PALGRAVE 
STUDIES IN 
COMEDY
TABOO COMEDY
TELEVISION AND 
CONTROVERSIAL HUMOUR
EDITED BY CHIARA BUCARIA AND LUCA BARRA

 Palgrave Studies in Comedy   
 Series Editors 
 Roger   Sabin 
 University of the Arts London 
 London  ,  United Kingdom  
 Sharon    Lockyer  
 Department Social Sciences Media Communication 
 Brunel University 
 Uxbridge ,  Middlesex,   United Kingdom  

Aims of the Series
 Comedy is part of the cultural landscape as never before, as older 
 manifestations such as performance (stand-up, plays, etc.), fi lm and TV 
have been joined by an online industry, pioneered by YouTube and social 
media. This innovative new book series will help defi ne the emerging 
 comedy studies fi eld, offering fresh perspectives on the comedy studies 
phenomenon, and opening up new avenues for discussion. The focus is 
‘pop cultural’, and will emphasize vaudeville, stand-up, variety,  comedy 
fi lm, TV sit-coms, and digital comedy. It will not cover humour in 
 literature, comedy in ‘everyday life’, or the psychology of  joke-telling. 
It will  welcome studies of politics, history, aesthetics, production, 
 distribution, and  reception, as well as work that explores international 
perspectives and the digital realm. Above all it will be pioneering – there is 
no competition in the publishing world at this point in time.  
More information about this series at 
  http://www.springer.com/mycopy/series/14644   

 Chiara   Bucaria  •  Luca  Barra  
 Editors 
 Taboo Comedy 
 Television and Controversial Humour  

Palgrave Studies in Comedy
 ISBN 978-1-137-59337-5     ISBN 978-1-137-59338-2 (eBook) 
 DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2 
 Library of Congress Control Number: 2016958102 
 © The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s)   2016 
 The author(s) has/have asserted their right(s) to be identifi ed as the author(s) of this work 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.  
 This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the 
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifi cally the rights of 
translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on 
microfi lms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, 
electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now 
known or hereafter developed. 
 The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this 
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specifi c statement, that such names are 
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
 The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information 
in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the 
publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to 
the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. 
 Cover image CSA Images/Archive / Getty Images 
 Printed on acid-free paper 
 This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by Springer Nature  
 The registered company is Macmillan Publishers Ltd. London 
The registered company address is: The Campus, 4 Crinan Street, London, N1 9XW,
United Kingdom
 Editors 
 Chiara   Bucaria  
 University of Bologna  
 Bologna ,  Italy 
 Luca  Barra  
 University of Bologna 
 Bologna ,  Italy 

v
 Taboo Comedy on Television: Issues and Themes 
    1 
 Chiara  Bucaria  and  Luca  Barra  
 Controversial Humour in Comedy and Drama Series 
   19 
 The Rise and Fall of Taboo Comedy in the BBC 
   21 
 Christie  Davies  
 The Last Laugh: Dark Comedy on US Television 
   41 
 Kristen   A.  Murray 
 ‘This Is Great, We’re Like Slave Buddies!’: Cross-Racial 
Appropriation in ‘Post-Racial’ TV Comedies 
   61 
 Carter  Soles  
 Phrasing!:  Archer , Taboo Humour, and 
Psychoanalytic Media Theory 
   77 
 Matt   Sienkiewicz  
 CONTENTS 

vi 
CONTENTS
 Taboo Humanity: Paradoxes of Humanizing
Muslims in North American Sitcoms 
   97 
 Kyle   Conway  
 Controversial Humour in Variety Shows,
Commercials and Factual Programming 
  117  
 Dummies and Demographics: Islamophobia as Market 
Differentiation in Post-9/11 Television Comedy 
  119  
 Philip  Scepanski  
 Excessive Stand-Up, the Culture Wars, and ’90s TV 
  139  
 Evan   Elkins 
 Tosh.0 , Convergence Comedy, and the 
‘Post-PC’ TV Trickster 
  155  
 Ethan   Thompson  
 Crude and Taboo Humour in Television Advertising: 
An Analysis of Commercials for Consumer Goods 
  173  
 Elsa   Simões   Lucas  Freitas 
 Filthy Viewing, Dirty Laughter 
  191  
 Delia   Chiaro  
 A Special Freedom: Regulating Comedy Offence 
  209  
 Brett   Mills  
Editors 
227
Contributors 
229
Index 
233

1
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2_1
 Taboo Comedy on Television: Issues 
and Themes  
 Chiara    Bucaria  and   Luca   Barra  
 C.  Bucaria  () • L. Barra 
 University of Bologna ,   Bologna ,  Italy  
 e-mail: chiara.bucaria@unibo.it  
 This chapter was prepared jointly by the two authors. However, Chiara Bucaria 
is mainly responsible for sections ‘Mapping Taboo Comedy on Television’ and 
‘Taboo Comedy and Humour Studies’ and Luca Barra for sections ‘Taboo 
Comedy and Television Studies’ and ‘A Large and Complex Field of Study’. 
 MAPPING TABOO COMEDY ON TELEVISION 
 When  Sex and the City and  Six Feet Under premiered on the US cable 
channel HBO in 1998 and 2001 respectively, they were saluted as ground- 
breaking shows because of—among other reasons—their unconventional, 
often-humorous, and explicit treatment of subjects such as sex, death, 
homosexuality, and illness. Since then, the use of humour containing 
taboo references has become more pervasive in Anglo-American television 
programming. From  Inside Amy Schumer and  The League of Gentlemen to 
Super Bowl commercials, stand-up comedy specials, and new generation, 
single-camera sitcoms, forms of edgy, transgressive, dark, and even taboo 

humour have in the last few years increasingly become part and parcel of 
both television programming and the viewing experience. Even unsus-
pected network family sitcoms are slowly but surely pushing the envelope 
of what constitutes acceptable material for comedy. Although, especially in 
the USA, the divide between network and cable television remains a sharp 
one, there is a noticeable trend towards a more extensive use of this kind of 
edgier comedy even in more widely available programming, which at least 
partially moves beyond the classic “least objectionable programming” and 
“mainstream” imperatives and tries to better respond to ever-changing 
media and television landscapes. From the heavy sexual innuendos of sit-
coms such as  Mom to paedophilia and incest jokes in  American Dad , from 
late-night talk shows to  Comedy Central Roasts , both traditional network 
shows and more niche cable productions are now rife with humorous 
references to subjects that were once reserved for comedy clubs at best, 
which makes taboo comedy a topical and relevant object of study for both 
Humour and Television Studies. 
 From a terminological standpoint, this kind of comedy has been in turn 
referred to—among others—as ‘tasteless’, ‘outrageous’, ‘gallows’, ‘abu-
sive’, ‘gross’, ‘sick’, ‘cruel’, ‘edgy’, ‘transgressive’, ‘aggressive’, ‘dark’, ‘dis-
turbing’, ‘rude’, ‘offensive’, ‘politically incorrect’, ‘quirky’, ‘offbeat’, and 
‘explicit’, to encompass a whole range of intensity. The number of terms 
that are variously used both in academia and the press to refer to this kind 
of comedy/humour is perhaps indicative of the many nuances that it can 
take on and of its slippery and elusive nature. However, faced with the task 
of having to choose a title for this collection, we selected  taboo and  contro-
versial as our two focal points. ‘Taboo’ is hopefully evocative enough to 
immediately conjure up examples of and issues concerning the intended 
subject, whereas the choice of the term ‘controversial’ refl ects a conscious 
effort towards terminological neutrality. As opposed to adjectives such as 
‘offensive’ and ‘rude’, for instance, ‘controversial’ appears to allow for less 
of a disapproving stance, thus mainly accomplishing a description of what 
the effect of this kind of comedy usually is, i.e. creating controversy on its 
appropriateness vs. inappropriateness. Although most academic literature 
and even journalistic discourse on controversial comedy often mention 
the ‘fi ne line’ between humour and offense and have sometimes veered 
towards a call for a more responsible and ethical use of taboo humour 
(e.g. Lockyer and Pickering  2005 ), we argue that a similar angle is beyond 
the scope and intention of this volume. In fact, this collection is meant 
to present scholarly research on issues concerning and arising from the 
2 
C. BUCARIA AND L. BARRA

use of controversial comedy in different forms of television programming 
without necessarily offering value judgements on it. This specifi c intention 
is refl ected in the following chapters, which tackle taboo comedy from a 
multiplicity of different approaches and points of view. 
 More specifi cally, under the umbrella phrase ‘taboo humour’ we mean 
to encompass the whole spectrum of comedy themes and subjects with 
which potential audiences might struggle because of its unconventional 
and at times intentionally shocking nature. Partially based on Allan and 
Burridge’s ( 2006 ) classifi cation of taboo in language, these include the 
following thematic categories:
 –  dark humour: humour about death, sickness, and disability;  
 –  sexual humour: humour relying on explicit sexual references, situ-
ations, or practices;  
 –  racial, ethnic, and minority humour, including sexist, homopho-
bic, transphobic humour, and humour directed at the elderly;  
 –  gross-out/sick humour: humour relying on references to faeces 
(scatological humour) or other bodily fl uids, and other traditional 
Western taboos such as incest and cannibalism;  
 –  sacrilegious/blasphemous humour: humour targeting established 
religious beliefs and dogmas, and the ministers of those religions;  
 –  physical appearance humour: humour involving deformity and 
other, non-normative traits, such as being overweight, short, or 
bald. 
 The possible intersections of these categories are obviously theoreti-
cally infi nite, as are the potential thematic overlaps among these spheres 
of taboo humour and the gamut of linguistic modes used to express them. 
However, albeit purposely broad, they represent a useful starting point to 
approach the variety of taboo comedy in current television programming. 
 Beyond the themes that taboo comedy touches upon, an analysis of 
the different forms of controversial humour on television cannot overlook 
the fact that its production, appreciation, and reception are not stand-
alone occurrences, but need to be interpreted in light of specifi c cultural, 
industrial, and even political tensions, e.g. the value attached to the appre-
ciation vs. rejection of taboo, edgy, and politically incorrect comedy in 
certain cultural and political circles, personal sense of humour and taste, 
and the contexts of production, reception, and distribution of comedy 
based on controversial subjects and language. Also, how do the constant 
changes in the media landscape—such as the existence of multiple and 
TABOO COMEDY ON TELEVISION: ISSUES AND THEMES 3

niche platforms on which television content is available—affect the use 
of taboo humour? Does niche programming necessarily correspond to a 
greater use of taboo subjects and—potentially—comedy? Are controver-
sial language and themes necessary elements to achieve the status of qual-
ity television (Akass and McCabe  2007 )? Furthermore, how does the use 
of politically incorrect language for humorous purposes relate to the pos-
sible regulatory intervention of institutions or authorities in order to pre-
vent the use of this kind of humour? And what are the ways in which TV 
production and distribution cultures position themselves and willingly or 
unwillingly interact with such topics? What are the boundaries—if there 
are any—between acceptable and unacceptable comedy? 
 In an attempt to discuss—if not provide answers to—the issues raised 
by the subject matter in this collection, the next two sections will address 
some of the themes and issues related to taboo and controversial comedy 
from the points of view of the macro disciplines of Humour and Television 
Studies, respectively.  
 TABOO COMEDY AND HUMOUR STUDIES 
 The potential for humour in a number of different contexts in human 
life and society has in itself been responsible for a wide range of different 
approaches to the study of humour and comedy, which makes Humour 
Studies an exceptionally interdisciplinary fi eld. While many of the chap-
ters in this collection delve into theories of humour and comedy in more 
detail, it might be useful here to look in broader terms at the ways in 
which some of those theories and concepts try to respond to the tensions 
addressed by taboo comedy. 
 One way in which existing humour scholarship can be valuable is in 
its contributions to the discussion of two central and recurring themes 
in the discourse on controversial comedy in general: on the one hand, 
the production and reception/appreciation of taboo humour and, on the 
other hand, the tension between the unacceptability or inappropriateness 
of taboo comedy and the legitimacy of humour addressing any sphere of 
human life. 
 As far as issues relating to the production and reception/appreciation 
are concerned—in other words, how and why people create and/or appre-
ciate taboo comedy—some theories of humour in general have been com-
monly used to illuminate the dynamics and the mechanisms at play in this 
kind of humour. Two of the theoretical frameworks that have been most 
4 
C. BUCARIA AND L. BARRA

commonly associated with controversial humour are superiority theory 
and incongruity theory. Superiority theory—which is usually associated 
with Plato, Aristotle, and Hobbes—addresses the more negative and 
aggressive components of humour, claiming that laughter is triggered by a 
feeling of superiority experienced by people towards an object, a situation, 
or a person. A further contribution of superiority theory to the theoriza-
tion of taboo humour, however, can be found in Plato’s description of 
the ambivalent emotions originating from observing other people in dis-
tressful situations. Plato’s view is also often considered as a forerunner of 
the ambivalence theory of humour, in which humour is seen as deriving 
from the perception of two opposite emotions. The connection between 
incongruity theory and taboo humour, on the other hand, seems to lie in 
the fact that, similarly to incongruous humour in general, taboo humour 
usually juxtaposes either content (death, disability, etc.) with a seemingly 
inappropriate form (comedy, jokes, farce, etc.) or two contrasting situa-
tions (bad timing, inappropriate circumstances), with a typical example 
being gallows humour, in which humour is created in stressful, oppressing 
situations. Support for the incongruous nature of taboo humour is also 
found in the Freudian concept of ‘displacement’ (Freud  1963 ), which 
implies a shift of emphasis that allows the teller of the joke to disguise the 
joke’s aim and to reveal it at the most unexpected moment, thus acting as 
a subverter of expectations that is paramount for the dynamics of taboo 
humour (Colletta  2003 : 28–29). 
 Indeed, psychoanalytic theory has contributed a number of concepts 
aimed at an understanding of the darker aspects of humour, with Freud 
being one of its key fi gures. In terms of the production of jokes, Freud 
identifi es a number of different jokework techniques—such as displace-
ment, condensation, and unifi cation—and further distinguishes between 
innocent (or non-tendentious) jokes and hostile (or tendentious) jokes. 
In non-tendentious jokes pleasure derives purely from the aesthetic enjoy-
ment of the cognitive technique involved, whereas tendentious jokes 
express unconscious, aggressive instincts that are temporarily allowed 
to be directed against someone or something. As Colletta notes, these 
jokes allow individuals to successfully circumvent ‘the obstacles to desire 
that society and education have erected’ ( 2003 : 29) and serve to appease 
what would normally be considered aggressive or socially unacceptable 
desires. Colletta compares this function of tendentious jokes to that of 
dark humour, which in a similar way allows for ‘rebellion against oppres-
sive circumstances and liberation from pressure’ ( 2003 : 29). 
TABOO COMEDY ON TELEVISION: ISSUES AND THEMES 5

 As explored by research in psychology, key to an understanding of why 
people produce and appreciate taboo humour is also the idea of humour 
as a coping mechanism. Partially echoing Freud’s theory claiming that the 
surplus energy that is not associated with negative feelings when people 
fi nd themselves in distressing circumstances is instead released through 
humour and laughter, more recent empirical studies have explored the 
function of humour as a moderator of life stress and as a tool to improve 
the quality of life (Martin and Lefcourt  1983 ; Lefcourt and Martin  1986 ; 
Martin et  al.  2003 ). Although these studies mainly address the use of 
humour in general, it isn’t diffi cult to hypothesize a more specifi c correla-
tion between coping and taboo humour. Particularly, some see the use 
of dark humour in and by minority groups—for example among women 
and ethnic minorities—as a device to overcome situations of distress and 
oppression. Typically, some kinds of Jewish humour have been interpreted 
as direct expressions of this function of dark humour, as have the so-called 
disaster jokes (Smyth  1986 ; Oring  1992 ; Kuipers  2011 ), which in the dig-
ital age now appear in a matter of minutes after a catastrophe or calamity 
and which according to Oring ( 1992 ) speak to notions of ‘decency’ and 
‘unspeakability’ as they deal with situations that go beyond their content 
and concern, more in general, their capability of conjoining ‘an unspeak-
able, and hence incongruous, universe of discourse to a speakable one’ 
(Oring  1992 , 35). 
 Finally, similarly to dead baby jokes (Dundes  1979 ,  1987 ), disas-
ter jokes—the more recent incarnations of which appeared in the wake 
of the 2015 and 2016 terrorist attacks in Europe—beg the question of 
what factors affect the appreciation vs. rejection of dark or taboo humour. 
Humour research has investigated a number of factors that seem to play a 
role in individual humour preferences, such as gender, age, class (Kuipers 
 2006 ), and even mood at the moment in which the humorous stimuli 
are provided (Martin  1998 ; Ruch  1998 ). For instance, with the help of 
their Humour Style Questionnaire, Martin et al. ( 2003 ) have identifi ed 
four possible humour styles—‘affi liative’, ‘aggressive’, ‘self-enhancing’, 
and ‘self- defeating’—which seem to indicate, both in terms of humour 
production and appreciation, the existence of individual preferences. 
Aggressive humour is the preference that would more closely resemble an 
appreciation for taboo comedy. 
 The second of the two broad themes mentioned previously, the unac-
ceptability/inappropriateness of taboo comedy, is at the centre of a long- 
standing debate when it comes to popular culture and one that concerns 
6 
C. BUCARIA AND L. BARRA

the attempt to identify the fl eeting boundaries of taboo or ‘offensive’ com-
edy. This debate, which ultimately comes down to the tension between the 
appropriateness of taboo comedy and the legitimacy of humour address-
ing any sphere of human life and freedom of speech, can be framed in 
terms of the pragmatics of humour. Similarly to all other forms of human 
interaction, instances of humour do not occur in a vacuum but have a 
context of delivery, which includes specifi c participants—who delivers the 
humour/comedy? who is the audience?—and a specifi c communicative 
setting. However, the crucial relationship between the content of comedy 
and the context in which it is delivered is not always given the relevance 
that it deserves as an interpretive tool. Often when we talk about the 
inappropriateness of something, we fail to see that the concept itself is 
relative, since it always implies reference to a specifi c context (appropriate 
for whom? in what situation?). Inappropriateness as an attribute is relative 
and not absolute, just like taboos tend to be relative and not absolute. 
When University College London professor Tim Hunt made what was 
perceived as a sexist joke at the World Conference of Science Journalists 
in 2015, and when presidential candidate Hillary Clinton and New York 
City mayor Bill de Blasio engaged in a racially charged joke at a fundrais-
ing event in April 2016, controversy soon arose at the international level. 
However, in denouncing the unacceptability of these attempted jokes not 
many made explicit the importance of the context of interaction and deliv-
ery of the intended humorous content. In other words, while it might 
have been acceptable for an African-American comic to deliver the same 
joke on Coloured People Time (CP Time) at a comedy club, the fact that 
two white, prominent, political fi gures used the joke at a public event 
raises several issues concerning power and hegemony, which are only par-
tially mitigated by the fact that Bill de Blasio, who delivered the CP Time 
line, is married to an African-American woman. 
 Particularly, in the interactional context of comedy involving in-group/
out-group and centre/periphery (Davies  1990 ) dynamics—such as, but 
not limited to, racist/ethnic, homophobic, and sexist humour—it seems 
crucial to take into consideration the directionality of humour, i.e. who 
the sender and the recipient of the humorous message are, which can 
signifi cantly contribute to determining the underlying reasons why taboo 
humour is perceived as generally inappropriate when delivered by a mem-
ber of a majority group addressing a minority group, whereas the opposite 
is generally considered less problematic. 
TABOO COMEDY ON TELEVISION: ISSUES AND THEMES 7

 In the debate on the use or abuse of taboo humour, this tension has 
recently been encoded in the ‘punching down’ vs. ‘punching up’ dichot-
omy, with the former ultimately implying an alignment with existing 
hegemonic structures and the latter trying to expose socio-economic 
inequality, or metaphorically punching the perpetrators and not the 
 victims. The concept of ‘punching up’ is similar to what Krefting refers to 
as ‘charged humour’, the idea that ‘charged humour relies on identifi ca-
tion with struggles and issues associated with being a second-class citizen 
and rallies listeners around some focal point be that cultural, corporeal, or 
racial/ethnic similarities’ (Krefting  2014 , 5). On the other hand, echoing 
the sentiment of many detractors of ‘punching down’ humour, Krefting 
sees the comedians who purposely use taboo content as merely employing 
a rhetorical device mainly based on shock value and devoid of any political 
or social critique, a generic ‘anti-political correctness’ stand in the name 
of free speech. By contrast, many comics, including Jerry Seinfeld and 
Chris Rock, have been vocal about the effect that political correctness 
has had on the appreciation of their comedy routines, particularly on US 
college campuses, where—in part because of the polemic involving trig-
ger warnings (Hume  2015 )—a large portion of students seems to react 
strongly to humour based on sensitive issues. The tension between the use 
of taboo humour and the legitimacy of making fun of any facet of human 
life and society is still very much at the centre of the debate, with come-
dians being scrutinized in their comedy routines not just on stage but 
also on social media, and sometimes being forced to apologize for seem-
ingly ill-advised jokes. Furthermore, the discussion is complicated by the 
subtlety and complexity of the intention of the speaker and their delivery. 
Since, as Gournelos and Greene note, ‘we can never be quite certain who 
is laughing, how they’re laughing, or why they’re laughing […]’ ( 2011 , 
xviii), one might legitimately wonder whether using politically incorrect 
humour is an effective way of breaking taboos and exposing hypocrisy or 
whether it simply perpetuates crass stereotypes on—among others—rac-
ism, misogyny, homophobia, rape, and mental and physical disability. 
 Lastly, we would be remiss if in an overview of the factors affecting the 
perception of the appropriateness of taboo humour we didn’t mention the 
signifi cance of culture-bound aspects. Just like the appreciation of contro-
versial comedy may depend on factors such as age, gender, and personality 
traits, the likelihood is worth mentioning that—for a number of historical, 
political, and religious reasons—certain cultures may display a higher or 
lower tolerance for humour based on subjects and language perceived as 
8 
C. BUCARIA AND L. BARRA

taboo. For instance, Hofstede et al.’s empirical research ( 2010 ) seems to 
point to the existence of recognizable national traits and values according 
to categories such as uncertainty avoidance, power distance, and gender 
roles, which, when applied to humour, in turn would explain why some 
cultures have a higher appreciation for humour based on nonsense or 
incongruity. Moreover, these categories, together with a country’s histori-
cal background, may also explain why certain kinds of taboo comedy are 
more tolerated than others within the same culture.  
 TABOO COMEDY AND TELEVISION STUDIES 
 As mentioned above, humour always originates from a specifi c context, 
and controversial comedy is no exception. Therefore, when taboo material 
is included in a television show, the jokes—as imagined by performers and 
producers, and then properly embraced by audiences—often need to take 
into account not only the nature and structure of the wordplay or the spe-
cifi c references employed, but also the specifi c traits of TV as a language, 
a technique, and a medium. In some ways, a clash is constantly developed 
and managed between the ‘exception’ constituted by humour and the 
regularity of ‘current’ television, often resulting in a stronger comedic 
effect. Taboo comedy does not completely fi t inside the small screen, its 
rules and its schemes, and this confl ict makes it more diffi cult and power-
ful at the same time. From a perspective grounded in Television Studies, 
it is useful here to outline at least some of these challenges, irregulari-
ties, and (explicit or implicit) contrasts, highlighting three different con-
tinuums that have emerged as particularly relevant, both historically and 
more recently. These contrasts defi ne a complex fi eld of relations where 
controversial comedy can be positioned and, in fact, constantly positions 
itself: a fi eld that is incessantly modifi ed by the stretching of boundaries or 
by the changes occurring in the TV industry and in society at large. 
 The fi rst continuum is the one between mainstream and niche. On the 
one side, television has been—and mainly still is today—a mass medium, 
offering its shows, series, imageries, and stars to the largest possible audi-
ence, and trying to build and engage a wide, invisible community made 
up of different and geographically spread out people. The very nature of 
broadcasting, in fact, implies the simultaneous transmission of its messages 
to a wide, undifferentiated public. As a consequence, two of the staples 
of television are, on the one hand, the traditional logic of L.O.P.—the 
‘least objectionable programming’, a common denominator aimed at not 
TABOO COMEDY ON TELEVISION: ISSUES AND THEMES 9

hurting the sensitivity of the majority of the audience—and, on the other 
hand, the more general need not to exclude or leave out anyone from the 
pleasures of television viewing for both editorial and commercial reasons 
(Gitlin  1983 ; Mittell  2010 ). Controversial humour constantly struggles 
and engages with such basic assumptions, pushing to expand the limits 
of the medium, and at the same time adopting those limits as a major 
device to obtain laughter and success. Consequently, the informal rule 
that implies that the target of television is the largest possible audience 
acts as a constraint that taboo comedy always has to abide by (or some-
how address), in some ways diminishing the power and extent of this kind 
of humour. Moreover, this rule constitutes a shared and acknowledged 
trait defi ning the medium, which performers must (and want to) accept, 
adapting their comedic material to this specifi c kind of audience. At the 
same time, once again, this rule provides controversial comedy with an 
irresistible and unlimited tension to push these boundaries, to overturn 
the general assumptions and expectations of TV audiences, to constantly 
expand the limits of what it is possible to say, show, and perform on televi-
sion. Thanks to this tension, taboo comedy is able to follow the rules and 
break them at the same time, to include fresh and original perspectives 
into a common ground of habits and repetitions. Controversial humour 
on network and mainstream television breaks boundaries, and in doing 
so it also adjusts to them. On the opposite side of the same continuum, 
cable, satellite, and digital outlets offer a wider space for taboo comedy. By 
defi nition, they break and expand the limits of what can be represented, 
redefi ne humour inside a logic of ‘quality television’ and premium pro-
gramming targeting specifi c niche audiences, and therefore are able—and 
somewhat proud—to create distinction and to stimulate controversy. Even 
in those cases, however, complete freedom is not possible and not allowed, 
in part because boundaries and constraints constitute a fundamental part 
of what makes taboo comedy work. Nevertheless, thematic and niche 
channels become a prolifi c space for controversial humour, often normal-
izing it and using it as a positioning and promotional tool, as a rhetorical 
and marketing device. However, in both cases—the breaking of a general 
rule for mainstream networks and the more regular presence on targeted 
platforms—the spaces dedicated to provocative comedy enjoy an excep-
tional status and a sort of ‘double-standard’, offering a hint of revolution 
in a generally fi xed context. Even in the most ground-breaking cases, TV 
comedy is taboo only as long as it remains suitable to the medium it is 
inserted into. 
10 
C. BUCARIA AND L. BARRA

 The second continuum involves the tension between reality and imag-
ery, truth and carefully built representation. Taboo comedy plays a role in 
the perpetual television balance between the informative role of ‘showing 
the truth’—e.g. in the news—and the symbolic reading and manipula-
tion of such reality—e.g. in entertainment genres or fi ction. On the one 
hand, controversial humour is a way to directly expose what happens in 
the world, to engage with the truth, to confront and to respond to a 
reality that is already in place. Here television breaks the fourth wall to 
show a more complex, varied, and truthful depiction of aspects we are 
used to hiding or forgetting. On the other hand, this kind of comedy 
necessarily exaggerates, distorts, and deforms such reality—for example 
through hyperbole, irony, detachment, and emphasis—thus highlighting 
the inauthenticity behind representation. Television humour exposes the 
truth, often recurring to artifi ciality. As it has been highlighted for comedy 
genres (Marc  1996 ,  1997 ; Gray  2008 ), parody (Thompson  2011 ) and 
satire (Gray et al.  2009 ; Meijer Drees and De Leeuw  2015 ), as a result 
of its immediacy, familiarity, and liveness, television plays a double role in 
strengthening the effect of the truth, while at the same time clearly reveal-
ing the tricks and production effects, the reality of its artifi ce. Moreover, 
TV comedy—including taboo humour—often does not take a clear posi-
tion but indulges in a fruitful duplicity, seemingly able to provide both 
a liberal and a conservative approach to reality and its changes. Taboo 
humour can be ‘relevant’, opening the space of the small screen to unseen 
and unnoticed social issues with a progressive stance, and can also be a way 
of mocking and demonizing such issues, ridiculing the idea of a progressive 
stance (Marc  1997 ; Mills  2005 ,  2009 ; Dalton and Linder  2005 ; Morreale 
 2003 ). In their long-lasting fi ght, both politically correct and controversial 
humour on TV become ways to establish a point of view. These struggles 
and negotiations between different perspectives—by comedians, produc-
ers, networks, and all the other parties involved—confi rm this crucial 
power of comedy to frame, shape, and present a ‘biased’ reality. 
 The third continuum contrasts long-term programming and one-off 
events. The majority of TV shows are serialized, spanning over multiple 
episodes across a single season and over multiple seasons year after year, 
and furthermore expanding with spin-offs, sequels, remakes, collections, 
reruns, and on-demand libraries. This is another fundamental feature 
of television and broadcasting (Kompare  2005 ), and its result is a fre-
quent repetition of the same text, or at least of similar contents, models, 
schemes, patterns, and jokes. While TV comedy in general is often rein-
forced by its constant reiteration, by consolidating the viewers’ affection 
TABOO COMEDY ON TELEVISION: ISSUES AND THEMES 11

towards on-screen personalities and by introducing sitcoms and comedy 
shows in daily or weekly familiar habits, such repetition constitutes a great 
challenge for subversive humour. In fact, what appears to be innovative, 
unexpected, and revolutionary when it is fi rst shown on TV, ends up being 
less powerful once it is inserted in a cycle of slight modifi cations and con-
stant reruns. The infringement of taboos—or the provocative challenge 
of shared topoi, clichés, and stereotypes—is therefore incisive in its fi rst 
occurrences, but the unexpected divergence from the norm is soon dimin-
ished by repetition. The ground-breaking role of sharp sitcoms or stand-up 
comedy shows follows here a process of domestication and accommoda-
tion, transforming ‘real’ taboo humour into a weaker—yet closer, more 
familiar, and more immediate—form of comedy. Revolution becomes the 
(new) norm, and the constant fl ow of programming plays an important 
role in this transformation. By contrast, controversial comedy appears to 
enjoy an easier and less compromised space in stand-alone events, one-off 
shows or guest appearances, where the strength of taboos is not weakened 
by everyday regularity. In this scenario, censorship, control, and polemical 
discourse, both on television and outside the box, are a good way of ‘even-
tizing’ the linear and repetitive series of episodes, highlighting a deviation 
from the norm and putting a single moment of television—‘worth watch-
ing’, or even impossible to watch—in the spotlight. 
 The three fi elds of opposite forces briefl y outlined here encompass some 
of the issues that arise when taboo/controversial humour is included in 
television programming, thus following the rules, constraints, and the 
strengths of this medium and its language. All these underlying topics chal-
lenge the defi nitions of taboo comedy: the obvious need to interact with 
large numbers of people, the pressure to abide by certain boundaries and to 
stress them, the tension between the effect of reality and its complex con-
struction, the always-present yet hidden framing of such reality, the repeti-
tion of episodes, seasons, and reruns, and the breaking of this usual scheme 
with events and once-in-a-lifetime television bits. These can help under-
stand the complex, sometimes contradictory, yet very interesting presence 
of taboo comedy across a large number of TV shows and networks.  
 A LARGE AND COMPLEX FIELD OF STUDY 
 This edited collection provides an exploration of the phenomenon of taboo 
comedy and controversial humour on television. Throughout these essays, 
the topics briefl y addressed in this chapter—the defi nition and the status 
of this kind of jokes and laughter, its roles and effects, and the complex 
12 
C. BUCARIA AND L. BARRA

relationship with the medium—are deeply scrutinized and analyzed from 
different perspectives, and with the help of a large number of examples. 
Some chapters adopt a mainly historical approach, focusing on important 
moments in television—as well as social—history, while other chapters 
adopt a more contemporary stance, highlighting how current television is 
permeated and shaped by multiple contradictory forces. The range of top-
ics includes different kinds of taboos, involving religion and sex, national-
ity and ethnicity, death and politics, gender and disgust; however, despite 
the differences in the objects of analysis, as well as in research methods 
and historical/critical approaches, some common traits emerge through-
out the book, including the role of public service, the responsibility of 
commercial television, the space for regulation and censorship, excess and 
its (im)possible limits, the specifi cities of comedic performances, comedic 
stardom, and television’s layered relationship with its audiences. 
 To give an order to such rich and complex material, two main criteria 
have been adopted. The fi rst one is geographical. Although both the 
book’s authors and approach are global, the majority of examples and 
case studies refers to the US and UK television systems. It is a deliber-
ate choice, for a number of reasons: fi rstly, the wealth of these media 
environments provides the most solid grounds and the best structural 
conditions for the development not only of controversial humour on 
television, but also of an on-going discussion of and debate on the vari-
ous issues involved; secondly, the global circulation and distribution of 
US and British TV shows and stars provide an easier ‘common ground’ 
and a shared framework for readers, who will at least have some famil-
iarity with the examples provided and can engage with the case studies; 
lastly, both the US and the UK television systems are important mod-
els for other countries in developing, modifying, and regulating taboo 
humour. A second criterion has to do with TV genres, which constitute 
the fi rst level of organization and structure for these essays. The fi rst 
section of the volume features essays involving scripted programming 
and fi ctional shows, especially comedies—including sitcoms—and dra-
mas; the second section focuses mainly on non-scripted and non-fi ction 
genres, with insights on stand-up comedy, variety shows, commercials, 
and the vast category of factual programming, reality and life-style shows. 
It is worth mentioning that we have adopted the traditional distinction 
between scripted and unscripted shows, although we are aware that it is 
indicative of specifi c industrial conventions rather than actual writing, 
production, and consumption practices. 
TABOO COMEDY ON TELEVISION: ISSUES AND THEMES 13

 Part I of this book opens with an essay by  Christie Davies , which criti-
cally and historically analyzes the ‘culture wars’ that took place in the UK 
behind the scenes of the BBC comedy department. With constant refer-
ences to archival documents and TV scripts, Davies explores the oscilla-
tions of comedy programmes between censorship and creative freedom, 
highlighting the internal and external forces at play, the slow emergence 
of politically correct policies, and the constant connections between TV 
comedy and secularization.  Kristen A. Murray discusses the role of dark 
humour and the different perceptions of death through television comedy, 
as depicted in a large number of series and sitcoms approaching the end 
of life in multiple ways. Death is a fundamental aspect of our lives, yet it 
is a topic increasingly removed from general discourse. However, by jok-
ing about and laughing at funerals, corpses, hospitals, drugs, ageing, and 
sanity, drama and comedy series help audiences to correctly and playfully 
deal with this issue. Dark humour is also used by contemporary society 
to express and hide its deepest feelings. The following chapter, by  Carter 
Soles , selects three US and Canadian TV series ( Arrested Development , 
 Trailer Park Boys , and  Party Down ) as interesting examples of the constant 
cultural appropriation of race by white-male-oriented comedy. Indulging 
in the fantasy of a post-racial society, these cult shows actually exploit dif-
ferent races and cultures, adopt racist stereotypes on African-Americans 
and Latinos, and project the weaknesses of the dominant group onto a 
derisive approach to blackness. In the process of recognizing and expos-
ing racism, these shows contradict their own goals, and fall into a differ-
ent kind of racism.  Matt Sienkiewicz adopts a psychoanalytical approach, 
using US series  Archer as a tool to engage with Freudian theory. Animated 
comedies are able to include complex and subtle elements into a larger 
pleasurable text, and become a good way to express the most repressed 
elements of the human psyche.  Archer , in particular, has set the oedipal 
fi xation as a constant background narrative, thus allowing viewers to read 
the text and its context as dreams in the dreamscape, with both an author- 
centred approach focused on producers and a reader-centred point of view 
exploring the audience and its feelings. In the last chapter in Part I,  Kyle 
Conway explores Canadian sitcom  Little Mosque on the Prairie and its role 
in humanizing Muslims through its characters and in erasing differences 
within the national community. Following a critical production studies 
approach, by means of interviews with professionals involved in the mak-
ing of the series, Conway refl ects on how minorities sitcoms constitute 
an entry point to television—albeit through a ‘narrow door’—in some 
14 
C. BUCARIA AND L. BARRA

ways leaving out negative emotions and other parts of the human experi-
ence. Conway’s analysis of regulation, commercialism, and media logics 
helps in understanding the different possible levels of multiculturalism, 
and explains the on-going persistence of taboos and stereotypes. 
 Part II of the volume opens with a chapter by  Philip Scepanski , which 
in some ways acts as a link between the two sections of the book. Scepanski 
investigates the comedic reactions that followed the 9/11 attacks and that 
contributed to reinforcing the distinction between ‘us’ and ‘them’, espe-
cially against Muslims. With an overview of animated sitcoms followed 
by a meticulous analysis of stand-up comedy shows by Carlos Mencia 
and Jeff Dunham, Scepanski demonstrates how the racist depiction of 
the other, often with the excuse of laughing at the enemy, reinforces 
cultural and political conservatism, justifi es xenophobia, exploits fear for 
commercial purposes, and works as a strategy for viewers and advertisers. 
 Evan Elkins analyzes the long-lasting confl ict between politically correct 
comedy and free speech, and investigates the appropriateness of joking 
on taboo topics. Elkins explores the censorship of some stand-up com-
edy routines on US networks in the early 1990s, including Andrew Dice 
Clay and Martin Lawrence on  Saturday Night Live and the well-known 
case of Bill Hicks’ performance which was edited out of the  Late Show 
with David Letterman . A tension between different logics ends up both 
celebrating and chastising controversial and potentially offensive comic 
material.  Ethan Thompson selects a Comedy Central show,  Tosh.0 , in 
an attempt to offer a better understanding of the relationship between 
convergent television, younger male demographics, and the boundaries of 
what is socially acceptable in comedy. Through an analysis of the structure 
of the show, Thompson highlights the ‘post-politically correct’ approach 
adopted by the programme, the multiple occasions for viewer participa-
tion (and ridicule, if not humiliation), and the recurring jokes on sexuality 
and race/ethnicity. A fi gure of ‘contemporary trickster’ clearly emerges, 
which accepts racial and sexual identities as unproblematic, and thus chal-
lenges and crosses traditional boundaries. The chapter by  Elsa Simoes 
Lucas Freitas focuses on television commercials and the ways in which 
taboo humour works—or struggles—in advertising. After a close analysis 
of the structural elements involved and of the similarities between jokes 
and commercials, Freitas investigates how advertisers trade the viewers’ 
attention for the entertainment value of the ads. Through the examples 
of Super Bowl commercials and Portuguese campaigns involving offense, 
grossness, or sexual innuendos, it becomes clear how taboo humour is an 
TABOO COMEDY ON TELEVISION: ISSUES AND THEMES 15

effective yet potentially risky practice.  Delia Chiaro shifts the focus to 
reality television, lifestyle and factual programming, and analyzes the UK 
show  How Clean is Your House? to discuss the various functions of laugh-
ter in response to shocking yet comical situations involving fi lth and dirt. 
The ironic detachment and the funny reaction to embarrassing moments 
are textual devices punctuating the narrative of the show and directly con-
necting with the audience, thus reinforcing the appeal of the programme. 
Lastly,  Brett Mills explores the diffi culties for authorities to regulate and 
recognize humour, as well as to apply the ‘special freedom’ granted to the 
genre in specifi c circumstances. By commenting on examples from some 
controversial episodes of BBC’s  Top Gear , including jokes on race, nation-
ality, and sexuality, Mills highlights the complexities and contradictions 
emerging in the reaction to live television banter, the confl icts between 
professionals and in-production routines, the diffi culty in making sense 
of audience responses and complaints, and the unpredictable differences 
between the jokes that are perceived as taboo and the ones that go unno-
ticed and do not stimulate further discussion. 
 By presenting a rich and complex set of examples, perspectives, topics, 
television genres, ways of laughing, and objects to laugh at, this collection 
and its chapters aim at defi ning and expanding the scholarship on taboo 
comedy and on the television spaces devoted to taboo. The volume offers 
an in-depth discussion of—among others—the boundaries of TV represen-
tations, the effects of comedy, censorship, and regulation, new and old ste-
reotypes, and the cathartic role of laughter. Hopefully, the issues raised here 
will be a valuable stepping stone for further questions and research for the 
benefi t of scholars and students in both Humour and Television Studies.  
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Akass, Kim, and Janet McCabe. 2007. Sex, Swearing and Respectability: Courting 
Controversy, HBO’s Original Programming and Producing Quality TV.  In 
 Quality TV. Contemporary American Television and Beyond , ed. Kim Akass, and 
Janet McCabe, 62–76. London: I.B. Tauris.  
 Allan, Keith, and Kate Burridge. 2006.  Forbidden Words Taboo and the Censoring 
of Language . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
 Colletta, Lisa. 2003.  Dark Humour and Social Satire in the Modern British Novel. 
Triumph of Narcissism . Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.  
 Dalton, Mary M., and Laura L. Linder (ed). 2005.  The Sitcom Reader. America 
Viewed and Skewed . Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.  
16 
C. BUCARIA AND L. BARRA

 Davies, Christie. 1990.  Ethnic Humor around the World: A Comparative Analysis . 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.  
 Dundes, Alan. 1979. The Dead Baby Joke Cycle.  Western Folklore 38(3): 145–157.  
 ———. 1987.  Cracking Jokes: Studies of Sick Humor Cycles & Stereotypes . Berkeley: 
Ten Speed Press.  
 Freud, Sigmund. 1963.  Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious . New York: 
Norton.  
 Gitlin, Todd. 1983.  Inside Prime Time . New York: Pantheon Books.  
 Gournelos, Ted, and Viveca Greene. 2011. Introduction. In  A Decade of Dark 
Humor: How Comedy, Irony, and Satire Shaped Post-9/11 America , ed. Ted 
Gournelos, and Viveca Greene, vi–xxxv. Jackson, MS: University Press of 
Mississippi.  
 Gray, Jonathan. 2008.  Television Entertainment . London: Routledge.  
 Gray, Jonathan, Jeffrey P.  Jones, and Ethan Thompson (ed). 2009.  Satire TV: 
Politics and Comedy in the Post-Network Era . New York: New York University 
Press.  
 Hofstede, Geert, Geert Jan Hofstede, and Michael Minkov. 2010.  Cultures and 
Organizations: Software of the Mind . New York: McGraw-Hill.  
 Hume, Mick. 2015.  Trigger Warning Is the Fear of Being Offensive Killing Free 
Speech? London: William Collins.  
 Kompare, Derek. 2005.  Rerun Nation. How Repeats Invented American Television . 
London: Routledge.  
 Krefting, Rebecca. 2014.  All Joking Aside. American Humor and Its Discontents . 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.  
 Kuipers, Giselinde. 2006.  Good Humor, Bad Taste . Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.  
 ———. 2011. “Where Was King Kong When We Needed Him?”: Public 
Discourse, Digital Disaster Jokes, and the Function of Laughter after 9/11. In 
 A Decade of Dark Humor: How Comedy, Irony, and Satire Shaped Post-9/11 
America , ed. Ted Gournelos, and Viveca Greene, vi–xxxv. Jackson, MS: 
University Press of Mississippi.  
 Lefcourt, Herbert M., and Rod A. Martin. 1986.  Humor and Life Stress: Antidote 
to Adversity . New York: Springer.  
 Lockyer, Sharon, and Michael Pickering. 2005.  Beyond a Joke: The Limits of 
Humour . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.  
 Marc, David. 1996.  Demographic Vistas: Television in American Culture . 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.  
 ———. 1997.  Comic Visions. Television Comedy & American Culture . Malden, 
MA: Blackwell.  
 Martin, Rod A. 1998. Approaches to the Sense of Humor: A Historical Review. In 
 The Sense of Humor. Explorations of a Personality Characteristic , ed. W. Ruch, 
15–60. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.  
TABOO COMEDY ON TELEVISION: ISSUES AND THEMES 17

 Martin, Rod A., and Herbert M. Lefcourt. 1983. Sense of Humor as a Moderator 
of the Relationship Between Stressors and Moods.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 45: 1313–1324.  
 Martin, Rod A., Patricia Puhlik-Doris, Gwen Larsen, Jeanette Gray, and Kelly 
Weir. 2003. Individual Differences in Uses of Humor and Their Relation to 
Psychological Well-being: Development of the Humor Styles Questionnaire. 
 Journal of Research in Personality 37(1): 48–75.  
 Meijer Drees, Marijke, and Sonja De Leeuw (ed). 2015.  The Power of Satire . 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.  
 Mills, Brett. 2005.  Television Sitcom . London: BFI.  
 ———. 2009.  The Sitcom . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.  
 Mittell, Jason. 2010.  Television and American Culture . New  York: Oxford 
University Press.  
 Morreale, Joanne (ed). 2003.  Critiquing the Sitcom. A Reader . Syracuse, NY: 
Syracuse University Press.  
 Oring, Elliot. 1992.  Jokes and Their Relations . Lexington: University of Kentucky 
Press.  
 Ruch, Willibald (ed). 1998.  The Sense of Humor. Explorations of a Personality 
Characteristic . Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.  
 Smyth, Willie. 1986. Challenger Jokes and the Humor of Disaster.  Western Folklore 
45(4): 243–260.  
 Thompson, Ethan. 2011.  Parody and Taste in Post-War American Television 
Culture . London: Routledge.  
18 
C. BUCARIA AND L. BARRA

 PART I 
 Controversial Humour 
in Comedy and Drama Series   

21
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2_2
 The Rise and Fall of Taboo Comedy 
in the BBC  
 Christie     Davies  
 C.  Davies  () 
 University of Reading ,   Reading ,  UK 
 e-mail: j.c.h.davies@reading.ac.uk 
 A historical account of the responses to questionable comedy within or in 
response to the BBC can be divided into two very different eras of confl ict. 
The fi rst of these, the internal ‘war against smut’, stretched from the very 
inception of the BBC in 1922, when it was given a monopoly over all UK 
radio, and later television, paid for by a compulsory licence fee, to 1960, 
when Sir Hugh Carleton Greene became the new Director-General. His 
appointment was a response to the crisis within BBC Television caused by 
the ending of its monopoly in 1955, when the Independent Television 
Authority began transmitting programmes funded by commercial adver-
tising. Before Greene’s appointment, the producers of comedy that might 
offend were involved in an endless on-going internal fi ght with the BBC 
bureaucrats who tried to repress anything they found offensive. Greene 
gave the producers their freedom, but this only moved the confl ict some-
where else, for the freer broadcasting of offensive comedy led to a culture 
war with those outside who vigorously objected to it. 
 During the time of its monopoly, and for a few years afterwards, the 
BBC operated almost as if it was a branch of the civil service when provid-
ing public service broadcasting. It was independent of the government, 

but the way its administrators were organized in a hierarchy, the outlook 
that went with this and the enormous emphasis placed on enforcing policy 
from the centre and on formal paperwork was that of the mandarins of the 
British civil service. Censorship of comedy was rigorous, particularly in 
relation to humour about sex or scatology, to the use of ‘bad language’ or 
to the mockery of religion. An elaborate code of prohibitions was imposed 
on radio and TV producers, and through them on performers and writ-
ers. There were even occasions in the 1940s when the Director-General 
himself, rendered apoplectic by a single joke contrary to ‘policy’, would 
intervene, fi ring off irate memoranda and demanding that those respon-
sible for it be chastised. 
 The situation changed radically when a new libertarian Director- 
General, Sir Hugh Carleton Greene, was appointed in 1960. Greene 
unleashed the producers and the comedy writers, and they came up with 
a series of comedy programmes characterized by bad language, smut 
and irreverence to the Christian religion that caused great offence but 
attracted exceptionally large audiences. The old-style administrative hier-
archy were so conditioned to accepting and implementing orders from the 
top that they gave up ‘the war against dirt’ and became the enablers of 
the new comedy. Some of them disagreed with the changes, but the party 
line had changed and democratic centralism prevailed. The younger ones 
among them, particularly those recently recruited to run the expanding 
television service, welcomed the changes. It was anyway a time of very 
rapid social change in the wider society, changes that had nothing to do 
with the BBC, and the new generation saw the world very differently from 
their elders. Thanks to Greene, the comedy producers could now defy the 
administrators with impunity. The upholders of the old order still in offi ce 
were not always happy with this, but they were well aware that the tide 
of social change outside the BBC was running strongly against them, and 
it was easier to drift with it rather than fi ght the new Director-General. 
Even so, John Arkell, Director of Administration, wrote to Greene oppos-
ing, in Tracey’s words, the new ‘untrammelled freedom of the producer’, 
with the role of the layers above being not to control but to cushion the 
pressure from outside. If this were BBC policy, Arkell added in an acid 
aside, ‘then the TV service is being run by a staff with an average age of 
twenty-seven’ (Tracey  1983 , 219). However, the centre of the confl icts 
had now moved from inside the BBC to being one between the BBC and 
its external critics. 
22 
C. DAVIES

 Those who resented most this new wave of smutty and irreverent com-
edy were the people outside the organization who had loved the  ancien 
régime , the old BBC known as Auntie, precisely because it was prim 
and proper, respectable and responsible. In particular, their indignation 
was expressed through the National Viewers’ and Listeners’ Association 
(NVALA) led by Mrs. Mary Whitehouse. They were quite unable to 
accept the new comedies that Greene had enabled. They campaigned 
strongly against them and with considerable personal hostility to Greene 
himself. They fought a long war of attrition against the transformed BBC 
and won several tactical victories, including the toppling of Greene him-
self (Thompson  2012 , 87–88). But despite these victories, they lost their 
war against the new permissiveness in broadcast comedy. They lost mainly 
because the wider social changes that had enabled the BBC to change 
direction continued, and the large and vocal minority who supported their 
campaign shrank in size. The remnant lost confi dence in its ability ever to 
reverse the unwelcome shifts not just in the BBC, but in society at large. 
British society had become more secular, freer in its sexual behaviour and 
attitudes and increasingly tolerant of homosexuality. The critics lost the 
culture war and failed substantially to curb BBC comedy in the ways that 
mattered to them. 
 THE ERA OF THE LITTLE GREEN BOOK 
 From its inception, the BBC had strongly curbed comedy, which was eas-
ily done when radio programmes were made in the studio using carefully 
vetted scripts, but tensions arose during World War II when outside radio 
broadcasts became common, often with a live audience of men serving 
in the armed forces, who were used to ribald humour. This led to trans-
gressions that provoked a series of vigorous interventions from as high 
as the Director-General himself that could reduce the minions dealing 
with comedy to a state of obsequious groveling. On 30 January 1941, the 
comedian Sydney Howard introduced an unscripted off-colour gag into 
a forces programme to the horror of the producer D. Miller and of Jack 
Payne who was in charge of musical continuity. A badly frightened Payne 
wrote a very angry letter to Howard, accusing him of doing it maliciously. 
Payne was minding his back, for he also wrote demeaning letters of apol-
ogy and exculpation to Roger H. Eckersley, Organiser of Programmes, to 
John Watt, Director of Variety and to the Director-General F.W. Ogilvie 
himself, until he felt he was entirely in the clear and could write, ‘I am 
THE RISE AND FALL OF TABOO COMEDY IN THE BBC 23

glad to know, Director-General, that you don’t blame me’. The joke had 
proved to be no laughing matter.  1 
 At the end of the war, the BBC began codifying its censorship of com-
edy into a set of mandatory written rules. In September 1945, Michael 
Standing, the Director of Variety, drew up a formal censorship code insist-
ing that programmes be entirely free of obscene and blasphemous lan-
guage. There was to be no use of ‘God! Good God! My God! Blast! 
Hell! Damn! Bloody! Gor Blimey! and Ruddy!’ It was followed by the 
Television Policy Censorship Code of January 1947. In 1948, Standing 
produced the defi nitive BBC Variety Programmes Policy Guide for Writers 
and Producers that came to be known as The Green Book.  2 The little 
Green Book stated sternly that: 
 There is an absolute ban on the following:
 Jokes about—Lavatories, Pre-natal infl uences, Marital infi delity, Effeminacy 
in men, Immorality of any kind (as well as) suggestive references to 
Honeymoon couples, Chambermaids, Fig-leaves, Prostitution, Ladies 
Underwear e.g. winter draws on, Animal habits, e.g. rabbits, Lodgers (and) 
Commercial Travelers. 
 Like all such censorship codes, The Green Book was always being extended 
to include new words and situations. Nothing was ever deleted, but new 
forbidden items were added whenever there was unease at the top, making 
it more and more restrictive over time. The comedy performer Nicholas 
Parsons could still, decades later, ‘remember being told by one producer 
when recording a stand-up show that I couldn’t use the word naked as a 
punch line to a joke, it was a banned word in the little Green Book’s guid-
ance and censorship’ (Parsons  2008 ). The little Green Book was strict not 
only on smut but also on irreverence:
 Sayings of Christ or descriptive of Him are, of course, inadmissible for 
light entertainment programmes […]. Jokes built around Bible stories, e.g. 
Adam and Eve, Cain and Abel, David and Goliath, must also be avoided or 
any sort of parody of them […]. Reference to and jokes about different reli-
gious or religious denominations are banned. The following are also inad-
missible:—Jokes or comic songs about spiritualism, christenings, religious 
ceremonies of any description (e.g. weddings, funerals). 
 The absolutism of the code is emphasized by the instruction that 
‘Warming up sequences with studio audiences before broadcasting 
should conform to the same censorship standards as the programmes 
24 
C. DAVIES

themselves. Sample recordings should be submitted to the same censor-
ship as transmissions.’ In other words, the code was not just a means of 
avoiding complaints from offended listeners but of upholding the inner 
purity of the BBC, one of Britain’s sacred hierarchies, a special space 
secluded from the vulgarity and commercialism of the outside world and 
its laughter. Those responsible for this code of practice for broadcast 
humour clearly felt that it might give rise to ridicule, should the general 
public learn of its existence and detailed content, for the fi le is marked as 
being only for reference and ‘not for circulation’, with a further note that 
it must be ‘kept in the offi ce and not taken away by outside producers’. 
 The fi les of the BBC reveal just how emphatically the rules were 
enforced. They are full of edicts, memoranda, and denunciations from 
senior offi cials directed against errant producers of comedy programmes. 
Their missives tell us all we need to know about the internal tensions 
within the Corporation. The use of capital letters to indicate shock-horror 
is particularly revealing:
 Cecil McGivern. Television Programme Director to producers. 11 August 
1947 
 Subject. Over-runs and smut. URGENT and IMPORTANT. 
 SMUT 
 There have […] been examples in variety programmes lately of very doubt-
ful gags and songs. If a producer is not capable of deciding what is smut and 
embarrassing to the average householder, then he should not be producing.  3 
 Poor McGivern, a gifted enabler of new programmes, was under constant 
pressure from above. On 8 December 1947 he wrote to his superiors in 
the hierarchy: ‘You will see from the attached the constant war I wage 
against dirt. The chief reason for the dirt is that our variety producers are 
young and inexperienced in BBC ways. They must be trained. And are 
being so. But alas! it takes a little time.’  4 On 8 October 1952, Ronald 
Waldman, Head of Light Entertainment, sent a missive to all producers, 
saying: ‘Twice in the last fi ve weeks we have been treated to the lavatory 
gag in Light Entertainment Programmes. It is NOT funny and NOT suit-
able in television […]. I shall have to treat any further lapses of taste with 
extreme severity and this must not be considered an idle threat.’  5 On 24 
March 1954, there was a broadside from the Director-General himself, Sir 
Ian Jacob, to the Director of Television Broadcasting. Jacob complained 
that the television service was seriously departing from BBC policy and 
THE RISE AND FALL OF TABOO COMEDY IN THE BBC 25

standards, notably in its indecent light entertainment programmes and 
concluded ‘Unless action is taken soon to stop this kind of thing there will 
very soon be no standards left and the drift downhill will go right through 
the Corporation.’  6 
 These splenetic letters are an indication of a guerrilla war  within the 
BBC between the administrators and those doing the creative work—the 
producers and performers of comedy. The administrators waged a ‘war 
against smut’, by which they meant sexual and lavatorial jokes, innuendo 
and cross-dressing. Their use of angry phrases such as ‘despite orders, 
remonstration and constant harping’, ‘serious outbreak of questionable 
and suggestive material’, indicate how upset they were and their rage 
was backed up by threats. To mark a memorandum URGENT and even 
URGENT and IMPORTANT, in capital letters, when it deals with a 
mere joke, indicates the extent of their bile. The administrators sound 
like petulant schoolmasters haranguing their impudent charges as when 
they say ‘dirt and nastiness’, ‘it is NOT funny and NOT suitable’. The use 
of terms like these is guaranteed to produce smirks and sniggers among 
those thus admonished. In 1947, Cecil McGivern, Television Programme 
Director, complained that ‘variety producers tend to smile behind their 
hands whenever I complain of smut in variety shows’.  7 
 The administrators saw themselves as part of a strict hierarchy imbued 
with moral purpose, what they would have called the BBC ethos. Obedience 
was for them a key virtue and directives from above were responded to 
with great deference partly because the administrators’ careers depended 
on obeying orders, and partly because they strongly believed they should. 
The BBC offi cials were alarmed by ‘smut’ in comedy, not just because 
it might lead to complaints from the public and more alarmingly from 
the politicians who ultimately controlled the organization’s fi nances but 
because of the very nature of their employment, which narrowed their 
minds. They lived in a world of rigid, fi xed, hierarchically arranged cat-
egories, as we can see from their compound titles built round the words 
‘Director’, ‘Head’, ‘Controller’, and known by complicated acronyms as 
Tel.P.D., H.L.E. G. Tel, S.P. Man AC(OS), A/ADV. The head of it all, 
the Director-General, would be referred to in conversation as ‘the D.G.’ 
even though everyone knew his name. 
 In such a world, ambiguity is suspect and irreverence to authority even 
more so, but these two things are the very building blocks of comedy. The 
senior offi cials of the BBC hierarchy were part of the Establishment and 
linked in sentiment and social background to the senior persons of other 
26 
C. DAVIES

hierarchies, those of the armed forces, the civil service and the church. 
They had a shared outlook that rejected the commercial world with its vul-
garity and the ‘anarchy of the market place’ and upheld traditional author-
ity of all kinds. 
 They were particularly likely to be worried about jokes that seemed to 
mock religion or were indecent. Religious creeds tend to be suspicious 
and fearful of sexuality and hold up ‘purity’ as an ideal, with pollution as 
its antithesis. Smutty and scatological humour cuts against such an out-
look. As they entered Broadcasting House on their way to their offi ces, 
the senior BBC offi cials would every day pass a dedication plaque that read 
(in the classical Latin, which they would all have studied in their youth):
 This Temple of the Arts and Muses is dedicated to Almighty God by the fi rst 
Governors of Broadcasting in the year 1931, Sir John Reith being Director- 
General. It is their prayer that good seed sown may bring forth a good har-
vest, that all things hostile to peace or purity may be banished from this house. 
 It was perhaps rather strange that a pagan temple of the Arts and the Muses 
be dedicated to the Almighty God of the Christians and the Jews. Purity 
was to be upheld except perhaps when the high seriousness of art required 
that it be suspended. Comedy did not qualify, and the rules about the 
use of ‘bad language’ on the air were stricter for comedy than for serious 
drama. Expletives such as Hell! God! and Damn! were rigorously excluded 
from light entertainment and replaced by Heck! Gosh! and Darn!, whereas 
they were allowed in drama to give verisimilitude and there was a reluc-
tance to bowdlerize the serious and sententious classics. On 29 April 1954, 
the Head of Drama Michael Barry wrote to all Drama Producers:
 URGENT. To be read today. This department has in the last four days trans-
mitted a performance using language that it had been agreed should not be 
used in comedy and used only after careful consideration in serious plays. 
 Far from having a ‘special freedom’, comedy was bound by special restric-
tions that did not apply to other kinds of programme that the high-minded 
mandarins saw as heavily earnest. Only earnestness was important enough 
to justify wild language. It was forbidden to refer to ‘marital infi delity’ or 
to ‘immorality of any kind’, ‘except in plays’. There could be no joking 
about it and certainly none about that most outrageous of vices, ‘effemi-
nacy in men (or impersonations)’.  8 Comedy could never contain the kind 
of redeeming purpose that would make the portrayal of transgression licit. 
THE RISE AND FALL OF TABOO COMEDY IN THE BBC 27

 The producers of the comedy programmes were by virtue of their trade 
not part of this world of high seriousness. Unlike the comedy performers, 
whose relationship with the BBC was temporary, commercial and con-
tractual, the producers were part of the BBC staff and had organizational 
responsibilities, but an individual producer was not, as the higher BBC 
bureaucrat was, ‘chained to the activity by his entire material and ideal 
existence […] forged to the community of all the functionaries who are 
integrated into the mechanism’ (Weber  1948 , 228–229). The producers 
worked closely with performers, men and women whose main concern 
was to amuse an audience, often a live outside audience, with whatever 
material they could get away with. These last were entertainers, a class 
about as far removed from the senior BBC bureaucrats as could be. The 
entertainers’ main strength in the marketplace lay in their popularity and, 
so long as this held up, they had high earnings and were not dependent on 
employment by the BBC. The salaried producers were stuck in the middle, 
but even though they were forced to obey the offi cials, their sympathies 
were likely to be with the entertainers with whom they worked on a regu-
lar and intimate basis. 
 The confl icts over humour during the 1940s and 1950s were, then, 
mainly internal ones, a confl ict of producers and performers versus the 
BBC’s senior bureaucrats. But even within the ordered hierarchy doubts 
and cracks were emerging. On 23 July 1963, Graham Miller, the Head 
of Northern Regional Programmes who was not happy with an explicit 
ban on jokes about the Profumo sex scandal, wrote in disagreement to 
R.D.A. Marriott, the Assistant Director of Sound Broadcasting, ending 
his letter with: ‘But orders are orders and they are being obeyed’.  9 One 
suspects he is being ironic for the year is 1963, Carleton Greene is the 
new libertarian Director-General and the old order is crumbling. The war 
against smut was beginning to be lost. The situation was soon to change 
radically, with greater internal freedom leading to intense confl ict with 
those outside determined to uphold the old taboos.  
 THE GREAT CULTURE WAR 
 The patterns of censorship of comedy in the BBC changed rapidly after 
Hugh Carleton Greene became Director-General in 1960. The Green 
Book gave way to the Greene book. He unleashed the producers of ribald 
and irreverent comedy and they made many outrageous series such as  That 
Was the Week That Was (TW3) (1962–1963),  Steptoe and Son (1962–1965; 
28 
C. DAVIES

1970–1974), and  Till Death Us Do Part (1965–1968; 1970; 1972–1975) 
for television, and  Round the Horne (1965–1968) for radio. They were 
all immensely popular. The audience for  TW3 , a satire programme that 
was shown very late in the evening (Hoggart  2005 ), rose from three and 
a half million when it began to six and a half million by the beginning of 
1963 (Tracey  1983 , 207) to 12 million just before it was taken off. In 
1966, Harold Wilson, when Prime Minister, successfully demanded that 
the BBC show a repeat of  Steptoe and Son later than usual in the evening 
on election night, well after the polls had closed, lest he lose votes (Tracey 
 1983 , 266), because Labour supporters would see watching a couple of 
comic rag and bone men as more important than voting for socialism. 
Later, Labour was to get Harry H. Corbett, the younger rag and bone 
man in the comedy, to take part in the Labour Party’s offi cial political 
broadcasts.  Till Death Us Do Part was for a time the most popular show in 
Britain and even the second series had 16 million watching it (Tracey and 
Morrison  1979 , 115). Even in 1986, an old and familiar repeat drew an 
audience of 12.5 million. When shown in Australia,  Till Death Us Do Part 
became the most popular programme ever seen on Australian television. 
 They were all hugely popular programmes and viewers voted for them 
by turning them on week after week. People wanted bad language, smut, 
irreverence and ‘racism’. But those who disapproved of that kind of thing 
were enraged. A Roman Catholic paper told its readers ‘to switch off when 
 TW3 comes on’ and an Anglican priest called  That Was the Week That 
Was ‘a poisonous conspiracy against all that is good in British life’ ( That 
Was  2012 ). Indeed, within two months of its inception  TW3 was ‘begin-
ning to give some people indigestion’ notably the item ‘Consumer Report 
on Religion’, which ‘described each of the main religions as if they were 
goods on offer’ (Tracey  1983 , 209). 
 The widespread indignation led to a substantial protest movement, 
the National Viewers’ and Listeners’ Association led by Mrs. Mary 
Whitehouse and dedicated to cleaning up TV (Whitehouse  1967 ), which 
at its peak had 150,000 members. Its main objections were to the use 
of blasphemous and indecent language, to salacious humour and to the 
humorous mocking of the Christian religion. Thousands attended its 
inaugural meeting in 1964, and the following year a petition with nearly 
half a million signatures supporting its manifesto for cleaning up television 
was presented to Parliament (Whitehouse  1971 , 68). It was a very rapid 
and hostile response to the new liberties being taken in the BBC. NVALA 
had very considerable support, particularly from traditional Christians of a 
THE RISE AND FALL OF TABOO COMEDY IN THE BBC 29

puritanical disposition, of whom there were many. But it represented only 
a moral minority, a large and important minority but a minority far smaller 
than the numbers choosing week after week to watch and enjoy the pro-
grammes that were giving so much offence. 
 The television programme that gave most offence was  Till Death Us 
Do Part , written for the BBC by Johnny Speight and produced by Dennis 
Main Wilson, perhaps the most celebrated and successful of all the BBC’s 
comedy producers for both radio and television, the man also responsible 
for  The Goon Show ,  Hancock’s Half Hour ,  Here’s Harry , and  It’s Marty. 
It was a satire directed against its central character Alf Garnett, a foul 
mouthed, authoritarian, reactionary, working-class Cockney, devoted to 
the monarchy and the church, bigoted and xenophobic (Booth  2005 ; 
Speight  1986 ). On 20 September 1972, the episode of  Till Death Us Do 
Part was called ‘The Bird Fancier’. In one scene Alf’s wife, Else, is saying 
that the local pub is a hotbed of scandal:
 Alf: 
Blimey… Hark who’s talking! When you and Old Gran get in there 
with yer port an’ gins no one’s reputation is safe. The other night 
in there—old Gran—she was spreading scandal about heaven… say-
ing—she was—that—Mary couldn’t be a virgin—‘cos she was in 
child by ( looks reverently upwards ) Him. 
 Else: 
( is shocked ) 
 Alf: 
I thought she’d get struck down any minute, I did—I walked away. 
I wasn’t the only one either. 
 Else: 
Well… I suppose they’re different to us—up there. I suppose they 
can have babies without having to do what we have to do. 
 Rita: 
( reacts sympathetically ) 
 Alf: 
Yer… I know… well, what they do is immaculate, anit? 
 Mike: 
I wonder how many they’ve got now? 
 Else: 
Who? 
 Mike: 
HIM and HER. 
 Else: 
They only had the one. 
 Mike: 
Yeah—but that was two thousand years ago—they could have had 
another fi fteen hundred by now. 
 Else: 
( is not amused ) 
 Mike: 
Unless they’re on the pill. 
 Alf: 
( explodes ) You… I only hope He can hear you—you blasphemous 
scouse git!   (Tracey and Morrison  1979 , 110–111). 
30 
C. DAVIES

 Speight’s humour here was particularly offensive to Roman Catholics, 
who believe not just in the Virgin Birth but in the Immaculate Conception 
(a doctrine declared  ex cathedra to be infallible), in Jesus not having siblings 
even though they are mentioned in the New Testament and that ‘artifi -
cial’ methods of birth control are wicked and forbidden. Speight had been 
brought up in an authoritarian Catholic family and sent to a Catholic school, 
and Alf Garnett is supposed to have been based on his own father, a Catholic 
docker, though Alf is depicted as an Anglican in the TV series. Speight is 
making fun not just of Christian churches and the oddities of their members 
and clergy, but of the central mysteries of their faith. This is not the mere 
gentle poking fun at religious institutions found in other BBC television 
comedies such as  The Vicar of Dibley ,  All Gas and Gaiters or  Father Ted ; this 
is comedy that puts the boot in. It is likely that not only did Speight not 
believe in God but he hated Him. Not surprisingly this very popular episode 
caused widespread outrage (Tracey and Morrison  1979 , 111–115) among 
those who had been protected from such comedies in earlier decades. 
 Both  Till Death Us Do Part and another very popular programme,  It 
Ain’t Half Hot Mum , were regularly attacked for their use of innuendo 
and of bad language (Tracey and Morrison  1979 , 88; Whitehouse  1967 , 
162). Alf Garnett’s use of the word ‘bloody’ was incessant and repeti-
tive, used as many as 103 times in a single episode (Tracey and Morrison 
 1979 , 88). One of Mrs. Whitehouse’s many supporters wrote two letters 
to Lord Hill, the Chairman of the Board of Governors, pointing out the 
monotony of his speech, a straight letter of complaint and a satirical ver-
sion using the word bloody as often as Garnett did. 
 Dear Lord Hill, 
 Will you please spare a few b----- minutes to read these two b----- letters. 
 Last Friday my b----- husband and I counted the b----- number of times the 
b----- word ‘bloody’ was used in b----- ‘Till Death Us Do Part’. You may 
be b----- well surprised to know the b----- number—44 times—16 in the 
fi rst few b----- minutes as a b----- result of this I found myself b----- well 
obsessed by the b-----word and b----- well tossed and turned the whole b---
-- night long. 
 I feel I should be b----- well failing in my b----- duty as a Christian if I 
didn’t raise my b----- voice small though it well b----- be and ask you as 
a b----- man in authority to raise your b----- voice in protest against such 
b----- programmes’ 
 (Whitehouse  1971 , 80–81, cited without naming its Christian author, the 
wife of a school-master). 
THE RISE AND FALL OF TABOO COMEDY IN THE BBC 31

 Lord Hill replied to the letters without using the ‘b’ word. He justifi ed 
Alf’s bloody mindedness on the grounds that he was inarticulate and so 
was forced to use it constantly. This was no more true of the highly articu-
late Garnett than of the comedian Billy Connolly when, like the legendary 
Australian (Davies  1990 , 269), he said ‘I know at least… oh my God, at 
least 127 words. And I still prefer “Fuck”.’ 
 Mrs. Whitehouse had long been a member of and was strongly infl u-
enced by an organization called Moral Rearmament (MRA) (Tracey and 
Morrison  1979 , 63–69), which was widely regarded with dislike and dis-
dain, and particularly by Sir Hugh Greene (Tracey  1983 , 231). By origin, 
MRA was evangelical Christian, but many church leaders condemned it 
and it later transformed itself into a general vehicle for what it called ‘abso-
lute morality’, open to members of any religion. One of its absolutes was 
‘absolute purity’, which sounded sinister to many. Its leader in the early 
1960s, Peter Howard, was full of contempt for what the BBC had become 
and obsessed with the ‘evils’ of homosexuality. Most of those who hold 
strongly negative views of homosexuals and homosexuality are not homo-
phobic, merely misguided. But Howard  was homophobic. He feared and 
hated homosexuality, and saw homosexuals as part of a conspiracy and as 
a potential source of total moral collapse. Howard’s book  Britain and 
the Beast has chapters with titles such as ‘Sods and Squares’ and ‘Queens 
and Queers’. He begins another chapter with the phrase ‘God is the great 
totalitarian’ (Howard  1963 , 84). The slightest public joke on the subject 
could reduce him to hysterical indignation:
 The radio and television push acceptance of unacceptables on us in many 
ways. Programmes often are sympathetic to dirt and make suggestive jokes 
about homosexuals and fi lth. One morning in Spring, 1963, I heard two 
men talking about cricket reports. One said he had had his camera trained 
on an Australian cricketer with his legs wide apart fi elding at left slip. He had 
commented to the public that the man was ‘waiting for a tickle’. Giggles and 
laughter. This goes out to millions (Howard  1963 , 33–34). 
 The harmless remark in question, a vulgar pun and innuendo, depends on 
the use of the word ‘tickle’ by cricket commentators to mean that the ball 
has just touched the edge of the bat, which may mean that someone fi eld-
ing behind the batsman can catch it and thus dismiss the batsman. The 
comment was made by Brian Johnston, known as Johnners, who was to 
32 
C. DAVIES

become one of the BBC’s most popular commentators on cricket matches. 
It is quite likely that the original remark had been a ‘Freudian leg slip’, 
but one that was instantly recognized and produced sniggering hilarity. 
Peter Howard made a fool of himself with his paranoid interpretation of 
it as part of a BBC lurch towards permissiveness in regard to homosexu-
ality. However, once the gaffe had been made it became and remains a 
very popular humorous item, and Brian Johnston repeated it in his book 
of jokes, along with his later gaffe broadcast by the BBC, ‘The batsman’s 
Holding, the bowler’s Willey’ ( 1995 , 10;  2008 ; Tibballs  2007 , 18). 
Michael Holding was a noted West Indian cricket player and Peter Willey 
an off-break bowler for England. They were playing together in a cricket 
match at The Oval in 1976 with Johnners commenting, but by this time 
there may well have been a deliberate carelessness about his gaffes. He 
knew that the cricket fans would laugh at these petty indecencies and that 
no-one would care. Had Peter Howard, a former rugby international, still 
been alive and listening he would no doubt have seen it as the fall of the 
Roman Empire and the decadence of Weimar Germany rolled into one. 
The key question is why he could regard a mere joke as a matter of such 
extreme importance. The answer is that he was in the grip of a rigid and 
infl exible ideology, and any affront to his worldview or a reminder of its 
fragility he found seriously, if irrationally, threatening. An innuendo that 
made light of an imagined, indecent physical contact between men might 
lead to an unleashing of the sins of Sodom on the country and to total 
social collapse or to a supine acceptance of a foreign invasion. It is not dif-
fi cult to guess what would have been the reaction of the by then deceased 
Howard to the popular radio comedy  Round the Horne , described here by 
Jonathan Green ( 2005 , 151): 
 But of all the  Round the Horne humour none equalled the strain of 
unashamed camping that ran through the show. Homosexuality was not 
legalised until 1967 and the running references to the gay world and its 
particular jargon, delighted both homosexuals who were already ‘in’, and 
a growing ‘straight’ public, who began to understand just what it was the 
team were going on about. At its simplest there were the throwaway lines: 
Kenneth ‘Stinker’ Williams, the fag with the fi ltered tip […] and, in refer-
ence to a well-known West End ‘cottage’: ‘Kenneth Williams can be seen in 
‘The Little Hut’ in Leicester Square—soap and towels, 3d extra’. 
THE RISE AND FALL OF TABOO COMEDY IN THE BBC 33

 ‘Hello, I’m Julian, and this is my friend Sandy’ was the catch-phrase of two 
outrageous camp characters played by two outrageous gay actors, Kenneth 
Williams and Hugh Paddick ( The Bona World of Julian and Sandy , 1996), 
in direct defi ance of the old BBC rule book edict that there must under 
no circumstances be humour about effeminacy in men. Mrs. Whitehouse 
would have been even more outraged by  Round the Horne had she been 
able to grasp the references to unnatural sexual shenanigans being made 
in Polari, a gay argot (Took and Feldman  1974 , 12; Baker  2004 ; Ellison 
and Fosberry  1996 ). One of the functions of Polari, particularly in the 
days before homosexual behaviour was legalized in 1967, was to enable 
gay men to talk freely about forbidden matters without incurring trouble 
from the censorious and indeed from police informers. If it fooled the 
informers, it would certainly have fooled Mrs. Whitehouse and she would 
not easily have been able to challenge in court what was being said. Both 
Paddick and Williams loved Polari and ad-libbed, which made the show 
far fi lthier than Mrs. Whitehouse could even have imagined. And yet even 
when the meaning was innocent, it sounded vaguely indecent. Kenneth 
Williams, the star of the show, wrote in his diary on 28 April 1968:
 BBC Studios for the talk with Peter Haugh on ‘Moviegoround’. He asked 
me for a defi nition of ‘camp’. I said ‘To some it means that which is fun-
damentally frivolous, to others the baroque as opposed to the puritanical 
(classical) and to others—a load of poofs’ (Williams  1994 , 324). 
 Despite considerable pressure from the members of MRA to play a larger 
role in the National Viewers’ and Listeners’ Association, Mrs. Whitehouse 
was careful to keep them at a safe distance and did not accept money from 
them. She did not want them explicitly involved in her work nor did she 
invite them to speak at her meetings (Tracey and Morrison  1979 , 68), 
though they did sometimes distribute their leafl ets in the foyer (Tracey 
 1983 , 231). She wanted to run a quite independent organization. Yet 
at some level in her mind she probably knew that many Christian people 
were very hostile to MRA because of its tactics (Harrison  1934 ) and its 
bigotry. Nonetheless, her outlook was very much shaped by her earlier 
experiences as a member of MRA (Tracey and Morrison  1979 , 63–64, 
69) and she went to MRA conferences in the 1960s when she was set-
ting up the NVALA. It was particularly manifest in the way she was later 
to mount savage legal attacks on representations of homosexuality in 
print or on stage, particularly if they impinged on and therefore, in her 
34 
C. DAVIES

eyes, besmirched religion or patriotism. In doing so, she foolishly drew 
the public’s attention to obscure items that would otherwise have gone 
unnoticed. For her, homosexuality was the  peccatum illud horrible, inter 
christianos non nominandum , that horrible crime not to be named among 
Christians, a crime against the very order of society and indeed of God’s 
creation (Davies  1982 ,  1983 ,  2004 ). But her crusade failed and Quentin 
Crisp’s ‘stately homos of England’ prevailed. Openly gay comedians are 
a standard part of twenty-fi rst century broadcasting comedy. Welcome to 
the queer new world.  
 WHY THE CULTURE WAR WAS LOST 
 The confl ict between the BBC and the NVALA over comedies that the 
latter found offensive has to be seen as part of a much more general ‘cul-
ture war’, which in turn arose from deeper patterns of social change. The 
dirty and irreverent BBC comedies were a symbolic battleground. Those 
who hated them did not understand the new and unwelcome patterns of 
social change in the wider world and must have felt helpless to stop them. 
Instead they attacked that which was visible and tangible and offensive 
and which they thought they could eliminate: offensive broadcasts. The 
would-be censors deluded themselves into thinking that these nasty com-
edies had a signifi cant negative effect on society as a whole and that, were 
they abolished, there could be a return to the old decencies. They were 
utterly wrong on all counts. Comedy is both important and unimportant. 
It is important because of the great pleasure it gives to those who decide 
to join an audience. That is why so many millions of people chose to 
watch the disapproved programmes, enjoyed them enormously and went 
on watching. Comedy is unimportant because it has no effect and no 
consequences at all in a world where social change is driven by other far 
stronger social forces (Davies  2011 ). 
 It does not follow that the underlying concerns of the NVALA were 
trivial or unreal. They were in the main fervent evangelical Christians and 
rigorist Roman Catholics who were living in a society that was increasingly 
secular. People were giving up going to church or belonging to a church 
and, most important of all, had stopped sending their children to Sunday 
school (Davies  2004 , 43–50). Very roughly, adherence to a church had 
peaked just before World War I and then gone into slow decline. From 
the mid-1950s the decline accelerated (Brown  2001 ; Davies  2004 ). The 
changes began well before the BBC descended into its comic mockery 
THE RISE AND FALL OF TABOO COMEDY IN THE BBC 35

of the Christian religion. The BBC did not cause secularization. Rather, 
the decline in religion created a cultural climate in which it was possi-
ble for the BBC to put out its offending comedies with impunity. Mrs. 
Whitehouse and her supporters were a remnant of what had once been the 
dominant culture and they did not like their new position. 
 With the decline in popular Protestantism (Green  2010 ) came a decline 
in the respectable virtues. The years of strong religion before World War 
I had produced a marked decline in both violent and acquisitive crime, 
in the abuse of drugs and alcohol, and in the number and proportion of 
illegitimate births. By the inter-war period, Britain was a low crime society; 
illicit drugs were almost unknown and public drunkenness rare. Prisons 
were being closed down because there were not enough inmates to justify 
their existence. From the mid-1950s all this changed. Crime rates of all 
kinds and drug and alcohol abuse rose rapidly, indeed alarmingly, and 
were to go on rising for forty years, completely transforming the society 
in undesirable ways (Davies  2004 , 1–42). But the change that alarmed the 
opponents of offending comedy was the marked shift in patterns of sexual 
behaviour. Younger people no longer saw any reason for waiting until 
they were married before enjoying sexual relations. Sexual matters were 
freely talked about. The use of the criminal law to punish homosexual 
behaviour came to be seen as an anachronism, and attempts were made 
to abolish these laws. People were ceasing to condemn the abominations 
of Leviticus or to take seriously the view of religious traditionalists that 
tolerating homosexuality would lead to disaster (Davies  2004 , 139–180). 
All this was abhorrent to the shrinking minority of true believers. Smutty 
comedies were seen as offensive because they aroused the deepest fears of 
those who were alarmed by the changes in sexual behaviour and attitudes. 
But secularization and the marked shift in sexual behaviour meant that 
in the long run the NVALA would be defeated because fewer and fewer 
people saw the world the way they did and ever fewer found comedies 
mocking the old conventional pieties to be unacceptable. Smut and irrev-
erence had won.  
 A NEW HEGEMONY 
 Mrs. Whitehouse lost, but in the twenty-fi rst century political correctness 
has taken the BBC back to the rigid patterns of the 1950s and comedy 
has been correspondingly enfeebled (Deacon  2009 ; Lawson  2009 ). The 
golden age of comedy of the latter part of the twentieth century is over. 
Many of the television programmes of that brief era of freedom, such as 
36 
C. DAVIES

 Till Death Us Do Part and  It Ain’t Half Hot Mum are never shown, even 
though they would still attract huge audiences for a BBC, which for fi nan-
cial reasons depends heavily on repeating successful old comedies such as 
 Dad’s Army or sketches from  The Two Ronnies (Barker  1999 ; Davidson 
and Vincent  1978 ). Needless to say, no new programmes employing or 
implying mockery from the outside of ethnic and religious minorities will 
ever again be made by or for the BBC.  It Ain’t Half Hot Mum made fun 
of British entertainer-soldiers in India in World War II with accompany-
ing Indian menials, one of whom was played by a browned-up, Hindi- 
speaking, Indian-born Englishman. It can no longer be shown because it 
offends today’s BBC elite, who, along with administrators and producers 
alike, belong to a new version of a high-minded upper middle class with 
a single seamless world-view. The hegemony is even more absolute than 
it was in the early days of the BBC, for there are no rebellious producers 
seeking to defy their masters and amuse the masses in politically incorrect 
ways. When politically incorrect old programmes such as  Fawlty Towers are 
shown, they are cut and censored. It does not take a great stretch of the 
imagination to guess how and why the  Fawlty Towers script reproduced 
here was mutilated before being shown as a repeat.
 The Major: Strange creatures women. 
 Basil: 
Well, can’t stand around all day… 
 The Major: I knew one once… Striking looking girl… tall, you know… 
Father was a banker. 
 Basil: 
Really. 
 The Major: Don’t remember the name of the bank. 
 Basil: 
Never mind. 
 The Major: I must have been rather keen on her, because I took her to 
see… India! 
 Basil: 
India? 
 The Major: At the Oval… Fine match, marvellous fi nish… Now Surrey 
had to get 33 in about half an hour… She went off to powder 
her… powder her hands or something… women… er… never 
came back. 
 Basil: 
What a shame. 
 The Major: And the strange thing was… throughout the morning she 
kept referring to the Indians as niggers. ‘No no no,’ I said, 
‘the niggers are the West Indians. These people are wogs.’ 
‘No, no,’ she said. ‘All cricketers are niggers.’ 
 Basil: 
They do get awfully confused, don’t they? They are not think-
ers. I see it with Sybil every day (from ‘The Germans’ broad-
cast on BBC2, 24 October 1975). 
THE RISE AND FALL OF TABOO COMEDY IN THE BBC 37

 The Major, who is clearly a doddering anachronism, rarely sober and 
not very sharp, provides humour by speaking in character and is not to 
be taken seriously or identifi ed with, but he has been cut out like a fallen 
member of the Central Committee in a Kremlin photograph (Stevens 
 2013 ). Mrs. Whitehouse lost the war, but her style of thinking has cap-
tured the BBC. Words once again have magical evil properties, regardless 
of intention or context and have to be excised from comedy. The delusion 
that comedy can have a powerful bad infl uence has returned, as has the 
idea that certain selected minorities must never be offended. Like Mrs. 
Whitehouse, the BBC elite are unable to understand that their views and 
values are not necessarily widely shared and that others may in good faith 
and for honourable reasons reject them. The confl icts are not about values 
and never were. They are about power. It is about who decides whose 
tastes in comedy shall prevail and whose shall never be catered to. It is 
about who has the power to decide who may be spurned when offended 
and who shall be pandered to.  
 NOTES 
 1.   BBC fi les. R34/292/21, 5 and 6 February 1942. All references to BBC fi les 
in the text refer to those in the BBC Written Archive in Caversham, England. 
I would like to thank the staff for their invaluable and helpful assistance to 
me during my research visits there.  
 2.   BBC fi les. R/34/275/3 Policy Censorship in Programmes 1947–1954, 
File 1c, July 1948.  
 3.   BBC fi les. T16/157.  
 4.    BBC fi les. T16/157.  
 5.   BBC fi les. T16/157.  
 6.   BBC fi les. T16/162.  
 7.   BBC fi les. T16/157, 1 September 1947.  
 8.   Draft Television policy Censorship Code, 20 January 1947. Taste File 
1946–1954. 
 9.  BBC fi les. R34/1250, Policy Censorship Variety and Comedy Programmes, 
1960–1967. 
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Baker, Paul. 2004.  Fantabulosa: A Dictionary of Polari and Gay Slang . London: 
Continuum. 
 Barker, Ronnie. 1999.  All I Ever Wrote: The Complete Works . London: Essential.  
38 
C. DAVIES

 Booth, Tony. 2005. Alf Garnett. In  British Comedy Greats , ed. Annabel Merullo, 
and Neil Wenborn, 12–16. Chester: Marks and Spencer.  
 Brown, Callum. 2001.  The Death of Christian Britain: Understanding 
Secularisation 1800–2000 . London: Routledge.  
 Davidson, Ian, and Peter Vincent. 1978.  The Bumper Book of the Two Ronnies: The 
Very Best of the News . London: Star.  
 Davies, Christie. 1982. Sexual Taboos and Social Boundaries.  American Journal of 
Sociology 87(5): 1032–1063.  
 ———. 1983. Religious Boundaries and Sexual Morality.  Annual Review of the 
Social Sciences of Religion 6: 45–77.  
 ———. 1990.  Ethnic Humor around the World: A Comparative Analysis . 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.  
 ———. 2004.  The Strange Death of Moral Britain . New Brunswick: Transaction.  
 ———. 2011.  Jokes and Targets . Bloomington: Indiana University Press.  
 Deacon, Michael. 2009. The BBC’s Censors Risk Killing Off Comedy.  The 
Telegraph , October 19.  
 Ellison, M.J., and Charles Fosberry. 1996.  A Queer Companion: A Rough Guide to 
Gay Slang . London: Abson.  
 Green, Jonathan. 2005. Round the Horne. In  British Comedy Greats , ed. Annabel 
Merullo, and Neil Wenborn, 148–151. Chester: Marks and Spencer.  
 Green, Simon J.D. 2010.  The Passing of Protestant England: Secularisation and 
Social Change, c. 1920–1960. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
 Harrison, Marjorie. 1934.  Saints Run Mad: A Criticism of the ‘Oxford’ Group 
Movement . London: Bodley Head.  
 Hoggart, Simon. 2005. That was the Week That Was. In  British Comedy Greats , 
ed. Annabel Merullo, and Neil Wenborn, 162–165. Chester: Marks and 
Spencer. 
 Howard, Peter. 1963.  Britain and the Beast . London: Heinemann.  
 Johnston, Brian. 1995.  I Say, I Say, I Say: Johnners’ Choice of Jokes to Keep You 
Laughing . London: Mandarin.  
 ———. 2008.  Johnners: Cricketing Gaffes, Giggles and Cakes . London: BBC 
Audio Books.  
  Lawson, Mark. 2009. Is Censorship Taking over the BBC?  The Guardian , 
November 18.  
 Parsons, Nicholas. 2008. How Radio Comedy Changed a Nation.  BBC News 
Magazine , October 17.  
 Speight, Johnny. 1986.  The Garnett Chronicles . London: Robson.  
 Stevens, Christopher. 2013. Censoring  Fawlty ’s Gags Makes the Beeb Look More 
Bonkers than Basil.  Mail on Line , January 24.  
 Thompson, Ben. 2012.  Ban this Filth: Letters from the Mary Whitehouse Archive . 
London: Faber and Faber.  
THE RISE AND FALL OF TABOO COMEDY IN THE BBC 39

 Tibballs, Geoff. 2007.  The Bowler’s Holding the Batsman’s Willey . St. Helens: The 
Book People.  
 Took, Barry, and Marty Feldman. 1974.  Round the Horne . London: Woburn.  
 Tracey, Michael. 1983.  A Variety of Lives: A Biography of Sir Hugh Greene . London: 
Bodley Head.  
 Tracey, Michael, and David Morrison. 1979.  Whitehouse . Basingstoke: Macmillan.  
 That Was. 2012. That Was the Show that Was.  Wales on Line , November 27.  
 Weber, Max. 1948.  From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology. Ed. H.H.  Gerth and 
C. Wright Mills. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.  
 Whitehouse, Mary. 1967.  Cleaning-Up TV: From Protest to Participation . London: 
Blandford.  
 ———. 1971.  Who Does She Think She is? London: New English Library.  
 Williams, Kenneth. 1994. In  The Kenneth Williams Diaries , ed. Russell Davies. 
London: Harper Collins.  
40 
C. DAVIES

41
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2_3
 The Last Laugh: Dark Comedy on US 
Television  
 Kristen   A.    Murray  
 K. A.   Murray  () 
 Department of English ,  City University of Hong Kong ,  Kowloon ,  Hong Kong 
 e-mail: kamurray@cityu.edu.hk 
 In the TV series  Pushing Daisies (2007–2009), a small car full of clowns 
runs off the road and crashes, killing all occupants. As the corpses are 
removed from the car, each clad in a colourful costume, the scene becomes 
increasingly preposterous. How many dead clowns fi t into a car?  1 
 The phenomenon of dark comedy—also known as gallows humour or 
black comedy—engenders perceptions of distaste, insouciance, confusion, 
revulsion and even transcendence. In the presence of these intrinsic con-
tradictions, dark comedy has emerged as a powerful and pervasive form of 
expression in contemporary US television.  2 Many recent series—such as 
 Six Feet Under ,  House, M.D. ,  Breaking Bad ,  The Last Man on Earth , and 
 The Big C —have created dark comedy through an imbrication of levity 
and death. 
 Despite the current popularity of dark comedy, there have been few 
efforts to understand the cultural conditions that evoked this form of 
expression. This chapter focuses on the social forces that sparked the cre-
ation of dark comedy and fuelled its prominence. I contend that dark 
comedy emerged from signifi cant shifts in people’s relationship to, and 
understanding of, death in contemporary American society.  3 Some of the 

key aspects of this alteration include: longer life expectancy, changing reli-
gious affi liations, differences in memorial arrangements, constant access 
to media information and interactive experiences related to death. These 
social changes, which occurred over the past half century, coincide with 
the period in which TV became a ‘social and aesthetic force that serves as 
a powerful instrument for disseminating and legitimating culture and for 
regulating how persons and things are represented and valued’ (Shoshana 
and Teman  2006 , 560). 
 This chapter explores television texts as cultural artefacts, or entities that 
both refl ect and shape the ways in which people process their existence. In 
applying this analytical metaphor to dark comedy, I consider how media 
about death generates ‘a cultural forum of ideas, rather [than] a singular 
unifi ed message’ (Mittell  2010 , 363). From this perspective, people who 
engage with media about death may be considered ‘participants’: individu-
als who actively and continuously make and remake meaning from these 
texts and who infl uence the creation of future media.  4 Thus, different forms 
of media ‘not only present culturally relevant content, [but also] models 
and opportunities for particular representational processes’ (Greenfi eld 
 1993 , 161). The TV scenes analysed aired in the United States and other 
countries between 2000 and 2015—a period when many prominent TV 
series explored new, confrontational terrain through dark comedy.  5  
 The following section offers a concise theoretical discussion of the 
structures and effects of dark comedy as well as illustrative examples of 
its caustic voice. The focus of this chapter is not primarily how dark com-
edy operates, but how particular social conditions facilitate the creation 
and appreciation of this form of expression. To that end, the central sec-
tions of this chapter look at how death has become increasingly medi-
calized, secularized and mediatized in contemporary society. Extending 
Mellor’s ( 1993 ) notion of the simultaneous absence and presence of death 
in contemporary society, this author argues that dark comedy is an urgent 
articulation of the tension between visible and hidden aspects of loss. The 
impetus for this research, then, is to ‘ascribe a place for humour in a par-
ticular process, by bringing it into relationship [with] the social structure’ 
(Palmer  1994 , 67). 
 APPROACHING AND RETREATING FROM DEATH 
 In the early to mid-twentieth century in the United States, experi-
ences of loss were particularly extensive and devastating, due to a wide 
range of untreatable diseases and the casualties of war (Kellehear  2007 ; 
42 
K.A. MURRAY

Seale  2000 ). These fatal forces were entwined with considerable social 
pressure to maintain an impervious personal facade. Despite the promi-
nence of death in daily existence, the expression of emotion regarding 
death and grief remained relatively taboo through most of the twentieth 
century (Ariès  1981 ; Jalland  2006 ; Mitford  2000 ). 
 From the 1970s onwards, discussions of loss became more prominent 
in public discourse. Nonetheless, issues surrounding death, grief and pal-
liative care have received, and continue to attract, insuffi cient research and 
public policy attention (Gibson  2007 ; Kellehear  2007 ). Becker ( 1997 ) 
believes this avoidance of death is entrenched in US institutions, cultural 
practices and personal interactions. Even in twenty-fi rst century America, 
there are societal protections in place—particularly the healthcare system 
and funeral home industry—that keep death partially shrouded (Hockey 
 2007 ; Mitford  2000 ). 
 Yet the denial of mortality, however intricately conceived and prac-
ticed, ignores the inevitability of death. Bauman calls death the ‘ultimate 
incongruity’ because it juxtaposes the free, rational human mind with the 
crude limitations of the human body ( 1992 , 1). This disconcerting public 
silence surrounding the subject of loss may ‘explain the intense confu-
sion, anxiety, and even terror which are frequently experienced by indi-
viduals [facing] signs of their own mortality’ (Mellor and Shilling  1993 , 
414). Because real, tangible death is generally concealed from view, people 
may be poorly equipped to face signifi cant bereavement. Despite society’s 
efforts to sanitize death, it ‘intrudes into human thought in a myriad of 
ways’ (Crouch and Hüppauf  1985 , xi). 
 Although American society seems to sequester death, there are other 
ways in which contemporary culture brings death to the fore, incessantly 
reminding people of the fragility and unpredictability of life. The media, 
both in news and entertainment forms, make death seem more likely than 
it actually is, by artifi cially infl ating our fears and predictions of loss (Höijer 
 2004 ). In addition, the entertainment industry creates virtual reality prod-
ucts that enable people to vividly view and perform acts of fatal violence. 
Thus, most Americans are exposed to countless deaths per day through both 
fi ctional and nonfi ctional media. In this sense, people  possess a high degree 
of information about, and artifi cial engagement with, mortality (Gibson 
 2007 ; Seale  2000 ). Yet death in the media involves a kind of disembodi-
ment—a crafted, marketed, sanitized representation of loss rather than a 
tangible, traumatic physical demise. As a result, media exposure to death 
may do little to assuage the angst of genuine, individual loss (Gibson  2007 ). 
THE LAST LAUGH: DARK COMEDY ON US TELEVISION 43

This creates a contradiction—between approaching and retreating from 
death—that seems to provoke dark comedy. The following section presents 
a concise discussion of the three key theories of humour and how they illu-
minate recent examples of comedy about death. 
 Incongruity Theory and Corpses 
 The television series  Six Feet Under (2001–2005) focuses on the Fisher 
family, who operate a funeral home in Los Angeles. In one episode,  6 an 
apprentice mortician named Arthur places the corpse of an extremely 
obese man on a trestle, awaiting the arrival of an extra-large coffi n. In 
the middle of the night, the trestle collapses, dumping the body onto the 
fl oor. Arthur recruits three other people—two funeral home staff and a 
friend named Russell—to move the dead man back onto the trestle. While 
funeral home employees calmly debate different strategies for lifting the 
corpse, Russell freezes; he has never seen a dead body. Eventually they 
cooperate and lift the corpse, only to drop it again and dislocate the man’s 
nose. Arthur spends the rest of the night reconstructing the deceased 
man’s face in preparation for the funeral. 
 As discussed extensively in previous research, there are three key per-
spectives on the process of perceiving humour: the incongruity, catharsis 
and superiority theories (Martin  2007 ; Raskin  2008 ).  7 The incongruity 
theory is particularly relevant to the perception of dark humour. This the-
ory focuses on the juxtaposition between two unlike elements that share 
some unexpected similarity or surprising connection (Bergson  1980 ). In 
this scene, the characters in the funeral home have a problem that feels 
both familiar (that is, moving a heavy object) and entirely foreign (the 
weighty object is a corpse). The body is both essentially human and irrevo-
cably inert. Bergson’s model for the incongruity theory of humour states 
that the perception of humour arises from human rigidity, or ‘a certain 
mechanical inelasticity just where one would expect to fi nd the wide-
awake adaptability and the living pliableness of a human being’ ( 1980 , 
66–67). Thus, the dark comedy in this funeral home scene stems from 
the  contradiction between the corporeal elements of infl exibility and mal-
leability, as well as the difference between Russell’s shock and Arthur’s 
complacency. 
 Another aspect of incongruity in dark comedy is the contrast between 
the ideal concept of a funeral and the reality of these events. Although 
most people envision a tranquil memorial service populated by scores of 
44 
K.A. MURRAY

devoted friends and family, this is often not an authentic picture of an indi-
vidual farewell. The series  Scrubs (2001–2010), about a team of residents 
at an urban hospital, depicts an irreverent moment at a funeral home. 
A young doctor named John Dorian, known as J.D., treats a man in an 
irreversible unconscious state in the hospital.  8 He labels the patient ‘Coma 
Guy’ and fl irts with the man’s wife. When the patient dies, J.D. attends 
the funeral, where the deceased man’s wife displays her romantic inter-
est in him. They are later caught, by the dead man’s parents, in a sexual 
encounter in the closet of the funeral home. The dark comedy in this scene 
stems from an obvious juxtaposition between an idealized, sacred memo-
rial service and an impulsive, disrespectful act of passion. The incongruity 
theory suggests that this type of situation becomes funny when it is sur-
prising, yet not too confronting. This dark comic scene in  Scrubs achieves 
that balance through its slapstick style, yet it also reveals the ruthless scope 
of this form of expression.  
 Catharsis Theory and Mortality 
 In the series  The Big C (2010–2013), a school teacher named Cathy 
Jameson confronts her mortality after being told she has melanoma and 
may have only 12–18 months to live. The prognosis creates complex ten-
sions within her family, community, colleagues and medical care envi-
ronment. As these anxieties intensify and overlap, Cathy copes by taking 
new risks. When she visits a restaurant,  9 the waiter asks ‘Are you ready to 
order?’ Cathy briefl y considers her situation. ‘I’ll just have desserts and 
liquor’, she replies. Cathy frequently manages anxiety—both her own and 
that of others—by creating dark comedy. She asks her oncologist what 
he thinks of her fi gure before she begins treatment for cancer.  10 He hesi-
tates, then gives her a compliment. Although he instantly regrets crossing 
the boundaries of appropriate patient/doctor relations, Cathy is amused. 
‘Don’t worry’, she reassures him, ‘you only have eighteen months to feel 
guilty about it. Lucky for you. Not so lucky for me.’ In this moment, 
Cathy diffuses the tension that the doctor’s comment, and her impending 
mortality, create. 
 These scenes from  The Big C align with the catharsis theory of humour, 
which suggests that a diffi cult situation generates an elevation in poten-
tially negative emotions; this agitation may be followed by a surprising 
perception that minimizes the threat of the situation, thereby producing a 
sense of relief and the possible perception of humour. This view originates 
THE LAST LAUGH: DARK COMEDY ON US TELEVISION 45

in Freud’s ( 1960 ) notion of psychological arousal and resolution, which 
sees an increase in tension as a catalyst to humour. When viewing  The Big 
C , Cathy’s comments create both apprehension and assurance. 
 In the series  Grey’s Anatomy (2005–present), about a team of surgeons 
in Seattle, a young doctor named George O’Malley attempts to allay the 
fears of a boy facing surgery.  11 George takes the boy into an operating 
theatre to show him how calm surgery can be. However, George chooses 
the wrong door and reveals a patient having a face transplant; the per-
son’s skull, musculature and eyeballs are entirely exposed. George and 
the child both scream. George then takes the boy into a different theatre, 
showing him a sleeping patient who is fully draped. The boy looks at the 
second patient and says: ‘I want to go back to the other one’. The child’s 
response indicates curiosity rather than terror, which dissipates the emo-
tional tension regarding his wellbeing and allows the scene to be perceived 
as humorous.  
 Superiority Theory and Accidents 
 The superiority theory of humour states that people fi nd it satisfying when 
a situation infl ates their impression of themselves and diminishes their 
view of others (Hobbes  1997 ; Martin  2007 ). When characters on  Six Feet 
Under die in embarrassing ways (such as a baker who dismembers himself 
in a bread machine, an actress who electrocutes herself in the bathtub with 
hair rollers), the participants who engage with this scene may minimize 
their concerns about their own mortality; they may feel inured to death, 
since they feel incapable of such obvious mistakes. Thus, dark comedy can 
foster the view that death is occasional and self-infl icted, not common-
place and inevitable. This perception of superiority offers participants a 
temporary, comfortable distance from their own demise. 
 The proximal/distant metaphor for dark comedy is supported by exten-
sive research on individuals working in emergency services and journalism 
(Buchanan and Keats  2011 ; Moran and Massam  1997 ; Scott  2007 ). In 
joking about the severity of the situations they encounter, fi rst respond-
ers and journalists employ dark comedy to ‘disengage from emotionally 
challenging emergency situations’, especially when the death is ‘associated 
with compromised or unusual situations’ involving the physical position 
or condition of the deceased (Scott  2007 , 357). Dark comedy is especially 
common in bizarre situations, such as accidental decapitation or dismem-
berment. In another scene from  Six Feet Under , the Fisher brothers try to 
46 
K.A. MURRAY

reconstruct a corpse that is in numerous pieces.  12 The two men search the 
funeral home for a missing foot. The mortician, David, asks his brother 
about the dismembered foot in an annoyed, parental tone: ‘Come on now, 
Nate, is there anywhere else you could have left it?’ In this scene, the 
physical segmentation of the dead body challenges the established notion 
of a unique, complete ‘self’ at the point of death. 
 In a similar scene from  Grey’s Anatomy ,  13 a junior doctor named Cristina 
Yang notices an abnormality with a patient who is prepped for surgery. She 
asks the senior surgeon to look at the patient’s feet. ‘What about them?’ 
barks the busy surgeon. Cristina pulls back the drape, revealing one leg 
and one dismembered foot. ‘They’re both left’, she replies. This scene 
enables Cristina, and those who engage with this text, to feel superior; 
they know they would never attach a left foot to a right leg. This percep-
tion of superiority creates a degree of distance from death, allowing par-
ticipants to become inquisitive but detached observers of the macabre—as 
though death is largely the result of incompetence. The perception of 
dark humour seems to require an ideal level of involvement in the text: 
participants need a feeling of recognition and empathy, but also a sense of 
neutrality and immunity. 
 While the three main theories of humour—incongruity, catharsis and 
superiority—provide frameworks for understanding the structure and 
effects of dark comedy, these perspectives do not fully illuminate the 
cultural conditions under which dark comedy thrives. In the following 
sections, it is considered how death is both shielded and exploited in con-
temporary society and how that infl uences the perception of dark humour.  
 CONCEALING AND REVEALING DEATH 
 Death is bound by a web of complex cultural factors, three of which—
medicine, religion and the media—help defi ne contemporary American 
society and its diverse cultural products. 
 Medicalizing Death 
 Since the mid-twentieth century, death has become the almost exclusive 
domain of professionals working in health and funeral services. In contem-
porary American society, people are more likely to die within sanctioned 
institutions (that is hospitals, nursing homes and hospices) than at home 
(Mitford  2000 ). In fact, people in the general population rarely witness 
THE LAST LAUGH: DARK COMEDY ON US TELEVISION 47

a death or see a dead body (Hockey  2007 ). The heightened medicaliza-
tion of the process of dying means that death is seen as a separate experi-
ence, rather than an integrated aspect of existence (Jalland  2006 ). Nuland 
describes this as a move towards ‘the method of modern dying, where 
[death] can be hidden, cleansed of its organic blight, and fi nally packaged 
for modern burial’ ( 1997 , xv). 
 Dark comedy can emerge from the contrast between those who wit-
ness death repeatedly and those who do not. In a scene from  Nurse Jackie 
(2009–2015),  14 a young nurse named Zoe is ordered to put pressure on a 
patient’s chest in an emergency room. ‘I could do something more impor-
tant’, the young nurse complains. The seasoned nurse Jackie says, ‘Take your 
hand off.’ Zoe does so and blood spurts out like a fountain. ‘See?’ Jackie 
states. ‘ That’s important.’ In these examples, dark humour emerges from 
the composure that health professionals show in life-threatening situations. 
 This familiarity with injury, illness and death is not present in the gen-
eral population because medical care usually occurs in a hospital or clinic, 
where patients and their families are partially shielded from the complexi-
ties of death (Hockey  2007 ; Jalland  2006 ). In addition, people are inclined 
to abdicate responsibility for their health to doctors (Nuland  1997 ). This 
strategy externalizes the sense of control over health issues—a perspective 
that can be both reassuring and frightening. In addition, the high reli-
ance on specialists to deliver palliative care and funeral services removes a 
degree of autonomy from the bereaved. People are more dependent upon 
professionals at times when they may be least prepared to advocate for 
themselves. Kellehear says that the last several decades have ‘heralded a 
major period of patient passivity’ ( 2000 , 6). 
 The notion of the doctor as God fi gure is essential to the series  House, 
M.D . (2004–2012), in which a famous diagnostician named Gregory 
House solves intransigent cases while fl aunting protocol. When a young 
boy’s disease worsens,  15 Dr. House brusquely relates the news to the par-
ents: ‘His liver is shutting down.’ The boy’s father is confused. ‘What 
does that mean?’ House responds with cheerful sarcasm: ‘It means he’s 
all better. He’s ready to go home.’ The dark comedy in this series stems 
from House’s behaviour, which is incongruous with hospital protocol. Yet 
House is virtually immune to discipline because of his unparalleled insights 
into disease. Bauman refers to this phenomenon as ‘the cult of specialists’ 
in which professionals are deemed capable of not only delaying death but 
almost avoiding it completely ( 1992 , 23). The excessive medicalization of 
death involves two additional, interrelated issues that infl uence dark com-
edy: the idealization of youth and the seclusion of the corpse.  
48 
K.A. MURRAY

 Idealizing Youth 
 Over the past century, life expectancy has increased by more than twenty 
years. Yet for disadvantaged groups within the broader population, life 
expectancy is lower than average and it may not improve in the near future 
(Seale  2000 ). This greater longevity, combined with the increased medi-
calization of death, can create a deceptive future: it may seem as though 
‘death, as such, is inevitable [but] each concrete instance of death is con-
tingent’ (Bauman  1992 , 8). The potential for a longer life prompts a kind 
of reverence for the vernal, vibrant body and unrealistic attempts to pre-
serve it. The process of ageing now seems ‘as disgusting as the natural 
processes of copulation and birth were a century ago’ (Gorer  1995 , 20). 
 Mellor and Shilling argue that an overwhelming emphasis on youth 
may make death particularly distressing. ‘[The] more people prioritise [a 
connection between] self-identity and the body, the more diffi cult it will 
be for them to cope with the idea of the self ceasing to exist’ ( 1993 , 13). 
Yet this rejection of the ageing process inhibits people’s ability to con-
template mortality and prepare for bereavement. As a result of improved 
medical treatment, ageing has become protracted. For those privileged 
enough to have stable healthcare, the process of dying now takes longer 
than ever before (Seale  2000 ). Even though the past three decades have 
seen signifi cant developments in hospices, home-based palliative care and 
bereavement programs, society still lacks suffi cient resources for those fac-
ing death and grief (Kellehear  2007 ).  
 Veiling the Corpse 
 Another area of notable social change over the past half century is the han-
dling of corpses. In previous generations, dressing a corpse was ‘a piece of 
domestic technology familiar to most households’ (Feifel  1977 , 5). By the 
end of the twentieth century, however, it was extremely unusual to view a 
corpse in the deceased person’s residence; almost all deaths were managed 
by professional funeral services and/or hospital morgues. In fact, cas-
kets—open or closed—are now less common, due to a signifi cant increase 
in cremations (Najman  2000 ). Crouch argues that the practice of omit-
ting the casket from public view symbolically hides the corpse and thereby 
denies the permanency of death. The ‘disposal [of the body] is hedged 
about with ritual to fence in the dangers it signifi es’ ( 2004 , 1). The sight 
of a dead body now seems more confrontational because it is less familiar. 
THE LAST LAUGH: DARK COMEDY ON US TELEVISION 49

 Corpses feature prominently in a signifi cant number of dark comic 
scenes on television. In the series  Monk (2002–2009), detective Adrian 
Monk becomes suspicious of the circumstances surrounding the fatal 
shooting of a bodyguard. Monk takes a seat in a church balcony to observe 
the man’s funeral, but he accidentally drops his keys into the open coffi n.  16 
Since the key ring was a special gift from his late wife, Monk attempts to 
retrieve the keys without interrupting the funeral. He attaches a paper clip 
to a long line of dental fl oss and lowers it from the balcony towards the 
open coffi n. Rather than grabbing the keys, however, Monk hooks the 
dead bodyguard’s sleeve and jerks the man’s entire arm out of the cof-
fi n. For a moment, it looks as though the dead man is waving. The entire 
congregation erupts into fearful cries; a few people faint, others run out of 
the church. Monk’s inadvertent raising of the corpse is a reminder of the 
chaos death brings. The movement of the dead body in this scene is ter-
rifying because most people in contemporary society are unfamiliar with 
the physical realities of death. The corpse is seen as an object that must 
be removed, albeit respectfully, so that living memories of the deceased 
individual can continue. 
 In a scene from  Grey’s Anatomy ,  17 the surgeon Cristina Yang fi nds it 
diffi cult to be sensitive about corpses because she sees them frequently. 
When a shocked and bereaved family is faced with diffi cult decisions about 
organ donations from their loved one’s body, Cristina hurries them along 
to obtain as many donations as possible within the optimal timeframe. Just 
after the family agrees to the donation of several organs, Cristina abruptly 
asks one more question: ‘Ok, what about the skin?’ Cristina’s view on the 
corpse requires a new perspective—one that the family cannot compre-
hend yet; the dead body is simultaneously a sacred entity and a collection 
of potentially reusable parts. 
 As noted, most people in contemporary society are unlikely to witness 
actual death or its aftermath. Thus, death seems more conceptual than prac-
tical; it is like a concealed possibility rather than a certainty. In the following 
section, it is considered another way in which death is sequestered from 
public view: through the diminishing, diversifying infl uence of religion.  
 Secularizing Death 
 In previous centuries, organized religion played a primary role in shap-
ing people’s beliefs about death by prescribing particular beliefs. More 
recently, religion provides a theological context for death as well as range 
50 
K.A. MURRAY

of communities in which people can contemplate and receive support for 
their experiences of loss. From approximately the 1950s to the present, 
however, the percentage of people involved in organized religion in the 
United States has declined. At the same time, the increasing power of the 
healthcare system has obscured the role of the church (Rumbold  2000 ). 
This shift—from a communal, religious perspective to a more individual, 
secular and medical one—foregrounds the physical aspects of death over 
its spiritual meaning. Mellor and Shilling point to an overall reduction in 
the ‘scope of the sacred’; they see the move away from organized religion 
as one of the major sociological changes of the twentieth century ( 1993 , 
413). Increased secularism means that people are less likely to have ‘an 
over-arching, existentially meaningful, ritual structure’ through which to 
understand death ( 1993 , 427). 
 The shift towards secularism has also affected funeral practices. Most 
funerals held in the fi rst half of the twentieth century were formal religious 
occasions with a pre-ordained structure (Jalland  2006 ). Over the past four 
decades, however, funeral practices have become more fl exible memorial 
events, ranging from traditional religious rituals, to secular celebrations of 
life, to any combination of these. In general, contemporary funerals are 
more likely to present a diverse and animated record of an individual life 
rather than a refl ection on shared beliefs about death (Crouch  2004 ). 
 The series  The Last Man on Earth (2014–present) follows the lives of 
a small band of survivors after the death of almost all the planet’s inhabit-
ants. An exuberant survivor named Carol, upon greeting another member 
of this strange group, screams ‘Boo!’  18 The man, Gordon, has a sudden 
heart attack and dies. Subsequently, the survivors hold a makeshift funeral 
for Gordon on a beach, following a burial in a simple, sandy grave. During 
the memorial service, Carol unexpectedly takes the fl oor—perhaps due to 
her guilt over causing Gordon’s death—and babbles about the deceased.
 Can I just say something real quick? I’ll be done in a jiffy. Um, well you 
know, I didn’t know, uh—Gordon? Was it Gordon? [Ok] Gordon. Is it 
Gordon with a G? Ok. I grew up across the street from a Dordon, with a D, 
like Dracula. I did not know Gordon well. May he have a smooth journey 
to heaven. Or hell. Again, I did not know him. By now we are all so used 
to death, as we have seen everyone in the world around us die. Every single 
person—dead. Just oodles and caboodles of death. Just heaps and piles. But 
Gordon will be missed. Uh, ok… 
THE LAST LAUGH: DARK COMEDY ON US TELEVISION 51

 Carol’s speech becomes comic because it breaks the boundaries of even 
the most casual and contemporary memorial service. While the framework 
of a eulogy is intact, the content is bizarre and explosive. At the same 
time, Carol does not severely disparage Gordon, so the speech remains 
relatively inconsequential. This balance—between meeting and contra-
dicting expectations about funerals—may enable participants to perceive 
dark humour in this context. 
 Over the past two decades, some memorial services (particularly for 
celebrities or groups of people) have mimicked the form of other cultural 
products, such as sporting rallies, music concerts or theatre productions. 
These public events place death within a contemporary social framework 
that emphasizes an individual’s life, but suggests a collective reluctance to 
accept the profundity and fi nality of loss. In Crouch’s view, these secular 
‘celebration of life’ events may serve to ‘paper over the fragmentations of 
our existence, our terror and ignorance of death…’ rather than bring a 
deeper sense of meaning to grief ( 2004 , 3). 
 In addition to becoming more secularized, memorial services are now 
increasingly globalized; a few large companies now own the vast majority 
of funeral homes in America and their reach extends overseas (Howarth 
 2000 ; Mitford  2000 ). This corporate dominance of the funeral industry 
results in ‘a lessening of cultural difference […] and the loss of diversity’ 
within funerals (Mitford  2000 , 90). Increased globalization leads to a sec-
ular blueprint for funerals into which personal variation may be inserted. 
It seems that the commercialism of the funeral industry, in combination 
with the increasing secularization of death, create a less communal, more 
commoditized place for death in society. This point links to the following 
discussion of death as depicted in the contemporary media.  
 Mediatizing Death 
 While the preceding analysis focussed predominantly on the ways in which 
death is kept private and separate from everyday life, this section looks at 
how death is made public and how stories and images of loss are infi nitely 
replicated. 
 At present, the US television landscape is a vast, dense, frenetic and 
frequently violent environment. There is also now a wide range of pro-
gramming choices and viewing modes that infl uence participants in vari-
ous ways; these processes of interpreting and shaping television content 
are complex, controversial and currently in fl ux, due to rapid shifts in the 
52 
K.A. MURRAY

way programs are transmitted and viewed (Mittell  2010 ). Denzin, writing 
prior to the Internet revolution, suggests that ‘the new information tech-
nologies turn everyday life into a theatrical spectacle [of] uncertainty’—
one that both stimulates and desensitizes ( 1991 , 8). 
 People living in contemporary American society encounter media about 
death so frequently, and often fl eetingly, that the experience may become 
unremarkable (Gibson  2007 ; Kearl  1995 ). Stories, images and informa-
tion about death form the core of most news programs and a signifi cant 
number of entertainment programs, particularly shows focussed on crime, 
medicine and science fi ction. The overwhelming majority of mediatized 
deaths are caused by crime and accidents, which generate vivid and vio-
lent images. Although sudden deaths represent only a small percentage of 
actual deaths per annum, the scenarios presented on television focus on 
unexpected, premature losses (Najman  2000 ). 
 A number of prominent television series from the past decade—includ-
ing  The Sopranos (1999–2007) and  Breaking Bad (2008–2013)—contain 
extremely violent dark comedy. In a scene from  The Sopranos ,  19 two mafi a 
men try several times to stab an obese man, but it takes many attempts to 
fell the man because the knives are not long enough to penetrate his girth. 
Just as the man collapses, his cell phone plays a jaunty ring tone.  Breaking 
Bad depicts a scene in which a drug dealer, Jesse, tries to eliminate a mur-
der victim’s body by placing the corpse in bathtub full of acid.  20 However, 
the acid leaks through the bathtub and the fl oor, dumping the body, debris 
and acid into the hallway below. In  Law & Order: Special Victims Unit 
(1990–2016) and  CSI: Crime Scene Investigation (2000–2015), charac-
ters joke about suspects, colleagues and corpses. An important aspect of 
these scenes is that the deaths depicted are mostly premeditated murders, 
as opposed to natural or accidental deaths. The intentionality behind these 
losses makes the dark comedy more callous and confrontational, perhaps 
also more fragile. As participants immerse themselves in these media 
images and narratives about death, they may develop a simultaneous sense 
of detachment: a feeling that they are momentarily enthralled and con-
cerned, but not distressed. This partial disengagement seems to foster the 
experience of dark humour. At the same time, these scenes reveal the lim-
inal areas of dark comedy—the spaces where viciousness may prevent the 
perception of humour. 
 Another important aspect of dark comedy in a violence-saturated media 
environment is the tendency for stories about death—in both fi ctional 
and factual contexts—to minimize or omit details about the deceased. 
THE LAST LAUGH: DARK COMEDY ON US TELEVISION 53

Television implores us to notice the deaths of strangers, then requires us 
to relinquish any attachments to these losses. Because television rarely 
provides follow-up information about the extended, interwoven conse-
quences of death, it contracts and contorts the experience of bereavement, 
making it seem like a contained, tearful moment followed by a funeral 
(Gibson  2007 ; Bauman  1992 ). In this respect, death in the media becomes 
merely a continuous, impersonal parade of anguish. Höijer points out that 
it is virtually impossible for people to engage with unrelenting misery and 
not experience a reduction in their sense of ‘collective global compassion’ 
( 2004 , 515). Kearl notes that ‘public callousness towards televised death 
[raises] the visual requirements’ ( 1995 , 24). As a result of ongoing expo-
sure to death in the media, people become inured and require increasingly 
shocking stories to garner their attention (Erth  2002 ). 
 The concept of desensitisation also relates to the research on dark 
comedy as a coping mechanism for emergency workers and journalists. 
Because fi rst responders encounter death so frequently, and because they 
rarely know the deceased, they may create dark comedy to express the 
‘absurd or paradoxical elements in daily sudden deathwork’; these coping 
strategies assist ‘by increasing camaraderie and forging solidarity’ (Scott 
 2007 , 358). Research suggests that an analogous process occurs for jour-
nalists and other participants who are exposed to war, crimes scenes and 
other media about death (Buchanan and Keats  2011 ). 
 Death in the media is also partially controlled by fortune and power; 
the passing of famous individuals is examined in extensive detail and rep-
licated continuously on the news, while the deaths of anonymous, single 
individuals, or groups of people killed in the same event, may be ignored 
or generalized. In addition, death perceived through a screen is always 
distant, untouchable. Death may seem close, through the magnifi cation 
the camera provides, but this ‘enhanced proximity’ to death cannot ‘over-
come the actual corporal and geographical distance’ to real death (Gibson 
 2007 , 417). The contrast between simplifi ed, immediate, public examples 
of loss and the complex, prolonged, private experiences of death may seem 
disconcerting, yet it may also be the essence of dark comedy.  
 RESPONDING TO THE ABSENCE/PRESENCE OF DEATH 
 This chapter presents the argument that current attitudes and practices sur-
rounding death, set against the pervasiveness of violence and loss in the 
media, create an unsettling juxtaposition. In some aspects of contemporary 
54 
K.A. MURRAY

American culture, the physical realties of death are concealed and the expres-
sion of grief subdued. Writing in the 1960s, Gorer makes a prescient point 
that ‘while natural death [has become] more and more smothered in prud-
ery, violent death has played an ever-growing part in the fantasies offered 
to mass audiences’ ( 1995 , 21). Yet in other respects, media images of death 
and bereavement are omnipresent and intrusive. These social conditions—in 
which death is both artifi cially absent and virtually present—enables people 
to preview death within acceptable parameters; they can examine some of 
its complexity and cruelty without its sense of permanence. This process 
appears to be complex and tenuous, yet crucial to the appreciation of dark 
humour. 
 The experience of dark humour does not eradicate the existential ques-
tions prompted by the absence/presence juxtaposition of death in con-
temporary American society. Dark humour entreats people to engage, at 
least momentarily, with the experience of loss. It seem that dark humour 
is not an instantaneous, superfi cial response, but an ongoing, provoca-
tive endeavour—an attempt to articulate the impact of grief and ascribe 
meaning to loss. Rather than seeing death as a transition at the end of life, 
Shoshana and Teman ‘offer the concept of transitory movements’, or a 
continuous ‘oscillation’ between the ‘life-self’ and the ‘death-self’ ( 2006 , 
568). This metaphor of movement, shifting between different viewpoints 
in relation to death, provides a better understanding of what dark humour 
achieves. Lewis argues that ‘the apparent intensifi cation of cruel humour’ 
in the late twentieth century suggests ‘a widely shared desire or need’ to 
comprehend and cope with the loss of life ( 1997 , 253). 
 Ultimately, dark humour seems to present a precarious optimism: a 
sense that life has an inevitable but potentially tolerable end, seen in the 
broader context of human existence. Crouch and Hüppauf caution that 
‘the history of [humanity’s] attempts to come to terms with death is a 
succession of obvious failures…’ ( 1985 , 2). The phenomenon of dark 
humour may be one of those enervating failures—or perhaps it is a sur-
prising, discomfi ting success.  
 NOTES 
 1.   Season 2, Episode 2, ‘Circus, Circus’, 8 October 2008.  
  2.    The terms ‘humour’ and ‘comedy’ may be applied in different ways in 
humour studies research. In this chapter, the term ‘comedy’ is consistently 
employed to denote media texts (in this case, fi lmed performances of written 
THE LAST LAUGH: DARK COMEDY ON US TELEVISION 55

television scripts). The term ‘humour’ is used to refer to the phenomenon of 
humour, or the experience of fi nding something funny. The term ‘dark com-
edy’ is used in preference to ‘black comedy’ out of respect for the wealth of 
comic material created and performed by African Americans and other cul-
tural groups who use the term ‘black comedy’. The term ‘dark humour’ 
refers to the perception that texts about death may be funny. (For an over-
view of recent humour studies research, see Martin  2007 ; Raskin  2008 ).  
 3.   The term ‘contemporary society’ is intended to highlight the shared aspects 
of American culture, not to suggest the existence of a singular, unifi ed cul-
tural experience. In this analysis, the term ‘society’ indicates that people 
within a national group have in common a range of cultural artifacts, includ-
ing television, that infl uence people’s perceptions of their existence (Gibson 
 2007 ; Hockey  2007 ; Mittell  2010 ). 
 4.   The term ‘participants’ represents the interactive nature of the relationship 
between the people who engage with experiences and the researchers who 
study people’s creations and perceptions surrounding these experiences. 
The term ‘participants’ is used to refer to individuals who ‘read’ the relevant 
media texts.  
 5.   This chapter focuses on dark comedy on US television since the year 2000, 
but the series  M*A*S*H (1972–1983) was a forerunner of contemporary 
dark comedy. The series was audacious and poignant in its depiction of sur-
geons in a military hospital who chide and laugh while performing opera-
tions and create comic skits to divert depression. The series also obliquely 
criticized the United States’ involvement in the wars in Korea and Vietnam. 
In the latter two decades of the twentieth century, following the completion 
of  M*A*S*H , few if any television series regularly and extensively engaged 
with dark comedy in this manner.  
 6.   Season 3, Episode 32, ‘Making Love Work’, 6 April 2003.  
 7.   It is not possible to extricate all strands of analysis on the texts discussed. 
This chapter applies the three key theories of humour in a concise analysis 
of dark comedy, but subsequently focuses on the overarching social condi-
tions that enable this form of expression to fl ourish. Other researchers have 
worked to develop the three theories and consider their relevance to a range 
of texts (Boskin  1997 ; Davis  2003 ; Davies  2011 ; Palmer  1994 ). 
 8.  Season 2, Episode 18, ‘My T.C.W. (Tasty Coma Wife)’, 20 March 2003.  
 9.  Season 1, Episode 1, ‘Pilot’, 16 August 2010.  
 10.    Season 1, Episode 2, ‘Summer Time’, 23 August 2010.  
 11.    Season 5, Episode 4, ‘Brave New World’, 16 October 2008.  
 12.   Season 1, Episode 2, ‘The Foot’, 17 June 2001.  
 13.  Season 2, Episode 6, ‘Into You Like a Train’, 30 October 2005.  
 14.  Season 1, Episode 7, ‘Steak Knife’, 20 July 2009.  
 15.  Season 1, Episode 11, ‘Detox’, 1 March 2005.  
56 
K.A. MURRAY

 16.  Season 1, Episode 1, ‘Mr. Monk and the Candidate’, 12 July 2002.  
 17.  Season 1, Episode 3, ‘Winning a Battle, Losing the War’, 10 April 2005.  
 18.  Season 2, Episode 3, ‘Dead Man Walking’, 11 October 2015.  
 19.  Season 6, Episode 11, ‘Cold Stones’, 21 May 2006.  
 20.  Season 1, Episode 2, ‘Cat’s in the Bag’, 27 January 2008.  
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Ariès, Phillippe. 1981.  The Hour of Our Death . Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
 Bauman, Zygmunt. 1992. Survival as a Social Construct.  Theory, Culture & Society 
9: 1–36.  
 Becker, Ernest. 1997.  The Denial of Death . New York: Touchstone Press.  
 Bergson, Henri. 1980. Laughter. In  Comedy , ed. Wylie Sypher, 61–190. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press.  
 Boskin, Joseph (ed). 1997.  The Humor Prism in 20th Century America . Detroit: 
Wayne State University Press.  
 Buchanan, Maria, and Patrice Keats. 2011. Coping with Traumatic Stress in 
Journalism: A Critical Ethnographic Study.  International Journal of Psychology 
46(2): 127–135.  
 Crouch, Mira. 2004. Last Matters: The Latent Meaning of Contemporary Funeral 
Rites. In  Making Sense of Dying and Death , ed. Andrew Fagan. Amsterdam: 
Rodopi.  
 Crouch, Mira, and Bernd Hüppauf. 1985. Introduction. In  Essays on Mortality , 
ed. Mira Crouch, and Bernd Hüppauf, xi–xiii. Sydney: The University of New 
South Wales Faculty of Arts.  
 Davies, Christie. 2011.  Jokes and Targets . Bloomington: Indiana University Press.  
 Davis, Jessica Milner. 2003.  Farce . Transaction: New Brunswick.  
 Denzin, Norman. 1991.  Images of Postmodern Society: Social Theory and 
Contemporary Cinema . London: Sage.  
 Erth, Spencer. 2002. Television Viewing as Risk Factor.  Psychiatry 652: 301–303.  
 Feifel, Herman. 1977.  New Meanings of Death . New York: McGraw-Hill.  
 Freud, Sigmund. 1960.  Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious . Trans. James 
Strachey. London: Hogarth.  
 Gibson, Margaret. 2007. Death and Mourning in Technologically Mediated 
Culture.  Health Sociology Review 165: 415–424.  
 Gorer, Geoffrey. 1995. The Pornography of Death. In  Death: Current Perspectives , 
ed. John Williamson, and Edwin Shneidman, 18–22. London: Mayfi eld. 
 Greenfi eld, Patricia Marks. 1993. Representational Competence in Shared Symbol 
Systems: Electronic Media from Radio to Video Games. In  The Development 
and Meaning of Psychological Distance , ed. Rodney R.  Cocking, and Ann 
Renninger. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  
THE LAST LAUGH: DARK COMEDY ON US TELEVISION 57

 Hobbes, Thomas. 1997. In  Leviathan , ed. Michael Oakeshott. New  York: 
Touchstone.  
 Hockey, Jenny. 2007. Closing in on Death? Refl ections on Research and 
Researchers in the Field of Death and Dying.  Health Sociology Review 165: 
436–446.  
 Höijer, Birgitta. 2004. The Discourse of Global Compassion: The Audience and 
Media Reporting of Human Suffering.  Media, Culture & Society 246: 513–531. 
 Howarth, Glennys. 2000. Australian Funerals. In  Death & Dying in Australia , ed. 
Alan Kellhear, 80–91. Melbourne: Oxford University Press.  
 Jalland, Pat. 2006.  Changing Ways of Death in 20th Century Australia: War, 
Medicine and the Funeral Business . Sydney: University of New South Wales 
Press.  
 Kearl, Michael. 1995. Death in Popular Culture. In  Death: Current Perspectives , 
ed. John Williamson, and Edwin Shneidman, 23–30. London: Mayfi eld. 
 Kellehear, Alan. 2000. The Australian Way of Death: Formative, Historical and 
Social Infl uences. In  Death & Dying in Australia , ed. Alan Kellehear, 1–13. 
Melbourne: Oxford University Press.  
 ———. 2007.  A Social History of Dying . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
 Lewis, Paul. 1997. The Killing Jokes of the American Eighties.  Humor 103: 
251–283.  
 Martin, Rod. 2007.  The Psychology of Humor: An Integrative Approach . Burlington: 
Elsevier.  
 Mellor, Philip. 1993. Death in High Modernity: The Contemporary Presence and 
Absence of Death. In  The Sociology of Death: Theory, Culture, Practice , ed. 
D. Clark, 11–30. Oxford: The Editorial Board of the Sociological Review.  
 Mellor, Philip, and Chris Shilling. 1993. Modernity, Self-Identity and the 
Sequestration of Death.  Sociology 273: 411–431.  
 Mitford, Jessica. 2000.  The American Way of Death . London: Virago.  
 Mittell, Jason. 2010.  Television and American Culture . New  York: Oxford 
University Press.  
 Moran, Carmen, and Margaret Massam. 1997. An Evaluation of Humour in 
Emergency Work.  The Australasian Journal of Disaster and Trauma Studies 3: 
26–38. 
 Najman, Jake. 2000. The Demography of Death: Patterns of Australian Mortality. 
In  Death & Dying in Australia , ed. Alan Kellehear, 17–39. Melbourne: Oxford 
University Press.  
 Nuland, Sherwin B. 1997.  How We Die . London: Vintage.  
 Palmer, Jerry. 1994.  Taking Humour Seriously . London: Routledge.  
 Raskin, Victor (ed). 2008.  The Primer for Humor Research . Boston: Mouten de 
Gruyter.  
58 
K.A. MURRAY

 Rumbold, Bruce. 2000. Pastoral Care of the Dying and Bereaved. In  Death & 
Dying in Australia , ed. Alan Kellehear, 284–297. Melbourne: Oxford 
University Press.  
 Scott, Tricia. 2007. Expression of Humour by Emergency Personnel Involved in 
Sudden Deathwork.  Mortality 124: 350–364.  
 Seale, Clive. 2000. Changing Patterns of Death and Dying.  Social Science and 
Medicine 512: 917–930.  
 Shoshana, Avi, and Elly Teman. 2006. Coming Out of the Coffi n: Life-Self and 
Death-Self in  Six Feet Under .  Symbolic Interaction 294: 557–576.  
THE LAST LAUGH: DARK COMEDY ON US TELEVISION 59

61
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2_4
 ‘This Is Great, We’re Like Slave Buddies!’: 
Cross-Racial Appropriation in ‘Post-Racial’ 
TV Comedies  
 Carter    Soles  
 C.  Soles () 
 The College at Brockport ,   Brockport ,  NY ,  USA  
 e-mail: csoles@brockport.edu 
 In the season two  Arrested Development episode ‘¡Amigos!’, Buster Bluth 
(Tony Hale), the effeminate, geeky youngest son of an affl uent Southern 
California family, stows away in the trunk of his older brother Michael’s 
(Jason Bateman) Mercedes in an attempt to escape his obligation to the 
US Army by fl eeing to Mexico. There are, of course, practical reasons for 
his journey (to evade the Army), but Buster’s fl ight also exemplifi es the 
trope of privileged, white male geeks seeking coded-ethnic melodramatic 
victimhood via proximity to non-whites in contemporary one-camera 
television comedies like  Arrested Development (2003–2006),  Party Down 
(2009–2010), and  Trailer Park Boys (2001–2008). Buster’s masculinity 
has been threatened by his fear of joining the Army, so he fl ees into an 
ethnicized fantasy of low-wage life among his housekeeper Lupe’s (B. W. 
Gonzalez) Mexican family in order to restore his manhood and generate 
sympathy for his abject plight. 
 The viewer is aware that Buster is not, in fact, in Mexico, but in Santa 
Ana, California, ‘just six minutes inland from his home’ according to the 
show’s narrator (Ron Howard). This only highlights that this ‘Mexican’ 
sojourn is purely Buster’s projected fantasy, an enactment of his desire to 

escape his whiteness: ‘I love being Mexican’ he tells Lupe at one point. 
Buster completes his imaginary fl ight from the world of white largesse by 
accompanying the several working men of his newly adopted family to 
work as dishwashers the next day: ‘This is great, we’re like slave buddies!’ 
he joyfully exclaims as he piles into the back of their truck. 
 Buster’s term, ‘slave buddies’, reveals what is at stake for him in this 
exchange: validation of his suffering (that is, his status as a ‘slave’) via 
proximity to non-white associates, which he uses to negate his substan-
tial white privilege and achieve a sympathetic ‘simulated ethnicity’ that 
marks him as authentic in a postmodern, supposedly ‘post-racial’ milieu 
(Kunyosying and Soles  2012 ). Of course, his ability to simulate racialized, 
lower-class status at will merely reaffi rms his place of privilege and social 
mobility as a white man. 
 Arrested Development and other millennial comedies participate in a 
longstanding tradition of cross-racial appropriation in American popu-
lar culture, from  Huckleberry Finn to the present day (Fiedler  1948 ). As 
Stuart Hall ( 1983 ), a key critic of race and ethnicity in American popu-
lar culture, asks: What happens to such cultural appropriation as the US 
moves into the new millennium, deeper into the ‘postmodern’ era? How 
does the white male’s desire for identifi cation with imagined blackness 
take shape in a cultural milieu increasingly (if wrongly) assumed to be 
‘post-racial’? 
 This chapter explores how (representations of) acts of cross-racial 
appropriation unfold when perpetrated by white geeks who perceive 
themselves to be post-racial. Throughout millennial one-camera televi-
sion comedies, there is a persistent trope of geeky white kids wishing to 
strongly align themselves with an imagined blackness, from Gob Bluth’s 
friendship with a black ventriloquist’s dummy in  Arrested Development to 
Michael Scott’s failed attempts to seem simultaneously racially sensitive 
and ‘hip’ in the presence of people of colour in the US version of  The 
Offi ce . This chapter investigates the deployment of the racial appropria-
tion trope across three recent, white male-centred comedy programmes 
 Party Down ,  Arrested Development , and  Trailer Park Boys , all single-cam-
era ‘mockumentary’ style shows with strong cult followings. Since none 
of these was a mainstream hit— Arrested Development is the most widely 
seen of the three, as evinced by its revival, with a fourth season of new 
episodes released on Netfl ix in May 2013—the chapter will look at how 
shows that specifi cally address marginal, ‘cult’ audiences deal with cross-
racial appropriation. Such shows are typically willing to expose the white 
62 
C. SOLES

geek’s complicity in creating the post-racial fantasy he himself engages in 
when in the presence of real people of colour. This helps these comedies 
achieve the aptly named black-comic, squirmy style of tonally dark and 
uncomfortable humour so pervasive amongst postmodern, one-camera 
shows produced since the new millennium. Ultimately, the chapter argues 
that while some of these shows make strides toward deconstructing the 
act of white cross- racial appropriation and offering a multi-ethnic point of 
view, they nevertheless tend to simultaneously perpetuate a narrow, ste-
reotypical view of non-white characters, failing to shake loose the limited 
perception of people of color in the white cultural imaginary. 
 While the cultural critiques at the heart of comedy are sometimes over-
looked due to the false notion that ‘it’s only a joke’, Freud’s work dem-
onstrates that all jokes reveal deeper unconscious impulses, and along that 
line these shows expose a society that wishes to be post-racial yet clearly 
has not moved beyond unconscious use of damaging racial stereotypes 
and unthinking cross-racial appropriation. 
 In the postmodern milieu, in which white maleness becomes increas-
ingly diffi cult to defend by virtue of its position of centrality and privilege, 
proximity to real ethnicity or racially marked persons connotes authen-
ticity and generates audience sympathy. In a related development, even 
discussing racial or ethnic markedness—what Linda Williams calls ‘play-
ing the race card’—is frequently interpreted by the dominant culture as 
a cheap ploy for undue sympathy and undeserved privileges: ‘the very 
accusation of playing the race card has now become a way of disqualifying 
the attempt to discuss past and present racial injury […]. To win at the 
“game” of race is to lose the larger game of life in which raced competi-
tors already play with a full deck’ ( 2001 , 4). Despite our culture’s toler-
ance of structural economic and social inequities levied against persons of 
colour, in the cultural milieu, non-whiteness is somehow perceived as an 
advantage, a badge of victimhood that can be played to elicit sympathy 
and claim a moral high ground over whites. 
 Therefore, white male protagonists in pop-cultural texts often seize 
onto non-white ethnic identities as a mode of generating sympathy and 
recovering their accustomed place of centrality in narrative and in culture. 
This tendency is especially present wherever such protagonists’ masculin-
ity or sexuality is challenged or called into question. Sexuality is racialized, 
and the geeky, feminized white male protagonists of the contemporary 
television comedies under discussion exist on a racial and gendered con-
tinuum that positions them as sexually inferior to male jocks and black 
‘THIS IS GREAT, WE’RE LIKE SLAVE BUDDIES!’: CROSS-RACIAL APPROPRIATION... 63

males, who are stereotypically considered more embodied, sexual and ani-
malistic than white men (Dyer  1997 , 20, 27–28). Of course, these raced 
positionings along the masculinity/femininity continuum result from the 
projection of white male fantasies, not necessarily anything in ‘real life’—
they are white, middle-class cultural stereotypes. The shows analyzed here 
depict interracial buddy pairings that exemplify the function of imagined 
black masculinity for the feminized geek in direct, highly sexually charged 
terms. In each case— Arrested Development ’s Gob and Franklin,  Trailer 
Park Boys ’ J-Roc and T, and  Party Down ’s Kyle and William—the femi-
nized white male protagonist’s anxiety over his own sexual impotency and 
fragile masculinity is channeled into projected blackness. These white men 
participate in imagined ethnicity to reinforce their masculinity and hetero-
sexuality in the face of their own geeky arrested development. 
 PROJECTION AND PUPPETRY:  ARRESTED DEVELOPMENT  
 Arrested Development chronicles the farcical exploits of the Bluth family, 
self-absorbed, overly entitled Orange County residents whose insensitivity 
to matters of race and class are attributed to their selfi sh, insular, upper- 
class cluelessness. As in many millennial comedies, audiences are encour-
aged to laugh at the anti-heroic Bluths’ failures and foibles, even as, each 
episode, we are encouraged to love them as well, their humanity empha-
sized through the  naiveté and earnestness of Michael’s barely pubescent 
almost-teenager George Michael (Michael Cera). 
 The show assumes an intelligent viewer who can follow the rapid- 
fi re, inter-textual references and complex gags; as in the example that 
opened this chapter, the show’s humour often centres upon the discon-
nect between the sympathetic way in which the characters see themselves 
and the obvious self-centredness of their onscreen actions, usually bluntly 
commented upon by the series’ narrator. Yet the series also signs off on 
the white characters’ fantasies to some extent, especially where Buster is 
concerned: his Mexican ‘slave buddies’ welcome him into their home with 
no protest or fanfare. We are never given any insight into Lupe’s  family’s 
emotions nor do we know if they are in on the joke of his presence among 
them or if they are genuinely pleased to adopt Buster. They are ciphers 
who act in perfect accordance with Buster’s fantasy of interracial frater-
nity, for reasons left opaque to the viewer. In fact, this potentially repre-
sents a case of superfi cially positive stereotyping in which Lupe’s family’s 
extraordinary hospitality and willingness to harbor Buster, the son of their 
white employer, is naturalized as an innate quality of stereotypically hard-
working and servile Latinos. 
64 
C. SOLES

 However, the series does feature several whistle-blower type characters 
of colour who call out the Bluths on their racist assumptions. For one, 
there is the Mexican man mistaken for a migrant labourer in the season 
one episode ‘Staff Infection’ who reveals that he is, in fact, a Professor of 
American Studies at the University of Mexico City, revealing Lindsay’s 
(Portia de Rossi) racist gaffe. Or, in the same season two episode in which 
Buster fi nds his Mexican ‘slave buddies’, Gob (Will Arnett), the eldest 
Bluth brother, unsuccessfully attempts to become buddies with an African 
American bounty hunter named Ice (Malik Yoba), who repeatedly reminds 
Gob that he is only a client, not a friend, repudiating Gob’s attempt to 
enlist him in an interracial buddy fantasy. 
 Gob fi nally fi nds a non-white friend in Franklin, a black ventriloquist’s 
dummy he unveils during a social gathering late in season two. Franklin 
serves as a recurring sidekick to Gob, allowing the latter to indulge his 
projected fantasy of tough-talking, black masculinity through the pup-
pet’s interactions with other members of the Bluth family and the out-
side world. During the penultimate season two episode ‘The Righteous 
Brothers’, Gob enters a recording studio with his dummy in order to 
produce  Franklin Comes Alive , a CD of the two of them singing duets 
together. As Gob and Franklin launch into one particularly racist set of 
lyrics about Franklin’s having fathered multiple illegitimate children, we 
see the black sound engineer disappear from the sound booth, obviously 
refusing to have any part in such a racially ignorant and offensive project. 
The joke is on Gob, his racism exposed by the ethically grounded depar-
ture of the nameless engineer. 
 Yet in its third season  Arrested Development concludes the ongoing 
Gob and Franklin saga in an uncritically stereotypical way by revealing (in 
‘Family Ties’) that the dummy Franklin is a real-life pimp. In an attempt 
to glean information about Nellie (Justine Bateman), a woman he believes 
to be his long-lost sister, Michael goes to a hotel room to meet with a 
man named Frank he has only previously spoken with over the phone. 
Once Michael arrives in the darkened room and speaks briefl y with the 
tough-sounding Frank, he turns on a light to fi nd Gob and Franklin sit-
ting in an easy chair, dressed as stereotypical pimps in loud suits and rakish 
porkpie hats; Gob and ‘Frank’ have been posing as Nellie’s pimp for some 
time. Michael briefl y expresses his disappointment with Gob but quickly 
refocuses upon the mystery of the sister, and neither Michael nor the ubiq-
uitous narrator make any comment about the racist nature of Gob’s equat-
ing Franklin’s blackness with pimphood. 
‘THIS IS GREAT, WE’RE LIKE SLAVE BUDDIES!’: CROSS-RACIAL APPROPRIATION... 65

 In line with the usual pattern of this trope, the viewer learns in fl ash-
back that Gob took on the role of pimp after meeting Nellie some months 
earlier and spending an evening ‘crying like a girl’ in her presence. 
Having the fragility of his masculinity exposed provokes Gob to shore 
up that masculinity by engaging an exaggerated performance of coded- 
black, hyper-masculine pimpness as a compensatory gesture. Of course, 
Gob’s assuming the role of pimp can be understood as an extension of 
his prolonged appropriation of a racialized identity via his partnership 
with Franklin, and the viewer knows the whole thing to be a charade 
perpetrated by Gob and endorsed by Nellie. Yet the show itself passively 
endorses the coding of pimphood as black, for ‘Frank’ has been acting as 
Nellie’s pimp for some time, and all of her clients have dealt with ‘Frank’ 
on the phone, believing him to be real. The simulation passes for the real 
thing: Gob’s performance of exaggerated, African-Americanized pimp-
hood works as an effective front for Nellie’s prostitution business in the 
show’s fi ctional world. In other words, its confl ation of pimphood and 
criminality with blackness is not just in Gob’s mind; it goes unquestioned 
by anyone in the show’s larger  milieu . 
 All of which reinforces the show’s focus on white characters and white 
experience. There are no signifi cant characters of colour in  Arrested 
Development , and the non-whites who interact with the Bluths are as often 
ciphers as they are accusatory fi gures who comically expose the Bluths’ 
cluelessness. Thus the show, while poking witty fun at the stupidity and 
ignorance of its over-privileged whites, nevertheless engages in a strategy 
of exclusion or omission wherein ‘repetition of black absence from loca-
tions of autonomy and importance creates the presence of the idea that 
blacks belong in positions of obscurity and dependence’ (Snead  1994 , 
6). The show’s fourth season continues this trend. The whole season arc, 
conveyed exclusively from the white characters’ multiple points of view, 
is framed around the Bluth family’s attempt to preempt Cinco de Mayo 
by staging a Cinco de Cuatro event, crassly appropriating the Mexican- 
American community’s holiday for fi nancial gain.  
 EMBODIED APPROPRIATION:  TRAILER PARK BOYS  
 As its title suggests, the Canadian single-camera mockumentary comedy 
 Trailer Park Boys examines white masculinity among the poor denizens 
of a low-rent Nova Scotia trailer park, at the opposite end of the class 
spectrum from the protagonists of  Arrested Development . Due to their 
66 
C. SOLES

lower class status and lived experience growing up around economically 
disenfranchised persons of white and non-white ethnicities, the white 
male protagonists of  Trailer Park Boys have perhaps a greater justifi ca-
tion for appropriating aspects of black culture into their identities. For 
example, most of the show’s main characters, regardless of race, are fans 
of rap music, as becomes clear early in the series when Julian (John Paul 
Tremblay) receives an NWA CD for his birthday and later on when virtu-
ally everyone in the park attends white rapper J-Roc’s (Jonathan Torrens) 
live freestyle rap show in the season three episode ‘Who’s the Microphone 
Assassin?’ 
 The connection between coded-blackness and poverty-ridden life in the 
trailer park is made explicit by T (Tyrone Parsons), J-Roc’s black sidekick, 
at the outset of ‘Microphone Assassin’. T says of himself and J-Roc that 
‘we live in the park, it’s real gangsta out here, you gotta keep it gangsta, 
you gotta keep it real, rappin’ about the real life things we go through’. 
Thus for T, trailer park life equals ‘gangsta’ life, and while that statement 
may be part of his own attempt to compulsively bolster his masculinity by 
making suburban trailer park residency seem rougher and tougher than it 
really is, the economic disenfranchisement and resulting petty criminality 
that pervades the park does to some extent validate T’s claim. The park, 
while not quite the same as an urban black ghetto, is surely not much akin 
to a middle-class white neighborhood either. 
 In addition to depicting the Sunnyvale Trailer Park as a quasi-ghetto, 
 Trailer Park Boys also makes clear early on that J-Roc truly considers him-
self to be culturally and ethnically black. He is the leader and only white 
member of a posse made up entirely of black rappers and dope dealers, and 
other park residents verify that J-Roc has  always considered himself black 
since childhood. No park resident ever seriously questions the appropri-
ateness of J-Roc’s assuming a coded-black identity, and his lifelong friend-
ship with T further naturalizes this cross-racial identifi cation. 
 J-Roc himself addresses the issue of his own racial identity at the outset 
of ‘Who’s the Microphone Assassin?’ in a speech to the camera in which he 
claims to be ‘reversing who’s black and who’s white’ through his rap career, 
and ultimately stating that for he and T, as well as society writ large, racial 
categories do not matter: ‘we’re saying, society, you know what’s up, this shit 
don’t even matter, you know what I’m sayin’, at the end of the day, right?’ 
Under the guise of post-racial rhetoric (‘it don’t matter’), J-Roc appropri-
ates a coded-black masculinity in order to conform to the demands of what 
Majors and Mancini Billson call ‘compulsory masculinity’, an alternative to 
‘THIS IS GREAT, WE’RE LIKE SLAVE BUDDIES!’: CROSS-RACIAL APPROPRIATION... 67

traditional masculinity often taken up by black males, a ‘rigid prescription 
for toughness, sexual promiscuity, manipulation, thrill-seeking, and a will-
ingness to use violence’ that ultimately serves to compensate for ‘feelings 
of shame, powerlessness, and frustration’ ( 1992 , 34). As a comedy,  Trailer 
Park Boys often reveals the cracks in J-Roc’s compulsively masculine facade, 
as when, despite his love of waving guns around in his rap videos, he fl ees 
every time a real gun fi ght occurs in the park. However, there is little doubt 
that J-Roc inhabits his compulsively masculine identity in large part due 
to his impoverished upbringing in the park and his early exposure to black 
culture through his friends. Yet as is the case with so many of the millen-
nial ‘squirmy’ comedies, whose humour emerges more so from provoking 
uncomfortable situations than setting up and delivering tightly constructed 
gags and punch lines, the show leaves some central questions unanswered, 
especially where ‘white negro’ J-Roc is concerned (Mailer  1957 ). 
 Trailer Park Boys negotiates issues of cross-racial appropriation in com-
plex ways, contextualizing J-Roc’s imagined black or ‘white negro’ iden-
tity within a cultural and class structure that, to some extent, explains 
(if not justifi es) it. Unlike the privileged whites of  Arrested Development 
and  Party Down ,  Trailer Park ’s J-Roc is lower class, living among the 
lower- class blacks and whites of Sunnyvale. As Eric Lott has documented, 
working- class white men, due to closer socioeconomic proximity to black 
men, often evince a complex relationship to black masculinity, an extremely 
ambivalent negotiation fraught with both admiration and emulation as 
well as fear and resentment ( 1997 , 195). This ambivalent proximity does 
not so much give working-class white men the  right to appropriate black 
culture, but it does complicate the act of appropriation in a way to elevate 
it above mere mercenary thievery. 
 Although J-Roc inhabits a more or less permanent coded-black identity 
as a white rapper, the biggest challenge to his cross-racial appropriation 
comes, as with Buster and Gob in  Arrested Development , in the wake of 
a direct affront to his masculinity. In ‘Who’s the Microphone Assassin?’ 
Julian, Ricky (Robb Wells) and Bubbles (Mike Smith) go to visit J-Roc in 
his mother’s trailer, where he lives. J-Roc’s mom (Linda Busby) shows the 
boys back to J-Roc’s room, only to walk in on the white rapper furiously 
pleasuring himself. J-Roc is incredibly embarrassed over this and spends 
the remainder of the episode denying that his mother caught him mastur-
bating. He specifi cally expresses concerns that the incident, if made public, 
may harm his rap career, making explicit the contrast between the imma-
ture, pre-Oedipal sexuality connoted by masturbation and the more com-
pulsively masculine values embodied in J-Roc’s usual coded-black identity. 
68 
C. SOLES

 Further complicating the implications of the masturbation scene are 
Cory (Cory Bowles) and Trevor (Michael Jackson), a buddy duo around 
whom an aura of heavily suggested yet never quite confi rmed homoeroti-
cism hovers throughout the series: in season two they have sexual  liaisons 
with two transvestites, and in season fi ve Trevor reveals that he knows on 
which nights male strippers take the stage at a local club. Signifi cantly, 
Cory and Trevor are peeping in J-Roc’s window during the masturbation 
incident, and while they claim to be following J-Roc’s movements due 
to their interest in participating in the rap show, their presence queers 
an already emasculating event, intensifying J-Roc’s need to reestablish 
his masculinity and heterosexuality via his coded-black (and compulsively 
masculine) performance at the rap show. 
 Once the rap show gets underway, things go fi ne for J-Roc until 
Detroit Velvet Smooth (Garry James), a black rapper from the nearby 
city of Moncton, shows up in Sunnyvale to interrupt the show and accuse 
J-Roc of pirating his music on a recent recording. Smooth’s accusation is 
valid, and when J-Roc feebly explains that he meant the act of piracy as an 
homage and gesture of respect to Smooth, whom he calls ‘my brother’, 
Smooth challenges him: ‘You calling me your brother? Seems like to me 
one of us ain’t black. Are you black?’ To which J-Roc replies, ‘Yeah, I’m 
black.’ Interestingly, at the moment of that pronouncement, T, standing 
just behind J-Roc, puts his hand to his forehead in a gesture of disbelief. 
This gesture is only visible for a brief second, but affords T the opportu-
nity for critique of his white buddy denied to so many characters of colour 
in  Arrested Development . However, the show never indicates whether T is 
skeptical of J-Roc’s right to consider himself black in general, or if he is 
simply embarrassed to hear J-Roc state his appropriative racial identity so 
boldly in front of Detroit Velvet Smooth. 
 Immediately following Smooth’s accusation and J-Roc’s claim to black-
ness, the show cuts to a brief interview segment wherein two acquaintances 
explain that ‘It’s not an act—[J-Roc] really believes [he’s black].’ This 
endorsement of J-Roc’s authenticity is followed by a second short inter-
view clip, this time of J-Roc explaining his theory that there are ‘degrees 
of black’ and delineating where a few famous entertainment fi gures fall on 
the continuum of whiteness and blackness: Lionel Richie is ‘barely black’ 
and Michael Jackson is a ‘white black’ according to J-Roc. While in no 
way negating the appropriative aspects of J-Roc’s identity and behaviour, 
his explanation nevertheless articulates an understanding of race as socially 
and culturally constructed, coding ‘blackness’ as a set of behaviours and 
‘THIS IS GREAT, WE’RE LIKE SLAVE BUDDIES!’: CROSS-RACIAL APPROPRIATION... 69

attitudes rather than a category essentially tied to biological race. As a bio-
logically white man claiming a black identity, this is potentially problem-
atic: J-Roc exercises his white privilege in  choosing a coded-black identity. 
Yet the show and the episode leave open the possibility that this may be a 
legitimate choice in J-Roc’s circumstances. 
 When we next see J-Roc after his confrontation with Smooth, he is 
hiding out in his room, site of the embarrassing masturbation incident 
that catalyzed his need to participate in the re-masculinizing freestyle rap 
show in the fi rst place. His mother again walks in on him, this time to offer 
him consolation, and fi nds him changed out of his usual clothes, instead 
wearing a rainbow-coloured polo shirt and khaki trousers, his outfi t sig-
nifying a stereotypically white man. When his mother inquires, he replies, 
in standardized English rather than his usual gangsta dialect: ‘Why would 
I be dressed any differently, mom? It’s who I am. It’s hard to admit it, 
but—mom, I’m white!’ J-Roc undergoes a race-based identity crisis that 
plainly reveals the constructed nature of his usual coded-black persona. 
Detroit Velvet Smooth’s challenge to J-Roc’s black identity has acted as 
a reality principle utterly shattering the white rapper’s cross-racial fantasy. 
 Yet J-Roc’s mother does not accept her son’s acquiescence to his own 
whiteness, and gives him a pep talk in which she asks him ‘Who’s the 
microphone assassin?’ and tells him that he needs to believe in himself. 
When this doesn’t quite convince him, she reveals that she has always pre-
ferred black men to white ones, and has had sexual relations with several 
black men in the past. This cheers him up signifi cantly. 
 Meanwhile, outside at the stalled rap show, Julian pays Smooth royalty 
money for the use of his music on J-Roc’s behalf, settling his gripe. Then, 
J-Roc’s mom, having reemerged from the trailer, asks the black rapper to 
go inside and speak to her son. He agrees. And while this at fi rst appears 
to be a scenario akin to that of Buster’s encounter with his Mexican ‘slave 
buddies’, in which a character of colour offers approval and validation for 
a white character’s act of cross-racial appropriation, Smooth warns J-Roc 
that ‘There’s a lot more to being black than just being down with NWA, 
seriously.’ This suggests that Smooth—and the show—is well aware that 
J-Roc does not in fact understand fully what it means to be black. Of 
course, to be fair,  Arrested Development is well aware of the ridiculous 
inappropriateness of its white characters’ appropriative cross-racial fanta-
sies as well, yet it only rarely gives its characters of colour a chance to 
directly admonish its comically clueless protagonists. Here, conversely, 
J-Roc is reprimanded by one of the very people upon which he has mod-
eled his ‘black’ identity. 
70 
C. SOLES

 Yet Smooth ultimately validates J-Roc’s right to be whatever he wishes, 
saying: ‘There’s black and there’s white and then there’s you, J-Roc, and 
I still don’t know what in the fuck that is yet.’ Interestingly, Smooth’s 
categorization of J-Roc places the latter in a liminal identity category, 
neither black nor white. While this pronouncement neatly sidesteps the 
problematic dimensions of a white person appropriating a coded-black 
identity, it nevertheless makes clear that whatever J-Roc is, it is unique and 
as-yet incomprehensible to people (and a society) who fi t more clearly into 
established ethnic categories. Buoyed by Smooth’s intervention, J-Roc 
changes back into his gangsta outfi t and resumes the rap show, joined 
onstage by his idol. In line with classical comedy conventions, the episode 
ends with celebratory unifi cation of the whole community around its male 
protagonist. The entire social body of the Sunnyvale Trailer Park rallies 
around J-Roc, validating his claim to a third racial category  between that 
of black and white, offering a positive, utopian interpretation of the white 
rapper’s act of ethnic self-determination. 
 However, this ostensibly happy ending masks a troubling subtext. As 
Eric Lott has written of Elvis Presley, ‘nobody who thinks with their ears 
can dismiss Elvis as merely a case of racial rip-off’ yet the fact remains that 
Presley made his fame and fortune by repackaging black music and dance 
moves for white audiences—what Lott ultimately calls a ‘whiteface’ per-
formance of black blues and gospel sounds ( 1997 , 203). Similarly, while 
it would be reductive to say that J-Roc  only or  merely steals his identity, 
music and performance style from black gangsta rap culture, it is neverthe-
less the case that he is a white man profi ting from his appropriation of rap 
music and gangsta style. So, liberating though Smooth’s liminal yet inde-
terminate classifi cation of J-Roc may be for the white rapper personally, 
the episode ends by representing a problematic real-world act of cultural 
theft. Structurally speaking, J-Roc gets away with repackaging rap music 
for a mostly white audience in his own form of ‘whiteface’ performance. 
The episode responds to its own titular question—‘Who’s the microphone 
assassin?’—with a sobering answer refl ective of the real history of popular 
culture: a white man.  
 DECONSTRUCTING THE POST-RACIAL TURN:  PARTY DOWN  
 Party Down centres upon the exploits of a group of Los Angeles-based 
caterers, most of whom view their work as a stop-gap on their way to suc-
cess in the entertainment industry. Though their ages and genders vary, 
‘THIS IS GREAT, WE’RE LIKE SLAVE BUDDIES!’: CROSS-RACIAL APPROPRIATION... 71

all are white. They all struggle to make ends meet but unlike the edge-of- 
poverty inhabitants of Sunnyvale Trailer Park, the  Party Down crew is all 
fi rmly situated in the middle class. 
 Being a darker comedy than the other two shows under discussion, 
 Party Down is the most savage in its critique of the white racial imaginary. 
This comes to the fore in the season two episode ‘James Ellison Funeral’, 
in which the Party Down catering crew works the funeral reception of an 
upper-middle-class black businessman. Much humour is generated from 
the fact that most of the black party guests are richer, better educated and 
much more well-mannered than most of the white caterers. 
 Early in the episode, geeky crew member Roman (Martin Starr) engages 
in a debate with Mary (Tamala Jones), the daughter of the deceased, over 
the exact meaning of the phrase ‘jungle fever’. Claiming that the term only 
applies when a white person lusts after a black one, and not vice-versa, 
Roman asserts that his position is based only upon ‘facts of semantics’ 
and does not mark him as racist: ‘I’m post-racial’, he confi dently claims, 
‘People are people. If you’re cool, you’re cool.’ To which Mary rejoins: ‘If 
you’re an ass, you’re an ass’, clearly referring to Roman himself, which he 
misses. This joke shows Roman not only to be self-involved and dense, but 
also exposes his claim to be ‘post-racial’ as a lie. Roman is an ‘ass’ precisely 
because he (wrongly) considers himself to be post-racial. His imagined 
post-racialness allows him to indulge his penchant for disregarding other 
peoples’ feelings, and Mary Ellison calls him on it. The joke is on Roman; 
we laugh with Mary at him. 
 Roman’s racism is reemphasized at one later point, when he asks a bira-
cial guest if he knows the exact defi nition of ‘jungle fever’. The guest 
stares at Roman in disbelief, and the vignette ends in an uncomfortable, 
squirmy silence. Roman’s assumption that it takes someone of colour or 
(even better) a biracial individual to understand the concept of interracial 
desire reveals his essentialist assumptions and marks him as racist. 
 An even more involved joke of similar stripe involves Kyle (Ryan 
Hansen), a privileged, white ‘pretty boy’ metrosexual who, when not 
catering, stars in ‘B’ fi lms and fronts a squeaky clean emo-pop band. As 
an aspiring musician, Kyle is utterly captivated by an older black funeral 
guest’s performance of ‘Amazing Grace’ at the reception, and approaches 
that guest to ask him for pointers in learning how to play the blues. The 
guest, William (Lee Weaver), agrees, and begins ordering Kyle to per-
form all manner of absurd tasks: removing and surrendering his designer 
belt, picking shrimp out of shrimp puffs, and fi nally, shining William’s 
72 
C. SOLES

shoes. All these tasks, William claims, will teach Kyle about the blues so 
long as the white caterer doesn’t try too hard to ‘understand’ their pur-
pose; instead, the blues singer urges, Kyle must simply ‘experience’ what 
is happening to him. For Kyle, these assignments are freighted with mean-
ing; he engages in each new humiliation with great eagerness, convinced 
he is learning something very special. However, at episode’s end one of 
William’s friends reveals that the blues man is not really a blues man at 
all, but rather a retired dentist who recently started learning to play guitar 
as a hobby. William and his chums (and Roman) have a laugh at Kyle’s 
expense, and the latter walks off, looking a bit embarrassed and crestfallen. 
 Yet at the end of the reception, Kyle approaches William and, despite the 
ex-dentist’s assertion that ‘there was nothing to learn’ from the degrad-
ing prank, insists again and again that he has indeed learned something, 
claiming to ‘get it’. Kyle’s earnestness here suggests that this is more than 
a simple defense mechanism against having been the butt of an elabo-
rate gag. Rather, Kyle engages the dentist’s joke in a postmodern way, on 
two levels, as both ironic  and authentic simultaneously, as if there were 
‘real’ lessons to be gleaned from it  even though it was a joke. Kyle believes 
his temporary simulation of ethnicity, which he repeatedly equates to the 
‘slave experience’, to be, in some sense, real. Just as, according to Judith 
Butler ( 1990 ), gender identity is performative, so too is ethnicity, when 
played to elicit melodramatic sympathy and simulate victimhood. Kyle 
reinterprets a process that only exists as a joke, investing it with depth, 
projecting a white racial fantasy, imagining (we suppose) that by partici-
pating as the victim of the joke, he has experienced genuine oppression 
akin to that of black slaves. He plays at being (what he imagines to be) 
black, but this is  not real slavery, nor even a convincing simulation of it. 
But it is all the premise Kyle needs to imagine that he understands the 
‘black slave experience’ which allows him to grasp ‘the blues’. Yet the 
audience knows that the dentist’s status as a Magical Negro, defi ned by 
Audrey Colombe ( 2002 ) as a ‘self-sacrifi cing’ black fi gure whose ‘sole pur-
pose in the story is to selfl essly use [his] powers to help a White man’, is 
only in Kyle’s imagination. 
 The ‘James Ellison Funeral’ episode does evince racial stereotyping in 
its depiction of the late Mr. Ellison as sexually promiscuous, though per-
haps the deployment of that stereotype is somewhat tempered by Mrs. 
Ellison’s (Loretta Devine) acceptance of her husband’s extramarital affairs 
and her claim that their marriage was an open one by mutual consent. 
However, the episode’s major punch line comes when it is revealed that 
‘THIS IS GREAT, WE’RE LIKE SLAVE BUDDIES!’: CROSS-RACIAL APPROPRIATION... 73

the deceased Mr. Ellison fathered not one but (at least) two illegitimate 
children, a depiction that plays upon the same offensive stereotype that 
causes the studio engineer in  Arrested Development to refuse to work with 
Gob and Franklin on their CD.  The damage here is mitigated by Mr. 
Ellison’s upper-class status, which works against the usual stereotype of 
 lower-class black men as sexually voracious. Yet this joke illustrates how 
even the most intelligent and incisively critical of comedy shows fi nds it 
diffi cult to resist indulging in stereotypical depictions of persons of colour, 
even in the service of deconstructing the presumed post-racialism of its 
white characters.  
 
CONCLUSION 
 Privileged members of the dominant white, Euro-American culture often 
fi nd the fact of lingering structural racism hard to digest, wanting very 
badly to believe that we now live in a post-racial society. Contemporary 
single-camera comedies belie this persistent fantasy. These post-millennial, 
single-camera comedy shows, at their best, call out white characters (and 
by extension, viewers) for their discomfort in confronting issues of struc-
tural racism and white privilege. Insofar as they poke fun at whites who 
think themselves post-racial yet indulge in unconscious stereotyping and 
other passively racist activities, these shows give the lie to the notion of 
a post-racial North-America, even as they—to varying degrees—recycle 
those same stereotypes for the purposes of comedy. 
 Each of the three shows under discussion approaches these issues 
differently. As the best-known and most ‘mainstream’ of the three, 
 Arrested Development focuses exclusively on its white characters. Despite 
a few moments of critique from characters of colour like Ice,  Arrested 
Development tends to deploy cross-racial appropriation as a means to gen-
tly satirize the privileged Bluths and their associates, laughing at them 
yet centralizing them and their racist worldview. It mines humour from 
the cluelessness of rich white people yet lets its stereotypical depictions of 
blacks and Mexicans go unproblematized.  Trailer Park Boys is more subtle 
in how it addresses the cultural constructedness of race, explicitly critiqu-
ing the essentialist position. Yet as a more traditional (less dark) comedy, it 
favours a utopian view that allows characters like J-Roc to appropriate an 
imagined black identity without serious or lasting consequences. Granted, 
 Trailer Park Boys self-consciously foregrounds its mockumentary form, 
74 
C. SOLES

thereby decentering J-Roc’s perspective by offering confl icting points of 
view (the acquaintances’ interview, Detroit Velvet Smooth’s accusation) 
on his act of racial appropriation in ‘Who’s the Microphone Assassin?’. Yet 
Smooth’s episode-concluding endorsement, while ambiguous, is never-
theless an endorsement. The show ultimately signs off on J-Roc’s right to 
inhabit an ethnically black identity, never again questioning his ethnic sta-
tus and even granting him a black son in its Netfl ix-produced ninth season 
(2014). Finally, as the least well-known and tonally darkest of the three 
shows,  Party Down makes the strongest effort to critique the white geek’s 
post- racial position. Roman and Kyle are made the butts of jokes articu-
lated by black characters, revealing the white caterers’ complete oblivi-
ousness to their own structural privilege. Though the show, like  Arrested 
Development , foregrounds economically advantaged white characters, it is 
more pointed in its critique of those characters’ obliviousness to racism. 
For example, as early as its fi rst episode,  Party Down positions team leader 
Ron Donald (Ken Marino) as a well-meaning but passively racist idiot who 
is excited to have recently attended racial sensitivity training yet thinks 
nothing of yelling the word ‘jiggers’ (in reference to alcohol glasses) in 
front of two black clients. That said,  Party Down ’s focus is predominantly 
on white characters and the show employs racist stereotyping, as in the late 
Mr. Ellison’s rapacious sexual desire for lighter-skinned women. 
 Ultimately, the trends analyzed here are bound up in the broader rise of 
geeky white masculinity to a place of cultural centrality and power in the 
postmodern  milieu . These shows’ threatened white characters participate 
in imagined ethnicity to reinforce their place of privilege in a culture in 
which whiteness is paradoxically (and inaccurately) seen as a liability. Yet 
while these shows’ depictions of white appropriation of imagined ethnicity 
belie or at least question these characters’ ‘post- racial’ fantasy, their focus 
on white characters and tendency to perpetuate racial stereotypes contrib-
ute to the ongoing marginalization and mistreatment of people of colour.  
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Butler, Judith. 1990.  Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity . 
London: Routledge.  
 Colombe, Audrey. 2002. White Hollywood’s New Black Bogeyman.  Jump Cut, 45.  
 Dyer, Richard. 1997.  White . London: Routledge.  
 Fiedler, Leslie. 1948. ‘Come Back to the Raft Ag’in, Huck Honey!  Partisan 
Review 15(6): 664–671.  
‘THIS IS GREAT, WE’RE LIKE SLAVE BUDDIES!’: CROSS-RACIAL APPROPRIATION... 75

 Hall, Stuart. 1983. What is this “Black” in Black Popular Culture? In  Black Popular 
Culture , ed. Gina Dent, 20–33. New York: The New Press.  
 Kunyosying, Kom, and Carter Soles. 2012. Postmodern Geekdom as Simulated 
Ethnicity.  Jump Cut, 54. 
 Lott, Eric. 1997. All the King’s Men: Elvis Impersonators and White Working- 
Class Masculinity. In  Race and the Subject of Masculinities , ed. Harry 
Stecopoulos, and Michael Uebel, 192–227. Durham: Duke University Press.  
 Mailer, Norman. 1957. The White Negro.  Dissent , Summer. 
 Majors, Richard, and Janet Mancini Billson. 1992.  Cool Pose: The Dilemma of 
Black Manhood in America . New York: Simon & Schuster.  
 Snead, James. 1994.  White Screens Black Images: Hollywood From the Dark Side . 
London: Routledge.  
 Williams, Linda. 2001.  Playing the Race Card: Melodramas of Black and White 
from Uncle Tom to O.J. Simpson . Princeton: Princeton University Press.  
76 
C. SOLES

77
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2_5
 Phrasing!:  Archer , Taboo Humour, 
and Psychoanalytic Media Theory  
 Matt   Sienkiewicz  
 M.   Sienkiewicz  () 
 Boston College ,   Chestnut Hill ,  MA ,  USA  
 e-mail: matt.sienkiewicz@bc.edu 
 Media theory, emerging at the intersection of literary criticism and critical 
theory, inevitably draws upon a variety of analytic tools. Some of these, 
such as the structuralist approaches to genre, remain intuitively appeal-
ing to contemporary students. For example, an evening watching net-
work sitcoms makes apparent that the culture industries themselves have 
embraced the existence of deep structures and formulas in the production 
of entertainment. Other approaches, such as critical race theory, remain at 
greater distance from industrial self-awareness, but resonate strongly with 
the contemporary socio-political moment. 
 Freudian psychoanalysis, however, presents a different set of obstacles 
to both teacher and student. Students have a tendency to question the 
approach’s relevance to the contemporary media industry and to contem-
porary life more generally. This makes the task of choosing a text through 
which to teach psychoanalysis particularly daunting. If the Freudian ele-
ments of a text are too obscure, the instructor is easily accused of ‘reading 
too much’ and infusing it with lewd connotations it has done nothing to 
deserve. If the Freudian elements are too obvious, the text is just as easily 
understood as mocking psychoanalysis and, perhaps, the instructor  trying 

to teach it. After all, if Freud is right, the stuff worth studying ought 
to be hidden, right? An ideal text for introducing psychoanalytic media 
theory, therefore, is one that engages with the core concepts of Freudian 
analysis while nonetheless employing more subtle, subterranean elements 
that can, with effort, be brought to the surface. In order to ease naturally 
resistant students into the realm of psychoanalytic criticism, a text must be 
willing to display a certain level of interest in ideas such as Oedipal fi xa-
tion, repression and the death drive. These elements must be visibly and 
audibly present enough to convince a careful viewer of their existence, but 
obscured enough, at least in places, to plausibly be understood as less than 
fully conscious references to psychoanalysis. The text must admit Freud, 
but not be about Freud. 
 In this chapter I argue that the animated FX series  Archer , through its 
consistent, yet often narratively oblique engagement with Freudian taboos, 
offers just such an opportunity. I contend that, alongside putting forth 
humour steeped in Freudian concepts of sexual and violent drives, the spy 
comedy also engages in a variety of textual practices that can be interpreted 
as unconscious acts on the parts of producers that serve to make palatable 
(and enjoyable) taboo desires. There are obvious Freudian overtones in 
 Archer ’s humour that must be understood in terms of consciously playful 
decisions on the part of the creators. However, through its exploitation 
of the medium of animation,  Archer ’s producers (perhaps unconsciously) 
craft a safe space in which to give expression to some of the most deeply 
repressed elements of the human psyche. Countless jokes about mother-
son incest and sadomasochism have no doubt been weaved into the show 
by producers at least somewhat conscious of their Freudian implications. 
Yet they are packaged in highly unusual ways that mitigate the threat these 
taboo jokes present to the social consciousness of producers and viewers. 
These techniques can be read as evidence of the impact of unconscious 
needs on the part of producers to blunt the edginess of their comedy. 
 Thus,  Archer becomes a text that both provides an introduction to 
obvious psychoanalytic material through which to teach key Freudian con-
cepts while nonetheless serving plausibly as a repository for the uncon-
scious needs of its producers and consumers. It should be noted that my 
interest lies less with the absolute truth of a multi-layered psychoanalytic 
interpretation of  Archer as with the utility the show provides as a peda-
gogical tool. The primary ambition of this argument is to present the 
program as an ideal text through which to communicate pre-established 
theories of the connection between comedy, taboo and the return of the 
repressed in media. 
78 
M. SIENKIEWICZ

 ARCHER AND THE DUALITY OF PSYCHOANALYTIC 
CULTURAL READING 
 Archer ’s fi rst episode opens with a slow zoom out from the glass-blue eyes 
of the animated program’s titular hero. He is chained to the wall of a dun-
geon, wearing nothing but tight black briefs over an Adonis body marred 
only by a few pink scars. A man with an odd, perhaps Russian, accent lights 
a large cigar and prepares for an interrogation. He speaks, making clear he 
knows exactly who his captive is: ‘Sterling Archer. Code name Duchess. 
Known from Berlin to Bang cock [the stress being audibly clear] as the 
world’s most dangerous spy.’ He walks over to a pair of jumper cables and 
touches the ends together. Sparks fl y and he shivers with excitement. After 
a moment of dramatic pause, Sterling speaks up. He mocks the interroga-
tor, accuses him of faking his accent and laughs at the pleasure he seems 
to be getting out of the sado-erotic overtones of the scene. A voice then 
booms in from an intercom: ‘Son of a  bitch !’ A screen lights up, reveal-
ing a middle-aged woman watching the scene while sipping on a mixed 
drink. She reprimands Sterling for not taking the interrogation simulation 
seriously. He complains about his code name, Duchess, which is revealed 
to be the name of the woman’s deceased dog. She picks up a picture and 
looks down at it longingly—it’s a black-and-white photo of her nude body 
huddled against the canine Duchess’. As the scene ends, the interrogator 
reveals that this woman, who had been watching the sexually charged 
interrogation and codenamed Sterling after a dog she once loved (perhaps 
physically), is Mallory Archer, Sterling’s mother. 
 Archer thus begins with a scene drenched in Oedipal tension that shat-
ters the few taboos that are left to break on cable television. Given the free 
expression of anormative sex found on FX programs such as  It’s Always 
Sunny in Philadelphia and  Nip/Tuck ,  Archer must turn to jokes about 
incest and bestiality in order to call attention to its edge and, from a psy-
choanalytic perspective, address drives that are still understood as being 
widely repressed. The scene sets up the semi-sexual tension that marks the 
relationship between Sterling and Mallory Archer throughout the series 
and has become a trademark of the program’s relentlessly taboo comedy. 
The plot of the episode, however, quickly moves away from this point of 
focus, developing a highly self-aware but nonetheless conventional story 
about a double agent infi ltrating Archer’s organization. While this Oedipal 
fi xation, along with many other Freudian concepts to be discussed later, 
fi gures into the background of every episode, it never serves as the primary 
PHRASING!: ARCHER, TABOO HUMOUR AND PSYCHOANALYTIC MEDIA... 79

driver of the program’s narrative.  Archer thus clearly places questions of 
humour and repression squarely on the surface but does not fi xate on 
them. The result is a show that engages with repressed ideas and desires 
but nonetheless makes a certain effort to marginalize them, creating, I 
argue, an ideal opportunity to consider the ways in which taboo comedy 
can serve as fertile ground for considering the psychoanalytic implications 
of the show for both the producer and its viewers. 
 In his widely used textbook  Cultural Theory and Popular Culture , 
Storey ( 2012 ) offers a simple but instructive division by which to articulate 
the possibilities for basic psychoanalytic interpretations of popular media 
texts. On the one hand, he puts forth the ‘author-centered’ approach. In 
this approach cultural texts are positioned as analogous to the ‘dreams and 
pathological ideas’ that, in Freudian clinical psychoanalysis, are revealed by 
the patient and interpreted by the analyst (Freud  1965 , 135). This reading 
strategy thus treats the textual elements of a movie, television program or 
other cultural product as a manifest level of signifi cation that, via analysis, 
can be made to reveal the latent meanings that the producer has unwitting 
imparted (Freud  1965 , 99). In identifying this approach, Storey draws on 
Freud’s own observations in  Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis on 
the parallels that exist between the production of dreams and works of 
art. There Freud argues that art is ‘a path that leads back from phantasy to 
reality’ and that the artist is capable of ‘work[ing] over his day-dreams’ in 
order to use them as material to be presented to the public (Freud  1989 , 
468). These dreams are made tangible in the process of artistic production 
and can be extracted by the attuned critic. 
 Freud’s artist, however, must ‘tone […] down’ the repressed material, 
thus stripping it of any apparent connection to desires that must, perforce 
of societal demands, be left hidden. As Flitterman-Lewis puts it, ‘conceal-
ment of those “marks of enunciation” that stamp [artistic] authorship’ 
are crucial for the viewer to experience fi lm as an analogue to their own 
dreams ( 1987 , 182). This, of course, presents a challenge to the teacher 
of the ‘author-centered’ approach. By defi nition, the true meanings of the 
text have thus been buried so as to avoid detection on the part of most 
viewers. And, at least in theory, the process of recovering this meaning 
ought to require a similar level of attention and expertise to that which 
an analyst must devote to a patient. This is a diffi cult, daunting and per-
haps even ridiculous-sounding prospect for students with no training in 
the fi eld of psychology. Although it is certainly possible to evoke these 
meanings through careful explication of Freudian principles, the general 
80 
M. SIENKIEWICZ

skepticism through which contemporary students tend to view the con-
cept of psychoanalysis can make this an extremely uphill battle. It can 
appear, perhaps with some reason, that the interpreter can do little more 
than hazard guesses at what repressed ideas have been submerged in the 
text.  Archer , however, offers something in the way of a happy medium. 
It is easy to identify material in the program’s humour that, according to 
Freudian theorists, is commonly repressed. This fact allows the student 
to consider why these elements are present and how the producers have 
done the work of ‘toning down’ the latent material in the program while 
nonetheless leaving such manifest traces. 
 The question of viewer pleasure points to the second of Storey’s two 
approaches, the ‘reader-centered’. In this case, the interpreter considers 
the media text a ‘substitute dream’ through which the viewer gains ‘uncon-
scious pleasure and satisfaction’ in the process of consumption (Storey 
 2012 , 100). In an introductory text on the subject, Allen argues that the 
process of media viewing is ideal ‘for escaping the tyranny of reason and 
staging the associative processes of condensation and displacement that, 
for Freud, characterized unconscious thought’ ( 2003 , 128). The broad 
popularity of a given text, therefore, can be explained by its ability to 
engage with feelings and desires that are repressed by large groups of 
potential consumers and to do so in fashion that produces a pleasurable 
sense of release in many of them. From this perspective, the overtness of a 
given text’s engagement with taboo thoughts and ideas ceases to be a hin-
drance and becomes an opportunity. However, those texts that emphati-
cally engage with the desires most easily communicated to students as 
being subject to near universal repression, rarely become popular hits. 
Although popular shows can often be mined for interesting psychoana-
lytic material, such work can require great nuance and appear to be rather 
forced.  Archer , once again provides a unique opportunity. Yes, it is a pro-
gram that is found in the higher numbers of most cable systems, but it is 
nonetheless a show that has gained a mainstream following unavailable to 
most texts that, to cite a few examples, feature repeated, explicit descrip-
tions of eroticized death fantasies or make repeated reference to a son’s 
ability to perform sexually in the presence of his mother. Furthermore, it 
is a program aimed precisely at the demographic most likely to be  learning 
critical media theory for the fi rst time—young, educated, middle-class 
viewers. The program thus not only offers the instructor the opportunity 
to ask why one might take pleasure at seeing a character described being 
choked to death during sex, but also to ask precisely why they seem to 
enjoy it. 
PHRASING!: ARCHER, TABOO HUMOUR AND PSYCHOANALYTIC MEDIA... 81

 In the following sections I analyze  Archer from both of Storey’s 
approaches to psychoanalytic interpretation. My aim is to show that 
 Archer can be productively and honestly presented in psychoanalytic terms 
that strike a careful balance between the obvious and the hidden. To do 
so, I consider the impact of the media of television and animation, as well 
as the specifi c content of  Archer , returning occasionally to original texts 
of Freud in order to bridge the comedic use of today’s taboos with tradi-
tional notions of repression and release.  
 ARCHER AND DREAMWORK, CONTEMPORARY TELEVISION 
AS DREAMSCAPE 
 The author-centered approach to media texts is one that asks not only what 
repressed materials from the creator’s unconscious are being expressed in 
the text, but also how those elements are incorporated in a fashion that 
makes them palatable to viewers. To answer this latter question is also 
perhaps to consider the ways in which artists are able to so consciously 
deal in the realm of their own unconscious. The ‘toning down’ that Freud 
describes not only serves the purpose of making taboo material palatable 
for others, but also enabling artists to plausibly distance themselves from 
the reality of the repressed desires they are expressing. My focus in this 
section is thus on the ways in which  Archer exploits the medium of tele-
vision animation in order to craft a fertile, safe environment in which to 
place the most shocking of repressed emotions and drives. All media can 
be thought in some ways to operate in a manner similar to that of dreams. 
 Archer , however, employs exceptional, innovative approaches to crafting a 
diegetic world that mirrors the logic of dreams as Freud explains them and 
thus tempers the fi erce reality of the repressed desires the show uses as the 
basis of so much of its comedy. 
 The foundations of psychoanalytic media theory lay primarily in schol-
arly refl ections on the experience of traditional cinema going. The cin-
ematic experience is said to run in parallel to the process of falling asleep 
and drifting into a dream state. The result is an aesthetic experience in 
which, as Mulvey notes, ‘the extreme contrast between the darkness in 
the auditorium (which also isolates the spectators from one another) and 
the brilliance of the shifting patterns of light’ allow the viewer to project 
‘repressed desire on to the performer’ (Mulvey  1975 ). Although psycho-
analytic cinema theorists have devoted much time to parsing out the spe-
cifi c ramifi cations of this media experience, Mulvey’s focus on darkness 
82 
M. SIENKIEWICZ

and isolation is generally considered central to cinema’s ability to grant 
access to repressed desires. 
 These factors have, however, created signifi cant barriers to the importa-
tion of psychoanalytic theory into the realm of television studies. As John 
Fiske argues ‘the huge bright cinema and the anonymous darkness of the 
auditorium’ stand in stark contrast to ‘the far less imperative television 
screen situated in the family living room in the middle of ordinary family 
life’, thus disrupting many of the dream parallels that Mulvey and others 
draw to the cinema ( 1987 , 226). Furthermore, as Flitterman-Lewis notes, 
television often resists the shot-reverse shot editing pattern that classical 
Hollywood engages in order to ‘suture’ the viewer into a scene ( 1987 , 
200). Even if a given show chooses to engage in such a visual style, the 
medium, via a preponderance of talk shows, game shows, variety program-
ming and other fare establish a mode of viewing that is starkly different 
from that attending a pitch-black megaplex screening. 
 Both Flitterman-Lewis and Fiske fi nd other means through which 
to employ psychoanalytic theory in order to explain televisual pleasure. 
Flitterman-Lewis attempts to turn the ‘fractured subjectivity’ of the tele-
vision medium into an asset by asserting that it must create ‘ever more 
powerful psychic mechanisms’ in order to maintain viewer interest ( 1987 , 
204). Fiske, in contrast, points to television’s traditionally degraded cul-
tural position via associations with sexual promiscuity, glorifi cation of 
violence and crass ‘appeal to the lowest common denominator’. This dis-
cursive positioning allows viewers to engage in the pleasure of ‘ plaisir ’ 
through which one releases repressed desires by ‘confi rming their social 
identity as one that opposes […] dominant social values’ ( 1987 , 228). 
 Archer certainly plays into these television stereotypes and taboos, offer-
ing levels of sex and violence that push the boundaries of what Michael 
Curtin describes as ‘edge’—the process by which broadcasters intention-
ally limit their appeal to specifi c cultural groups in order to craft ‘market-
able boundaries of difference’ (Curtin  1996 , 190). 
 However, the contemporary context, particularly when viewed from 
the perspective of the student, complicates the picture that Fiske portrays. 
Yes, today’s television landscape features more taboo material than ever 
before, but a new critical approach has come to eclipse the traditional 
stances toward televisual sex and violence. Whereas writers such as Jerry 
Mander once bemoaned television’s insistence on promoting violence over 
values of ‘cooperation, loving and caring’, contemporary popular critics 
have reappraised such televisual tendencies, often reframing them in terms 
PHRASING!: ARCHER, TABOO HUMOUR AND PSYCHOANALYTIC MEDIA... 83

of art ( 1978 , 36). For example, the best-selling critic Alan Sepinwall, while 
never praising sex and violence for its own sake, points to the HBO series 
 Oz , full of scenes of prison rape and murder, as a key text in the creation of 
‘another golden age’ for television (Sepinwall  2012 , 2). The violence of  The 
Sopranos , the sexual candor of  Sex and the City and the casual portrayal of 
extramarital sex on  Mad Men have in each case contributed to television’s 
cultural cache, not diminished it. This is not to say defi nitively that view-
ers no longer have access to the pleasure of  plaisir that Fiske points out. It 
does, however, emphasize the importance of updating discussions of con-
temporary television in order to account for changes within the medium. 
 Some of these changes, in fact, signifi cantly recast the original obser-
vations that forced Fiske and Flitterman-Lewis to reject the cinematic 
approach to television’s psychoanalytic signifi cance. Most plainly, televi-
sion’s domesticity, while certainly still prevalent for some viewers, is by 
no means universal. Both technology and industrial shifts have changed 
the television-watching experience, a fact that is plainly clear to contem-
porary students of the medium. For many, the experience of watching 
 Archer might, in fact, provide an even more persuasive case as a parallel 
to a dream state than did cinema viewing for scholars such as Mulvey. 
Fiske approaches television as a small screen watched at a distance in the 
presence of the entire family. Younger viewers, however, are just as likely 
to watch  Archer in bed, alone (or not alone), in the dark, on a computer 
screen laying mere inches away. Occasionally, one supposes, they fall asleep 
and enter actual dream states as a result of the experience. The rise of 
online video as a mainstream form of television consumption thus radically 
repositions the possibilities for considering television psychoanalytically, 
particularly with regards to shows aimed primarily at younger, richer and 
therefore more technologically advanced audiences. 
 Even when watched in real time on FX, the domesticity of  Archer is 
signifi cantly reduced in comparison to the context in which the founda-
tional work on television and psychoanalysis was written. Network Era 
television was pitched at large swaths of viewers lending credence to Fiske 
and Flitterman-Lewis’ sense that televisual publicity stood in opposition 
to cinematic intimacy. Over time, however, the fracturing of the television 
audience has complicated this picture, particularly with regards to cable 
television. As Lotz notes, networks such as FX have ‘sought to develop pro-
gramming that establishes their narrowly focused brands and allows them to 
deliver […] particular demographic and psychographic groups of consum-
ers’ ( 2007 , 183). In the case of individual households this suggests greater 
84 
M. SIENKIEWICZ

levels of solo viewing. Furthermore, in order to reach this goal, networks 
have made concerted efforts to cordon off certain timeslots in order to craft 
a sense of intimacy and personal attention for viewers. Cartoon Network’s 
 Adult Swim block, for example, inserts ‘bumps’ into its commercial breaks 
aimed at crafting a sense of intimacy. These simple, text-based shorts are 
often addressed in the second person, creating a simulation of a one-on-one 
dialogue between viewer and television. 
 Archer ’s network, FX, uses a similar tactic, and one that can be read as 
particularly useful in setting up the viewer for the reception of repressed 
desires that is to be found in the programming that follows. Billing its late 
block as  FX Fully Baked , the network introduces each episode of  Archer 
with a soft focused, oddly lit scene featuring a young, beautiful woman 
baking in a messy, haze-fi lled kitchen. She is, in her own right, a rather 
striking Freudian concoction, equal parts suicide girl and fi fties housewife. 
She wears her hair in a style reminiscent of June Cleaver, along with a very 
low cut apron revealing abundant cleavage. Her arms are covered in tat-
toos of domestic items—an eggbeater, cookie cutters and so on. And the 
end of each scene she smiles provocatively and offers the viewer a baked 
treat that, implicitly, has been made with some ingredients unavailable at 
the grocery store. These scenes not only offer a sense of intimacy to the 
viewer, but also suggest that the following material comes from a place 
devoid of standard social inhibitions. Just as Freud notes that the oncom-
ing of sleep causes ‘involuntary ideas’ that must otherwise be repressed to 
emerge in the process of clinical psychoanalysis, the branding of  FX Fully 
Baked as late-night, drug-like comedy suggests a safe space in which to 
grapple with taboos.  
 ARCHER , ANIMATION AND THE LOGIC OF DREAMS 
 It is this ‘safe space’ that is crucial in understanding the sense in which 
 Archer is particularly suited to be read through the ‘author-centered’ 
approach to media psychoanalysis. As will be detailed later, the series 
 provides ample material for the psychoanalytic critic to consider. Too 
much, even. In order to understand  Archer as a text susceptible to psy-
choanalysis, as opposed to one that is simply  about psychoanalysis, there 
must be some explanation as to the means by which the text tempers its 
release of repressed psychic materials, both for the sake of the audience and 
the producer. In this section, I argue that  Archer ’s innovative use of the 
medium of animation plays this role. The narrative and aesthetic strategies 
PHRASING!: ARCHER, TABOO HUMOUR AND PSYCHOANALYTIC MEDIA... 85

of  Archer work to reframe its content, employing tactics that bare remark-
able similarity to Freud’s descriptions of dreams. By mimicking dreams in 
such a fashion,  Archer becomes a text in which producers can insert con-
cepts such as Oedipal desire without fully facing their reality and viewers 
can enjoy them without understanding their true, unconscious origins. 
 The choice of animation as the medium for  Archer plays a central role 
in establishing such an environment. Although FX and other cable net-
works often push boundaries in live action programming,  Archer ’s ani-
mated format allows the program to depict images of intense sexuality and 
sexual violence, and to do so in the context of comedy no less. To a certain 
extent this likely relates to issues of television standards and practices. It is 
hard to believe a network signing off on depicting an actor naked, being 
choked to the brink of death as another looks on in apparent amusement 
or arousal. Such scenes appear with frequency in  Archer . The question is 
why this double standard persists. The answer, perhaps, lies in the psycho-
logical framework in which audiences engage animated programming. As 
Napier notes, animation, by virtue of its ability to construct entirely arti-
fi cial realities, ‘challenges our expectations of what is “normal” or “real,” 
bringing up material that may seem more appropriately housed in dreams 
or the unconscious, and this can be a deeply disconcerting process’ ( 2005 , 
74). Along similar lines, Wells argues that animation, by re-writing both 
the rules of physics and society, can stage a space in which ‘the free-play 
of the id, unchecked by other mechanisms in the personality’ can be made 
manifest ( 1998 , 154). 
 Archer , however, goes further in establishing such a space, engaging 
practices that, if not unique to the show, are nonetheless highly unusual 
in the context of mainstream narrative television. This can be seen in its 
unique use of what may be described as ‘kettle’ or dream logic. In  The 
Interpretation of Dreams , Freud posits that dreams possess a unique trait 
that stands in stark contradiction to the rules of waking, social reality. In 
dreams, something can be true and not true at once. As an illustration, 
he points to a patient of his who had a dream in which he had damaged 
his neighbor’s kettle. As a defense, the dream-self of the patient offered 
three explanations to the neighbor: that he had returned the kettle with-
out damage, that it was damaged when he borrowed it and that he had 
never borrowed it at all ( 1965 , 153). These obviously contradictory expla-
nations are, Freud argues, one of the fundamental markers of the dream 
space in which repressed ideas can be safely expressed. In dreams, Freud 
argues that ‘thoughts which are mutually exclusive make no attempt to do 
86 
M. SIENKIEWICZ

away with each other, but persist side by side […revealing that which] our 
conscious thoughts would never tolerate but such as are often admitted in 
our actions’ ( 1965 , 635). 
 Archer engages with this sort of ‘kettle’ logic in two fashions. For one, 
the show constructs scenes in which characters admit to the reality of two 
entirely contradictory experiences. For example, in the episode ‘Training 
Day’, Sterling Archer explains to Cyril Figgis, via fl ashback, an encounter 
he once had in Jamaica:
 Cyril: 
When would you use an underwear gun? 
 [The scene cuts to a smoke-fi lled room. Archer gazes down at a naked women 
in bed.] 
 Archer  [v.o.] : 
Hopefully never. But say you’re in a Caribbean bungalow, 
and you’re kind of high, an exotic woman on the bed. Now 
is she just the high-priced whore you asked for? 
 [She kisses him.] 
 Archer  [v.o.] : 
Or is she an assassin? 
 [Out of nowhere, she pulls out a small gun.] 
 Cyril  [v.o.] : 
I don’t know. 
 Archer  [v.o.] : 
Oh, here’s room service. Who ordered champagne? 
 [Three large Jamaican men enter, all with friendly looks. One pushes a room 
service cart.] 
 Cyril  [v.o.] : 
Ah. How should I know? 
 Archer  [v.o.] : 
Exactly. You’re baked. You can’t remember. But since when 
does it take three huge surly Jamaican guys to deliver one 
bottle of champagne? 
 [Each of the men pulls out a gun and scowls.] 
 Cyril: 
Ohh. Because they’re assassins too? 
 Archer  [v.o.] : 
Or. Maybe one guy’s a new waiter. The second one’s train-
ing him, and the third’s from maintenance, fi nally off his 
lazy ass to fi x the A.C. 
 [The guns have disappeared. The Jamaicans pull out a bottle of champagne, a 
room service bill and a wrench, respectively, and present them.] 
 Cyril: 
Oh, yeah. I guess that could happen. 
 Archer: 
Point is, you come out of the john waving this [the under-
wear gun] around… no one’s gonna bug you for a tip. 
 Equally kettle-like is the entire environment in which  Archer takes 
place. Historically, the version of New York City featured in the program 
is one built on bizarre contradictions that emphasize the unreality of the 
PHRASING!: ARCHER, TABOO HUMOUR AND PSYCHOANALYTIC MEDIA... 87

elements being presented in the story. For example,  Archer ’s world is one 
in which The KGB and Soviet Union remain America’s greatest enemy, 
but also one in which sleek, slim contemporary cell phones are standard. 
The super high-tech offi ce in which much of the show’s action takes place 
is equipped quite noticeably with circa 1980 Apple 2C computers, yet 
characters travel by blimp, dress in 1950s-style suits, talk about their expe-
riences in World War I and create holograms of Japanese anime vixens. 
The effect is not one of science fi ction, as none of the elements are particu-
larly remarkable or remarked upon. It is instead a world of contradictions, 
cobbled together from bits and pieces of cultural memory. Like the kettle 
logic Freud describes in dreams,  Archer ’s New York both is and is not set 
in the past. 
 Archer also follows the dream logic outlined by Freud in its creative use 
of scene transitions, whereby individual words or images are used to pro-
vide a fulcrum on which to move from one scene to the next. As the series 
has developed, the scripts have moved away from traditional transitions 
between scenes occurring in different plotlines, employing techniques in 
which a character from one scene will apparently answer a question posed 
in another or, more commonly, a homonym is used in order to serve as 
a point of connection between two storylines. For example, in the sea-
son one episode ‘The Rock’ the following exchange serves as a point of 
transition:
 Mallory:  [Speaking of the wealth of a prospective client] The thing impor-
tant is that they’re loaded. 
 [Scene transitions to another room.] 
 Pam: 
 [Describing her previous evening] Just shit-faced! About fi fteen 
freaking beers, although that shootsy and holy shit, did honk 
down a bunch of absinthe! 
 The connection between the scenes hinges upon the double meaning 
of the word ‘loaded’ and follows quite strikingly the sort of transitional 
logic that Freud ascribes to dream states in  The Interpretation of Dreams . 
In dreams, he puts forth:
 The ideas which transfer their intensities to each other stand in the loosest 
of mutual relations. They are linked by associations of a kind that is scorned 
by our normal thinking and relegate to the use of jokes. In particular, we 
fi nd associations based on homonyms and verbal similarities treated as equal 
in value ( 1965 , 629). 
88 
M. SIENKIEWICZ

 Archer ’s use of this technique can by understood as a means by which 
the creators, perhaps unconsciously, create a fi ctional space in which, like 
in dreams, it is possible to address drives and desires too socially taboo 
to consider in straightforward terms. Moments after the transition just 
described, the character of Cheryl proceeds to punch Pam in order to 
induce her to vomit. She then turns to Cyril, telling him, with a hint of 
seduction in her voice, that she has ‘lost her appetite-for food, that is’. This 
intertwining of scatology, violence and eroticism represents just the sort 
of repressed desire that, according to psychoanalytic theory, requires the 
mitigation of dream logic and structure to remain palatable and enjoyable.  
 ARCHER AND THE ID,  ARCHER AND OEDIPAL DESIRE 
 Having established the sense in which the authors of  Archer craft a text in 
which repressed desires are made manifest in fashion that mitigates con-
scious rejection, I now turn to the ‘reader-centered’ approach that Storey 
describes. This interpretative strategy asks the critic to consider the ele-
ments of the text that give expression to the consumer’s unacknowledged 
but deeply held subconscious drives. The intentionality of the author thus 
plays a far less central role, as the psychoanalytic success of a text depends 
only on the viewer not being too harshly reminded of the fact that 
repressed material is being made manifest. Given the relatively low level of 
understanding (or interest) that most viewers have in Freudian concepts, 
this allows for a text that might be seen as rather obvious to the critic. 
Though  Archer engages playfully with a variety of desires attributed to the 
unconscious in psychoanalytic thought, it most commonly invokes drives 
towards non-normative sexual behaviour, often mixed with a sense of 
sadomasochism. In this section I consider this tendency of  Archer in terms 
of the Oedipal drive and the theorized dual forces of  eros and  thanatos . 
 As the interrogation scene that opens  Archer ’s fi rst episode makes plain, 
much of the humour in the program derives from its interrogation of the 
relationship between Sterling and his mother Mallory. The series spells 
out an Oedipal drama in which Sterling, having no knowledge of his own 
father, condenses both parental roles into the character of his mother. 
Mallory, simultaneously sensuously feminine and stern in the manner of 
a prototypical father fi gure, becomes a simultaneous object of Sterling’s 
drives towards both sex and violence. According to Freud, a young boy 
plays out an Oedipal drama by lusting after his mother and fantasizing 
PHRASING!: ARCHER, TABOO HUMOUR AND PSYCHOANALYTIC MEDIA... 89

about the death of his father. For Sterling Archer, a man who maintains a 
boyish level of maturity and self-awareness, his mother takes on both roles. 
 Though never becoming the focus of the narrative, this story of Oedipal 
desire is present throughout the series premiere. Later in the fi rst episode, 
by way of explaining Sterling’s failed relationship with the character of 
Lana,  Archer cuts to a fl ashback of the two lovers in bed. They speak 
lovingly to one another. Lana suggests they reengage intercourse while 
watching pornography. She fl ips on the television and moves towards 
Sterling as the phone rings. He picks up and begins talking to Mallory. 
Frustrated, Lana turns off the porn. Sterling, with the phone still open, 
turns to Lana, whispering ‘No, turn it on. I can do both.’ A few scenes 
later the theme of mother-son sexuality is further developed, as Sterling 
enters Mallory’s offi ce to fi nd her masturbating. Sterling verbalizes a mild 
disgust at the sight but goes on to enter the room and discuss his own 
philandering. 
 This Oedipal comedy takes on yet another Freudian form in a running 
gag that develops over the course of the series. As a running joke through-
out the series, Mallory stumbles into a series of statements that, to the ears 
of her son Sterling, are understood entirely on the level of sexuality. At 
the conclusion of each, Sterling exclaims ‘phrasing!’ in order to alert his 
mother to the sexual implications of her words. For example, in a scene 
during which Mallory complains about the professional ethics of a rival, 
male competitor:
 Mallory: You want to play me hard? 
 Sterling: 
Phrasing! 
 Mallory: Then you better nut up! 
 Sterling: 
Phrasing! 
 Mallory: Cause I’ve swallowed just about as much as I can take from you! 
 Sterling: 
Hey! Phrasing! 
 Each element of the exchange falls precisely into the category of 
humour that Freud describes as  double entendre , meaning a joke that 
‘depends quite specially on the sexual meaning’ despite the presence of an 
equally available non-sexual meaning ( 1989 , 44). In Freud’s conception 
of comedy these  double entendres function to aid in the release of nervous 
energy that comes with the expression of repressed sexual and aggres-
sive desires (Buijzen and Valkenburg  2004 , 148). Set in the context of 
 Archer ’s mother-son dynamics, however, they take on a second meaning. 
90 
M. SIENKIEWICZ

In this case Sterling’s insistence on pointing to his own mother’s sexual-
ity via the vehicle of  double entrendre can be understood as allowing the 
viewer to safely play out her Oedipal inclinations. Although the material 
is perhaps too overt to be considered revelatory of the repressions of the 
producers, the Oedipal content, fi ltered through the identifi cation char-
acter of Sterling, can nonetheless be understood as providing pleasure in 
part through its expression of the audiences deeply held repressed desires. 
 The fi nal scene of  Archer ’s fi rst episode cleverly combines the two main 
components of Oedipal desire. In a comically confusing ‘Mexican stand-
off’ Sterling fi nds himself holding a gun to Lana’s head while an infi ltra-
tor—the man who was performing the mock interrogation earlier—puts 
a gun to Mallory’s head and threatens to shoot her. The assailant asks 
Sterling to envision his mother ‘down in the gutter’ and describes her 
violent demise. The scene resolves as Lana screams in disgust, noting that 
Sterling has become physically aroused at the thought of Mallory’s death, 
creating the distraction that ultimately saves the day. The scene, reaching 
for the ultimate taboo in the pursuit of edgy comedy, engages directly 
with the Oedipal implications of Mallory taking on both the feminine 
and masculine elements of Sterling’s parenting. As both loving mother 
and relentless disciplinarian, Mallory has aroused in her son a simultane-
ous sexual and violent desire that fi nds expression when he is forced to 
consciously consider her gruesome death. From a Freudian perspective, 
his erection declares that he wants to love his mother and kill his father. 
In this case, they are condensed into a single fi gure. Although it is unclear 
how conscious the creators are of this dynamic, it would seem to nonethe-
less offer viewers the pleasure of relief in seeing their own, deeply hidden 
Oedipal desires expressed.  
 ARCHER , EROS AND THANATOS 
 Archer ’s consistent engagement with Freudian psychoanalytic concepts 
perhaps fi nds its most satisfying and ingenious expression in the program’s 
dedication to the linking of sexual and violent desires. The program links 
the two in both obvious and subtle ways without resulting to overt con-
templation of their connection. The highly unusual, nonjudgmental way 
in which sex and death are intermingled throughout the show offers a rare 
opportunity to clearly illustrate media’s potential for giving voice to the 
component parts of Freud’s conception of the id. 
PHRASING!: ARCHER, TABOO HUMOUR AND PSYCHOANALYTIC MEDIA... 91

 Animation has long been considered an ideal place for the representa-
tion of Freud’s general breakdown of the personality into the  superego , 
 ego and  id . David Berland, in a study of Disney and psychoanalysis, argues 
that the world of Mickey and Donald is beset with Freudian allusions. 
The debates that go on between Donald’s mini angel and devil selves, 
for example, can be understood as a battle between the superego and id 
( 1981 , 96). Similarly, Mickey’s perfectly behaved, sexless persona makes 
him the embodiment of the superego, whereas Goofy’s slovenly joyfulness 
stands in for the id ( 1981 , 97).  Archer employs a similar tactic, but at a 
more sophisticated Freudian level. 
 Sterling is a truly powerful personifi cation of the id. At the most basic 
level, he represents the absolute refusal to maintain the rules of one’s 
social position. A running joke throughout the program derives from his 
insistence on broadcasting his position as the world’s greatest secret agent 
because if one does not, then ‘what’s the point?’ Sterling’s appetites and 
fears account for the near entirety of his character with few scenes going 
by in which he is not drinking, copulating, destroying or doing some com-
bination of the three. However, what makes  Archer more useful in the 
explicating of Freud’s concept of the id is the means by which the program 
goes deeper, expressing the Freudian division of  eros (libido) and  thanatos 
(the death drive) that comprise the id component of the personality. 
 In  Civilization and its Discontents Freud codifi ed a more complex con-
ception of the id, acknowledging the need to supplement his theory that 
repressed sexual drives constitute the most basic motivations for human 
behaviour. He argues that the erotic drive and a destructive drive (named 
the  thanatos by later writers) ‘seldom—perhaps never—appear in isolation 
from each other, but are alloyed with each other in varying and very dif-
ferent proportions’. He points to the sadomasochist as merely an extreme 
case in which these dual desires, unconsciously present in all of us, take a 
‘conspicuous and tangible form’ ( 1962 , 66). It might be argued that in 
contemporary Western society many elements of sexuality that were once 
repressed by the socially driven superego no longer must be. However, as 
the move towards a more open attitude regarding sexual desire has taken 
hold, the same could hardly be said for the case of sexual violence. In a 
contemporary classroom, students are probably more open to consider-
ing the possibility that sexual desire drives their actions at a subconscious 
level. Given the progress that has been made in fostering awareness of 
sexual assault, however, the connection between sex and violence,  eros and 
 thanatos , perhaps more than ever, is likely to be a point of repression. 
92 
M. SIENKIEWICZ

 In  Archer , however, they are presented as intimate, inseparable instincts, 
just as Freud would have it. In the character of Sterling, this manifests 
primarily in exuberant scenes in which he revels in his ability to simulta-
neously engage in destruction and eroticism. In ‘Tragical History’, for 
example, Sterling fi ghts twin sister ninjas who, in previous scenes, have 
been remarked upon both for their skills with katanas and hand jobs. The 
fi ght becomes complicated by Sterling’s obviously torn sense of purpose in 
the battle. On the one hand, he needs to defeat them in order to survive. 
On the other, he feels a desperate desire to seduce the twins. The added 
taboo of incest is always mixed into the scene. Sterling assures the twins 
he is ‘totally into, obviously’ the idea of sleeping with sisters simultane-
ously. Such scenes are commonplace in  Archer , appearing at least once per 
episode and arguably giving the audience a form of safe expression of the 
drives towards both sex and destruction. 
 More potentially shocking, however, to the contemporary viewer, is the 
aggressive way in which the character of Cheryl articulates the intimate 
connections between the allures of sexual pleasure and self-destructions. 
Cheryl’s comedic position is related almost entirely to her ability to overtly 
express the ways in which she fi nds death and self-affl iction erotic. The joke, 
more often than not, derives simply from her ability to express this fact. A 
monologue she delivers in the episode ‘Honeypot’ nicely enforces this point:
 Cheryl: Imagine […] a big sweaty fi reman carries you out of a burning 
building, lays you out on the sidewalk and you think ok, yeah, he’s gonna 
give you mouth to mouth. But instead he just starts choking the shit out 
of you and the last sensation you feel before you die is he is squeezing your 
throat so hard that big, wet blob of drool drips off his teeth and, blurp, onto 
your popped out eyeballs… I’m wet just thinking about it. 
 The monologue is, in its own right decidedly unfunny. It expresses what 
it is, to most observers, not only a shocking sexual preference but also 
one in which it is morally abhorrent to fi nd humour. But yet, for some 
at least, when placed into the context of  Archer ’s fi ctional universe, in 
which dream logics trump narrative coherence, an atmosphere of ‘fully 
baked’ haze lingers and repressions of all sorts are made manifest, there 
is something amusing and even pleasurable in hearing this most taboo of 
sentiments given voice. This does not prove, of course, that the pleasure 
of  Archer derives from the relief of seeing one’s repressed desired made 
manifest in a safe space. It is, however, a persuasive way to explain how 
this might be the case.  
PHRASING!: ARCHER, TABOO HUMOUR AND PSYCHOANALYTIC MEDIA... 93

 
CONCLUSION 
 I have illustrated the ways in which  Archer represents a model text 
through which to teach both the ‘author-centered’ and ‘reader- centered’ 
approaches that Storey develops in his discussion of psychoanalysis. I have, 
admittedly, for the most part avoided considering competing possibili-
ties for the popularity of  Archer ’s deep engagement with taboo humour. 
There are many other means of explaining  Archer ’s aesthetics and their 
success. However, no competing approach ought to detract from the ped-
agogical possibilities that  Archer offers in terms of teaching psychoanalytic 
media theory. By combining representations of oft-repressed desires with 
an innovative, dream-like mode of animated story-telling,  Archer offers an 
opportunity both to draw students into the main concepts of psychoanaly-
sis, as well as to consider the more subtle implications of media’s relation-
ship with the theory. Its bold use of taboo material immediately demands 
both attention and critical consideration. And although few students will 
freely admit their joy in the show derives from their own repressed drives 
towards sex and death,  Archer nonetheless provides a perfect opportunity 
in which to provoke such a discussion.  
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Allen, Richard. 2003. Psychoanalytic Film Theory. In  Blackwell Companion to 
Film Theory , ed. Toby Miller, 123–145. London: Blackwell.  
 Berland, David. 1981. Disney and Freud: Walt Meets the Id.  The Journal of 
Popular Culture 15(4): 93–104.  
 Buijzen, Moniek, and Patti M.  Valkenburg. 2004. Developing a Typology of 
Humour in Audiovisual Media.  Media Psychology 6: 147–167.  
 Curtin, Michael. 1996. On Edge: Culture Industries in the Neo-Network Era. In 
 Making and Selling Culture , ed. Richard Ohmann, 181–202. Hanover: 
Wesleyan University Press.  
 Fiske, John. 1987.  Television Culture . New York: Methuen.  
 Flitterman-Lewis, Sandy. 1987. Psychoanalysis, Film, and Television. In  Channels 
of Discourse , ed. Robert C. Allen, 172–210. Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press.  
 Freud, Sigmund. 1962.  Civilization and its Discontents . New York: Norton.  
 ———. 1965.  The Interpretation of Dreams . New York: Avon.  
 ———. 1989.  Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis . London: Liveright.  
 Lotz, Amanda D. 2007.  The Television Will Be Revolutionized . New York: NYU 
Press.  
94 
M. SIENKIEWICZ

 Mander, Jerry. 1978.  Four Arguments for the Elimination of Television . New York: 
William Morrow Paperbacks.  
 Mulvey, Laura. 1975. Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema.  Screen 16(3): 6–18.  
 Napier, Susan J.  2005. The Problem of Existence in Japanese Animation. 
 Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 149(1): 72–79.  
 Sepinwall, Alan. 2012.  The Revolution Was Televised . New  York: What’s Alan 
Watching?.  
 Storey, John. 2012.  Cultural Theory and Popular Culture . Dorchester: Longman.  
 Wells, Paul. 1998.  Understanding Animation . London: Routledge.  
PHRASING!: ARCHER, TABOO HUMOUR AND PSYCHOANALYTIC MEDIA... 95

97
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2_6
 Taboo Humanity: Paradoxes of Humanizing 
Muslims in North American Sitcoms  
 Kyle   Conway 
 K.   Conway  () 
 University of Ottawa ,  Ottawa ,  ON ,  Canada  
 e-mail: kconwa2@uOttawa.ca 
 Thanks to Lucian Stone for the conversation about ‘humanness’ that led to this 
chapter. 
 In December 2010, CBS news anchor Katie Couric said she thought ‘the 
bigotry expressed against Muslims in this country has been one of the 
most disturbing stories to surface this year. Of course, a lot of noise was 
made about the Islamic Center, or mosque, down near the World Trade 
Center, but I think there wasn’t enough […] careful analysis and evalua-
tion’. As a solution, she proposed, ‘Maybe we need a Muslim version of 
 The Cosby Show . I know that sounds crazy, but  The Cosby Show did so much 
to change attitudes about African-Americans in this country, and I think 
sometimes people are afraid of things they don’t understand. [M]aybe if 
it became more a part of the popular culture’, attitudes toward Muslims 
would change ( Katie Couric Speaks , 2011).  1 
 In fact, Couric was late to the game. In January 2007, a gentle 
Muslim-themed comedy called  Little Mosque on the Prairie (2007–2012) 
premiered on the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation’s (CBC) fl agship 
English-language television network.  2 It was the creation of Zarqa Nawaz, 
a feminist Muslim fi lmmaker whose previous fi lms included a comedy 

about two brothers accused of terrorism when their backyard grill blows 
up, and a documentary about conservatism in North American mosques. 
It was produced by Westwind Pictures, whose biggest prior hit was the 
reality show  Designer Guys . By the end of 2010, when Couric made her 
comment, it had fi nished its fourth season, and it would run for two more 
before ending in 2012. 
 Little Mosque was remarkable in many ways, not least of which was its 
success—it attracted more than 2.1 million viewers when it premiered, rival-
ing the ratings of popular US programs such as  CSI and  Grey’s Anatomy . 
It differed from previous shows about Muslims in many ways, including its 
setting and characters. It took place in the fi ctional small town of Mercy 
in the prairie province of Saskatchewan, and it was about a mosque com-
munity that found a place to worship in the basement of an aging Anglican 
church. It had an ensemble cast with six major Muslim characters, ranging 
across the political and theological spectrums, in addition to non-Muslim 
characters who represented a similar range of perspectives. The mosque- 
within- a-church conceit allowed writers to put Muslims and Christians 
into conversation with each other, and the diversity of characters allowed 
them to address a wide range of points of view. According to Nawaz, that 
was the show’s purpose: to ‘[show] Muslims being normal. It humanizes 
Muslims. I want the broader society to look at us as normal, with the same 
issues and concerns as anyone else’ (Bilici  2010 , 204–205). 
 But despite its creator’s efforts,  Little Mosque did not do what Couric 
thought a Muslim version of  The Cosby Show should do. Although it 
expanded the range of representations of Muslims on North American 
television, it did so in a paradoxical way. ‘Humanizing Muslims’ was a 
paradoxical task. It presupposed that ‘regular’ viewers were non-Muslim, 
and as a result, ‘humanizing Muslims’ meant erasing visible markers of dif-
ference. To talk about belief, writers had to privilege simplicity over com-
plexity. Some traits were entirely out of bounds: ‘humanizing Muslims’ 
meant avoiding negative emotions such as anger and indignation. Hence 
the paradox: ‘humanizing’ Muslim characters meant cutting them off 
from much of what it means to be human. 
 In this chapter, I describe the factors that led to this paradox. Instead 
of describing how people use humour to deal with taboo topics, I con-
sider topics that remain taboo—at least in sitcoms—even with the use of 
humour. I begin by considering the conceptual limits of representation, 
which result from the logic (or illogic) of synecdoche that subtends the 
idea that a member of a group can stand in for the group itself. Then I 
98 
K. CONWAY

describe two forms of pressure exerted on program-makers that limit the 
choices they can make. Some pressures are a function of genre: although 
sitcoms frequently serve as an entrance point for minorities into the 
realm of television programming, the door they provide has often been 
narrow, allowing certain people through but not others. Other pressures 
are related to policy and industry. Canadian broadcasters have a mandate 
to represent the country’s diversity, but producers and networks want 
their shows to be commercially successful; as a result, commercial suc-
cess plays a larger role in their decision-making process than policy. CBC 
executives have long had to borrow strategies from their commercial 
rivals, even though the CBC receives funding from Parliament. 
 To make my argument, I adopt a critical production studies approach 
(Caldwell  2008 ; Havens et al.  2009 ). I draw on interviews conducted in 
2011 and 2012 with people involved in the production of  Little Mosque , 
including the show’s creator, executive producers, directors, writers, and 
fi nancial underwriters, as well as CBC network executives involved in the 
green-lighting process.  3 I supplement these interviews with CBC reports 
and accounts from popular magazines and newspapers. These addi-
tional materials corroborate, and sometimes challenge, program-makers’ 
accounts, and in the process, they provide a multi-dimensional picture of 
the production process. The conclusion will examine a specifi c episode of 
 Little Mosque where characters’ reactions to mistreatment (detention at 
the airport) demonstrate writers’ avoidance of depictions of negative emo-
tions. In the end, I describe a situation characterized by good intentions 
but contradictory results: although the characters had a wide range of per-
spectives, there were still Muslim viewers who felt left out; although the 
characters experienced a wide range of emotions, there were still some—
which were no less human for being negative—that were left out. 
 THE LOGIC OF SYNECDOCHE AND REPRESENTATION 
 In his story ‘The Congress’, Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges describes a 
plan devised by a group of utopian dreamers that illustrates the shortcom-
ing of synecdochic representation, where one person stands in for a group 
with similar traits. Led by don Alejandro Glencoe, the dreamers want to 
‘[call] together a Congress of the World that would represent all men of 
all nations’, but they soon discover it is a complicated task: ‘Planning an 
assembly to represent all men was like fi xing the exact number of platonic 
types—a puzzle that had taxed the imagination of thinkers for centuries’ 
TABOO HUMANITY: PARADOXES OF HUMANIZING MUSLIMS IN NORTH... 99

(Borges 1974, 33–34). The problem is their list of traits to represent is 
ever-expanding, and as a result, so is their need for representatives. In the 
end, they abandon their plans and destroy their work because they realize 
the Congress is coterminous with all of humanity, making representation 
unnecessary: ‘The Congress of the World’, don Alejandro explains, ‘began 
with the fi rst moment of the world and it will go on when we are dust. 
There’s no place on earth where it does not exist’ (Borges 1974, 47). 
 A key idea that underlies Borges’s story is that of the asymmetric rela-
tionship synecdochic representation creates. No person’s identity matches 
up exactly with the identities of the members of the group he or she rep-
resents, but as a stand-in for a group, a person still comes to defi ne its 
public face. The act of standing in creates a power differential between the 
representative and the other group members, whose diversity is obscured 
in the process (Galewski  2006 ). It is for this reason that don Alejandro’s 
Congress, as it is initially conceived, fails: the people who were represented 
felt that those who spoke for them could do so inadequately. Hence the 
expansion of the list of traits to account for, and, ultimately, the characters’ 
realization that representation, as they understood it, was bound to fail. 
 This logic has important implications for  Little Mosque on the Prairie , 
whose creators wanted characters who better represented Muslims in 
Canada (and North America more broadly). To that end, they created 
six main Muslim characters. First is Yasir Hamoudi, an opportunistic con-
tractor who rents the basement of the church on the pretense of hous-
ing his business there, and his wife Sarah, a local woman who converted 
from Christianity to marry him. They have a daughter named Rayyan, 
the town’s doctor and a strong feminist. There is also Fatima Dinssa, a 
woman from Nigeria who owns a local café and is more traditional in her 
approach to Islam. Finally, there is Baber Siddiqui, an irascible conserva-
tive who serves as the mosque’s imam until the arrival of Amaar Rashid, a 
young (and liberal) lawyer-turned-imam who comes from Toronto in the 
pilot episode. 
 This distribution of characters—an example of what Christopher 
Cwynar ( 2013 , 43) calls ‘strategic essentialism’—clearly demonstrates the 
logic of synecdoche. Zarqa Nawaz explains, ‘I was fortunate enough to 
have […] six main Muslim characters […] so each character could repre-
sent a different aspect of the Muslim community, so they didn’t all have to 
be these “good” practicing Muslims, so you could have every spectrum, so 
you could deal with all the different nuances of the Muslim community’.  4 
100 
K. CONWAY

Some viewers felt the show accomplished this task. As one wrote in a letter 
to the editor in an Ottawa newspaper,
 The sitcom was actually a fairly realistic look at some of the challenges that 
Muslims face in Canada and around the western world. It also showed that 
Muslims are not always the typical stereotypes that one sees in the media. 
 There were Muslims from various countries and cultures, each arguing typi-
cally about what food would be best to serve for  iftar (the opening of the 
fast), and how the moon should be best sighted for the start of Ramadan. 
There were Muslims who had adopted the faith of Islam through conversion 
as well as Muslims who were fairly secular in their approach, and Muslims 
whom one might describe as ‘straight off the boat’ (Sherazi  2007 , A15). 
 Others identifi ed the shortcomings of the show’s characters. Faiza Hirji 
( 2011 , 44) wrote of the doctrinal differences the show obscured: ‘all of 
Mercy’s Muslims seem to practise the same way—if there are Sunnis and 
Shias, who would differ in their understanding of how an imam is appointed, 
or in the specifi cs of their prayers, this is not made apparent’. Tarek Fatah 
and Farazana Hassan ( 2007 ) of the Muslim Canadian Congress, in contrast, 
considered the liberal/conservative spectrum: ‘Although the characters are 
meant to refl ect the diversity of Muslim society, a closer examination reveals 
the show is not about liberal or progressive Muslims competing with con-
servatives. Rather, the writer has created a false dichotomy of ‘conservative’ 
Muslims vs. ‘ultra-conservative’ Muslims[,] the former being disingenu-
ously passed on as feminist and progressive’. 
 The point here is not to offer an exhaustive analysis of the reception 
of  Little Mosque on the Prairie , but to highlight how the logic of synec-
doche created an asymmetric relationship between the show’s characters 
and the real people they were meant to represent. The show fell short of 
Nawaz’s goal of ‘deal[ing] with all the different nuances of the Muslim 
community’. How could it do otherwise? There are more North American 
Muslim identities than six characters could embody. Although the show’s 
makers were not deliberate in excluding certain identities, the gaps they 
left were the result of decisions they made: the list of traits they could 
address was fi nite, and addressing one category meant not addressing 
another. Thus the relevant question becomes, why did they choose the 
traits they did? And what effect did those choices have on what it meant to 
‘humanize’ Muslims for their viewers?  
TABOO HUMANITY: PARADOXES OF HUMANIZING MUSLIMS IN NORTH... 101

 TELEVISION’S STAGES OF REPRESENTATION 
 To answer these questions, it is useful to consider a second meaning of 
the word ‘representation’: in addition to ‘standing in for’, it also means 
‘depiction’. In television studies, this second meaning is more common 
as scholars have asked, what images do viewers see of minorities? In an 
early infl uential paper, Cedric Clark ( 1969 , 18) suggested: ‘The com-
mercial nature of the medium emphasizes advertising of products bought 
by those at the top of the social structure, and thus reinforces the sta-
tus quo. And it does this often at the expense of those at the bottom 
through non- recognition, ridicule, or regulation.’ Each of these stages—
non- recognition, ridicule, and regulation—allow the hegemonic class to 
control the images of ‘those at the bottom’. During the stage of non- 
recognition, minorities are excluded. When they exert pressure for visibil-
ity, they appear on TV ‘at the price of being ridiculed’ ( 1969 , 19). When 
they continue to exert pressure through protests, such as during the US 
civil rights movement of the 1960s, they begin to appear as people in posi-
tions of responsibility for maintaining law and order, where they call on 
viewers (directly or indirectly) to ‘identify with the “right” side of society’. 
Clark identifi ed a fourth stage but was doubtful about minorities’ ability 
to reach it: ‘In their bid to be recognized in a natural fashion by the mass 
media, ethnic groups must also pass through a fourth stage, which can be 
characterized as one of respect’ ( 1969 , 21). 
 Clark’s model has been applied, critiqued, and extended by schol-
ars writing about African Americans (Means Coleman and McIlwain 
 2005 ), gays and lesbians (Baley and Lucas  2006 ), and Native Americans 
(Fitzgerald  2010 ), to give only a few examples. The pattern also seems to 
fi t depictions of Muslims (and Arabs, two categories that are often con-
fl ated), especially in North American fi lm and television. Images of men 
as ‘stooges-in-sheets’ and women as ‘bosomy bellydancers’—clear exam-
ples of ridicule (Shaheen  2001 , pp. 19–20)—have given way to images 
of Muslims as terrorists or, more interestingly, innocent victims of rac-
ism who must accept the indignity of suspicion in order to prove their 
loyalty to the United States (Alsultany  2008 ). In this second case, stories 
that present Muslims as unfair targets of hate and discrimination have a 
 regulatory effect because they illustrate the idea that suspicion of Muslims 
is natural and warranted. 
 With respect to  Little Mosque , the value of Clark’s model is two-fold: 
it highlights the evolution of depictions of minorities, and it emphasizes 
the infl uence of the socio-political context on the TV industry, and of the 
102 
K. CONWAY

industry in turn on that evolution. At fi rst glance, the earnestness with 
which  Little Mosque ’s creators approached their show, made evident in 
the range of characters, suggests that Muslims have begun to enter the 
‘respect’ stage, even if depictions in other programs remain in prior stages. 
But if that is the case, it is so only partially: the logic of synecdoche dic-
tates that the range of traits represented will be smaller than the ones that 
characterize the broader Muslim community. 
 To understand what is left out, let us consider the socio-political and 
industrial contexts affecting Canadian television. Two factors are espe-
cially important: Canada’s policy of multiculturalism and its predomi-
nantly commercial system of broadcasting. Of those, multiculturalism is a 
weak force, while commercialism is a strong force.  
 CANADIAN BROADCASTING AND MULTICULTURALISM 
 In the Canadian context, ‘multiculturalism’ can refer to diversity as a 
demographic reality, a philosophy about how such diversity should be 
managed, and the policies meant to put such philosophies into action 
(Kallen  1982 ). Canada was the fi rst country in the world to enact an offi -
cial policy of multiculturalism in 1971, and in the following decades, it 
enacted two policies (one in 1985 and one in 1991) directly related to 
multiculturalism in broadcasting, but any direct effects on programs have 
been mitigated by the ambiguities of Canada’s experience with managing 
its cultural diversity. 
 The 1971 policy came as an indirect result of the rise of the Quebec sep-
aratist movement in the 1960s. Although the colonial powers that ‘settled’ 
Canada were France and Great Britain, immigrants, especially those who 
moved to the western provinces, came from a wide range of other places. 
These non-French, non-English immigrants objected to the French- 
English dichotomy that framed debates about Quebec and shaped the 
policies, such as offi cial bilingualism, that the federal government enacted 
in response. Their objections led Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau to enact 
the multiculturalism policy, which had the added benefi t of undercutting 
one argument in support of Quebec nationalism, namely the idea that 
Canada was not only bilingual but also bicultural.  5 
 The policy has had a mixed impact on its broadcasting policy. In the 
decade that followed its enactment, the term ‘visible minority’ entered 
the Canadian lexicon as a way to describe people of non-European ori-
gins (Karim  1993 ). It drew attention to the visible markers of culture, 
TABOO HUMANITY: PARADOXES OF HUMANIZING MUSLIMS IN NORTH... 103

race, and ethnicity such as skin colour and dress that set these new immi-
grants apart and made them targets for discrimination. By the early 1980s, 
visible minorities had grown increasingly vocal about the discrimination 
they faced, prompting the government to create a Special Committee on 
Participation of Visible Minorities in Canadian Society in the House of 
Commons. The committee examined social integration, employment, 
public policy, education, justice, and the media. About the latter, it said, 
‘The media are very far from the goal “of making Canadians visible to each 
other”. Our very advance to the forefront of communications technology 
brings with it a threat to our identity as a nation, not to mention to ethnic 
groups within the nation’ (Canada  1984 , 94). 
 In 1985, in response to visible minorities’ complaints, Canada’s regu-
latory agency, the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission (CRTC), crafted ‘A Broadcasting Policy Refl ecting Canada’s 
Linguistic and Cultural Diversity’, which established fi ve categories of 
‘ethnic programs’. Type A programs were in languages other than English 
or French. Types B, C, and D were in English or French and were directed 
at ‘culturally or racially distinct’ groups. The only programs intended 
for broader audiences were those of type E: ‘A program in French or 
in English that is directed to any ethnic group or to a mainstream audi-
ence and that depicts Canada’ s cultural diversity through services that are 
multicultural, educational, informational, cross-cultural or intercultural in 
nature’ (CRTC  1985 ). To be licensed as an ‘ethnic station’, stations were 
required to devote at least 60 percent of their programming between 6:00 
am and midnight to programs in categories A, B, C, and D. 
 The existence of these ethnic stations had an infl uence on the presence of 
minorities on ‘mainstream’ commercial stations. In 1991, Parliament revised 
the  Broadcasting Act ; the new act defi ned the system as made up of ‘public, 
private and community elements’ that collectively ‘serve[d] the needs and 
interests, and refl ect the circumstances and aspirations, of Canadian men, 
women and children, including equal rights, the linguistic duality and mul-
ticultural and multiracial nature of Canadian society’ (3.1.b and 3.1.d.iii). 
Because the system, by defi nition, was a single one, ‘it was initially possible 
to use the text to argue that as long as there is cultural and racial diversity 
somewhere in the system, it is balanced’ (Roth et al.  2011 , 390). After 2001, 
in response to the continued absence of minorities on the major commercial 
networks, the CRTC began to require broadcasters ‘to develop strategies 
specifi c to their own operations that detail the measures they are taking and 
104 
K. CONWAY

procedures they will follow to ensure that they properly meet their ongoing 
responsibilities to refl ect and portray cultural diversity’ (CRTC  2005 ). But 
a 2004 report by a Canadian Association of Broadcasters (CAB) task force 
found that the inertia of past practices made change slow. In its report, the 
CAB wrote:
 There are very few experts (or expert news analysts/guests) from culturally 
diverse backgrounds used in English-language news. Very few on-screen 
roles such as anchor or reporter are fi lled by individuals from culturally 
diverse backgrounds on French-language news. Very few primary speak-
ing roles are fi lled by individuals from culturally diverse backgrounds on 
English-language drama (Task Force  2004 , 4). 
 Thus, multicultural broadcasting was characterized by a contradiction: 
the CRTC saw it as important enough to warrant its own policy, but the 
‘ethnic stations’ it created targeted minority viewers, not majority viewers. 
This let the commercial networks off the hook, able to pursue their goals 
unfettered by the need to present a more representative image of Canada. 
In this way, concerns about multiculturalism were subordinated to the 
exigencies of Canada’s predominantly commercial system.  
 COMMERCIALISM AND THE CBC 
 The commercial logic also affected Canada’s public broadcaster, the CBC, 
which had an even more specifi c mandate. The 1991  Broadcasting Act 
required the CBC to offer programming that ‘refl ect[ed] the multicul-
tural and multiracial nature of Canada’ (3.1.m.viii). Parliament required 
the CBC to fi le annual reports about its efforts to uphold this mandate; 
during the years leading up to  Little Mosque on the Prairie , these reports 
tended to focus on news programming (where content was concerned) 
and efforts to diversify production staff (where hiring practices were 
concerned). 
 In fact, the mandate’s role was indirect at best in the conception and 
green-lighting of  Little Mosque . Its principal value was to provide the CBC 
with a reason to take a risk on the show (Conway  2014 ). But the mandate 
did not fi gure into Zarqa Nawaz’s decision to create the program.  6 Nor 
did it fi gure into Westwind Pictures’ decision to produce it, as executive 
producer Mary Darling explains:
TABOO HUMANITY: PARADOXES OF HUMANIZING MUSLIMS IN NORTH... 105

 I think there is that feeling that it’s CBC’s mandate to refl ect what we see 
of ourselves as Canadians to ourselves as Canadians […]. But  I see  Little 
Mosque on the Prairie as a show which should have been able to air on any 
of the channels. I don’t think it has to be mandated—I think […] we went 
in with a very strong interest in the content for our own reasons, but those 
reasons couldn’t become preachy or didactic, or it wouldn’t have gotten 2.1 
million on its fi rst airing. It had to be about relevance, relatable character 
comedy with some real laughs in it.  7 
 According to Darling, Anton Leo, the CBC executive who was instru-
mental in green-lighting the show, thought about  Little Mosque in similar 
terms:
 When we pitched [ Little Mosque ] […] Anton didn’t say to us, ‘Hey, that 
really fi ts our mandate beautifully, let’s do that.’ He said, ‘You know what? 
I am—my parents came straight from Sicily’ [… H]is parents came from 
Italy […] and Anton was a fi rst-generation Canadian, but he really got the 
cultural context in the universal characters that we tried to create. He never 
went off about, ‘Doesn’t this hit the mandate beautifully?’ and ‘This is what 
Canadians need’.  8 
 Instead, Leo saw the show in terms of its potential audience appeal: in a 
country of immigrants, viewers could relate to a story about marginaliza-
tion, regardless of which group was marginalized.  9 
 The question of audience appeal was, at its core, a question about com-
mercial success. This is clear in the answers I received when I asked  Little 
Mosque ’s writers about what is necessary to make good multicultural pro-
gramming. They worked to strike a balance between depicting diversity 
and attracting ‘mainstream’ non-minority viewers:
 [W]hat the best multicultural programming […] should do is it should have 
[…] an opening up of things that the rest of mainstream culture doesn’t 
know and opening it up to them so that they learn about it in a way that 
doesn’t feel like a lesson. And you only do that by making something that 
has kind of a mainstream appeal to it. And yet it at the same time is a window 
into cultures that you normally don’t get a window into. And that’s what I 
think  Little Mosque did really well. A lot of the programming does not suc-
ceed that well. It doesn’t succeed in [being] interesting to the mainstream 
audience, and so its only appeal is to the people of the [ethnicity depicted 
in the show].  10 
106 
K. CONWAY

 This is not to say that writers whitewashed cultural difference, however, 
only that they had to temper it by fi nding points of commonality with 
non-minority viewers. As another writer explained:
 I don’t like anything where it’s about something that I know nothing about 
but I could have written all the jokes, you know what I mean? [… I]f I 
see an Aboriginal comic, I want to learn something about the Aboriginal 
people or an Aboriginal point of view or something that I don’t know going 
in because I could write a whole bunch of […] simplistic and stereotypi-
cal jokes about any culture based on my rudimentary understanding—but 
the deeper you get into something, the better the comedy is always going 
to be because then you get subtlety, and […] the more subtlety you have, 
the more likely you are to hit pay-dirt in terms of fi nding common ground 
[…]. Whatever it might be, there’s just something where you’re grounded 
enough that there’s a little thing they do, some ritual, some little thing 
between mother and child, that’s very similar to something you do. They do 
it like that, but it’s just like the way we do something else. They both mean 
the same thing, you know, and that’s where you fi nd the comedy.  11 
 Writers’ concerns about reaching an audience matched those of the Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation itself, which had seen its budget cut dramatically 
over the course of prior decades. Parliament was asking the CBC to do more 
with less, and the CBC in response had adopted progressively more com-
mercial strategies. Commercial networks in Canada, especially those car-
ried on cable, sought to create audiences by counter- programming against 
their competitors. The CBC began to adopt a similar niche approach in the 
1990s: its focus was Canadian programming. It wrote in a submission to the 
House of Commons Standing Committee on Canadian Heritage,
 As the environment in which we operate shifts and the business models 
upon which we depend become more and more unreliable, there is an esca-
lating need to consider how best to bring the system back into balance. 
And the strength of the Canadian system hinges on a robust national public 
broadcaster, since there are some things that private broadcasters either can-
not or will not do, but that a public broadcaster can and will do (CBC/
Radio-Canada  2007 , 6). 
 What were those things? The CBC argued it could provide program-
ming that was ‘Canadian’, ‘distinctive’, and ‘intelligent/challenging’, 
among other things (CBC/Radio-Canada  2007 , 7–8), as opposed to the 
TABOO HUMANITY: PARADOXES OF HUMANIZING MUSLIMS IN NORTH... 107

commercial networks, which relied heavily on programming imported 
from the United States. In other words, the CBC sought to justify con-
tinued Parliamentary appropriations by re-articulating its public service 
mandate in commercial terms: Canada’s broadcasting system worked bet-
ter if the CBC, through its niche strategy of Canadian programming, gave 
commercial broadcasters the freedom to be, in a word, commercial. 
 In this way, the writers’ concerns about audiences echoed those of the 
CBC.  The CBC was willing to take a risk on  Little Mosque because it 
helped the network make the case that it was upholding its mandate while 
also being commercially strategic. The writers’ (and producers’) attention 
to non-minority audiences paid off in the ratings  Little Mosque received. 
But what effect did they have on representations of Muslims? If the logic 
of synecdoche means writers could not refl ect all aspects of Muslim life, 
what did they leave out?  
 DISCRIMINATION AS COMIC MISUNDERSTANDING 
 The people who created  Little Mosque wanted to address issues related to 
discrimination. The CBC’s Anton Leo explained,
 [Creator Zarqa Nawaz] told me stories about people calling the police when 
a white van showed up in front of her mom’s house [and…] about people 
who didn’t want to really associate with them [that is, Muslims]. And it was 
that sense of suspicion that animated this conversation I had with Zarqa […] 
because no one was more in the news than Muslims at the time.  12 
 Writers, as their explanations show, wanted to create a program that depicted 
Muslims more accurately, or at least less like generic ‘ethnic’ characters. 
They even wrote scenes where characters faced discrimination and allowed 
characters to express indignation, as long as it was funny. But in each case, 
they resolved the plot by redirecting attention away from the structural 
factors (such as racism and the institutionalized war on terror) that made 
such discrimination possible and focused instead on characters’ personal 
shortcomings. In other words, there was a limit to the negative emotions 
characters could express about racism, and to resolve the plots, characters 
had to express personal responsibility for the problems they faced.  13  
 The pilot episode illustrated this phenomenon well and set a pattern 
for the rest of the season. It begins with Amaar, the new imam, in the 
airport, as he prepares to check in for his fl ight to Mercy. He is talking on 
108 
K. CONWAY

the phone to his mother, and he says, ‘It’s not like I dropped a bomb on 
him. If Dad thinks it’s suicide, so be it. This is Allah’s plan for me. I’m not 
throwing my life away—I’m moving to the Prairies!’ The woman behind 
him ducks away, and a few seconds later, security guards drag him away, 
saying, ‘Step away from the bag. You’re not going to paradise today.’ 
 The humour, of course, derives from the juxtaposition between Amaar’s 
sinister-sounding words and his innocent intents. This juxtaposition con-
tinues a few scenes later, when Amaar fi nds himself in a small room where 
the security guard, who seems to have learned his interrogation technique 
from police procedurals on TV, asks him questions. Here and throughout 
the episode, the scene builds on viewers’ familiarity with other genres. 
Much of the humour comes from parody, or the way writers rework other 
shows’ conventions. Thus, in Amaar’s ‘interrogation’, the security guard, 
like other TV cops, presumes the suspect is guilty. He asks why Amaar 
left his father’s law fi rm, and Amaar answers, ‘While I was in Egypt doing 
my Islamic studies, I found my true calling.’ ‘Explosives?’ asks the offi cer. 
Amaar rolls his eyes: ‘Yeah, explosives.’ But the scene does not end as it 
would in an episode of  Law and Order or  CSI . The agent does not extract 
a confession, but instead insists on his obviously mistaken understanding 
of the situation. Amaar fi nally explains he is moving to Saskatchewan to 
become an imam, and he says he can prove it: ‘I have the ad I answered 
for the job. You can call the mosque if you like. If the story doesn’t check 
out, you can deport me to Syria.’ The offi cer answers, ‘Hey, you do not 
get to choose which country we deport you to.’ 
 In addition to parody, another form of intertextuality—satire—is at 
work here. Satire, as Cwynar ( 2013 , 52–53) writes, is concerned with 
‘moral, social, and political’ critique, whereas parody is concerned with 
other texts’ formal or aesthetic qualities: ‘Satire […] reduces the stature 
of dominant entities, while parody often refers to shared cultural mate-
rials and frames of reference.’  14 For viewers, the reference to Syria was 
likely to bring to mind Maher Arar, a Canadian-Syrian dual citizen whom 
the United States deported to Syria in 2002 on suspicion of belonging 
to Al-Qaeda. A Canadian commission of inquiry later cleared him of all 
charges, but the controversy surrounding his extraordinary rendition 
would have been familiar to viewers of the CBC, whose news programs 
covered it extensively. But the satirical edge is dulled when the scene ends 
with a clever one-liner. It is delivered by the contractor Yasir Hamoudi, 
whose answering machine the agent reaches when he calls the number 
Amaar gives him: ‘Hello. You’ve reached Yasir’s construction and con-
tracting at our new location. We’ll  blow away the competition!’ 
TABOO HUMANITY: PARADOXES OF HUMANIZING MUSLIMS IN NORTH... 109

 Satire’s critique is mitigated later in the episode, too. When Amaar 
arrives in Mercy, a reporter from the local paper asks whether he is a ter-
rorist, a question that the town’s radio shock jock, Fred Tupper, wants 
to ask, too. When Amaar accepts Fred’s invitation to appear on air, their 
exchange sounds much like what viewers might hear on conservative talk 
radio. In that respect, it uses parody’s intertextuality in the service of sat-
ire’s critique, at least at fi rst:
 Fred: 
Are you a terrorist? 
 Amaar: No, I’m – 
 Fred: 
Do you object to the term? 
 Amaar: Of course I do! 
 Fred: 
Or do you prefer mujaheddin? 
 Amaar: Yes! No! I mean, look, Fred, I came here to clear the air. You’re 
not letting me get a word in. 
 Fred: 
Oh, please feel free to give as good as you get. That’s the privilege 
of living in a country with freedom. 
 Amaar: Freedom? To do what? Fan the fl ames of hatred? 
 Fred: 
Oh, isn’t it Muslim preachers like yourself who do that, huh? I got 
news for you, Johnny Jihad – 
 Amaar: That’s – 
 Fred: 
Folks around here will not sit back and let that happen. You can 
bet your falafel on that! 
 Fred’s aggressive style and his unwillingness to let Amaar speak both 
follow the scripts of shock jocks on networks like Fox News, which is 
based in the United States and has been available in Canada since 2004. 
Fred forces Amaar to choose between two bad options—Amaar is either 
a terrorist or a mujaheddin, and he either supports the freedom to insult 
or opposes the very idea of freedom. Fred also makes ‘common sense’ 
appeals to ‘folks around here’ who ‘will not sit back’ and let Amaar spread 
his supposed hatred. In response, Amaar begins to express his frustration 
with a system that forces him to say something he does not want to say. 
Satire’s critique comes through in that frustration, but it is quickly tem-
pered as the parodied scripts shift from talk radio to the western:
 Fred: 
I call on Rev. Magee to turn you and your gang out of the church 
hall by sundown. ( cut to shot of Rev. Magee ) 
 Magee: Yasir, this is Rev. Magee again. We need to talk about this lease. 15 
( cut to shot in Fred’s studio ) 
 Amaar: Sundown? What is this, the wild west? 
 Fred: 
You got that right, my little bedouin buckaroo. 
110 
K. CONWAY

 The shift from talk radio to the western also marks a shift in the logic 
of the episode’s plot. Amaar reaches a line he cannot cross: despite having 
made his frustration with Fred (and the airport security agent) clear, he 
must now accept responsibility for his unhappiness. Fred fi nds his weak 
spot—his ego and sense of big-city superiority—and exploits it:
 Fred: 
You’re not in the big city any more. ( cut to shot of 
radio in café ) 
 Amaar ( exasperated ): 
Oh, I’ve noticed. Doesn’t anyone in this town 
know how to make a cappuccino? 
 Fred: 
Oh, you’re saying we are ignorant? ( cut to reaction 
shots of café patrons ) 
 Amaar ( over the radio ): Some of you, yes. In fact, I’ve never seen so much 
small town ignorance in my life. 
 Unnamed patron: 
Well if he hates it here so much, why doesn’t he go 
back to Toronto? 
 The camera cuts to Amaar in his offi ce. He holds a telephone and says, 
‘Yes, a one-way ticket back to Toronto.’ Thus, through his actions, he 
admits he is not up to the task he has undertaken, an idea confi rmed in a 
later scene, when Rayyan comes to persuade him to stay:
 Amaar ( on the phone ): A one-way ticket to Toronto. ( pause ) Amaar Rashid. 
( pause ) Yes, I’ll hold. ( Rayyan enters the offi ce. ) 
Can’t a Muslim book a one- way fl ight these days 
without someone having to call their supervisor? 
 Rayyan: 
Oh, you poor thing! Racial profi ling, making it very 
diffi cult for you to  run away . 
 Amaar: 
What am I supposed to do? 
 Rayyan: 
I don’t know. Let me ask the imam. Oh, wait! He’s 
 running away ! 
 Amaar: 
Look, I screwed up, okay? 
 Rayyan: 
No, it is not okay. 
 This exchange confi rms what the earlier scene suggested: Amaar is frus-
trated not because of the discrimination he has faced but because of his 
own personal failings. As Rayyan repeatedly insists, he is ‘running away’ 
because he ‘screwed up’. Amaar repeats the point at the end of the episode 
during a sermon on humility: his failings become the punch-line to his 
self-deprecating jokes, which themselves lead to his announcement that 
he will stay. The episode follows the sitcom’s narrative logic and ends on a 
point of stasis (Feuer  2001 ). 
TABOO HUMANITY: PARADOXES OF HUMANIZING MUSLIMS IN NORTH... 111

 Thus the episode responds to the pressures of the commercial system by 
hewing to convention and privileging parody (of police procedurals, talk 
shows, and westerns) over satire and critique. This pattern recurs through-
out  Little Mosque ’s run. For instance, in ‘No Fly List’ (season 2, episode 
9), Baber Siddiqui is scheduled to give a talk at a conference in Chicago, 
but his name appears on a no-fl y list. The episode revolves around Baber’s 
interactions with the US border guard indifferent to his plight, but in the 
end, Baber reveals that his name is not on any list—the ‘list’ was a story he 
told to cover up his fear of fl ying.  16 Similarly, in ‘Smooth Hate Criminal’ 
(season 5, episode 6), it appears that someone has committed a hate crime 
against the mosque, but the ‘perpetrator’ is really the town’s mayor, and 
the ‘crime’ is the result of a misunderstanding attributable to the mayor’s 
ineptitude.  
 
CONCLUSION: TELEVISION’S LOGIC OF PERSONAL 
RESPONSIBILITY 
 In the fi nal analysis,  Little Mosque on the Prairie was a complex and 
contradictory program. It expanded the range of Muslim characters on 
North American television, but, through the structure and logic of its 
plot, it restricted the range of emotions they could express. Restriction of 
some sort was unavoidable, and the specifi c form it took in  Little Mosque 
resulted from program-makers’ decisions in response to policy and indus-
try pressures. 
 Was  Little Mosque the Muslim  Cosby Show Katie Couric imagined? No, 
but to be fair,  The Cosby Show did not do what Couric thought, either. 
Similarly to  Little Mosque , it expanded the range of black characters: the 
main characters Cliff and Clair Huxtable belonged to the professional 
class (he was a doctor, she was a lawyer). But, as Sut Jhally and Justin 
Lewis show, it gave the impression that US blacks’ material conditions 
had improved, when in fact they had declined in the previous decade. By 
not addressing the structural factors infl uencing black poverty, the show 
suggested that racism was not based ‘on the functioning of social institu-
tions but upon the behaviour of individuals’ (Jhally and Lewis  1992 , 72). 
 In this light,  Little Mosque points to a larger overriding logic shaping 
North American television, one that privileges personal, character- driven 
explanations over structural accounts of inequality or discrimination. 
Perhaps this is because structural accounts would implicate viewers, whom 
112 
K. CONWAY

program-makers are loath to alienate. As long as that logic holds, expres-
sion of certain emotions—danger, indignation, and so on—will remain 
taboo, even or especially in sitcoms: if characters take personal responsibil-
ity for problems that are structural in origin, program-makers can leave 
viewers undisturbed and willing to tune in again next week.  
 NOTES 
 1.   Couric made this comment, it should be noted, before Cosby faced multi-
ple accusations of sexual assault.  
 2.   The show’s title was, of course, a play on  Little House on the Prairie 
(1974–1983), the series based on Laura Ingalls Wilder’s books of the same 
name. Executive producer Mary Darling says it was a reference to her home 
state of Minnesota (personal interview, 20 July 2011), but the similarities 
between the shows end with their prairie settings.  Little Mosque was a half-
hour contemporary sitcom, while  Little House was an hour-long historical 
drama.  
 3.  I conducted most interviews in person or by telephone, and they lasted 
between 30 and 90 minutes. I conducted one interview by email when the 
interviewee had limited availability. I structured interviews around the fol-
lowing questions: What relationships (for example, between Muslims and 
non-Muslims) did the interviewee want to infl uence? What issues did the 
interviewee see as salient in the context of those relationships? How did they 
shape the interviewee’s actions in producing  Little Mosque ? I cite by name 
only those interviewees who gave me explicit permission to do so.  
 4.   Personal interview, 8 April 2011.  
 5.   This is a truncated history of a series of events that were much more com-
plicated. See Cameron ( 2004 ) for a collection of primary historical docu-
ments concerning Canada’s multiculturalism policy. The point here is not 
an exhaustive account of multiculturalism, but of the policy’s effect on TV 
programs, especially  Little Mosque .  
 6.   Personal interview, 8 April 2011.  
 7.   Personal interview, 20 July 2011.  
 8.   Personal interview, 20 July 2011.  
 9.   Personal interview, 9 July 2011.  
 10.   Writer f.rom seasons 1, 2, and 6, personal interview, 12 August 2011.  
 11.   Writer from seasons 1, 2, and 6, personal interview, 19 July 2011.  
 12.   Personal interview, 9 July 2011.  
 13.   This logic echoes the one Alsultany ( 2008 ) identifi es in recent dramas with 
Muslim characters. One recurring device writers use to avoid stereotypes is 
to create characters wrongly accused of terrorism. To prove their patriotism, 
TABOO HUMANITY: PARADOXES OF HUMANIZING MUSLIMS IN NORTH... 113

these characters must accept the injustice of the racism they face. To criticize 
it would be to call into question the justness of US foreign and domestic 
policy since the rise of Al-Qaeda, but especially since the attacks of 9/11.  
 14.   Cwynar ( 2013 ) draws on the work of Katarzyna Rukszto, Zoë Druick, and 
especially Linda Hutcheon.  
 15.  This refers to a plot point made earlier: Yasir signed a lease to rent the 
church basement for his business, but the lease does not mention the 
mosque.  
 16.  This episode caught the attention of the US diplomatic service, which was 
more concerned with the depiction of the border guard than the resolution 
of the plot, as a leaked cable published by WikiLeaks reveals: ‘The Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) has long gone to great pains to highlight 
the distinction between Americans and Canadians in its programming, gen-
erally at our expense […]. A December 2007 episode portrayed a Muslim 
economics professor trying to remove his name from the No- Fly- List at a 
US consulate. The show depicts a rude and eccentric US consular offi cer 
stereotypically attempting to fi nd any excuse to avoid being helpful’ (United 
States  2008 ).  
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Alsultany, Evelyn. 2008. The Primetime Plight of the Arab Muslim American after 
9/11. In  Race and Arab Americans Before and After 9/11 , ed. Amanby Jamal, 
and Nadine Naber, 204–228. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press.  
 Baley, Amber B., and Jennifer L. Lucas. 2006. Prime-Time Television’s Portrayals 
of Gay Male, Lesbian, and Bisexual Characters.  Journal of Homosexuality 51(2): 
19–38. 
 Bilici, Mucahit. 2010. Muslim Ethnic Comedy: Inversions of Islamophobia. In 
 Islamophobia/Islamophilia: Beyond the Politics of Enemy and Friend , ed. Andrew 
Shryock, 195–208. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.  
 Borges, Jorge Luis. 1977. ‘The Congress.’ In  The Book of Sand , trans. Norman 
Thomas di Giovanni, 27–49. New York: E.P. Dutton.  
 Caldwell, John Thornton. 2008.  Production Culture: Industrial Refl exivity and 
Critical Practice in Film and Television . Durham: Duke University Press.  
 Cameron, Elspeth (ed). 2004.  Multiculturalism and Immigration in Canada . 
Toronto: Canadian Scholars’ Press.  
 Canada. 1984. House of Commons. Special Committee on Participation of Visible 
Minorities in Canadian Society. In  Equality Now! Issue 4 of the Minutes of 
Proceedings and Evidence . Ottawa: Queen’s Printer.  
 CBC/Radio-Canada. 2007. Public Broadcasting in Canada: Time for a New 
Approach. 
  www.cbc.radio-canada.ca/_fi les/cbcrc/documents/parliamen-
tary/2007/mandate.pdf   
114 
K. CONWAY

 Clark, Cedric. 1969. Television and Social Controls: Some Observations on the 
Portrayals of Ethnic Minorities.  Television Quarterly 8(2): 18–22.  
 Conway, Kyle. 2014.  Little Mosque , Small Screen: Multicultural Broadcasting 
Policy and Muslims on Television.  Television and New Media 15: 648–663.  
 CRTC. 1985. Public Notice CRTC 1985-139: A Broadcasting Policy Refl ecting 
Canada’s 
Linguistic 
and 
Cultural 
Diversity. 
  www.crtc.gc.ca/eng/
archive/1985/PB85-139.HTM   
 ———. 2005. Broadcasting Public Notice CRTC 2005-24.   www.crtc.gc.ca/eng/
archive/2005/pb2005-24.htm   
 Cwynar, Christopher. 2013. The Canadian Sitcom and the Fantasy of National 
Difference:  Little Mosque on the Prairie and English-Canadian National Identity. 
In  Beyond the Border: Tensions Across the Forty-Ninth Parallel in the Great Plains 
and Prairie , ed. Kyle Conway, and Timothy Pasch, 39–70. Montreal: McGill- 
Queen’s University Press.  
 Fatah, Tarek, and Farzana Hassan. 2007. CBC TV’s Mosque Sitcom: Little 
Masquerade on the Prairie.  Toronto Sun , February 12.   www.muslimcanadian-
congress.org/20070212.html   
 Feuer, Jane. 2001. Situation Comedy, Part 2. In  The Television Genre Book , ed. 
Glen Creeber, 67–70. London: BFI.  
 Fitzgerald, Michael Ray. 2010. Evolutionary Stages of Minorities in the Mass 
Media: An Application of Clark’s Model to American Indian Television 
Representations.  Howard Journal of Communications 21(4): 367–384.  
 Galewski, Elizabeth. 2006. Counter/publicity: Conceiving the Means of Effective 
Representation. In  Engaging Argument , ed. Patricia Riley, 250–256. 
Washington: National Communication Association.  
 Havens, Timothy, Amanda D. Lotz, and Serra Tinic. 2009. Critical Media Industry 
Studies: A Research Approach.  Communication, Culture and Critique 2: 
234–253. 
 Hirji, Faiza. 2011. Through the Looking Glass: Muslim Women on Television. An 
Analysis of  24 ,  Lost , and  Little Mosque on the Prairie .  Global Media Journal. 
Canadian Edition 4(2): 33–47.  
 Jhally, Sut, and Justin Lewis. 1992.  Enlightened Racism: The Cosby Show, Audiences, 
and the Myth of the American Dream . Boulder: Westview Press.  
 Kallen, Evelyn. 1982. Multiculturalism: Ideology, Policy and Reality.  Journal of 
Canadian Studies 17: 51–63.  
 Karim, Karim H. 1993. Constructions, Deconstructions, and Reconstructions: 
Competing Canadian Discourses on Ethnocultural Terminology.  Canadian 
Journal of Communication 18(2).  
 Means Coleman, Robin R., and Charlton D. McIlwain. 2005. The Hidden Truths 
in Black Sitcoms. In  The Sitcom Reader: America Viewed and Skewed , ed. Mary 
M.  Dalton, and Laura R.  Linder, 125–138. Albany: State University of 
New York Press.  
TABOO HUMANITY: PARADOXES OF HUMANIZING MUSLIMS IN NORTH... 115

 Roth, Lorna, Leen d’Haenens, and Thierry Le Brun. 2011. No Longer “the 
Other”: A Refl ection on Canadian Fiction Television.  International 
Communication Gazette 73: 380–399.  
 Shaheen, Jack G. 2001.  Reel Bad Arabs: How Hollywood Vilifi es a People . New York: 
Olive Branch.  
 Sherazi, Aisha. 2007. Little Mosque Hits Home.  Ottawa Citizen , January 11, 
A15. 
 Task Force for Cultural Diversity on Television. 2004.  Refl ecting Canadian: Best 
Practices for Cultural Diversity in Private Television . Ottawa: Canadian 
Association of Broadcasters.  
 United States. 2008. Department of State, U.S.  Embassy in Ottawa. Subject: 
Primetime Images of US-Canada Border Paint U.S. in Increasingly Negative 
Light. 25 January. Published by WikiLeaks, 1 December 2010.   www.wikileaks.
ch/cable/2008/01/08OTTAWA136.html   
116 
K. CONWAY

 PART II 
 Controversial Humour 
in Variety Shows, Commercials 
and Factual Programming   

119
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2_7
 Dummies and Demographics: Islamophobia 
as Market Differentiation in Post-9/11 
Television Comedy  
 Philip    Scepanski  
 P.  Scepanski  () 
 Marist College ,   Poughkeepsie ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: Philip.Scepanski@marist.edu 
 Despite promises and attempts by offi cials to respect racial difference and 
religious freedom, Middle Easterners and Muslims came under height-
ened scrutiny after September 11, 2001. In addition to the relatively subtle 
racial profi ling of which federal and other agencies were accused, more 
obvious Islamophobia surfaced in forms like mosque vandalism (Lewin 
and Niebuhr  2001 ; Ridha  2003 ). ‘Do you know what it’s like being of 
Arab heritage with a Muslim last name living in America?’ asked Dean 
Obeidallah in the TV special  The Axis of Evil Comedy Tour (2007), ‘I could 
use a hug.’ As one of many television comics engaged with post-9/11 cul-
ture, he joked from a position (both ideologically and marketably) of mul-
ticultural tolerance. But this was only one position within the ever- growing 
expanse of choices in the narrowcasted television landscape of the 2000s. 
Scholars of TV comedy have often focused on the apparent growth of a 
strain of moderate-left, politically aware satirical comedy over the course 
of the 2000s and not without reason (Day  2011 ; Gray et al.  2009 ; Jones 
 2010 ). But that is of course not the only form of comedy TV from this era. 
Although more politically progressive fare grew in prominence, other pro-
grammes demonstrated countervailing attitudes, both by avoiding easily 

pigeonholed political expression, or by playing more explicitly to conserva-
tive audiences. This chapter focuses on more ostensibly conservative pro-
grammes by examining how comedy programs featuring Carlos Mencia, 
Jeff Dunham, and others used post-9/11 Islamophobia for market differ-
entiation. By feeding into the anti-Islamic and anti-terrorist sentiments of 
post-9/11 American culture, comics positioned themselves as brave truth-
tellers against the tide of political correctness with relative safety. At the 
same time, these were not overly simplistic attacks, but required a certain 
amount of negotiation between discourses of racism and anti-racism as 
well as dehumanizing and humanizing in order to create their humour 
while navigating the rules that govern expression in twenty- fi rst century 
American culture. 
 Though appropriately ridiculed as a cliché and exaggeration, there is 
some truth to the saying that ‘9/11 changed everything’. Alongside obvi-
ous changes like the Bush administration’s shift in focus from domestic 
to foreign affairs, Marita Sturken ( 2007 ) notes more subtle developments 
like changes to architecture and consumer automobile preferences. Of 
course, changes in common topics of conversation occurred as well—with 
issues like civil and religious liberties gaining prominence in media outlets 
and elsewhere. But for all these seemingly sudden changes, 9/11 occurred 
amidst various older and more slowly developing shifts. 
 Following trends as old as the medium itself, the US television industry 
continued to expand its outlets and subdivide its audiences during the 
1990s and 2000s. In addition to the continuing spread of factors begun 
decades earlier, including cable subscriptions and home video sales, the 
Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the discontinuation of the Financial 
Interest and Syndication (Fin-Syn) rules in 1993 proved particularly nota-
ble aspects of the move towards ever-narrower niche marketing (Holt 
 2011 , 140–177). The 9/11 attack seemed anomalous amongst these 
broader trends in that it temporarily drew US television viewers to a seem-
ingly unifi ed national culture. But as Lynn Spigel rightly predicted:
 The post-9/11 performance of nationalism will fail because it really does 
not fi t with the economic and cultural practices of twenty-fi rst century U.S. 
media society. The fact that there is no longer a three-network broadcast sys-
tem means that citizens are not collected as aggregate audiences for national 
culture. As we all know, what we watch on TV no longer really is what other 
people watch—unless they happen to be in our demographic taste culture. 
The post-network system is precisely about fragmentation and narrowcasting. 
120 
P. SCEPANSKI

While the new fi ve-hundred-channel cable systems may not provide true 
diversity in the sense of political or cultural pluralism, the postnetwork sys-
tem does assume a culture that is deeply divided by taste, not one that is 
unifi ed by national narratives (Spigel  2004 , 257). 
 Though Spigel is sceptical towards claims of true ‘political or cultural plu-
ralism’, TV attempts to court viewers based on their position within dis-
courses of left/right American political culture. 
 Although often discussed as a unique event, 9/11 seemed repeatable 
inasmuch as it instilled a sense that the United States was under threat of 
future attacks. This model fi t readily into familiar Cold War discursive pat-
terns, positing an ever-lurking, foreign threat. The period separating the War 
on Communism from the War on Terror was not free from catastrophes, as 
events like the 1992 Los Angeles rebellion, the Oklahoma City Bombing, 
and the Columbine shootings proved. But compared to those instances, 
where the apparent perpetrators were American, post-9/11 fears focused on 
external, foreign threats. Terrorists, Muslims, and those of Middle Eastern 
descent were the prime targets for an anxious government and citizenry. 
Unlike in the catastrophes of the 1990s, television did not purport to rep-
resent a marginalized group’s or disturbed individual’s position in relation 
to the nation except in rare cases. Instead, it largely addressed issues from 
more nativist perspectives. ‘How should Americans respond to this new 
Other?’ they seemed to ask. In answering this question, certain programs 
confl ated the categories of terrorist, Muslim, and Middle Easterner, while 
others made sure to distinguish them. Depending on ideological positions 
then—ones determined to a great extent by the target demographics—tele-
vision comedy reinforced us/them binarisms, complicated these categories, 
and/or argued positions more refl ective of pluralism. 
 Hamid Nafi cy ( 1997 ) notes the importance of derisive humour in 
American reactions to the 1979–81 Iranian hostage crisis—an event that 
represented a threatening mix of despotism, Islam, and anticolonial atti-
tudes similar to those that seemed to energize Al-Qaeda. While bin Laden 
may have replaced the Ayatollah Khomeini on toilet paper sheets and in 
satirical songs, the enormous discursive imprint of 9/11, among other 
factors, meant a larger and more varied television engagement with the 
Middle East, its people, and its diasporas than had occurred two decades 
earlier. Additionally, while the taking of American hostages in Iran neces-
sarily focused attention on another part of the world, the domestic nature 
of the 2001 attacks caused American Muslims and those of Middle Eastern 
DUMMIES AND DEMOGRAPHICS: ISLAMOPHOBIA AS MARKET... 121

descent to come under heightened scrutiny, albeit a scrutiny that often 
threatened and/or denied their status as fully or authentically American. 
General cultural suspicion along with more offi cial federal responses from 
agencies like the FBI and FAA echoed the kind of xenophobia directed at 
Japanese-Americans in the wake of the Pearl Harbor attack in 1941. 
 Debates over ‘political correctness’ also proved a longer-term trend 
into which 9/11 factored. Geoffrey Hughes explores the history of the 
term as well as many of its implications.
 Political correctness became part of the modern lexicon and, many would 
say, part of the modern mind-set, as a consequence of the wide-ranging 
public debate which started on campuses in the United States from the late 
1980s. Since nearly 50 percent of Americans go to college, the impact of 
the controversy was widespread. It was out of this ferment that most of the 
new vocabulary was generated or became current. However, political cor-
rectness is not one thing and does not have a simple history. As a concept it 
predates the debate and is a complex, discontinuous, and protean phenom-
enon, which has changed radically, even over the past two decades. During 
just that time it has ramifi ed into numerous agendas, reforms, and issues 
concerning race, culture, gender, disability, the environment, and animals 
rights (Hughes  2010 ). 
 Hughes’ book offers a complex history of the way an explicit academic 
attempt to ‘sanitize the language by suppressing some of its uglier prej-
udicial features’ transformed into a more implicit set of codes pre- and 
proscribing certain actions and forms of communication. To detractors 
like Doris Lessing ( 2004 ), the threat of being labelled politically incorrect 
acts as a form of ‘mental tyranny […] manifesting as a general intoler-
ance’. Political correctness in the television industry is likely the result of 
two primary factors. First, it refl ects a genuine ethical concern of a largely 
left-leaning, metropolitan, college-educated, creative labour force. At the 
same time, to the extent that rules of conduct might help to avoid scaring 
away viewers and advertisers, the strictures also refl ect a business strategy. 
But if ‘political correctness’—however understood—reigns, then acting 
against this set of social mores offers the promise of unique content. 
 As the 1990s’ popular understanding of political correctness rose to 
cultural prominence, both cultural conservatives like Lessing and com-
ics of more varied political leanings grew nervous regarding their ability 
to speak with impunity (Saper  1995 ). So while these attitudes may have 
helped usher comics like Andrew Dice Clay out of the limelight, hipper 
122 
P. SCEPANSKI

comedies like  Seinfeld (‘The Outing’, 1993) and  The Simpsons (‘Homer’s 
Phobia’, 1997) narrativized the apparent struggles of straight white males 
to navigate the new cultural sensitivity. By the late 1990s, more self- 
conscious rejections of political correctness like  South Park and  Family 
Guy appeared on broadcast and cable. At the same time, stand-up comics 
like Carlos Mencia worked comedy clubs and television’s fringier cable 
and late-night sites as the apparent successors to Don Rickles, playing on 
their ability to say in comedy routines what appeared to be increasingly 
silenced elsewhere. 
 This thumbnail sketch of comedy in the 1990s suggests that those who 
negotiated, ignored, or fl aunted the developing rules of political correct-
ness served a wide swath of demographic markets from young adults to 
fans of older more Borscht Belt-inspired comedy. While crises of racial 
identity like the O.J.  Simpson case informed these comedic debates 
throughout the 1990s, 9/11 infl ected the confl ict differently for the rea-
sons discussed earlier. But since these nebulous standards acted as a subtle 
cultural dominant governing many areas of public life, certain television 
texts could differentiate their product by testing or fl outing the rules. So 
while there was a perceived air of multicultural tolerance by the turn of 
the millennium, 9/11 created an Other defi ned in large part as a minority 
culture, religion, and ethnicity. 
 Numerous scholars have weighed in regarding humour’s ability to 
create a sense of community as well as its ability to alienate individuals 
and subcultures from larger group formations. Henri Bergson’s essay on 
laughter contains an often overlooked insight into the phenomenon’s 
social dynamics. In his understanding, laughter is always that of a group 
directed at an individual ( 1980 , 64). When one person is not performing 
in the best interest of society, the laughter of the group disciplines the 
individual.  1 More contemporary humour theorists offer further insight 
into humour’s group-building aspects. Ted Cohen describes the ways 
that joking reinforces established bonds among comics and audiences by 
ritual engagements with linguistic codes ( 1999 , 12–32). Group laughter 
signals common knowledge and values and thus reinforces group bonds 
and identity. And while admitting its potential for divisiveness, Lawrence 
E. Mintz believes that American humour developed the way it did as a way 
to smooth over divisions within the nation’s ‘dynamic and heterogeneous’ 
culture ( 1999 , 237). John Limon has a similar take, though instead of see-
ing comedy as an ever-present force unifying all Americans, he proposes 
that comedy of a type has spread to unite Americans. ‘America, between 
DUMMIES AND DEMOGRAPHICS: ISLAMOPHOBIA AS MARKET... 123

1960 and the millennium’, he writes, ‘in a process that began around the 
ascension of Johnny Carson or the Kennedy Assassination, comedifi ed. 
Stand-up was once a fi eld given over to certain subsections of a certain 
ethnicity. By now, roughly speaking, all America is the pool for national 
stand-up comedy’ (Limon  2000 , 3). In its ability to pilot issues of same-
ness and difference, comedy proved a privileged discourse after 9/11 in 
navigating the seemingly oppositional desires of xenophobia and ecumen-
ism within culture. 
 Though comics like Rickles and others had been pushing similar buttons 
for decades, self-consciously anti-PC comedies from those of seemingly 
right-wing Jeff Dunham to the obviously leftist Bill Maher’s  Politically 
Incorrect fl outed the rules as a way to build comic credibility. Thus after 
9/11, Muslims and Middle Easterners became prime targets for comics 
who wanted to demonstrate their edgy rejection of political correctness, 
while ingratiating themselves to those who considered themselves to be 
more truly American. In comedy especially then, the clashes of cultural 
and religious tolerance, nationalist anger, anti-PC backlash, and humour’s 
ability to negotiate such issues created a particularly telling milieu where 
these debates could be argued and examined like they could in no other 
television genre or cultural discourse. 
 LAUGHTER AS A WEAPON: TARGETING BIN LADEN 
AND TERRORISM 
 While 9/11 did not produce the Arab terrorist as a common enemy in 
American discourse, it undoubtedly increased the prominence of and 
scorn towards such fi gures. Coverage of and fallout from the events crys-
tallized negative attitudes felt by many towards bin Laden, Al-Qaeda, ter-
rorists, and perhaps Middle Easterners and Muslims more generally. Some 
comedy shows served the desire by symbolically mocking and abusing 
these fi gures. But while anti-terrorist sentiment hit a high point during 
this period, attempts to satisfy these desires were tempered by certain fac-
tors. Parties ranging from politicians to comedians almost immediately 
made sure to distinguish between Islamic extremists and peaceful Muslims 
and Americans of Arab descent, perhaps refl ecting aspects of the gains 
made by proponents of ‘political correctness’ in the previous decades.  2 
 At the same time, the 9/11 attacks produced a cultural demand for humour 
that attacked a foreign enemy while solidifying a sense of Americanness. 
Throughout this period, attacks on bin Laden served as a safe constant while 
124 
P. SCEPANSKI

comedies variously took liberties humorously attacking terrorists, Islam, 
Middle Easterners, or non-Americans more generally. Flagrantly mocking 
ethnic and religious minorities would have signalled a strain of cultural con-
servatism, but in the wake of 9/11 it grew more diffi cult to easily peg some 
shows’ political allegiances. Despite these upheavals and shifting signifi ers of 
political allegiance, a number of comedies cornered portions of the market 
by blatantly appealing to the political and cultural interests of more conserva-
tive demographics through humour. 
 In reporting on his 2011 death, much was made of Osama bin Laden’s 
appetite for pornography. While a curious element to the story of his 
demise, highlighting this aspect of his lifestyle clearly held value as a way 
to demean him. News outlets likely were not using this element rhetori-
cally, since very few in their viewing audience would have remained on the 
fence about the terrorist mastermind. Instead, this acted as a unifying rit-
ual meant to elicit disdainful laughter at this less-than-holy warrior. One of 
the most extreme examples of this symbolic shaming technique came from 
the stop-motion animated  Robot Chicken (‘Poisoned by Relatives’, 2012). 
Airing after his death, it exaggerates reports of bin Laden’s porn habit so 
that when Navy SEALs break into his compound, they not only discover 
pornography, but evidence of severe sexual deviance as bin Laden hangs 
in a closet wearing only woman’s underwear in addition to his standard 
turban, suggesting that he died from autoerotic asphyxiation. Reporting 
to his commanding offi cer, a SEAL radios, ‘I understand how it would 
look if the history books told future generations that a porn-loving jerk off 
enthusiast had gotten the upper hand on America.’ Following an implied 
order, the soldier then shoots the corpse twice, recreating reports of his 
death as a result of shots to the chest and head. 
 Though  Robot Chicken ’s extreme example came after the leader’s death, 
attacks on bin Laden and other newly perceived enemies were among the 
earliest forms of humour on television after 9/11. Bin Laden was of course 
a prime target during this period. One of the most notable examples of 
that period’s attacks occurred in  South Park ’s 7 November 2001 episode, 
‘Osama bin Laden has Farty Pants.’ While complex on many issues, it 
treated bin Laden fairly simply as a target for abuse, often mobilizing reli-
gion and ethnicity in its attacks. This episode offers numerous examples of 
violent slapstick, all with fairly comparable ends. For example, when bin 
Laden threatens Eric Cartman with a knife, Cartman announces, ‘Uh oh. 
Five-thirty; time to pray.’ At once mocking the leader’s presumed piety and 
an invented gullibility, the leader kneels on a rug before the child fl attens 
his head with an oversized mallet. These gags of physical humiliation give 
DUMMIES AND DEMOGRAPHICS: ISLAMOPHOBIA AS MARKET... 125

way to those of sexual humiliation. Cartman dresses in drag in order to 
entice the leader, but instead a camel catches bin Laden’s eye. This bit stops 
just short of literally showing bin Laden as a ‘camel fucker’. 
 While the use of cartoon texts may suggest that these responses are 
somewhat juvenile, allusions to Bugs Bunny and Elmer Fudd also conjure 
a sense of nostalgia. In visiting humiliations on bin Laden, Al-Qaeda, and 
Islam in this episode,  South Park paid homage to Warner Bros. Cartoons. 
These segments especially invoke those of the World War II era like  Herr 
Meets Hare (1945) and  Bugs Bunny Nips the Nips (1944) wherein Bugs 
Bunny took on Axis foes. And it is not the only nostalgic tribute. In this 
episode’s fi nal scene, one of the characters symbolizes America’s imperfect 
superiority by propping up a miniature US fl ag in a nod to the 1965  A 
Charlie Brown Christmas ’s similar treatment of a Christmas tree. 
 Textual and formal nostalgia in one sense spoke to a larger discourse from 
this era on wanting to return to a pre-9/11 sense of security, even while pol-
iticians decried those who held a pre-9/11 mentality.  3 In other senses, play-
ing around with the imagery of World War II implied comparisons between 
Pearl Harbor and 9/11 as unprovoked, devastating attacks. The connection 
to World War II also suggested popular notions of the 1940s and the imme-
diate post-9/11 period as those of greater public unity regarding the belief 
in a military response that would be more justifi able than those of confl icts 
in the second half of the twentieth century. Most notably, it also served as a 
reminder of a time when comics felt more comfortable mocking enemies of 
the United States using ethnic and racial stereotypes. 
 That terrorists other than bin Laden served as targets for comedic scorn 
is unsurprising. The Seth MacFarlane-branded television shows— Family 
Guy ,  American Dad , and  The Cleveland Show —tend to align with the 
United States’ moderate, and sometimes less moderate, left even while 
relying on humour that deliberately fl outs politically correct conventions. 
Similar to instances imagining violence on bin Laden,  Family Guy provides 
examples where violent slapstick encourages laughter at the expense of 
less notable terrorists. One gag offers a parodic alternate history where 
‘America was attacked by mentally challenged suicide bombers’ (‘Hannah 
Banana’, 2009). A cutaway demonstrates by showing an Arab man shout-
ing ‘Allahu akbar’ as he rides a bicycle into a World Trade Center tower. 
The characters’ use of the politically correct term ‘mentally challenged’, 
even while making a politically incorrect joke proved interesting consider-
ing the show’s common use of the word ‘retarded’ (‘Petarded’, 2005). 
While often presenting as a politically progressive text,  Family Guy ’s 
126 
P. SCEPANSKI

moments of apparent cultural conservatism deny easy reading as either left 
or right. But other comedy texts engaging in negative humour of this type 
spoke more directly to cultural and political conservatism.  
 ARAB IS THE NEW BLACK: RELATIVIZING THE OTHER 
 John Caldwell notes the way media texts familiarize crises and catastro-
phes by comparing them to recognizable historical precedents ( 1995 , 
317–318). While his examples focus on journalism during the 1992 Los 
Angeles uprising, post-9/11 media culture showed a similar impulse. As 
with any broad discourse, forms and levels of engagement varied. In one 
of the more notable forms of historical engagement, comics spoke of 9/11 
as a historical turning point where certain older ethnic prejudices gave way 
to newer ones. If Muslims and those of Middle Eastern descent were the 
new Other, perhaps it meant that other oppressed minorities could escape 
that history. 
 The cheekily titled  Axis of Evil Comedy Tour (2007) showcased Persian- 
and Arab-American comics, highlighting their position in relation to 
9/11 and political labelling. Coming from this special, Dean Obeidallah’s 
‘I could use a hug’ joke underscores his position as a prime Other in 
post-9/11 United States. He characterizes this as a recent development. 
‘Before 9/11 I’m just a white guy living like a typical white guy life […]. 
I go to bed September 10 white. I wake up September 11—I’m Arab.’ 
Obeidallah’s historicising instructs viewers regarding the political instabil-
ity of racial categories. Not only does his race change in the eyes of many, 
but so too do the implications of being Muslim or of Middle Eastern 
descent. Discussions of these issues were common among comics who 
engaged with the idea that ‘Arab is the new black’, as he explicitly states. 
However, Obeidallah is fairly unique in that comics of Middle Eastern 
descent, while not entirely absent from television, are rare. 
 Lanita Jacobs-Huey’s ( 2006 ) ethnography of African American com-
edy clubs demonstrates that even in the earliest days after the 9/11 
attacks, black comics and their audiences celebrated the perception that 
‘the Arab is the new nigger’. While the historical specifi city of each group 
and the conditions under which they became the target of conscious and/
or structural racism prevent such simplistic comparisons from an earnest 
perspective, this discourse serves as a method by which comics negotiate 
the position of Middle Easterners vis-a-vis other minorities, explore the 
history of racial minorities in the United States, and historicise arguments 
DUMMIES AND DEMOGRAPHICS: ISLAMOPHOBIA AS MARKET... 127

over whether everything had indeed changed. For one comic in particular, 
this logic acted as a useful tool by which to activate and justify xenophobia. 
 Carlos Mencia is a stand-up comic whose performances refl ect an immi-
grant persona. Despite this aspect of his identity, his comedy rarely aligns 
neatly with a pluralist tolerance viewpoint. Instead, it often relies on self- 
consciously politically incorrect material playing with ideas about racial 
difference. As might be expected of this sort of comic in a post-9/11 
environment, Mencia joked at the expense of Middle Eastern people, 
Americans of Middle Eastern descent, and Muslims to cement his persona 
as an anti-PC bad boy. This tendency is apparent in his Comedy Central 
program, which ran from 2005 to 2008. Mencia’s monologue from the 
fi rst episode of  Mind of Mencia marks his stance with regards to both the 
dominant and perhaps growing racial power bloc and the Middle Eastern 
Other. The show’s set decoration included a barbed-wire fence indicative 
of a border-crossing checkpoint. In his fi rst monologue, Mencia enters the 
stage, exclaiming:
 The beaner got a show! I want you guys to know that the fence around here 
is not just for decoration. This is the actual fence that my mom and dad 
jumped when they came to this country. Is he already making fun of people? 
I’m gonna make fun of everybody. I get Muslims pissed off. [ adopting an 
Arabic accent ] Why are the American people messing with me? [ return-
ing to his voice ] Because Achmed, it’s your turn! America’s a giant game 
of tag, somebody’s always ‘it’ and guess what Achmed? You’re it. Here’s 
what happened, a lot of people don’t understand. September 11: bad day 
in American history; great day for blacks and Hispanics; greatest day in our 
generation, because on that day, white people accepted us as Americans. 
Before that, we weren’t Americans. Then on the eleventh, the buildings col-
lapsed; they showed the pictures of the hijackers. When they showed those 
pictures, Maria, Loquisha, Carlos, and Tyrone walked up to Achmed and 
went, ‘tag. Your turn!’ 
 Perhaps as a justifi cation for the more controversial content to follow, 
Mencia both establishes and teases himself as an immigrant, despite admit-
ting that his parents actually crossed the border. His promise to ‘make 
fun of everybody’ also functions as a justifi cation since it guarantees some 
level of equity in his attacks on different races and ethnicities. And to some 
extent, Mencia lives up to this promise by mocking whites, blacks, Indians, 
and others. But the opening monologue signals two important tactics. 
First, though perhaps not the prime reason for self-deprecating humour, 
128 
P. SCEPANSKI

Mencia’s willingness to poke fun at his own ethnicity justifi es much of his 
other material. And second, like many comics during this period, he uses 
9/11 as ground upon which to show off his willingness to engage in edgy 
and racially insensitive humour in the relatively safe manner of attacking 
the newly perceived threat. While the seemingly indefensible argument 
that 9/11 was good may shock some viewers in its evocation of radical 
leftist politics, Mencia redirects these implications to buoy certain minori-
ties at the expense of others. 
 Continuing the routine’s use of comic metaphor, he moves from the 
‘giant game of tag’ to comparing the United States to a fraternity. ‘In 
order to join our country’, he argues:
 You must get hazed. And guess what? It’s Greek week. Everybody went 
through it. That’s what I don’t understand. I’m not afraid of people calling 
me a racist. Go ahead and call me a racist. Go ahead and do it. [ adopting 
an Arabic accent ] Hey that’s not fair you’re only checking me. Why don’t 
you check the women? [ returning to his voice ] Well, because women in this 
country, Achmed, were treated like crap for about 150 years when they 
couldn’t vote. So unless you don’t want to vote for that long and possibly 
give me head, I suggest you [agree to increased scrutiny]. 
 Mencia attempts to short-circuit possible dismissals of his routine as racist 
by accepting all such criticism before again arguing for solidarity among 
all non-Middle Eastern, non-Muslim historically oppressed groups. The 
rhetoric in this routine relies on mixed appeals to racial and gender equal-
ity as well as racist exceptionalism. While to some extent admitting the 
injustice of racial profi ling, Mencia places the contemporary wave of xeno-
phobia in relation to historical injustices to argue that such hardships are 
necessary evils for gaining acceptance into the dominant racial power bloc. 
Of course, European Americans are largely absent from this argument, but 
Mencia ingratiates himself to various historically oppressed categories of 
Americans by adopting a logic where past suffering is a patriotic virtue. 
African and Latin Americans as well as women of all backgrounds earn the 
right to current liberties thanks to past violations. So while Mencia selec-
tively subscribes to the classically liberal notion of individual equality, it is 
a zero-sum game by which one group’s civil rights can only be purchased 
at the expense of another’s. 
 At one point in the routine, Mencia’s straw Arab American man asks, 
‘Why don’t you check the Hispanics? Is it because you are Hispanic?’ 
‘No’, he responds as himself, ‘It’s because Hispanics don’t blow shit up. 
DUMMIES AND DEMOGRAPHICS: ISLAMOPHOBIA AS MARKET... 129

They clean it up, then build it up after you blow it up.’ While he does 
not dwell on this point, it performs an important role in the routine, 
excusing the comic from accusations of self-interest. Mencia’s use of Latin 
American stereotypes continue to exhibit his penchant for political incor-
rectness, but the contrast he makes between Arab Americans as destructive 
and Latin Americans as constructive justifi es Mencia’s as a more valuable 
category of immigrant. 
 These comedic tactics were not new to the 2000s. Scholars David 
R. Roediger ( 2007 , 115–163) and Noel Ignatiev ( 1995 ) argue that Irish 
American immigrants performed black face minstrelsy in large numbers 
because denigrating African Americans was a way to win status as white 
Americans during a period when many considered Irish to be neither white 
nor American. Robert Nowatzki ( 2006 ) adds that the new immigrants 
were well-suited to this role not only because of a history of cultural shar-
ing between Irish Americans and free African Americans, but also because 
the Irish had been the subject of minstrel shows performed by native-born 
Americans during earlier waves of immigration. To have been the subject 
of racist humour in the past offered entrée to the fi eld, suggesting that the 
most successful racist humour comes from those who are or had recently 
been the subject of it. 
 Mencia’s monologue betrays a similar logic to that described by cul-
tural historians regarding Irish American integration. Though a common 
tactic in history, his monologue’s notability arises from its explicitness 
and, compared to examples like Jacobs-Huey’s, for being performed on a 
mass medium where such boundary pushing comes under closer scrutiny. 
Seemingly having purchased with his own oppression the right to make 
these statements and jokes, Mencia explicitly argues for the curtailment 
of another group’s civil rights and invites all other formerly or currently 
oppressed parties to join his cause. Implicitly, this also functions as an 
argument for the freedom to attack the Othered group through humour, 
a right that  Mind of Mencia exercised throughout its run.  
 A PITIABLE ENEMY: JEFF DUNHAM AND ACHMED 
THE DEAD TERRORIST 
 Though performing in relative obscurity since the early 1990s, Jeff 
Dunham’s self-conscious attempts to appeal to a conservative, rural, 
Christian audience enabled him to become one of the most fi nancially 
130 
P. SCEPANSKI

successful stand-up comics of the decade following 9/11. In a telling 
interview, Dunham confessed to mocking everything equally with the 
exception of ‘basic Christian-values stuff’ (Mooallem  2009 ). More gener-
ally, he revealed that while often working blue and trying to attract a large 
audience, he intends his humour for a particular type—‘the conservative 
“country crowd”’. And even though this  New York Times Magazine piece 
intends kindness to both Dunham and his fans, even the writer could not 
help but poke fun as she describes Dunham’s ‘not thin’ audience. While 
offering different views of his audience, both the comic and the inter-
viewer depict a particular taste culture. In his Comedy Central specials and 
short-lived weekly show, Dunham codes his routines to speak to a cultur-
ally conservative audience—often classifi ed in news articles as ‘red state’ 
crowds (Genzlinger  2009 ; Lowry  2009 ; Mooallem  2009 ). 
 The comic’s Comedy Central specials tend to follow a pattern. After a 
short introductory sketch and the opening credits, Dunham performs a 
relatively short traditional stand-up routine that in part establishes themes 
and set-ups for later callbacks when he turns to his comedy’s more notable 
aspect: ventriloquism. In the opening stand-up routine for his 2007 special 
 Spark of Insanity , Dunham proudly proclaims ‘I know it’s not politically 
correct to drive [my Hummer SUV] anymore’, to which the audience 
offers an applause break. While not exactly fi tting with a common under-
standing of ‘politically correct’ as avoiding offence to identity categories, 
the attack on this concept as limiting a wider range of behaviour serves 
a number of purposes. Among others, it ingratiates the comic to right- 
identifi ed members of the so-called culture wars. Additionally, the more 
general attack on the concept of political correctness—a theme that recurs 
throughout his performances—functions similarly to Mencia’s invitation 
to label him a racist. By adopting the politically incorrect label, Dunham 
seeks to short-circuit criticism. And in associating the strictures of political 
correctness with more broadly perceived attacks on personal liberties, like 
the types of automobile one chooses to drive, the comic further disparages 
the concept in the minds of his fans, implicitly justifying the more overtly 
edgy humour that follows. Finally, in celebrating a behaviour frowned on 
by one taste culture, he identifi es with its perceived foes, defi ned in part 
through their resentment towards such social proscriptions. 
 Similar to Carlos Mencia, Dunham literally promises to offend—in that 
he verbally guarantees it when introducing content ( The Jeff Dunham 
Show , ‘Episode 6’, 2009). But unlike Mencia, Dunham’s stage persona 
does not present him as a raging truth-teller. Instead, he more often 
DUMMIES AND DEMOGRAPHICS: ISLAMOPHOBIA AS MARKET... 131

presents as an affable everyman or, at worst, a mischievous but harmless 
idiot. This despite his humour’s overt reliance on racial and other ste-
reotypes. Again like Mencia, Dunham justifi es his offence as distributed 
evenly. Efforts to balance the mockery with white trash, black hustler, 
and Arab terrorist dummies function as another way in which Dunham 
justifi es his speech in a media environment sensitive to issues of racial 
representation. A cell phone ring tone of his Achmed character’s ‘I kill 
you!’ catchphrase was banned in South Africa due to its being perceived as 
offensive to Muslims. Dunham defended himself by arguing, ‘I’ve skew-
ered whites, blacks, Christians, Jews, Muslims, gays, straights, rednecks, 
the elderly, and my wife. As a stand-up comic, it is my job to make the 
majority of people laugh, and I believe that comedy is the last true form of 
free speech’ (Miller  2008 ). 
 Dunham’s fans do not appear to be as even-handed in their preferences 
as the ventriloquist is in providing options for comedic scorn. By many 
indicators—from on-screen audience reactions, to Internet video views, 
to journalist estimations—Achmed the Dead Terrorist, a skeletal puppet 
primarily used to poke fun at Muslim terrorists, proves time and again to 
be the comic’s signature and most popular character. As  Time points out, 
‘The explosion [of popularity] came, appropriately enough, with Achmed 
the Dead Terrorist, a character Dunham debuted in late 2007 on his 
[Comedy Central special and] DVD  Spark of Insanity ’ (Luscombe  2009 ). 
 As a means of introduction, Dunham allows his cranky elderly puppet 
Walter to mock terrorists and Islam more generally just before introducing 
Achmed in that 2007 special.
 Walter: 
There’s one group of folks I don’t understand at all. 
 Dunham: Who’s that? 
 Walter: 
Damn suicide bombers. 
 Dunham: Oh. 
 Walter: 
Good God! What the hell is this? [ performs an impression of 
Arabic speech followed by a battle cry and explosion ]. Well way to 
go, Habib! Betcha can’t frickin’ do it again. [ repeats battle cry/
explosion ] Dumbass. 
 Dunham: You know Walter, those guys actually believe that if they martyr 
themselves like that there will be 72 virgins waiting for them in 
paradise. 
 Walter: 
Well, April fool, dumbass! If there are virgins waiting for you, 
it’ll be 72 guys, just like you! [ affects an accent ] Oh no, this is 
not what Osama said it would be. [ repeats battle cry/explosion ] 72 
virgins? Why not 72 slutty broads who know what they’re doing? 
132 
P. SCEPANSKI

 In this special, disparaging attacks on Islamic terrorism and Islam more 
generally meet with vocal audience approval. Dunham plays the slightly 
knowledgeable, somewhat respectful straight man, setting Walter up with 
his comment on 72 virgins as a reward for martyrdom. Dunham’s angry, 
psychopathic, and mischievous puppets clearly demonstrate the psycho-
analytic understanding of jokes as expressing pent-up aggression (Freud 
 1963 ). In fact, later in  Spark of Insanity , his character Peanut suggests that 
each of his puppets represent different repressed emotions, with Walter 
standing in for Dunham’s anger and resentment. 
 When ‘Achmed the Dead Terrorist’ fi rst appears, the routine shifts 
registers from Walter’s non-ironic anger to an Arab character’s illegiti-
mate rage. Blatantly satirical, Achmed functions as a symbolic straw man. 
Having only managed to kill himself (and, in one routine, his son) with 
his suicide bombing, he operates as a pathetic fi gure at which the audi-
ence laughs ( Very Special Christmas Special , 2008). Whereas Walter is a 
surrogate, giving voice to Dunham’s and his audience’s frustrations and 
anger, Achmed serves primarily as a target of derision. In this way, he is 
also an object at which symbolic violence can be directed. Not only did 
Achmed’s self-victimization allow for slapstick humour, it also shows his 
incompetence. 
 As he fi rst introduces the puppet, Dunham plays it straight: ‘As we all 
know there’s a big mess going on in the Middle East right now and when 
it comes to the terrorists, most of us don’t understand their extremist 
views and beliefs and I got to thinking the other day, “How would it be 
just to sit down and talk to one of those guys?”’ ( Spark of Insanity , 2007). 
Adopting the language of cross-cultural curiosity and ecumenism presents 
the ventriloquist as the reasonable counterpoint against which his puppet 
will contrast. But at another level, it critiques the ideology that underpins 
such attempts to understand the Other. As quickly becomes clear, there is 
little thinking necessary to ‘get’ Achmed—he is single-mindedly violent. 
There is no point in trying to ‘understand [his] extremist views’ and no 
point in adopting any stance towards the Middle East’s ‘big mess’ other 
than one of laughing derision. While all of Dunham’s dummies are about 
the same size, the obvious intercultural confl ict and Achmed’s role as an 
object of scorn make the contrast in appearance between puppet and mas-
ter notable. Dunham, representing a typical American, stands far taller 
than Achmed whose exaggeratedly large head and eyes, small body, and 
sitting posture suggest that of a toddler. This infantilization colours his 
emotions such that his and all other terrorist anger are more associated 
DUMMIES AND DEMOGRAPHICS: ISLAMOPHOBIA AS MARKET... 133

with childish temper tantrums than legitimate political or religious frus-
tration. Introducing himself as ‘a terrifying terrorist’, Achmed repeatedly 
tries to frighten Dunham. Each time he refuses to be scared, defeating the 
terror of terrorism. Frustrated, Achmed mutters, ‘God dammit. Ooh! I 
mean, uh, Allah dammit!’ simultaneously admitting defeat and profaning 
the religion that he supposedly serves. 
 While Dunham peppers the rest of the routine with further disparages 
towards terrorism—as when Achmed says that his organization’s recruit-
ment slogan is ‘We’re looking for idiots with no future’ (in reference to 
the US Marines’ slogan, ‘We’re looking for a few good men’)—Achmed 
is at times more sympathetic. The audience applauds approvingly when 
he claims that he could pass through airport security by claiming to be 
Lindsay Lohan (in reference to a discourse from that period painting the 
star as too skinny). ‘I told a joke’, the dummy proclaims with the excite-
ment of a child. Achmed takes this approving laughter as a cue to tell 
more jokes, eventually telling both anti-Semitic and anti-Catholic ones. 
‘I would not kill the Jews. I would toss a penny between them and watch 
them fi ght to the death. Ha ha ha ha. Yes, yes! I did the same thing with 
two Catholic priests, but I tossed in a small boy. Ha ha ha ha. Yes, yes! And 
the winner had to fi ght Michael Jackson!’ None of Dunham’s other pup-
pets nor would Dunham himself have been as successful telling such jokes 
to his audience. But by displacing jokes about Jews killing each other for 
money and Catholic priests killing one another for the privilege of molest-
ing a child to an Arab fi gure, Dunham and his audience can have their cake 
and eat it too. The otherwise-verboten jokes get told, but are justifi ed by 
coming from the mouth of an anti-Semitic, anti-Catholic character. The 
audience can laugh at the jokes in their own right as well as the teller, ulti-
mately defaming all three groups, plus Michael Jackson. 
 Considering ventriloquism’s roots in the type of verbal play associated 
with ‘Who’s On First’-type vaudeville, Achmed the Dead Terrorist repre-
sents an exceptionally physical form of slapstick among ventriloquism acts 
generally and Dunham’s routines in particular. Achmed’s existential joke 
is that he was a terrorist too incompetent to kill anyone but himself and 
perhaps his son ( Very Special Christmas Special , 2008). While more often 
described than shown, Achmed’s stories of botched attacks paint a picture 
of self-infl icted physical trauma that distinguishes him from Dunham’s 
other puppets, whose humour relies more on wordplay. ‘If you must 
know, I am a horrible suicide bomber’, he explains, ‘I had a premature 
detonation […] I was getting gas and I answered my cell phone’ ( Spark of 
Insanity , 2007). ‘What was the last thing that went through your mind?’ 
134 
P. SCEPANSKI

asks Dunham. ‘My ass’, replies Achmed. Considering Achmed’s role as 
an object of scorn, this physicality makes sense. The symbolic shaming of 
verbal insults and humiliation as well as celebrations of physical damage 
wrought on Achmed and other terrorists speak directly to his role as a 
response to post-9/11 fears about the threat of terrorist violence. 
 In Dunham’s  Very Special Christmas Special (2008) Achmed’s more 
physical humour plays out in a number of ways. Notably, one bit begins 
with a pun—among the most verbal forms of humour. After Dunham 
asks if he had actually ever blown anything up, Achmed responds that 
he has ‘blown up’ a woman. ‘She was infl atable. You know, an infl atable 
virgin. I had to stop seeing her […] she popped.’ Achmed then makes the 
sound of a balloon popping and farting out its air. While described rather 
than shown, this routine quickly turned from a pun into a description of 
physical comedy in which the diminutive Achmed humps and ultimately 
destroys the less animate object. Presumably, the infl atable virgin popped 
because of Achmed’s skeletal body, referencing his self-victimization. The 
humour exists primarily in the situation described, but also reminded the 
audience of the slapstick violence that caused Achmed to be a ‘dead ter-
rorist’ in the fi rst place. 
 In this and other stand-up specials, Achmed’s physical humour goes 
beyond mere description. While Dunham’s puppets all rely on physicality 
to some extent, all but Achmed stop for the most part at exaggerated facial 
expressions and head movement. In his fi rst appearance, Achmed’s skeletal 
feet fall upside down, leading him to exclaim, ‘I need some ligaments!’ 
( Spark of Insanity , 2007). This same gag repeats in the 2009 Christmas 
special except that in addition to his foot problems, Achmed loses an arm. 
A victim of his own violence, Achmed shrinks from a threatening fi gure to 
a pathetically fragile, albeit comic, one. 
 Because its fi lmed format allowed for more complex staging, Dunham’s 
sketch comedy show, in which his puppets left Dunham’s side to interact 
with off-stage people, provided an ideal place for Achmed to perform his 
self-destructive slapstick. On more than one occasion, the show features 
Achmed trying to learn how to be a more effective perpetrator of violence 
only to be comically stymied. Most notably, he attempts in one sketch to 
join the US Marine Corps. Justifi ed as an attempt to become a citizen so 
that he could attack the United States ‘from the inside’, this bit is more 
about creating humorous contrast between the highly competent sol-
diers and Achmed, whose incompetence both highlights his harmlessness 
and offers an excuse for slapstick at his expense ( The Jeff Dunham Show , 
‘Episode 6’, 2009). 
DUMMIES AND DEMOGRAPHICS: ISLAMOPHOBIA AS MARKET... 135

 Various physical gags make these points. As punishment for his incom-
petence, a drill sergeant repeatedly orders Achmed to do push-ups that he 
cannot perform, underscoring his physical weakness. Although he eventu-
ally performs a lone push-up, Achmed’s arms fall off in an exaggerated dis-
play of fragility. The dummy reinforces this point in bits where he attempts 
to fi re weapons. When using a rifl e, the recoil violently drives him back. 
And when Achmed throws a grenade, his entire arm goes with it, again 
showing how easily he could be torn apart. But because he is also stupid, 
Achmed runs after his arm, stepping on the grenade just as it explodes to 
re-enact his initial ‘death’. 
 In the fi nale of the Achmed routine from the  Very Special Christmas 
Special , he sings a song called ‘Jingle Bombs’, to the tune of ‘Jingle Bells’ 
with lyrics like ‘Dashing through the sand/with a bomb strapped to my 
back./I have a nasty plan/for Christmas in Iraq./I got through check-
point A,/but not through checkpoint B./That’s when I got shot in the ass 
by the U.S. Military’. Here, US military forces in Iraq caused Achmed’s 
wounds, seemingly in opposition to his previous explanations. Politically, 
this song seems to support the Iraq war as an anti-terror measure, one 
of the more controversial justifi cations for the United States’ operations 
there. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 The pleasure of revenge fantasies against Middle Eastern terrorists from 
bin Laden to Achmed is fairly self-explanatory. But shows demonstrat-
ing these tendencies varied in the ways they presented and attacked these 
representative fi gures. While  South Park , in ‘Osama bin Laden has Farty 
Pants’ at least, uses both visual and narrative tools to ridicule bin Laden, 
 Family Guy barely bothers to characterize its mentally handicapped ter-
rorist. Mencia justifi ed Islamophobia partly as a method for preventing 
further attacks, but also as a means for promoting other minorities’ civil 
rights. Dunham took a somewhat different approach with Achmed in that 
the character has some depth and at times even arouses sympathy. Despite 
all the ways Dunham demeans Achmed, the character is at least partly 
humanized. Neat us/them binarisms thus cannot fully explain Mencia’s 
rhetorical logic or the enjoyment of watching the puppet injure himself 
or fall apart. Dunham humanized the Other even while visiting violence 
upon him. 
136 
P. SCEPANSKI

 Though appearing rather simplistic at fi rst blush, these examples and 
their defi ance of easy readings represent a confl uence of factors. The use 
of demeaning comedy to attack fi gures associated with terrorism demon-
strate the differentiated appeal of anti-PC humour in a fragmented media 
market. At the same time, they at least acknowledge and sometimes subtly 
support aspects of the politically correct discourses they ostensibly reject. 
Ultimately, 9/11 produced a target uniquely suited for this type of com-
edy and media environment. It appeared edgy and delivered on aspects of 
the pleasure associated with contentious humour, albeit while attacking 
thoroughly safe targets. But even these most fl agrant attempts to defy con-
vention—using targets that seem especially safe for xenophobic and racist 
mockery—had to deal with the realities of discourse on race in the 2000s.  
 NOTES 
 1.  Even if one person laughs, Bergson believes that person serves the larger 
societal interest and imagines themselves part of a group.  
 2.  President Bush’s Address on Terrorism Before a Joint Meeting of Congress, 
21 September 2001.  
 3.  See the Transcript of the Candidates’ First Debate in the Presidential 
Campaign, 1 October 2004.  
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Bergson, Henri. 1980. Laughter. In  Comedy , ed. Wylie Sypher, 61–190. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press.  
 Caldwell, John Thornton. 1995.  Televisuality: Style, Crisis, and Authority in 
American Television . New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.  
 Cohen, Ted. 1999.  Jokes: Philosophical Thoughts on Joking Matters . Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.  
 Day, Amber. 2011.  Satire and Dissent: Interventions in Contemporary Political 
Debate . Bloomington: University of Indiana Press.  
 Freud, Sigmund. 1963.  Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious . New York: 
Norton.  
 Genzlinger, Neil. 2009. No Puppet to Political Correctness.  The New York Times , 
December 9.  
 Gray, Jonathan, Jeffrey P. Jones, and Ethan Thompson (ed). 2009.  Satire TV: Politics 
and Comedy in the Post-Network Era . New York: New York University Press.  
 Holt, Jennifer. 2011.  Empires of Entertainment: Media Industries and the Politics 
of Deregulation, 1980–1996 . New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.  
DUMMIES AND DEMOGRAPHICS: ISLAMOPHOBIA AS MARKET... 137

 Hughes, Geoffrey. 2010.  Political Correctness: A History of Semantics and Culture . 
Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.  
 Ignatiev, Noel. 1995.  How the Irish Became White . New York: Routledge.  
 Jacobs-Huey, Lanita. 2006. The Arab is the New Nigger: African American 
Comics Confront the Irony and Tragedy of September 11.  Transforming 
Anthropology 14: 60–64.  
 Jones, Jeffrey P. 2010.  Entertaining Politics: Satiric Television and Political 
Engagement . Lanham: Rowman and Littlefi eld. 
 Lessing, Doris. 2004. Censorship. In  Time Bites: Views and Reviews , 7–12. 
London: Fourth Estate.  
 Lewin, Tamar, and Gustav Niebuhr. 2001. Attacks and Harassment Continue on 
Middle Eastern People and Mosques.  The New York Times , September 18.  
 Limon, John. 2000.  Stand-Up Comedy in Theory, or, Abjection in America . 
Durham: Duke University Press.  
 Lowry, Brian. 2009 The Jeff Dunham Show.  Variety , October 22.  
 Luscombe, Belinda. 2009. The Puppet Master.  Time , June 8.  
 Miller, Joshua R. 2008. Comedian Defends Achmed the Dead Terrorist Puppet 
Routine Against South African Ban.  Fox News , October 2.  
 Mintz, Lawrence E. 1999. American Humor as Unifying and Divisive.  Humor 12: 
237–252.  
 Mooallem, Jon. 2009. Comedy for Dummies.  The New York Times Magazine , 
November 1, 38–43.  
 Nafi cy, Hamid. 1997. Mediating the Other: American Pop Culture Representations 
of Postrevolutionary Iran. In  The U.S. Media and the Middle East: Image and 
Perception , ed. Yahya Kamalipour, 73–90. Westport: Praeger.  
 Nowatzki, Robert. 2006. Paddy Jumps Jim Crow: Irish Americans and Blackface 
Minstrelsy.  Éire-Ireland 41: 162–184.  
 Ridha, Jennifer R. 2003. Federal Racial Profi ling.  The New York Times , June 22, 
WK10. 
 Roediger, David R. 2007.  The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the 
American Working Class . London: Verso.  
 Saper, Bernard. 1995. Joking in the Context of Political Correctness.  Humor 8: 
65–76. 
 Spigel, Lynn. 2004. Entertainment Wars: Television Culture After 9/11.  American 
Quarterly 56: 235–270.  
 Sturken, Marita. 2007.  Tourists of History: Memory, Kitsch, and Consumerism from 
Oklahoma City to Ground Zero . Durham: Duke University Press.  
138 
P. SCEPANSKI

139
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2_8
 Excessive Stand-Up, the Culture Wars, 
and ’90s TV  
 Evan   Elkins  
 E.   Elkins () 
 Colorado State University ,   Fort Collins ,  CO ,  USA 
 e-mail: evan.elkins@colostate.edu 
 Recent years have seen renewed debates over comedy and political 
correctness in American culture. Incidents such as Daniel Tosh’s 2012 on-
stage suggestion that a heckler should be raped or the discovery of offen-
sive tweets from new  Daily Show host Trevor Noah have produced outcries 
and discourse regarding the appropriateness of joking about certain topics 
as well as public laments from comedians that ‘P.C. culture’ constrains 
their freedom of expression. Because questions of appropriateness, propri-
ety, and political correctness are so central to contemporary comedy, this is 
a good time to revisit three instances of controversial stand-up comedy on 
US network television during the 1990s, all of which point to the changes 
and continuities in more contemporary debates. 
 In particular, I will revisit Andrew Dice Clay and Martin Lawrence’s 
controversial  Saturday Night Live hosting gigs (1990 and 1993, respec-
tively) and Bill Hicks’s censored  Late Show with David Letterman appear-
ance from 1993. These performances are all notable for having been 
policed, regulated, or censored in some fashion; some of the comics were 
banned from these respective programs, and some led others to boycott 
the programs. The fl aps over Lawrence, Clay, and Hicks’s routines came 

out of two contexts—one cultural and the other industrial. The fi rst is the 
various political, social, and regulatory public battles over art, free speech, 
and political correctness usually characterized as the ‘culture wars’. These 
extended from the Reagan 1980s into various debates over art and politics 
in the 1990s. The second is US network television during what Amanda 
Lotz ( 2007 , 12) refers to as the ‘multichannel transition’, the period of 
widespread expansion and change in the television industry occurring 
between 1985 and 2005. These contexts each characterize certain dis-
courses, regulatory acts, and political and aesthetic strategies existing at 
multiple levels of bureaucratic power, artistic practice, and audience activity. 
 Specifi cally, these performances characterize the uneasy existence of 
stand-up comedy on US television at an important moment of transition 
in US TV that shaped public discourses about comedy and offense. On 
one hand, the highly performative and improvisational characteristics of 
stand-up afford it a visual banality and unpredictability seemingly at odds 
with both the medium’s ‘televisual’ style during this period as well as its 
imperative to police and contain overtly offensive material. On the other 
hand, Lawrence, Clay, and Hicks all represent different versions of a highly 
popular and promotable anti-P.C. ‘bad boy’ comic persona that was a sta-
ple of comedy clubs, late night programs, and cable stand-up specials at 
the time. Such tensions also highlight network TV’s ambivalent adoption 
and rejection of offensive material within the competing contexts of con-
servative culture wars and deregulation of the television industries. While 
this was an era in which the ‘big three’ networks increasingly found them-
selves competing with the looser affordances of niche cable programming 
and the Fox network, they still had to maintain their position as exhibitors 
of more mainstream entertainment during a period when certain sectors 
of American art and culture were under fi re from various watchdog groups 
and the US government. 
 CULTURE WARS, THE MULTICHANNEL TRANSITION, 
AND STAND-UP COMEDY 
 The ‘culture wars’ refer to a wide-ranging series of debates and contro-
versies surrounding art and culture considered offensive or transgressive 
in some way.  1 Although rooted in long-held binaries of left/right, pro-
gressive/conservative, and Christian/secular, the culture wars of the late 
1980s and early 1990s are often associated with two art exhibits in par-
ticular: Andres Serrano’s  Piss Christ (1987), a photograph of a crucifi x 
submerged in the artist’s urine, and photographer Robert Mapplethorpe’s 
140 
E. ELKINS

retrospective  The Perfect Moment , which contained explicitly homoerotic 
photographs. In 1989,  Piss Christ attracted the attention of Reverend 
Donald Wildmon, chairman of the American Family Association (AFA), 
a fundamentalist Christian organization promoting conservative val-
ues and politics. Wildmon sent a letter to Congress decrying the work 
and initiated a letter-writing campaign. The same year, Mapplethorpe’s 
retrospective resulted in a public and political outcry when it arrived at 
Washington, D.C.’s Corcoran Gallery of Art. The fervor over  Piss Christ 
and Mapplethorpe in particular led to former US Senator Jesse Helms’ 
ultimately failed attempt to cut funding for the National Endowment 
for the Arts (NEA) the same year. During this period, the culture war 
debates spilled over into countless venues, including congressional hear-
ings, newspaper editorials, court cases,  2 and perhaps most infamously, 
former Republican presidential candidate Pat Buchanan’s speech at the 
1992 Republican National Convention. Often dubbed the ‘culture war’ 
speech, Buchanan’s address outlined his vision of a polarized America and 
supported a right-wing, fundamentalist Christian set of values while pos-
iting supporters of these values as directly opposed to the purportedly 
left-wing, secular pole represented by Democratic presidential candidate 
Bill Clinton. 
 While the culture war debates were prominent among the spheres of 
high art, news media, and partisan politics, they also focused on popular 
culture and television. In one example, bowing to pressure and boycott 
threats from religious groups (including the AFA), Pepsi dropped singer 
Madonna from its advertising campaigns in 1989. However, the most 
notable war over pop-culture censorship surrounded the rap group 2 Live 
Crew and their album  As Nasty As They Wanna Be . In 1990, a Florida 
record store clerk was arrested for selling a copy of the album, which a 
US court had recently ruled obscene after complaints from, once again, 
the AFA. Shortly after, 2 Live Crew was arrested after performing songs 
from the album at a concert. Eventually, the band and record clerk would 
be acquitted and an appeals court would overturn the initial obscenity 
ruling.  3 Throughout the ordeal, 2 Live Crew became a convenient target 
for conservative pundits and politicians attempting to build capital with 
their conservative base by condemning what they considered obscene and 
offensive material. 
 Writing in 1992 at the heart of the culture wars, Lawrence Grossberg 
outlines the importance of these practices and discourses for conserva-
tive politicians, who ‘have won and held political power only by waging a 
EXCESSIVE STAND-UP, THE CULTURE WARS, AND ’90S TV 141

cultural war’. As he suggests, ‘If the new conservatism can accomplish its 
victory directly within the space of culture and everyday life, it will have 
already won the terrain on which any democratic state, no matter who 
controls it and with what ideology, must operate’ ( 1992 , 257–258). Thus, 
lest examples from popular culture and television seem frivolous or banal 
compared to the court cases and congressional hearings just described, they 
in fact exist within a terrain of hegemony, power, and discourse that cir-
culates beyond the more explicitly ‘political’ realms of the state. As Jeffrey 
P. Jones points out, the ideological battles waged in the culture wars ‘have 
been conducted as much through social institutions or cultural patterns 
and behaviours (such as media, language, lifestyle, academia, religion) 
as through formal politics’. Furthermore, ‘the battlegrounds are quite 
fl uid, though, to the point where cultural battles can be waged in political 
forums […] and political battles may be waged in cultural forums such 
as talk television’ ( 2010 , 50). Indeed, S. Craig Watkins notes that during 
the culture wars, a key battleground for conservative groups’ attempts to 
achieve ideological dominance was the popular media, which they viewed 
‘as a bastion of permissiveness and nihilism that erodes public civility and 
antagonizes traditional American values by promoting violence, sexual 
promiscuity, and familial disintegration’ ( 1998 , 29). In addition to this 
more nuanced understanding of the relationship between popular culture 
and politics, the three examples of regulation and censorship discussed 
herein represent complex articulations of race and gender that erode the 
simplistic binaries that tend to circulate within culture-war discourse. 
 In many ways, television during its ‘multichannel transition’ was mov-
ing against a tide of new conservatism that seemed to dominate much of 
the national discourse around the culture wars. Due to the development of 
new media technologies, deregulation of ownership and content, and espe-
cially the rise of basic and subscription cable networks, broadcast television 
shifted its programming strategies during this era (Lotz  2007 , 12–15). As 
Lotz points out, ‘Instead of needing to design programming likely to be 
least objectionable to the entire family, broadcast networks—and particu-
larly cable channels—increasingly developed programming that might be 
most satisfying to specifi c audience members’ ( 2007 , 14). An inevitable 
consequence of straying from the ‘least objectionable’  strategy that char-
acterized broadcast television in the network era was a move toward edgier 
content that would hopefully pry eyes away from cable’s laxer decency 
standards. The late-night variety and talk show became one of the formats 
where networks could offer more audacious material. 
142 
E. ELKINS

 While late-night broadcast television has been a space more permissive 
of excessive and offensive performance, in the 1990s it was, and is still, 
bound to the Federal Communications Commission’s (FCC) decency 
rules. However, the US Supreme Court case  Federal Communications 
Commission v. Pacifi ca Foundation (1978) resulted in a post-prime-time 
‘safe harbor’ enabling looser restrictions for broadcast content between 
midnight and 6:00 am (Hendershot  1998 , 79–81). This safe harbor, and 
the resulting ‘transgressive’ or ‘indecent’ material that might air during 
that time, has helped sustain a vision of late-night viewers as constitut-
ing part of what Lynn Spigel calls the ‘fringe time public’ (Spigel  2008 , 
270). For Spigel, such viewers maintain a ‘queer relation to the entire 
apparatus of TV time’ insofar as they exist outside of the normative, nine- 
to- fi ve work paradigm and watch programming other than the fi rst-run, 
prime-time material that holds a more central place in US television cul-
ture ( 2008 , 270–271). It follows, then, that the ‘fringe time public’,’ or at 
least the sector of it that views late-night programming, will likely prefer a 
different, and perhaps even bawdier, form of humour. Still, while it makes 
sense that late night was a space where networks would exhibit such come-
dians, network television still had to tread a fi ne line between promoting 
these fi gures around their extreme personae and restricting that excess 
within the strictures of network television content. As David Marc notes 
regarding stand-up on television, ‘the fetishization of “dirty words” on 
television puts severe limits on stand-up text. It is perhaps principally for 
these reasons that the stand-up comedian has been largely squeezed out 
of prime time into what the industry terms “marginal hours”’ ( 1996 , 23). 
 Similarly, stand-up comedy has been at once a mainstay of US television 
and a marginalized factor in histories of the medium. On one hand, this is 
surprising, considering the importance of stand-up as not only a form of 
television but a feeder system of talent into the television industries as well. 
On the other hand, comprised largely of monologues told to a generally 
unseen audience, stand-up is at odds with the excessive visual style of ‘tele-
visuality’, which John Thornton Caldwell posits as the reigning aesthetic 
of US television during the 1980s and 1990s. However, while visually 
banal on the surface, stand-up comedy communicates its excess through 
the performativity of the comedians and the often ribald  content of their 
acts. As Caldwell points out, televisuality is 'conceived of as a  presenta-
tional attitude , a display of knowing  exhibitionism' ( 1995 , 5). Indeed, 
such a description is in many ways similar to Marc’s characterization of the 
comedy-variety show, and its ‘presentational teleforms: stand- up comedy, 
EXCESSIVE STAND-UP, THE CULTURE WARS, AND ’90S TV 143

impersonation, and the blackout sketch’, which strive for ‘the spectacle 
of excess’ (Marc  1996 , 21). He notes that by ‘eschewing the protection 
of narrative superstructure and continuity’, stand-up ‘is one of the most 
intense and compelling of modern performance arts’ ( 1996 , 22). Caldwell 
draws on Marc’s analysis of the comedy-variety show, suggesting, ‘pre-
sentational comedy […] involves the traits one associates with liveness: 
improvisation, snafus, and spontaneity’ ( 1995 , 30). Thus, even if stand-up 
is less ‘visual’ than other, fl ashier forms of television at the time, it exhibits 
televisuality’s ‘stylizing performance’ ( 1995 , 5) through excessive person-
alities and star images. However, individual performances based in rhetori-
cal and actual violence against people, groups, institutions, ideologies, and 
social mores could still only push so far against the regulatory mechanism 
of network television standards and practices. In a few instances, comedic 
performances crossed, or at least threatened to cross, these lines.  
 ‘BAD BOYS’ ON LATE NIGHT 
 The examples I look at in this section are far from the only instances 
of stand-up comics going too far during this time period. Though not 
nationally televised (at least until its circulation on the news after the fact), 
Roseanne Barr’s loud and playfully obscene rendition of  The Star Spangled 
Banner before a 1990 Major League Baseball game between the San 
Diego Padres and the Cincinnati Reds drew the ire of conservatives like 
columnist George Will and President George Bush (Rowe  1995 , 50–52). 
In another untelevised incident, at the 1993 Friars’ Club Roast of Whoopi 
Goldberg, actor Ted Danson (then Goldberg’s boyfriend) performed, in 
blackface, a racially charged act written by Danson and Goldberg (Haggins 
 2007 , 166–169). In 1994, ‘alternative’ comedian Bobcat Goldthwait was 
banned from  The Tonight Show after dousing one of the set’s couches in 
lighter fl uid and setting it ablaze. On the same token, it should not be 
assumed that these were by any means the fi rst instances of US broadcast 
television regulating excessive stand-up. On  Saturday Night Live , Richard 
Pryor in 1975 and Sam Kinison in 1986 were both placed on seven-second 
delay. And while there have been fewer controversies surrounding stand-
 up comedians on broadcast television specifi cally since the culture wars of 
the 1980s and 1990s, the FCC complaints over U2 singer Bono’s use of 
profanity on the 2003 Golden Globe Awards and FCC fi nes brought after 
Janet Jackson’s 2004 Super Bowl halftime performance indicated that 
battles over appropriate content on broadcast television would continue 
into the new millennium. 
144 
E. ELKINS

 But let’s return back to the early nineties. Andrew Dice Clay’s 12 May 
1990 performance as host of  Saturday Night Live came at the peak of 
his career. At the time, he represented the archetypical ‘bad boy’ comic 
that existed in the stand-up world but also characterized the ‘shock jock’ 
sensibility of Howard Stern, Don Imus, and later Clay cohorts Opie and 
Anthony. In his stand-up act Clay offered affronts against multicultural-
ism, feminism, and other movements promoting social justice and equi-
table treatment but that were often derisively dubbed ‘political correctness’ 
by conservatives and comedians alike. This drew him a large audience in 
the early 1990s, and he became the fi rst stand-up comedian to sell out 
Madison Square Garden twice. Accordingly, his act was often sexist, rac-
ist, and homophobic, and this combination of celebrity and offense made 
him a controversial character. Given the level of his fame, Clay was in many 
ways a natural choice to host  Saturday Night Live in 1990. At the same 
time, the profane nature of his act would seem to be a poor fi t for a live 
program so notoriously skittish about dirty words. By this point, he had 
already been banned from MTV for reciting an explicit monologue on the 
1989 MTV Video Awards, and considering the more permissive nature of 
MTV’s censorship rules, it is unsurprising that Clay’s appearance on the 
presumably more restrictive venue of network television would be greeted 
with public controversy and unease from NBC’s Standards and Practices 
department. Adding to an already substantial level of publicity surrounding 
Clay’s appearance,  Saturday Night Live cast member Nora Dunn and musi-
cal guest Sinead O’Connor boycotted the episode as a protest against Clay’s 
misogynistic act (Donlon  1990 ). Furthermore, as a result of the comedian’s 
raunchy routine, the network announced that it would place the program 
on a seven-second delay in case Clay swore on the air (just as they had done 
for Pryor and Kinison in past years) (Shales and Miller  2003 , 354). 
 Although the episode brought reasonably high ratings, the news that 
Clay would appear on the program and the subsequent outcry would 
prove to be more eventful than the actual episode. The episode’s cold 
open is a parody on  It’s a Wonderful Life , which comments directly on the 
uproar over Clay’s hosting gig. In the skit, the devil (Jon Lovitz) shows a 
suicidal Clay what life would be like had Clay not been born and, thus, if 
he would not have hosted the episode of  Saturday Night Live . In a wink-
ing nod to the controversy leading up to the episode, as a result of Clay’s 
absence, Nora Dunn is killed when she is crushed by Sinead O’Connor’s 
amplifi er. The crowd’s uproarious laughter at the revelation that the legs 
under the amplifi er belong to Dunn indicate that the joke’s true punchline 
EXCESSIVE STAND-UP, THE CULTURE WARS, AND ’90S TV 145

was her mock-killing rather than the sketch’s self-referential commentary 
on the controversy. Following the cold open, Clay’s jittery and largely 
inscrutable monologue is comprised of material about telling clean jokes 
and one dirty, misogynistic joke about brides wearing white. The rest of 
the episode is generally garden-variety  Saturday Night Live , except for an 
after-school special parody wherein Clay explains sex to his son (played by 
Mike Myers) in particularly lewd terms. 
 The hosting gig would appear to be the beginning of the end for Clay. 
After the critical and commercial failure of his feature fi lm,  The Adventures of 
Ford Fairlane , released in the summer of 1990, his career began to fall into 
a decline. Only two months after his  Saturday Night Live appearance, the 
 New York Times would write, ‘Popular entertainment does, after all, have 
a revulsion threshold. Andrew Dice Clay should know. He stepped over 
it and is now desperately trying to salvage his career as a stand-up comic’ 
(O’Connor  1990a ). By the end of the year, the same writer blamed Clay 
for two of the television year’s most ‘dreadful moments, the kind that trig-
ger an involuntary shudder. Andrew Dice Clay gets credit for scoring twice 
in this regard: being the host of “Saturday Night Live,” and weepily whin-
ing about his critics on  The Arsenio Hall Show ’ (O’Connor  1990b ). Several 
years after the fact,  Saturday Night Live and NBC executives refl ected on 
Clay’s hosting gig as an unfortunate period in the program’s history. For 
example, NBC Vice President of Late Night Rick Ludwin calls booking 
Clay onto the program a ‘professional mistake’ made without knowledge 
of the misogynistic nature of his act (Shales and Miller  2003 , 354). 
 Looking at Clay’s career and performance on  Saturday Night Live , it 
should be evident that humour considered ‘politically incorrect’ or ‘offen-
sive’ in some way, or comedy that has been subject to censorship, does not 
necessarily imply a politically progressive stance. Thus, while the ‘culture 
wars’ described in the preceding section are often framed in the binaries 
I outlined earlier, the confl ict between decrying the hateful material in 
Clay’s act and denouncing censorship on broadcast television indicates 
that these debates take place on a more complicated and multivalent matrix 
of power. The same can be said of another example of excessive stand-up 
on  Saturday Night Live : Martin Lawrence’s 1993 hosting gig. While most 
of the controversy surrounding Clay’s performance on  Saturday Night 
Live involved the hype leading up to his appearance on the program, the 
outcry over Lawrence’s performance stemmed directly from the material 
in his monologue. 
146 
E. ELKINS

 On the 19 February 1993 episode of  Saturday Night Live , Lawrence 
presented one of the lewder moments in the program’s history. Beginning 
his monologue with a comment suggesting he needs to watch himself 
because of the network censors, Lawrence proceeds to joke about John 
Bobbitt and the supposed anger and malice of women in the 1990s. This 
leads into an infamous, extended bit about poor feminine hygiene:
 I’m meeting a lot of women out there, and you got some beautiful women, 
but … some of you are not washing your ass properly … I tell a woman in a 
minute, douche! … Some women don’t like when you tell them that, when 
you straightforward with them … I say, well, I don’t give a damn what you do, 
put a Tic-Tac in your ass. Put a Cert in your ass … But if you’re not clean in 
your proper areas I can’t, you know, kiss all over the places I wanna kiss. You 
know, some women’ll let you go down, you know what I’m sayin’, knowin’ 
they got a yeast infection … Come up with dough all on your damn lip.  4  
 Even by today’s standards, the bit crosses lines rarely crossed on network 
television. Indeed, Lawrence’s monologue was pulled from the program 
in all subsequent reruns. The whitewashing of Lawrence’s monologue is 
made literal during rebroadcasts of Lawrence’s episode. When the epi-
sode has been rerun in syndication, an onscreen disclaimer read in a pro-
fessional, sober monotone by long-time  Saturday Night Live writer Jim 
Downey replaces the offending portion of Lawrence’s monologue:
 At this point in his monologue, Martin begins a commentary on what 
he considers the decline in standards of feminine hygiene in this country. 
Although we at  Saturday Night Live take no stand on this issue one way or 
the other, network policy prevents us from re-broadcasting this portion of 
his remarks… It was a frank and lively presentation, and nearly cost us all our 
jobs. We now return to the conclusion of Martin’s monologue. 
 The cheeky nature of the voice-over, as well as Downey’s faux-sincere 
delivery, provide a safe, ironic distance from the black male excess of 
Lawrence’s monologue. Indeed, there is a conscious and even jokingly 
refl exive sanitation of Lawrence’s material, as Downey continues, ‘Martin 
feels… that the failure of many young women to bathe thoroughly is a 
serious problem that demands our attention. He explores this problem, 
citing numerous examples from his personal experience, and ends by pro-
posing several imaginative solutions.’ By couching the monologue in aca-
demic terms, the program implies a heightened address that, along with 
EXCESSIVE STAND-UP, THE CULTURE WARS, AND ’90S TV 147

Downey’s elocution, is coded as ‘white’ to counteract the now-censored 
black masculinity from the initial broadcast. 
 As in the case of Andrew Dice Clay, however, outlining network cen-
sorship should not imply a full-throated endorsement of the censored 
material. Indeed, Kristal Brent Zook notes that Lawrence’s monologue 
was entirely in keeping with his misogynist sense of humour, manifest in 
his feature fi lm  A Thin Line Between Love and Hate , his concert fi lm  You 
So Crazy , and his appearances on HBO’s stand-up showcases  Def Comedy 
Jam (which he hosted) and  One Night Stand (Zook  1999 ). Zook notes 
that this misogyny is at odds with much of the contemporaneous public 
discourse about Lawrence’s starring Fox vehicle  Martin , which framed 
the program as a tale of a generally functional, happy relationship between 
Martin Payne (Lawrence) and his girlfriend Gina Waters (Tisha Campbell), 
thus ignoring the explicitly patriarchal dimensions of the program ( 1999 , 
64). In her criticism of  Martin , Robin Means Coleman also suggests that 
the program relied largely on black stereotypes and misogynist humour, 
writing, ‘In full view of young white viewers (the series’ primary audi-
ence) Martin belittled not only Black women, but cultural signifi ers at 
times attributed to Black females’ (Means Coleman  1998 ). That Means 
Coleman laments in particular the presentation of intra-racial animosity 
to a white audience recalls Christine Acham’s discussion of black comedi-
ans like Chris Rock exposing the ‘internal critique’ existent within black 
American cultures. As Acham points out, once black comedians begin air-
ing grievances in white, mainstream contexts of national television, ‘the 
venue can change the meaning. No longer are you speaking to an audi-
ence that has a shared historical understanding underlying the humour’ 
( 2004 , 182). 
 Still, while Clay was undoubtedly controversial, his white, Brooklyn- 
based masculine persona protected him from the often literal polic-
ing to which people embodying other identity groups were subjected. 
As Kimberlé Crenshaw points out, ‘While 2 Live Crew was performing 
in an adults-only club in Hollywood, Florida, Andrew Dice Clay was 
 performing nationwide on HBO’ ( 1991 ). This double standard suggests 
that while Clay’s exaggerated version of familiar white-masculine aggres-
sion could be domesticated safely enough for late-night network televi-
sion (MTV ban notwithstanding), the offensive humour and excessive 
black masculinity represented by Martin Lawrence’s stand-up made for 
a more volatile mix on network TV. While the misogyny of Lawrence’s 
148 
E. ELKINS

monologue is deserving of harsh criticism, it enters a cultural conversa-
tion that is more complex than a binary of offensive/inoffensive based 
merely around the jokes’ content. In addition to stand-up comedy, 
Lawrence maintains an association with early 1990s hip-hop culture due 
to his hosting gig on Russell Simmons’  Def Comedy Jam and his existence 
within a Fox milieu that promoted its brand around hip-hop aesthetics 
and signifi cation. As Bambi Haggins and Amanda Lotz point out, while 
the program ‘offered a comedy product apropos of television’s zeitgeist 
in the early 1990s’ ( 2008 , 159), it belongs in a broader context. They 
write, ‘Russell Simmons brought black and “blue” comedy to HBO at the 
moment hip-hop was blowing up into mainstream American popular cul-
ture.’ As implied by Crenshaw’s comparison between Andrew Dice Clay 
and 2 Live Crew, Lawrence’s monologue can be understood in concert 
with public battles over rap music and hip-hop culture from the same time 
period. The censure of Lawrence’s monologue is at once an ambivalent 
reaction against hatefully misogynist humour as well as a policing of ethni-
cally coded performance in a predominately white space. 
 Due to their hugely popular stand-up acts and television programs, 
Clay and Lawrence were fi rmly entrenched in the early 1990s zeitgeist. 
However, more obscure ‘alternative’ comedians also found themselves 
facing network regulation during this time. Already well known in various 
stand-up comedy scenes around the country and especially in the United 
Kingdom, Bill Hicks began to achieve a measure of mainstream success in 
the late 1980s and early 1990s along with other ‘alt-comics’ like Janeane 
Garofalo, Denis Leary, and Steven Wright. Hicks, a Texas-based stand-up 
with a signifi cant British fan base, but only a cult following in the United 
States, was a regular guest on David Letterman’s talk shows in the late 
1980s and early 1990s. On 1 October 1993, Hicks taped a stand-up seg-
ment for  The Late Show with David Letterman , where he told jokes target-
ing anti-abortion activists. Hicks says:
 You know who’s really bugging me these days. These pro-lifers. You ever 
look at their faces? ‘I’m pro-life!’ … Boy, they look it don’t they? They just 
exude joie de vivre. You just want to hang with them and play Trivial Pursuit 
all night long. You know what bugs me about them? If you’re so pro-life, 
do me a favor. Don’t lock arms and block medical clinics. If you’re so pro- 
life, lock arms and block cemeteries. Let’s see how committed you are to 
this idea. 
EXCESSIVE STAND-UP, THE CULTURE WARS, AND ’90S TV 149

 In addition, Hicks mocked the Christian practice of wearing crucifi xes as 
jewelry and the absurdity of Easter celebrations involving ‘giant bunny rab-
bits’ and chocolate eggs. After the bit, Letterman invited Hicks to sit beside 
the desk, making the good-natured crack that Hicks should have fun read-
ing his mail for the next few weeks. That evening, however, Hicks received 
a call from  Late Show executive producer Robert Morton notifying him 
that the set had been cut and would not air that evening (Lahr  1993 ). 
 While Clay’s performance was controversial due largely to the audi-
ence’s preceding knowledge of his persona and act and Lawrence’s 
because of the misogynistic nature of his monologue, Hicks’s performance 
was cut due to the fear of backlash from right-wing groups and sponsors. 
Furthermore, his was the only one of these three that, until recently, never 
made it to air. Of the three acts discussed in this study, his is the most 
blatantly political, inasmuch as it touches on the hot-button partisan issue 
of abortion, one of the mainstays of the culture wars. Indeed, the battle 
over representations of abortion on television predates  Roe v. Wade , the 
US Supreme Court ruling that eased federal and state restrictions on abor-
tion (D’Acci  1997 ). After the ruling, fundamentalist groups like the AFA, 
Pat Robertson’s Christian Coalition of America, and Jerry Falwell’s Moral 
Majority publically opposed abortion and a woman’s right to choose, and 
as I have discussed, such groups saw television and popular culture as 
one of the battlegrounds on which these cultural wars should be waged. 
That  The Late Show cut the act pre-emptively speaks to the power of such 
groups’ ability to pressure networks and advertisers. 
 After the Letterman taping, Hicks discussed the incident on Howard 
Stern’s radio program and Austin Public Access program  CapZeyeZ . In the 
 CapZeyeZ interview, Hicks tells host Dave Prewitt that he appreciates public 
access and decries network television for its reliance on advertising dollars 
and its unwillingness to promote experimental or controversial material. 
Signifi cantly, then, the fi ght against censorship is framed not only as a battle 
against generally oppressive social norms, but against the capitalist exigen-
cies of broadcast television. As Hicks says in the interview, ‘I thought I 
lived in the U.S.A., United States of America, and actually we live in the 
U.S. of A., the United States of Advertising. Freedom of expression is guar-
anteed—if you’ve got the money.’  5 Ultimately, insofar as Hicks’s set was 
banned due to generally progressive viewpoints denouncing the radical, 
right-wing tactics of many anti-abortionists (although it’s worth mention-
ing that the act also contained homophobic humour), it is in many ways 
a more admirable example of fi ghting against network television strictures 
150 
E. ELKINS

than those of Clay and Lawrence, which prop up traditionally dominant 
power structures. On the same token, as a battle between network televi-
sion executives and advertisers trying to avoid angering right-wing groups 
and an explicitly left-wing comedian mocking uptight pro-life groups, 
Hicks’s  Late Show appearance offers a neat summation of the polarized—
and polarizing—discourses, functions, and practices of television regulation 
during the period sustaining these culture wars.  
 
CONCLUSION 
 Network television maintains its complex relationship to offensive mate-
rial, at once celebrating and castigating it. Indicating television’s pro-
pensity to both promote and refl ect on its most sordid histories once 
enough time has passed to heal the wounds, two of the incidents dis-
cussed recently made reappearances, of sorts. On the 30 January 2009 
episode of  The Late Show , sixteen years after Hicks’s performance and fi f-
teen years after his death from cancer, Letterman invited Hicks’s mother 
onto the program for an interview and fi nally aired the suppressed set. In 
an unusual moment of sincerity for the broadcast (though also refl ecting 
the program’s tendency to look back unsentimentally on its own past as 
Letterman approached his retirement in 2015), Letterman apologized to 
Hicks’s mother and took responsibility for cutting the set in the fi rst place. 
Lawrence’s censored monologue from seventeen years earlier made a less 
serious comeback during actor Jon Hamm’s monologue on the 30 January 
2010 episode of  Saturday Night Live . During the monologue, Hamm 
alludes to fi ctional pre- Mad Men gigs, one of which was an appearance on 
 Def Comedy Jam . The program cuts to Hamm, dressed as his  Mad Men 
character Don Draper in a suit and holding a tumbler of whiskey, standing 
behind a stand-up microphone and dryly reciting the following adaptation 
of Lawrence’s monologue: ‘Have you seen them? You know what I’m 
talking about—those round the way girls… They need to wash they ass.’ 
The program then cuts to archival footage of a predominately black  Def 
Comedy Jam audience laughing uproariously. That the joke is based on the 
incongruity of the paradigmatically white Hamm in a distinctly black con-
text, and the according incongruity of the suave Draper/Hamm reciting 
such ‘debased’ material, indicates that such humour’s racial dimensions 
maintain an uneasy presence on broadcast television. Even as it represents 
its own way of making amends for an earlier act of censorship, it does so 
EXCESSIVE STAND-UP, THE CULTURE WARS, AND ’90S TV 151

by packaging Lawrence’s monologue within Hamm’s broad appeal—a far 
cry from Letterman’s much more honest and diffi cult contrition. 
 Still, while US television’s allowances for dirty or willfully offen-
sive humour have increased a great deal since these incidents, the blu-
est material remains on premium cable, streaming platforms like Netfl ix, 
and basic cable channels like Comedy Central (particularly during the 
Comedy Central  Roasts ), Adult Swim, and FXX. Nevertheless, contempo-
rary domestic (and domesticated) network sitcoms are more amenable to 
relatively offensive humour, as a viewing of, say,  Two Broke Girls will indi-
cate. Although it would be tempting to attribute this to an inexorable and 
ethereal loosening of ‘standards’ or ‘mores’ due to the evolution or de-
evolution of American society, a more accurate reading is that broadcast 
television comedy, in what Lotz has called the ‘post- network era’ (Lotz 
 2007 ), must continue to compete with cable and web comedy for viewers. 
Still, such industrial dimensions must always take into account the social 
contexts in which they are embedded. Looking back at recent history, 
then, the examples of Clay, Lawrence, and Hicks indicate much about the 
confl icts that would continue to exist within the US TV industry and US 
political culture as well. 
 Indeed, these incidents speak to both the longevity of debates regard-
ing comedy and political correctness, but they also indicate how the indus-
trial and technological mechanisms that sustain them have shifted over 
time—from decisions made by powerful television executives to debates 
produced primarily by online activists and comedians speaking directly to 
Internet-based publications like  Salon and  The Daily Beast . While complex 
debates over the cultural politics of Clay, Lawrence, and Hicks’s acts came 
largely out of top-down actions from executive boardrooms, more con-
temporary rhetoric over the appropriateness of rape jokes and racist and 
misogynist comedy is often produced from Internet-based writers. Some 
of these writers are professionals or freelance pop-culture commentators, 
but some are simply fans who are tired of comedians ‘punching down’, 
to use an increasingly common parlance. That many of the more contem-
porary debates over comedy and political correctness revolve less around 
the appropriateness of ‘blue’ material and more about the cultural and 
identity politics of certain kinds of comics and jokes also indicates that at 
the center of debates over comedy, offense, and freedom of expression is a 
much- needed critique of humour steeped in patriarchal aggression. While 
the politics of comedy, offense, and freedom of expression are thorny and 
complex, this criticism is, at least, welcome and necessary.  
152 
E. ELKINS

 NOTES 
 1.   For more thorough history and analysis, see Bauerlein and Grantham 
( 2009 ); Bolton ( 1992 ); Heins ( 1993 ); Hunter ( 1991 ); Wallis et al. ( 1999 ). 
 2.   For reprints of many documents pertaining to these debates, see Bolton 
( 1992 ). 
 3.   For a comparison of the 2 Live Crew and Mapplethorpe controversies, see 
Brigman ( 1992 ). 
 4.  Transcript from  
 SNLTranscripts.org   .  http://snltranscripts.jt.org/93/93nmono.phtml   
 5.   The  CapZeyeZ interview is available at
  http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=-8409129199157823217   
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Acham, Christine. 2004.  Revolution Televised: Prime Time and The Struggle for 
Black Power . Minneapolis: Minnesota University Press.  
 Bauerlein, Mark, and Ellen Grantham (ed). 2009.  National Endowment for the 
Arts: A History 1965–2008 . Washington: National Endowment for the Arts.  
 Bolton, Richard (ed). 1992.  Culture Wars: Documents from the Recent Controversies 
in the Arts . New York: New Press.  
 Brigman, William E. 1992. Pornography, Obscenity, and the Humanities: 
Mapplethorpe, 2 Live Crew and the Elitist Defi nition of Art. In  Rejuvenating 
the Humanities , ed. Ray B. Browne, and Marshall W. Fishwick, 55–66. Bowling 
Green: State University Popular Press.  
 Caldwell, John Thornton. 1995.  Televisuality: Style, Crisis, and Authority in 
American Television . New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.  
 Crenshaw, Kimberlé. 1991. Beyond Racism and Misogyny: Black Feminism and 2 
Live Crew.  Boston Review 16: 6. 
 D’Acci, Julie. 1997. Leading up to  Roe v. Wade : Television Documentaries in the 
Abortion Debate. In  Feminist Television Criticism: A Reader , ed. Charlotte 
Brunsdon, Julie D’Acci, and Lynn Spigel, 273–289. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.  
 Donlon, Brian. 1990. What Clay’s Hateful Humor Hath Wrought.  USA Today , 
May 11 .  
 Grossberg, Lawrence. 1992.  We Gotta Get Out of This Place: Popular Conservatism 
and Postmodern Culture . New York: Routledge.  
 Haggins, Bambi. 2007.  Laughing Mad: The Black Comic Persona in Post-Soul 
America . New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.  
 Haggins, Bambi, and Amanda D. Lotz. 2008. At Home on the Cutting Edge. In 
 The Essential HBO Reader , ed. Gary R.  Edgerton, and Jeffrey P.  Jones, 
151–171. Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky.  
EXCESSIVE STAND-UP, THE CULTURE WARS, AND ’90S TV 153

 Heins, Marjorie. 1993.  Sex, Sin, and Blasphemy: A Guide to America’s Censorship 
Wars . New York: New Press.  
 Hendershot, Heather. 1998.  Saturday Morning Censors: Television Regulation 
Before the V-Chip . Durham: Duke University Press.  
 Hunter, James Davison. 1991.  Culture Wars: The Struggle to Defi ne America . 
New York: Basic Books. 
 Jones, Jeffrey P. 2010.  Entertaining Politics: Satiric Television and Political 
Engagement . Lanham: Rowman and Littlefi eld. 
 Lahr, John. 1993. The Goat Boy Rises.  The New Yorker , November 1.  
 Lotz, Amanda D. 2007.  The Television Will Be Revolutionized . New York: NYU 
Press.  
 Marc, David. 1996.  Demographic Vistas: Television in American Culture . 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.  
 Means Coleman, Robin R. 1998.  African American Viewers and the Black 
Situation Comedy: Situating Racial Humor . New York: Garland Publishing.  
 O’Connor, John J.  1990a. Taking a Pratfall on the Nastiness Threshold.  The 
New York Times , July 22. 
 ———. 1990b. Innovative Shows? It was Far from a Bountiful Season.  The 
New York Times , December 30.  
 Rowe, Kathleen. 1995.  The Unruly Woman: Gender and the Genres of Laughter . 
Austin: University of Texas Press.  
 Shales, Tom, and James Andrew Miller. 2003.  Live from New York: An Uncensored 
History of Saturday Night Live . Boston: Black Bay Books.  
 Spigel, Lynn. 2008.  TV by Design: Modern Art and the Rise of Network Television . 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  
 Wallis, Brian, Marianne Weems, and Philip Yenawine (ed). 1999.  Art Matters: 
How the Culture Wars Changed America . New  York: New  York University 
Press.  
 Watkins, S. Craig. 1998.  Representing: Hip Hop Culture and The Production of 
Black Cinema . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  
 Zook, Kristal Brent. 1999.  Color by Fox: The Fox Network and The Revolution in 
Black Television . Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
154 
E. ELKINS

155
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2_9
 Tosh.0 , Convergence Comedy, 
and the ‘Post-PC’ TV Trickster  
 Ethan   Thompson  
 E.   Thompson  () 
 Texas A&M-Corpus Christi ,   Corpus Christi ,  TX ,  USA  
 e-mail: Ethan.Thompson@tamucc.edu 
 In the summer of 2010, comedian and television host Daniel Tosh pulled 
off a Comedy Central coup: his show,  Tosh . 0 , was drawing more viewers 
than the US cable network’s nightly cornerstone,  The Daily Show with 
Jon Stewart . True, Tosh only put one new episode on the air each week 
to Stewart’s ‘daily’, but in the land of basic cable comedy, this seemed 
a signifi cant milestone. The show had more than doubled its viewer-
ship from the previous, premiere summer, and Daniel Tosh was, in the 
words of  The New York Times , ‘indisputably the television comedian of 
the moment’ (Stelter  2010 ). Most surprisingly, Tosh had done it all on a 
cheaply produced clip show featuring online videos that many people had 
already seen or could easily see elsewhere. Originally conceived as an inex-
pensive format that would drive content to the Comedy Central website, 
the program successfully leveraged online videos as a free (or nearly free) 
source of content with the clip show format popularized by E!’s  Talk Soup 
(1991–2002) and  The Soup (2004–present). However, the popularity of 
 Tosh.0 has proved to be anything but ‘of the moment’. Going into its fi fth 
season in 2013,  Tosh.0 remained not only the most highly rated program 
on Comedy Central, but had become the highest rated program among 

men ages 18–34 across all channels on Tuesday nights (Levine  2012 ). By 
2015, it had not only maintained its ratings success on Comedy Central, 
but had been sold into broadcast syndication on Fox stations across the 
country (Block  2015 ). 
 This chapter will argue that the success of  Tosh.0 is not simply due to 
the combination of funny videos and a wise-cracking host, but how the 
program integrates participatory practices of online media into TV con-
tent, and how Tosh’s comedy is preoccupied with what appear to be the 
declining privileges of white masculinity. Tosh’s success is symptomatic of 
a particular moment in media culture where  what we laugh at and  what 
we feel about that laughing is in fl ux, due to technological and cultural 
change. Henry Jenkins ( 2006 ) has described how the sweeping changes of 
convergence culture refi gure relationships between media producers and 
consumers in provocative ways. And yet, in this new era of media culture, 
many of the traditional power relationships maintain prominence. For 
example, the ‘we laugh’ above is a problematic assumption, similar to how 
television comedy (such as  Tosh.0 ) presumes to speak for and to every-
one, yet is often calculated to specifi cally appeal to males aged 18–34. 
Since it now constitutes a long-running hit,  Tosh.0 is a prime example of 
media culture that begs to be analyzed in order to situate and understand 
the assumptions and privileges elided when males aged 18–34 stand in 
for the norm. Daniel Tosh deftly crosses boundaries between what is or 
isn’t socially acceptable to do or say, just as his show blurs boundaries 
between consumers and producers of comedy, and between viewer and 
host. This goes beyond the typical self-deprecation of many comedians, 
and seems key to his construction of a masculine identity privileged to 
engage in ‘politically incorrect’ comic commentary. The combination of 
these strategies helps explain why  Tosh.0 has managed to be the ‘comedy 
of the moment’ for so long. Tosh’s comedy incorporates participatory 
components and also turns upon shifting cultural politics and values in 
relation to identity. Tosh’s recurring jokes about race and ethnicity seem 
symptomatic of white male anxiety about ‘who gets to say what’ in an era 
of increased diversity, complaints of censoring due to ‘political correct-
ness’, and continued discomfort talking about race in particular.  Tosh.0 
is an important example to consider as representation and articulation of 
white masculinity in what has been referred to as a ‘post-politically cor-
rect’ moment in television—particularly in how the comedy seems preoc-
cupied with the politics of language and power. 
156 
E. THOMPSON

 Freud theorized that laughter relieved the anxieties produced by social 
repression. The joke is social subterfuge; it allows the getting around of 
social decorum and the explaining of reaction as involuntary. ‘A joke will 
allow us to exploit something ridiculous in our enemy which we could not, 
on account of obstacles in the way, bring forward openly or consciously; 
once again, then, the joke will evade restrictions and open sources of plea-
sure that have become inaccessible’ ( 1960 ). From this theoretical perspec-
tive on comedy, the social changes brought about by identity politics and 
‘political correctness’ creates social pressures, and laughing at ‘politically 
incorrect’ jokes is a return of the repressed. Another essential piece to 
understanding this social repression/release mechanism and its relation 
to culture and the broader community is Mary Douglas’s work on ‘jok-
ing relations’, which describe how jokes map tensions within a culture 
and emerging perspectives ( 1975 ). The job of the comic or clown then 
becomes mapping the borders of what can or can’t be said.  Tosh.0 enacts 
this mapping through television, bringing into existence through his audi-
ence a community whose laughter or squirms provide the other half of 
making that map, signaling what can or can’t be said. Simply put,  Tosh.0 
resonates with the 18–34-year-old male audience’s online habits, as well 
as its repressed anxieties. 
 COMMENT COMEDY, ON TV AND ONLINE 
 The simplest description of what happens during almost any episode of 
 Tosh.0 is that a stand-up comedian does something people usually do them-
selves. That is, they watch videos from the relative safety of a computer, 
perhaps sharing them with friends, or commenting on other people’s post-
ing of them on Facebook or other social media. Though the content of 
the featured videos varies from episode to episode,  Tosh.0 has followed a 
strict structure in how those videos are presented and commented upon. 
Like many sitcoms, each episode starts with a cold open: a short video 
that usually involves self-infl icted physical injury. Tosh introduces him-
self, makes a short joke about the clip, then shows it again, making more 
comments. Soon after is ‘20 Seconds on the Clock’ in which Tosh fi ts in 
as many comments about a video as he can in 20 seconds. The result is 
similar to reading a series of brief comments on a video from different 
users, one after another, sometimes related to each other, sometimes not. 
Another regular segment is ‘Video Breakdown’, in which a clip is slowed 
down and paused while Tosh comments upon what happens at various 
TOSH.0, CONVERGENCE COMEDY, AND THE ‘POST-PC’ TV TRICKSTER 157

moments. Thus,  Tosh.0 is modeled upon the ways in which viewers all 
over the world have been interacting with online videos since before the 
dawn of YouTube: watching and ridiculing videos of individuals humiliat-
ing themselves in an infi nite number of ways. 
 True, as a professional comedian with a team of writers, Tosh’s com-
ments trump the entertainment value of your average comment thread. 
But making snarky comments about television  on television isn’t exactly 
ground-breaking, either. Examples of television antecedents to the comic 
commentary of  Tosh.0 include clip shows like  Talk Soup , amateur video 
showcases such as  America’s Funniest Home Videos , and other programs 
that have featured hosts or characters talking about TV or media culture, 
such as  Mystery Science Theatre 3000 and  Beavis & Butt-Head. These 
examples of media culture all create comedy from comic commentary 
on media culture, and model such practices as methods of making media 
pleasurable by ridiculing it.  Tosh.0 weds that format with the expansion of 
individual viewers commenting on and about media beyond isolated con-
versations on fan message boards to the common, mainstream media prac-
tice it has become. The participatory culture of comically commenting 
may target anything from a lousy episode of an expensively produced TV 
show, showcased on an offi cial website, to a low-res, mobile phone-shot 
clip of backyard wrestling, to a badly produced, early 1990s hip-hop video 
digitized off an old videotape and posted on YouTube. Whether actually 
commenting on the footage, or laughing at other people’s comments, 
there are abundant opportunities to engage and participate in the culture 
of humiliation comedy without actually being the person shooting the 
video or its subject. Aside from the videos themselves, comments posted 
by individuals now provide a legitimate draw in their own right, especially 
for those who enjoy taking pleasure in the pain and failures of others. For 
every Daniel Tosh, there are thousands of others who provide similar ser-
vices, and they do so without their own television show but a peculiar kind 
of self-produced celebrity: ‘trolls’ who don’t just try to be funny but seek 
to create a negative response because of the harshness of their comments. 
 Tosh’s commenting is a professionally enhanced version of what indi-
viduals might do online, but the show does actually offer opportunities 
for viewer participation in the show itself. From its premiere,  Tosh.0 has 
embraced online participatory practices, with Tosh commissioning fans to 
make particular kinds of videos that could be uploaded to the show’s web-
site and even showcased on the program alongside viral video stars. The 
program’s rise also coincided with that of Twitter, and Tosh  encouraged 
158 
E. THOMPSON

viewers to ‘live tweet’ the show, to interact with him and each other, long 
before the networks began superimposing hashtags in the corners of every 
primetime program. Some of those comments routinely were put at the 
end of the episode for Tosh to respond to—a convergence culture update 
of the practice of reading viewer mail that has been around since the medi-
um’s early days. 
 Talk show hosts have long addressed their audiences in such ways, but 
Tosh uses social media to engage them in conversation and even feature 
them on the program to an unprecedented extent. He regularly gives 
video assignments based on other videos he shows, encouraging viewers 
to submit their own videos, which may be later featured on the show or 
its website. An example is ‘I’m Better Than You, Na-Na-Na-Boo-Boo’, in 
which Tosh challenges viewers to outdo something he has done on video, 
usually some physical feat such as jumping chairs or something more elab-
orate such as a gag that had Tosh and staff members repeatedly jumping 
through a fl aming hoop as it rolled down a hill.  Tosh.0 occasionally takes 
viewers behind the scenes of the show’s production, usually to show Tosh 
torturing/humiliating staff members or himself. These scenes are usually 
in dialogue with one of the videos, and the behind-the-scenes nature of 
them is obviously done to set up jokes, rather than provide any actual doc-
umentation of what producing the show is like. Comedy shows for many 
years have offered behind-the-scenes moments as one way to invite audi-
ences in on the production of comedy. This includes David Letterman’s 
banter with his director in the control room, for example, all the way back 
to Ernie Kovacs, who liked to appear wearing a headset before a pile of 
monitors, chomping on a cigar.  Tosh.0 has gone beyond the tease of such 
glimpses, not only prompting viewers to consider what it might be like 
to put a show together, but making their contributions and participation 
fundamental to the content and structure of the show. 
 Will Brooker has described web content for television programs as 
‘overfl ow’ that seeks to capture viewer attention when not actually watch-
ing the program ‘on TV’. Such content constitutes an extension of the 
television text for fans to engage and ‘live’ beyond just viewing ( 2004 ). 
Because  Tosh.0 is so based upon online videos and practices, it makes sense 
that the program’s website offers many opportunities for fans to talk back 
to Tosh, comment upon other videos and photos featured on the site, and 
talk to one another. The blog is continually updated with videos that don’t 
make it to TV, and contests are held for fans to write captions for photos 
or argue the merits of a video. Aside from these offi cial sites, there are also 
TOSH.0, CONVERGENCE COMEDY, AND THE ‘POST-PC’ TV TRICKSTER 159

many videos on YouTube and groups on Facebook campaigning to get 
the stars of various clips on the show.  Tosh.0 has not just nurtured its fan 
base by giving them something to do ‘off TV’, but reversed the process 
of overfl ow, bringing the habits of commenting and communication of 
interactive media to television.  
 PARTICIPATORY HUMILIATION OR REDEMPTION? 
 Tosh.0 is not a narrative, but its ‘Web Redemption’ segment creates nar-
rative for online videos by tracking down their stars, then fl ying them out 
to appear on the show to ‘redeem’ themselves by correcting their failed 
performances or bad behaviour. By facing Tosh (and through him those 
who would comment upon their failures and humiliations) these segments 
don’t simply provide moments of prolonged humiliation, but offer an 
opportunity for the subject to regain some control of their identity. The 
‘Web Redemption’ segment involves both the star/victim and the viewer 
taking pleasure in their failure, allowing an opportunity for the star/vic-
tim to talk back and regain a modicum of control while humiliation is 
displaced upon Tosh—usually. Whether the star/victims come off look-
ing good or bad, or better or worse than Tosh, is somewhat inconsistent. 
For example, Denny Blazin, the self-proclaimed ‘Average Homeboy’ who 
made his own rap video circa 1990, comes across as a jerk who complains 
that you couldn’t make a movie called ‘Black People Can’t Swim’ without 
being called a racist ( Tosh.0 , 10 February 2010). One way Tosh attempts 
to be non-threatening in these segments is by appearing as an exagger-
ated version of the individual in the original video. This usually means 
similar-but-worse fashion choices and showing off his skinny body the 
way Will Ferrell is fond of showing off his not-so-skinny one. In doing so, 
Tosh offers to preemptively humiliate himself, both as a visual joke and an 
apparent attempt to put the individual at ease. But this comic feminizing 
also seems designed to put Tosh’s sexuality into question, freeing him up 
to inquire about or taunt viral star/victims about their sexuality. Examples 
include asking a male intern to take his shirt off when he delivers water 
to him during a web redemption in which Tosh is attempting to ‘out’ 
the male star of the video ( Tosh.0 , 18 January 2011). Two other exam-
ples suggest the extreme to which Tosh is willing to tease male anxieties 
about sexuality: in season two, he fi lmed a slow-motion segment in which 
he meticulously rubbed tanning oil all over physically ripped comedian 
Carrot Top ( Tosh.0 , 21 August 2010), and another in which he and male 
160 
E. THOMPSON

staff members took Viagra and then watched gay porn in a contest to see 
who would involuntarily out himself as being attracted to men ( Tosh.0 , 
25 January 2011). In retrospect, the fi rst example seems a similar taunt 
of his male fans, forcing fans to watch a man rub oil on another man. The 
Viagra segment itself surely prompted a large proportion of the demo to 
ask themselves, ‘What if?’ 
 Usually the redemption itself is fairly simple: a better music video, a 
better job answering pageant questions, a better job singing the National 
Anthem. Others are more elaborate. The fi rst episode of the third sea-
son featured Antoine Dodson, the star of Auto-Tune-the-News’ ‘Bed 
Intruder’ video, which was based on footage from his TV news interview 
following the sexual assault of his sister ( Tosh.0 , 11 January 2011). The 
segment offers Dodson a chance to recapture control of how audiences 
read him, and while Tosh dresses up as Dodson in the video, with an afro 
wig and red do-rag, and sleeveless shirt, Dodson comes across as dignifi ed 
and, mostly, annoyed with Tosh. 
 A description of the redemption illustrates the standard format, as well 
as the recurring kinds of jokes about sex and sexuality Tosh likes to make. 
Tosh meets Dodson in a park where he says there are more unsolved rapes 
per square acre than any place in the United States—queue a scream-
ing woman running behind the two of them. Tosh asks Dodson what 
he wants the world to know about him, and when Dodson says that he 
is openly gay, Tosh counters that he thinks people knew that one sec-
ond into his video, alluding to his effeminate mannerisms. Tosh also asks 
him about his reactions to being remixed. Dodson says he was initially 
offended and thought that his family was being made fun of, then he 
decided the video had a positive message and was an ‘alert’. Tosh seizes 
upon this to turn the redemption as an opportunity to treat sexual vio-
lence as a topic for light humour. The two conduct a ‘rape prevention 
class’, then set a trap with Tosh in a pink tutu as bait for a rapist. It all 
culminates with a timely joke about Ben Roethlisberger, the Pittsburgh 
Steelers quarterback accused of sexual assault. This redemption, while 
typical in terms of its structure, is disconcerting for how it typifi es the sex-
ist tone and content of much of Tosh’s material. Rape is made a topic for 
light humour throughout the piece, a screaming victim of sexual violence 
little more than a quick gag. This kind of attitude, while successful with 
the demo, would later create controversy, also typifi ed by an ill-conceived 
viewer challenge: ‘Lightly Touching Women’s Stomachs While They’re 
Sitting Down’ ( Tosh.0 , 3 April 2012). 
TOSH.0, CONVERGENCE COMEDY, AND THE ‘POST-PC’ TV TRICKSTER 161

 Given how the featured performers usually end up getting the better of 
Tosh, the Web Redemptions don’t seem to add up to prolonged humilia-
tion of the online video star/victim. They might be seen as symptomatic 
of audience fascination with celebrity (and the industry’s proven methods 
to nurture that fascination), however minor or dependent upon humili-
ation that celebrity might be, as well as confl icted feelings about taking 
pleasure in other people’s humiliation. That self-consciousness is symp-
tomatic to this moment not just because of online video, but because of 
reality television, which often features ordinary people humiliating them-
selves with bad behaviour, or showcases fashion failures necessitating a 
makeover. Aside from criticism based on quality, the complaint that plea-
sures produced by watching these shows is unethical is part of the popular 
discourse on reality TV. The Web Redemption segments do adopt the 
‘makeover’ trope of many recent reality television shows. However,  Tosh.0 
skips the empathy crucial for melodrama or the sense of justice neces-
sary for Schadenfreude that Amber Watts has described as so important 
to makeover shows ( 2008 ). The continued centrality of these segments 
to the show as its success has continued might signal audience anxiet-
ies about what social media could ‘do to them’ if old video from high 
school found its way online, for example, or if someone happened to have 
a video camera that time a public speaking engagement went tragically 
off course. Again,  Tosh.0 offers another opportunity for the audience to 
wonder, ‘what if?’  
 IS IT (OR THE HOST OR THE AUDIENCE) RACIST? 
 That several of the examples noted in this chapter include comedy that 
overtly engages issues of race, gender, and sexuality is not the result of 
cherry-picking content from the series for social relevance.  Tosh.0 is over-
whelmingly preoccupied with what it means to be ‘politically correct’. 
This in itself is not a negative criticism: violating taboos and mapping the 
boundaries of what can or can’t be joked about (and therefore, what can or 
can’t be said) is an important social function of comedy. However,  Tosh.0 
doesn’t so much engage identity politics as it attempts to ridicule and dis-
miss them. The program serves as a prototypical example of what Amanda 
Lotz terms ‘post-PC comedy’—comedy that seems to have internalized 
the discourses of identity politics, not to the extent of having ‘learned 
the lessons’ or embraced identity politics, but that takes audience aware-
ness of them for a given, and treats this as a license to incorporate jokes 
162 
E. THOMPSON

with racist, sexist, or homophobic content while suggesting that the jokes 
themselves are not racist, sexist, or homophobic because both comedian 
and audience know better (Lotz  2011 ). 
 The negotiation of the politics of language, what can or can’t be said or 
laughed at, is right on the surface of  Tosh.0 . ‘Is it racist?’ is another segment 
that has appeared multiple times over the seasons, and usually includes 
both an online video and another segment starring Tosh. Sometimes it is 
simply the visual content of the video itself that seems to embody racist 
stereotypes. For example, video of a watermelon eating contest held by a 
Baptist Church, which shows a black woman destroying two white male 
competitors while she is cheered on by several white women ( Tosh.0 , 28 
February 2012). Other times, the videos are about the politics of lan-
guage, basically showing white people saying things that contemporary 
social standards dictate they shouldn’t. For example, in one episode, Tosh 
shows a clip from a local news show in which one of the news anchors 
introduces an African American weather man with the phrase ‘speaking 
of the colors’ ( Tosh.0 , 26 February 2013). Tosh then says, ‘In this hyper-
sensitive day and age, it’s hard to know who will be offended by what’, 
and so he developed a list of terms he says have no racial connotations 
whatsoever and presented them to an ‘extremely diverse’ focus group: 
a white woman, a gay man, a Latino, an African American man, and an 
Asian woman. Tosh presents terms that he wants to know if any of them 
fi nd offensive. While most seem totally nonsensical, they bear enough of 
a derogatory nature that the individuals argue back and forth with Tosh. 
‘Cream jockey’, ‘water fl aps’, ‘sugar taster’, ‘saddle shins’, ‘clink clunk’—
by the end it is a back and forth between him and the African American 
man. ‘What can I call you?’ ‘Apple picker? Why are you offended by Apple 
Picker?’ What is lost on Tosh, but not the individuals, is that it is not the 
particular words that are offensive, but the exercise of privilege and power 
that labeling a group assumes. The terms may be nonsensical, but the fact 
that the entire scene is essentially seeking to update white privilege with 
new derogatory terms for referring to entire groups of people is not lost 
on the members of the focus group, who repeatedly object. What this is 
really about is trying to maintain existing white, male power by updating 
language. The joke is supposed to be that minorities will be offended by 
even total nonsense, but the end joke is that it is Tosh that can’t fi gure out 
that it’s the ‘name calling’ and not the names themselves that are offen-
sive. ‘Be careful using those new terms, guys’, Tosh tells the audience. ‘It’s 
a slippery slope. I’m pretty sure you also shouldn’t say “slippery slope”.’ 
TOSH.0, CONVERGENCE COMEDY, AND THE ‘POST-PC’ TV TRICKSTER 163

 The presence of the studio audience in each episode is also noteworthy. 
Not only does Tosh stand in front and comment while we hear audiences 
laugh approval or groan disapproval, but we see reaction shots of them as 
well. Tosh will even sometimes poll the studio audience as to whether a 
segment or joke is racist. For example, one ‘Is it racist?’ segment featured 
a news report about a middle-aged, white high school teacher who argued 
that he shouldn’t have gotten in trouble for saying ‘niggas’ rather than 
‘niggers’, which he regards as two completely different words ( Tosh.0 , 19 
July 2011). Tosh uses this video to create a segment where he attempts 
similar transformations, adding an ‘A’ to other racial slurs. We see Daniel 
at work, throwing around such creations as ‘chinka’, ‘wetbacka’, and ‘dis-
gusting diabetes having fat piece of crapa’. The extent to which  Tosh.0 
recognizes that this segment caters to the demographic that has to moni-
tor its language for offensiveness is made a part of the joke. After the tape 
ends, Tosh says, ‘Let’s let the black people in our audience decide, is it 
racist?’ The camera cuts to a single African American man standing in the 
midst of the studio audience. He gives a thumbs-up, to which the audi-
ence cheers. But Tosh feigns confusion: ‘Guys, I don’t know what you’re 
cheering about. A thumbs-up means it is racist.’ Tosh suggests his audi-
ence is clueless about what it means for something to be racist, perhaps 
acknowledging that the segment is just another in the fl ow of comedy, 
something else to laugh at without refl ecting upon what’s at stake with 
racist language. 
 Herman Gray describes whiteness as ‘the privileged yet unnamed place 
from which to see and make sense of the world’ ( 1995 , 86). Richard Dyer 
has likewise stressed the need to interrogate whiteness:
 White power […] reproduces itself regardless of intention, power differ-
ences and goodwill, and overwhelmingly because it is not seen as whiteness, 
but as normal. White people need to learn to see themselves as white, to 
see their particularity. In other words, whiteness needs to be made strange 
( 1997 , 10). 
 A generous evaluation of  Tosh.0 might suggest that in its brazen attempts 
to be funny for males aged 18–34 it has succeeded, inadvertently, at ‘nam-
ing’ that position and working through its particularities. This happens 
continually through jokes about sexuality, race, and gender, and some-
times very directly in segments like ‘Is it racist?’, which are staged over 
and over and over. Tosh’s inability to recognize that it is fundamentally 
164 
E. THOMPSON

not language but privilege that is offensive undermines the potential for 
interrogating privilege, overdetermining the repetitive, reductive ways the 
segments address and dismiss the anxieties of the audience. 
 Tosh, of course, is not alone in making comedy that directly or tan-
gentially deals with identity politics in the ‘post-PC’ context. The pro-
gram’s approach bears comparison to two distinctive other programs that 
have been considered by scholars. The fi rst is  Chappelle’s Show , a Comedy 
Central hit years before  Tosh.0 , and  Psych , a light drama on the USA 
Network. Examining  Tosh.0 in the context of these other shows illumi-
nates how differently race is treated and made meaningful in comedy at 
the same, or nearly the same, cultural moment. Davi Johnson Thornton 
writes that ‘ Psych ’s jocular treatment of race and racism communicates to 
audiences that racial humour enhances, rather than threatens, interracial 
intimacy because humour demonstrates that genuine amity need not be 
regulated by race-conscious social etiquette such as the rules of “polit-
ical correctness,” or PC’ ( 2011 , 426). Lisa Perks investigates how the 
humorous discourse in  Chappelle’s Show is structured in order to encour-
age activation of ‘polysemic potential’ in the text.  Chappelle’s Show, she 
says, created,
 a rhetorical space to question cultural defi nitions of race and racial discrimi-
nation. The inclusion of confl icting discourses that circulate around issues of 
racial stereotypes, racial epithets, discrimination, and White privilege magni-
fi es the semiotic system of racial stereotypes, plays with semiotic bonds of 
racial signifi ers, and gently pushes the comedic generic constraints so as to 
make serious issues more palatable to a diverse audience ( 2010 , 286). 
 More recently,  Inside Amy Schumer (2013–present) , which also airs on 
Comedy Central and is formatted very similarly to  Chappelle’s Show , rou-
tinely interrogates defi nitions of gender and sexist discrimination.  Inside 
Amy Schumer also has repeatedly referenced its unique status as a female- 
centered program on a male-skewing network. Its second season opener, 
for example, featured a sketch in which a focus group of male viewers 
argued about how sexually desirable Amy Schumer was or wasn’t ( Inside 
Amy Schumer , 1 April 2014). Such refl exivity or polysemic layering is miss-
ing in  Tosh.0 , which appears to lack the desire to mean different things to 
different people.  Chappelle’s Show had to make comic commentary on race 
more palatable for its audience—a fact that ultimately lead Chappelle to 
quit the show when he realized he had little control over what  audiences 
TOSH.0, CONVERGENCE COMEDY, AND THE ‘POST-PC’ TV TRICKSTER 165

were laughing at (Haggins  2009 ).  Inside Amy Schumer has already gar-
nered Emmy and Peabody Awards, but it still can’t transcend the gen-
dered demographics of the Comedy Central audience. Deadline.com, for 
example, caged the ratings success of her debut episodes each year rela-
tive to how much of her lead-in audience she lost. Her lead-in? The pro-
gram that was routinely the highest rated show among male viewers on 
Tuesdays,  Tosh.0 (De Moraes  2015 ) . 
 Tosh, on the other hand, starts from a privileged position that needn’t 
worry over audience reception, as he can assume he and the audience are 
the same; that is clear in the content of the ‘Is it racist?’ segments. Mary 
Douglas’s description of the position of the joker in a culture suggests 
a homogeneity that fi ts Tosh better than Chappelle. She writes that the 
joker ‘has a fi rm hold on his own position in the structure and the disrup-
tive comments which he makes upon it are in a sense the comments of the 
social group upon itself. He merely expresses consensus’ (Douglas  1975 , 
107). Chappelle’s position as an African American comedian with a largely 
white audience was much more tenuous, as is Schumer’s among the male 
audience. 
 Perhaps, then, we shouldn’t be surprised by the prolonged success of 
 Tosh.0 vs. Chappelle’s retreat from television.  Chappelle’s Show featured 
sketches about race until Chappelle famously called it quits, crediting his 
own misgivings about who was laughing at what in his comedy (Haggins 
 2009 ). But Daniel Tosh continues to churn out episode after episode, not 
just feigning a lack of self-awareness, but outright dismissing the notion 
that his comedy might mean something, aside from occasionally warrant-
ing an apology. Since he speaks to and for dominant masculine tastes, 
there is little need to worry anyone might be laughing against the grain.  
 
CONCLUSION: TRICKSTER 2.0 
 Andrew Stott, in his elaboration on recurring comic types, differentiates 
the ‘trickster’ from other fi gures by the frequent boundary crossing that 
the fi gure engages in. While other comic types might be laughed at for 
being inferior or engaging in activities outside social norms, the trickster 
makes a game of violating prohibitions and ‘is not confi ned by boundaries, 
conceptual, social, or physical, and can cross lines that are impermeable to 
normal individuals’ ( 2005 , 51). But rather than destroying such bound-
aries by their violations and ultimately subverting social order, tricksters 
narratives, he notes, ‘usually conclude with the meddlesome actions of the 
166 
E. THOMPSON

protagonist coming to serve some useful or illustrative purpose’ ( 2005 , 
53). Trickster fi gures from the Coyote of Native American cultures of the 
southwest United States, to Puck in Shakespeare’s  A Midsummer Night’s 
Dream , to that ‘cartoon anarchist’ Daffy Duck, ridicule belief systems 
from the inside and out, ultimately not to subvert but to prevent them 
from becoming too secure in themselves. 
 Tosh is a convergence media trickster, whose television program crosses 
boundaries between watching videos and starring in them, between laugh-
ing at people from a safe distance, to confronting them and allowing them 
to ‘talk back’ in person. That is,  Tosh.0 confuses boundaries between who 
is laughing and who is laughed at. Bridging boundaries of time and space 
are what frame him as the trickster, who then can cross the socially conten-
tious boundaries of decorum and language that is the substance of much 
of the show. The trickster gets away with things others can’t; his comic 
power comes from his ability to cross boundaries, to switch identities, 
to break categories that ‘normal’ people (who don’t have the power of 
their own television program, and who abide by social decorum) cannot. 
He blurs boundaries between what the white male says, wants to say, and 
shouldn’t say. This is the source of what makes him funny; it’s not what 
he says, or how he helps us see the world differently. Rather, it is how he 
relentlessly breaks the rules that govern our world, that repress all the 
psychic energy waiting for comic release. 
 Tosh.0 is a not just a prime example of a trickster fi gure on television, 
but a trickster fi gure as product of (and suited for) the technological char-
acteristics of television in the convergence era, the industrial parameters 
of its production, and the cultural tastes and experiences of its audiences. 
That is, while the Coyote might have spoken to the particular social 
mores and belief systems of southwestern Native American cultures, Tosh 
is a trickster for the twenty-fi rst century male audience aged 18–34. He 
therefore crosses and violates boundaries of socially acceptable and unac-
ceptable behaviour and language that are symptomatic of that audience’s 
experiences, and, crucially, does so in ways that ultimately reaffi rm the 
belief systems of that audience. In other words, it isn’t just what Tosh 
says, but the particular format of his show that makes him such a suc-
cessful ‘post-PC’ trickster. Considering Tosh as trickster fi gure helps us 
recognize that it isn’t so much the particular videos Tosh comments on, 
or the specifi c ‘redemptions’ he stages, that can be credited with his quick 
ascension and long-running ratings success. Rather, it is how he routinely 
stages scenarios for white, heterosexual, masculine identity that perform 
TOSH.0, CONVERGENCE COMEDY, AND THE ‘POST-PC’ TV TRICKSTER 167

insecurity in the face or sexual, racial, or gender difference, but end by 
confi rming masculine power. While ostensibly providing another oppor-
tunity to see online videos featuring humiliating or disgusting content 
to laugh at, Tosh’s humour overwhelmingly derives from anxiety about 
cultural change and the loss of privilege. While that might be found in the 
punchlines of the highest rated sitcoms of the day ( The Big Bang Theory , 
for example) , the format of  Tosh.0 enables a more fl exible boundary cross-
ing that, divorced as it is from narrative, explicitly engages with questions 
of language: who can say what about whom—or who can laugh at whom. 
 Tosh possesses the ability to cross boundaries of time and space that 
are impermeable to the audience. That is, Tosh doesn’t just laugh at an 
Internet fail, he can summon that person to Los Angeles, restage a sce-
nario, and through a ‘Web Redemption’ attempt to rewrite the fail or 
whatever it was to begin with. This is of course not just the product of 
technology, but of the power granted Tosh by Comedy Central. In other 
words, any individual might Skype with the star of a YouTube video, 
but they wouldn’t be able to compel them to do so for cash or greater 
celebrity/notoriety the way Tosh can. Tosh’s engagement with audiences 
through social media and through his speaking to them and about them 
on the show itself invites them along for the tricksterdom. The opportuni-
ties Tosh provides online for fans to comment on videos provides another 
staging for audiences where they can assume the role of trickster by cross-
ing boundaries of what is acceptable to say about people. 
 The demographic profi le of the basic cable audience that  Tosh.0 success-
fully targets mirrors that of Daniel Tosh himself: young, white, and male. 
The awareness of that mirroring that we’ve been examining helps us better 
understand the success of  Tosh.0 aside from its adept use of participatory 
media practices. It also helps us understand Tosh’s resilience in the face 
of the most controversial event in the history of the show. While attend-
ing one of Tosh’s stand-up performances at the Laugh Factory in July 
2012, a woman, offended at Tosh’s discussion of the humorous merits of 
rape jokes, intervened by heckling him, saying, according to her account, 
‘Actually, rape jokes are never funny!’ Tosh responded by immediately 
countering that it would indeed be funny if she was raped by fi ve guys. 
Her description of the event testifi es to the immediacy of the experience: 
‘I should probably add that having to basically fl ee while Tosh was enthus-
ing about how hilarious it would be if I was gang-raped in that small, 
claustrophobic room was pretty viscerally terrifying and threatening all the 
same, even if the actual scenario was unlikely to take place.’ The comment 
168 
E. THOMPSON

was particularly threatening because of its invocation of sexual violence 
‘in person’. That is, Tosh made the comment to a particular woman in 
the same space he was performing. The sexism of the comment, while 
consistent with the sophomoric tenor of his material, crossed over into the 
territory of invoking violence. 
 The story was fi rst publicly recounted on an anonymous Tumblr page 
( 2012 ), which garnered more attention after Tosh tweeted a two-part 
apology, not surprisingly inspiring an explosion of responses back and 
forth about the appropriateness of rape as a subject for comedy. Enter 
another comedian adept at navigating and manipulating the convergent 
media landscape, Louis C.K., who tweeted ‘@danieltosh your show makes 
me laugh every time I watch it. And you have pretty eyes’ in the midst of 
the controversy. When he did so, he became the subject of headlines across 
the Blogosphere as well as in the trade papers (Zakarin  2012 ). As Amanda 
Ann Klein ( 2012 ) has written, what proved especially interesting about 
the incident were its repercussions—not so much for Tosh, but for Louis 
C.K. While Tosh’s comments were offensive, they were consistent with 
his comedy and not particularly offensive to his core audience. By 2012, 
Louis C.K., not Tosh, had arguably become the comedian of the moment, 
particularly following the success of his critically acclaimed program  Louie , 
which he writes, directs, edits, and stars in. Like Tosh, Louis C.K. combines 
social media acumen with narrowcasted TV success. Aside from Twitter, 
he has self-released comedy specials online and sends lengthy email mes-
sages fi lling his followers in on his current comedy projects, on top of 
the success of his series on the cable station FX. However, C.K.’s defense 
of Tosh, while typical of comedians refl exively defending one another, 
was not consistent with his brand of politically conscious, liberal-friendly 
comedy. Louis C.K. had become known as a comedian whose stand-up 
routines and sitcom routinely critiqued white male privilege. Repairing his 
image, C.K. appeared on the  Daily Show , trying to explain that he wasn’t 
 really defending Tosh’s comments, but that he thought jokes about any-
thing bad were a good thing that increased dialogue. As an example, he 
described how after reading some responses to the controversy, his eyes 
had been opened to how rape polices women’s lives, limiting where they 
can go and when. Thus, after a reckless tweeting error, he went on TV 
to make his bumbling more consistent with his brand. In his next HBO 
special  Oh My God, which was shot in early 2013, C.K. even included a bit 
on how ill-advised it was for women to date men at all, since men were the 
number-one danger to women. 
TOSH.0, CONVERGENCE COMEDY, AND THE ‘POST-PC’ TV TRICKSTER 169

 Unlike Louis C.K., Daniel Tosh is no critical darling, but the rape con-
troversy did little to hurt his popularity.  Tosh.0 has continued to mine 
Internet failures and humiliations for comedy gold. While Tosh’s profi le is 
prominent enough that he receives attention outside his core audience, he 
is beholden to their tastes (and anxieties) for his comedy and his paycheck. 
 Tosh.0 has mined online culture not just to fi nd videos to repurpose, but 
for jokes (and insults) from viewers, treating ‘the Internet’ as a production 
partner. That back-and-forth sometimes leads to Tosh defending himself 
on his own show, as in a 2013 episode in which he felt compelled to spell 
out his show’s 'mission statement.' I’m well aware you think I’m getting 
too big for my britches. That’s why I thought tonight it would be appro-
priate to remind you of the mission statement that hangs in our offi ce and 
has been the guiding principle behind every episode of  Tosh.0  since day 
one: to create a silly, web-based clip show that makes males between the 
ages of 18 and 34 laugh and occasionally cringe, all at the lowest possible 
price point so that one day I can purchase a private island. That’s it, noth-
ing more, nothing less ( Tosh.0 , 5 March 2013). Contrary to Tosh’s denial 
of any cultural agenda, this examination of the content and format of the 
show reveals it is profoundly preoccupied with the politics of language 
and identity. In fact, this preoccupation need not be an agenda, as it is 
inseparable from Tosh’s directive to make males aged 18–34 ‘laugh and 
occasionally cringe’. What makes that audience do so are those videos, 
sketches, and jokes that violate boundaries of decorum, which evade social 
controls, and thereby elicit the involuntary response of laughter. The very 
content of the program itself shows that identity politics isn’t just a mine-
fi eld for a comedian to navigate, but central to the cultural work of map-
ping the boundaries of what is funny, and what is just offensive.  
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Block, Alex Ben. 2015. Fox Stations Pick Up  Tosh.0 for Daily Syndication.  The 
Hollywood Reporter , April 3. 
 Brooker, Will. 2004. ‘Living on  Dawson’s Creek : Teen Viewers, Cultural 
Convergence, and Television Overfl ow.’ In  The Television Studies Reader , 
edited by Robert Allen and Annette Hill, 569-580. New York: Routledge.  
 De Moraes, Lisa. 2015.  Inside Amy Schumer Returns With About 1 Million Tuned 
In.   Deadline.com , April 22.  
 Douglas, Mary. 1975.  Implicit Meanings . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.  
 Dyer, Richard. 1997.  White . London: Routledge.  
170 
E. THOMPSON

 Freud, Sigmund. 1960.  Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious . Trans. James 
Strachey. London: Hogarth.  
 Gray, Herman. 1995.  Watching Race: Television and the Struggle for ‘Blackness’ . 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.  
 Haggins, Bambi. 2009. In the Wake of the Nigger Pixie. In  Satire TV: Politics and 
Comedy in the Post-Network Era , ed. Jonathan Gray, Jeffrey P. Jones, and Ethan 
Thompson. New York: NYU Press.  
 Jenkins, Henry. 2006.  Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide . 
New York: NYU Press.  
 Klein, Amanda Ann. 2012. Talking About Rape Jokes (Again).  Antenna , July 28.  
 Levine, Stuart. 2012. Comedy Net Renews  Tosh.0 .  Daily Variety, September 20.  
 Lotz, Amanda D. 2011. Imagining Post-PC Humor.  Presented at the Unboxing 
Television Conference , Madison, Wisconsin, October 15–16.  
 Perks, Lisa Glebatis. 2010. Polysemic Scaffolding: Explicating Discursive Clashes 
in  Chappelle’s Show .  Communication, Culture & Critique 3(2): 270–289.  
 Stelter, Brian. 2010. Their Pain is His Gain.  New York Times, August 20.  
 Stott, Andrew. 2005.  Comedy . New York: Routledge.  
 Thornton, Davi Johnston. 2011.  Psych ’s Comedic Tale of Black–White Friendship 
and the Lighthearted Affect of “Post-Race” America.  Critical Studies in Media 
Communication 28(5): 424–449.  
 Tumblr. 2012. So a Girl Walks into a Comedy Club.   breakfastcookie.tumblr.com/
post/26879625651/so-a-girl-walks-into-a-comedy-club   
 Watts, Amber. 2008. Laughing at the World:  Schadenfreude , Social Identity, and 
American Media Culture. PhD dissertation, Northwestern University.  
 Zakarin, Jordan. 2012. Louis C.K. Explains Daniel Tosh Tweet, Addresses Rape 
Joke Dialogue.  The Hollywood Reporter , July 17. 
TOSH.0, CONVERGENCE COMEDY, AND THE ‘POST-PC’ TV TRICKSTER 171

173
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2_10
 Crude and Taboo Humour in Television 
Advertising: An Analysis of Commercials 
for Consumer Goods  
 Elsa   Simões    Lucas    Freitas 
 E. S.  L.  Freitas  () 
 Universidade Fernando Pessoa ,  Porto ,  Portugal  
 e-mail: esimoes@ufp.edu.pt 
 The analysis proposed in this chapter implies, from the start, two different 
sets of problems: advertising is, due to its nature, a restless and elusive type 
of discourse, which resists categorization; at the same time, consensual 
defi nitions of humour are diffi cult or even impossible to reach. 
 The issue of humour in advertising has generated considerable aca-
demic interest since its use as an advertising strategy is widespread (Gulas 
and Weinberger  2006 , 18). Although the positive effects of humour for 
the purposes of memorization and increased likeability towards a brand 
are not defi nitely proven, it is generally accepted that the ‘right’ audience 
will react favourably to the ‘right’ humorous approach and that, regardless 
of the underlying mechanisms involved in the process, the outcome is pos-
itive and benefi cial to the participants and to the message itself (Flaherty 
et al.  2004 , 26). 
 In order to achieve this purpose, a number of variables must be taken 
into account, namely the type of product that is being advertised, the 
characteristics of the audiences intended, the media where the ad is being 
broadcast, and, fi nally, the type of humorous approach that is going to be 
used—hence the diffi culty of correctly gauging what is meant by ‘right’, 

since contemporary advertising often resorts to cruder versions of humour 
that would be potentially alienating for certain audiences. 
 It is the aim of this chapter to refl ect on the uses of crude and taboo 
humour in a number of contemporary ads, with a view to understand-
ing the way in which they manage to effectively reach their target audi-
ence, despite their potential offensive charge. The corpus of the present 
chapter consists mainly of television ads. Effectively, advertisers are almost 
unanimous in singling out television as one of the best media for the use 
of humour, since its dynamic qualities are well adapted to the depiction of 
situations that require a temporal development that ends with a punch line 
(Freitas  2008 , 108). There is also some consensus as to the most suitable 
products to be advertised by means of humour: as we will see, these would 
seem to be the ones in the category of consumer non-durables, or ‘yellow 
products’ (Gulas and Weinberger  2006 , 73), a category that encompasses 
most of the ads on which this analysis will be based. 
 THE USES OF HUMOUR IN ADVERTISING 
 The complex mechanisms that underlie humour are hard to describe 
(Berger  1993 , 2; Yeshin  2006 , 301), even though response to humour 
would seem to be something of a universal human trait (Raskin  1985 , 
2). There are even doubts as to the way laughter (one of the most visible 
consequences of humour) can be categorized among the gamut of human 
emotions and behaviours (Morreall  1983 , 2). In fact, laughter is normally 
seen as a commonplace and normal reaction to funny events. However, as 
Morreall points out, it is diffi cult to pinpoint the utility of this behaviour 
as a physical response to a humorous situation, which can assume myriad 
forms—unlike other reactions such as an impulse to fl ee caused by a ter-
rifying event ( 1983 , 3). 
 However, other authors foreground some major benefi ts that this 
apparently irrelevant behaviour might encompass, which would be telling 
of its cognitive advantages for the adaptation of humankind to its environ-
ment. In fact, mere crude jokes require the use of a number of social and 
linguistic skills, and it is therefore possible to say that humorous reactions 
enable further social activity, which is reinforced, in turn, by the positive 
emotions that were generated (Polimeni and Reiss  2006 , 348). 
 Rather in the same way humour, as we will see, can be a diffi cult strategy 
to handle in ads, writing about humour in general can be a hard task to 
undertake—the diffi culty arising with the very defi nition of the concept. In 
174 
E.S.L. FREITAS

fact, ‘humour’ covers such a broad spectrum of possibilities (ranging from 
wit or whimsicality to laugh-out-loud reactions) that it becomes problem-
atic to provide a defi nition that comprehends all the varieties of humour 
available. It is also a matter of controversy which mechanisms underlie the 
gratifi cation we obtain from different kinds of humour (Berger  1993 , 2; 
Gulas and Weinberger  2006 , 22; Yeshin  2006 , 301). However, generally 
speaking, it seems to be related with a pleasurable sensation of satisfaction 
either to the party at the production end, the receiving end or even both. 
 Raskin ( 1985 ) proposes a number of obligatory ‘external’ conditions 
for humour, which are closely related to those required by advertising as 
a communication process. Firstly, (1) a speaker and a hearer are necessary 
(as a minimum of participants), followed by (2) a stimulus, whose exact 
nature or trigger is debatable. It is also important to take into account (3) 
the participants’ ability to deal with humour as a form of communication, 
which will necessarily vary according to (4) the psychology of the indi-
viduals involved. Another fundamental element in the process is (5) the 
situation where the humour act is taking place, which defi nes whether a 
funny situation is indeed humorous or not. As Attardo points out ( 2003 , 
1289), humour is a highly collaborative situation, where two (at least) 
have to agree on the adequateness of the moment and context for humour 
to be effective. In close connection to these situational elements come (6) 
the social backgrounds of the participants, which must be shared, at least 
to some extent, for a joke to succeed (Raskin  1985 , 16). 
 Although all the conditions mentioned here imply diffi culties in terms 
of taxonomy, condition number two (the stimulus) is, admittedly, one of 
the most complex to defi ne (Polimeni and Reiss  2006 , 349). Effectively, 
there are several theories that purport to explain why we laugh, some of 
them mutually exclusive and others presenting a number of overlapping 
features. These theories are often grouped according to the main approach 
they adopt, as in Raskin ( 1985 ), who puts forward three main classes: 
one possibility are (a) incongruity-based theories, which correspond to 
a cognitive-perceptual approach, where humour would stem from an 
unexpected element that frustrates previously created expectations—the 
humorous effect would then result from the collusion of the two  ‘stories’ 
or scripts being told when reaching the fi nal surprise element, or the 
punch line; another theory corresponds to (b) superiority/disparagement 
approaches to humour, (classifi ed by Raskin as ‘social-behavioral’), which 
can be traced back to Plato and Thomas Hobbes, which claim that the 
CRUDE AND TABOO HUMOUR IN TELEVISION ADVERTISING: AN ANALYSIS... 175

enjoyment we derive from humour always has at its roots some feeling 
of superiority experienced by a group of individuals when compared to 
others, felt to be more ridiculous and weaker than them (Zillmann and 
Cantor  1996 , 94). Finally, (c) arousal-release/relief theories, (a psycho-
analytical approach), which stress a biological purpose of laughter, in that 
it can serve as a means to vent pent-up tensions and energies (as postu-
lated by Freud), as well as presenting some advantages in terms of pleasur-
able feelings, which might contribute to an overall healthier state of mind 
(Polimeni and Reiss  2006 , 351). 
 There is extensive research on the specifi c ways humour can work in 
advertising. There seems to be a natural affi nity between this discursive 
format and humour, as a strategy. In fact, there is some similarity between 
the proper functioning of a joke and the felicity conditions for a TV ad to 
work in the best way, which involve the ideal length, content, timing of a 
punch line and details in the right measure (Raskin  1985 , 18). 
 These coincidences are probably due to the fact that both joke telling 
and advertising have a very defi nite purpose (in broad terms, on the one 
hand, to make the hearer laugh and, on the other hand, to persuade an 
audience into buying something). The clarity of the aim intended by these 
discursive pieces demands strict economy of means and a perfect adjust-
ment to the hearers’ needs and expectations. Additionally, a television ad, 
with the vast array of channels it can resort to, can pack immense signifi ca-
tion in a matter of few seconds—which mimics real life experiences of joke 
telling, where the speaker hints, anticipates, insinuates a lot just with facial 
expressions, gestures and voice modulations. In the same way we expect 
to be amused when a number of clues on the speaker’s end signals that a 
joke is about to be told, we have also learned to expect an ad to deliver its 
message in very a competent (albeit artistic and creative) way. 
 Following on the path of the traditional grouping of the different theo-
ries of humour that were previously mentioned, several authors have tried 
to point out which one (or ones) correspond to the most prevalent or 
effectively used in advertising. Pioneer studies in the area, such as Alden 
and Hoyer ( 1993 ), Cho ( 1995 ) and Alden et al. ( 2000 ), have undertaken 
the task of analyzing different executional humorous styles in television 
ads, in an attempt to gauge their effectiveness. Alden and Hoyer ( 1993 ) 
concluded that the most successful humorous formats seem to be the ones 
that resort to everyday life situations followed by a surprising punch line, 
in contrast with direct presentations of real life confronted with impossible 
events. This controlled kind of incongruity (vs. an obvious plunge in total 
176 
E.S.L. FREITAS

absurdity) apparently elicits the best results in terms of humorous read-
ings. Cho’s research ( 1995 ) confi rms this position, adding that, according 
to cognitive approaches, the audience’s problem solving abilities are acti-
vated by the proposed incongruent elements of the ad, in order to make 
them fi t pre-existing schemata—but this will only happen in case there is a 
proper balance of all elements. 
 The fact that there are clues signalling intended playfulness is also 
decisive in order to make the ad be read as humorous—otherwise, other 
unwanted feelings (such as fear) could be aroused, which would be det-
rimental to the overall message of the ad. There are a number of possible 
executional styles related with humour that are commonly found in ads, 
such as ‘slice of life’, ‘ludicrousness’, ‘miniaturization’, ‘subtle complex-
ity’, and ‘perceptual interest’ (Cho  1995 , 193). From all these styles, the 
fi rst, ‘slice of life’, is clearly the one that relates the most with people’s daily 
struggles and is, therefore, the easiest for audiences to identify with. This 
is possibly the reason why this style came second in perceived humour, 
according to Cho’s research, immediately after ‘subtle complexity’, a style 
that includes ad messages conveyed by means of metaphors, indirectness 
and allusions, which stresses subtlety. In the wake of these fi ndings, Cho 
posits that cognition and affection seem to rank higher in the audience’s 
ability to perceive an ad as humorous. On the other hand, styles based 
in disparagement and negativity, as ‘ludicrousness’ and ‘miniaturization’, 
although widely used in ads (especially in the United States and the UK), 
often result in an ad that is not perceived as funny. 
 Starting with the assumption that failure to detect intended humour in 
an ad will necessarily affect the way the message is perceived, Alden et al.’s 
research ( 2000 ) builds on previous studies focussed specifi cally on televi-
sion ads, which have concluded that a combination of controlled incon-
gruity and an element of surprise (that was previously signalled as playful) 
can result in enhanced humour perception. This, in its turn, might eventu-
ally result in a more positive attitude and warmth towards the ad (and, in 
extension, towards the brand at stake). However, the authors stress that 
not all attempts at humour in ads will result in an ad that is perceived as 
funny, and this failure can eventually backfi re when it comes to the public 
reading of a given brand ( 2000 , 12). 
 Regardless of the different approaches that try to cover the effects and 
inner workings of humour in general, in the specifi c case of advertising, it 
can be agreed that humour is used as a strategy at the service of the adver-
tiser’s ‘hidden agenda’, that is the promotion of a given product or service 
CRUDE AND TABOO HUMOUR IN TELEVISION ADVERTISING: AN ANALYSIS... 177

with a view to raising the audience’s positive awareness of the brand, which 
may eventually lead to a purchase decision (Belch and Belch  2004 , 206). 
In fact, humour seems to be an increasingly pervasive phenomenon in the 
world of advertising (Alden et al.  2000 , 1) and one that, apparently, guar-
antees memorization (Cho  1995 , 191)—if not of the product or service 
that is being advertised, at least of the ad itself. 
 Humour as an Advertising Strategy 
 The diffi culty inherent to the characterization of the phenomenon makes 
it all the more valuable when used as an attention-grabbing strategy in ads. 
As Cook points out, ads make the most of indeterminacy and appeals to 
emotion ( 1992 , 45), such as the ones conveyed by humour or even music, 
which might help disguise the lack of a relevant or noteworthy message. 
When it is hard to pinpoint what exactly makes us remember a specifi c ad 
is when the combined appeal of its different elements has effectively man-
aged to convey a powerful global message (Freitas  2008 , 128–129). 
 Humour can indeed be a useful tool when indeterminacy is an intrinsic 
part of the message (Polimeni and Reiss  2006 , 348). That is usually the 
case with advertising when, very often, there is no real discernible differ-
ence between products in the same category (Myers  1986 , 49). Therefore, 
differentiation has to be established on the basis of intangible and often 
emotional associations that are used to extol the virtues of a material artefact 
(Williamson  1978 , 24; Dyer  1982 , 53). Ambiguity allows the product to be 
read beyond the mere physical characteristics, which are no longer enough 
to seduce the audience into buying a specifi c brand (Myers  1994 , 19). 
 Humour, as a strategy, can in some cases play a major role in an ad, 
but it must necessarily be supported by other auxiliary strategies, such as 
music, metaphors or intertextual references. This  caveat is important in 
that it draws attention to the fact that every single element in an ad conveys 
meaning and all of them work together, concurring to the conveyance of 
a unique message at the service of the product at stake (Cook  1992 , 37). 
However, the fact that humour never works alone in ad messages adds 
extra complexity to an already demanding task, since the  different effect 
of humour in ads can be heightened, foregrounded or even downplayed 
by the action of the other strategies that are also present. 
 Especially in the case of television ads, it is the simultaneous effect of all 
the elements as they unfold during a chronological timeline that conveys the 
overall effect intended (Freitas  2008 , 127). An analysis that is exclusively 
178 
E.S.L. FREITAS

centred in either the text, the image or even the audio part of the ad will 
necessarily be limited and fragmented in its scope (Cook  1992 , 38), since it 
does not take into account the way ads are seen and interpreted by real-life 
consumers. In the case of humorous ads, a global approach in their analysis 
is all the more necessary since, very often, the build-up of a fi nal humor-
ous effect is achieved by means of an abridged narrative process, where text 
(which can be written, spoken or sung), moving and static images, as well as 
music and special sound effects all contribute to the delivery of a successful 
punch line—and the joke will not be the same without one of them. 
 Humour represents a special case in advertising strategies, since it can 
both describe a functional device—one of the many ingredients, which 
can assume different forms, used to convey the ad’s message—as well as 
an outcome or global effect of the ad (which allows us to describe a spe-
cifi c ad as ‘funny’). This fact clearly positions humour as an extraordinary 
instance among the possibilities advertisers can resort to in order to trans-
mit their messages in a convincing manner.  
 Alienating the Audience? Risky Uses of Humour in Ads 
 As we have seen, the use of humour in ads does not guarantee persuasion. 
Many complex factors have to be taken into account and to interact prop-
erly for it to succeed since, as Gulas and Weinberger point out, humour is 
somewhat frail as a strategy ( 2006 , 19). However, humorous ads seem to 
be a favourite form of entertainment for many people and humour is defi -
nitely one of the features that audiences single out as revealing of creativity 
and talent in the area of advertising. 
 As we have seen, ads are a marginal kind of discourse, which keep inter-
rupting other discourses—the ones that people really want or need to pay 
attention to (Cook  1992 , 13). Therefore, to make us overlook this intru-
sion, ads have to give audiences something in return for their trouble. 
The bargaining chip is, very often, their entertainment value. An ad makes 
an implicit promise that it is worth watching, because it will be creative, 
funny and entertaining. The use of humour is, normally, a safe bet in this 
case, since people will only tolerate an interruption that is not boring. In 
certain cases, the entertainment value of ads has even created a tradition 
of its own, as in Super Bowl advertising, an event where the social power 
of advertising becomes obvious (McAllister  1999 , 403), and where series 
of ads are sometimes run months in advance, building up to the culmi-
nation of one fi nal glorious ad during the event (Kim et al.  2005 , 46), 
and where ‘ad meters’ measure the entertainment value of the ads, that 
CRUDE AND TABOO HUMOUR IN TELEVISION ADVERTISING: AN ANALYSIS... 179

is, their likeability, which is often associated with humour. As Gulas and 
Weinberger postulate, it is possible that this measurement does not yield 
crucial marketing information in terms of brand recall or even purchase 
intent—however, it is most revealing of the fact that people have come to 
expect ads to fulfi l other functions apart from the mere delivery of a sales 
pitch ( 2006 , 165–166). In fact, research shows that a part of the audi-
ence will only watch the Super Bowl games in order to watch the famed 
Super Bowl commercials (Kelley and Turley  2004 , 399, based on previous 
studies), which demonstrates that some audiences have come to enjoy ads 
merely for the entertainment they may offer, appreciating them as pure 
fun or even objects of aesthetic contemplation—or even both, simultane-
ously (González Requena and Ortiz de Zárate  1995 , 12). 
 In view of the diverse fi ndings discussed, which indicate that cognition 
and affective-based approaches might achieve better results in the iden-
tifi cation of an ad as humorous, thus enhancing its positive effects, there 
could be something of a paradox in the fact that some brands deliberately 
decide to advertise their products with more aggressive humorous tactics. 
In the case of the Super Bowl ads mentioned previously, research indicates, 
interestingly, that ads that combine violence with humorous contents were 
among the public’s favourites, this type of ads having doubled in number 
when comparing fi gures from 2005 and 2009. Apart from the informa-
tion this research may yield, it also raises serious ethical concerns, mainly 
related with issues such as trivialization and acceptability of violence, when 
embedded in humorous messages, which, apart from the humour, also 
contain attractive and seductive features, rendering the whole experience 
enjoyable (Blackford et al.  2011 , 131). 
 Due to the complexity of the matter, the concept of ‘aggressive/vio-
lent humour’ has to be modulated by reassessing a number of factors that 
always have to be taken into account when the issue is humour: among 
others, it is crucial to defi ne (1) the type of product that is being advertised, 
(2) the audience at stake, and (3) the interplay of the mechanisms that are 
activated in the individual during the processing of the ad’s message. 
 Concerning point (1), Gulas and Weinberger ( 2006 ), based on previ-
ous studies, conclude that advertisers prefer to use humour in products 
that imply low involvement, low risk and less fi nancial investment (des-
ignated as ‘yellow products’ or ‘small treats’). These products seem to 
be the ones that lend themselves to light readings, which will (hopefully) 
keep the product in the prospective buyers’ minds, whereas in the case of 
180 
E.S.L. FREITAS

more serious, high-involvement products, the humorous approach might 
trigger readings of frivolity or shallowness, which could easily rub off onto 
the product itself, therefore affecting its more sober image. 
 Point (2) is crucial when it comes to assessing the pertinence of adopt-
ing more aggressive approaches when existing research as well as empirical 
evidence, up to a point, suggest that subtlety and affection might be more 
effective in the long run. However, it is essential to bear in mind whom the 
message of the ad is, in fact, addressing (Freitas  2008 , 108). The matter of 
offensive approaches should be viewed taking into account the intended 
addressee of the ad message. In fact, criticism often comes from people 
who are not the intended audience of such ads and who are imposing their 
own concept of ‘good taste’ on messages that were not meant for them 
in the fi rst place (Boddewyn  1991 , 33). Admittedly, some audiences are 
harder to reach than others, and the characteristics of a given audience will 
decisively affect our taking offence with the content of a specifi c ad (Beard 
 2008a , 14). On the other hand, our ever increasing media and advertising 
literacy makes us more diffi cult to seduce and persuade (Myers  1999 , ix). 
One of the most diffi cult targets to reach is that of males between the ages 
of 18 and 34. This is partly due to the fact that they are very familiar with 
every type of media and the possibilities they offer when it comes to escap-
ing unwanted interruptions by commercial breaks, and also to their evasive 
habits when using technology, seldom allowing their undivided attention 
to dwell on any broadcast content for a long time (Gulas and Weinberger 
 2006 , 167–168). Men in this age span are more tolerant of ads that fea-
ture sensitive issues, whereas women (particularly the ones over the age of 
fi fty) are more easily offended with references to antisocial themes (Waller 
 1999 ). This higher level of tolerance seems to be an opportunity for adver-
tisers to try to reach such an elusive target (even if it raises ethical concerns, 
as pointed out by Gulas and Weinberger), attracting their attention with 
the outrageousness of the humorous approaches adopted—certainly, run-
ning the risk of alienating other audiences by doing so ( 2006 , 168–169). 
 Point (3) is an especially complex one in that, on one hand, it is closely 
connected to the nature of the different humour theories previously 
discussed, and their possible simultaneous existence, albeit in different 
degrees, in many humorous ad executions (Cho and Kim  2000 , 196). On 
the other hand, we have to keep in mind that the market is overfl owing 
both with remarkably similar products in each category and with myriad of 
ads in every medium imaginable. It is becoming increasingly more diffi cult 
to cut through the clutter and achieve some visibility. As Beard postulates, 
CRUDE AND TABOO HUMOUR IN TELEVISION ADVERTISING: AN ANALYSIS... 181

resorting to more aggressive forms of humour might be a way to achieve 
this, enhancing attention to and awareness of the ad and, consequently, of 
the brand ( 2008b , 3). 
 However, attention and awareness have to be of the positive kind if 
effective results are to be obtained. There are several classic cases where, 
by means of a misguided humorous campaign with shocking advertising 
appeals, increased notoriety was indeed achieved, but for the wrong rea-
sons, which tarnished, in some cases permanently, the image of the brand 
at stake. As examples of different types of attempts at humour gone astray, 
Gulas and Weinberger mention the case of the shoe retailer Just for Feet, 
with a campaign that was felt as racist and insensitive; Nike, with a magazine 
ad that was felt as offensive to the disabled community, as well as several 
ads for beers that stress the infamous ‘beer and bimbo’ sexist association 
( 2006 , 174–177). Potential for offence when using humorous execution 
styles is certainly high—hence the ‘fragility’ of the strategy that was men-
tioned before (Gulas and Weinberger  2006 ). However, research indicates 
that it can be minimized with specifi c approaches. Even though their use 
does not guarantee that the ad will be perceived as funny, it is less likely 
that viewers will take offence, which, in the long run, will have positive 
results for the brand’s image. Beard ( 2008a , 14) concludes that the risks 
of humour in advertising are mostly concentrated on negatively aggressive 
arousal-safety instances, since humour with positive resonations is relatively 
safe. Additionally, when taking the risk of using the most risky approach, 
the best target would be the most tolerant target audience (young males). 
 These fi ndings seem to confi rm the previously existing research, when it 
comes to the riskier humorous types of execution. Approaches based on dis-
paragement and aggression seem to correspond to higher potential in terms 
of offence, which may even obliterate the possibility of the ad being seen as 
funny at all. As to the more compliant target audience, this study reinforces 
the notion that young men are the most tolerant ones—which provides a 
safe haven for advertisers who want to attempt more daring approaches for 
the sake of novelty and innovation. Surprisingly enough, this same target is 
increasingly becoming a favourite butt for jokes (Gulas et al.  2010 ).  
 ANALYZING AD CAMPAIGNS 
 Examples of purportedly funny ads that end up causing offence, for different 
reasons, are not hard to fi nd. A traditional repository for such material can be 
found in the famous Super Bowl ads. In fact, the annual championship sports 
182 
E.S.L. FREITAS

event of the National Football League (NFL) in the United States, which 
culminates the sports season, has become much more than a sports event. 
Due to the huge worldwide viewership it enjoys, it represents, for some 
brands, a major broadcasting opportunity for their most expensive advertise-
ments—and, very often, for their most risqué ones. Broadcasting these ads 
during the Super Bowl event is, for some brands, a test of their acceptability 
when it comes to using them for traditional media such as national TV. The 
brief analysis that follows of specifi c ads will refer to Super Bowl ads, as well 
to as some randomly chosen television ads recently broadcast on Portuguese 
television channels. The criteria underlying these selections is ads that illus-
trate some of the theoretical points from the fi rst part of this chapter as to 
different types of humour and possible readings on their effects. 
 Blondes, Beer and Hamburgers: The Male Paradise 
 The classic association (already referred to) between a cold refreshing beer 
and a ‘dumb blonde’ is explicit in a Sagres beer ad. Sagres is one of the two 
most popular beer brands in Portugal and this particular ad was broadcast 
on television in 2010 during the summer months. The ad relies on a very 
basic narrative thread line, where a gorgeous blonde young woman in a 
small bikini emerges from the sea, after taking a bath, and sashays slowly 
along the sand towards a group of google-eyed, gaping-mouthed young 
men. After looking at them for a few seconds in a seductive way, the woman 
picks up a bottle of beer from an icebox next to her beach towel and gulps 
it down with relish as the men still gaze at her. The intended humour in 
the ad is to be found in the facial expressions of the group of drooling 
men and on the lyrics of the song that is heard during the narrative. Sung 
loudly by a male choir, it speaks about ‘Sagres, our very own blonde’, with 
a very straightforward pun involving the colour of the young woman’s 
hair and the colour of the beer—a metaphor that any Portuguese viewer 
would immediately grasp, since it is still quite usual to hear beer referred 
to as ‘a blonde’. What this ad does is to illustrate a rather sexist view of 
women, using a visual and verbal metaphor to convey the notion BEER = 
WOMEN. However, it is also possible to discern objectifi cation of men in 
the ad who are portrayed as simple-minded individuals, who are rendered 
speechless by the sight of a beautiful woman, and are contented if they have 
cool refreshing beers to keep them happy during a hot day at the beach. 
This approach is similar to the one found in several of the crudest ads 
aired in the Super Bowl series, in the United States, with comparable edgy 
CRUDE AND TABOO HUMOUR IN TELEVISION ADVERTISING: AN ANALYSIS... 183

approaches by brands such as   GoDaddy.com    an Internet domain purchase 
company - which heavily stress the 'buxom bimbo' theme (with the use 
of celebrities such as Danica Patrick and Bar Refaeli), although in recent 
years there has been a noticeable effort to downplay the excessive sex-
ism typically associated with their Super Bowl advertising. A part of this 
trend, which seems generalised of late, might be associated with a shift in 
viewership demographics: in fact, as of 2014, 46% of Super Bowl viewers 
are women, which might help explain this recent turn towards a more 
mature kind of humour (B2BNews  2015 ). However, brands like Carl’s 
Jr. burgers are still betting on sexual suggestiveness as a source for rather 
crude humour, as in their 2015 ‘All Natural’ ad featuring supermodel 
Charlotte McKinney, who successively pays short visits to the different 
stands at a farmer’s market. As she sashays along the aisles, we see curvy 
fruit being superimposed on her body parts, which both exaggerate and 
hide the curves of her—almost naked—body. This (c)overt sexuality is fur-
ther emphasized by the model’s delighted reaction to the male, wide-eyed 
admiration she is obviously eliciting. 
 Both the Sagres ad described previously and in the ‘All Natural’ ad by 
Carl’s Jr., the attempt at humour might easily backfi re, on the one hand, 
due to its perceived crudeness, but on the other hand, also due to the lack 
of a strong narrative thread that might help support the use of the meta-
phors WOMEN = BEER, in the former, or FRUITS = FEMALE BODY 
PARTS, in the latter. The use of metaphors usually indicates indirectness 
and subtlety in the humorous approach, which normally increases positive 
feelings and likeability (Cho  1995 ). However, as the metaphors used in 
both ads are rather worn-out and simplistic, the fi nal effect may result in 
a rather crude reading—which, in the case of the Carl’s Jr. ad, could even 
disqualify it from airing on national television (Daily News  2015 ). 
 The disparagement of young males and their simplistic needs is extremely 
visible, in a more laugh-out-loud way, in a Super Bock ad (another brand 
of Portuguese beer) also broadcast in 2010. This ad is for a stout beer, 
which is traditionally associated with more mature men. The humour in 
this ad is centred on incongruity, paired with the unlikelihood of the situ-
ation it proposes. The ad begins with a number of men in their thirties, in 
white bathrobes, standing at the door of the ‘Stout Beer Spa’. When they 
enter the spa, they see that it is designed as a men’s paradise: a number 
of gorgeous and sophisticated female attendants wait on them hand and 
foot, serving them all the (stout) beer they want, as they lounge in com-
fortable sofas and have their backs massaged with a special oil concocted 
184 
E.S.L. FREITAS

with stout beer. Although funny (and most men would probably fi nd it 
so), this ad clearly imposes a sexist reading of men in general. However, 
the Sagres ad elicited more criticism and caused more offence, on the 
one hand, probably because its approach is blunter. On the other hand, 
it is possible that the more sophisticated approach of the Super Bock ad 
(BEER + WOMEN = EARTHLY PARADISE FOR MEN), where a nar-
rative thread can be detected and where the actors seem to be aware that 
they are indulging in a stereotypical masculine fantasy, creates a frame that 
erodes the disparagement and enhances the creativity and ingenuity of the 
concept. Men are the butt of the joke, in this case, but they are doing it in 
a mock-ironical way, as if that kind of behaviour were expected of them, 
after all. In this instance, it might be possible to read this ad’s humorous 
approach as a depiction of male fantasies that has been duly sanitized (by 
the use of irony and self-deprecation) for general consumption, so as to 
render it eventually non-threatening for female viewers (Gulas et al.  2010 , 
117). These pre-emptive strategies are quite common when advertisers 
use crude humour: after all, although an ad is meant for the enjoyment 
of a specifi c audience, it is seldom good policy to outrage and antagonize 
other potential viewers.  
 Drenched in Sweat: Making Grossness Funny 
 The ad chosen to illustrate this point can also be seen as disparaging for 
men. In the ad for Axe deodorant (Lynx in the UK), humour clearly stems 
from absurdity and exaggeration. Its technique is that of slapstick, when it 
shows a young man so seriously affl icted with a perspiration problem that 
he completely drenches everybody around him. Although it was seen as 
truly disgusting by the majority of adults and even young women, this ad 
proved extremely popular with young men (as most Axe ads are), which 
seems to confi rm that this is, indeed, the ideal approach for this target 
audience, who are highly tolerant of explicit grossness. 
 In the present case, the Axe ad is resorting to an exaggeration of taboo 
in order to create interest and humorous effects. It is common practice in 
ads for products that enclose taboo readings (such as sanitary protection 
products for women, toilet paper, laxatives, deodorants) to downplay what-
ever is unpleasant about them and divert the viewers’ attention towards 
more pleasant things, with the help of music, metaphor, intertextuality, 
and, eventually, unrelated (and positive) humour (Freitas  2008 ). Taking 
the opposite approach, for the sake of originality, the Axe ad highlights 
CRUDE AND TABOO HUMOUR IN TELEVISION ADVERTISING: AN ANALYSIS... 185

the perspiration problem, magnifying it into a major sweating affl iction, 
which affects the man doing the sweating and everyone who happens to 
be nearby—for maximum grossness effects. Highlighting taboo instead of 
hiding it can be a risky strategy, but for a brand like Axe, with a tradition in 
outraging ads, it may pay off, especially with its target audience: once again, 
constituted by young men.  
 The Blue Pill: Unlucky Man vs. Lucky Car 
 The Fiat 500X ad for the 2015 Super Bowl features, right from the start, 
some classic elements of a humorous narrative, further enhanced by the 
technical possibilities offered by the medium, such as the fast-paced alter-
nate angles that effectively tell the story, the close-ups on the actors’ faces, 
and the scenic landscapes that help create the sense of scenic grandeur 
that plays on the ‘enlargement’ metaphor that pervades this very Italian 
universe. The famous blue pill and its effects are, just by themselves, com-
monly used humorous elements in jokes, and this prop guarantees, right 
from the beginning, the appropriate mood on the part of the viewers. 
What begins as a positive humour script suddenly takes an unexpected 
twist, as the blue pills misses the elderly man’s open mouth, bounces all 
over the town and fi nally lands in the open fuel tank of a Fiat 500, turning 
it into a 500X crossover, bursting with life and energy, as the pill starts to 
work inside it. 
 The sexual impotence vs. increased virility metaphor is, in the case of 
this ad, safely kept within boundaries, making it a lot less racy than it could 
be. The sexual readings are mainly expressed by means of the transfor-
mation (i.e. the sudden enlargement) of the small car’s frame, and con-
fi rmed by the lewd gazes of several women who glance at the transformed 
 version. This succession of metaphors effectively protects the ad from the 
disadvantages negative humour could bring to the brand, and manages to 
retain its attractiveness both for the main target audiences as well as for 
other secondary ones.  
 
CONCLUSION 
 This chapter ends with a truism of sorts: it is impossible to separate humour 
in advertising from individual and contextual factors. Although we can say 
that this applies to every single instance of humour in any situation, it is 
186 
E.S.L. FREITAS

even truer of its use in advertising: although an ad can be planned from 
scratch to be funny (and with such a loaded form of communication as 
advertising, that kind of planning was certainly earnest and intensive, were 
such a strategy intended), it is only the individual on the receiving end that 
will determine whether a specifi c ad will be received with laughter (Gulas 
and Weinberger  2006 , 56). 
 Audiences use the humour they fi nd in ads for their own purposes, 
which means that it cannot be imposed from outside. As with every other 
strategy meant to seduce the viewers, attempts at humour in ads are pro-
posals, which can be successful or not, depending on many circumstances. 
As Myers points out, ‘advertising does not impose its messages on passive 
audiences, but provides a text that audience may take up and transform—
or may ignore entirely’ ( 1999 , 14). One of the advantages of humour is 
that it enhances an experience that can be already enjoyable: if successful, 
the laughter it elicits is an extra reward given to us for taking the time to 
pay attention ( 1999 , 125). 
 A number of ethical issues can be associated to this discussion, and 
the need to discuss them becomes even more pressing in the cases where 
humour in ads is insensitive, sick, cruel, racist or sexist, due to the violence 
that it can contain and depict, in more or less explicit manners. Although 
in some cases ads with such characteristics do sell, they also have adverse 
effects, since they may undermine the credibility and acceptance of the 
advertising industry (Boddewyn  1991 , 33). 
 It is true that risky humour strategies in ads can serve their purpose 
and please the public they want to seduce. As we have seen with the Fiat 
500X example, it is certainly possible to dilute or minimize aggressive 
humour, combining it with other approaches so that it makes sense in 
the overall context of the ad. Humour, in general, can be a very helpful 
strategy for ads to say things in a more appealing and enjoyable way, even 
when their subject is drab or downright unpleasant. However, as we have 
seen, humour can also be a very dangerous weapon, when inappropriately 
used—and the risk of it happening is considerably higher when extreme 
forms of humour are used.  
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Alden, Dana L., and Wayne D. Hoyer. 1993. An Examination of Cognitive Factors 
Related to Humorousness in Television Advertising.  Journal of Advertising 
22(2): 29–37.  
CRUDE AND TABOO HUMOUR IN TELEVISION ADVERTISING: AN ANALYSIS... 187

 Alden, Dana L., Ashesh Mukherjee, and Wayne D. Hoyer. 2000. The Effects of 
Incongruity, Surprise and Positive Moderators on Perceived Humor in 
Television Advertising.  Journal of Advertising 29: 1–16. 
 Attardo, Salvatore. 2003. Introduction: The Pragmatics of Humor.  Journal of 
Pragmatics 35: 1287–1294.  
 B2BNews. 2015. What to Expect from 2014 Super Bowl Ads.  B2BNews , January 
30. 
 Beard, Frank K. 2008a. How Products and Advertising Offend Consumers. 
 Journal of Advertising Research 48: 13–21.  
 ———. 2008b. Advertising and Audience Offense: The Role of Intentional 
Humor.  Journal of Marketing Communications 14(1): 1–17.  
 Belch, George E., and Michael A. Belch. 2004.  Advertising and Promotion: An 
Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective . New York: McGraw-Hill.  
 Berger, Asa A. 1993.  An Anatomy of Humour . New Brunswick: Transaction.  
 Blackford, Benjamin J., James Gentry, Robert L. Harrison, and Les Carlson. 2011. 
The Prevalence and Infl uence of the Combination of Humor and Violence in 
Super Bowl Commercials.  Journal of Advertising 40(4): 123–133.  
 Boddewyn, Jean J. 1991. Controlling Sex and Decency in Advertising Around the 
World.  Journal of Advertising 20(4): 25–35.  
 Cho, Hyongoh. 1995. Humor Mechanisms, Perceived Humor and Their 
Relationships to Various Executional Types in Advertising.  Advances in 
Consumer Research 22: 191–197.  
 Cho, Hyongoh, and Heejin Kim.  2000. The Effects of Viewer Responses to 
Television Commercials on Immediate and Delayed Ad Attitude and Brand 
Evaluation Among Korean Consumers.  Advances in Consumer Research , 27: 
245-260. 
 Cook, Guy. 1992.  The Discourse of Advertising . London: Routledge.  
 Daily News. 2015. Too Hot for TV? Charlotte McKinney Channels her Best Kate 
Upton, Goes All Natural for Carl’s Jr. Super Bowl Ad.  New York Daily News , 
January 22.  
 Dyer, Gillian. 1982.  Advertising as Communication . London: Routledge.  
 Flaherty, Karen E., Marc G. Weinberger, and Charles S. Gulas. 2004. The Impact 
of Perceived Humor, Product Type, and Humor Style in Radio Advertising. 
 Journal of Current Issues and Research in Advertising 26(1): 25–36.  
 Freitas, Elsa S.L. 2008.  Taboo in Advertising . Amsterdam: John Benjamins.  
 González Requena, Jesus, and Anaya Ortiz de Zárate. 1995.  El espot publicitario. 
La metamorfosis del deseo . Catedra: Madrid.  
 Gulas, Charles S., and Marc G.  Weinberger. 2006.  Humour in Advertising: A 
Comprehensive Analysis . New York: M.E. Sharpe.  
 Gulas, Charles S., Kim K. McKeage, and Marc G. Weinberger. 2010. It’s Just a 
Joke: Violence Against Males in Humorous Advertising.  Journal of Advertising 
39(4): 109–120.  
188 
E.S.L. FREITAS

 Kelley, Scott W., and L.W.  Turley. 2004. The Effect of Content on Perceived 
Affect of Super Bowl Commercials.  Journal of Sport Management 18: 398–420.  
 Kim, Juran, Sally J.  McMillan, and Jang-Sun Hwang. 2005. Strategies for the 
Super Bowl of Advertising: An Analysis of How the Web Is Integrated into 
Campaigns.  Journal of Interactive Advertising 6(1): 46–60.  
 McAllister, Matthew P. 1999. Super Bowl advertising as commercial celebration. 
 The Communication Review 3(4): 403–428.  
 Morreall, John. 1983.  Taking Laughter Seriously . Albany: State University of 
New York Press.  
 Myers, Greg. 1994.  Words in Ads . London: Arnold.  
 ———. 1999.  Ad Worlds . London: Arnold.  
 Myers, Kathy. 1986.  Understains: The Sense and Seduction of Advertising . London: 
Comedia. 
 Polimeni, Joseph, and Jeffrey P.  Reiss. 2006. The First Joke: Exploring the 
Evolutionary Origins of Humor.  Evolutionary Psychology 4: 347–366.  
 Raskin, Victor. 1985.  Semantic Mechanisms of Humor . Dordrecht: D.  Reidel 
Publishing Company.  
 Waller, David S. 1999. Attitudes Toward Offensive Advertising: An Australian 
Study.  Journal of Consumer Marketing 16(3): 288–294.  
 Williamson, Judith. 1978.  Decoding Advertisements: Ideology and Meaning in 
Advertising . London: Marion Boyars.  
 Yeshin, Tony. 2006.  Advertising . London: Thompson.  
 Zillmann, Dolf, and Joanne R. Cantor. 1996. A Disposition Theory of Humor and 
Mirth. In  Humor and Laughter: Theory, Research and Applications , ed. Antony 
J. Chapman, and Hugh C. Foot, 93–115. New Brunswick: Transaction.  
CRUDE AND TABOO HUMOUR IN TELEVISION ADVERTISING: AN ANALYSIS... 189

191
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2_11
 Filthy Viewing, Dirty Laughter  
 Delia   Chiaro  
 D.  Chiaro  () 
 University of Bologna ,   Forlì ,  Italy 
 e-mail: delia.chiaro@unibo.it 
 There is nothing intrinsically amusing about fi lth and dirt, especially when 
it is displayed in vast quantities, in full colour and in minute detail across 
our television screens. However, for some inexplicable reason, watch-
ing Kim Woodburn and Aggie MacKenzie, the presenters of TV series 
 How Clean Is Your House? dipping their beautifully manicured fi ngers 
into thick gunges of sticky, mouldy leftover food and brandishing toilet 
brushes streaked with faecal matter is not simply repulsive and nauseating, 
it is also very funny. What exactly is so funny about these repugnant visu-
als? Are such revolting scenes amusing because they are incongruous and 
out of step with the pristine perfection for which we so often aim? Are we 
purely taking pleasure in the misfortunate lifestyles of others? Or are the 
producers dabbling in some tendentious fun and laughing at these serial 
‘grime offenders’? 
 In his extensive work on jokes, Davies has established that the trait 
of stupidity is at the core of a vast number of joke targets, while another 
widespread characteristic of those who are stupid is dirtiness. In serious 
discourse ‘dirty’ has a stronger negative connotation than ‘stupid’—con-
sider ‘dirty bugger’ versus ‘stupid bugger’. Davies explains that in some 

societies the absence of ethnic jokes about the fi lthy habits of others 
refl ects confl icting values and attitudes towards rational hygiene in dif-
ferent nations ( 1992 , 173–174; 190). Having poor personal hygiene or 
living in fi lth is not something of which people are generally proud.  How 
Clean Is Your House? places the dirt and grime of a person’s home on pub-
lic display, thus breaking a social taboo. After all, cleanliness, according to 
the proverb, is close to godliness. Furthermore, this public display of dirt 
reinforces the mores of society. By framing these images of dirt within 
a context where they can be safely viewed, and above all contemplated 
and ridiculed, they can subsequently be rejected as modes of behaviour 
appropriate in the everyday world (Makarius  1970 , 68). However, this 
display of fi lth reminds us of our animal nature and with its many images 
and references to faeces and urine the subject matter of the show is truly 
scatological. The indigestible content of  How Clean Is Your House? is far 
from being metaphorical alone. The thought that people actually go about 
their daily activities including eating and assimilating nutriments in envi-
ronments surrounded by rotting food and faecal materials, is, in itself, 
stomach churning. Yet we laugh and enjoy it. 
 This chapter sets out to examine the humour factor and to identify 
some diverse types and functions of laughter occurring in a representa-
tive sample of six episodes from the series. Rather than simply occurring 
in response to the shocking yet comical situations presented in each epi-
sode, much laughter in the series conveys nervousness and embarrassment 
as well as being a manifestation of alignment or dis-alignment with the 
show’s presenters by the ill-fated residents of the unkempt homes. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 How Clean Is Your House? is a lifestyle entertainment program produced 
by Stephanie Harris and Lisa Edwards that ran for fi ve seasons on UK 
Channel 4 between May 2003 and September 2009. In each thirty- minute 
episode, experienced cleaners Kim Woodburn and Aggie MacKenzie tackle 
a house or an apartment that is in an exceptionally dirty condition and, 
with the help of a team of professional cleaners, meticulously clean it from 
top to bottom and thereby restore it to immaculate perfection. Unlike 
other home makeover programs such as Endemol’s  Extreme Makeover 
Home Edition (2003–12), in which dilapidated houses are totally refur-
bished with new fi ttings and furniture,  How Clean Is Your House? limits 
itself to cleaning and restoring the contents that are already present in 
192 
D. CHIARO

the household. Furthermore, although the show deals with people who 
have serious problems regarding lack of hygiene, it is also different from 
programs such as  Hoarders (A&E, 2009–present) and  Hoarding, Buried 
Alive (TLC/Discovery, 2000–13) . How Clean Is Your House? is not con-
cerned with the physical and psychological ordeal that people suffer when 
they are unable to control their surroundings, but focuses instead on the 
dirt and chaos in which they live. Above all, the program mostly tackles 
the problem from a light-hearted and whimsical stance. 
 A US spin-off of  How Clean Is Your House? ran for two seasons in 2004 
on Lifetime network. The series differed from the UK series in that the 
presenters, who typically give out household tips and use everyday house-
hold products like lemon juice and bicarbonate of soda for cleaning, in the 
US version also use and advertise commercially available cleaning products 
throughout. Translated versions of the show, via subtitling and dubbing, 
have ensured its success in twenty countries worldwide, while the format 
also exists in its Dutch and French adaptations, respectively  Hoe schoon is 
jouw Huis? and  C’est du propre! 
 As in all makeover shows,  How Clean Is Your House? follows a before- 
and- after format that is repeated throughout the series with each epi-
sode following exactly the same set-up and structure. Practiced cleaners 
Woodburn and MacKenzie arrive at an exceptionally fi lthy and unkempt 
property in need of cleaning and begin by inspecting the premises for 
dirt and grime. They reprimand the owners for their slovenly habits, offer 
practical advice on how to carry out household tasks and with the help of 
a team of professional cleaners, clean the premises to utmost perfection. 
However, as well as providing instructions in terms of tips regarding how 
to set about a variety of household tasks, the show also provides a good 
deal of comic relief. Each episode is a sort of humorous cautionary tale 
that provides a shock factor deriving from the extreme living conditions 
of the occupants of the households, tempered by the contrast of the pre-
senters’ appearance (especially Kim’s) plus their irony, sarcasm and witty 
banter. The mismatch between sharp, witty discourse and its surround-
ing images of extreme fi lthiness contributes to a general atmosphere of 
non-seriousness. In other words, the program walks the fi ne line between 
the serious predicaments of the occupants’ dire living conditions and the 
objective absurdity of these very conditions. Images of noxious matter 
and serious discourse regarding the dangers of living in fi lth constantly 
switches to friendly banter and then back again to seriousness in a matter 
of seconds. 
FILTHY VIEWING, DIRTY LAUGHTER 193

 So, how exactly does  How Clean Is Your House? succeed in transform-
ing the serious problem of people who have at the very least an aversion to 
cleanliness and at the worst who suffer from a pathological condition into 
light entertainment? According to the contents of this show, the answer is 
quite simple: through humour and laughter. In fact, from the capricious 
opening credits and upbeat background music to actor Paul Copley’s 
quirky and alliterative voice-over narration together with Woodburn’s 
amusing banter, each episode is in sharp contrast with its more serious 
documentary style counterparts. The show’s true protagonist, together 
with dirt, is the repartee that succeeds in subverting situations concerning 
the unpleasant subject matter of messy homes into something that audi-
ences actually want to watch. 
 The episodes examined in this chapter are all contained in a DVD com-
pilation entitled  How Clean Is Your House. Six of the Filthiest Shows ever 
seen on TV!  1 Presumably the producers of this DVD must have considered 
the single episodes representative enough to make up a sort of ‘greatest 
hits’ compilation making it ideal material for the purpose of this study as 
they should exemplify six typically dirty premises and six equally typical 
residents, or, as they are wittily labelled on the show ‘grime offenders’. 
 Media scholars have examined makeover shows such as, and including, 
 How Clean Is Your House? Of particular interest are the studies by Hunt 
( 2009 ), Moseley ( 2000 ) and Nathanson ( 2013 ), which examine these 
series from the point of view of femininity in the postfeminist context. 
While providing signifi cant (indigestible?) food for thought, these studies 
remain beyond the scope of this chapter, which is restricted solely to the 
humorous aspect of the show.  
 MUCKY SURROUNDINGS 
 The stark, white DVD cover features Kim and Aggie relaxing on a sofa. The 
duo are wearing the white cleaning overalls and bejewelled rubber gloves 
they don in the cleaning stage of each episode and are clutching feather 
dusters. Both are looking straight into the camera, poised with their legs 
crossed, Aggie simply smiling while Kim has a mock-stern expression and 
waves a gloved hand in a queen-like manner. The accompanying blurb is 
couched in a light-hearted mode as it informs viewers that Kim and Aggie, 
‘the ladies who like to ditch the dirt’ will ‘…expose their [the homes’] 
deepest, darkest, dirtiest secrets’. The cover also includes a short review 
from the  Daily Star that claims that the series guarantees ‘Good, fi lthy 
194 
D. CHIARO

fun. Humiliating, embarrassing and extremely funny.’ So, thanks to the 
not especially subtle sexual innuendo of terms like ‘dirty’ collocated with 
‘secrets’ and ‘fi lthy’ with ‘fun’, viewers can expect a program that may not 
be totally in earnest. As well as this, the terms ‘humiliating’ and ‘embar-
rassing’ hint at unkindness, suggesting that the series will involve some 
kind of underdog, a target to be laughed at. In fact, the blurb appeals to 
what George Orwell famously refers to, in  The Art of Donald McGill , as 
the typically British inclination for ‘low’ humour, the ‘naughty’  double 
entendre of the seaside postcard and the  Carry On tradition. This informa-
tion, together with the comic-style haphazard font of the graphics, builds 
up expectations that are more reminiscent of a tabloid newspaper than a 
documentary about home maintenance. 
 The title sequence at the beginning of each episode opens with roughly 
twenty seconds of black-and-white close-ups of different parts of the 
house where dirt and upheaval reign accompanied by a tune that is char-
acteristic of a horror fi lm. There are quick fl ashes of sinks piled up high 
with dirty dishes, piles of laundry scattered all over, fl oors covered in rub-
bish, close-ups of dusty and grimy surfaces and the fl oating corpses of a 
variety of insects. Each shot of a fi lthy space is interspersed with a short 
clip of the residents explaining how and why the premises got into such 
a state. The horror music reaches a crescendo as the photographs moves 
into a 17-second long title sequence, in which the presenters appear as 
their cartoon parodies. The cartoon versions of Kim and Aggie consist of 
exaggerated caricatures of their real life persona: Kim is excessively buxom, 
Aggie overly nerdy. As in reality, the duo are meticulously well dressed 
in colourful outfi ts, trendy shoes, costume jewellery and signature mani-
cured nails so, the opening sequence, like the entire show itself, strongly 
focuses on the contrast between the well-groomed duo and their slovenly 
surroundings. Against a background of dramatic music that includes the 
sound of squeaking doors, gasps, screams and horrifi c laughter, the fi rst 
thing the audience sees is a spider crawling across a wedding photo cov-
ered in cobwebs and a manicured index fi nger rubbing a thick layer of 
dust off the surface beneath it. A close up of Kim’s stylized face honing in 
on an anthropomorphised spider dashing across the screen follows, while 
bespectacled Aggie’s inspection beneath a table is met with the silhou-
ettes of two Disney-style mice and several pairs of headless, beady eyes. 
Audiences next see insects emerging from the toilet pan, a kitchen sink 
overfl owing with dirty dishes, pots and pans and spiders dangling from 
the ceiling. However, the blood-curdling shrieks and horror fi lm music 
FILTHY VIEWING, DIRTY LAUGHTER 195

gradually morph into the upbeat rhythm of a jazzy tune and dust and 
cobwebs transmute into soap bubbles. A series of close-ups follow, fi rst of 
Kim threateningly shaking a tin of Scour Away at the offensive dirt, then 
of the tightly swathed derrières of the cartoon versions of Kim and Aggie 
on their knees as they scrub a fl oor wiggling their hips to the rhythm of the 
music. The sequence ends with a close up of Kim’s curvaceous calves, her 
feet in teetering high heels as she sweeps away numerous creepy-crawlies 
from the fl oor. Finally, we see the pad of Kim’s fi nger with its long mani-
cured nail lacquered with scarlet varnish, writing the title of the series 
in a layer of dust. Therefore, from the musical score to the caricature 
of the presenters and a dirty home literally crawling with insects, audi-
ences receive a clear signal of the non-seriousness of what is to come. And 
this represents the program’s fi rst incongruity, the fi rst hint of (ill)logical 
mechanisms and oppositions contained in the text that render it humor-
ous in intent (Attardo  2001 , 25–27). 
 A further important element that signals non-seriousness of the series 
is actor Paul Copley’s whimsical, often alliterative voice-over narration for 
each episode. As discussed at length elsewhere (Chiaro  2016 ), Copley uses 
words and expressions from the semantic fi eld related to the specifi city of 
each episode and elaborates as many connected puns as possible. Although 
makeover shows are generally considered to be unscripted, it is unlikely 
that Copley’s voice-over has not been carefully planned, written down and 
rehearsed in detail in order to get the timing that is so crucial to achieve a 
comic effect, just right. When Kim and Aggie set about cleaning a house-
boat, Copley says that the residents are ‘a family who have sailed into deep 
water’ and are now ‘struggling to keep their heads above water’ as, among 
other things ‘the family has made a titanic mess of the toilet’ but that 
Kim and Aggie are ‘ready to stick their oar in’. Copley’s delivery is usually 
deadpan but at times he delivers his lines in a ‘smile voice’—a ‘raspy way 
of speaking that correlates with smiling, nearly laughing, or preparing to 
laugh’ (Glenn and Holt  2013 , 6). In other words, some situations are so 
extreme that at times Copley is unable to maintain a straight voice and his 
smile voice will emerge.  
 SHOCK, HORROR AND LAUGHTER 
 According to Glenn and Holt, time after time laughter turns up either in 
moments of celebration or moments of trouble ( 2013 , 2). The quality and 
quantity of fi lth in the homes in question is undoubtedly a troublesome 
196 
D. CHIARO

situation and over and above matters of safety and hygiene, these spaces 
are exaggeratedly unkempt, so much so as to trigger a reaction of shock, 
horror and, why not, laughter. After all, more incongruous situations than 
homes in which garbage takes over most of the living spaces and refrigera-
tors teem with rotten food are hard to fi nd. Therefore, it stands to reason 
that upon entering each household Kim and Aggie will normally react to 
the dirt and chaos they see with shock and revulsion. In fact, the duo typi-
cally have diffi culty moving around, as the residents of the home will have 
usually hoarded large quantities of clutter that haphazardly occupies large 
areas of space. As the couple explore, often physically having to climb over 
debris, they come across fi lth and grime of all sorts, including food left to 
rot, mould surfacing on unfi nished drinks, dead insects and the excrements 
of rodents. Kim and Aggies outfi ts further impede their movements. They 
wear brand new shiny shoes, Kim’s with high heels to complement a very 
tight skirt, and Aggie’s trendy with pointed toes. Neither of them wears 
shoes that are suitable for mountaineering over rubbish heaps, so viewers 
engage in their physical exertion. Of course, this contrast shiny, new/dirty, 
messy teamed with the sheer struggle of physically negotiating the spaces 
adds to the humour factor. Moreover, Kim and Aggie will quite rightly 
shriek and gasp in histrionic disgust, but most of all they use laughter to 
express their revulsion. Upon entering a household where eleven birds are 
fl ying around the room and defecating on every possible surface, Kim and 
Aggie retreat to a corner of the room where they crouch down and cover 
their heads to prevent being hit by droppings. Surrounded by fl ying birds 
both women shriek and laugh presumably out of a mixture of astonish-
ment and fear. Having eleven birds run (fl y) wild in someone’s living quar-
ters is undoubtedly bizarre, but how exactly does all this become comic? 
 Arguably, it is the duo’s use of laughter as well as their physical reac-
tion as they huddle together giggling loudly, combined, of course, with 
a series of extra-textual elements that create the humour. Viewers are 
already privy to the cartoon opening sequence, the offbeat music and, 
of course, the tenor of the Paul Copley’s camp voice-over. In this epi-
sode, Copley’s wordplay includes painful puns such as ‘Kim and Aggie 
don’t normally get into a fl ap’, ‘These birds may be living in Paradise 
but Corinne’s kitchen is no Garden of Eden’ and that luckily upstairs is a 
‘No fl y zone’. This episode is especially comical because of the combina-
tion of animals and excrements in which spectators return in laughter, 
that, according to Critchley, is in itself, similarly to defecation, ‘an erup-
tive, physical  animality’ ( 2002 , 47). Critchley argues that animal jokes and 
FILTHY VIEWING, DIRTY LAUGHTER 197

therefore by extension humour involving animals ‘are a sort of code for 
the body and its wayward desires’—‘look this isn’t really about birds, is 
it?’ Combined with the horror fi lm music in the background, the scene is 
quite reminiscent of Hitchcock’s  The Birds , especially as Kim’s hairstyle, 
worn up in a blonde bun, recalls Tippi Hedren’s. Only, Hitchcock’s mas-
terpiece is not funny while this scene with Kim and Aggie, on the other 
hand, is. The thought of being defecated upon by a bird is unthinkably 
ghastly, and the duo quite rightly retreat to a corner of the room, and 
do their best to ‘protect’ themselves fi rst by adopting a brace position of 
‘safety’ and second, by clinging onto each other. Their laughter seems 
to be genuinely fearful rather than laughter connected to the absurdity 
of the situation itself. In a way, it recalls the behaviour of children trying 
to avoid being touched by the child who is playing ‘it’. Children’s fear 
of being caught is mingled with laughter, as they know they are playing 
a game. Kim and Aggie’s squealing shrieks of fear continually transmute 
into laughter giving the impression of genuine fear and at the same time 
betraying their feeling of foolishness for feeling that fear. However, it is 
Aggie, in particular, who laughs and giggles the most, while Kim prefers 
to put on a brave face, that of a sort of stern matron fi gure. 
 In fact, Kim tends to partake in what Drew ( 1987 ) calls ‘po-faced’ 
behaviour; in other words, she is especially good at retaining an overtly seri-
ous stance while her interlocutor attempts to stifl e laughter. Throughout 
the series Aggie will often fall into fi ts of giggles, also mixed with fear 
(or pseudo-fear) when confronted with especially strange situations while 
Kim adds to the comedy by remaining po-faced. When the pair present 
themselves to Corinne, they do so wearing clear plastic rain bonnets, again 
a ridiculous incongruity as they are indoors. Aggie is clearly stifl ing laugh-
ter when Corinne asks them whether it is raining outside. Po-faced Kim 
remarks, ‘She’s a comic cut isn’t she? This is to stop the doody.’ 
 Before the residents arrive, the couple will walk around the property 
picking up smelly underwear and retrieving half-eaten meals from beneath 
piles of debris. They especially seem to enjoy putting their beautifully 
manicured nails into oven trays deep in old fat and grease and picking 
thick clusters of stagnated urine and faecal matter from around toilet rims. 
Another favourite activity is to pull clumps of hair out of various plugs 
and bathroom appliances. For a few seconds viewers see grease, hairs and 
gunge being rubbed with relish between French manicured fi ngers—dis-
gusting, yes, but it is likely that viewers’ appalled expressions at such sights 
may well include a smile. It is in such scenes that Copley goes to town 
198 
D. CHIARO

on the punning while Kim never misses an opportunity for banter either. 
When Aggie retrieves a dusty book entitled  Home Comforts ,  The Art and 
Science of Keeping House from beneath a pile of detritus, Kim emits a series 
of genuinely loud guffaws, but even without the help of Kim’s laughter 
the irony is self-evident. 
 Examples of what Critchley labels 'peditological wit' ( 2002 , 47–50) 
do not escape Kim and Aggie. Upon stepping into a particularly putrid 
houseboat, Kim opens the bathroom door and Aggie says ‘What a terrible 
smell you just released’, opening the way for Kim to retort ‘Well it wasn’t 
me… are you suggesting?’, in an affronted tone. What is funny here is not 
the hypothetical fart, which would not be that funny in itself, but Kim’s 
negation and articulation of disrespect.  
 HOW EMBARRASSING! 
 After a fi rst inspection of the premises, the presenters meet the residents, 
who are probably already embarrassed about their life-style, yet Kim in 
particular will scold them quite vigorously for having allowed their homes 
to get into such a terrible state. Kim’s dressing downs are not always taken 
seriously. Recipients do hang their heads in shame, but they will do so at 
the very least with a wide grin on their faces, at the worst with laughter. 
It would appear that this laughter is an attempt at jokingly laughing the 
situation off, a dis-alignment with the presenter. This reaction to Kim’s 
admonishments causes Kim to reply with comments such as ‘I’m glad you 
have the grace to laugh’ delivered in her deadpan, po-faced manner. 
 During Kim’s admonishments, another kind of laughter can be detected 
within residents’ explanations and excuses for the state of their houses. 
Unlike the predictable schoolchild laughter of a reaction to a scolding, 
this is clearly embarrassed laughter. A mother of seven says she does ‘have 
a clean out now and then especially £when we have visitors coming£’;  2 
another mother of three says, ‘I’d say Ryan was the worst offender but 
Daniel comes a close second heh huh’ and a woman living on a house-
boat ‘we’re actually £too tired to do anything about it£’. As Billig points 
out ( 2005 , 218), in his discussions on embarrassment, Goffman ignores 
the role of laughter, yet it is evident that nervous laughter plays a part 
in conveying discomfi ture. Laughter accommodates an apology, albeit 
non-verbally. 
 Kim and Aggie are extremely severe with bird lady Corinne, but her 
response to ‘How can you live like this? How can you not notice this?’, 
FILTHY VIEWING, DIRTY LAUGHTER 199

with regard to a house covered in bird droppings, she replies giggling 
‘They’re my babies aren’t they?’ Corinne also giggles when shown putrid 
food from the fridge. Research reports that there is a relationship between 
laughter and ‘delicate’ environments. Corinne is being scolded and may 
be using laughter in an attempt to ameliorate a confrontation (Arrminen 
and Halonen  2007 ) or else, she may be trying to ‘win round’ the present-
ers in an endeavour at affi liation. Laughter here can be interpreted as a 
way to relieve the tension of the moment by undermining the seriousness 
of the situation. However, Corinne’s laughter is equivocal and it is most 
likely that it displays a stance of dis-alignment in response to the present-
ers’ complaint (Holt  2012 ). 
 Residents do not always react passively to Kim and Aggies’ reproaches, 
and Corinne is one of those residents who stand up to the presenters 
through their own witticisms. In answer to how bird droppings got onto 
the walls of her lounge, Corinne proudly shows the presenters how she 
herself fl icks the droppings from her clothes onto the walls ‘you know 
what that is don’t you? You know if they do it on you, you go ping!’ She 
then laughs loudly and proudly at her audacity in clear dis-alignment to 
Kim and Aggie. Flicking pieces of bird excreta across a room from one’s 
clothes to a wall is not for the squeamish, but the incongruity and surprise 
element of Corinne’s bravado is disgustingly funny. Presumably, audiences 
perceive a mixture of horror and amusement too. From the safety of our 
armchairs, as viewers we are distanced from the mess and stench of these 
properties and are therefore relieved not to be a part of it. 
 When Kim and Aggie open the fridge of a young chemistry teacher 
(James) and fi nd some very old eggs, Aggie asks ‘Shall we open them?’ 
While begging them not to crack the egg, James’ speech is full of laugh 
particles as he is aware that the eggs are rotten and if opened will let out 
a stench:
 O(h)h n(h)o! oh my G(h)od d(h)on’t d(h)o that! O(h)h no n(h)o no no 
Oh God!  3 
 Indeed, Aggie, Kim and James break out into peals of laughter when the 
year-old rotten egg is cracked. Cries of disgust (ugh!) are indistinguishable 
from laughter although Kim does emit a reproachful ‘Ho ho!’, followed 
by an appalled ‘Oh you dirty devil! You dirty beggar!’ This last epithet, 
which she uses repeatedly throughout the series, again, like her response 
to the accusation of having broken wind, is not funny per se, but as in real 
life conversation, we generally try not to insult other people so directly, 
200 
D. CHIARO

the shock factor is conversationally incongruous and unexpected. What is 
funny about Kim’s manner is that she breaks conventional conversational 
behaviour, and according to Chiaro ( forthcoming ), Kim’s overt disrespect 
of the grime offenders makes good entertainment. Again, Kim reprimands 
a young woman who lives with her father but does no housework, ‘Life 
is not just pleasuring yourself’, to which the young woman replies ‘but 
I’m only 24!’ True to style Kim retorts ‘You’re a dirty 24!’ It is not at all 
usual to affront a complete stranger in such terms, but Kim does and the 
effect is comical. In line with Kim’s signature insult, the DVD examined 
contains a ‘Grime and Punishment Quiz’ in the special features. This quiz 
consists of a multiple-choice test about cleaning and if the respondent gets 
the wrong answer, they receive a screen shot with the words: ‘You dirty 
beggar!’ Rules of politeness dictate that we do not overtly signal others’ 
shortcomings with such a rude epithet. We are surprised, possibly shocked 
and therefore laugh. 
 Aggie is generally kinder in her scolding. When she tells the residents of 
a houseboat that a toothbrush taken from their toilet contains 32 million 
bacteria, they quietly laugh in what can only be described as mortifi cation, 
also conveyed by their hanging heads.  
 KIM AND AGGIE: THE FEMME FATALE AND THE DETECTIVE 
 As Nathanson points out, the show’s hosts Kim and Aggie are ‘extremely 
feminized and maternal…decked out in pearls, heels and manicures’ 
( 2013 , 44)—a highly polished dress code that is in stark contrast with the 
fi lth contained in the homes they visit. While on one level Kim and Aggie 
are a pair of middle-aged fairy godmothers, on another, contradictory 
level, Kim plays on her sexuality by taking on the persona of the coquette. 
No spring chicken, Kim is tall and Junoesque and her shapely fi gure is 
accentuated by tight fi tting pencil skirts and glossy nylon stockings and 
heels. In each episode, cameras never miss an opportunity to close into 
her hips and legs. Her skirt is too tight to step over a mountain of laundry 
so she hitches it up to reveal her shapely legs. Audiences get full views of 
her thighs as she climbs onto a houseboat and above all, when, daringly 
for a woman her age, she tries to stop a passing dustcart by standing on 
the kerb and pulling up her skirt as far as her thighs. However, she does 
not stay in her civvies for long as in each episode, when Kim changes into 
her white working overalls; she emerges from the changing room to a tune 
the fi rst bars of which are reminiscent of ‘The Stripper’, an instrumental 
FILTHY VIEWING, DIRTY LAUGHTER 201

composed by David Rose that evokes the kind of music that traditionally 
accompanies striptease artists. Once kitted out in her whites and rubber 
gloves embellished with marabou feathers and jewels, she stands in front 
of the camera in a sexy burlesque pose. Kim is the embodiment of camp. 
 A leitmotiv and huge source of humour is Kim’s ‘sexy’ persona. Typically, 
Kim glares appraisingly at a group of male cleaners, prods the arms of one 
of them, looks into the camera with a sultry look and says ‘they’re all 
muscle’ and fl irts with male residents: ‘Vince you’re a lovely man, but a 
dirty beggar’. Queen of the innuendo, when she provocatively leans on an 
especially short male resident as he does the washing up he fl irtingly says, 
‘I’m just the right height for you, aren’t I?’ Kim is not game and replies 
‘Could you possibly take your mind out of the gutter and get on with what 
you are doing?’ Later she rubs his arm with a nylon scouring pad and asks, 
‘Is it rough on you darling? Is it nice?’ Kim is a tease with an attitude. As 
she struggles to make her way through a cramped houseboat choc a block 
with rubbish, she holds onto her breasts and says ‘Got to be fl at chested I 
tell you!’ If, as argued by Critchley, humour functions by ‘exploiting the 
gap between being a body and having a body’ ( 2002 : 42), then the false 
tragic sublimity of Kim’s body collapses into comic ridiculousness. Kim 
inhabits her body powerfully and comically. Interestingly, we do not laugh 
 at Kim, and although she is acting with her tongue fi rmly in her cheek, she 
is not ridiculous. We are not laughing at mutton acting like lamb—in fact, 
whether Kim is actually sexy is questionable. Kim’s attitude is reminiscent 
of Mae West, of a girl behaving badly yet who is very much in control of 
her sexuality and in no way a sex object (Chiaro  2005 ). Neither is Kim 
object of laughter. Like West, she is very much subject. When she makes 
fun of herself it is not in a self-deprecating way.; On the houseboat Kim’s 
distinctive hairdo—her hair is worn up in a ponytail looped over with plaits 
on top—gets tangled up in the rubbish dangling from the ceiling; ‘Me 
coiffeur me coiffeur, me coiffeur’s going to seed here’, she shrieks. 
 Playing on her femme fatale image, before cleaning the houseboat, she 
tells Aggie that ‘I can take the husband and you can take the wife’. Aggie 
complains that ‘you always take[s]the men’ and the banter continues with 
Kim’s ‘Jealousy does not become you Aggie, come on, don’t start’.  
 PROFESSIONAL LAUGHTER 
 While Kim acts the part of a middle-aged sex kitten, Aggie, the less volup-
tuous of the two, plays the role of the serious, bespectacled scientist. When 
fi rst entering each property, Aggie in particular adopts the persona of the 
202 
D. CHIARO

frightened woman who startles at every creak and noise. When the noise 
has a simple explanation, such as an object falling off a pile of debris, 
she will typically laugh in relief. She inhabits the ‘serious’ body. When 
she changes into a lab coat there is no accompanying music or burlesque 
pirouettes that accompany Kim’s ‘striptease’. Aggie inspects the premises 
for bacteria and takes swabs of dirt from different areas of the house that 
are then professionally analyzed for microorganisms. Characteristically, lab 
tests show that the premises are infected by a variety of bacteria such as 
salmonella, E. coli, etc. Aggie presents the residents with magnifi ed (and 
disgusting) close-ups of these germs that are seen moving around beneath 
a microscope. Microbiologist Dr. John Barker takes part in the episode 
featuring bird lady Corinne and discusses the health hazards present in 
her house:
 Barker: when you consider that 1 gram of bird faeces can contain up to 
10 billion bacteria and £there may be 500 or a 1000 grams£ of 
faeces £distributed r(h)ound the room that means there could 
be trillions and trillions of bacteria£ within the room on those 
surfaces. 
 Aggie: 
So Corinne could be eating bird poo? 
 Barker: W(h)ell £she may well be£ and of course £fresh£ b(h)ird d(h)rop-
pings are a g(h)reater hazard than those that h(h) ave. dried onto 
a surface…’. 
 Aggie is perfectly serious and concerned about the health hazards cre-
ated by the bird droppings, yet Barker is clearly amused by the absurdity 
of the situation. He begins by explaining that the quantity of bacteria the 
birds are creating is unsafe but does so with the inclusion of laugh particles 
as he speaks. The complete ludicrousness of someone who may actually 
be eating bird droppings is overstated by the technicalities of fresh versus 
dried excreta and as before Barker is unable to suppress particles of laugh-
ter from his speech. 
 Chemistry teacher James keeps a cat litter in his kitchen that he is reluc-
tant to move elsewhere. Aggie informs James that he has carpet beetles 
and, worse still, fl ies breeding in his home. When she tells him that they 
found a pupa in his home his response is ‘One?’ to which Aggie laughs in 
dis-alignment while James defensively and laughingly asks ‘S(h)eriously, 
just the one?’ Cameras zoom into numerous fl ies and maggots while 
Aggie explains that:
FILTHY VIEWING, DIRTY LAUGHTER 203

 They’re laying eggs, the eggs are turning into maggots, the maggots are 
pupating, more fl ies and you know how fl ies eat? They need everything to 
be liquefi ed, so there’s lots of vomiting, lots of pooing all over the kitchen 
surfaces. 
 ON (NOT) CALLING A FILTHY SPADE A FILTHY SPADE? 
 Aggie juxtaposes scientifi c terms such as ‘pupating’ with childish words like 
‘pooing’. This use of euphemisms used to talk about excrements and urine 
adds to the humour, especially when it occurs encircled by more technical 
terminology. The presenters refer to bird droppings as ‘bird poo’, faeces as 
‘doody’, a bad smell is described as ‘everything is stinky poo’ and chemis-
try teacher, James, who habitually urinates outside the toilet bowl is made 
to smell his own ‘pee pee’. When Kim has to leave a bathroom gagging 
because of the stench, Aggie cries out ‘Oh uric acid everywhere’ and ‘This 
person is just not aiming, there’ s wee wee everywhere.’ Kim scolds the 
owner ‘Dear the devil’s living in your bladder!’ Presumably, female viewers 
will laugh in alignment with the presenters regarding the male habit (com-
monplace?) of missing the bowl:
 Aggie: Look at that loo seat, it’s thick with urine. 
 Kim: 
Men, never aim down a toilet. 
 Aggie  They don’t… 
 Kim: 
You can pick it up in little balls. 
 The presenters use a wide gamut of nouns to describe urine, from uric 
acid right the way down the register scale to pee pee. The same occurs 
with terms concerning defecation:
 Having that cat litter on the fl oor, you’re attracting lots of fl ies, they’re crap-
ping and weeing everywhere so it’s all over your surface and your food and 
the cat jumps out of the litter tray, up onto the surfaces as well, licking out 
of your bowls and round the taps… 
 After a close up of droplets of caked urine that Kim rubs with delight 
between her hands, Aggie summons James:
 Aggie: James I want you to take a look at all this nastiness around here. 
 Kim: 
It’s called urine. 
 James: I don’t want to get any closer. 
204 
D. CHIARO

 Kim: 
Excuse me it’s your pee pee dear. 
 James: It might not all be my pee pee. 
 Kim: 
Don’t start that business, if you can’t bear to look at what you’ve 
done, it’s a disgrace. You are cleaning up your own pee pee. 
 Kim is totally dour throughout the exchange while Aggie looks on with 
a huge wide mouthed smile on her face, which turns into a quiet giggle 
of alignment with Kim and dis-alignment with James. Tackling the fi lthy 
state of what Copley describes as ‘the toilet time forgot’, Kim fl aunts the 
toilet brush towards James telling him to look at it. He begs her not to 
make him look but the camera zooms into the soiled brush as she contin-
ues to brandish it telling James that it contains ‘dried in urine and little bits 
of faeces’—that are clearly visible to viewers. 
 So this switching between technical jargon and childish euphemism 
adds to the humour. In fact, examining the toilet on the houseboat Kim 
says ‘That toilet is so full of stale poopy-doops’ and ‘Pee pees I’m being 
very polite’. She then throws in a pun for good measure: ‘Aggie have you 
ever heard the expression on the poop deck? This is a poop-poop house-
boat. A poopy decky houseboat.’  
 LAST LAUGHS 
 At the end of each episode, the residents are led around the clean prem-
ises. Dissolves of before and after in different locales of the property are 
accompanied by a sweet musical refrain. At this point, instances of laughter 
occur as a sign of the contented reaction to the makeover. Residents laugh 
in amazement and happiness and the laughter is convivial as Kim and Aggie 
smile proudly at their—hopefully reformed—grime offenders. Residents’ 
laughter is of an affi liative nature and in alignment with the presenters. In 
the episodes examined, two residents actually become over-emotional and 
shed a few tears, but the usual reaction is laughter. When Kim tells James 
he is a changed man, he laughs in accordance and alignment, as do other 
reformed residents. At this fi nal stage of the makeover, only the laughter of 
one resident, bird lady Corinne, has a different function. After presenting 
her with a pristine house, Aggie tells Corinne ‘We will be back’ to which 
Corinne emits a lengthy cackle. When Kim and Aggie leave the premises 
Corinne rubs her hands and chortles and she says to herself in glee ‘I’ll just 
go and get the birds now’. When the presenters actually return after two 
weeks and fi nd the house in reasonably good condition they tell Corinne 
FILTHY VIEWING, DIRTY LAUGHTER 205

to ‘Keep up the good work’ and wish her ‘Good luck with the cleaning’. 
Nevertheless Corinne sarcastically replies, ‘I will try’ followed by an artifi cial 
‘Ha ha ha…I’ll do my best…I’ll try huh (shrug) try not to come back, eh? 
Bye heh huh’. However, the duo do get the last laugh as Aggie, ever the 
optimist thinks that the house could remain clean ‘Once she’s got the poo 
under control’, to which Kim replies ‘Yes and pigs might fl y!’  
 LAUGHTER AND MATTER OUT OF PLACE 
 Feminist scholars such as Nathanson ( 2013 ) have read much into make-
over shows, claiming, among other things, that these shows place the fault 
of home mismanagement, women’s careless appearance and badly behaved 
children onto women’s newly acquired social position in the workplace. 
Women now share time that was once dedicated solely to the home with 
the workplace. In fact, the transformation in  How Clean Is Your House? 
takes place in 24 hours and the underlying message is that anyone can 
achieve an immaculate home with minimum effort—never mind the 
expense of the squad of numerous cleaners who actually do the work on 
the show. This program like others in the genre does indeed focus on the 
time factor. But unlike other shows it does not involve only female cul-
prits, although it does suggest that a clean home will lead to eternal hap-
piness and joy—as does being able to cook a meal in twenty minutes, or 
having a slimmer body and looking ten years younger of other makeover 
shows. This signifi cant aspect of the show is beyond the focus of this study. 
 How Clean Is Your House? presents audiences with dust and grime, 
mould and gunge, fl ies and larvae, urine and faeces and a variety of 
stenches, a fl otsam and jetsam of stomach-churning conditions in which 
some people choose to live. If the pain and suffering of the human condi-
tion is the essence of humour, then this, in itself is funny. According to 
philosopher Critchley, this kind of subject matter is what triggers the  risus 
purus , the highest laugh that laughs at the laugh, the laugh that laughs 
at the unhappy ( 2002 , 111). Take away Kim in her camp attire and her 
po-faced attitude, take away Copley’s voice-over and take away the embar-
rassed smiles of the ‘grime offenders’ and the program turns into one of 
many tear-jerking reality shows that promise happiness if we simply tidy up 
and lose weight. Instead, the show invites us to laugh and to laugh at what 
we, as humans, are capable of achieving left free to act as the animals that 
we really are deep down inside. A cold thought, but a funny one. After all, 
206 
D. CHIARO

in the famous words of Margaret Mead, dirt is only matter out of place, so 
let us rejoice and laugh at what is out of place in the places of others. After 
all, we are only human.  
 NOTES 
 1.   How Clean is your House? Six of the Filthiest Shows ever seen on TV! (Talkback 
Thames Productions/FremantleMedia Group, 2004). The disc has a run-
ning time of approximately 144 minutes and contains six episodes plus spe-
cial features. The episodes included are: ‘Kim and Aggie take a fright at bird 
lady’; ‘Kim and Aggie climb a mountain of laundry’; ‘Kim and Aggie sniff 
out the science teacher’s ancient egg’; ‘Kim and Aggie clean up with Geordie 
jokers’; ‘Kim and Aggie perk up the Perkins’; and ‘Kim and Aggie ask How 
Clean in your Houseboat?’.  
 2.   From the system for notating laughter in conversation developed by Gail 
Jefferson ( 1984 ): £yes£, pound signs, indicate a ‘smile voice’ of delivery of 
materials in between, and ‘heh huh’ indicates beats of laughter.  
 3.   From the system developed by Jefferson ( 1984 ): y(h)es, h in brackets, indi-
cates laugh particle within speech.  
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Arminen, Ilkka, and Mia Halonen. 2007. Laughing with and at Patients. The 
Roles of Laughter in Confrontations in Addiction Therapy.  The Qualitative 
Report 12(3): 483–512.  
 Attardo, Salvatore. 2001.  Humorous Texts: A Semantic and Pragmatic Analysis . 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.  
 Billig, Michael. 2005.  Laughter and Ridicule: Towards a Social Critique of 
Humour . London: Sage.  
 Chiaro, Delia. 2005. The Wisecracking Dame: An Overview of the Representation 
of Verbally Expressed Humour Produced by Women on Screen.  MediAzioni, 1. 
 ———. forthcoming.  The Language of Jokes in the Digital Age . London: Routledge.  
 Critchley, Simon. 2002.  On Humour . London: Routledge.  
 Davies, Christie. 1992.  Jokes and their Relation to Society . Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter.  
 Drew, Paul. 1987. Po-faced Receipts of Teases.  Linguistics 25: 219–253.  
 Glenn, Phillip, and Liz Holt (ed). 2013.  Studies of Laughter in Interaction . 
London: Bloomsbury.  
 Holt, Liz. 2012. Using Laugh Response to Defuse Complaints.  Research in 
Language and Social Interaction 45(3): 430–448.  
FILTHY VIEWING, DIRTY LAUGHTER 207

 Hunt, Anna. 2009. Domestic Dystopias:  Big Brother ,  Wife Swap and  How Clean is 
your House? In  Feminism, Domesticity and Popular Culture , ed. Stacy Gillow, 
and Joanne Hollows, 123–134. London: Routledge.  
 Jefferson, Gail. 1984. On the Organization of Laughter in Talks about Laughter 
in Talks about Troubles. In  Structures of Social Action: Studies in Conversational 
Analysis , ed. J.M. Atkinson, and J. Heritage, 346–369. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.  
 Makarius, Laura. 1970. Ritual Clowns and Symbolic Behaviour.  Diogenes 59: 
44–73. 
 Moseley, Rachel. 2000. Makeover Takeover on British Television.  Screen 41(3): 
299–314.  
 Nathanson, Elizabeth. 2013.  Television and Postfeminist Housekeeping No Time for 
Mother . New York: Routledge.  
208 
D. CHIARO

209
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2_12
 A Special Freedom: Regulating Comedy 
Offence  
 Brett   Mills 
 In January 2010 a man called Paul Chambers, who was stranded at Robin 
Hood airport in Doncaster, England, after his fl ight was cancelled due 
to bad weather, tweeted, ‘Crap! Robin Hood airport is closed. You’ve 
got a week and a bit to get your shit together otherwise I’m blowing the 
airport sky high!!’  1 A week later Chambers was arrested by anti-terrorism 
police, his house was searched and his laptop, PC and mobile phone were 
confi scated. He was charged with ‘sending a public electronic message 
that was grossly offensive or of an indecent, obscene or menacing charac-
ter contrary to the Communications Act 2003’. In May 2010, Doncaster 
Magistrates Court found him guilty, and he was fi ned £385, plus £615 
costs. As a result, he lost his job. 
 This series of events has come to be known as the ‘Twitter Joke Trial’ 
in the UK, and Chambers’ ordeal continued for another two years.  2 After 
two failed appeals in 2010 and 2012, his conviction was fi nally quashed 
in July 2012 at the High Court. Explaining their decision to overturn 
the conviction, the judges stated that ‘a message which does not cre-
ate fear or apprehension in those to whom it is communicated, or who 
may reasonably be expected to see it, falls outside [the Communications 
 B.   Mills  () 
 University of East Anglia ,   Norwich ,  UK 
 e-mail: Brett.Mills@uea.ac.uk 

Act 2003]’. At the court, Chambers was accompanied by the comedians 
Stephen Fry and Al Murray, who saw the case as one vital to debates over 
free speech and comedy; Fry had offered to pay any legal costs and fi nes 
Chambers incurred. 
 The Twitter Joke Trial was heavily reported in the British press, with 
many commentators seeing it as emblematic of the failure of state institu-
tions to understand how humour works, and the ways in which fears of ter-
rorism affect how forms of communication are understood (for example, 
Bracchi  2010 ; Mensch  2012 ); indeed, the judge that rejected Chambers’s 
fi rst appeal explicitly referred to the current socio-political context in the 
UK, justifying the decision by saying, ‘Anyone in this country in the pres-
ent climate of terrorist threats, especially at airports, could not be unaware 
of the possible consequences.’ In doing so, this judge asserted that such 
judgements are predicated on the content of a piece of communication, 
irrespective of whether those who saw the tweet thought it was a genu-
ine terrorism threat or not: in contrast, the successful appeal ruling fore-
grounds readers and audiences, noting that if no ‘fear or apprehension’ is 
caused then nothing wrong has been done. 
 Nowhere in the story is there evidence that anyone involved thought 
Chambers’s tweet was a real terrorism threat; this is unsurprising consider-
ing it’s unlikely that terrorists commonly end their warnings with exclama-
tion marks, nor do they conventionally give a ‘week and a bit’s’ notice of 
their intentions. The trial was not really interested in whether or not the 
tweet was a joke, nor does it analyse the success or failure of the humour; 
instead, in fi nding Chambers guilty, the English courts demonstrated their 
inability to make sense of humorous communication, which, by defi ni-
tion, prioritises ‘ambiguity, inconsistency, contradiction and interpretative 
diversity’ (Mulkay  1988 , 26), in opposition to the seriousness of legal 
systems, which are predicated on ‘the existence of a single, organized, 
independent world’ ( 1988 , 23). Furthermore, the trial raises questions 
concerning the relationships between comedy and regulations, and high-
lights the consistent diffi culty regulators have in putting together rules 
and guidelines that successfully encompass comedy. 
 This chapter aims to explore these relationships and diffi culties, and to 
contribute to debates about the roles of humour in society and, in par-
ticular, the boundaries that regulations place upon comedy. This is an 
extremely broad area, and debates about the ‘appropriate’ use and content 
of humour repeatedly arise in many societies and cultures (Davies  1990 ; 
Lockyer and Pickering  2005 ), resulting in this being one topic of Humour 
210 
B. MILLS

Studies, which, perhaps, non-scholars see as worthy of interest. Certainly, it 
is a fi eld that many sections of the mainstream media report and comment 
upon, as the examples in this chapter demonstrate. Such debates are, of 
course, historically and culturally specifi c, and a single chapter is incapable 
of exploring these contexts in their entirety. The focus here, therefore, is 
on a much smaller area, and explores how regulations pertinent to British 
television attempt to encompass and make sense of comedy. It is hoped that 
focussing upon this area is a fruitful entry point into broader debates about 
‘appropriate’ and ‘taboo’ humour in society, including those pertinent to 
the Twitter Joke Trial, which is predicated on similar, though not identical, 
assumptions about humour in mass media and the consequences comedy 
might have. 
 To do so, this chapter fi rst outlines the ways in which regulations have, 
and had, defi ned comedy’s role on British television. While such regula-
tions respond to broader social understandings of comedy, there are con-
texts related to broadcasting that inform the development and function of 
such regulations. For a start, TV is a mass medium wherein there is a geo-
graphical and temporal distance between the joke being told and the audi-
ence that hears it, and so it is much more diffi cult for joke tellers to respond 
to audiences in the same way that someone might in a stand-up comedy 
club, or when friends tell jokes to one another. Perhaps more important, 
though, are the roles that television is ascribed in many cultures, and that 
are made concrete within the British context through the concept of public 
service broadcasting. Britain has always seen television as something that 
is not merely a product, and has instead always required it to have a social 
role as a ‘public utility’ (Scannell  2000 , 46): in negative terms this has been 
because of a fear of the effects of mass media and a mistrust of audiences; 
in positive terms this has been intended to inform a democratic citizenry 
and therefore aid the country functioning in the best way it can. While this 
chapter does not intend to examine these contexts, they are worth not-
ing because the regulations demonstrate these two confl icting contexts in 
action. The idea that comedy might fulfi l a social purpose—and therefore 
be a part of public service broadcasting—is enshrined in British television 
regulations to an extent that is not seen in all such systems around the 
world. Indeed, we can see these regulations as emblematic of the ways in 
which British society defi nes itself in terms of its sense of humour. The 
problem, of course, is that societies are made up of individuals who have 
different ideologies, beliefs and boundaries, and therefore have differing 
ideas of what kinds of comedy are and aren’t ‘acceptable’. Regulations are 
A SPECIAL FREEDOM: REGULATING COMEDY OFFENCE 211

therefore inevitably compromises, and the problems that arise in their con-
struction and application result from the necessity of making rules that 
apply to all. Paul Chambers was a victim of this, whereby a rule intended 
for one purpose gets applied in a manner unlikely and unforeseen; he is 
one example who powerfully highlights the consequences of attempting to 
regulate humour. 
 THE SPECIFICS OF COMEDY 
 The problems of regulating comedy are shown in the phrase, ‘a special 
freedom’. This phrase comes from the  Code on Standards produced by the 
Broadcasting Standards Commission, which until being abolished in 2003, 
was responsible for responding to audience complaints about broadcast-
ing standards on British television. The  Code on Standards ‘aims to give 
broadcasters, their regulators and the public an understanding of the fac-
tors which should be taken into account when making editorial judgments’ 
about programme content, and it notes that it ‘is part of the broadcasters’ 
duty to fi nd ways of striking a balance between their creative freedom and 
their responsibility to their diverse audiences’ (BSC  1998 , 3). The  Code 
draws on extensive audience research, and justifi es its guidance by noting 
that, as much as possible, it aims to refl ect the perceptions and preferences 
of the audiences it claims to represent via such qualitative research. 
 What is noticeable is that the  Code repeatedly points towards the dif-
fi culties it faces in coalescing the multiple viewpoints held by the public it 
represents, as well as the inevitable confl ict arising from the ambition for 
innovation and creativity in broadcasting and the possible offence or upset 
such programming may cause. The  Code ’s key areas concern matters of 
representation, sexual content, and violence, and these are presented as 
being those of most concern for the viewing audiences. On the whole, the 
 Code distinguishes little between different genres of programming, and 
instead foregrounds matters of audience expectation, which, it suggests, 
are predominantly a result of scheduling ( 1998 , 4–5), promotional mate-
rial ( 1998 , 5), and previous experience of similar programming ( 1998 , 
3). However, there is a fairly remarkable paragraph in the  Code , under its 
introductory section on ‘Respect and Dignity’:
 Challenging or deliberately fl outing the boundaries of taste in drama and 
comedy is a time-honoured tradition. Although these programmes have a 
special freedom, this does not give them unlimited licence to be cruel or to 
humiliate individuals or groups gratuitously ( 1998 , 6). 
212 
B. MILLS

 As such, the  Code acknowledges the diffi culty of its remit, as the majority 
of the document asserts the value of constraint, yet here it is made appar-
ent that one of the key roles much culture has is precisely in ignoring 
such boundaries. It is telling that the phrase ‘a special freedom’ is used: 
in using the term ‘freedom’ the existence of boundaries is constructed as a 
barrier to free expression, perhaps inadvertently acknowledging the nega-
tive, restrictive consequences of regulation; in referring to this freedom 
as ‘special’ the  Code positions it as abnormal. In that sense, this could be 
seen as the  Code giving up on its own ambition, as the document spends 
18 pages outlining guidance, but then admits that it may not be applicable 
to a rather wide range of programming. 
 Perhaps more noticeable here is that the  Code does not in any way 
defi ne this ‘special freedom’; we are not told to what extent it can be 
used, what its consequences are, how special it is, how much freedom it 
offers, or the extent to which audiences accept this freedom as valuable. 
Considering the document is intended to help broadcasters make deci-
sions about the content of their productions, there is little concreteness 
on offer here which gives prescribed and specifi c guidance. Of course, the 
Commission would insist that this is the point, and the  Code ’s role is not 
to be overly prescriptive. However, it is easy to imagine a programme- 
maker looking at this guidance and not knowing to what extent they can 
exploit or rely on this ‘special freedom’. 
 More signifi cant for the analysis here is the assumption that comedy 
 should have this special freedom. After all, if the majority of broadcasting 
is bound by certain regulations and expectations, why should humorous 
forms be any different? The  Code justifi es this via the ‘time-honoured tra-
dition’ it refers to, yet it is perfectly comfortable with rejecting other cul-
tural traditions; for example, it notes that ‘Racist terms and terms mocking 
disability and mental illness have come to be regarded as deeply offensive, 
overtaking some traditional terms of abuse’ ( 1998 , 7). In that sense, why 
is one ‘tradition’ held to be worth enshrining within guidance if another 
is not? How come the breaking of some taboos is deemed more accept-
able—even desirable—than others? 
 That comedy is diffi cult to regulate is apparent in other documents 
attempting to help programme-makers make decisions about content. For 
example, the BBC publication  Taste, Standards and the BBC ( 2009 ) draws 
on data from a wide range of specially commissioned audience research, 
using methods including in-depth interviews, focus groups and a large- 
scale quantitative survey in order to try and get as broad an overview as 
A SPECIAL FREEDOM: REGULATING COMEDY OFFENCE 213

possible on viewers’ perceptions of, and responses to, broadcasting con-
tent. Unlike the Commission’s  Code , this study does explore material in 
terms of genre, and fi nds that audiences insist that ‘The context in which 
potentially offensive content is placed is of paramount importance, and 
can make the difference between taking offence and not’ ( 2009 , 22). 
However, when looking at comedy, the report outlines fi ndings so dispa-
rate as to be as of little use as those proffered by the idea of an undefi ned 
‘special freedom’:
 Comedy: This is such a wide-reaching genre, from mainstream family com-
edy, to edgy, niche comedy, that it is diffi cult to make generalisations about 
the audience’s expectations of content. Furthermore, opinions of ‘offensive-
ness’ in this area are often very subjective and a matter of personal taste, 
more than for other types of programmes, and most say comedy comes with 
‘it’s own licence’ ( 2009 , 24). 
 This section goes on to note that a number of common themes arose 
in discussion with audiences about comedy, which point towards the 
factors viewers take into account when responding to such material. 
Firstly, ‘strong language’—however this is defi ned—repels some viewers. 
Secondly, audiences learn to expect particular kinds of material from cer-
tain comedians and series, and therefore choose to avoid them if they 
know they dislike what they do. Following on from this is an issue of 
trust, and audiences state that newer comedians, for which they had no 
preconceived expectations, need to ‘earn the right to push the boundar-
ies of taste and standards’. Finally, audiences are wary of the overly male 
aspect of much comedy and the combative nature of such humour. What 
this points towards is how insignifi cant actual content is compared to the 
context within which it is placed, for audiences seem to insist that there is 
no material that is defi nitively offensive or not, and the appropriateness of 
comedy is fundamentally affected by the context within which it occurs. 
While this may seem obvious, it does have signifi cant consequences for 
the makers of such programming and those of us attempting to examine 
them, for it shows the complex ways in which comedy is understood and 
the multiple factors that affect how it is received. 
 The specifi city of comedy as opposed to other forms of broadcasting 
is found in other pieces of research carried out by the BBC and other 
broadcasters. For example, the report  Disabling Prejudice (Sancho  2003 ) 
draws on a wide range of interviews and focus groups about ‘disability 
214 
B. MILLS

representation’ in order ‘to assist programme makers and broadcasters in 
making judgements about material to ensure that, as far as possible, it does 
not cross the offence boundary’ ( 2003 , 6). One of the largest sections of 
the report concerns humour, and it notes that ‘Comedy has a special role 
in offering different perspectives on changing cultural norms and trends 
in society. It is also a genre that pushes boundaries with the potential to be 
controversial, especially in relation to sensitive issues’ ( 2003 , 72). There 
is, of course, a commonality here between this report noting comedy has a 
‘special role’ and the BSC’s references to humour’s ‘special freedom’. Yet 
the further data  Disabling Prejudice offers demonstrates the complexity 
of working out how this functions in practice. For example, the research 
participants were asked whether or not they agreed with the statement ‘I 
think any aspect of society is fair game when it comes to comedy’; 41% 
agreed, 37% disagreed, and 23% neither agreed nor disagreed ( 2003 , 73). 
Yet it is hard to reconcile that 41% with the result from a different, but 
related, research question. When asked for responses to the statement, 
‘Broadcasters have a duty to ensure they show nothing that is offensive to 
any element of their viewing audience’, 48% agreed, with 28% disagreeing 
and 24% undecided. While not a majority, 48% of respondents agreeing 
that  nothing should offend  any audience member sends a signifi cant sig-
nal, and implies that offence is in and of itself wrong, and with no poten-
tial to have a positive impact. In essence, this suggests viewers have a right 
 not to be offended. Such a result places severe limitations on the idea that 
comedy has a ‘special freedom’, for it is hard to see how that liberty can 
survive if offence has to be always avoided. 
 In order to explore the ways in which offence might depend on the 
content of humour the research in  Disabling Prejudice also asks its par-
ticipants to state whether they found jokes about particular social groups 
‘very or quite offensive’ ( 2003 , 74). The kinds of groups covered in the 
research is broad, and are constructed around a wide range of categories to 
do with physical aspects (for example, ‘disability’ and ‘overweight’ are cat-
egories), sexuality (‘homosexuals’, ‘lesbians’) race and ethnicity (‘black’, 
‘Asian’), nationality (‘Chinese’, ‘Irish’), and so on. While there are clear 
problems in lumping such disparate categories together, this method helps 
give an overview of the ways such groupings are correlated by audience 
members, and signal those aspects which humour might fi nd as a target 
in broadcasting. Signifi cantly, jokes about all but one of these categories 
are found to be ‘very or quite offensive’ by the minority of respondents, 
even if some of these minorities are sizeable (for example, 44% found jokes 
A SPECIAL FREEDOM: REGULATING COMEDY OFFENCE 215

about the ‘overweight’ offensive, and 41% found jokes about ‘black’ peo-
ple offensive). The one category where a  majority of people found offence 
(65%) was the ‘disabled’. The statistics produced here offer interesting, 
if often confusing, reading. For example, 35% found jokes about ‘homo-
sexuals’ offensive, whereas 31% said the same about ‘lesbians’; 29% were 
offended by jokes about ‘women’ compared to only 18% for ‘men’; and 
while jokes about the ‘overweight’ were found offensive by 44%, only 23% 
were offended by jokes about people who were ‘short’ or ‘bald’, demon-
strating a signifi cant difference in responses to comedy about a range of 
physical characteristics. The report explores the participants’ responses to 
jokes about disability further, and fi nds that two key aspects of such jokes 
are common in such humour found to be offensive; fi rstly, when comedy 
encourages anti-social behaviour ( 2003 , 76), and secondly, where audi-
ences are encouraged to laugh  at disabled people ‘where the focus of the 
humour is aimed at their disability’ ( 2003 , 77). It is probable that both 
of these aspects apply to the other categories covered by the research too, 
but these fi ndings do suggest that there is something particular about dis-
ability that heightens the offence felt by audiences. 
 The fact that this research points towards the ‘anti-social’ potential of 
comedy makes explicit an assumption about humour and broadcasting 
that underpins all regulation in practice and the assumed necessity of regu-
lation  at all . That is, there is no point in having regulation, and being con-
cerned about the content of broadcast comedy, unless it is assumed that 
such comedy can affect society in undesirable ways. Of course, the debate 
about media effects is one of the most thoroughly researched yet least 
settled topics in Media Studies (for overviews see Barker and Petley  2001 ; 
Kirsh  2012 ). Yet, like the judges that found Paul Chambers guilty, all 
regulation assumes that comedy has effects, and this is such a normalised 
assumption that evidence supporting it does not seem to be required when 
judges and regulators present their conclusions. 
 The aim of this overview of some of the research into British television 
comedy regulation was to highlight the tension that exists in a desire to 
uphold a ‘special freedom’ and the often unexamined assumption that 
mass media can have negative and widespread effects. It is rare for some-
one to argue that there should be no regulation at all, highlighting the 
persistent fears mass media engender. Comedy is pertinent here, as its 
‘special freedom’ is precisely problematic for those who believe that televi-
sion can destabilise the social order. The rest of this chapter will explore 
these tensions via two case studies, which show the regulatory system in 
action, and the ways in which those involved aim to balance the freedom/
offence problematic.  
216 
B. MILLS

 CASE STUDIES:  TOP GEAR  
 The two case studies selected are from the same programme:  Top Gear 
(1977–present).  Top Gear is a motoring magazine programme in which 
cars are reviewed and other motoring news is covered. While a long- 
running series it was relaunched in 2002 and has been a considerable 
ratings success since that time.  3 It has a claim to be the most watched 
television programme in the world (Bonner  2010 , 32), partly because it 
is sold to many television networks, but also because its content is attrac-
tive to the international business community, and so it is sold to many 
airlines and hotel chains for their customers. It was noted earlier that some 
viewers fi nd the overly masculine nature of some comedy problematic, 
and  Top Gear has repeatedly been on the receiving end of such concerns. 
Its three main presenters engage in mocking banter of one another and 
other people, and it has gained a reputation for containing jokes based 
around race, nationality and sexuality. Indeed, the programme has such a 
history of audience complaints and issues raised by particular groups that 
there is a separate page on Wikipedia devoted to its controversies, which 
is longer than the main entries for many other television programmes. 
That  Top Gear and its presenters have such a reputation is signifi cant for 
the ways in which regulators respond to complaints about it, for, as noted 
earlier, expectations are assumed to be key in enabling audiences to decide 
whether to watch a programme or not. However, as will be shown, the 
fact that the kinds of humour covered in these case studies are precisely 
the kind of thing to be expected from  Top Gear is not the only factor taken 
into account, because in one of these examples the complaints made by 
viewers were upheld and the programme was censured, whereas in the 
other this was not the case; that is, the content and perceived intent of the 
humour was seen to be signifi cant too, and therefore expectations—while 
a key component of regulators’ adjudications on offence—do not trump 
all other factors. 
 The fi rst case study concerns an episode of  Top Gear broadcast on 5 
February 2012. In it the three presenters discussed the new Prius camp-
ervan, and mocked its appearance as ugly, comparing the shape of the 
vehicle (which looked as if the campervan part of the vehicle had simply 
been forced onto the pre-existing car) to a ‘growth’ on someone’s face. In 
the fi nal adjudication made by the BBC Trust that upheld the complaint 
there is much detailed analysis of a particular piece of dialogue from the 
programme, and it unpicks the acceptability and unacceptability of specifi c 
sections of it. It is therefore worthwhile recounting that dialogue in full, 
as it appears in the published adjudication:
A SPECIAL FREEDOM: REGULATING COMEDY OFFENCE 217

 Jeremy Clarkson: 
Hey, now, you know sometimes you meet some-
body who’s got a growth on their face and it’s 
actually bigger than their face? 
 [ Richard Hammond gestures towards Jeremy Clarkson as if he were a case 
in point ] 
 Jeremy Clarkson: 
No, I  mean one of those really ugly things. No, 
this is just a face. I’m talking about a growth… 
 Richard Hammond: [ Maintaining the gesture ] That’s your face? 
 Jeremy Clarkson: 
I bring this up because there’s a company in Japan 
who’s obviously used this growth thing as an inspi-
ration for their new Prius campervan. Here it is. 
 [ Full-screen picture ] 
 Richard Hammond: Oh, God—it’s the Elephant Car. 
 Jeremy Clarkson: 
It is. ‘I’m so pleased to meet you. I hope that 
nobody knocks my cathedral over’ [ slurred speech ]. 
 Richard Hammond: It’s a monster! 
 Jeremy Clarkson: 
You’ve got a double bed in the back and then 
another one in that growth. That is not a car that 
you could talk to at a party unless you were look-
ing at something else is it?   (BBC Trust  2012 , 12). 
 This sequence draws on references to the fi lm  The Elephant Man (David 
Lynch, 1980), which tells the story of John Merrick (1862–90),  4 whose 
body developed large growths and who made a living exhibiting him-
self as ‘the Elephant Man’. Clarkson’s slurred speech and reference to 
the ‘cathedral’ draws directly on John Hurt’s portrayal of Merrick in the 
fi lm. In its report the BBC Trust directly highlights this reference, and 
asserts that ‘the audience would have understood this connection’ ( 2012 , 
12). However, the report goes on to state that Clarkson’s fi nal statement 
is not about Merrick but instead refers to disability more broadly, and 
its  adjudication draws directly from this distinction. That is, its fi nding 
delineates the acceptability of making a joke about the specifi c individ-
ual Merrick and the category of disability more broadly, fi nding the for-
mer acceptable and the latter unacceptable. The report does not make 
clear why mocking Merrick is ‘on the margins of acceptability’ ( 2012 , 3) 
while mocking disability more widely is not, yet it can be presumed that 
a number of factors might come into play here. Firstly, that the Trust 
sees a distinction between jokes about individuals and jokes about groups; 
secondly, that a distinction is made between joking about people who 
are dead and those who are alive; and fi nally that humour about a fi gure 
218 
B. MILLS

such as Merrick who is known in contemporary society only via media 
portrayals such as Lynch’s fi lm is perceived differently to humour about 
social categories that exist outside of media and therefore impact upon the 
everyday lives of large numbers of people. That is, the humour the Trust 
deems acceptable is presumed not to have implications for disability more 
widely, whereas that which it condemns instead fi nds comedy in circum-
stances that many viewers might regularly encounter. In that sense, the 
Trust seems to assume that Clarkson’s fi nal line normalises the stigmatisa-
tion of disability, and therefore ‘encourages anti-social behaviour’ (Sancho 
 2003 , 76), which  Disabling Prejudice shows audiences fi nd problematic 
about such comedy. 
 A number of other factors were taken into account by the Trust when 
making this decision, and some of these respond to the defence the 
programme- makers mount in order to justify the broadcast. For exam-
ple, the section under discussion is performed as ad-libbed banter, and 
 Top Gear ’s tone is one that purports to capture the unscripted interplay 
of the three presenters. In fact, as the adjudication notes, some of this 
exchange was scripted while other sections were not, as is common for 
the programme. In defending the programme, ‘The Executive Producer 
[…] said that banter such as was broadcast on  Top Gear would always 
be an imperfect science; it would invariably upset some viewers at some 
point’. Drawing on ideas of creative freedom, he goes on to argue that 
if guidelines and punishments were too strict, ‘humour or banter would 
inevitably become strangled’ (BBC Trust  2012 , 10). Interestingly, this 
justifi cation also refers to the fact that due process was carried out; the 
BBC has a compliance process in which potentially problematic mate-
rial is referred up the Corporation’s management chain, and signed off 
as acceptable before broadcast. There is, then, a managerial structure 
intended to support programme-makers but that could also be seen as 
passing the responsibility for programme content to those outside the 
production process. Hence the Executive Producer argues that ‘if the seg-
ment was found to have overstepped the mark, the compliance system and 
editorial team were as much to blame as the presenters and arguably more 
so’ ( 2012 , 13). Such a statement has interesting connotations for debates 
about creative freedom, for it seems to suggest that programme-makers 
(rightly) demand such freedom yet suggest responsibility lies elsewhere 
if it is seen to be used for unacceptable purposes. Furthermore, there’s 
a telling distinction made here between how freedom functions during 
banter, and its applicability to scripted material. This might make more 
sense during a live programme, where managing such banter might be 
A SPECIAL FREEDOM: REGULATING COMEDY OFFENCE 219

more diffi cult, but considering the lengthy gap between the recording of 
the unscripted banter in  Top Gear and its broadcast, it is hard to see why 
it is categorised differently from scripted material. There’s clearly leeway 
being offered here to unscripted material which conforms to idea of live-
ness that permeate cultural understandings of television, even television 
which is not live (Levine  2008 ; Marriott  2007 ). The decision to delineate 
between different kinds of utterances highlights the Trust’s assumptions 
about the ‘norms’ of television, and these are enshrined in the adjudica-
tion that resulted. 
 It is perhaps also worth noting here the long and tortuous journey this 
complaint took, until it was eventually upheld by the BBC Trust. The 
BBC had, in fact, responded to this complaint twice before, via different 
systems, and the existence of a wide range of committees and boards that 
such complaints can be referred to is testament to the BBC’s desire to be 
seen to be responding to audience views as thoroughly as possible. This 
long narrative is outlined in the BBC Trust’s report ( 2012 , 9–10). In 
the fi rst instance, the complaint was directed to BBC Audience Services, 
which ‘is responsible for handling all complaints, comments and enqui-
ries that the BBC receives via phone calls, emails, SMS and letters’ (BBC 
Press Offi ce  2009 ), and is currently contracted out to a separate company, 
Capita. The complaint was investigated by the Complaints Adviser for 
Drama and Entertainment who, after consultation with the programme’s 
production team, decided that ‘the BBC hoped that it would be clear 
from the absurdity of the context that no offence was intended’. However, 
while the complaint was not upheld at this stage, ‘The Executive Producer 
[of  Top Gear ] repeated that the BBC was sorry if it had caused offence’ 
(BBC Trust  2012 , 9), demonstrating that the Corporation is capable of 
acknowledging that offence has been caused, while justifying its inclusion 
and deciding that nothing needs to be done to rectify this. Unhappy with 
this outcome, the complainant then ‘escalated’ ( 2012 , 10) their complaint 
by writing to the Editorial Complaints Unit. This Unit ‘deals with serious 
complaints about breaches of the BBC’s editorial standards in connec-
tion with specifi c programmes or items of content’ (BBC  n.d. , 215). The 
Unit’s response was to fi nd that the broadcast was acceptable, because 
of the programme’s ‘well-established expectation that exchanges between 
the presenters would be characterised by a fl outing of political correctness 
and a degree of hyperbole bordering on self-parody’ (BBC Trust  2012 , 
10). The adjudication once again, then, relies on audience expectations 
and the norms that exist for particular genres or series. However, the Unit 
220 
B. MILLS

acknowledged that the broadcast has the ‘potential’ to offend audiences, 
even though this is mitigated by such audience expectations; though it 
is diffi cult to delineate how such potential is defi ned, especially as the 
existence of a complaint shows that this potentiality has been realised. 
It was only after these two organisations had rejected the complaint that 
it reached the Editorial Standards Committee, which ‘may consider any 
matter which raises questions of a potential breach of the BBC’s edito-
rial standards, […] including appeals against decisions and actions of the 
Editorial Complaints Unit’ (BBC  n.d. , 215). It was this Committee that 
upheld the complaint, overturning the adjudications made by Audience 
Services and the Editorial Complaints Unit. The fact that  three bodies 
exist to respond to audience complaints, allowing audiences a hierarchy of 
institutions structures to appeal to, demonstrates the centrality of viewer 
response to the BBC’s ethos and behaviour. 
 That the complaint against this edition of  Top Gear was eventually 
upheld, despite two other rulings to the contrary, highlights the diffi culty 
an institution such as the BBC has in making sense of audience responses, 
and the care that is taken in ensuring regulations do not unnecessarily limit 
programme-making. Tellingly, all three of the bodies take the complainant’s 
grievances seriously, and profess regret at causing it; there is no discourse 
here allowing the BBC to simply say a viewer is wrong to be offended, 
or to point to the fact that such offence is a minority view in this case. 
The upholding of this complaint has consequences for future programme-
making for such rulings are understood to be test cases that production 
teams, for any kind of programme, should take note of. In this instance, the 
complainant also requested that the BBC’s Editorial Guidelines be updated 
to foreground the potential offence generated from inappropriate repre-
sentations of disability, but despite upholding the complaint the Editorial 
Complaints Unit rejected this plea, arguing that ‘the Guidelines and cor-
responding Guidance together give suffi cient and appropriate guidance to 
programme-makers on the issue of the portrayal of minorities and vulner-
able social groups’ (BBC Trust  2012 , 14). Indeed, the Unit argued that 
as they were able to uphold the complaint using the existing Guidelines 
there was demonstrably no need to change them. The complainant’s pleas 
here turned on the specifi city of disability, arguing that it was a particular 
category that the Guidelines do not recognise. This may be a telling point, 
as the second case study to be explored here is one that does not concern 
disability and that was not upheld; it is therefore a matter of debate as to 
whether the distinctions between the two cases are predicated on their dif-
ferent subject matter, or if other criteria come into play. 
A SPECIAL FREEDOM: REGULATING COMEDY OFFENCE 221

 So, in an edition of  Top Gear broadcast on 30 January 2011, the three 
presenters discuss a newly released sports car from Mexico, and their 
responses to it centre on humour drawing on national stereotypes. This is 
set up early in the section, as one of the presenters quickly sets up those 
stereotypes in wondering why such a car would be of interest to anyone:
 Why would you want a Mexican car? ‘Cos cars refl ect national characteris-
tics, don’t they? So German cars are very well built and ruthlessly effi cient, 
Italian cars are a bit fl amboyant and quick—Mexican cars are just going to 
be a lazy, feckless, fl atulent oaf with a moustache, leaning against a fence, 
asleep, looking at a cactus, with a blanket with a hole in the middle on as a 
coat (Ofcom  2011 , 44). 
 The discussion quickly moves away from the car, and instead makes com-
ments about Mexicans more broadly:
 Richard Hammond: 
I’m sorry but just imagine waking up and remem-
bering you’re Mexican. ‘Oh no…’ 
 Jeremy Clarkson: 
It’d be brilliant, it’d be brilliant because you could 
just go straight back to sleep again. ‘Aaah, I’m a 
Mexican…’ 
 Richard Hammond: 
… that’s all I’m going to do all day … 
 Jeremy Clarkson: 
That’s why we’re not going to get any com-
plaints about this—‘cos the Mexican Embassy, 
the Ambassador’s going to be sitting there with 
a remote control like this [ slumps in seat and 
snores ]. They won’t complain. It’s fi ne  (Ofcom 
 2011 , 44). 
 The irony, of course, being that people did complain; Ofcom received 
157 such complaints. The number of complaints is telling because it is 
more than that received for the earlier case study, yet this was a broadcast 
that, as will be shown, was deemed to be acceptable. That is, the regula-
tory system does not take into account the number of complaints, and 
there’s ample evidence of regulators rejecting complaints made by thou-
sands of people, and upholding ones made by single people. Considering 
the regulatory system repeatedly insists its criteria for making decisions is 
based on ‘generally accepted standards’ (National Archives  2003 ) ascer-
tained via large-scale, quantitative, representative surveys, which suggest 
the attitudes of the mass are pertinent in this context, it could be seen as 
odd that the number of complaints made about a broadcast is rarely taken 
222 
B. MILLS

into account. All such regulatory systems function with as much speed 
and tenacity irrespective of the number of complainants. That a complaint 
could be upheld even if it is only made by one person gives evidence 
of the notion that it is assumed that no-one should be unduly offended 
by broadcasting. In rejecting the complaints of 157 people here, Ofcom 
makes no mention of the fact such a number is, of course, a tiny minority 
of the actual viewing audience; numbers here simply don’t count, and the 
system therefore allows the taboos of the individual to be valued identi-
cally to those of the group. 
 In its adjudication Ofcom distinguishes between the content of the 
comedy here, and the context within which it is broadcast, stating that it 
‘took into account that  Top Gear is well known for its irreverent style and 
sometimes outspoken humour’ ( 2011 , 45). That this kind of comedy is 
‘normal’ for this series is given further evidence:
 We considered that viewers of  Top Gear were likely to be aware that the 
programme frequently uses national stereotypes as a comedic trope and that 
there were few, if any, nationalities that had not at some point been the 
subject of the presenters’ mockery throughout the history of this long run-
ning programme. For example, this same episode featured a competition 
between the U.K.’s  Top Gear presenters and their Australian counterparts, 
throughout which the Australians were ridiculed for various national traits 
(Ofcom  2011 , 45–46). 
 There is, of course, an interesting side question here, as to why Ofcom 
seemed to receive  no complaints about the jokes about Australians, and 
anthropological research shows societies have ‘implicit cultural rules’ 
(Davies  1990 , 40) governing the acceptability of jokes about other nations 
or communities. What Ofcom’s adjudication tells us more is that the regu-
lator is not interested in discussions concerning the social consequences 
of such jokes, or whether national stereotypes are appropriate fodder for 
broadcasting; instead their only interest is whether audiences could expect 
such material within a particular programme. In that sense, by making 
jokes about Mexicans  and Australians  Top Gear makes it clear that it regu-
larly employs national stereotypes and audiences should expect as much. 
Perversely, Ofcom’s adjudication seems to advise those wanting to be 
offensive in the future to start doing so  now , so that audience expectations 
can be put in place. The rather absurd consequence of this could be the 
 proliferation of humour audiences fi nd problematic, as Ofcom does not 
A SPECIAL FREEDOM: REGULATING COMEDY OFFENCE 223

seem to see such material as a problem as long as it is expected. It is an 
odd regulatory system that might inadvertently  encourage material audi-
ences have said they are uncomfortable with, perhaps minimising taboo by 
rendering it more common.  
 
CONCLUSION 
 So, what are we to make from the analysis of these two case studies? How 
does a regulator go about making decisions on comic material some audi-
ence members clearly defi ne as taboo, balancing the requirement for 
broadcasting to minimise offence while upholding ideas of free speech? 
How does a regulator maintain its commitment to comedy’s ‘special free-
dom’ while appropriately responding to audience expectations? 
 Perhaps the key fi nding here, and the underlying assumption that runs 
through regulation, is the idea that there is some material that is taboo 
and should remain so, at least in regulatory terms. It is simplistic to equate 
‘censorship’ with ‘taboo’, but punishing broadcasters for disseminating 
material that contravenes ‘generally accepted standards’ both prescribes 
allowable material and, by extension, therefore renders it taboo. That this 
kind of comedy has some kind of extra pleasure attached to it because it 
is taboo is evident in the audience reactions in  Top Gear , and the produc-
ers’ insistence that regulation should not be so heavy-handed as to limit 
creative freedom asserts the value of not delineating boundaries too mark-
edly. Yet no party in any of these case studies—including the Twitter Joke 
Trial—asserts the blanket right to freedom of speech, and no-one argues 
that regulation should be got rid of completely. Taboo comedy is seen as 
a problem here because it is assumed its existence and dissemination will 
have social consequences, with such culture a threat to the social order. Of 
course, there’s a circularity here, in which the justifi cation by the regula-
tors for the policing of boundaries rests on audience research, yet audience 
expectations are created at least partly through the norms of broadcast-
ing. That it’s impossible to defi ne these in any concrete—or even useful—
terms, is pretty much admitted in the BBC’s  Editorial Guidelines , which 
state ‘In a perfect world the BBC Editorial Guidelines would consist of 
one sentence: use your own best judgement’ ( n.d. , 2). 
 The freedom for comedy, then, remains a special one, but in a variety 
of ways. It acknowledges the social role of comedy, and its cultural power, 
and asserts its right to say and do that which would be unacceptable in 
other, more serious modes. Yet it is also special precisely because it is so ill-
224 
B. MILLS

defi ned, seemingly able to allow  Top Gear to make jokes about Mexicans, 
but not about disability.  
 NOTES 
 1.   The tweet was posted by the account @pauljchambers on 6 January 2010, 
4:08 AM. Later, it was deleted.  
 2.   For newspaper articles covering the story for its entire length see Guardian 
( 2012 ); all quotes in this overview come from articles on that site.  
 3.   In March 2015, one of the presenters of  Top Gear was suspended following 
allegations of physical violence towards a producer. In response, the BBC 
also ceased broadcast of the programme. The BBC also carried out an 
enquiry into the alleged violence. In the end, all three presenters left the 
show, and as of 2015 are making a motoring series for Amazon Prime. The 
BBC’s  Top Gear is slated to return to television in 2016, with new 
presenters.  
 4.   More recent research suggests Merrick’s name was Joseph, but the fi lm 
depicts him as John (Howell and Ford  1980 ). 
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 Barker, Martin, and Julian Petley. 2001.  Ill Effects: The Media/Violence Debate . 
London: Routledge.  
 BBC. 2009.  Taste, Standards and the BBC: Key Findings from the Audience 
Research . London: BBC.  
 BBC. n.d.  Editorial Guidelines . London: BBC.  
 BBC Press Offi ce. 2009. Capita Wins BBC Audience Service Contract.  Press 
release , August 4.  
 BBC Trust. 2012.  Editorial Standards Findings (July and September 2012) . 
London: BBC. 
 Bonner, Frances. 2010. Top Gear: Why Does the World’s Most Popular Programme 
Not Deserve Scrutiny?  Critical Studies in Television 5(1): 32–45.  
 Bracchi, Paul. 2010. Twitter and the Bomb Joke that’s Blown Justice to Bits. 
 Daily Mail , November 16.  
 BSC. 1998.  Code on Standards . London: Broadcasting Standards Commission.  
 Davies, Christie. 1990.  Ethnic Humor around the World: A Comparative Analysis . 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.  
 Guardian. 2012. Twitter Joke Trial.  The Guardian , December 19.  
 Howell, Michael, and Peter Ford. 1980.  The True History of the Elephant Man: The 
Defi nitive Account of the Tragic and Extraordinary Life of Joseph Carey Merrick . 
London: Allison and Busby.  
A SPECIAL FREEDOM: REGULATING COMEDY OFFENCE 225

 Kirsh, Steven J. 2012.  Children, Adolescents and Media Violence: A Critical Look at 
the Research . Los Angeles: Sage.  
 Levine, Elana. 2008. Distinguishing Television: The Changing Meanings of 
Television Liveness.  Media, Culture & Society 30(3): 393–409. 
 Lockyer, Sharon, and Michael Pickering. 2005.  Beyond a Joke: The Limits of 
Humour . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.  
 Marriott, Stephanie. 2007.  Live Television: Time, Space and the Broadcast Event . 
London: Sage.  
 Mensch, Louise. 2012. The Twitter Joke Trial and the Twits who Pursued Paul 
Chambers.  The Guardian , July 27. 
 Mulkay, Michael. 1988.  On Humour: Its Nature and Place in Modern Society . 
Cambridge: Polity.  
 National Archives. 2003. Communications Act 2003: Ofcom’s Standards Code. 
 The National Archives . 
 Ofcom. 2011.  Ofcom Broadcast Bulletin, Issue Number 179 . London: Ofcom.  
 Sancho, Jane. 2003.  Disabling Prejudice: Attitudes Towards Disability and its 
Portrayal on Television . London: BBC.  
 Scannell, Paddy. 2000. Public Service Broadcasting: The History of a Concept. In 
 British Television: A Reader , ed. Edward Buscombe, 45–62. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.  
226 
B. MILLS

227
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2
 Chiara Bucaria is Assistant Professor of English Language and Translation 
at the University of Bologna’s Department of Interpreting and Translation. 
Her research focuses on the impact of censorship and manipulation in 
dubbed and subtitled TV programs—with a specifi c interest in the linguis-
tic and cultural adaptation of controversial humour—textual manipulation 
in translation, translation and humour, and the cross-cultural adapta-
tion of media paratexts. She has co-edited the collections  Between Text 
and Image. Updating Research in Screen Translation (John Benjamins, 
2008) and  Non-professional Interpreting and Translation in the Media 
(Peter Lang, 2015), and has published the volume  Dark Humour as a 
Culture-Specifi c Phenomenon: A Study in Audiovisual Translation (VDM 
Publishing, 2009). She is also the originator of the conference series  The 
Taboo Conference , which aims at showcasing interdisciplinary scholarship 
on various aspects of taboo in the humanities. 
 Luca Barra is Lecturer in Television and Media Studies at the University 
of Bologna’s Department of Arts, where he teaches Television and 
Broadcasting History. Previously, he has been Post-Doctoral Fellow 
Researcher at Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, in Milan, Italy. He 
also works as a senior researcher at Ce.R.T.A., the Research Centre on 
Television and Audiovisuals of Università Cattolica. His research mainly 
focuses on television production and distribution cultures, comedy and 
 EDITORS 

228 
EDITORS
humour TV genres, the international circulation of media products (and 
their national mediations), the history of Italian television, and the evolu-
tion of the contemporary media landscape. He published the books  Risate 
in scatola  (Vita e Pensiero, 2012) and  Palinsesto  (Laterza, 2015), and sev-
eral essays in edited volumes and journals. He is consulting editor of the 
Italian TV studies journal Link.  Idee per la televisione . 

229
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2
 Delia Chiaro is Professor of English Language and Translation at the 
University of Bologna’s Department of Interpreting and Translation, and 
President of the International Society of Humour Studies. She is author of 
more than 100 publications on diverse areas of Humour Studies, Audio- 
Visual Translation, Sociolinguistics, and the combination of all three. 
Her most recent publication is  The Language of Jokes in the Digital Age 
(Routledge, 2016). She is regularly a keynote speaker at various interna-
tional conferences. 
 Kyle Conway is Assistant Professor of Communication at the University 
of Ottawa. His books include  Everyone Says No: Public Service Broadcasting 
and the Failure of Translation (McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2011), 
 Beyond the Border: Tensions across the Forty-ninth Parallel in the Great 
Plains and Prairies (co-edited with T. Pasch, McGill-Queen’s University 
Press, 2013),  The Bakken Goes Boom: Oil and the Changing Geographies of 
Western North Dakota (co-edited with W. Caraher, CreateSpace, 2016), 
and  Little Mosque on the Prairie and the Paradoxes of Cultural Translation 
(University of Toronto Press, forthcoming). 
 Christie Davies is a graduate of Cambridge University (M.A., Ph.D.) and 
an Emeritus Professor of the University of Reading. He is the author of 
several academic books about humour, the latest being  Jokes and Targets 
(Indiana University Press, 2011), and has published articles about the 
 CONTRIBUTORS 

230 
CONTRIBUTORS
social origins of taboos in leading sociology journals. He has a lifetime 
achievement award from the International Society for Humour Studies, 
and an honorary doctorate from Galați University. He has been a BBC 
researcher and producer, he is a frequent broadcaster, and he wrote and 
appeared in the television documentary  The Silver Road to Guanajato 
(BBC, 1985) . 
 Evan Elkins is Assistant Professor of Media and Visual Culture in the 
Department of Communication Studies at Colorado State University. He 
researches various issues involving digital media technologies, cultural dif-
ference, the media industries, and globalization. His research interests also 
include transgressive comedy and the US television industry. 
 Elsa Simões Lucas Freitas is Associate Professor at Fernando Pessoa 
University in Porto (Portugal), where she teaches advertising, literature 
and translation. She has a Ph.D. in Linguistics (Lancaster University). 
She is the author of  Taboo in Advertising (John Benjamins, 2008), and 
she has contributed chapters to  The Language of Advertising (edited by 
G. Cook, Routledge, 2007), to  Intermediality and Storytelling (edited by 
M. Grishakova and M.L. Ryan, De Gruyter, 2010), and to  The Routledge 
Handbook of Discourse Analysis (edited by J.  Gee and M.  Handford, 
Routledge, 2013). She is currently co-editor of  Media Studies Dossiers. 
 Brett Mills is Senior Lecturer in Television and Film Studies at the 
University of East Anglia. He is the author of  Television Sitcom (BFI, 2005), 
 The Sitcom (Edinburgh University Press, 2009), and  Dumb Animals: 
Animals on Television (Palgrave, 2016), and co-author of two editions 
of  Reading Media Theory (with D.M.  Barlow, Pearson, 2009/2012), 
and  Creativity in the British Television Comedy Industry (with S. Ralph, 
Routledge, 2016). 
 Kristen Murray is an interdisciplinary scholar, focusing on areas of engage-
ment between the performing arts and the social sciences. Her research 
examines the communication surrounding experiences of loss in contem-
porary society. Murray also analyses current theatre practice and devel-
ops active pedagogical strategies for students of English as an additional 
language. She holds a Ph.D. from the University of New South Wales in 
Sydney, as well as a Master of Creative Arts in Theatre and a Master of 

CONTRIBUTORS 231
Science in Psychology. Currently, Murray teaches in the Department of 
English at the City University of Hong Kong. 
 Philip Scepanski is Assistant Professor in the School of Communication 
and the Arts at Marist College. His research interests include American 
TV and broadcast history, cultural theory, humour studies and trauma 
theory. His current book project explores the ways in which US television 
comedy engages and manages moments of national crisis and catastrophe. 
 Matt Sienkiewicz is Assistant Professor of Communication and 
International Studies at Boston College. He is the co-editor of  Saturday 
Night Live and American TV (with R.  Becker and N.  Marx, Indiana 
University Press, 2013) and the author of  The Other Air Force (Rutgers 
University Press, forthcoming). 
 Carter Soles , Ph.D., is Assistant Professor of Film Studies in the English 
Department at The College at Brockport (SUNY). He has published arti-
cles on the rise of geek culture for  Jump Cut (with K. Kunyosying) and on 
Team Apatow for  Bright Lights Film Journal . His ecocritical work includes 
a chapter on the cannibalistic hillbilly in 1970s slasher fi lms in  Ecocinema: 
Theory and Practice (edited by S. Rust and S. Monani, Routledge, 2012) 
and on environmental apocalyptic themes in 1950s horror fi lms for 
 Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature and the Environment . He teaches fi lm 
theory, genre studies and ecocinema courses at The College at Brockport. 
 Ethan Thompson (Ph.D., University of Southern California) is Professor 
of Communication & Media at Texas A&M University (Corpus Christi). 
He is the producer and director of  TV Family , a feature-length docu-
mentary (2015), the author of  Parody and Taste in Post-War American 
Television Culture (Routledge, 2013), and the co-editor of the books  How 
to Watch Television (with J.  Mittell, NYU Press, 2013) and  Satire TV: 
Politics and Comedy in the Post-Network Era (with J. Gray and J.P. Jones, 
NYU Press, 2009). In 2015, he was a research and teaching fellow with 
the Peabody Awards program at the University of Georgia.  

233
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
C. Bucaria, L. Barra (eds.), Taboo Comedy, Palgrave Studies in 
Comedy, DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-59338-2
 INDEX 1  
1  Note: Page numbers followed by “n” denote notes 
 A 
 Adult Swim , 85, 152  
 Adventures of Ford Fairlane, The , 146  
 A&E , 193 
 All Gas and Gaiters , 31 
 Al Qaeda , 109, 114n13, 121, 124, 
126 
 Amazon Prime , 225n3  
 American Dad , 2, 126  
 American Family Association (AFA) , 
141 
 America’s Funniest Home Video , 158  
 Archer , 14, 77–95  
 Aristotle , 5  
 Arkell, John , 22  
 Arnett, Will , 65 
 Arrested Development , 14, 61, 62, 
64–6, 68–70, 74, 75  
 Arsenio Hall Show, The , 146  
 As Nasty As They Wanna Be , 141  
 Austin Public Access , 150 
 Axe (Lynx) , 185–6 
 Axis of Evil Comedy Tour, The , 119, 
127 
 B 
 Barker, John , 203 
 Barr, Roseanne , 144 
 Bateman, Jason , 61 
 Bateman, Justine , 65 
  Bauman, Zygmunt , 43, 48, 49, 54  
 BBC , 14, 21–38, 213, 214, 217–21, 
224, 225n3 
 Audience Services , 220 
 Editorial Complaints Unit , 220–1 
 Editorial Standards Committee , 
221  
 Trust , 217–21  
 Variety Programmes Policy Guide 
for Writers and Producers (The 
Green Book) , 24 

234 
INDEX
 Beavis & Butt-Head , 158  
 Berger, John , 174–5  
 Bergson, Henri , 44, 123, 137n1  
 Big Bang Theory, The , 168  
 Big C, The , 41, 45–6  
 bin Laden, Osama , 121, 124–7, 136  
 Birds, The , 198 
 Blazin, Denny , 160 
 Bona World of Julian and Sandy, The , 
34 
 Bono , 144 
 Borges, Jorge Louis , 99–100  
 Bowles, Cory , 69  
 Breaking Bad , 41, 53  
 Britain and the Beast , 32 
 Broadcasting Standards Commission , 
212 
 Buchanan, Pat , 46, 54, 141  
 Bugs Bunny , 126  
 Bugs Bunny Nips the Nips , 126  
 Busby, Linda , 68  
 Bush, George , 120, 144  
 Butler, Judith , 73  
 C 
 Campbell, Tisha , 148  
 Canadian Association of Broadcasters 
(CAB) , 105  
 Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 
(CBC) , 97, 99, 105–9, 107, 
114n16  
 Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunication 
Commission (CRTC) , 104, 105  
 Capita , 220  
 CapZeyeZ , 150, 153n5  
 Carl’s Jr. , 184  
 Carrot Top , 160  
 Cartoon Network , 85  
 CBS , 97  
 Cera, Michael , 64  
 C’est. du propre! , 193 
 Chambers, Paul , 209–10, 212, 216  
 Channel 4 , 192  
 Chappelle, David , 165–6 
 Chappelle’s Show , 165–6 
 Charlie Brown Christmas, A , 126 
 Christian Coalition of America , 150 
 Clarkson, Jeremy , 218–19, 222  
 Clay, Andrew Dice , 15, 122, 139, 140, 
145, 146, 148, 149, 151, 152  
 Cleaver, June , 85 
 Cleveland Show, The , 126 
 Clinton, Bill , 141 
 Clinton, Hillary , 7 
 Code on Standards , 212 
 Coloured People Time (CPTime) , 7 
 Comedy Central , 15, 128, 131, 132, 
152, 155–6, 165–6, 168 
 Comedy Central Roasts , 2, 152 
 Copley, Paul , 194, 196–8, 205, 206 
 Corbett, Harry H. , 29 
 Cosby Show, The , 97, 98, 112 
 Couric, Katie , 97, 98, 112 
 Crime Scene Investigation (CSI) , 
53, 98, 109  
 D 
 Dad’s Army , 37 
 Daffy Duck , 167 
 Daily Beast, The , 152 
 Daily Show, The , 139, 155, 169 
 Daily Star , 194 
 Danson, Ted , 144 
 de Blasio, Bill , 7 
 Def Comedy Jam , 
148, 149, 151 
 De Rossi, Portia , 65 
 Designer Guys , 98 
 Devine, Loretta , 73 
 Discovery , 193  
 Disney , 92, 195  

INDEX 235
 Dodson, Antoine , 161  
 Douglas, Mary , 157, 166  
 Downey, Jim , 147–8  
 Dunham, Jeff , 15, 120, 124, 130–7  
 Dunn, Nora , 145–6 
 E 
 E! , 155 
 Eckersley, Roger H. , 23 
 Edwards, Lisa , 192  
 Elephant Man, The , 218  
 Elmer Fudd , 126 
 Endemol , 192  
 Extreme Makeover Home Edition , 192  
 F 
 Falwell, Jerry , 150 
 Family Guy , 123, 126, 136  
 Father Ted , 31  
 Fawlty Towers , 37  
 Federal Communication Commission 
(FCC) , 143–4 
 Ferrell, Will , 160  
 Fiat 500X , 186–7 
 Fiske, John , 83–4  
 Fox , 140, 148, 149, 156  
 Fox News , 110  
 Freud, Sigmund , 5, 78, 80–2, 85, 86, 
88–90, 92, 93, 133, 157, 176  
  Fry, Stephen , 210 
 FX , 78–9, 84–6, 152, 169  
 FX Fully Baked , 85  
 G 
 Garnett, Alf , 30–2  
 Garofalo, Janeane , 149  
 GoDaddy.com , 184  
 Goldberg, Whoopy , 144 
 Golden Globe Awards , 144 
 Goldthwait, Bobcat , 144 
 Gonzalez, B.W. , 61 
 Goofy , 92 
 Goon Show, The , 30 
 Greene, Sir Hugh Carleton , 
21–3, 28, 32  
 Grey’s Anatomy , 46, 47, 50, 98  
 Grossberg, Lawrence , 141 
 H 
 Hale, Tony , 61 
 Hall, Stuart , 62 
 Hamm, Jon , 151 
 Hammond, Richard , 218, 222 
 Hancock’s Half-hour , 30 
 Hansen, Ryan , 72 
 Harris, Stephanie , 192 
 HBO , 1, 84, 148, 149, 169  
 Helms, Jesse , 141 
  Hendren, Tippi , 198 
 Here’s Harry , 30 
 Herr Meets Hare , 126 
 Hicks, Bill , 15, 139, 140, 149–52  
 Hitchcock, Alfred , 198 
 Hoarders , 193  
 Hoarding, Buried Alive , 193 
 Hobbes, Thomas , 5, 46, 175  
 Hoe schoon is jouw Huis? , 193 
 Holding, Michael , 33 
 Home Comforts, The Art and Science 
of Keeping House , 199 
 House M.D. , 41, 48 
 Howard, Peter , 32–3 
 Howard, Sydney , 23 
 How Clean Is Your House? , 
16, 191–4, 206, 207n1  
 Huckleberry Finn , 62 

236 
INDEX
 Hunt, Tim , 7  
 I 
 Imus, Don , 145 
 Independent Television (ITV) , 21 
 Ingalls Wilder, Laura , 113n2  
 Inside Amy Schumer , 1, 165, 166  
 It Ain’t Half Hot Mum , 31, 37  
 It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia , 79 
 It’s a Wonderful Life , 145  
 It’s Marty , 30  
 J 
 Jackson, Janet , 144  
 Jackson, Michael , 69, 134  
 Jacob, Sir Ian , 25  
 James, Garry , 69  
 Jeff Dunham Show, The , 131, 136  
 Johnston, Brian (aka Johnners) , 
32, 33 
 Jones, Tamala , 72  
 Just for Feet , 182  
 K 
 Katie Couric Speaks , 97 
 Kinison, Sam , 144, 145  
 Kovacs, Ernie , 159  
 L 
 Last Man on Earth, The , 41, 51  
 Late Show with David Letterman, 
The , 15, 139, 149  
 Law & Order  , 53  
 Lawrence, Martin , 15, 139, 140, 
147–9, 151, 152  
 League of Gentlemen, The , 1 
 Leary, Denis , 149 
 Lessing, Doris , 122  
 Letterman, David , 15, 139, 149–1  
 Lifetime , 193  
 Little House on the Prairie , 113n2  
 Little Mosque on the Prairie , 14, 97, 
100, 101, 105, 106, 112 
 Lohan, Lindsay , 134 
 Louie , 169 
 Louis C.K. , 169 
 Lovitz, Jon , 145 
 Ludwin, Rick , 146 
 Lynch, David , 218 
 M 
 MacKenzie, Aggie , 191–3 
 Mad Men , 84, 151  
 Madonna , 141  
 Maher, Bill , 124 
 Mapplethorpe, Robert , 140–1, 153n3  
 Marino, Ken , 75 
 Marriott, R.D.A. , 28 
 Martin , 146–8  
 M*A*S*H , 56n5 
 MacFarlane , 126  
 McGivern, Cecil , 25–6 
 McKinney, Charlotte , 184 
 Mead, Margaret , 207 
 Mencia, Carlos , 15, 120, 128–32, 136  
 Merrick, John , 218–19  
 Mickey Mouse , 92 
 Midsummer Night’s Dream , 167 
 Miller, D. , 23  
 Miller, Graham , 28 
 Mind of Mencia , 128, 130 
 Mom , 2 
 Monk , 50 
 Moral Majority , 150 
 Moral Rearmament (MRA) , 32 
 Morton, Robert , 150 
 MTV , 145, 148 
 MTV Video Awards , 145 
 Mulvey, Laura , 82–4 

INDEX 237
 Murray, Al , 210  
 Myers, Mike , 146  
 Mystery Science Theatre 3000 , 158  
 N 
 National Endowment for the Arts 
(NEA) , 141 
 National Football League (NFL) , 183  
 National Viewers and Listeners 
Association (NVALA) , 23, 29, 
34–6 
 Nawaz, Zarqa , 97, 98, 100, 101, 105, 
108 
 NBC Standards and Practices , 145  
 Netfl ix , 62, 75, 152  
 New York Times , 146  
 New York Times Magazine , 131  
 Nike , 182  
 Nip/Tuck , 79  
 Noah, Trevor , 139 
 Nurse Jackie , 48  
 O 
 Obeidallah, Dean , 119, 127  
 O’Connor, Sinead , 145–6  
 Offi ce, The , 62  
 Ogilvie, F.W. , 23  
 Oh My God , 169  
 One Night Stand , 148  
 Opie and Anthony , 145  
  Orwell, George , 195  
 Oz , 84  
 P 
 Paddick, Hugh , 34 
 Parsons, Nicholas , 24  
 Parsons, Tyrone , 67 
 Party Down , 14, 61, 62, 68, 71–5  
 Patrick, Danica , 184  
 Payne, Jack , 23 
 Pearl Harbor , 122, 126 
 Pepsi , 141  
 Perfect Moment, The , 141 
 Piss Christ , 140–1  
 Plato , 5, 99, 175 
 Presley, Elvis , 71 
 Prewitt, Dave , 150 
 Prius , 217, 218 
 Pryor, Richard , 144–5 
 Psych , 165  
 Pushing Daisies , 41 
 R 
 Refaeli, Bar , 184 
 Richie, Lionel , 69 
 Rickles, Don , 123–4 
 Robertson, Pat , 150 
 Robot Chicken , 125 
  Rock, Chris , 8, 148 
 Roethlisberger, Ben , 161 
 Rose, David , 202 
 Round the Horne , 29, 33, 34  
 S 
 Sagres , 183–5 
 Salon , 152 
 Saturday Night Live , 15, 139, 
144–7, 151  
 Schumer, Amy , 165 
 Scrubs , 45 
 Seinfeld , 123  
 Seinfeld, Jerry , 8 
 Serrano, Andres , 140 
 Sex and the City , 1, 84  
 Shakespeare, William , 167 
 Simmons, Russell , 149 
 Simpson, O.J. , 123 
 Simpsons, The , 123 
 Six Feet Under , 1, 41, 44, 46  

238 
INDEX
 Skype , 168  
 Smith, Mike , 68  
 Sopranos, The , 53, 84  
 Soup, The , 155 
 South Park , 123, 125, 126, 136  
 Spark of Insanity , 131–3, 135  
 Special Committee on Participation of 
Visible Minorities in Canadian 
Society , 104  
 Speight, Johnny , 30–1  
 Standing, Michael , 24  
 Starr, Martin , 72  
 Star Spangled Banner, The , 144  
 Steptoe and Son , 28–9  
 Stern, Howard , 145, 150  
 Super Bock , 184–5 
 Super Bowl , 1, 15, 144, 179–80, 
182–4, 186 
 T 
 Talk Soup , 155, 158  
 Television Policy Censorship Code, 
24, 38n8 
 That Was the Week that Was (TW3) , 
28, 29 
 Thin Line Between Love and Hate, A , 
148 
 Till Death Us Do Part  , 29–31  
 TLC , 193  
 Tonight Show, The , 144  
 Top Gear , 16, 217–25  
 Torrens, Jonathan , 67  
 Tosh.0 , 15, 155–70  
 Tosh, Daniel , 139, 155–6, 158, 164, 
166, 168, 170  
 Trailer Park Boys , 14, 61, 62, 64, 
66–71, 74 
 Tremblay, John Paul , 67 
 Trudeau, Pierre , 103  
 Tumblr , 169  
 Twitter , 158, 169, 209–11, 224  
 Two Broke Girls , 152 
 2 Live Crew , 141, 148–9, 153n3  
 Two Ronnies, The , 37 
 U 
 U2 , 144  
 USA Network , 165 
 US Supreme Court , 143, 150 
 V 
 Vicar of Dibley, The , 31 
 W 
 Waldman, Ronald , 25 
 Warner Bros. , 126 
 Watt, John , 23 
 Weaver, Lee , 72 
 Wells, Robb , 68, 86 
 West, Mae , 202  
 Westwind Pictures , 98, 105 
 Whitehouse, Mary , 23, 29, 31, 
32, 34, 36, 38 
 Wildmon, Reverend 
Donald , 141 
 Willey, Peter , 33 
 Will, George , 144 
 Williams, Kenneth , 33–4 
 Wilson, Dennis Main , 30 
 Wilson, Harold , 29 
 Woodburn, Kim , 191–3 
 Wright, Steven , 149 
 Y 
 Yoba, Malik , 65 
 You So Crazy 148 
 YouTube , 158, 160, 168   

