 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
2
Conditions and Terms of Use 
Copyright © Heritage History 2010 
Some rights reserved  
This text was produced and distributed by Heritage History, an 
organization dedicated to the preservation of classical juvenile history 
books, and to the promotion of the works of traditional history authors.  
The books which Heritage History republishes are in the 
public domain and are no longer protected by the original copyright. 
They may therefore be reproduced within the United States without 
paying a royalty to the author.  
The text and pictures used to produce this version of the work, 
however, are the property of Heritage History and are subject to certain 
restrictions. These restrictions are imposed for the purpose of protecting 
the integrity of the work, for preventing plagiarism, and for helping to 
assure that compromised versions of the work are not widely 
disseminated.  
In order to preserve information regarding the origin of this 
text, a copyright by the author, and a Heritage History distribution date 
are included at the foot of every page of text. We require all electronic 
and printed versions of this text include these markings and that users 
adhere to the following restrictions.  
1. You may reproduce this  text for personal or educational purposes as  
long as the copyright and Heritage History version are included. 
   
2. You may not alter this text or try to pass off all or any part of it as 
your own work. 
   
3. You may not distribute copies of this text for commercial purposes.  
   
4. This text is intended to be a faithful and complete copy of the original 
document. However, typos, omissions, and other errors may have 
occurred during preparation, and Heritage History does not guarantee 
a perfectly reliable reproduction.  
Permission to use Heritage History documents or images for 
commercial purposes, or more information about our collection of 
traditional history resources can be obtained by contacting us at 
Infodesk@heritage-history.com 
 
PREFACE 
The story of William the Conqueror is the story of 
the man who for more than a quarter of a century was the 
most prominent personage of western Europe. Into whose 
hands shall England fall, was one of the two or three great 
questions of the time, and it was William who solved the 
problem.  
Whether or not his claim to the English throne was 
just, the people and their new sovereign seemed made for 
each other. The English could follow; William could lead. 
The English could endure; William could strike the blow 
that made endurance needless. The English were inclined to 
be grave and serious; William enjoyed a jest. The English 
were a little slow in their thinking; William was quick-
witted. The English would yield to fate; William was fate 
itself.  
William's reign was a period of transition, and in 
such a time both faults and virtues stand out in bold relief. 
Whatever in the character of the Conqueror the twentieth 
century may find worthy of blame or of praise, no student 
of his life will deny that his faults were those of his time, 
that his virtues were his own.  
 
EVA MARCH TAPPAN.      
Worcester, 
Mass. 
          November, 1900  
 
 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
THAT WHICH HE WOULD HAVE ................................... 4 
THE BANQUET AT ROUEN .............................................. 9 
FROM CASTLE TO COTTAGE ....................................... 15 
ROBERT THE PILGRIM ................................................. 21 
THE LITTLE DUKE ....................................................... 26 
GUEST OR PRISONER? .................................................. 32 
"WILLIAM KNOWS HOW" ........................................... 38 
A VISIT TO ENGLAND ................................................... 44 
WHAT HE HAS HE HOLDS ........................................... 50 
A VOICE FROM THE CLIFF ........................................... 56 
PROMISE OR PRISON? .................................................. 61 
ON BOARD THE "MORA" ............................................. 68 
"ENGLAND IS MINE" ................................................... 73 
"WILL YOU YIELD?" .................................................. 79 
A STERN RULE ............................................................. 85 
THE LAST YEAR ........................................................... 91 
 
 
 
 
 
"WILL YOU PROMIS ME?"  
 
 
 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
4
CHAPTER I 
THAT WHICH HE WOULD HAVE 
"Come to the window, Ermenoldus. See how the 
country stretches out,—fields and vineyards and corn land! 
There's no richer ground in the whole duchy of Normandy."  
"You and Duke Richard rule it together, do you not, 
my lord?"  
"No. We hold it together after a fashion, but he rules. I 
am his vassal. Hiesmes is mine, and this goodly castle of 
Falaise ought to go with it."  
"Was the duke your father's favorite, my lord?"  
"Doesn't it look like it, when he left me only Hiesmes 
and then cut off the best part of it for Richard?"  
"Could it have been suggested to him, my lord?"  
"You mean, did Richard tell him to do it," said Count 
Robert bluntly. "Who knows what one man has said to 
another? Richard was with him from morning till night. My 
father called him a 'good youth.' I suppose I was a bad one," 
and the young man laughed recklessly. "Anyway, Richard is 
Duke of Normandy, and I am only the Count of the Hiesmois; 
and here I am in the village of Falaise that ought to be mine, 
collecting taxes that ought to be mine, and putting them safely 
away for my brother in the treasure-room of the castle that 
ought to be mine."  
"This castle seems to be of good strength, my lord. The 
walls are thick and heavy. It would not be easy to batter them 
down. It stands at the very edge of the cliff, and the cliff falls 
down sheer to the valley. No one could approach on that side."  
"No; it's a strong castle, but I have none that could not 
be captured in a day. Come to the window again, Ermenoldus. 
See what a mass of rook the castle is built on, and how it juts 
out over the valley! Across the Ante is that other great, jagged 
precipice. You're a wizard, Ermenoldus; I verily believe you 
are. Couldn't you build me a castle on Mount Mirat yonder 
that would be as strong as this?"  
I'm not enough of a wizard to give you a castle, my 
lord," said Ermenoldus; "and yet, there's more than one way," 
he half whispered. Count Robert did not hear the whisper, for 
he had turned again to the narrow window.  
"If those girls are as pretty as they are graceful and 
merry," he said, "they would be well worth seeing. 
Ermenoldus, will you call some one to get my horse? or, if you 
stamp three times on the stone under your feet, won't the horse 
come of its own accord, all saddled and bridled?"  
"You think too highly of the little that I have learned," 
said Ermenoldus.  
"I'm not sure, though," said the count laughing, "but 
you are in league with the fiend himself and know all that 
there is to be known. Whence do you come and whither do 
you go? You appear and then you disappear, and all I know is 
that you are gone."  
"Never did I go faster than you will go to gaze upon 
the pretty maidens washing linen on the banks of the stream," 
said Ermenoldus; "only I beg you, my lord, don't ride down 
over the cliff in your haste. All my magic could not save you 
then;" but Count Robert was already at the gate, and the next 
minute he was galloping down the rough, rocky way that led 
to the foot of the cliff.  
The linen had been spread out on the grass to dry and 
to whiten in the hot sun, and the young girls were frolicking in 
the ripples of the little stream, laughing and splashing water at 
one another. One had bent down a green bough and held it in 
front of her face to protect it.  
"By my faith!" said Count Robert to himself, "if that 
maiden's face is as fair as her little feet are white, she's prettier 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
5
than all the high-born dames at my brother's castle." Just then 
the maiden let go the green branch and it sprang up above her 
head.  
"Let's dance," she said, "not splash water at one 
another like children."  
"That's a fairer face than I ever saw before," thought 
the count, as he stopped his horse, and hidden by the trees, 
gazed at the young girls in their playful imitation of the village 
dance, their white feet now twinkling in the green grass on the 
river's brink, and now splashing rainbow drops around them.  
"See how high the sun is," said one of the girls. "The 
linen is dry, and we must go home."  
"I'm tired. I'm going to rest awhile here under the trees 
before I go," said the maiden of the green branch.  
"But the sun is almost overhead," said one girl. "Won't 
your mother beat you if you do not come?"  
"Beat? What is that? No one ever beats me," she 
replied indifferently. "You carry the linen home for me, and I 
will come when I have had my little nap. Good-by, my 
friends," and she waved them a farewell as she sat on the bank 
with her head on her hand, half reclining on the soft green 
grass in the shadow of the trees.  
"Well, if that isn't Arletta!" said one young girl. "She 
commands us to carry home her linen for her, and we obey. 
We always do just what she tells us to. Listen! Now she is 
singing. If I stayed after the washing was done to sleep on the 
bank and to sing songs, I should have a sound beating, but 
Arletta always does what she likes." The maidens went slowly 
down the valley. Arletta half closed her eyes, and sang softly 
to herself.  
"And may I listen to the pretty song?" said a voice 
coming so suddenly that it seemed to be just at her ear. Arletta 
sprang to her feet and made a humble courtesy, and then stood 
still, too abashed to look up. The rider had dismounted and 
stood holding his hat with its long plume in one hand and the 
horse's bridle in the other.  
"Are you one of the maidens of Falaise?" he asked, and 
then smiled at the idle question, for where else could she 
belong?  
"I'm Arletta," she answered, looking up shyly, "and my 
father is Fulbert the tanner."  
"Strange that such a flower should blossom in the foul 
garden of a tanner," said Robert to himself.  
"Are you the great Duke Richard?" asked the maiden.  
"No, I'm not," said Robert half gloomily. "I'm nobody 
but Count Robert, his younger brother; and I haven't even a 
strong castle to bless myself with. But you must be tired. Isn't 
this washing too hard work for a girl like you?"  
"Oh, no, I am strong," she said. "All the girls come out 
here to wash the linen for their homes."  
"Shouldn't you rather stay at home and have some one 
to wash the linen for you? When you braid your hair, you 
could braid in a cord of shining gold, and you could wear a 
silken mantle and fasten it with a golden clasp."  
"But it is only the great ladies in castles who wear 
silken mantles and braid gold in their hair," said Arletta, 
smiling, nevertheless, at the thought of so much luxury.  
"And should you like to have a young man ride up on a 
great black horse to see you? He would have a feather in his 
hat, and perhaps he would wear a gold chain, if he is only a 
count, and he might bring you one day a jewelled band for 
your hair, and another day a veil of silken tissue, or perhaps a 
mantle of silk or of velvet. Should you like it?" Arletta said 
nothing, but her cheeks were bright red. Her eyes were bent on 
the ground, but when she ventured to look up for a moment, 
they were glittering with excitement.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
6
"Farewell, my pretty Arletta," said he, "but it will not 
be many days before you will hear from me." He sprang upon 
his horse, kissed his hand to her gayly, and rode away, the 
horse's hoofs clattering on the fragments of stone in the road.  
Whatever were Robert's faults, no one could accuse 
him of putting off what he meant to do, and it was only the 
next day when Fulbert came meekly from his tan-yard at the 
demand of the young noble.  
"I have seen many a high-born maiden," said Robert 
without a word of explanation or preface, "and your daughter 
pleases me better than all of them. I would have her as the lady 
of the castle. Will you send her to me to-morrow?"  
"The child of a tanner cannot well consort with the lord 
of a castle," said the father bravely, but with a trembling voice.  
"And I have no castle worthy of the name," said Count 
Robert bitterly, "but I suppose that I may have a bride."  
"The great folk have the power to take whom they 
will," said the tanner, his voice choking in his throat, "but I 
would have had my daughter wed one of her own station, and 
not in the castle but in the little church; and I wanted my 
kinsfolk and her mother's to look at her and smile upon her, 
and then to come to our house and rejoice that Arletta was 
going to her own home with the one that she had chosen."  
"As you will," said the count, with pretended 
indifference; "but before you refuse, ask the girl herself. If she 
says no, I will leave her; but should she choose to say yes, you 
shall lose nothing by having your daughter the bride of a 
noble."  
In the tiny inner room of the cottage stood Arletta, 
trembling and flushing.  
"Hasten, Arletta," said her mother, Doda. "Hasten, and 
put on your best robe, the gray with the blue belt. He will go. 
A count will not wait long for a tanner's daughter. Tell him 
that you are ready—but, no; tell him that you will agree if—
no, that will not do; ask him humbly if he would not rather that 
his bride were the daughter of a brewer than of a tanner; and 
tell him that if he would only give your father the gold to 
become a brewer, he would not be shamed that you have come 
from the home of a tanner."  
"But perhaps I do not wish to go to the castle," said 
Arletta indifferently. "Perhaps I would rather walk to the 
church with all the village maidens, and have a wedding 
feast."  
"Arletta, why will you torment me? Hasten; I do not 
hear a sound. Perhaps he is already gone. One would think you 
had no idea how great an honor it is. Don't you know that he 
can wed whom he will?"  
"The one that weds me will be the one that I  will," said 
Arletta.  
"You are a proud, undutiful girl," said Doda. "Pull 
those folds more on the shoulders, and draw the girdle to the 
right. There, I hear his voice again. He has not gone."  
"No, he has not gone," said Arletta, with a peculiar 
little smile, and she went forward slowly, till she stood in the 
opening between the two rooms. The soft gray garment hung 
in long folds from her shoulders, and was confined at the waist 
by a blue belt. Her cheeks were red, and her eyes shone.  
"Go to him. Tell him you are sorry you have kept him 
so long," whispered Doda, twitching her daughter's robe, for 
she had crept up softly behind the girl. But Arletta did not take 
even a single step through the opening. She stood with one 
foot drawn back, as if she might disappear in a moment. So 
beautiful she was that Robert bent on one knee before her, and 
kissed her hand as if she had been some maiden of high 
degree.  
"The next time that I see you, shall it be in the castle? 
Will you come to me, Arletta?"  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
7
"Say yes," whispered her mother, and even Fulbert had 
begun to realize that this was a great opportunity, and to fear 
lest the wayward damsel should refuse so lordly a suitor.  
"Will you come, Arletta?" asked the count gently, 
looking eagerly into her eyes.  
"Yes, I will come," said Arletta, with slow 
graciousness, and with a touch of condescension in manner 
that would have seemed to belong to a princess rather than to a 
simple maiden of the people. The count slipped about her neck 
a slender gold chain with a pearl in every link.  
"That is to hold you fast," he said. "The castle is a grim 
and dreary place; but I know where there is a little door that 
leads to a chamber the thickness of the wall. It is dark and 
gloomy now, but people who are wise in using colors shall 
paint the walls with blue and gold and vermilion. The 
hangings shall be of silk, and every day the straw on the floor 
shall be bright with fresh flowers; and there shall you abide, 
and, tanner's daughter as you are, you shall be treated as if you 
were a king's daughter."  
"Tell him you are grateful," whispered Doda anxiously, 
but Arletta only smiled slightly, with the air of one conferring 
a favor. The count sprang upon his great black horse, and went 
his way to the castle.  
As he dropped his bridle into the hands of a servant, he 
asked:—  
"And where is Ermenoldus?"  
"Truly, my lord, I do not know," said the man. "He was 
here, and then he was not here, and when he was here he said, 
'Tell my lord there is a message from me,' and then he was not 
here."  
"Folly! no man could leave the castle unless the gate 
was opened for him. If you are telling me false, I'll have you 
thrown from the top of the cliff."  
"Indeed, my lord, it is true," said the servant earnestly. 
"He was here, and then he was not here, and he said there was 
a message for you that you could read only in the glow of the 
fire."  
"I believe the man is in league with the fiend," said 
Robert to himself. "To leave me just when I wanted him 
most!"  
That night, when the count went to his bed, there lay 
on his pillow a scroll, closely tied with a golden cord that was 
wrought into an intricacy of many twists and coils. Impatiently 
he struggled with the knot.  
"There's surely magic about it," he said, "and I have 
heard that if one cuts a magic knot, the wizardry will all turn 
against him," so he pulled and turned and twisted the golden 
thread, until all of a sudden it seemed to fly apart of its own 
accord under his fingers. Apparently nothing was written on 
the scroll, but as he held it half fearfully before the fire in the 
castle hall, there came out, letter by letter, a message. He read 
it slowly, for he was more used to reading the faces of men 
than lettering on parchment. It was this:—  
"When one holds that which he would have, let him see 
to him see to it that he hold it fast."  
"Indeed I will," he said under his breath. "Arletta is 
mine, and the workmen shall work as never before, and if the 
little room in the tower is not ready in two days, some one 
shall go into the dungeon."  
No one was thrown into the dungeon, for on the second 
day the little chamber in the wall was as bright and cheery as a 
place could be that had but a single window, and that a tiny 
one. However, people thought more of safety than of sunlight 
in those days, and the smallness of the opening was looked 
upon as an advantage. The frowning vaulting of the gray 
stonework that made the top of the room was hidden by a light 
blue coloring, half veiled by a graceful scrollwork of gold. All 
about the little window the stone was stained a deep, rich 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
8
vermilion, and the walls were hung with heavy silken 
tapestries of a clear, sunny yellow. The floor was strewn with 
the softest of straw, and over it were sprinkled fresh roses 
from which the pages had removed every thorn. With precious 
stones—cut from the count's mantle of state—hung here and 
there on the walls, the little room flashed when the door was 
thrown open as if it was full of humming-birds.  
All was ready, and Robert sent a chamberlain for 
Arletta. Behold, he returned without the village maiden!  
"She would not come with me," he explained. "She 
said she would not come to the castle as a serving maid, she 
would come as the bride of a great lord; and she bade me 
return, if you were of the same mind, with an escort of 
palfreys well caparisoned, and with a due attendance. 'I do not 
go to the castle to beg,' she said—and O my lord, she looked 
like a queen when she said it—'I go of my own will, and as the 
free maiden daughter of a gallant man. I will not creep up hill 
with a single chamberlain as my escort. If I am worth having, I 
am worth sending for in proper state. Then, too, the count has 
sent me no finely woven robe and no silken mantle. I have 
nothing save what is the gift of my father. Would he have me 
come to him wearing the gift of a tanner, or would he have me 
wear nothing at all but the little chain of gold and pearls?' 
Then she turned away, and I saw her no more." The count 
laughed.  
"I like her the better for it," said he. "And now do you 
make up an escort as you would for the daughter of a duke. 
Carry her the handsomest tunic and mantle to be found in the 
castle. Choose the best palfreys, and have them as well 
groomed and as handsomely caparisoned as for a queen. Let 
twenty men-at-arms go with you, and see to it that you delay 
not in going. As for the coming, the fair Arletta will choose 
her own pace."  
The little procession went forth and made its way along 
the rocky road to the home of the tanner. Robert watched it 
eagerly as it carne slowly up the hill. At the castle gate there 
was a halt.  
"Throw the gates open wide," he heard a low, clear 
voice say. "I am not an uninvited guest. I come here at the 
wish of the count and of my own free will."  
"Let him see to it that he hold it fast," said Robert, "and 
that I will," and he hastened to welcome the fair Arletta.  
Month after month passed away, but the charm of the 
tanner's daughter for the young count did not grow less. 
Whether she met him in her plain gray gown, with the playful 
humility of a village maiden, or in the rich robes of the lady of 
the castle, to whom all must do honor, and with a pride and 
haughtiness equal to that of the count's aristocratic 
grandfather, Richard the Fearless, she was equally fascinating 
to Count Robert. His brother's interests were forgotten. Of his 
own he took no heed. It began to be whispered that he would 
not willingly depart from the castle of Falaise.  
Now Normandy and the districts round about were 
swarming with people, too many for even so fertile a country 
to nourish. The land had been divided and subdivided until the 
share of a man would no longer support those who were in 
helpless dependence upon him. There was restlessness 
everywhere. The women of the household must abide at home; 
nowhere else was there protection or safety. The fathers of 
families must struggle on as best they could; but the young 
men were held back by no question of fear, bound by no 
demands of any who were dependent upon them. From one 
domain to another they wandered, ready to throw themselves 
vehemently into whatever cause might come to hand. They 
were any man's soldiers if he would pay them well. They 
would follow the sound of the tinkling silver wherever it might 
lead.  
The country about was full of such men, and at the first 
whisper of the count's unwillingness to leave Falaise, they 
hastened to the castle. The weapon lay at Robert's hand. 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
9
Would he use it? One of the boldest of the young soldiers 
made his way to the count.  
"Here we are," he said, "and here are our weapons. Can 
you make use of us and of them? We will fight for you bravely 
and faithfully."  
CHAPTER II 
THE BANQUET AT ROUEN 
Give a child a knife and its first thought is to cut. So it 
was with the count. Here he was in a castle that ought to be 
his. Its walls were solid, its keep was massy. Men who were 
eager to fight under his banner were pressing upon him. What 
should hinder him from holding fast to his own?  
"I wish Ermenoldus was here," he thought. Then his 
mind wandered back to the last time that he had seen the 
wizard, as he called him, and more than half in earnest.  
"We were talking about the castle and its thick walls 
and the great precipice below it," he thought, "and then he 
disappeared and left me the mysterious message that I could 
read only in the glow of the fire." Ever since the strange guest 
had departed, Robert had carried the little scroll in his bosom. 
He drew it out and read it anew. Another interpretation flashed 
upon him.  
"The castle of Falaise is that which I 'would have,' " he 
said aloud. " 'Let him see to it that he hold it fast.' That will I 
do. Brother or demon, duke or king, let them come on. Here is 
my castle—my  castle—and here are bold fighters, and up 
there in the little room in the thickness of the wall is as 
beautiful a lady to fight for as ever sat on a royal throne. Here 
I am and here will I remain." In an hour the castle was in 
commotion. There was a great polishing of shields and spears. 
Armor that had grown rusty in the time of quiet, so unusual in 
those stormy days, was rubbed and strengthened and its breaks 
repaired. The forges blazed night and day. War-horses were to 
be shod. Arrowheads were to be made. Swords were to be 
sharpened to a keen edge that would cut through head and 
helmet at a blow. Axes were ground, and the helve of each 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
10
was carefully tested, for on its strength might depend a 
fighter's chance of life or the defence of the castle gate.  
In the midst of all the eager preparations, a man 
appeared at the gate. He was muddy. His shoes were in 
fragments, and his clothes were torn to rags by the thick briers 
through which he had forced his way; but when he spoke, men 
listened as if their lives hung upon his words. The words were 
few, they were only these:—  
"Duke Richard and a great force are coming through 
the forest at the other side of the town."  
Robert's first thought was of the security of the fair 
bride whom he had taken from the home of her father. In 
general, the keep of a castle was the safest place in a siege, but 
in this instance, when a duke was trying to regain possession 
of his own, then, however much he might be forced to injure 
the castle, he would do no needless damage to the peasants 
living on his land. The best place for Arletta was in her father's 
house, and there she was carried with as much of form and 
ceremony as the hasty departure would permit.  
Hardly had the castle gate been closed upon the return 
of the men who had acted as her escort, when the glitter of the 
spears of Richard's soldiers was seen in the distance. Nearer 
and nearer they came. First rode the standard-bearer and the 
guards of the standard. Then came the duke himself, with 
flashing helmet and shield and coat of mail, his armorial 
bearings blazoned on even the trappings of his horse. The coat 
of mail was in one piece, and was shaped like a tunic, falling 
to the knees, and protecting his arms down to the wrists. His 
legs were guarded by wide thongs of leather crossed and 
recrossed. To the broad belt that fell across his shoulder hung 
a dirk and a short, stout sword. His shield was oblong, rounded 
at the top and narrowing to a point at the bottom. That there 
should be no little crevice where an unfriendly lance might 
enter, his coat of mail had a kind of hood, also of mail, that 
covered the back of his head to the helmet, and shielded his 
cheeks. He carried a lance, and from its head waved the 
gonfalon, or pennant, around which his men were to rally at 
the call of their lord.  
The knights who accompanied Richard were armed 
and equipped in much the same way, save that their 
accoutrements were less rich, and not always as complete. 
Around each knight were grouped his own vassals, whom he 
was required to arm and mount and lead in the service of the 
duke.  
No coat of mail had the men of low degree. That 
belonged to the knights, and every one knew that a man of 
humble birth could never be worthy of being made a knight. 
They were allowed to wear a stuffed tunic that afforded some 
little protection, and under it they might have a sort of 
breastplate of leather. They carried a round shield. Their 
weapons were the lance, the battle-axe, the bow, the sling, 
even clubs and flails and maces, and staves with prongs. They 
were permitted to carry a sword, but it must be long and 
slender—not short and thick like that of the nobles. Together 
with these vassals were many of the same eager, restless 
adventurers that had entered the service of Robert.  
Up the winding road came the troops of Richard, closer 
and closer to the castle. Robert's men stood on the wall hurling 
down great stones, firing deadly arrows, and thrusting back 
with their long lances the foremost men in the ranks of the 
duke. The contest was the more bitter in that the foes were 
brothers. Wild shouts arose from both sides—of rage from one 
and defiance from the other. Richard's arbalests, unwieldy 
machines for hurling great stones, drove Robert's men down 
from the walls; or rather their dead bodies were dragged down 
by their fellow-fighters to make room for other men. The outer 
walls were captured, and there was a pause.  
Robert's men were few, and there was no way to make 
good his losses; while Richard's followers had been more in 
number at first, and additions had been continually coming up. 
The walls of the donjon were thick and heavy, but the art of 
using stone as a material for castle-building was in its infancy, 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
11
and there were weaknesses in the structure of which a 
determined assailant might take advantage. After the moment's 
rest, Richard's men were rousing themselves for a final attack, 
and this, Robert knew, could hardly fail to be successful. He 
stood with grim, set face, and around him gathered his 
fighters, watching him, and ready to obey the least indication 
of his wishes.  
"It is of no use. The castle must yield," said Robert 
gloomily.  
"True, my lord," said a grave voice behind him.  
"Ermenoldus! wizard that you are, give me your aid. 
How came you here?"  
"I wish I was a wizard, my lord," said Ermenoldus 
sadly. "I would run the risk of the flame and the fagot if I 
could help you, for I have done you nothing but harm when I 
meant to work you good."  
"But how came you here?"  
"By no wizardry, my lord. There is a tiny crevice under 
a jutting rock which is hidden by bushes. A slender man like 
me can easily make his way up the crack, for it is scarcely 
more than that. A sudden twist, a writhing through a little gap 
between the foundation rocks, and I am in your fortress. It was 
as well that your servants should think it witchcraft. 
Unrevealed knowledge is unshared power."  
'"Is there no hope, Ermenoldus?"  
"None, my lord. To save yourself from death—no, 
perhaps not death, that is easy—but from a life in the lowest 
depths of the castle dungeon, you must yield. Take down your 
standard. Put up the white flag and sue for peace. Make what 
terms you can, but yield."  
The white flag was put up, and in the gloomy keep of 
the castle, red and slippery with the blood of slaughtered men, 
the two brothers debated again the question of the heritage—
Richard calmly, as with the manner of a man who did but 
claim his own; Robert gloomily, but with a certain ready 
meekness that might have made those who knew him best 
question whether all his thoughts were made clear by his 
words. The end of the discussion was this: Robert might have 
the district of the Hiesmois, and hold it free from his brother's 
interference, but the castle of Falaise must still belong to 
Richard.  
All was quiet and concord. The soldiers marched to 
Richard's capital, Rouen, the two brothers riding together at 
the head of their men. A great banquet was made ready in the 
castle—a strange mixture of luxury and discomfort. The chairs 
of that day were heavy and clumsy. At family dinners people 
sat on stools, but at a ceremonious feast like this benches were 
used, and the guests huddled together as best they could. There 
were nutcrackers, but there were no forks. Warriors noted for 
their bravery were given bulls' horns bound with rings of silver 
or of gold for their drinking cups, and these were filled over 
and over again with beer or wine. There were vegetables of 
many kinds, fish of all varieties, rabbits, fowl, venison, and 
lamb. Pork appeared in the shape of ham, sausages, black 
pudding, and roast. It was the most common meat, though it 
was often eaten with a little fear lest it should produce leprosy.  
For dessert there were baked fruits and nuts of all the 
kinds that could be obtained, cheese, red and white sugar-
plums, and on a raised platform in the middle of the table were 
jellies, elaborately fashioned in the shape of a swan, heron, 
bittern, or peacock. The real peacock was the dish of honor, 
and was called the "food for the brave." It was stuffed and 
roasted. Its beak was gilded with gold, and sometimes its 
whole body was covered with silver gilt. The bird was brought 
in with a waving of banners, and a flourish of trumpets like 
that which announced the coming of some great dignitary.  
The feast was elaborate, but it was served with no 
attempt at any special order. After orange preserves came 
chickens, and after lamb sausages came a delicate pie made of 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
12
larks. Nuts were quite likely to appear before ham, and sweet 
jellies before soup.  
Such a banquet as this required a kitchen of generous 
dimensions, and so it was that the kitchen of a noble must have 
great spits on which many joints of different kinds could be 
roasted, together with whole sheep and venison and long rows 
of poultry. There must be many utensils, and in the houses of 
men of highest rank there was a special servant to take care of 
the copper dishes, kettles, saucepans, and caldrons, and to see 
to it that they were safe and bright and shining.  
The banquet hall was lighted by hanging lamps, and 
lamps on standards, and countless wax candles set in 
chandeliers and in candlesticks. The walls were hung with 
finely woven tapestries. Within the hall there was a barbaric 
sort of luxury, but in the town in which the hall of feasting 
stood, the pigs were still running wild in the streets.  
When men began to weary of feasting, jugglers and 
minstrels came in to amuse them. The minstrels sang to the 
music of a sort of double-barrelled flute, or recited long poems 
of war or adventure in doggerel rhymes. Lavish gifts were 
presented to them, and they went away rejoicing in generous 
sums of money, or clothing of scarlet or violet cloth, or in fur 
robes or jewels or noble horses.  
The jugglers were treated equally well, and perhaps the 
amusements which they provided were even more generally 
appreciated by the guests. These jugglers performed all sorts 
of sleight-of-hand tricks. They boxed and they wrestled and 
they danced. They threw up lances and caught them by the 
point, or they spun naked swords over their heads and caught 
the flashing weapons as they fell. Then, too, they led about 
bears and monkeys and dogs that fought or danced together. 
The dogs would walk about on their hind legs, the monkeys 
would ride horseback, while the bears pretended to be dead 
and the goats played on the harp.  
Hour after hour the feasting and the amusements and 
the rejoicing continued. Every one drank the health of every 
one else. Especially friendly and harmonious did the two 
brothers appear, who had so recently fought together as the 
deadliest of foes. In many a golden-bound horn of wine they 
pledged each other. At last the time came when men could 
feast no more. The words of farewell were said, and the 
banquet was over. Scarcely had the festival lights been 
extinguished when the bells began to toll for the sudden death 
of Richard. Robert returned to Falaise. The castle was his, and 
he was Duke of Normandy.  
The new duke began his reign by a generosity that 
made his followers rejoice.  
"He's the duke for me," said one of them jubilantly. 
"Duke Richard gave me one suit a year, and Duke Robert will 
give me two."  
"Yes," said a second retainer, "when Arcy showed him 
his sword all dinted and bent in the fight and asked for 
another, he gave him a sword and a new coat of mail and a 
fine new horse and a helmet."  
"Was that what killed Arcy? Did he die of joy?"  
"That is what some one said, but I think he ate too 
much at the feast, and they didn't bleed him soon enough."  
"Perhaps he drank of the wrong cup by mistake," said 
another, with a significant look.  
"I don't quarrel with any duke that doubles my salary," 
said the first. "He is my friend who shows himself a friend, 
and I'll stand by Robert the Magnificent. Richard died, to be 
sure; but then he might have been killed in the battle so it 
would have been all the same now."  
It mattered little to Robert who was pleased and who 
was displeased at his accession. He was duke, and he meant to 
rule, and that was enough. Falaise pleased him. The hunting 
was good, the castle was the strongest in his domain; it was the 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
13
place for which he had fought, and now that it was in his 
hands, he meant to keep it. Moreover, in the home of a man 
who had once been a tanner, there was the fairest lady in the 
duchy. It seemed best that she should remain for a while in her 
father's house. Those were stormy times, and until Robert's 
position was perfectly established, she would be more safe 
from secret foes in the humbler home of her parents than in the 
castle itself, with all its mighty walls and its store of weapons.  
He had lost one upon whom he had been more than a 
little inclined to rely—the "wizard" Ermenoldus—and in a 
way to make him feel the loss the more keenly. Ermenoldus 
had accused certain nobles of being unfaithful to Robert. One 
by one they challenged him to single combat. One by one they 
were defeated, but at last in a final duel with a forester he was 
slain. Sorrow, pleasure, anxiety, triumph, contended in 
Robert's mind. It is no wonder that he was restless and uneasy.  
"One would think that the great folks might let us sleep 
of nights," said a peasant woman sleepily to her husband, as 
she turned wearily on the heap of straw that was their bed.  
"That was the duke," said her husband. "Listen! you 
can hear his horse's hoof-beats even now, and he must be 
almost up to the castle. He gallops faster than any one else."  
"Why can't he do his galloping by day?" grumbled the 
woman. "They take our cattle, and they make us work in their 
fields and on their roads. If we turn around we have to pay a 
tax, and if we stand still, we have to pay a tax. They might let 
us sleep at night."  
"Perhaps the duke cannot sleep either," said the 
peasant; and he added significantly: "It is not good to fight 
with one's brother. I have heard that if a man does, little 
demons will come at night and torment him."  
"Perhaps evil spirits made him do it," said the wife 
making the sign of the cross; but the husband said:—  
"I don't believe he is a very good man, for they say that 
sometimes he burns a whole armful of wax candles in a night, 
because he won't be in the dark."  
"Well, everybody knows that wax candles ought to be 
given to the church," said the wife.  
"A wizard used to come to see him sometimes," said 
the man, "and no one knew how he ever got into the castle or 
how he got out of it. The porter said that once when the wizard 
was standing close to him and the gate was shut, he looked 
away for just a minute, and when he turned, the wizard was 
gone; but when he opened the gate half an hour later, the 
wizard was going down the hill as free as might be, and the 
porter declared that when the man waved his hand, he could 
see a streak of fire."  
"It might have been his ghost," said the woman.  
"It might now,"  said her husband, "but he wasn't dead 
then. Mayhap, though, it was his ghost that fought the— No, 
he was not dead then, either. They used to say that he could 
make a vine grow fast or slow as he would, and that if he 
looked at you over the right shoulder, you would have good 
luck, but that if he looked at you over the left shoulder, 
whatever you planted would die or your house would burn 
down or the spring would dry up or something bad would 
come to you. I have heard that if he said some good words 
over the ground, there would be a great harvest, and that if he 
shook his head at the moon and said something that no one 
could understand, any one that went out into the moonlight 
that night would fall down dead."  
"Duke Richard fell down dead right after the great 
feast, didn't he? They say that the wizard was there."  
"No, he wasn't there; but what happened then is why 
they call the duke 'Robert the Devil.' They say it was only 
Richard and the very bravest of his knights that died, and that 
not one of Duke Robert's men was hurt."  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
14
"I think it was all that wizard," said the wife positively. 
"A wizard can do things if he isn't there; and then he might 
have been there, even if they couldn't see him. A wizard 
doesn't have to be seen if he doesn't choose to be. He might 
have looked at the wine over the left shoulder. Duke Robert is 
kind and good, I am sure of that, for when he was riding at full 
speed one day, Pierre's little girl stood still in the road right in 
front of his horse. He had a right to run over her, of course, but 
he dashed out among those great stones just at the turn of the 
road and did not harm her at all. And there's something more 
to tell, for instead of going down on her knees and thanking 
him for sparing her life, the silly little thing only opened her 
mouth and cried at the top of her voice."  
"Didn't he even tell some one to beat her?"  
"No, that he did not; he bent away down from the 
saddle—and he might have fallen off and rolled down the 
bank and been killed; only think of it, the duke killed for the 
child of a serf!—he bent down from the saddle and caught her 
up. The mother thought he was going to throw her down over 
the rocks, and she began to cry too; but he gave the child a ride 
on that great black horse of his, and then lifted her down and 
filled both her hands with red and white sugar-plums, the kind 
that they say great folks have at their feasts. No one in the 
village ever saw any before, and all the people around here 
have been in to see them. The child is so proud that when she 
plays with the other children, she is all the time saying, 'You 
never rode on the great black horse'; and really her mother isn't 
much better, for she says her daughter shall never marry any 
man who isn't at least a freeman."  
"She will marry the one that the duke chooses, of 
course," said the husband; "but she was certainly a fortunate 
child. Not many nobles would have let her off so easily when 
she was right in the road. Perhaps it was the wizard, after all, 
and Duke Robert had nothing to do with the wine."  
"I heard one of the knights call the duke 'Robert the 
Magnificent,' " said the woman.  
"And I heard one call him 'Robert the Devil,' " said the 
man.  
"I suppose the great folks have some way of knowing 
which is right," said the woman, and then they went to sleep.  
More than once that night did the great black horse 
gallop up and down the winding road between the castle and 
the village below the hill. More than once did the rider in his 
restlessness fling himself from the saddle and stride 
impatiently up and down in front of his stronghold. Then he 
would mount again and ride furiously down the hill, the hoofs 
of his horse striking fire on the stones in his path.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
15
CHAPTER III 
FROM CASTLE TO COTTAGE 
In the village, not far from the market-place, was the 
home of Fulbert, made larger and more comfortable. To keep 
out the cold draughts, the walls were hung with tapestry, a 
refinement of luxury never seen before in the cottage of a 
peasant, so that the little house was the wonder of all the 
people in the vicinity. There was also a chair, a real chair; 
clumsy and heavy, to be sure, but there was gilt on it, and the 
arms were carved, and, moreover, it was the only chair in the 
neighborhood, and that was fame. The family sat on stools at 
the table, of course; but then every one knew that they could 
use a chair if they chose.  
Doda was not at all averse to letting her friends have a 
glimpse of her cooking utensils, and report said that some of 
them were made of copper, "Just as if they were in a king's 
kitchen," said the admiring people. When Fulbert and his 
family ate their dinner, they did not use plain wooden 
trenchers as did their neighbors, but a kind of pottery with 
thick, heavy glazing. They drank from wooden cups, to be 
sure, but the cups were edged with a rim of silver; and most 
astounding luxury of all, rumor said that they actually had all 
the wax candles that they chose to burn.  
More than one armful of them was burned on the night 
that Duke Robert rode so furiously up and down the long hill. 
By and by all was still in the cottage. The duke was quiet in 
the castle, but before the sun was far above the horizon, he 
was again at the foot of the hill, and softly entering the door of 
the little house.  
"Here he is, my lord, here he is," said the old nurse, 
"and he's even a lustier boy by daylight than he was by 
candlelight. It's a good thing that light of a wax candle shone 
on him first, for bees gather wax, and so he will be rich and 
powerful. Here's your boy, my lord," and she put the baby into 
the arms of its father, and drew aside the curtain that separated 
the outer from the inner room where Arletta lay. The duke 
would have known what to do on a battlefield with an enemy 
before him and with a sword in his hand, but with his quick-
witted, sparkling Arletta lying pale and weak, and in his arms 
the little red bundle that seemed heavier than a suit of armor, 
he was as helpless as any other young father who is not a 
duke. Arletta smiled gently, and whispered:—  
"Is he not a fine boy?"  
"Indeed he is," said the duke, "and I'll do more for him 
than any one thinks. But what makes him shut up his hands so 
tight? Is anything the matter?" he said to the nurse.  
"All babies do," said the nurse composedly, "but all 
babies don't do what he did last night; for when we laid him on 
the straw, he clutched a handful and he held on to it, and when 
he was put on the bed to sleep, he kept it in his hand, he did; 
and that means something, it does. Everybody that's had to do 
with babies knows that."  
"What does it mean?" asked Duke Robert, looking at 
the nurse as if she alone could speak the words of wisdom.  
"This is what it means—and it isn't myself alone that 
says it, for I heard my mother's mother say it when I was no 
higher than that—that whatever thing a child does first, that 
will he always do; and this child will reach out and take to 
himself, and what he takes he will hold, until the time comes 
that he will have more than any one dreams of."  
"That is the tree in your dream," said Robert, turning to 
Arletta.  
"Yes, and dreams mean something, too," said the 
nurse, who was so elated at having the duke for a listener that 
she had no idea when to stop. "When the lady Arletta told me 
what a dream she had had, that a tree arose from her body, and 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
16
its branches spread out till they shaded all Normandy, I  knew 
what it meant; and I  knew what it meant when the boy 
clutched the straw. He's no common child."  
"No, he's not," said the duke, looking at the baby with 
much respect mingled with a little alarm, for it was puckering 
up its face to do the duke knew not what; and when the first 
cry came forth, the warlike noble who never fled from his foes 
actually dropped his son into the nurse's arms and made his 
way into the open air as rapidly as possible, feeling very big 
and clumsy, and really trembling and glancing around him in 
dismay when his sword knocked against the heavy oaken chair 
in his hurried escape.  
One week after its birth the baby was taken to the 
parish church to be baptized. Never before had there been such 
an assemblage to see the baptism of any infant. Falaise was 
quite an important place, not only because of its castle, but on 
account of its trade in leather and its manufacture of woollens. 
The people were not all humble peasants, some among them 
were well-to-do; and the country round about, rich in flocks 
and herds, was the home of many a prosperous vassal. The 
herdsmen left their flocks and the weavers their looms, the 
peasants willingly ran the risk of fines and penalties, and all 
flocked to the church to see the baptism of the child of a great 
noble. What would be his name? The crowds that pressed 
around the font had been all eyes, but when the priest asked:—  
"What is the name of this child?" then they were all 
ears. They need not have been afraid of losing a word, for in a 
great voice that rang throughout the church Duke Robert 
said:—  
"His name shall be William, and let all men know that 
he is named for William of the Long Sword, his ancestor."  
Just within the church door was another William, one 
William Talvas, Earl of Belesme, who stood with angry eyes 
and grim, stern face.  
"You have a namesake, Earl William," said the burgess 
of a neighboring town, who stood near him. "How do you like 
the robust son of your liege lord?" 
 
 
 
THE BAPTISM OF WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR  
"Shame on him, shame on him!" said the haughty 
chieftain bitterly. "My grandfather was a faithful friend of 
Robert's grandfather, and did him good service; and now for 
the sake of the whining grandson of a tanner, I and mine will 
be put to loss and dishonor. May shame and disgrace be his lot 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
17
as long as he shall live!" and William Talvas, without waiting 
for the rest of the ceremony, flung himself out of the church 
and galloped furiously away, as if the very air of Falaise was 
poisoned by the little child at the font.  
Arletta was soon taken to the stone castle, together 
with her father; mother, and her brother Walter, for Robert, in 
his delight at having in arms the "fair young son" for whom he 
had longed could not do enough for the lady and her family.  
It was a gloomy place. Thick walls surrounded it, 
pierced by a formidable gate. Over the gateway was the heavy 
iron portcullis, ready to be dropped in a moment at the 
approach of a foe or a stranger; for in those times of sudden 
alarms any unknown man was a foe until he had shown 
himself a friend. Within the walls was a courtyard that might 
have been bright and pleasant, had it not been for the grim 
stone bulwarks that seemed to shut it away from all the 
cheerful, sunny world without. Here stood the keep. In its 
lowest depths were the cellars and the dungeons, where a lord 
might fling his captive enemies; and there, unless their friends 
were stronger than he, he might keep them without word or 
interference, until their bones strewed the damp stone floors 
that had been wet with the blood of many a wounded prisoner 
before them.  
Above the dungeons was the hall. The windows were 
mere slits in the walls, so that the sunlight rarely entered; but 
there was a great cheery blaze in the fireplace, and it was the 
very heart of home to the feudal lord. Here the family sat. 
Here the lady of the castle and her maidens embroidered the 
lord's coat of arms on his standard, or, with the bright colors 
gleaming in the light of many candles, worked on the rich 
tapestries that were to be the comfort and the beauty of the 
home. Here the children of the family played about the 
glowing fire; and here the girls were taught to care for the sick 
and the wounded, to make the decorations for robes of 
ceremony, and to do all that might fall to the share of the lady 
of a castle. The boys made bows and arrows and wooden 
spears, and held mimic tournaments in the further corners of 
the great room. Then they would all gather around the father 
of the family as he told of some success in the hunting field; 
and the dogs, lying as near the fire as they had been able to 
press their way, would prick up their ears as they heard their 
names, and understood that it was their deeds that their master 
was praising.  
Even more attentively did the household listen to the 
lord when he told of some warlike exploit, the repulse of an 
assault, or a successful attack upon some distant castle. Then 
the children would gather closer, and the lady would drop her 
embroidery, for when her lord was away, she was defender of 
the castle; her commands were obeyed, and it would be her 
skill or her ignorance that would save her home or lose it.  
Duke Robert had made Fulbert his chamberlain, or 
guardian of the ducal robes of state, while the son Walter 
seems to have been a special watchman to care for the safety 
of his little nephew; for even when the child was in the cradle, 
there was more than one fierce warrior who, noting the duke's 
fondness for his son, feared loss to him and his, and would 
gladly have seen injury or death come to the grandchild of the 
tanner.  
In this little time of peace Robert was happier than at 
any other period of his stormy life; but his happiness was soon 
interrupted, and by his own relatives. Robert was a hard rider, 
a ready fighter, and utterly fearless in time of danger. There 
were many possibilities that such a man would die by an early 
and violent death. Several of these relatives had counted upon 
their chances of succeeding to the inheritance; but with his 
devotion to the child at his castle, their hopes grew less, and 
they were the more ready to find cause of resentment in real or 
fancied wrongs. Some one whispered to Robert that his uncle, 
the Archbishop of Rouen, was assembling large numbers of 
fighting men at his own town of Evreux. Without waiting 
many days to inquire into the rights of the case, and whether or 
not there was actual danger of a revolt, Robert marched 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
18
straightway against his warlike uncle, and besieged his 
stronghold so vigorously that the fighting prelate thought it 
best to take refuge under the sheltering care of the king of 
France.  
As a warrior he had failed to overpower his energetic 
nephew, so he took what seems a rather unfair advantage of 
his priestly authority, and excommunicated him as a rebel 
against the church. By this decree all persons were forbidden 
to offer him food or shelter. They were to avoid him, as one 
whose touch would infect them with some deadly disease; and 
if mortal illness came upon him, he was to be buried without 
word of prayer or religious ceremony. Nor was this all, for the 
archbishop also laid Robert's duchy under an interdict. The 
churches were to be closed, no bells could be rung—and no 
one knew how many evil spirits might be hovering in the air 
that the sound of a church-bell would have dispersed—no 
marriage could receive the blessing of the church and no burial 
rites could be performed.  
Even if this decree was not carried out with the most 
literal obedience, any duke, be he as fearless as the great Rollo 
himself, might well wish to make terms with an enemy who 
used such thunderbolts as his weapons. Peace was made 
between them, the archbishop was invited to return to 
Rouen—and Robert straightway fell into similar difficulties 
with another priestly relative, Hugh, Bishop of Bayeux. He, 
too, shut himself up in a stronghold, but Robert besieged him 
so effectually that he yielded.  
More trouble was yet to come. Following the custom 
of the land, Robert, on his accession, had sent for his vassals to 
do him homage and swear to be faithful to him. Among them 
was William Talvas of Belesme. The old earl was not the man 
to change his mind lightly, and his scorn of Robert's child was 
as bitter as ever. With sullen rage the earl and his four sons 
debated what should be done.  
"Never will I do homage to the father of the brat that I 
saw in the church!" said the earl. "There's no priest and there's 
no church that can free the grandson of a vile tanner from 
stain," he thundered; "and I'll swear no fealty and I'll do no 
homage to the man whose chamberlain is a tanner, the man 
who sits in his own hall beside a tanner's son, the man who is 
father to a tanner's grandchild. A tanner! A skinner of dead 
beasts! The meanest, lowest, most contemptible of all trades! 
There is not a serf in Alençon that does not despise it. Call out 
our fighters! Fill the castle with arms! Strengthen the walls 
and the gates, and make the dungeons deeper!" and the old 
man sank upon a bench, exhausted by his own rage.  
His orders were obeyed. The earl and his four sons and 
many other brave fighters shut themselves up in the stronghold 
of Alençon. Robert's forces drew nearer. They surrounded the 
walls. They pressed closer and closer, so indomitable that the 
earl had no hope of victory, so watchful that he had no chance 
of escape. Fulk was slain, Robert, the second son, was 
severely wounded; and still, drawn up closely around the 
fortress, stood that line of resolute fighters. The earl yielded, 
and asked permission to beg pardon and to take the oath of 
fealty.  
Now it had become a custom in the land that an 
unfaithful vassal should be forgiven only after great 
humiliations. The earl, never yielding in thought, whatever his 
lips might say, must stand before his conqueror, barefooted, 
half naked, with a horse's saddle strapped to his shoulders, and 
beg pardon for his unfaithfulness. This the earl did, trembling 
with cold as well as with rage.  
The Duke of Normandy had become a man of power. 
His duchy had a matchless sea-coast. It bordered upon several 
of the great lordships that were some day to form a united 
France. It manufactured arms and cutlery and woollen goods, 
and it was rich in agricultural products. Its revenues flowed in 
so generously that even a lavishness like Robert's failed to 
affect them. The rightful king of the district then known as 
France looked upon the duke as his most potent friend. Great 
need had he of friends, for his mother, his younger brother, 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
19
and a strong party were against him. The helpless king, fleeing 
from his enemies with an escort of only twelve attendants, 
came to Robert, his vassal, and begged for help to gain 
possession of his own kingdom.  
Robert received the suppliant king with such honors 
and such richness of entertainment that he well merited the 
name of "Robert the Magnificent"; but no less did he deserve 
the title of "Robert the Devil" from his savage punishment of 
those who had rebelled against their sovereign. Henry's 
gratitude was equal to Robert's services, and he gave his ally a 
strip of borderland called the Vexin. Robert's dominions now 
extended almost to the city of Paris; and henceforth Normandy 
and France must stand or fall together.  
In these stormy times the home of Arletta and her 
children, for now there was also a little daughter, had been by 
turns the frowning castle of grim gray stone at the brink of the 
precipice, and the sunny little cottage in the valley below it. 
When the duke was at home, they were with him in the castle; 
but when he was absent on his war-like expeditions, it was 
safer for them to be where in case of need they could more 
readily find a hiding-place among the homes of the poor. 
There was also another reason. When the lord was away, the 
lady of the castle must take command, as has been said before, 
if her home was attacked by enemies. When Robert was by the 
side of Arletta, he could bear down upon all disobedience with 
a heavy hand, and punish with the utmost severity the least 
disrespect shown to the mother of his child; but he knew well 
that in his absence not one of all his men-at-arms would obey 
the orders of a tanner's daughter. There would be rebellion and 
insurrection. It might be that the duke would lose his favorite 
castle.  
So it was that the earliest memories of the little 
William were of being carried hurriedly from castle to cottage 
or from cottage to castle. He would hear the din of armor and 
the clashing of swords and spears. Then the duke, with a great 
company following him, would ride away on his war-horse, 
and when the little boy asked:—  
"But, my mother, where is my father?" the answer 
would be:—  
"He is fighting for the king of France," or "He has gone 
away to kill the men that wanted to kill him."  
"And will he come home to Adelaide and me when he 
has killed them?"  
"Yes," his mother would say.  
"Then I hope he will kill a great many, and kill them 
very soon, so that he will come back to see us," the little boy 
would answer wistfully.  
When the duke was on the return, his little son would 
listen for the first hoof-beats of his horse, and even if it was in 
the night, he would awake and call out joyfully:—  
"Did you kill many men, father? Will anybody try to 
kill you if you stay with us now?" Then they would go to the 
castle, and there would be a feast in the great hall. The 
firelight would sparkle and glow, and flash upon the rows of 
shields and the clusters of spears on the wall. The child 
thought that the weird pictures which it made were the faces of 
the people that had been killed, and that they were trying to 
come down to sit at the long table and share the feast.  
"You won't let them come down, will you, father?" he 
asked, pointing to the shields above his head.  
"No," said his father, "but you shall have a shield if 
you like, and a sword, too." So the little boy had a tiny suit of 
armor made of quilted linen with metal rings sewn thickly 
over it, and a helmet and a lance and a sword and a little 
shield. When they were all on, they were so heavy that he 
could hardly stand, but he would stagger about happily under 
their weight and say proudly:—  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
20
"Now I'm a soldier just like my father, and when I'm a 
man, I'm going to ride on a big horse, and go off to kill people 
just as he does."  
The nobles might refuse, so far as they dared, to allow 
their sons to be playmates of the grandson of a tanner; but to 
the children of the well-to-do burghers of Falaise it was an 
honor to play with the son of a duke; and the boys readily 
allowed the little fellow to take the lead in their games, and 
when he said:—  
"I don't want to play marbles," or "I don't want to spin 
tops," they were ready to do whatever he suggested. One day 
he said:—  
"I don't want to play morra, I don't want to hold my 
fingers up any more. I want to do what my father does and 
have some soldiers."  
"But we  haven't any swords," said the boys, who had 
often envied the son of the duke his military outfit.  
"My father will give you some if I ask him," he said 
confidently. And so it was, for soon every boy was provided 
with some kind of weapons or armor, and the little child 
became commander of a company of children. Up and down 
they marched to orders which the little fellow thought were 
like those that his father gave. One day he suddenly stood still 
and said:—  
"My father doesn't go up and down the road. He takes 
castles. He said he did. We'll go and take the castle." So 
straight up to the gate marched the line of boys, led by their 
proud little commander. He beat upon the wall with the hilt of 
his tiny sword, and the porter began to swing open the gate.  
"No, that isn't the way," said the boy indignantly. "Shut 
the gate and go and tell the duke to come down." The man 
obeyed, and the duke came at the command of this new 
sovereign. The little boy marched up to him with as long 
strides as his heavy armor and his short legs would permit and 
called out:—  
"Are you the duke?"  
"Yes," said his father in amazement.  
"We've come to take the castle, and we'll kill 
everybody if you don't surrender."  
The duke surrendered.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
21
CHAPTER IV 
ROBERT THE PILGRIM 
"I am the grandson of Richard the Fearless as well as 
he, and I will never do homage to my proud cousin." So said 
Alain of Brittany, and again the little boy saw his father mount 
the great war-horse, and ride swiftly down the hill. He was 
followed by a troop of fighters, for there were plenty of men 
who would do anything for money, and Robert had "sous of 
Rouen" enough to hire as large an army as he chose.  
When his little son saw the preparations, he 
straightway asserted his right to go with the company.  
"I am a soldier, too," he said, "and you let the other 
soldiers go. I have a sword and a coat of mail, and I can give 
the commands—you know I can. I've taken a castle, too. You 
know you had to surrender. Won't you let me go?"  
"A soldier must ride a horse," said the duke, "and you 
can only ride a pony. The next time I go out to fight, then, if 
you are big enough to ride a horse, perhaps I will take you 
with me.—I believe the youngster would be as brave as "any 
old fighter," he muttered to himself proudly.  
Alain, too, had summoned his vassals—men of high 
rank, brave warriors with a brave leader—and yet, when 
Robert's men dashed upon them, suddenly rushing up from the 
glen where they had been hidden, they fled for their lives. The 
enemy pursued, hunted them down like wolves, killed horse 
and rider without mercy, until more than half the noble army 
had been slain. There was one more expedition against 
Alain—an angry, pitiless campaign. Would Alain submit, or 
did he prefer, first to have his land devastated, and then to 
submit? Alain yielded, and did homage. Then he turned 
sullenly to leave the presence of the duke, but Robert called 
him back.  
"Alain, my cousin," said he, "I have fought you as 
fiercely as I know how to fight, for I was holding to what I 
believe is my lawful due. Do you blame me for that?"  
"Every man has a right to his own," said Alain 
evasively; but the duke had more to say.  
"I thought it was mine. You thought it was yours. We 
fought it out fairly and squarely, and I have won. Do you bear 
malice for the result of an honest fight?"  
No," said Alain hesitatingly.  
"I have made my own way," said the duke. "I have 
never sought aid or favor or advice from any man. This is the 
first time that I have asked a man for his friendship, but now I 
want a friend, not a conquered enemy. Will you give me your 
hand and swear to be, not my vassal, but my friend?" Alain 
turned slowly toward the duke. Then he glanced at his cousin's 
face. There was an appealing look that no one had ever seen 
before on the countenance of the proud noble. The fiery, 
warm-hearted Alain melted in an instant. He laid his hand in 
that of the duke, and said:—  
"I will be your friend, and whatever you ask in the 
name of our friendship, that will I do."  
"I thank you from the bottom of my heart," said 
Robert; "and the time may come when I shall ask the greatest 
favor that one man could ask of another in this the duchy of 
Normandy, and I shall trust you as never before did one man 
trust another." Then in a moment, Robert was the same proud, 
headstrong, self-sufficient man that he had always been, and 
for a while Alain almost fancied that those few minutes had 
been a dream.  
It was but a short time after this that Robert called 
together the earls and barons and bishops and abbots of his 
duchy, every man of mark among those who paid him 
homage. In their robes of state they came to the appointed 
place, each one followed by a company of armed men. It was a 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
22
brilliant assemblage. There was the Archbishop of Rouen, the 
uncle with whom Robert had fought, and whom he had 
afterward made chief of his council, and there was his cousin, 
Alain of Brittany.  
No one could even guess why they had been 
summoned. They knew of no question great enough to call out 
the whole ducal council. Not one of them had the least 
suspicion of what was to come, nor would they have known 
any better even if they had heard the duke's last command to a 
chamberlain just before he entered the council room. It was 
this:—  
"'When you hear me strike three times with the hilt of 
my sword, bring in my son; and see to it that he is dressed in 
the richest attire that the castle will furnish." Then the duke 
entered the room where the whole dazzling company awaited 
his presence. After the usual forms of opening a council of 
state had been completed, then, without word of introduction, 
Robert expressed his will.  
"It is well to be duke of a wide realm," said he, "but 
one must care for the good of his soul. I have sinned, and I 
must do penance, or else suffer forever and ever the 
punishment due to my misdeeds."  
"He is going to resign the kingdom," thought the 
councillors, and more than one of them formed in a moment a 
scheme to secure the dukedom for himself. But Robert went 
on:—  
"There is one way by which a man may wipe away 
even the darkest crime, and that way will I take. This is what I 
will do. Bare-headed, bare-footed, in the guise of a pilgrim, 
and with staff in hand, I will go to Jerusalem; and when once 
my feet have trodden on the holy ground, then shall I be freed 
from my sins. Then will I return and rule my duchy—and woe 
to him who has been an unfaithful vassal. I shall find means to 
make him regret his falseness," said the duke haughtily, for 
humility was not exactly his most prominent virtue. Then 
arose one of his relatives.  
"Duke Robert, my cousin," said he, "I am most heartily 
sorry that such a thought has entered your mind. I can only 
guess whom we have to thank for this," and he glanced toward 
the Archbishop of Rouen, "but I am safe in saying that if any 
one has had a hope of gain for himself in persuading—"  
"My thoughts are my own," said the duke proudly. "If 
there is any one here who can say that he had word or whisper 
of my plan before this day, let him speak." There was silence 
for a moment, then another councillor arose.  
"A lordless land is open to every foe," he said. 
"Normandy is strong, but we have on every side territories that 
are envious of her wealth, of her power, of her alliance with 
King Henry of France. We have brave leaders, and we can call 
out brave soldiers, but what is all our bravery without a 
commander who holds his place by a right that none can 
dispute? It is well to cleanse one's self from sin, but shall our 
land fall into revolt and ruin that it may be done so hastily? 
Duke Robert, you are a young man, let the pilgrimage wait. In 
years to come, if you would make a pilgrimage, you can leave 
us in quiet fealty to a rightful ruler. Go now, and who is there 
to whom we can pay our homage? Who will stand with 
unquestionable right at the head of this realm?"  
Robert stood silent for a moment, gazing at the face of 
one and then of another. Through the minds of at least three of 
those present flashed the thought: "I am closely akin. I have 
the right to rule in his place—and I will."  
Silently the duke looked at them. Then, still without a 
word, he unsheathed his sword and beat with the hilt sharply 
three times upon the heavy table before him. What did it 
mean? It was mysterious, and in those days whatever was a 
mystery was expected to be of satanic origin. What evil spirits 
might come forth at the magic call? Those brave fighters 
gazed into Robert's face as if spellbound. They actually feared. 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
23
He was called "Robert the Devil." Would he make good his 
name?  
The curtain was drawn aside, and there stepped 
forward into the council room a handsome boy of seven years. 
He was dressed in a tunic of the richest, softest silk, falling to 
the knees. It was of a deep blue, and all around its lower edge 
and about the opening at the neck there was a wide border of 
elaborate silken embroidery, with a pearl gleaming here and 
there among the brilliant colors. No thought of fear had the 
child. He stood for a moment looking about the room. Then 
when he saw the duke, he went quietly to him and said:—  
"Father, the chamberlain said that you wanted me."  
"I do, and the man here that does not want you is an 
unfaithful vassal, and on him will I wreak my vengeance." He 
held the boy up in his arms and kissed him before them all. 
Then he said:—  
"If any one among you dares to say that I am leaving 
you without a head, let him come forth. This child is my son. 
That he is the offspring of a peasant mother matters naught to 
you. Look at him; will he not be a fit man to represent you at 
court, to lead you in battle, and to render you justice? He is 
little, but he will grow. He is beautiful, gallant, and brave. I 
name him as my heir, and I here give him possession of the 
duchy of Normandy. From this moment he is your liege lord. 
Refuse to acknowledge him, if you wish to meet the penalty 
that is inflicted upon a faithless vassal."  
The whole assemblage was so taken by surprise that 
not a word was spoken. The duke waited for a moment, then 
he turned to Alain of Brittany.  
"Alain of Brittany, my cousin, my friend," he said 
significantly, "to you I intrust my son's possessions. I appoint 
you governor of Normandy until I return; and if I do not 
return, then are you governor until my boy is of age to rule his 
own domain. Do you accept the trust?"  
"I do," said Alain gravely.  
"Is there any one here who has aught of objection to 
bring forward?" asked the duke. He would have been a bold 
man who dared to brave the will of "Robert the Devil" to his 
face, and not a word was said. There was another reason for 
the silence. Alain was the strongest of the three that had had 
some hope of the kingdom, and his voice was hushed by the 
dignity offered him as governor of Normandy for, it might be, 
many years; and, moreover, although the charge of the 
interests of a tanner's grandchild and the maintenance of his 
rights would be at best no easy and no welcome task, he felt 
himself in honor bound to grant, for the sake of his promised 
friendship, what the duke had asked of him.  
As for the others, they knew well that the first claim set 
forth by any one of them would be the signal for determined 
opposition on the part of the rest. There had been no 
opportunity to gain any man's support by bribes or promises or 
threats. No man present knew what allies he could count upon. 
The result of it was that one by one the bishops, archbishops, 
barons, and all the haughty company of nobles meekly folded 
their hands, hardened by the grasp of the sword and browned 
by the sun of many battlefields, and laid them, within the 
hands of the tanner's grandchild, and promised to be faithful to 
him as their feudal chief.  
During the long, tiresome ceremonial the little boy was 
perfectly composed. He had more than once seen a vassal do 
homage to his father, and he felt a manly pride in behaving 
just as he had seen his father behave on similar occasions. 
There was something more. There had been little slights and 
rebuffs on the part of the nobles, and there had been words 
whose meaning he did not know, but with a child's quick 
sensitiveness he had felt that the nobles were not his friends, 
and it is no wonder that he had an instinctive pleasure in 
seeing them bow down before him. He might well sit quietly 
and receive with a certain childish dignity their oaths of fealty.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
24
"If I were the Duke of Normandy, I would not leave a 
boy like that so that every one who wanted the dukedom might 
strike a blow at him," said one noble, as they went out from 
the council chamber.  
"What can he do?" said another. "Who knows what 
sins Robert the Devil may have to answer for? It may be no 
wonder that he wants to go on a pilgrimage."  
"No one would think that the mother of that boy was a 
peasant," said the first.  
"The duke never seems to think of it, either. The child 
is his, and that is enough in his mind. He does not seem to 
remember that the blood of the tanner's daughter flows in the 
veins of the boy," said the other.  
It is enough to make one think he is right to look at that 
child. I don't believe there is another boy in Normandy as 
brave and as handsome as he. They say it is really a pretty 
sight to watch him train that little company of youngsters. I 
suppose you heard about his leading them up to his father's 
castle and calling on the duke to surrender?"  
"No, but I did hear that when he was playing one day 
on the bank of the Ante below the castle, a much larger boy 
than he came up behind him and whispered, 'This is where 
your father first met Arletta.' The little fellow understood 
somehow that it was an insult to his mother, and they say that 
the small child whirled around, and in the wink of an eye the 
other boy was in the water, for the blow was so sudden that he 
had no idea what was coming. Then the seven-year-old baby 
took his sister by the hand and walked off, never looking over 
his shoulder, and with his head high up in the air, just exactly 
as the duke carries his."  
"It's a fine thing to be governor of Normandy," said the 
first, after a moment's pause; "but for all that, I don't envy 
Alain of Brittany."  
"No one but Duke Robert would have thought of 
making him the child's guardian, a man whom he had just 
pursued almost to the death."  
"What will you wager that he will be faithful?"  
"I'll wager my castle that he will have a hard time of it 
if Duke Robert isn't at home within a year, and that either the 
child or Alain will suddenly die. Did you see the face of 
William of Montgomery? I did, and if he does not mean 
mischief, I am no prophet."  
"The duke has been generous with him."  
"What is, hold fast; what is to come, be grateful for; 
what is past, forget. That's William's way of doing it."  
The feudal system was a great chain. Each one of those 
who had sworn to be true to the child William had received 
promises of fealty from men who paid him dues and were 
dependent upon him for protection. Now William, in his turn, 
must pay his homage to the king.  
Robert had made most careful provision for Arletta, 
and as the grand procession swept away from Falaise one 
bright morning, she watched it, with her little daughter 
Adelaide, from a window that was hung with the richest 
draperies. Grieving to lose her son, she was nevertheless 
greatly comforted by the thought that it was her son for whose 
sake all this splendid cavalcade was marching to Paris. 
Moreover, this separation was to her almost a mark of nobility, 
for while peasant mothers might keep their boys, the sons of 
nobles were taken from them at the age of seven and put under 
the care of men, either at home or in some friendly castle, that 
they might the sooner learn the duties of knighthood.  
King Henry was glad of the opportunity to appear 
grateful to Duke Robert for the assistance that he had rendered 
in his time of need, and the special court which he held to 
receive the Normans was most magnificent. The king sat on 
his royal throne. His velvet mantle glittered with gold and was 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
25
loaded with ermine. Upon his head rested his jewelled crown. 
Barons, bishops, archbishops, and officers of state were 
around him, each in his most gorgeous array.  
When the ducal party appeared, the dazzling company 
separated to the right and to the left, leaving a broad aisle from 
the entrance up the long hall to the foot of the throne. Slowly 
the duke and his men walked between the glittering lines, the 
duke leading his child. The boy's tunic was of a deep crimson 
velvet, the richest that Italian skill could produce, but with no 
touch of ornament. Beside him was the duke, bare-footed, 
bare-headed, and wearing the coarse gray cloak that marked 
him as one who would make the great pilgrimage. His haughty 
bearing, not to be disguised even by the garb of the pilgrim, 
together with the beauty and animation of the boy, held every 
eye.  
They knelt at the foot of the throne, and King Henry 
gave Robert a most gracious welcome. The duke then formally 
presented William as his son and heir, and said to the king:—  
"King Henry, my liege, now that I am on the point of 
departing on a holy pilgrimage for the good of my soul and the 
forgiveness of my sins, I have brought to you my son, to 
whom I have given my duchy, and I ask that you will 
graciously receive his promise of fealty." Then said the 
king:—  
"I will receive it, and I will do all that can fall to the 
share of him who is as faithful to his vassal as he would have 
the vassal be to his lord." Then the little boy knelt again before 
the throne. He folded his hands and laid them within the hands 
of the king. Phrase by phrase he repeated after his father:—  
"I do now swear that from this day forth I will be your 
man, that I will serve you with life and limb and worldly 
honor, and that I will keep my faith and be loyal to you 
forever." Then the king said:—  
"I do now accept you as my true and honest vassal. I 
will protect your person and your estate; and all things that a 
lord should perform for his faithful vassal, those will I do for 
you." The king then kissed the boy and gave him a green twig 
and a bit of turf, for in these feudal relations people had a 
theory that all the land belonged to the king, and that in return 
for the promised service of the vassal, he would allow him to 
make use of a certain amount of it; and it was this privilege 
which was signified by the presentation of the twig and the 
turf.  
Now things became less formal. Cupfuls of silver coins 
were scattered among the poor people, and the king and all the 
nobles partook of a great feast. King Henry was most cordial 
to the duke, and especially attentive to his little new vassal. He 
promised that the boy should have a home at his own court, 
and there be trained in all such exercises of chivalry as were 
fitting to be taught to the future ruler of a great duchy like 
Normandy.  
"You must grow fast, my little man," said one of the 
French nobles to William, "for there isn't a handsomer knight 
in King Henry's court than you will be."  
"Will the king let me be a knight very soon?" asked the 
child eagerly. "I'm a pretty big boy now."  
"Judging from the way he behaves, he will do whatever 
you wish," said the noble, with a meaning glance at another 
who stood near him.  
"What does that look signify?" asked the other, with a 
little smile, as the boy wandered away to look at the pictures 
on the tapestry.  
"Need it signify anything?" asked the first.  
"Even looks are not without meaning when one dwells 
in a royal palace," said the other. "Do you mean that King 
Henry will not always be as devoted to the interests of his 
young vassal as he seems to-day?"  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
26
"Who shall say?" answered the first, with a shrug of 
the shoulders. "Normandy is a fair country. It joins France; 
there would be no opposition on this side."  
"Do you not incline to think that Alain of Brittany will 
keep faith with Robert?"  
"Who knows?" said the first, with another shrug; "but 
even if he does, there is William of Montgomery and the 
Archbishop of Rouen. More than one man, more than two, 
more than three, would be willing to accept the fertile lands 
and the flourishing manufactories of Normandy. Who knows 
what will happen?"  
"Who knows?" said his companion.  
CHAPTER V 
THE LITTLE DUKE 
In spite of King Henry's urgent hospitality, Duke 
Robert was much too eager to be on his way to Rome to linger 
for many days in the French court, and before a week had 
passed he had begun his journey.  
It was a great company. Many of Robert's nobles 
accompanied him, among them Drogo, count of his new 
possession, the Vexin, and Toustain, his chamberlain and 
favorite attendant. Not all of these travellers went necessarily 
for the good of their souls and the forgiveness of their sins, as 
Robert put it; some went because a pilgrimage was an 
exceedingly interesting expedition. No one knew what perils 
might be met by the way, and the flavor of danger gave an 
added zest to the enjoyment of seeing new countries and 
journeying in unknown places. Moreover, to have gone on a 
pilgrimage was with many people a strong title to a peculiar 
respect and deference that could be gained in no other way. 
There was another advantage, though perhaps no one counted 
upon it in setting out—the memory of such a journey, 
combined with a little imagination, would provide a man with 
enough materials for story-telling to the circle around his hall 
fire for all the rest of his life.  
There was a long train of servants and attendants. The 
men that cared for the horses would make quite a troop by 
themselves, for there must be war-horses, in case any fighting 
was necessary; and there must be pleasure-horses, for every 
once in a while Robert would forget that he was a humble 
pilgrim, and then the whole party would canter along the way 
as merrily as if they were on a pleasure trip instead of a 
pilgrimage. There must be many beasts of burden, and their 
load was by no means light, for they bore the provisions for 
man and horse, and all the other necessities for the journey. 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
27
Many of the pack-horses were loaded with skins filled with 
wine, sewn up and coated thickly with pitch. There were 
harbingers, of course, whose special duty it was to ride in 
advance of the rest of the company and arrange for lodgings 
and entertainment wherever they could be had; but such places 
were few, and it was desirable that the pilgrims should be able 
to stop to rest wherever they might choose.  
Through France they went, through Switzerland,—or 
rather, what are now France and Switzerland,—over the Alps, 
and into Rome. So far the duke was a pilgrim,— when he did 
not forget it,—but on leaving Rome he became a mere 
traveller, and set out for Constantinople, and then for the Holy 
Land. Frequent tidings came by messenger to the little boy at 
the French court. One man reported the duke's great humility, 
and said that when a warder struck him with his staff and told 
him not to loiter by the way, Robert bore the blow meekly, 
saying that it was the duty of pilgrims to suffer.  
Then came another tale of his prank in Rome, where he 
threw a rich mantle over the shoulders of a statue of the 
Emperor Constantine, "to protect him from the wind and 
cold," said this merry pilgrim.  
The Norman notion of a jest was not exactly in 
accordance with modern ideas, and the Normans seem to have 
found it exceedingly amusing that when in Constantinople the 
duke entered the handsome audience chamber of the Emperor 
of the East he rolled up his embroidered cloak, dropped it on 
the floor, and made a seat of it, refusing to take it when he left, 
because it was "not the custom of the Normans to carry their 
seats away with them." Equally entertaining they thought the 
speech of Robert when a Norman on his homeward way saw 
him borne in a litter by four black slaves, and asked the duke 
what message he would send to Normandy. "Tell them," said 
Robert, "that you saw four demons bearing me to Paradise."  
Everywhere he lavished great sums of money. He was 
Robert the Magnificent wherever he went, and often Robert 
the Reckless. The story is that in entering Constantinople he 
had his horse shod with shoes of silver. They were but slightly 
nailed on, so that they might drop off by the way and be 
picked up by whosoever would. At Jerusalem he made a better 
use of his wealth by paying for the great numbers of needy 
pilgrims outside the city the golden bezant demanded of each 
of them before they were allowed to enter.  
Robert was wildly extravagant in his expenditures, and 
also in his penances, but it was an extravagant age. The scenes 
of remorse were as theatrical as the scenes of crime were 
tragic. Only a few years before Robert's pilgrimage, Foulques 
Nerra, Count of Anjou, made three journeys to the Holy Land, 
and once on reaching Jerusalem he had himself bound to a 
hurdle and dragged through the streets of the city, while by his 
own orders two of his servants scourged him most 
unmercifully amidst his cries of "Have pity, O Lord, have 
pity!" Robert's excesses were no greater than those of his 
contemporaries, and there seems no reason for the story that 
arose that he was insane.  
Before many months had passed, a sad message came 
to the little boy at the French court, for Robert had died at 
Nicæa, by poison, it was thought. As a mark of special honor, 
permission was given that he should be buried in the 
Byzantine basilica of Saint Mary.  
"It is the beginning of troubles," said Alain of Brittany 
to himself, and he set out to have an interview with William. 
"Much depends upon what kind of boy he is," thought Alain, 
"and a year may have changed him greatly."  
The change had indeed been great, and in Alain's eyes 
it was for the better in every respect. The boy had grown tall 
and large, and had a manly bearing, which pleased the 
governor of Normandy.  
"Do you know what you are to be when you grow up?" 
asked Alain.  
"Yes," said the boy. "My father was Duke of 
Normandy, and that is what I am to be."  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
28
"And supposing that there are people who will try to 
keep you from being duke?" said Alain, to see what the boy 
would say.  
"But I am  the duke," said William. "No one can keep 
me from it."  
"And what will you do if they take your castles?"  
"I shall say, 'This is my castle, and you must give it 
up.' "  
"And what will you say if they do not give it up?"  
"Then I shall not say anything to the people in my 
castle, but I shall say to my men: 'Bring up the arbalests, tear 
down the walls, put up the scaling ladders;' and I shall go first, 
and I shall say: 'Come on, my men, follow me; rally round my 
gonfalon; strike with your swords. This is my castle, and no 
one shall keep it away from me.' " The boy drew himself up to 
his full height. His cheeks blazed and his eyes flashed as he 
paced quickly up and down the room, now thrusting an 
imaginary lance, and now drawing an imaginary sword.  
"There's not another child like him in France," thought 
Alain. "He's not much more than eight years old, and he looks 
as if he were twelve. He's a fine boy, and he shall have his 
duchy, if there's any power in my right hand to—"  
"Why did you put your hand on your sword?" asked 
William.  
"In these times one must remember where his sword 
is," said Alain. The boy was silent for a moment; then he 
said:—  
"I have a sword, and it is larger than the one that I used 
to have, because I am a bigger boy. If I am Duke of 
Normandy, when shall I be big enough to go to Falaise? Isn't 
that my castle?"  
"I believe you captured it," said Alain with a smile. 
William looked abashed.  
"I was only a little boy then," he said. "I should know 
better now; but I mean, shall I have to grow much taller before 
I am a real duke? I'm stronger than any other boy of my age—
not one of them can bend my bow—and I can throw a spear 
and ride a horse—my father said perhaps I might go to fight 
when I could ride a horse—and I can wear heavier armor than 
any other boy at the court. What shall I have to do before I go 
to Normandy?"  
"Perhaps we shall ask you to go to Normandy very 
soon," said Alain, "if King Henry is willing."  
"Did my father have to ask King Henry if he might go 
to his castle?" asked the boy.  
"No," said Alain with a little smile, "King Henry asked 
your father for permission to go to his own; and when you are 
grown up, I think it will be you to whom people will come to 
ask what they may do. But tell me, would you be afraid to go 
where men were trying to take your castles and to kill you?"  
"No," said the boy simply. "There were people who 
tried to kill my father, and he wasn't afraid; but where is my 
mother, and where is Adelaide? Now that my father is dead, I 
want to take care of them."  
"And so you shall when you are older," said Alain; 
"but they are in a safe castle, and strong men are guarding 
them."  
"I shall be a strong man soon;" said William, drawing 
himself up, "and I shall learn all there is to know about 
fighting. Thorold is teaching me. I like Thorold. He taught me 
how to ride, and King Henry hasn't a horse that can throw me. 
Could my father ride better than that?"  
Soon Alain took his farewell, and went away.  
"He's a brave boy," he said to himself, as he rode 
through the castle gate. "I almost wish he was in Normandy, 
and yet, perhaps King Henry is right in keeping him here. He 
might be murdered in a day."  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
29
 
 
 
HE RODE THROUGH THE CASTLE GATE  
And indeed, there was murder and robbery and 
devastation in every corner of Normandy. People believed that 
as soon as a king was dead, whatever laws he had made ceased 
to be of force, and that any promises that they had made to 
him were no longer binding; and so between the death of a 
king and the proclamation of what was called the "king's 
peace,"—a peace which was not peace at all, unless it was 
accompanied by an enforcement of the claims of the next heir 
as king,—every man did what he chose, and most of the 
nobles thought that such a break was the proper time to 
revenge themselves on their enemies, a time for burning and 
pillage and murder.  
So it was in Normandy, as soon as it was known that 
the duke was dead. The nobles who made promises to serve 
him if he would protect them, now said that there was no one 
to protect them, and so they were freed from all service. 
William was proclaimed duke. "But what does that amount 
to?" said the nobles scornfully. "He is only a child. A child 
cannot see to it that we have justice done us, and he cannot 
lead us in battle. We want a strong man for our duke—and we 
do not want the grandson of a tanner."  
There was no very definite law of succession to the 
dukedom, and if Robert had left a grown-up brother, or if there 
had been any one person with a good claim to the duchy on 
whom the nobles could unite, the little boy at King Henry's 
court would have had small chance of ever becoming the ruler 
of Normandy, even if he could ride any horse in the royal 
stables; but the difficulty was that there were so many people 
who thought that the boy's inheritance ought to be theirs. 
Rollo, the Norman chieftain, who had been the first duke of 
Normandy, had left many descendants, and every one of these 
was sure that no one else had so good a right to rule the land as 
himself. There were six of these relatives whose claims had 
some shadow of justice; but of the six, one was a monk, one a 
priest, and one an archbishop. Of the other three, one was 
Alain of Brittany, who held himself in honor bound to save for 
the child the lands that had been intrusted to him; another was 
William, Count of Arques, a half-brother of Duke Robert; and 
the third was Guy of Burgundy, a nephew of Robert.  
There was another reason for the turbulence in the 
duchy. No one was allowed to build a castle without the 
permission of the ruler of the country; but in Robert's time he 
had been so sure that he could put down any uprising, that he 
had made no objection to the erection of a castle wherever any 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
30
one chose to put one. Now very few of these strongholds were 
at all like what we should call a castle to-day. Not all of them 
were of stone, by any means. Even a square wooden tower 
with a moat and a drawbridge was called a castle; but in the 
three districts of Normandy in which the greatest number of 
fighters lived there were at least one hundred and thirty-two 
built so solidly that even now their remains may be seen. 
Every noble who had built a castle stood by himself, and in 
spite of what they had said, these men were not at all eager to 
have a strong man become duke and limit their independence. 
So it was that, instead of uniting at to revolt against William, 
they all revolted against one another, and against all law and 
order. Every man did just as he chose, and many chose to 
avenge any wrongs that they fancied had been done them. 
Robbery and fire and murder were in every corner of 
Normandy. Nothing could quiet the disorder but a duke who 
ruled either by undisputed right or by irresistible force.  
William was only a child, but he had one great 
advantage—his guardians were true to him and to his interests. 
One guardian has already been mentioned, the brave Alain of 
Brittany, whose special care was that the duchy of Normandy 
should be held for Robert's son. The second was the old 
soldier Thorold. The third was Seneschal Osbern, and the 
fourth was Count Gilbert of Eu. King Henry was a kind of 
overlord to these men, and the boy was still at his court.  
There were others whose friendliness to William was 
of the greatest value, those men who had gone on the 
pilgrimage with Robert, and who were now beginning to 
return to Normandy. They brought with them the relics of 
saints and martyrs that Robert had collected in the east, and 
had intrusted to his chamberlain Toustain to present to the 
Abbey of Cérisy. Robert had founded this abbey not long 
before he went on his pilgrimage, and he had expected to be 
buried within its walls. He had endowed it richly, but no more 
valuable gift could he have bestowed upon it than those bits of 
hair and bone and wood, those fragments of gowns and 
scourges and psalters; for men who came to look upon them 
never failed to leave a generous offering in the fortunate 
church to whose care they had been intrusted. Few of these 
visitors went away without a thought of Duke Robert and 
some gain of friendliness toward the little boy whom he had 
loved so well. As for the travellers themselves, people thought 
of them with a sincere reverence, because they had been 
pilgrims. Then they remembered that Robert, too, had been a 
pilgrim, and many of them began to feel that the child whom 
he had left in their care was fairly entitled to their loyalty. 
Moreover, these pilgrims had been chosen friends of Robert's, 
and their support of his child was worth much. All these strong 
allies of William were called together by Alain.  
"I have asked you to meet," he said, "to decide whether 
it is best for the young duke to remain in Paris or to return to 
Normandy." Then said one of the councillors:—  
"The duke is far safer in Paris than he would be here."  
"Surely," said another, "there are enough who are loyal 
to defend a child and a castle."  
"Yes, we can fight armed forces," said the first, "but 
can we fight poison or assassination?"  
"There is another side," said one who until then had 
been silent. "Soldiers need a gonfalon rally about; so do our 
nobles of Normandy need to see the duke. They think of him 
as a child in the French court. Let them see him for 
themselves, a bold, brave, handsome boy on his own rightful 
heritage, and I believe that they will be far more likely to stand 
by him."  
"Still, there is the danger," said the first that had 
spoken.  
"Yes," said the silent one; "but shall we save the child 
and leave him a beggar, or shall we let him share the risk, that 
we may help him to hold fast to that which is of right his 
own?"  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
31
"Moreover," said another, "are we so sure that he is 
safe in Paris? King Henry owed his throne to Duke Robert, but 
France would not be unwilling to possess Normandy and the 
Norman sea-coast. A child's life is a small matter when one 
wants a kingdom. A child may easily die or disappear. There 
would be no other claimant on whom so many would unite, 
and in the tumult and confusion Normandy could easily be 
made a part of France."  
Finally it was decided that William should be taken to 
Vaudreuil, the castle that Robert had recommended as a safe 
place for the boy. It was situated on an island in the river Eure, 
and a river would be a better protection than a moat. 
Moreover, it was in the district of Evreux in Normandy, and 
yet not too far from the French domain to call upon King 
Henry in case of need; for after all, no one could believe that 
he would forget what was due to the son of the man who had 
befriended him in the days when he most needed a friend.  
First, however, the king's permission to remove the boy 
to Vaudreuil must be gained. The councillors had looked upon 
this as hardly more than a matter of form, but much to their 
surprise King Henry began to make objections; the boy was 
safer with him, he said; a removal would interfere with his 
military education, etc.  
The councillors became a little alarmed when the 
escort returned without the young duke. They had thought of 
King Henry as of one upon whom they might call for aid. Was 
it possible that he really had plans against the boy and his 
heritage? Shut up in one of Henry's strong castles, he might be 
held all his life as a captive; and then there were a hundred 
means by which a child that was in the way might be disposed 
of, and no one be the wiser. A second escort was sent with 
more emphatic demands than the first, and after some delay, 
the king yielded. Thorold was appointed to take command of 
the escorting party. It was an unfortunate journey for him, for 
soon after reaching Vaudreuil he was murdered by some 
unknown assassin.  
It was a hard life for a boy in the stern, gray castle on 
the island.  
"Why cannot my mother and Adelaide live with me?" 
the boy demanded. The guardians had thought it best that 
Arletta should be kept away from her son, so that the people 
might remember only that he was the child of Duke Robert, 
but they said:—  
"You know that you are to be a great soldier, and a 
soldier must learn of men, not of women."  
"But a soldier must take care of women," said the boy. 
His guardians made no reply, but before long they told him 
that his mother had married a loyal knight, Herlwin of 
Conteville, and that Adelaide was safe in their care.  
"I wanted to take care of them myself," said the boy 
soberly.  
"Some day you will be able to," said his guardians.  
Meanwhile it was all that they could do to take care of 
him. Not a moment, night or day, could he be left alone; for, 
although they could perhaps prepare for an armed attack, who 
could tell when an assassin might steal into the stronghold? 
Who could be sure that the members of the young duke's own 
train were faithful? A strong hand laid upon the boy's throat, a 
drop of poison forced gently between his lips as he slept, and 
Normandy would be the helpless prey of him who might have 
the power to take it. Gilbert, Count of Eu, had already been 
murdered, and the faithful Alain of Brittany had been poisoned 
as he was besieging the castle of William of Montgomery. 
Who knew when a like fate would befall the young duke?  
Osbern slept in the boy's room at night, and watched 
him by day as he would watch some precious jewel. Walter, 
his mother's brother, was always on guard; but in spite of all 
their vigilance, there came a terrible night when William of 
Montgomery and his men forced their way into the castle, 
coming so suddenly and so powerfully that even before an 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
32
alarm could be made, the faithful Osbern was stabbed as he 
lay asleep in the bed beside the duke. In the darkness the 
murderers believed that they had slain the duke himself, and 
while they were rejoicing, Walter hid the boy and carried him 
away to safety; not to some stone castle, but to the cottages of 
the poor, where no one would think of looking for him.  
This was only one of the many attempts that were 
made to kill William, and only one of the many times that he 
was rescued by the bravery and quickness of his uncle. When 
the castle failed, the cottage was always his refuge.  
Every one of the men who had been chosen as 
guardians for William had been killed by the boy's enemies. 
Lawlessness was everywhere. If a man was not robbed, it was 
because he had nothing that was of value to his stronger 
neighbor; if he was not murdered, it was because his neighbor 
had nothing to gain by his death. To these robbers and 
murderers the fact that a son of their former duke was alive 
and among them was a continual threat of vengeance. If the 
boy could be killed, they were safe, they thought, from fear of 
punishment or interference. Thus far these men had triumphed. 
Would they continue to triumph?  
CHAPTER VI 
GUEST OR PRISONER? 
All acts of William's protectors were done in his name, 
and now messengers were sent to those of the nobles who still 
wished for a united, peaceful duchy to say that William, Duke 
of Normandy, had called together his council. The first 
business was to choose new guardians, and now the boy was 
of legal age to have a voice in the matter.  
Whether by his own wise instincts or by the advice of 
his council, his choice was Ralph of Wacey, the son of that 
Archbishop of Rouen whom Duke Robert had besieged in his 
castle at Evreu. Now Ralph had been the murderer of Count 
Gilbert, but this appeal to his honor conquered his hostility. He 
became military tutor to William and commander-in-chief of 
the armies of Normandy, and from that time he was one of the 
boy-duke's strongest supporters.  
Ralph ruled with a heavy hand. From one rebellious 
vassal to another he sped, ever leaving behind him peace, and 
an obedience that, on the surface, at least, bore every mark of 
loyalty. Under his firm, steady control, the duchy might have 
become a land of law-keepers instead of law breakers, had it 
not been for the ruler of a neighboring domain who now began 
to lend a listening ear to all complaints that came from the 
treacherous nobles that dwelt in Normandy. This ruler was 
King Henry of France. Not long after the election of Ralph as 
William's guardian, he sent a formal demand for the young 
duke to come to Evreux to do him homage. William's council 
straightway assembled to consider the matter.  
"Never has there been such a going to and fro between 
Paris and every part of Normandy as of late," said one of the 
councillors significantly.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
33
"You mean by that that King Henry is a friend to 
Norman traitors?" asked another bluntly.  
"That is a thing which I would not say," said the first; 
"but I hardly think he has forgotten that Normandy was once a 
part of the land of the Franks, and that his own capital stands 
on a river that is controlled by another power."  
"For three generations the kings of France have owed 
much to the dukes of Normandy," said another, "and save for 
Duke Robert, King Henry would have been no king."  
"King Henry said, 'I thank you,' and gave the duke the 
Vexin," said a fourth; "but that is past. Perhaps he would be 
willing to let Normandy keep the thanks, if he could take back 
the Vexin."  
"Perhaps he would like also the Norman sea-coast. 
Perhaps he would like to have Rouen a French city once 
more," said another.  
"I think he would," said gravely the one that had first 
spoken. "But the question just now is whether the duke shall 
be advised to go to Evreux to pay homage to the king. I admit 
that I do not like the place. To leave the stronghold of 
Vaudreuil—and go nearer the French capital seems to be full 
of danger."  
"The duke could have a large train of attendants," said 
one, "and every one of them should be armed from head to 
foot. To refuse to pay homage would be to plunge the land into 
war with France. Just now the friends of the duke seem to be 
in power, but not every one who bends the knee is faithful. 
There may be many a traitor among those who seem to be 
truest. A refusal to pay homage may be only the pretext for 
which the king is waiting."  
"A king who would seize upon a second kingdom 
would wait for no—" began one, but stopped; for the duke, 
who had been listening closely to every word, had risen to 
speak.  
He was only a boy of twelve years, but most of them 
had been spent among grave, stern warriors. Hardly an hour of 
his life had been free from danger. Many a time he had 
listened to his guardians while they discussed in which place 
there was least chance of his being murdered, and whether 
some knight who had seemed to be loyalty itself was more 
likely to stand by him or to attempt to kill him. He had learned 
of arms and warfare, understanding perfectly that some failure 
to know how to defend a stronghold might lose him a castle, 
that some slight lack of skill in arms might cost him his life. 
Hawking and hunting had been almost his only recreations, 
and even in the hunting-field there were many dangers for one 
who threw himself into the chase with such headlong 
eagerness and delight.  
One would not expect such a childhood to make a boy 
gentle and tender-hearted, but it could hardly fail to bring him 
to an early maturity, to make him bold and strong and hardy, 
and to give him coolness and judgment far beyond his years. 
This was why, when the young duke arose to speak, his 
council turned toward him, not with the mere polite attention 
of vassals to their feudal chief, not even with a keen curiosity 
to see what a boy of his age would say, but with much the 
same kind of consideration that they would have shown to the 
expression of opinion of a man of twice his years.  
It hardly seemed possible that he was but a boy of 
twelve, so dignified and composed did he seem. He was tall 
and strong and well developed, and more than one of the 
councillors before him said to himself, "If I were on a field of 
battle, I should rather have him for a friend than a foe." 
Quietly assuming that the final decision lay in his own hands, 
the boy said:—  
I have listened to the advice of my councillors. Since I 
am the duke of Normandy, I must not fear danger, neither 
must I plunge my country into war with France. I will go to 
the king and I will say, 'King Henry, I am now fully twelve 
years of age, and I come to you not only to do homage to my 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
34
liege lord, but to ask the honor of knighthood from the king of 
France.' "  
"Never was there such wisdom in so young a head," 
said one councillor to another, as they went out of the room. 
"Boy as he is, he has cut the knot when we could not. However 
it may be about going to do homage whenever and wherever 
the king of France may ask it, a young noble may go to an 
older one and demand the blow of the sword that shall make 
him a knight, and for this he must go to whatever place the 
older shall name."  
"Surely," said another; "and no train of attendants can 
be too long for a young duke who is on his way to receive the 
golden spurs."  
"It shall be as splendid an escort as the Norman duchy 
can furnish," said the nobles; and forthwith each one of them 
called out every man who was a vassal to him and owed him 
military service, to come to the appointed place with as 
handsome an equipment as he could command. The duke was 
unarmed,—for a vassal must not appear in arms to do homage 
to his suzerain,—but every one else was in full armor.  
The horses had been groomed until they fairly shone. 
The coats of mail and the bright shields and lances and 
helmets glittered in the sunshine the brilliant as the company 
set out. William was at its head, carefully guarded by Ralph of 
Wacey and twenty of the strongest men and most experienced 
fighters. A little distance before the ducal line rode ten men as 
advance warders, for who could tell what danger might be 
lying in wait for the young man upon whom so much 
depended? The rear was as closely watched; for although their 
force was so strong that they needed to have little fear of a 
direct attack, who knew what treacherous foes might be about 
them ready to cut the duke from his defenders?  
King Henry received the duke with calm courage, but 
glanced with a shade of annoyance, the nobles thought, at the 
great company of armed men.  
"You come to a friendly court in full array, it seems," 
he said to the duke.  
"I have many friends who wish to see me receive the 
golden spurs," said the young noble, and the king was silent. A 
messenger had been sent to King Henry long before the 
company set out to say to him that William would ask for 
knighthood, and so all things had been made ready. The 
ceremony of homage was short, and then came the 
preparations for receiving the accolade, and these were by no 
means short or simple.  
Every part of the preliminary rites was full of 
significance. First came the bath followed by the white tunic to 
indicate the purity which was expected of every true knight. 
Over the white tunic was put a red robe to call to mind the 
blood that the knight must always be ready to shed in a 
righteous cause. Over the red robe was drawn a close black 
coat, that the knight might never forget that death will finally 
come to all men.  
If this ceremony had taken place in France, William 
would have been required to fast for twenty-four hours, to 
spend a night alone in the church praying before the altar, to 
confess and receive absolution, to attend service in the church 
and listen to a sermon about his new life and its duties; but the 
Normans were much inclined to feel that knighthood was more 
closely connected with warriors than with priests, and so much 
of the usual religious ceremony was omitted.  
The rite, however, took place in the church, and it is 
possible that William followed the French custom of 
advancing to the altar with his sword hanging by a scarf about 
his neck; and that the priest took it off, laid it upon the altar, 
and blessed it. William advanced to the king and knelt before 
him with hands clasped, and said:—  
"I am come to you, King Henry of France, to ask that I 
may be armed as a knight, and that all forms may be fulfilled 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
35
that are necessary to my having the right to serve and 
command in all ranks." The king asked:—  
"To what purpose do you wish to become a knight? Is 
it because you seek to be rich, to take your ease, to be held in 
honor among men without doing that which shall make you 
deserving of honor?" Then William answered:—  
"I do not seek to become a knight for any honor save 
that of punishing those who do evil, of protecting the innocent 
and avenging their wrongs, and of maintaining true religion. If 
I am admitted to the noble rank of knighthood, I will endeavor 
to perform its duties faithfully and well."  
Then all the knights in their shining armor gathered 
about the young duke. Then, too, came the ladies of the court 
in their most brilliant attire, and together they put the young 
man's armor upon him, piece by piece; first the golden spurs, 
then the coat of mail, the cuirass, and last of all the sword. 
Then the ladies and the knights drew back, and William, 
glittering in his flashing steel, advanced to the king and again 
knelt before him. The king unsheathed his own sword, a sword 
that had been reddened by the blood of many battles, and gave 
the duke the accolade,—that is, three light blows on the 
shoulder or the nape of the neck,—saying:—  
"In the name of God, Saint Michael, and Saint George, 
I dub thee knight. Be valiant, bold, and loyal."  
Again the brilliant company gathered around him. The 
knights flashed their swords over their heads and embraced 
him and welcomed him among them. A helmet was brought 
him, and a horse was led up to the church door. The newly 
made knight sprang upon its back, disdaining to make use of 
the stirrups, and galloped back and forth, poising his lance and 
brandishing his sword. One of the old chroniclers says:—  
"It was a sight both pleasant and terrible to see him 
guiding his horse's career, flashing with his sword, gleaming 
with his shield, and threatening with his casque and javelins."  
After all this came a most elaborate feast, when every 
one drank to his health and every one rejoiced in his new 
honors. Generous gifts were made to the minstrels and to all 
that had helped to entertain the guests; and finally large sums 
of money were distributed among the servants, that every one, 
even the humblest, might be glad in the young knight's 
gladness.  
The homage was performed, the ceremony of 
knighthood was completed, the pleasures of the feast and the 
rejoicing were at an end, the formal farewell had been said, 
and the Normans prepared to set out on their homeward march 
to Falaise. William was about to mount his horse, when a 
chamberlain from King Henry stood before him, saying:—  
"I am the bearer of a message from the king. It is this: 
'King Henry of France, suzerain of the duchy of Normandy, 
summons his vassal, William, Duke of Normandy, to appear 
before him.' " The faces of the Normans were grave, but 
William still looked upon the king as the guardian whom his 
father had chosen, and without hesitation he advanced with 
only a small bodyguard to the royal audience chamber. The 
king gave him no word of greeting, but looked at him sternly 
and said:—  
"I am little pleased, my young sir knight, with the 
reports that have come to me in regard to this new fort of 
yours at Tillières."  
"My councillors have told me," answered William, 
"that the fort at Tillières was built by Richard the Good, the 
father of my father."  
"It matters not," said the king, with a frown, "the fort 
stands, and it is garrisoned, and its men are making continual 
incursions into my territory."  
"If that is true," said William, "I am very sorry. I will 
send a messenger to the commander of the fort. If my men 
have made incursions into your lands, they shall be punished, 
and there shall be no more annoyance."  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
36
" 'No more annoyance!' " repeated the king angrily, 
"and 'If it is true!' I tell you, young sir, a vassal is not to arm 
himself against his suzerain. The fort at Tillières is a menace 
and a threat, and it must fall; and until it falls, I look upon you 
as a rebellious vassal. Perchance your councillors have told 
you how a rebellious vassal is to be treated." The king spoke 
harshly, and sat gazing with the utmost sternness at the young 
duke.  
Mature as he was by reason of his bitter experience, 
William was but a boy after all, and in such a strait as this 
even an older and wiser head might well have been puzzled. 
He was silent.  
"You cannot speak?" said the king. "Then I will 
provide one that can speak for you. A messenger is in 
readiness to bear to the commander of the fort at Tillières your 
orders that it be razed to the ground."  
What could the boy do? He was in the hands of the 
king, practically a prisoner at his court. Then, too, he had spent 
many months in Henry's care, and he was accustomed to obey 
him as he would obey a father. There was no opportunity to 
consult his councillors; he must decide the matter himself.  
"Here is a scribe," said the king. "Will you send to the 
governor of the fort an order to raze it to the ground, and will 
you seal the order with your seal?"  
"I will," said William slowly.  
"I give you most courteous invitation to remain as my 
guest until word shall come that the castle of Tillières has been 
levelled," said the king ironically, and William was 
immediately escorted with a guard to a part of the castle from 
which it would have been almost impossible for his own men 
to reach him or for him to escape.  
The order was sealed with the duke's seal and sent to 
the governor of the fort; but this independent governor calmly 
refused to surrender. He returned a brief message that the fort 
had been intrusted to him by Robert, duke of Normandy, to 
watch and ward as the heritage of his son William. It was 
impossible, he said, that this son should have given the order 
to destroy it, and he would surrender it to no one but the duke 
himself in person.  
The king was more angry than ever, and now he sent a 
great armed force to tear down the castle. He expected that the 
sight of his soldiers would be enough to make the governor 
submit, but Gilbert Crispin was made of somewhat unyielding 
material. He shut himself up in the castle with his men, and 
there he stayed. Henry's soldiers attacked the fort, and the 
governor was more determined than ever when among them he 
recognized some of the traitorous Norman nobles, who either 
preferred to pay their allegiance to a suzerain that would be 
chiefly in another district, or who were eager to help on any 
kind of warfare that they might the more readily find 
opportunities for robbery and pillage.  
Gilbert's reply to the king's messenger had left it to be 
inferred that if the duke himself in person commanded him to 
give up the fort, he would yield; but when King Henry in a 
storm of anger had William taken to Tillières, even then, with 
the duke before him, Gilbert hesitated, and it was, only when 
the orders of the duke were seconded by those of the council 
that he submitted. The gates were thrown open, and the 
faithful governor and his valiant men marched out. The castle 
was in the hands of the French, and they at once set fire to it. 
The roofs and floors were burned, and the stone tower, 
blackened and despoiled, stood as a gloomy monument to the 
unjust claims of the French king.  
Again the council met, and now Henry was recognized 
as an undoubted foe.  
"I am but young in knighthood," said William; "but 
when I received my arms, I was told that a true knight would 
never couch his lance against the noble who had given him the 
accolade. Shall I be true to my oath of knighthood, or shall I 
fight against my suzerain?"  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
37
"It is the duty of a knight to be faithful to him who has 
admitted him to knighthood," said one of the council, "and 
therefore as a loyal knight you cannot couch your lance 
against him; but you are more than a knight. King Henry is 
your feudal chief, and you are his vassal. You owe him 
service, and he owes you protection. If he has broken his 
promise of protection by himself invading your lands, you are 
no longer bound by your promise of service. As a knight you 
cannot fight him; but as the duke of Normandy you are bound 
to defend your country and protect it from every one that 
would work it harm."  
It was evident enough that King Henry intended to 
work it harm. He seemed to have forgotten that the duke was 
his ward, and that by every tie of honor he was bound to be 
faithful to the boy's interests. Apparently he had no 
recollection of the fact that, save for the aid of William's 
father, he would have had no power to harass the son.  
Henry began to march his forces into the district 
beyond Tillières, and now the Norman council realized that by 
surrendering the fort at the king's demand, they had only 
weakened themselves without lessening his longing for the 
broad and fertile lands of Normandy. Faster and faster came 
the bands of Frenchmen into the Norman boundaries, each 
company venturing farther than those that had preceded it. Into 
the very centre of the Norman domain they pushed their way.  
If all Normandy had been faithful to William, there 
would have been little chance for the ravages of any foreign 
power; but some preferred the tumults of war to the restraints 
of peace, some blamed the duke, boy as he was, for the loss of 
the fort of Tillières, and there were many among the proud 
nobles of Normandy who still declared that they would never 
submit to the "grandson of a tanner."  
Even in the district of the Hiesmois, it was not difficult 
to find a traitor. In the very heart of Falaise, in the castle itself, 
was the man whom the council had trusted, and whom the 
bribes and promises of Henry now succeeded in making 
unfaithful to his trust. This traitor, governor of the castle, rid 
himself one by one of the soldiers who would have stood by 
their duke, and garrisoned the castle with men from the forces 
of the French.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
38
CHAPTER VII 
"WILLIAM KNOWS HOW" 
There could hardly have been a heavier blow to 
William than to find that the castle of his birthplace, the home 
of his childish memories, was the very centre of the attack 
upon him. It is no wonder that he was aroused to a fury of 
indignation. He was no longer alone, as he had been at King 
Henry's court when he was forced to give up his border fort. 
He had by his side a wise man, well skilled in the art of war, 
his guardian, Ralph Wacey, and by his advice the duke called 
out all the nobles who were faithful to him to rally around his 
standard.  
In the castle of Falaise was the traitor governor with 
some few of William's friends who could not be sent away 
without arousing suspicion, and as many of Henry's men as 
could well be brought within its walls. On three sides of the 
fort was the steep and rocky precipice at whose foot clustered 
the houses of the town. About the town was a wall, and 
beyond the wall were encamped the forces of the French.  
All was arranged. The French troops were to make 
their way through the town, carry on a pretended siege for a 
short time, and then the traitor within the castle was to be false 
to his trust and surrender the fort to the soldiers of the king. 
Henry's commander outside the wall of the town had no 
thought of a surprise. The castle was sure, the people in the 
town would not dare to make any resistance, and there was 
little possibility of the duke's coming against them; so one 
morning they leisurely made ready to enter the town.  
The leader had not yet fully armed himself for the fight 
when rapid hoofbeats were heard, and a horseman galloped at 
full speed into the royal camp. His horse was wet with sweat 
and covered thickly with dust and foam. The rider dropped 
from his saddle and fell on the ground at the feet of the 
commander. He tried in vain to speak, for his mouth was so 
parched and dry that he could not utter a word. With a great 
effort he pointed feebly down the road. Men brought water. 
They wiped away the stifling dust. They lifted him up. They 
poured wine down his throat. Again he pointed and whispered 
a single word. It was, "William!" and he fell back on the 
ground weak and helpless.  
Now William had not so many men as the king, but 
every man was true and resolute. They fell like a storm-wind 
upon the French camp, and the king's troops fled for their 
lives. So far it was well for the Normans, but there were foes 
in the castle, William knew that; and how would it be with the 
town? From the lack of heavy engines of war in the abandoned 
French camp, the king's men evidently did not expect very 
much difficulty in entering the town. How would it be when 
the Normans should try to enter?  
The time that he had to wait in uncertainty could 
almost be measured by minutes, for men on the walls had 
quickly recognized the young duke. He was their duke, and 
their home was his. He was coming to his own, and never did 
an heir come to his own with greater rejoicing.  
"Welcome! Welcome!" they shouted. "Hail to the son 
of Arletta! Welcome!" Banners and strips of bright-colored 
cloth and green branches of trees were waved joyfully as the 
Norman forces entered the Norman town. Women held up 
their children to see the duke.  
"That's he," they called, "on the black horse. Look at 
him! See how he rides! His father used to ride like that, and 
his mother was one of us, and he is our own duke. Look at 
him! Hail to the son of Arletta!" And one peasant woman, who 
was holding up her baby and who had nothing else to wave, 
actually waved the baby in her excitement as the duke rode by, 
and the baby's cries mingled with the cheers of the people.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
39
Now ever since William was seven years old he had 
lived among stern warriors. They had taken care of him as a 
valuable piece of property, and they had guarded him from 
injury as they would have guarded a piece of property. He had 
trusted King Henry, and the king had met him with coldness 
and blame and imprisonment. Never before, since the death of 
his father, had the young duke received a sincere, hearty 
welcome. It is no wonder that ever after this day his love for 
the town below the precipice was firm and sure.  
Through the familiar streets he rode at the head of the 
line. Past the river Ante they went, and his cheeks burned 
under the cold steel of his helmet as he remembered the insult 
of the boy whom he had pushed into the stream.  
"Hail to our duke, the son of Arletta!" the people cried. 
And under the steel helmet the stern young duke smiled, and 
with fresh courage rode up the winding way to the castle. Not 
quite pleasing to the proud Norman nobles were these cries of 
"Arletta," but it was no time to be critical; friendly enthusiasm 
was worth more than pride just then.  
"You have taken the castle once," said Ralph Wacey, 
who had heard of William's childish exploit, "and it ought to 
be easy to take it again."  
"Easy or not easy, we will have it," said William, and 
in a moment his wrath came back at the thought that it was the 
castle of the town of Falaise, the castle of his own home, that 
had rebelled.  
The attack was furious, and the defence desperate, for 
the faithless governor knew full well that death was the just 
penalty of such guilt as his. The Normans fought fiercely, but 
the castle was strong. Forenoon, afternoon, sunset,—still they 
fought, the attack as violent and the defence as obstinate as in 
the early morning. Just as darkness began to hide the assaulters 
from their foes within the castle, the duke's men succeeded in 
making a breach in the outer wall.  
The false governor put up a white flag and begged for 
mercy. Few men would have refused to be merciful after such 
a victory and in the first great joy of their lives. William 
pardoned the traitor on condition of his leaving Normandy 
forever. The district which he had held as a vassal of the duke 
was, of course, taken from him; and a large share of this land, 
the first winnings of that sword which was to conquer 
wherever it was unsheathed, William immediately presented to 
the mother whom he had scarcely seen since the days of his 
early childhood in Falaise.  
When Tillières was surrendered, one condition was 
that it should not be restored for four years; but King Henry, 
ever faithless, paid no heed to his promise, and soon the fort 
stood in all its early might, the stonework repaired and 
strengthened, the roofs and floors renewed; and now, instead 
of being a protection to Normandy, it was a constant threat of 
invasion and conquest.  
In the middle of the eleventh century there seems to be 
nothing but fighting. The governments were weak; if men 
would protect their rights they must fight for them. It was not 
only one man and his retainers fighting against another man 
with the men whom he could bring into the field; in the chain 
of feudalism every man had sworn to give military service to 
some one of greater power than he, and every man had sworn 
to give protection to several men who were of less power than 
he. Whenever any link of the chain was touched, the whole 
chain quivered.  
In those troublous times,—those days of destruction, 
rebellion, and the foulest of treachery,—the one power in the 
land was the church. The church cried "Peace," and peace 
there was to an extent that would have seemed impossible. 
Too wise to require what no fear of her thunders would force 
men to grant, the church limited her demand for peace to 
Sunday and the last three days of each week. During those 
days not a sword was to be unsheathed, not a blow struck. The 
clergy proclaimed:—  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
40
"It is the peace of God. Whoever shall break it, let him 
be accursed." Then they turned their lighted tapers downward 
and extinguished them, while the people chanted:—  
"And so may God extinguish the joys of every one who 
shall refuse to observe peace and justice." Whoever broke this 
law was shut out of the church. If he died before bringing 
about a reconciliation, he was forbidden to receive Christian 
burial. The only way for him to win forgiveness was to 
confess his fault with all meekness, atone for whatever wrong 
he had done, leave home and friends, and spend many years of 
penance in exile.  
With this law of the church and William's increasing 
power, the condition of Normandy became greatly improved. 
He offered free pardon to all who would lay down their arms, 
and gave generous rewards to those who were true to him. He 
was interested in commerce, he encouraged manufactures, he 
maintained peace with the neighboring states wherever peace 
was possible. His relations with King Henry of France were of 
the only character that could be wisely maintained with that 
changeable monarch; that is, he was on the terms of peace and 
allegiance that were proper between vassal and suzerain, but 
he did not neglect to make friends with those nobles especially 
who had some reason to dislike the king of France. After all 
the murders and revolts, there seemed to have come a time of 
peace. Even the duke might borrow a few days for rest end 
pleasure.  
William and his court went to Valognes—"pleasant 
Valognes." Day after day they hunted in the forest and feasted 
at the castle. One night, after the guests had departed full of 
plans for the next day's hunt, the last day before the duke was 
to return to Rouen, William was so sound asleep that not even 
a loud knocking on the gate aroused him.  
"Open, open!" a voice cried. "Enemies are coming, fly! 
Rise, wretches, you will all be murdered!"  
"It's the duke's jester," said one of the household 
sleepily. "He's trying to play some trick on us. Go down and 
let him in. The duke will be angry if he is kept out all night." 
So the door was opened and the jester burst in.  
"Where's my master?" he cried, "where's William? 
William, where are you?" and in spite of the half-laughing, 
half-sleepy attempts of the watchman to stop him, he made his 
way to the door of William's chamber and beat upon it madly.  
"Master, master," he cried, "open the door, open it! 
They are coming to kill you! Fly, fly!"  
"Who are you?" said William.  
"Gallet, master, your own jester. I heard them at 
Bayeux. I slept in the stable and—" But William had thrown 
open his door, and there was a strange figure, for the jester 
wore a close-fitting doublet of red on the right side and yellow 
on the left. His right stocking was yellow and the left was red. 
Over his doublet was a coat of all the colors of the rainbow. A 
yellow hood covered his head, pointed, and with little bells 
hanging from every point. In his hand was a wand with what 
had been a fool's head, but now it was flattened and broken 
where its owner had beaten it against the door.  
"Is this one of your pranks?" demanded the duke 
sternly.  
"I heard them, indeed I did, and I saw the horses and 
the arms, and they are coming to kill you, and I love you, 
master, and if they come, you will never, never again see the 
light of day. Fly, master, fly!"  
One glance at the face of the jester was enough. This 
was no untimely prank; it was fearful truth. William made the 
sign of the cross. He thrust on a tunic, buckled on a sword, 
caught up a travelling cloak and ran, barefooted and 
bareheaded, to the stables. He was only nineteen years of age, 
but he showed the wisdom of sixty, for he trusted no one. 
Whom could he trust in all his duchy but the poor jester? He 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
41
saddled his horse and fled. From whom? To whom? Who 
could say?  
The galloping of horses was heard, and it seemed but a 
moment before the castle was surrounded. Armed men 
swarmed from turret to dungeon. Where was William? The 
servants stood pale and trembling. They did not know, they 
said, and by their faces they told the truth. They clustered in a 
frightened group, terrified and silent. There was another group 
of the invaders, loud and angry, for the duke was nowhere to 
be found. Between these two groups, playing tricks on one 
man and then on another, was the jester. He was in high 
spirits. He tossed his stick with the broken fool's head. He 
whirled it around and around.  
"One fool's head is broken," he said, "but the other 
fool's head is sound," and then he felt for the corners of his 
hood and shook his bells. "Too late, my brave men, too late," 
he cried, whirling around on the yellow foot and then on the 
red one, and turning somersaults in the very midst of the angry 
group. "William is gone. O William! Where's William? He'll 
make ready for you; William knows how. William knows, he 
does. You gave him a bad night, and he'll give you a bad day. 
How wise you are! Glad am I that I am a fool! William knows, 
he knows."  
Now a jester might be tormented and he might be 
beaten, but no man cared really to injure one of these quick-
witted, half-mad beings, for no one knew what evil might 
befall him who struck a deadly blow. So the jester jeered at 
them to his heart's content, but long before his antics were 
over, they were on their horses shouting:—  
"Death to him! Death to him!"  
Down the same road by which the traitors had come, 
William galloped. It was bright moonlight. The shadow of 
every rock and of every tree was black and dense. Who could 
tell behind which one an enemy might lurk, ready to spring out 
and strike the fatal blow? He heard horsemen coming furiously 
up the road. He slipped into the gloom of a thicket, and stood 
with his hands closely clasping his horse's nose, lest the animal 
should neigh as the others came near. The horsemen dashed 
on. In their excited talk he was sure that he heard his own 
name. He was but a little way from the castle. His enemies 
would fail to find him, and then they would follow on his 
tracks. Not a moment could be lost. He thrust into his horse's 
sides the cruel Norman spurs that were fastened to the stirrups. 
The river Vire lay before him. If it was low tide, he could 
cross by the ford; if high, he must go far around. The tide was 
out, and he splashed through the shallow water in safety. Close 
by the shore on the opposite side stood the tiny stone church of 
Saint Clement, every line of it clear and distinct in the 
moonlight.  
"God has helped me," said the fugitive. "To thank him 
cannot delay me." He sprang from his horse and burst into the 
little church. He threw himself before the altar. It was but a 
moment. On, on! they were pursuing. Bayeux lay before him, 
but—what was it that he had heard of Bayeux? Oh, the jester 
had said that his enemies were there. He must go north by 
lanes and by-paths between Bayeux and the sea; then he would 
pass Rye and come to the districts that he believed were 
faithful to him. The moon had long since set, but he had 
galloped on through the darkness. The east began to brighten. 
Here and there the sleepy twitter of a bird came from some 
tree above his head. Dew fell from the branches as he dashed 
by. There was a stone tower. Whose was it? No matter, every 
one was false; and once more the cruel spurs were plunged 
into the horse's bleeding sides.  
All was quiet and peaceful in the castle. Hubert, its 
lord, stood just without the gate. Before him was the little 
church, and he was on his way to matins. He stopped a 
moment to look at the east, which was brightening with the 
rising sun. Then he turned to the west. He heard a furious 
galloping. What fugitive was this? No criminal must pass his 
castle gate. He sprang forward and caught the bridle rein. The 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
42
horse was covered with foam and blood. On its back was a 
man without shoes or stockings, bareheaded, covered with 
dust. His mantle was torn to shreds by the briers through 
which he had come. His face was bleeding. He was clinging to 
his horse's neck, and as Hubert caught the bridle he sank to the 
ground. For a moment Hubert stood silent in amazement. Then 
he fell on his knees before the horseman.  
"My duke, my duke," he cried, "what has happened? 
Where are your followers? Who has done this? Who pursues 
you? Trust me, and I will save you as I would save myself. 
Have I not sworn to be your loyal vassal, to be faithful to you 
as well as to God?"  
"Many have sworn to be faithful," said William sadly, 
"but I trust you;" and then he told Hubert the story of the 
pursuit and the escape. They are on my track," he said; "I must 
flee."  
"Then will I give you a guard," said Hubert, "and one 
that will not fail you." So Hubert brought him food and wine 
and clothes, and set the duke upon his own good horse.  
"Fear not, my lord," said he; "the horse is strong and 
sure of foot, and he will hold out well to your journey's end." 
Then called he his three sons, three brave knights.  
"Buckle on your swords, my three brave knights," said 
he, "for here is my lord and yours. Foul traitors have wished to 
murder him. Save him. Give your life for his, if need be. God 
gives glory and honor to him who dies for the lord to whom he 
has sworn to be faithful."  
"We swear to be true to our own sovereign lord, Duke 
William of Normandy," said the three young men, making the 
sign of the cross. Then William and his guards left the sun on 
their left, and rode swiftly to the river Orne and crossed over, 
and soon the duke was safe in his own castle of Falaise.  
Then was there great rejoicing, for the roads were full 
of peasants wandering to and fro, and saying with sadness and 
many tears, "Where is our duke? Is he a prisoner, is he 
wounded, or perchance is he slain? Who are the knaves that 
have done this?" And when they knew that he was neither a 
prisoner nor wounded nor slain, then were they joyful, and the 
heart of every one of them was glad.  
 
 
 
DOWN THE SAME ROAD BY WHICH THE TRAITORS HAD COME WILLIAM 
GALLOPED  
But who were these foes that pursued William so 
savagely, and whose first move was an attempt at 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
43
assassination? The leader was one Guy of Burgundy, his own 
cousin. Guy had spent much of his childhood at Falaise, and 
had received knighthood from William's hands. William had 
made him lord of two castles, and had treated him as if he was 
a younger brother. To this young man who had every reason 
for being loyal to his cousin, went one Grimbald, whose castle 
of Plessis was in the district of Bayeux.  
"Did it ever enter your mind," said Grimbald, "that you 
are rightful heir to the dukedom of Normandy?"  
"My father claimed no such right," said Guy, "and 
surely I have no claim that he had not."  
"That is but a childish excuse," said Grimbald. 
"William's father had but a peasant wife. You are the lawful 
heir to the dukedom. You need only to stretch out your hand to 
take that which is your own. Do you not wish to be duke?" 
Then Guy began to wish for it, and soon he was sure that he 
had a right to the dukedom. All William's kindness was 
forgotten. From one noble to another this new claimant went. 
To the lords of the strong castles in western Normandy he 
said:—  
"If I am duke, I shall content myself with the eastern 
part of the duchy, and you may go on building your castles and 
live in the independence which day by day you are losing 
under the rule of him who now unjustly holds control." 
Western Normandy stood by Guy, while eastern Normandy 
armed itself and was ready to fight to the death to maintain the 
rights of William.  
The first act of the conspirators was the attempt to 
murder William which was frustrated by the devotion of the 
jester Gallet. Now the duke was in his castle. He knew who 
were false to him and who were true, but he had not the forces 
to conquer his foes. Whom should he ask? Up and down the 
room he paced. Suddenly he struck his hand on the hilt of his 
sword.  
"I will do it," he said. "I do not bow down to one who 
has wronged me, I make him of service to me. I claim that 
which I have a right to claim, and if he gives it, it shall atone 
for the harm that he has done me." Straightway he started for 
the French court.  
"To you as my suzerain I am come," he said.  
You owe me protection. I am come to claim it. It was 
to you that my father, setting out on a holy pilgrimage, 
intrusted my interests. Had he done nothing to warrant him in 
his trust? Do you not hold your kingdom to-day because of the 
aid that he gave you? You came to him in your need with but 
twelve knights, and he treated you with honor and put you on 
the throne of France." Henry made no reply, and the duke went 
on:—  
"The western districts will hold by my cousin. I can 
name you over the traitors one by one. You know well that not 
one of those men can unite Normandy or rule it if it is united, 
and you know that I can, if you help me to overcome these 
rebels." Still Henry was silent. Then said the duke:—  
"It rests with you whether you will have Normandy 
united and under a strong hand, or whether you will have 
bloodshed and robbery and murder. Even if these men should 
ask to be your vassals, what kind of subjects, think you, will 
rebels and traitors become? Will they be any more true to you 
than they have been to me?" For the third time in William's 
few years of life, it had been shown that to throw one's self 
frankly upon the generosity of either Frenchman or Norman 
would often arouse in him a spirit of chivalry and honor. King 
Henry spoke at last.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
44
CHAPTER VIII 
A VISIT TO ENGLAND 
"The full truth has not been told me," he said. "And 
now that you have come directly to me to ask of your suzerain 
that which you have a right to ask, I will join you. I will lead 
my own troops in person, and I will put you on the ducal 
throne so firmly that no one shall ever dare attempt to thrust 
you from it. I came to your father with twelve knights, it is 
true, but I will come to you with three thousand, and with 
them shall come a great band of followers. This is what the 
king of France will do for his vassals."  
So it was that William set out for what was to be one of 
the three decisive battles of his life. The hostile troops met at 
Val-ès-dunes, near Caen. The rebels came from the west; the 
French and the Normans from the east. As both parties were 
arranging their men, there came up from the south so noble a 
band that the leaders stopped, each hoping that these one 
hundred and forty knights, so finely armed and accoutred, 
would be on his side. Just between the opposing lines they 
came, and then halted as if to decide which to choose.  
"Who are they?" asked King Henry of William. "On 
whose side will they stand?"  
"On mine, I think," said William, and he went up 
boldly to the leader.  
"You are Ralph of Tesson," said he, "and when my 
father went to Jerusalem, you laid your hands in mine and 
swore to be faithful to me."  
"And I have sworn also to be the first to give you a 
blow. I swore it on the shrine at Bayeux no longer ago than 
yestermorn."  
"The French, the French, Ralph; go with the French," 
said the knights behind him softly. Ralph hesitated. "A man 
must keep his oath," he said, "and what's more, I will. Pardon 
me, my liege," said he, as he struck William lightly on the 
shoulder, "there's one oath kept; now come on, my men, for 
the other, and we'll stand by Duke William till the river runs 
uphill."  
 
 
 
WILLIAM SETS OUT FOR BATTLE  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
45
The two great bodies of knights rushed together, 
shouting their war-cries.  
"Montjoie Saint Denis!" cried the French.  
"God help us!" cried the Normans.  
"Saint Amand! Saint Sever! Thury! Thury!" shouted 
the barons, making the hills resound with the names of their 
castles or their patron saints. Lances were shivered, shields 
were forgotten, and men fought hand-to-hand with swords, 
pikes—anything they could snatch up, even with their naked 
fists. King Henry was as eager to help William as he had been 
to harm him, and he flung himself into the wildest of the fight. 
A lance was thrust against him by a knight of the Cotentin 
district with such terrible force that he fell from his horse, and 
for many generations the minstrels of the Cotentin sang 
proudly:—  
"From Cotentin came forth the lance 
That once unhorsed the king of France." 
But a Frenchman came to his aid, and the old chroniclers glory in the 
prowess of the king and in the victory of the young duke over the 
champion warrior of Bayeux.  
The rebels retreated, but they escaped one death only 
to run into another; for over the steep river banks they were 
driven till the stream was red with their blood and the mill-
wheels were stopped by their dead bodies.  
What should be the punishment of the traitors, was the 
next question. Except on the battle-field, William almost 
invariably refused to take human life; so, although Guy still 
maintained his rebellion, and had to be besieged in his castle 
before he would yield, his life was spared. Even Grimbald,—
the tempter and the would-be assassin, as it was proved,—
even Grimbald was not put to death. After three years in 
prison, he died and was buried in his chains. On some of the 
conspirators, indeed, William did inflict a most useful and 
appropriate vengeance, and one not without a grim touch of 
humor; for he forced them to build a road from Valognes to 
Falaise, following closely the line of his mad gallop to save his 
life on the night of the attempted assassination.  
Even after this victory, there were many disturbances 
which William had to suppress. Many a noble was still stung 
to the quick by the thought that he was forced to pay homage 
to a tanner's grandson. Many a knight, forbidden by his rank to 
engage in any pursuit except fighting, was ready to seize upon 
any pretext to take up arms. There were disturbances, but 
never again anything like a general revolt.  
It was not long before William was called upon to help 
Henry in a war with Geoffrey, Count of Anjou. The district of 
Maine lay between France and Anjou, and the rulers of each 
country claimed it as tributary to himself. Just across the 
boundary and on the Norman side was the town of Alençon, 
the city of William Talvas of Belesme, who had cursed 
William when the duke was in his babyhood. On Norman 
ground as it was, this town had always hated the tanner's 
grandson, and the people gladly seized the opportunity to 
strike at him by aiding the count of Anjou. The soldiers of 
Anjou were welcomed into the town and formed a strong 
garrison for the fort.  
Duke William was besieging another town some 
distance away, but he knew that if he struck at all, he must 
strike suddenly; so he marched all night, and just at sunrise 
drew up his men before Alençon. Soldiers were at the bridge, 
and a fierce reception they gave him. William fought with his 
usual vigor, but the men of Alençon were well armed and 
brave. They began to feel sure of the victory, and in their 
bravado they went one step too far. Not content with blows, 
they even ventured to enrage William with insulting words.  
"Hail to the grandson of the tanner!" they shouted. 
Then they hung from the walls leather aprons and jerkins, and 
skins wet with blood and foulness, and called out:—  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
46
"Hides, hides, hides for the tanner! Plenty of work for 
the tanner! Come on, grandson of the tanner!"  
Now from his earliest childhood, the least disrespect to 
his mother seemed to throw William into a passion that was 
almost like a fit of insanity. He had the one thought of 
revenge, and a terrible revenge he took. For one moment he 
stood still, then he swore a great oath that the men who had 
thus mocked him should be lopped off as are the branches of a 
tree. He fought like a very demon. The bridge was torn down; 
the palisades, the gates, the roofs of houses, everything that 
could be battered or burned, was destroyed. Still with grim, set 
face, William struck to the right, to the left. Lance or sword, it 
mattered not to him—the blow was all; and with every blow 
the tanner's grandson had one enemy the less.  
Even then the castle refused to yield. William was 
beside himself with fury. He kept his fearful oath. The hands 
and feet of thirty-two of the men that had been captured were 
cut off, and with great slings they were flung over the castle 
wall. No wonder is it that at this ghastly threat the garrison 
surrendered, and begged most humbly for mercy. William had 
come to himself again, and he was merciful.  
The one excuse that can be given for such savage 
barbarity is that it was the custom of the times. While capital 
punishment was somewhat rare, men seemed never to hesitate 
to condemn a vanquished foe to lose eyes or limbs, or to be 
thrown into a dungeon so horrible that the life of a single day 
was worse than any death. Men seemed utterly without 
sympathy with the physical sufferings of others. Nearly forty 
years after the taking of Alençon, it was decreed by Henry IV, 
Emperor of Germany, that if a boy over twelve years of age 
offended against the truce of God by striking a blow that 
produced a wound, his hand should be stricken off.  
William's devotion to his mother was shown in less 
violent ways than this, not only by his gifts to her directly, but 
by his watchfulness of the interests of his half-brothers. On 
one of them he bestowed the bishopric of Bayeux, and to the 
other he gave so large a grant of land as to place him at once 
among the principal landholders of Normandy. Neither bishop 
nor landholder could have been more than twelve years of age 
when the gift was made, but this, too, was done in accordance 
with the custom of the times; and it is the only instance in 
William's reign of his yielding to the old abuse of giving 
church positions to members of his family for whom he 
wished to provide.  
Now that William had shown his ability to govern 
Normandy and to rule revolting vassals, his nobles became 
very anxious that he should marry. They had hope of a lasting 
peace under his strong control, if he only had a son to be his 
heir. The duke was now about twenty years of age. The 
chroniclers say that he was handsome, well formed, and far 
above the ordinary height of men. On more than one occasion 
he had proved himself a man of bravery and power. His 
bravery would not diminish, and his power would increase. 
There was every reason why he should be able to ally himself 
with the ruler of some puissant country, and so strengthen his 
duchy as well as his own position.  
Whom should he choose? William looked about him 
and set his mind upon Matilda, daughter of the Count of 
Flanders. This was exactly the marriage which his councillors 
would have chosen for him, not so much because Matilda was 
beautiful, 
virtuous, 
and 
skilled 
in 
the 
two 
great 
accomplishments of the day, music and embroidery, but 
because the Count of Flanders was a man of great power. He 
had wealth and soldiers, and, moreover, his family was of very 
high rank. One of his ancestors had married a daughter of 
King Alfred the Great, so that Alfred's blood ran in the veins 
of Matilda. The proud count must have had much respect for 
William's achievements, or he would never have allowed his 
daughter to become betrothed to the offspring of a peasant, the 
grandson of a tanner.  
Now just at this time a number of princes were forced 
to do penance or were even excommunicated, for breaking the 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
47
laws of the church concerning marriage. The haughty Count of 
Flanders must have been very indignant when he was 
forbidden to give Matilda to the duke, and there is surely no 
doubt that William's wrath rose when he was forbidden to 
marry her if she was offered to him. No one knows just why 
such a decree was passed. It may have been because of some 
relationship between the two, or possibly because the count 
was an exceedingly independent vassal and the church did not 
wish him to increase his power by forming an alliance with the 
strong Norman duchy. At any rate, the highest church 
authorities pronounced their decree that William and Matilda 
should not marry.  
When William had once set his mind upon a thing, that 
thing usually came to pass. He was never impatient, he could 
wait, but he must have his own way in the end. He had 
determined to marry Matilda of Flanders. His council was with 
him, and neither the Count of Flanders nor Matilda seems to 
have made any objection. The church had forbidden the 
marriage, to be sure, but William did not give it up on that 
account. He kept up his friendship with the count, he sent 
legates to Rome to try to win the permission of the Pope, and 
then he waited.  
But he did not take his seat on the ducal throne and 
fold his hands. There was much to be done. Many a proud 
noble still paid his homage to Arletta's son most unwillingly; 
but it was paid, and William was in peaceful control of his 
own country. The Count of Flanders was his friend, and the 
king of France was his ally—for the time, at any rate. William 
began to think of making a visit to England.  
About fifteen years before he was born, his great-aunt, 
Emma, and her husband, the king of England, were driven 
from the English throne, and fled to Normandy with their two 
little boys, Edward and Alfred. Soon the king died, and in a 
very short time Emma married Canute, son of the man who 
had thrust her husband from his kingdom. She seems to have 
had no affection for her boys, for she left them in Normandy, 
and even agreed in the marriage contract that they should have 
no claim to the English throne.  
These boys remained at the Norman court, and were 
treated very kindly by Duke Robert's father and then by 
himself. Robert even made an attempt to invade England in 
their behalf, and get possession of the English throne for them. 
Alfred was finally killed in trying to regain his father's crown; 
but Edward, after living quietly in Normandy for almost thirty-
five years, was invited by the English people to come to be 
their king. He was nearly twenty-five years older than 
William, and had known and cared for the young duke in his 
boyhood. Since William was fourteen, they had never met. 
Naturally, Edward wished to see him. William always clung to 
his relatives with as warm affection as they would permit, and 
he was more than ready to cross the narrow channel that lay 
between him and England.  
In these days, their wish to see each other would have 
been enough to explain the journey, but in the eleventh century 
it was a rare thing for two princes to exchange visits merely 
from friendship. There was generally a good reason for their 
staying at home, since in most countries a revolt would break 
out if the king was absent; and in this case, we are perhaps 
safe in thinking that Edward had a plan for his young cousin's 
advancement, and that William had at least a suspicion of what 
it was.  
However that may be, William set out with a great 
train of nobles and attendants. They wore their finest array. 
Their ships were gilded and ornamented. The figurehead of 
William's was an image of Rollo, the first duke of Normandy, 
and from the mast floated the pennant of the present duke. 
They carried to the king gifts of noble steeds, beautifully 
embroidered cloaks, handsome armor, and, it may be, some of 
the precious relics that Duke Robert had sent home when he 
was on his pilgrimage.  
A warm welcome King Edward gave them. The lad of 
fourteen whom he had left in Normandy had become the man 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
48
of twenty-four, tall, strong, manly, and with a reputation of 
wielding a sword that won its way wherever he unsheathed it. 
It was hardly a strange court to which he had come. Although 
Edward's father was a Saxon, his mother was of Norman birth, 
and from early childhood till near his fortieth year the king had 
lived in Normandy. He had always spoken French, and now he 
gathered Normans around him in his court. The highest offices 
in the kingdom he gave to Normans. These men had not 
forgotten their own country, nor the little son of Duke Robert 
who had become this masterful ruler of lordly Normandy. 
When they looked at him, they could well put aside the 
thought of the peasant mother, and remember only that he was 
a man whom they might be proud to have at the head of their 
homeland.  
A merry time they had. There were feasts and 
tournaments and hunting parties, and there were long 
"progresses," or journeys through the kingdom, to show the 
Norman guests the cities and castles of the country. Edward 
was inclined to be meek and humble, and he always preferred 
to live simply and with as little of display as possible; but 
whatever William's virtues were, meekness was not the 
leading one among them, and he did enjoy having a touch of 
magnificence to whatever was going on around him. To please 
his guest, Edward made these "progresses" in a much more 
sumptuous style than he had ever favored before in travelling 
about his kingdom. The Normans who dwelt at the English 
court were delighted, but the Saxons looked, at the swarms of 
foreign guests with some displeasure, and a little fear of what 
the result of the visit might be.  
"What do you think of this sudden outburst of 
hospitality?" said one Saxon noble to another.  
"I suppose a king must entertain his guests," said the 
other.  
"True," said the first; "but we are Saxons in a Saxon 
land, and our king is half Norman by birth and wholly Norman 
by feeling. He has given the great bishoprics to Normans. 
Normans build their strongholds when and where they please. 
The officers of the king's household are Normans. We are 
under Norman rule. We call our country England; and we say 
that we are free, but—"  
"But we are only a province of Normandy," said a 
third, who had stood by them listening grimly to their talk.  
"We have the king of our own choice," said the second, 
"and he is a good, kind man. Don't you remember when they 
showed him the great casks of gold, the tax that the people 
groaned over so loudly,—don't you remember that he looked 
at it for a minute without a word, and then he said, 'This shall 
never be collected again; I can almost believe that I see little 
exulting demons of cruelty and extortion dancing on every 
barrel'? Was he not a good king to say that?"  
"Yes, but he said it in French," said the third noble. "A 
king who does not speak the language of the country may be 
king of the land, but he is not king of the people."  
"But he is almost a saint," said the second. "Only 
yesterday I heard some one call him the 'Confessor.' They say 
that he can work miracles, too, just like a real saint, and that if 
he touches any one who has scrofula, the disease is cured; and 
I have heard that more than once he has foretold what was 
coming to pass, and it came just as he said."  
"It is of what may come to pass that I am afraid," said 
the first. "Who is to be king when this 'Confessor' dies? He has 
no children. There is no man in all England who can be called 
his rightful heir. He is Norman, his language and his feelings 
are Norman. What is more natural than that he should try to 
bequeath the throne to this Norman cousin of his?"  
"And this is what the visit of Duke William and his 
roisterous crowd of knights signifies," said the third. "This is 
why all this elaborate entertainment which is never given to 
our own nobles when they go to court is lavished upon this 
Norman gang. We are fighters. Do you call out your men. I 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
49
will call out mine. We will spread it through the kingdom. 
Never shall this foreigner, this son of a—"  
"Gently, my friend," said the first; "what could we do? 
The king has the treasury and the arms and the castles and 
many soldiers. Shall we take a little band and march up to his 
gates and say, 'Come down from the throne, for I don't like to 
have you there'?"  
"And so you would have us stand by in silence and fold 
our hands while our kingdom is taken from us?" demanded the 
third.  
"What has been done? The king is receiving a friendly 
visit from a favorite cousin. May not a man receive a visitor 
and entertain him in the way that is most pleasing to the guest? 
They say that William has come here intending to pay homage 
to King Edward. Would you drive away a powerful vassal 
from our kingdom?"  
"When one does homage, it is for some gain," said the 
third. "William of Normandy needs no aid from this side of the 
water to rule his duchy. All that he can want from England 
is—England itself."  
"King Edward cannot give away his throne; that 
belongs to the country, not to him," said the first. "He is a 
Norman and looks at things in a Norman fashion, and he may 
promise to help William to get it; but that means more than a 
peaceful 'I give it to you' from Edward, and a grateful 'I thank 
you' from William. It means an attack by sea and land. It 
means that Saxon blood will flow to save the land, and that 
Norman blood will flow to win it. When that time comes, we 
will fight."  
"But after all, Edward is a good man," said the second, 
"and they do say that even to bathe in the water in which he 
has washed his hands will often cure sickness."  
From this discussion the second noble went away with 
more devotion to the king than ever. The third went home to 
count over his retainers, and to think upon how many brave 
men he could depend in case of a sudden uprising in behalf of 
William. The first, after a little time, sent a messenger secretly 
to a trusty friend in Normandy to suggest to the Count of Eu 
that this time of William's absence would be an excellent 
opportunity to raise a revolt.  
"He may be killed in the fighting," thought the Saxon 
noble, "and at least, it will take him away from the court of 
England."  
Meanwhile the festivities went on. Minstrels, jugglers, 
feasts, hunting—there seemed to be no end to the pleasures of 
the entertainment that King Edward gave so willingly to his 
cousin and guest.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
50
CHAPTER IX 
WHAT HE HAS HE HOLDS 
"And what do you think of my misty kingdom?" asked 
King Edward of the Norman duke.  
"That it is misty, but that it is a kingdom," said the 
duke laughingly, "and it is a kingdom that may become very 
great."  
"It may, but only under a great king," said Edward. 
"My brother Alfred should have been the king. If my mother—
but no, we will not speak of her. Alfred would have ruled it 
well. He would not have been unworthy of him whose name 
he bore. I am better fitted for the cloister and the cowl. Have 
you thought seriously of the matter for which I wished you to 
come to England?"  
"I have," said William.  
"You see what the land is and what the people are," 
said the king. "These English are a blunt race; not stupid, but 
slow. They can do a thing and do it well if it once occurs to 
them that they can do it. They make far better jewelry than we, 
but it has not yet entered their heads that they can build as fine 
churches as we. For their homes they are satisfied with what 
some of our villeins would despise; and it is all because it has 
not yet occurred to them that they can do better."  
"It has occurred to them that they can eat and drink," 
said William.  
"Yes," said the king; "and their feasts are not feasts, 
they are simply times of stuffing. They do not eat and drink to 
enjoy, but to see how much they can hold. One might as well 
shovel stones into a quicksand."  
"They have a strange-sounding language," said 
William.  
"Not a word of it do I know," said the king. "All 
around me are Normans. The Bishop of London is a Norman, 
and so is the Archbishop of Canterbury, so are all the people 
of my household. I must have men whose speech I can 
understand, and besides that, these English are fit only to serve 
Normans, not to rule them. But to our subject. You have done 
homage to me as to your liege lord, and I have promised you 
the crown of England at my death. Whether the English have 
any law about who shall follow me, I do not know, but surely 
a crown should belong to him who wears it. Be that as it may, 
I give it to you. I have not forgotten the kindness that your 
grandfather and your uncle showed me when I was a boy in 
Normandy, and I have not forgotten that your father lost ships 
and money in his attempt to give me the throne that belonged 
to me. I have much more to say to you, and to-morrow—"  
"What is it?" asked the king, for a servant had drawn 
aside the curtain that hid the doorway. The servant bowed 
before the king and the duke.  
"A messenger from over the seas would see the Duke 
of Normandy. He says that his errand is speedy and brooks no 
delay." Involuntarily William laid his hand on his sword. The 
king smiled at the motion.  
"We will hope not," said he; "and yet to a soldier like 
you, to use the sword is to win glory." The messenger was 
admitted. He was travel-stained and dusty, and his dress bore 
every mark not only of a hasty journey but of a hasty departure 
from home. His Norman courtesy was almost forgotten, and 
after a slight obeisance to the king, he turned quickly to 
William and said:—  
"My lord duke, there is trouble in Normandy. The 
Count of Eu rebels against your authority."  
A hasty farewell did William and his knights bid to 
King Edward. Straight across the channel they sailed, and 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
51
before the revolting count realized that they had left the shores 
of England, he found himself a prisoner in his own castle. 
Bold man as he was, he trembled and asked for conditions of 
surrender.  
"Surrender without conditions," was William's reply, 
"or we storm the castle." The count remembered Alençon and 
surrendered. What should be done with the rebel was the next 
question. A hasty consultation was held between William and 
his barons.  
"The count is a traitor. The punishment for treason is 
death," said one stern warrior, leaning on his shield.  
"It is the custom of the country and a fitting penalty," 
said another.  
"The Count of Eu is the cousin of my father," said 
William. "I will not send my own blood to the death of a 
traitor."  
"He lived the life of a traitor," said a baron grimly, 
"and we are living the lives of honest vassals. We are giving 
you our blood and our service without stint, that there may be 
peace in your land. Will you hold back from just vengeance 
the man who is overthrowing all that we are trying to build 
up?" The young duke sat in silence a moment. Then he said:—  
"My barons, you are older and more experienced and 
perhaps much wiser than I, and it might well be that I should 
yield to your advice on the battle-field and in the council-
chamber, but this is neither. The Count of Eu is conquered. He 
has submitted. There is no more battle."  
"There is council, though, or there ought to be," 
muttered one of the barons through his beard; but his ruler 
turned upon him fiercely and said:—  
"There is not. By council a traitor may be hanged. So 
be it; but I am the duke, and I say that the cousin of my father 
shall not  be hanged. Banished he may be, hanged he shall not 
be."  
"The young eagle begins to feel his wings," whispered 
one soldier to another, and not without a secret delight that 
their ruler had again shown himself to be one that would rule.  
"If the traitor is once in the hands of the duke," said the 
other, "and is allowed to live, every traitor in the duchy will 
rise up against us."  
"Then he must never be in the hands of the duke," said 
the first; and so among them they contrived a way by which 
the count might quietly disappear from the place of battle and 
make his escape. Every Norman rebel knew where to go when 
he was exiled from his own country, and the count fled 
straightway to the King of France. Henry had forgotten all 
about the assistance that William had given him. He greeted 
the count with much honor, and soon received him as one of 
his vassals and gave him a goodly piece of territory.  
This revolt was a small matter, but there was trouble of 
a more serious nature to follow. Duke Robert had left two 
young half-brothers, Malger and the Count of Arques. The 
count had never been friendly to William, but he had made no 
open revolt, and had even fought under the duke's banner. 
Malger was a priest, and William by the advice of his council 
had made him Archbishop of Rouen. No tie of gratitude bound 
Malger, and although he readily accepted the high position, he 
determined to use his power to overthrow the nephew who had 
given it to him, and to put the Count of Arques on the ducal 
throne. No son of Arletta, said the archbishop, should ever 
hold the place of his brother Robert.  
Some years earlier William had intrusted to his uncle 
the county of Arques, and the count had at once built a strong 
castle. It was on a narrow tongue of land, while the keep, 
standing on a hill at the point near where the tongue joined the 
mainland, shut off all hostile approach. Around the keep the 
count had dug a fosse of unusual depth and width. William 
had reason to suspect his uncle's loyalty, and therefore he 
filled this castle with a garrison of his own men whom he 
thought he could trust. Unfortunately, either they feared the 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
52
threats of the count, or else they were not able to resist his 
bribes. At any rate, they soon swore allegiance to the revolter.  
Straightway there broke out all over the district of 
Arques a frenzy of theft, robbery, and murder. Men who so 
readily broke their oath of fealty could not be trusted to keep 
their hands from the property of others. They seized upon the 
goods of merchants, and the crops upon which the very lives 
of the peasant farmers depended. The church, too, was a 
constant sufferer. Church and peasant united in an appeal to 
William.  
The duke was at Valognes when the messenger came. 
Without an instant's delay, he buckled on his sword to set out 
for Arques.  
"The King of France is making ready to assist the 
Count of Arques," added the messenger. William stood with 
his hand on his horse ready to spring into the saddle.  
"Say you so?" he asked sternly. "Is this the truth that 
you are telling me?" The messenger raised his right hand.  
"Strike this off if you find me false," said he. William 
dropped his horse's rein, and stood for some minutes silent and 
in deep thought.  
"Be it so," he said half aloud. Then he turned to his 
waiting knights.  
"Let those who love me follow me," he said; and they 
set out on as wild a gallop as that on which William had once 
before set out from this same castle of Valognes. They spurred 
their steeds. One horse after another was exhausted. Twice 
William's horse sank under him, and twice he sprang upon a 
fresh one. When he came in sight of the castle of Arques, his 
faithful knights were far behind him. Only six could endure 
that frantic ride. Just what William expected to do with six 
men against a mighty castle no one knows, for happily some 
loyal vassals had called out three hundred knights. Even this 
force was slender enough, so the vassals told him, for the 
whole district was in rebellion.  
"All the more need to quiet one part of it," said the 
duke. "When those rebels once see me face to face, they will 
yield." William's courage aroused a new hope in the others. 
Wild shouts of loyalty and enthusiasm echoed and reëchoed. 
The faithful nobles waved their swords, their shields, their 
lances, anything, as they rallied eagerly about their 
commander.  
"There they are!" he cried. "Let every brave man 
follow me," and he galloped furiously toward the hill. His 
quick eye had seen a company of the rebels winding up the 
steep. They were evidently returning from some marauding 
expedition, for they seemed to be carrying great loads, and 
their horses went slowly and wearily. Without a glance to see 
whether any one was supporting him, William galloped on, 
and his brave men followed. The men of Arques were 
overtaken close to the castle gate. They fought for only a few 
minutes, then they retreated to the castle for their lives, and the 
great gates closed behind them.  
"They shall yield," cried William, "and not a drop of 
loyal Norman blood shall be shed." More of the faithful 
knights had arrived. Between the keep and the mainland, 
William dug a deep ditch and built a palisade. Then he put up 
quickly a wooden tower to shut off food and allies.  
Inside the castle were the rebels, the Count of Arques 
and all the vassals whose military service he could command, 
together with many more whom the aid of his archbishop 
brother had enabled him to hire. Outside the castle were 
William's men, and on the way to help the rebels and to crush 
the faithful Normans between the castle and the forces of the 
king, came Henry, ruler of France, and sworn protector and 
friend of William of Normandy.  
William might possibly have conquered the rebels 
before him, but the army of the king, coming upon him in the 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
53
midst of the battle, would almost certainly have given the 
victory to the men of Arques. The whole district was in an 
uproar. No one knew from what direction aid might come for 
the rebels. Leaving part of his army to defend the wooden 
tower and shut off any hostile troops that might appear from 
the east, the duke set out to intercept any that might come from 
the other directions.  
It was not long before some loyal friends sent word to 
the brave besiegers in the wooden tower that King Henry and 
his men were encamped not far away, ready to come to the aid 
of the castle of Arques. None too many men had the besiegers, 
but a party started at once to prevent the coming of the allies, 
slipping away silently in the darkness that the rebels might not 
know that the numbers of their foes were less.  
Morning came, and the French soldiers started out 
merrily. The young knights caracoled their horses. They sang 
old love-songs, and they laid wagers with one another about 
how high the sun would be when the men of this troublesome 
duke would flee before them like so many crickets. Then they 
formed in marching order. First came the soldiers armed with 
pikes and battle-axes, a formidable advance-guard. Behind 
them followed the long train of baggage, engines of war, loads 
of weapons, tents, and provisions for themselves and for the 
beleaguered garrison. With this were the "scullions, cooks, and 
carters," whose business it was not to fight, but to care for all 
these things. Then came the king and the whole troop of horse 
and foot, well armed and ready to engage in whatever conflict 
might arise.  
Steadily the long line marched on. Victory lay before 
them; they had no thought of fear. It was a pleasant, sunny 
way. Little birds sang over their heads, flowers were under 
their feet. One stalwart soldier stooped to pick a tiny white 
blossom. The next moment he lay dead with the little white 
flower fresh and fair in his stiffening hand. An enemy's arrow 
had struck him; and there was the Norman band, only a little 
company, so little that the Frenchmen laughed and shouted 
exultantly and turned upon them.  
The Normans fled. Whither? No matter, it was easy to 
follow and capture them; and with cries of derision the whole 
force of the king pursued. Into a narrow valley ran the 
Normans, with apparently no thought save of escape from 
their foes. On either side were steep, heavily wooded hills. The 
Normans ran, and the Frenchmen followed.  
Suddenly a hissing storm of steel-tipped arrows burst 
upon the lines of the French. Not a foeman was in sight save 
the disordered ranks that were fleeing before them, but high up 
on the hills on either hand were William's good archers. 
Behind every rock and every tree they had stood so motionless 
that the shy little animals of the wood had forgotten their first 
alarm, and had begun to run fearlessly about their feet. The 
disordered troops of the Normans instantly faced about, 
formed in line, and fell upon the French forces. These, shut 
into the valley by the Normans, were thrust back upon their 
own troops. Everywhere there was disorder and confusion. In 
the clouds of dust and sand, friends and companions in arms 
struck wildly at one another. The horses, bold to meet danger 
face to face, were terrified by a peril that they could not see. 
They freed themselves from all control, and ran wildly 
wherever there was a moment's break in the flash of swords. 
Still swept over them the terrible storm of arrows from the 
unseen foe. Lance and gonfalon were trampled into the dust. 
There were great writhing masses of dead and wounded; and, 
through it all, past where the happy little white flowers had 
grown and the yellow sunshine had brightened the mossy 
ground around them, there began to trickle slow, sullen 
streams of the red blood of brave men.  
Part of the army, led by the king himself, formed a 
wedge, and worked through to safety from immediate attack. 
They even went as far as Arques, but William's men were too 
strong for them, and they withdrew to the French boundaries, 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
54
the king mortified and angry, and the soldiers talking sullenly 
to one another.  
"Where is our vanguard, and where are our wings? 
What has this mighty king, this great man of battle, done with 
them?" And another would say:—  
"Has he any more mousetraps to lead us into, this wise 
and valiant ruler of ours?"  
 
 
 
STILL SWEPT OVER THEM THE TERRIBLE STORM OF ARROWS  
Duke William, having prevented any aid from coming 
to the castle from either hand, returned to the wooden tower, 
not to fight, but to wait. Why should one fight when hunger 
would do the work? The Count of Arques had contrived to 
send a messenger to Henry begging for help, but no help came. 
The castle was swarming with defenders, but there was no 
food. To have many men is good in a fight, but it is not good 
in a famine. The white flag was run up.  
"Promise us safety of life and limb, and we yield," said 
the starving garrison. The gates were thrown open, and out 
came a miserable company. With faces worn and haggard, and 
drawn by the pangs of hunger, tottering along on feet that 
could hardly support them, and resting their hands on horses 
that were too feeble to bear the weight of their masters—to see 
the proudest knights of the land in such a plight was indeed 
pitiable. Nor was this all; for some of them, knowing well that 
death was the punishment for such treason as theirs, and 
fearing that William's promise would not restrain his just 
resentment, came out bowed down by the weight of the 
saddles that were strapped to their shoulders, hoping by their 
humility to disarm his anger.  
To William's honor be it said that he inflicted no 
further suffering upon these miserable men. He did not banish 
the count. He even permitted him to retain nearly all of his 
estate; and when the count finally withdrew of his own accord 
to the court of Boulogne, William granted the land to another 
member of the same family.  
William had paid a visit to England, and he had 
returned and conquered a revolt in his duchy, but there was 
another matter which he had not forgotten in all his feasting 
and fighting. Matilda of Flanders was to be his wife, and he 
had waited for the Pope's permission about as long as his 
impatience would permit. Some five years it had been since he 
was forbidden to marry her, and for five years he had waited 
with apparent meekness and obedience to the Pope's 
command.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
55
He was in a different position now from that of five 
years earlier. He was at the head of Normandy much more 
perfectly than he had been before, for he had shown that what 
he had he could hold. Moreover, he had good reason to believe 
that in due time he would be king of England. Was a king and 
duke to be refused a dispensation that any ordinary knight 
might hope to obtain? The Normans had powerful settlements 
in Italy. Jealousy and war had arisen, and the Pope had been a 
captive in the hands of the victorious Normans. He had 
thought of the Normans as a wild, only half-civilized people, 
and expected from them the most severe treatment. Much to 
his surprise, the Norman commander came to him at once in 
person and addressed him most respectfully, inviting him to 
the Norman camp, not as prisoner, but as guest. All the chief 
officers attended the Pope to the camp. The greatest courtesy 
was shown him, and he was entertained for several days with 
as much luxury as a camp could furnish. Then with a guard of 
honor, he was conducted to the city where he wished to 
remain. Leo IX was a sincere man. Understanding the nature 
of the Normans better, he absolved them from censure, and 
even blessed their arms. These Norman warriors had opposed 
him sword in hand. Would he who had so readily pardoned 
them refuse a dispensation to the greatest Norman of them all? 
William thought not. To give permission in advance was one 
thing; to pardon what was already done was another.  
So it was that Duke William took matters into his own 
control and appealed to the Count of Flanders for the hand of 
Matilda. The count was pleased with the powerful alliance and 
gave with his daughter a generous dowry, land and money and 
costly robes and priceless jewels. A ruling sovereign must be 
married in his own territory, so the count set off with his 
daughter and a long procession of knights and nobles to cross 
the district of Ponthieu to the Norman frontier. A brilliant 
company it was. The ladies were in elegant attire, their 
mantles sparkling with jewels and gleaming with many rich 
colors. The knights wore their armor, and it shone and flashed 
in the sunshine. The horses were richly caparisoned, with 
bright stones glowing here and there in their trappings.  
At Eu, the first castle over the Norman frontier, 
William met his bride. He wore armor, and his helmet and 
mantle both flashed with precious stones. So magnificent was 
this mantle and that of his bride, that both garments, together 
with the duke's helmet, were presented to the cathedral at 
Bayeux and were kept for at least four hundred years. The 
whole company rode to the church of Eu; and there some 
priest, who trusted to the power of William to free him from 
the censure of the Pope, pronounced the blessing of the church 
upon the couple who were to become the ancestors of the 
English sovereigns of to-day.  
There were celebrations and feasts and entertainments 
of all sorts; then with all the honor that Normandy could show, 
the maiden of Flanders was escorted to the Norman capital of 
Rouen. The Count and Countess of Flanders and all the 
Flemish court accompanied her, and at Rouen there were again 
many days of festivity and merrymaking.  
The Flemings went back to their own land, and 
William with the greatest pride and delight took his bride on a 
royal progress to see the towns and people of Normandy. It 
had been thirty years since Normandy had had a duchess, and 
this beautiful, cultivated woman found a sincere welcome 
wherever she went. The church dignitaries might be pleased or 
displeased; the masses of the Norman people rejoiced.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
56
CHAPTER X 
A VOICE FROM THE CLIFF 
This marriage is thought to have taken place in 1053, 
when William was probably twenty-five years of age. His 
whole life had been a warfare, and one of his three decisive 
battles had been fought before he was twenty years old. This 
battle was Val-ès-dunes, and his victory settled the question of 
his supremacy in Normandy. He had conquered his own 
duchy, and he had shown that in all Europe there was no better 
commander than he. Two other great victories lay in the years 
before him. Nothing came to him by gift; everything must be 
won. Even for the hand of Matilda he had laid siege, and he 
had waited as he would have done to capture a city. His love 
for his wife was as earnest as was his vehemence on the field 
of battle. At last a gleam of happiness had come to him; but 
clouds were gathering, and in all his joy there were mutterings 
of a rising storm, of a battle that could not be fought with 
sword and lance.  
"What do you think of our duke's marriage?" 
questioned a Norman knight of a priest.  
"The lady Matilda is a gracious and beautiful woman," 
replied the priest.  
"You priests are so cautious," laughed the knight. 
"Think you that the Pope will bless the marriage?"  
"The gift of prophecy was not bestowed upon me," said 
the priest, smiling at the knight's apparent discomfiture.  
"What would you do if you were Pope?" questioned 
the knight shrewdly.  
"I am but a simple priest. Never could I even think of 
myself in so exalted a position as that of Father of the 
Church."  
"I see there is no getting anything out of you," said the 
knight good-humoredly. "We'll drop it; but priest or no priest, 
I fancy that you know something about a good horse when you 
see one. Come with me on a hunt, and I'll lend you the best 
horse that you ever mounted. I presume you can think of some 
one who would be the better for a little wild meat. "  
The hunt was successful, and on the return the knight 
said:—  
"To make a man a priest does not seem to make him a 
coward. That was a close thing when the boar attacked you. 
Ought a bishop to be braver than a priest, and the Pope braver 
than a bishop?"  
"I don't know about that," said the priest; "but at any 
rate, the Pope is no coward. They say that he picked up a leper 
who was at his door, took him on his shoulder, and laid him in 
his own bed. A man who will do that is a brave man. He cares 
not a straw who opposes him. He means to work reforms in 
the church, and when he has once said what he believes is 
right, there is no power that will make him change." The priest 
made his farewell, and the knight looked after him with a grim 
smile.  
"They all tell the same story," said he. "Sometimes it 
needs only a question, sometimes a cup of wine or a ride, and 
sometimes a horse; but they all think alike. The Pope will 
never bless this marriage. There's a chance for Malger, and 
there's a chance for King Henry—and, mayhap, there's a 
chance for me," and he spurred his horse and rode away in the 
direction of the Norman capital, where abode Malger, 
Archbishop of Rouen.  
With the custom of giving high positions in the church 
to any young relatives for whom the head of a powerful family 
might wish to provide, there could hardly fail to be bishops 
and archbishops who were unfit for their office. No one doubts 
that Malger was one of these. At the head of the church in 
Normandy he was, the chroniclers declare that more than one 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
57
pope had refused him the snowy pallium, the sacred vestment 
which was the sign of his ecclesiastical rank.  
At this man's door the knight knocked. Sounds of 
feasting and high revelry came from within. After some delay 
the door was opened a little way, and the servant said, with a 
grimace that one might interpret as he would,—  
"The archbishop sees no one to-day; it is a fast-day."  
"I think he will see me," said the knight. "Come here." 
He whispered a single word. The door was flung open, and in 
five minutes the archbishop had excused himself from his 
guests, and he and the knight were talking earnestly together in 
a private room, far away from listening ears.  
"The trouble is that no one can foretell what that 
turbulent nephew of mine will do," said Malger; "he can turn 
in as many ways as the fiend himself."  
"True," said the knight, "but what can he do? He has a 
sword, and he knows how to wield it; but there are knots that 
even so keen a weapon as his will not cut."  
"Nine-tenths of the nobles in the duchy favor the 
marriage," said Malger.  
"Yes, so eager are they to have an heir to the throne 
and a hope of lasting peace that they will favor anything," said 
the knight; "but there need not be peace unless you will it. It 
all lies in your hands. Think of it! An excommunication—an 
uprising—help from a certain foreign power—the Count of 
Arques on the ducal throne—and would your brother dare to 
neglect the weapon by which he had won his place?"  
"But would the Pope support an excommunication that 
I might pronounce?"  
"You mean that he does not always manifest a hearty 
approbation of what seems to you a desirable course?" said the 
knight with a knowing smile.  
"That is perhaps a gentle way of putting it," said the 
archbishop ruefully.  
"And has it occurred to you that if he sees you so 
zealous in the discharge of the duties of your office, so eager 
to uphold his decree that you even venture to oppose the will 
of a ruler like the duke—do you not think that you will win the 
favor not only of the Pope, but of all the powers of the church? 
You have a high position, but even you may rise. There are 
other fields than Normandy." The knight gazed fixedly for a 
moment at the archbishop's face. Then with a careless 
obeisance he withdrew. As he went from the house, he 
whispered to himself exultantly:—  
"I've done it. Now for King Henry and a rich marriage 
and a great feoff."  
Straightway 
Malger 
issued 
a 
decree 
of 
excommunication against William and Matilda, the two 
children of the church who had so boldly ventured to disregard 
her authority.  
Well might Archbishop Malger say that no one could 
foretell the deed of his nephew. Without delay William laid 
before the Pope proofs of Malger's unfitness for his office. The 
Pope could censure William's marriage, but he was none the 
less bound to consider impartially a complaint of this kind 
coming from the ruler of a great duchy. The proofs were only 
too plentiful, and two years after the marriage the archbishop 
was deposed.  
A louder voice than Malger's now spoke. It was the 
voice of one Lanfranc, prior of the convent of Bec. Lanfranc 
was a scholar, with an eloquence and logic worthy of his 
descent from a famous family of lawyers, a man whose 
honesty and keenness of intellect had won for him the favor 
and the confidence of the Norman duke. This was the man 
who, with nothing to gain by his opposition and much to lose, 
now spoke out boldly against the marriage, blaming equally 
duke and duchess.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
58
The same madness which always seemed to overcome 
William at any insult offered to his mother, now burst forth at 
this censure of his wife. He drove Lanfranc from his convent 
and banished him from Normandy. His wrath knew no bounds. 
He ordered part, at least, of the lands of the monastery to be 
ravaged and some of the buildings belonging to the abbey to 
be burned.  
Lanfranc prepared to leave the Norman territories, but 
he took care to withdraw by a road where he was almost sure 
to fall in with the duke. The exiled monk wore the humblest 
garb that his convent could furnish, and he was mounted on a 
lame horse—some say a horse with but three legs. A single 
servant, whose dress was certainly no better than that of his 
master, followed the man who had been at the head of a great 
convent and the friend of a great duke. William met this little 
procession face to face. Lanfranc and the lame horse made a 
simultaneous bow. The combination was irresistible, and the 
duke's stern lips twitched with grim amusement at the sight. 
The prior saw his opportunity. Pretending great eagerness to 
hasten, he belabored his poor beast and said:—  
"Pardon, pardon, my lord, that I am so slow to obey 
your command. Indeed, I am going as fast as I can, but if you 
would only give me a better horse,—if you would perhaps 
exchange with me,—I should be far more obedient." Whoever 
got the better of William in a jest had won the day, and he 
said:—  
"Never before did a criminal ask a gift of his judge. 
Supposing that I should not only give you a horse, but should 
more than make up all that you have lost, what would you do 
for me?"  
"Whatever an honorable man can do for his prince," 
replied the prior steadily. William looked him full in the eyes.  
"You know the thing that I want," said he, "and you 
know that you can get it if any one can. Will you do it?" 
Lanfranc was no coward. He returned to the full the searching 
look of the duke.  
"William, Duke of Normandy," said he, "my own liege 
lord, many a favor have you done me, but not for all that you 
have done and all that it is in your power to do would I say 
that your marriage is according to the laws of the church to 
which we have both promised obedience."  
"Go, then," said William angrily, "and never let me see 
your face again in Normandy." The duke rode away furiously, 
and Lanfranc hobbled along in the opposite direction. An hour 
later a cloud of dust arose behind the banished prior. It came 
nearer. Some one was galloping so madly that Lanfranc 
guided his sorry steed to the side of the road. The rider drew 
up his horse so suddenly that the poor animal almost fell 
backward. It was the duke.  
"Lanfranc!" he called.  
"My liege lord," answered the prior.  
"Did you ever hear of such a thing as the forgiveness of 
a sin?"  
"Yes, surely," said Lanfranc.  
"You say that my marriage is not according to the law 
of the church. Very well. Will you go to Rome and say, 'The 
Duke of Normandy has broken a law of the church; but for 
pardon, for the Pope's confirmation of his marriage, he will as 
a thank-offering do whatever deed of charity the Pope shall 
command.' Will you say this, and will you do your best to 
bring it about?"  
"I will."  
"Then what are you waiting for?" cried William. "Give 
him the best horse that you have," he said to his attendants, 
who were standing at a little distance. "And do you," said he to 
Lanfranc, "do you get you back to your convent and put on 
your richest robes. Horses and guards will be at your door, and 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
59
do you be on your way to Rome before the sun begins to sink. 
On the very day that a messenger arrives to tell me that you 
have secured a dispensation, I will rebuild all that has been 
destroyed; and I will give the abbey of Bec three times the 
value of what it has lost. As for you, if you are true to me, and 
if you prove yourself the man that I think you are, you shall 
one day hold positions that have never entered into your 
dreams. Now go." William embraced him and gave him the 
formal kiss of reconciliation, and the prior went on his way.  
That William had a sincere regard for the welfare of 
the church is proved by the character of the men to whom he 
gave her highest honors in his duchy,—Lanfranc, Anselm, and 
Maurilius, men worthy in mind and in heart of all that the duke 
could bestow. His marriage manifested less of opposition to 
the law of the church than of confidence in her willingness to 
pardon. About a year after the marriage, his son Robert was 
born; and in his love for the child and the mother, the 
negotiations with the Pope and with his successors would have 
seemed slow indeed, had not his thoughts been so fully taken 
up by other matters that pressed upon him.  
The king of France, a fickle, vacillating ally, had once 
shown himself a generous friend; now he appeared in the 
character of a bitter enemy. France had never ceased to look 
with envy upon the fertile expanse of Normandy. The French 
kingdom, strong or weak, as contrast with its neighbors might 
show it, began to fear before the ever increasing power of the 
duchy. Ought a vassal, who at best could not be called over-
submissive to his suzerain, to control the district that shut 
France from the sea, even the very river whereon her capital 
was situated? Ought these Normans, only five generations 
removed from the heathen who had forced an unfortunate king 
to part with his territories, to hold a duchy which by its size, 
power, and position was a constant menace to the kingdom to 
which it owed service? Let William keep the northwest; the 
east should again belong to France.  
So said the French, and King Henry and his army set 
out to overpower this too prosperous duke. The plan was for 
Henry to lead one division of the army into Normandy from 
the south, while his brother made an attack from the north 
upon the country about Rouen. To meet the advance from the 
north, William trusted some of his well-tried nobles; but to 
meet the advance from the south, King Henry and his great 
band of allies, William would trust no one but himself.  
The Norman fighters assembled—and stood still. The 
French forces swept into Normandy from the north. They 
burned and they pillaged and they murdered. Churches or 
dwelling-houses, old men, young men, women, or children, it 
was all the same to them; and with a ferocity almost as savage 
as that of the Danes in their most savage days they ploughed 
their way, leaving want and suffering and death behind them. 
They encamped in the town of Mortemer. Every day there was 
burning and pillage of the country roundabout; every night 
there was feasting and drunkenness.  
Just what was William about? There must be no battle, 
said this wise general of twenty-six years, until the whole 
Norman force could be brought together; and so all that the 
Normans attempted was to save what property they could, and 
to cut off small bodies of men who had strayed from the 
French troops.  
At last the Normans were strong, and one dark night 
they marched silently to the town of Mortemer. It was just at 
the break of day. After a night of carousing, the Frenchmen 
were lost in a drunken slumber. Was it a bad dream? The 
houses were all ablaze. Where were their arms, their horses? 
What had happened? Was it the troops of Normandy or was it 
hosts of demons that were upon them? Half-dressed, half-
armed, mad with pain, they were cut down on the steps, even 
in their beds. They attempted to fight their way out of the 
burning town, but the head of every street was guarded. They 
resisted furiously. From early in the morning till the middle of 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
60
the afternoon they fought, but it was in vain. They were cut 
down till the little town was red with their blood.  
A man of high rank was chosen to be the bearer of 
news like this to William's camp across the Seine. "A Norman 
knight is riding swiftly up the hill," reported the sentinel.  
"Our men are in trouble. Arm and make ready to got to 
them," ordered William; but the rider waved his gonfalon 
joyfully.  
"There is no longer an enemy in Mortemer," said he; 
"all whose ransoms would be worth having are in the prisons 
of Normandy, the rest are slain."  
"It is God that has given us the victory," said William 
reverently; "to Him be the thanks." King Henry was encamped 
not far away.  
"Surprise routed one army," said William; "it may be 
that fright will rout the other." In the middle of the night the 
king and his men were aroused by a weird, solemn chanting 
from the top of a cliff which overhung their camp.  
"Arouse, ye soldiers of France! Too long have your 
eyes been closed in slumber. Onward to Mortemer, to bury 
your friends who lie dead in the streets, slain by the swords of 
the Normans."  
Before sunrise King Henry and his men had fled, 
caring for no plunder, no captives,—nothing but to get far 
away from the terrible duke.  
The king was ready to make peace, and for three years 
there was peace. This was about as long as Henry could resist 
the temptation to attack the ever increasing power of the 
Normans. He set out with a great company of Frenchmen and 
their allies to plunder Normandy. With wrathful patience 
William gathered his knights together, and then again he 
waited. In Falaise he remained, while the Frenchmen cut a 
swath of fire and pillage through the country. Everywhere 
were William's spies, and when the moment came he struck.  
Henry was on his return. He and his vanguard had 
crossed the river Dive at Varaville, and had climbed the cliffs 
on the eastern aide of the stream. The rear-guard and the great 
quantities of treasure that they had taken from the country had 
not yet come across. They were on a narrow causeway that 
was built out into the river at a place where it might be forded 
when the tide was low. William had secretly marched around 
the French lines, and now he fell suddenly upon the half of the 
army on the causeway. There was a terrible struggle, hopeless 
from the first. It is said that not one of the rear-guard escaped.  
From the cliffs only just across the stream King Henry 
saw every movement. He saw his men struck down and taken 
captive, and to see was all that he could do. If his counsellors 
had not held him back, he would have plunged down the cliff 
in a hopeless attempt to rescue his knights; but the tide was 
coming in swiftly; only the most expert swimmers could cross 
the stream, and what could even they do with Norman arrows 
flying about them, and the lance and the terrible battle-axe 
waiting to receive them on the opposite shore? There was 
nothing for Henry to do but to save what men remained to him 
by a speedy flight from Norman territory.  
This battle at the ford of Varaville was the end of the 
French invasions. Henry gladly made peace, and for the sake 
of it he offered to rebuild Tillières and restore it to Normandy. 
Two years later Henry died, and profiting perhaps by 
William's experience, he too threw himself upon the 
generosity of a foe, and left the guardianship of his little son to 
William's father-in-law, the Count of Flanders.  
William had gained possession of his own country, and 
he had repelled the invasions of the ruler of another. He 
himself was to become an invader, but with a kind of 
lawfulness of claim so like that which is put forward a few 
years later that his conquest of Maine seems like a rehearsal of 
his conquest of England.  
Count Herbert, driven from his inheritance of Maine, a 
large and fertile district south of Normandy, fled to William, 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
61
became his vassal, and bequeathed to him the county of 
Maine.  
"The land is mine, and I shall take it," said William; 
"but I shed no unnecessary drop of blood." With his usual 
policy of patience, he kept his hands from the chief city, Le 
Mans, but took one fortress after another and ravaged district 
after district. The people of Maine were finally exhausted. 
William held the whole country, and when he called upon Le 
Mans to surrender, it not only yielded, but flung open the gates 
with a welcome to William and to peace which was sincere in 
part, at any rate, for now there would be no more fighting. 
William had taken the city without shedding a drop of blood. 
Men greeted the duke as a saviour rather than a conqueror. 
Throughout the town his praises were shouted. A long 
procession swept out of the church chanting psalms of joy. He 
might almost have been entering his own Falaise, so great was 
the rejoicing.  
William had yet another cause for happiness. Lanfranc 
had been doing his best in Rome, and finally the promised 
messenger came to William with the word that he had awaited 
so eagerly for six long years.  
"The duke will not yield," Lanfranc had said, "and an 
interdict punishes the innocent in the kingdom as much as it 
does the guilty. Moreover, if the marriage is not confirmed, if 
by any means William should be forced to send Matilda back 
to Flanders, that will cause war. Ought not the Father of the 
Church to prevent bloodshed by mercy? Are there not heathen 
enough to kill without shedding Christian blood?"  
Pope Nicholas yielded, and the marriage was formally 
confirmed by the church. The penance imposed was that 
William and Matilda should build four hospitals, one in each 
of the four chief towns of Normandy, and that they should 
build a convent for women and one for men. They obeyed, and 
the two noble abbeys of Caen are the memorial of the broken 
law of the church, of the penance, and of the pardon.  
CHAPTER XI 
PROMISE OR PRISON? 
Occupied as William was by revolts in his own duchy, 
invasions of the king of France, and negotiations to obtain the 
Pope's sanction of his marriage, he had never forgotten the 
promise of King Edward that some day he should wear the 
crown of England. He waited patiently, increasing his power 
in Normandy, and watching keenly every movement of the 
people across the Channel. Twelve years had passed before 
anything happened that seemed to strengthen his hold upon the 
English crown.  
Now when "all folk chose Edward to king," the 
principal reason for their choice was that Edward belonged to 
the old Saxon family that had been their rulers before the 
coming of the Danes. One of Edward's chief supporters was a 
powerful noble named Godwin, Earl of Wessex, and he gave 
to the new king his daughter Edith in marriage. Godwin may 
have been indignant that Edward's gratitude was not powerful 
enough to make him obedient to the man who had helped him 
to the throne; or he may have been genuinely disappointed 
when he found that he had only exchanged Danish rule for 
Norman; for in education and taste Edward was as much of a 
Norman as if he had never left Norman soil, and to Normans 
he gave all places of honor in court and church. Whatever may 
have been the reason, he opposed Edward determinedly. The 
king accused him of the murder of Alfred, and the council 
seized his estates and banished him.  
Soon after William made his visit to England, Godwin 
returned. He had cleared himself of the charge of murder, and 
the council gave back his land. It did more, for a decree was 
passed declaring that the king's Norman friends must leave 
England because it was their advice that had brought about 
such injustice.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
62
An event like this could hardly fail to make it clear to 
the king that the English people would not give up easily to 
any 
foreign 
rule. 
Edward 
began 
to 
find 
that 
his 
recommendation to the council would not be enough to place 
William peaceably upon the throne. Would it not rather bring 
about discord and war? and would not the Danish party seize 
upon any time of disunion to force a Danish king upon the 
land? Was there anything better to do?  
Far away in Hungary was a prince called the "Outlaw," 
a nephew of Edward's. He was invited to England, and now 
the question seemed to be settled, for his father had been 
greatly loved by the English people; but in a few weeks he 
died. His son was too young to be thought of as ruler of the 
land, and again Edward must try to plan for the succession. He 
had learned that the king could not give away his crown; but 
he had also learned that when the people came to make their 
choice, the wish of the king would be of great weight. What 
should he do?  
Godwin was dead, but he had left a son, Harold, and 
every day Harold's power was on the increase. He had no 
claim to the throne by blood, he was merely the brother-in-law 
of the king; but William's relationship was only that of grand-
nephew to Edward's Norman mother. No drop of English 
blood royal was in his veins any more than in Harold's. 
Edward's choice lay between a child of the royal family, 
whose youth would lay the kingdom open to Danish dominion; 
a foreigner of a race hated by the English; and an Englishman 
loved and admired by the English nation. Who could blame 
him if his mind turned toward Harold?  
It came about one bright day in 1064 that Earl Harold 
went out sailing with a merry party. There were three vessels 
full of his friends. They started from Bosham, near the Isle of 
Wight. Just where they would go, they had not decided, but 
they took with them their dogs and hawks and bows and 
spears, for they meant to hunt wherever they landed. A storm 
came up suddenly. The boats were separated, and the one that 
carried Harold was driven across the Channel and wrecked. In 
the darkness he and several of the party were cast upon an 
unknown coast. Harold was the first to reach the land, and in 
the roar of the surf he shouted:—  
"Ho, there, ho! Is any one saved?" There was no sound 
from the shore, but from the waves came a cry of "Help, help!" 
Into the fearful tumult of the waters Harold plunged in the 
direction of the voice. He touched a man in the darkness and 
brought him to land.  
"The earl himself," said the man. "Glad am I that you 
are saved."  
"And I, too," said another. "And I," "And, I" cried 
other voices. "It would have fared ill with us in England if we 
had gone back without the man who is to be its king."  
"Talk not of kings," said the earl; "talk rather of where 
we are and how we are to escape. If we are on the coast of 
Normandy, I'd rather go back into the sea."  
"The duke owes England nothing but kindness," said 
one of the party.  
"He would willingly owe her for more kindness," said 
the earl grimly. "We will stay under these rocks till daybreak. 
They seem to rise up high above us; at least, it is darker there 
than to the right or the left; and when morning comes, we will 
try to escape. I would give half of my earldom to have a good 
piece of English ground under my feet once more."  
Just before the break of day two men stood on the little 
cliff that in the darkness had seemed to tower so far above the 
beach. By their dress they should have been fishermen, but on 
the shore there were no signs of nets having been spread, and 
the men had neither fishhooks nor lines. Instead they bore 
stout ropes and long poles with strong hooks at the end.  
"Stop!" said one softly, as the little path came near the 
edge of the cliff; "there are sometimes better things than 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
63
driftwood, or kegs of food or bits of iron. Stay back and let me 
look."  
"Yes, I know what you want. Stay back yourself," 
whispered the other angrily, and he flung his companion back 
heavily away from the cliff. The noise of the waves covered 
that of the scuffle, and the man crept to the edge and peered 
over.  
Down below him was the little group. The sailor's 
dress and the knight's dress he could make out, but there was 
one man the richness of whose garments even the salt water 
could not entirely conceal. The watcher on the cliff noticed 
that some attempt seemed to have been made to lessen his 
discomfort. The cloak of one and the tunic of another were 
thrown over him. He moved, and the fisherman caught a 
glimpse of his face and started.  
"I haven't been on the English coast for nothing," he 
said to himself. He sprang up softly, but the other caught him 
by the leg.  
"Where are you going?" he demanded in a fierce 
whisper.  
"To the count."  
"Then I go with you," and he pursued closely as the 
first ran across the field. They were soon out of hearing of the 
shipwrecked party.  
"What are you  going to the count for?" called over his 
shoulder the one who had seen the group on the shore.  
"Because you expect a reward from him, and I mean to 
have some of it," said the other boldly.  
"You do? and what can you say to win a reward? I 
have something to tell."  
"Tell me what it is, or you will never get to the count."  
"And what would you have to tell, then? Would the 
count be pleased that you had killed a man who was useful to 
him? Watch and see that no one escapes, and I will give you a 
pound when I come back."  
"You expect to get twenty, or else you wouldn't," 
muttered the fisherman; but there was nothing else to do, so he 
gave up the pursuit. The spy ran on, but before he came to the 
castle he met the count.  
"Count Guy," said he, "I have a bigger fish than I ever 
caught before. Will you give me twenty pounds for him? I'll 
warrant you he'll pay you one hundred. It's the Earl of 
Wessex."  
Without a moment's delay, the count summoned his 
followers and rode to the coast. The broken vessel had come 
ashore, and the shipwrecked men were trying to make it 
seaworthy. So busy were they that the first they knew of the 
coming of the count was his call,—  
"Hold, you are my captives!"  
"Who are you?" demanded Harold defiantly.  
"Count Guy of Ponthieu, a faithful vassal of 
Normandy. You are my prisoner."  
"I claim of you the hospitality that one noble has the 
right to claim of another," said Harold.  
"You do not give me your name," said the count with a 
peculiar smile. "I know it, however. You are Earl Harold of 
England, and down into my strongest dungeon you go until 
your ransom is paid."  
"And this is your Norman courtesy? You are thieves 
and robbers all, and so was your Rollo before you," said 
Harold fiercely.  
"What the wave brings to us is our own, be it weed or 
drift," said the count calmly.  
"Or men?" asked Harold angrily.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
64
"Or men," repeated the count. "The man who is 
wrecked is accursed of God, or God would have brought him 
safely to his haven."  
"What kind of God you have in Normandy, I know 
not," said Harold bitterly; "but the God of England tells us to 
help the unfortunate."  
"And so may you do when you are in England," said 
the count; "but this is Ponthieu, and I am lord of Ponthieu, and 
a faithful vassal to Duke William and—"  
"And when did your faithfulness begin?" asked Harold 
scornfully.  
"Long enough ago for me to have a castle. It has a 
dungeon and a torture chamber, too, and sometimes these will 
hasten the coming of a ransom."  
Harold was taken to the castle, perhaps to the dungeon; 
but one of his faithful attendants who had been out of sight 
when the count appeared, remained in hiding until he and his 
captives were gone, and then made his way to Rouen and 
demanded to see Duke William. To him he told the story of 
the wreck and the capture, and begged that he as overlord 
would force the count to set Harold free.  
It was a terrible temptation to set before the man whose 
ambition it was to become king of England. Here was his only 
rival fallen by the fate of the waves and the winds into the 
hands of a man whose anger the earl had already aroused by 
his boldness. He need do nothing but to let the count work his 
will. The dungeon and the rack might hasten the ransom, or 
they might hasten the death of the only man that stood 
between the Duke of Normandy and the succession to the 
English crown. He had only to imprison this messenger, and it 
would never be known that any appeal had been made to him.  
Whatever William did afterward to further his 
ambition, his course now seemed most honorable. Swift 
messengers were sent to Count Guy to ask for the freedom of 
the English earl, to demand it if need be. Guy yielded 
gracefully, and accompanied Harold, not as jailer but as host, 
to the castle of Eu on the boundary line of Ponthieu. There 
Duke William received him with the greatest courtesy. Count 
Guy was rewarded with money and land, and Harold, Earl of 
Wessex, became the guest of William, Duke of Normandy. 
The two men who were most prominent in western Europe 
were together; what would come of the meeting?  
Apparently the chief result of it was only a most 
hospitable entertainment. Harold was provided with the best 
that the castle afforded. There were feasts and games and 
hunting and hawking; and finally, there came the noblest sport 
of it all, so Harold and his friends thought, for one of the 
Breton nobles had revolted, and William invited his guests to 
join him in an expedition to overcome the rebel. They were 
successful, and when they returned, William gave them 
generous presents and knighted those who had not already 
received knighthood. It was a merry time.  
"You have shown us great courtesy," said Harold to 
William. "Save for you, I might still have been a prisoner in 
the dungeon of the Count of Ponthieu. The silver I can return 
to you, but the kindness and the hospitality I can return only if 
you will become my guest in Wessex. May I hope that this 
will come to pass?"  
"I thank you," said William heartily, and he added 
slowly: "Yes, I will come; but, Earl Harold, there is something 
on my mind that I wish to discuss with you. We have lived in 
friendly companionship, and it would not displease me if the 
relationship between us was even closer. You are a man of 
great power, and some day you will marry, and in such wise as 
to increase your power. How would an alliance with 
Normandy please you? I have a daughter Adelaide, nine years 
old, or eight—I will ask her mother. When my father left me 
to rule the barons of Normandy, he said of me, 'He is little, but 
he will grow.' So say I of my Adelaide. But here comes the 
little maid herself. Will you have her, Earl Harold? She's the 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
65
fairest little girl in Normandy." He caught the child in his arms 
and seated her high up on his shoulder.  
"How is it with you, Adelaide? Will you marry this 
Englishman and go across the water with him to live in the far-
away land?"  
"Will he take me in a boat?" asked the child earnestly.  
"Yes, will you marry me?" said Harold.  
"I've wanted to go in a boat ever since I was a little 
girl," said Adelaide. "I'll marry you right away; but wait till I 
call my dog, he wants to go in a boat, too. Come, father, you 
and mother, and we will go across the water."  
So it was that the little daughter of William was 
betrothed to Earl Harold. A formal ceremony followed, and 
the child was much disappointed to find that she would not 
cross the water at present, but would only be led up to the altar 
in the church by this tall Englishman with a brilliant company 
of knights and nobles and ladies looking on.  
Harold was older than William; the marriage was far in 
the future; and even if it came to pass, an alliance with the 
Duke of Normandy would be a great advantage, so the earl 
willingly agreed to the betrothal.  
Harold had been entertained as a guest to whom the 
duke wished to show special honor; but for all that, he would, 
as he said, have given half his earldom to have a good piece of 
English ground under his feet. Several times he had named an 
hour to set sail for England, but when the hour had come, the 
duke had always had some excuse for detaining him. A 
wonderfully large wild boar had been seen in the forest, and 
his guest must join in just one more hunt; or the wind was not 
in the right direction; or the sky gave signs of a change of 
weather. These excuses were often so trivial that Harold well 
understood that, guest as he was, he was not at liberty to leave 
the Norman shores till it should please the duke to allow his 
departure.  
The crown of England lay between these two men. 
Each knew that the other intended to win it, and Harold was 
not entirely surprised when William said:—  
"There is another subject that I wish to discuss with 
you. Of course a man in the king's counsel as you are knows 
that it was settled some twelve or thirteen years ago that at my 
cousin's death I was to become king of England."  
"The king does not reveal all his plans," said Harold 
evasively.  
"True," said the duke quietly; "but I fancied that he had 
revealed this one to an earl who was so fully in his confidence. 
Edward is feeble, his life cannot last many years, perhaps not 
many months. We must be prepared for what may happen. 
Until that comes to pass which will come, I must remain in 
Normandy; but I need a strong man to look after my interests 
in England. I need not say that when the time comes, I shall 
look after his interests. He who serves me well now will have 
wide stretches of land and the highest honors of the kingdom. 
Will you promise me to act in my behalf and to do all in your 
power to secure for me the throne of England?"  
"I will do all that I can to carry out King Edward's 
will," said Harold evasively.  
"That may be enough, and it may not. Edward is 
advancing in years, and as one grows weak in body, he is 
sometimes influenced by those around him to make plans that 
he would not have thought of in his stronger days. Will you 
promise me—"  
"Father," said a childish voice, "won't you come and 
tell the armorer to make me a sword? He won't, and I'm ten 
years old, and you had one when you were not nearly so old. 
You told me you did. Come quick, father." Robert seized his 
father's hand, and the great duke followed meekly to give the 
order to the armorer. When he returned, he seemed to have 
forgotten all about the English crown, and he said to Harold:—  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
66
 
 
 
WILL YOU PROMISE ME?  
"I think you have never seen the whole of the castle. 
Will you go over it now?" Up the narrow, winding stairs they 
went to the very summit of the tower; then down, down below 
the hall with its light and color and cheer to the wine cellars, 
and below those to the dungeons. Great pits they were into 
which no ray of light could penetrate. There was a noisome 
smell of slime and foulness.  
"Count Guy spent two years in one of my dungeons; 
but I fancy that less than two years in this would make a man 
agree to anything," said William with a significance which 
Harold understood.  
When they were in the hall again, the duke said 
quietly:—  
"I may depend upon you, may I not, to act in my 
interest to the full, and to do your best to secure for me 
peaceable possession of the English crown? Do you promise?" 
The duke spoke gently; but his eyes were fixed upon Harold, 
and in them was a stern glitter like the flashing of a sword.  
Harold was a man of truth, but he held many honors, 
and even greater ones were before him. At the last breath of 
Edward the English people were ready to make him king. 
Should he give up a kingdom and submit to a living death in 
the horrible dungeons of Normandy for a scruple of 
conscience? What was a word after all? Only a breath. Ought 
it to hold one like a chain of iron? Moreover, he must think of 
others besides himself. If he was down in that fearful pit, 
William would attempt to become king of England. There 
would be war. Ruin and devastation and bloodshed would 
sweep over the country. Had a man the right to keep his 
conscience pure at the cost of the whole land? These were not 
new thoughts to Harold, but in a moment they flashed through 
his mind like a flash of lightning. He yielded.  
"I will do it," he said, "I will do my best to place you 
peaceably on the throne of England."  
"And all that the man who sits on the throne can do for 
another, will I do for you," said William; "and the day after to-
morrow, if you insist upon going, all our merry company will 
ride to the shore with you and see you safely launched on the 
blue waters of the Channel.  
Morning came, and with it a message from the duke.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
67
"My knights are assembled in the council hall. They 
are come to do you honor before you depart from our court. 
Will you come with me to receive their farewells and their 
good wishes?"  
Harold rode with the duke to the great council 
chamber. There was a brilliant assemblage of knights and 
nobles and ladies of the court. They seemed to have clustered 
about some object in the centre of the hall, but as William and 
Harold drew near they separated. There stood the richly carven 
chair of state. Over it was thrown a cloth of gold, and on this 
were the holy vessels brought from the nearest cathedral. In 
the centre was a missal open at one of the Gospels, and near it 
lay some of the relics of Saint Candre.  
"I know well that you are a man of your word," said. 
William to Harold, "and your promise is enough for me; but 
for the sake of those about me, to increase their loyalty and 
their confidence, I ask you to swear on the Gospel and on 
these relics that you will do everything in your power to aid 
me to become king of England."  
To the people of the eleventh century an oath was far 
more binding than an ordinary promise, but Harold had gone 
too far to go back, he thought; and although William spoke in 
a most friendly way, his eyes were sternly bent upon the 
English earl. Harold hesitated for a moment. The thought 
flashed through his mind, "Saint Candre is not a very powerful 
patron. I need not fear him. I will do penance, and I will make 
great gifts to the church, and I will win over every other saint 
in the calendar to be my friend." So Harold laid his hand on 
the Gospels, as William bade him, and took the oath. Two 
priests, who had stood one on either side of the chair of state, 
gently lifted the golden cloth. There was silence through the 
great hall; and Harold turned white with horror, for under the 
golden cloth were relics of the most powerful saints of 
Normandy, and relics that Duke Robert had sent from Rome 
and from Jerusalem. Upon these relics he had laid his hand as 
he took the oath, and if the oath was broken every one of those 
saints was bound to be his enemy and to do him harm. No 
wonder that he was aghast.  
"A promise is a promise," said William in his ear. "To 
a man like you, whose promise is sincere, it matters not that he 
has sworn to it on the holiest relics that the church in 
Normandy possesses." He turned to his knights:—  
"Our good friend and welcome guest has told me that 
he must set sail for England in the morning. Let us give him a 
merry escort to Harfleur, and see him fairly embarked on the 
water that perhaps will not always separate the interests of 
Normandy from those of England."  
Never had William's knights seen him so full of jests 
and gayety as on their return from Harfleur. They did not 
know that he was saying to himself over and over:—  
"If he keeps his oath, it is well; if he breaks it, who is 
there in all England that will trust the kingdom to a man who 
is forsworn?"  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
68
CHAPTER XII 
ON BOARD THE "MORA" 
Two years later, on January 5, 1066, King Edward 
died. That same day saw the meeting of the council to name 
his successor. The choice was soon made, but not without free 
discussion.  
"I give my word for the crowning of Edgar," said one 
gray-haired councillor.  
"Edgar is but a child," said many voices.  
"He is of the royal blood," said the old man. "Never 
has England of her own free will bestowed her crown upon 
one who was not of the house of Cerdic."  
"Shall a few drops of blood in the veins of a child 
count for more than the valor in the heart of the man who has 
been the real sovereign of England for more than ten years?" 
said another councillor. "There is no one else in the land—or 
out of it," he added, with a withering glance at a little group of 
men who were suspected of being Norman in their 
sympathies—"there is no one else whom the people of 
England love and admire and trust as they do Earl Harold of 
Wessex, and I give my voice for him as the successor of our 
holy King Edward."  
"And yet it is said in Normandy that many years ago 
the holy king gave his word that the Duke of Normandy 
should be his successor," said the boldest of the little group in 
the farther corner.  
"Have the Normans who have come to our land been 
so true and upright that we should trust even an unproven 
rumor of their country?" retorted a knight fiercely.  
"No king can bequeath his crown," said another 
councillor gravely; "that is the gift of the people; and, 
moreover, this is, as you say, but a rumor, while we know by 
the testimony of many witnesses that the king in the last hour 
of his life recommended Harold as his successor."  
"Holy men at the hour of death have often new vision 
and strange powers of prophecy," said the abbot of a great 
convent. "It is not well to pass lightly by what men see who 
see more than men can see." The vote was taken, and Harold 
was elected with hardly a dissenting voice. Two great 
chieftains bore to him the slender golden crown from the 
chamber of the dead king.  
For a moment Harold hesitated. His wise use of his 
abilities had raised him to the highest position in the land; it 
was a time to be proud. But was it all his wisdom, was it not 
the course of events? Would not another man with his 
opportunities have done even more? it was a time to be 
humble. And in the doorway stood the two nobles with the 
golden circle which he had solemnly promised to give to 
another man. It was a forced oath—no, it was not, his word 
was his own; he had chosen, a hard choice, but he had chosen. 
He would refuse and say boldly, "Come what may, I will not 
live a man forsworn. I cannot be your king." What freedom 
that would be! But the councillors were speaking:—  
"We bring the crown of England from the chamber of 
King Edward. We are come to say that it is the will of the 
council that you, Harold, Earl of Wessex, should be our king. 
Do you accept the crown?"  
"The will of the council." That was the way of escape. 
He had no more right to refuse the crown than a king had to 
give it away. He was but a tool, a weapon of the people. 
Should the sword say, "Why choose me? I will not be chosen." 
So said Harold to himself. Again he yielded, and as he had 
once said, "I will promise," so he now said, "I will be your 
king."  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
69
The times were too full of danger for a land to remain 
for a single day without a lawful sovereign. Before the next 
nightfall, Westminster Abbey had seen the burial of Edward 
and the coronation of Harold.  
William of Normandy was hunting in the forest near 
Rouen. He had bent the bow which no other man had strength 
to bend, and he had taken aim at a deer, when from behind him 
came a voice, "My lord!" The arrow flew wide, and the deer 
sprang away.  
"How dare you?" said William, turning upon the man 
fiercely. "I have forgiven rebellious vassals, but I never yet 
forgave a man who spoiled a shot like that."  
"Pardon, my lord," said the man who had spoken. "I 
have a message for you from one over the water. Edward has 
ended his life, and Earl Harold is raised to the kingdom." 
William turned deadly pale. His bow fell to the ground. He 
laced and unlaced his mantle. Then without a word he strode 
to the bank of the Seine and motioned to his boatman to row 
him across. He went up the hill to his castle and entered the 
great hall. He looked to one side, then to the other. He dropped 
upon a bench, and with his mantle thrown over his face sat 
leaning against a pillar. The men in the hall withdrew silently 
into little groups.  
On the hunt with William had been one William Fitz-
Osbern, son of the faithful guardian whose death had once 
saved the life of the duke. He alone ventured to speak to his 
master.  
"Duke William," said he, "this is no secret. Every street 
in Rouen is ablaze with the news. This is no time to mourn 
that Edward is dead or that Harold is forsworn. This is the time 
to cross the water and seize the kingdom that is your own."  
William straightway sent an embassy to Harold, 
demanding the keeping of his oath. Harold replied that it was 
better to break a bad oath than to keep it; and that in any case 
the crown was not for him to give, but for the nation. It was 
plain that to win the kingdom William must fight for it. He 
appealed to his vassals.  
"Many years ago," he said, "the English crown was 
promised to me by King Edward, and this was right, for I am 
his lawful heir. When Edward had become a feeble old man, 
Harold usurped his power and turned the English people as he 
would. Harold belongs to an accursed race, for to his father is 
laid the savage murder of Alfred. In your very presence he 
swore on the relics of the saints that he would uphold my 
right—not my right, but that of Normandy, for Alfred was 
supported by Norman arms, and the relics were those of the 
greatest saints of our land. He and his father together drove the 
Normans from England. Shall we not avenge the wrongs of 
our own countrymen?"  
Lanfranc, who had won the Pope's confirmation of 
William's marriage, was ready to place his keen intellect at the 
service of the duke, and now an appeal was made to Rome. To 
the Pope the matter was put as a missionary undertaking. 
William was going to England, it seemed, to punish a usurper 
and a man forsworn, a man who had not only stolen a 
kingdom, but who had insulted the saints, whose good deeds 
were the most cherished possession of the church. Would the 
Father of the Church judge between them? The Pope decided 
in favor of William, and sent him a consecrated banner and a 
ring containing a sacred relic.  
While the embassy was in Rome, William called 
together his vassals at Lillebonne and asked their aid. He could 
not command it, for a vassal was not bound to cross the sea 
with his lord. They were not enthusiastic.  
"England is rich," said one, "and Harold can engage 
even kings and dukes to fight for him."  
"Yes," said another, "we cannot win; and if we attempt 
it, we shall only ruin our own Normandy."  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
70
"I would gladly follow you over land and sea," said 
one, "but I am poor; I cannot furnish ships or even arm my 
men as they should be armed for such an attempt."  
"Harold will grow stronger every day," said a noble. 
"Whatever is done should be done at once; but England has a 
great fleet and well-trained sailors. More than one year, more 
than two years, would it take us to prepare ships to meet it." 
Then came forward bold William Fitz-Osbern.  
"You have fought for the duke," said he, "but has he 
done nothing for you? You owe him service for your feoffs; 
and what matters it whether you fight on one side of the water 
or the other? The ground is the same. Shame on the faithless 
vassal whose chief must beg for his obedience. There is 
something more," he added. "You know the temper of the 
duke. Is he one to yield? Has he ever yielded? If you refuse 
him now, what do you think the end will be? He is angry. He 
has left your assembly. Shall I beg him to return?"  
Even the boldest of the barons were alarmed. They did, 
indeed, know William's temper. "Speak to him for us," they 
said to Fitz-Osbern.  
Fitz-Osbern spoke, but in accordance with his own 
wishes, and without the least regard to those of the barons.  
"Your barons have such zeal in your service and such 
affection for you," he said, "that they will gladly meet all 
danger into which you may lead them." The barons looked at 
Fitz-Osbern angrily and motioned him to stop, but William sat 
by with stern, lowering face, and they were silent. Fitz-Osbern 
went on:—  
"To punish the wicked usurper, the scorner of Norman 
arms, the insulter of Norman saints, I will furnish sixty ships, 
well filled with fighting men; and every man here will agree to 
furnish not the number of men to which he is bound, but twice 
that number."  
Then the wrath of the barons broke out. There was no 
attempt to keep order. The hall was full of angry, shouting 
men, each struggling to be heard. Now was William's time. He 
was no longer the stern ruler, but the fascinating pleader; and 
when William chose to persuade rather than to demand, few 
could resist him. One by one they yielded.  
This expedition was setting out to avenge a broken 
oath and an insult to religion. The Pope had blessed the 
enterprise. The ships would sail under the banner of the 
church. This was more profitable than a pilgrimage. A man 
might gain the good-will of the powerful ruler of Normandy, 
who would perhaps be king of England; he might have a 
reasonable hope of winning land and gold; and he might be 
working for the good of his soul, all at the same time. So 
advantageous a bargain as that was seldom offered. No 
wonder that soldiers came from near and from far. No wonder 
that all the seaport towns were building ships, and that all the 
inland towns were forging armor. Night and day the anvils 
rang and the hammers beat.  
As has been said before, there was always danger in a 
sovereign's leaving his country, if only for a short time. As far 
as possible, William must secure the friendliness of the 
surrounding districts. As a vassal of France, he went to Philip, 
son of Henry, to offer him a share in the conquest of England. 
Philip and his councillors had already discussed this project of 
William's, and they were prepared to oppose it. "Normandy," 
said they, "is so independent as it is that her vassalage is only a 
name. Let her win England, and it will not be even that." So 
when William came to Philip and said:—  
"I come to you as my suzerain to ask if you will assist 
me to gain my rights in England and to punish a usurper. If 
you will help me, I promise to hold England, as I do 
Normandy, as a feoff of the kingdom of France." Then the 
young Philip replied rather pertly, inasmuch as he was 
speaking to a man much older than himself and the greatest 
military commander in Europe:—  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
71
"And who will care for your duchy while you are 
trying to gain these rights of yours across the sea?" William 
looked down upon the young fellow before him and 
answered:—  
"That is a matter which need not trouble my neighbors, 
for God has given me a prudent wife and loving subjects, and 
together they will care for my duchy."  
William then invited his wife's brother-in-law to join 
with him, but young Baldwin asked first what he would gain 
by it. William never could pass by the opportunity for a jest, 
and even in this hurried time he stopped to fold a blank 
parchment into the shape of a royal missive, sealed it with the 
ducal seal, and on the outside he wrote:—  
"Brother-in-law, in England you'll win 
Just as much as you find within." 
Afterward, however, he made generous promises to 
Matilda's relatives for their aid.  
The last thing before setting out to join his forces, 
William solemnly appointed Matilda ruler of Normandy 
during his absence; and that in case of his death his son 
Robert, a boy of twelve or thirteen, might be already in power, 
he put him in nominal command of the military forces of the 
duchy. There was a great assemblage of the chief men of 
Normandy when Matilda was formally declared "Duchess 
Regent," and at the end of the ceremony William said 
earnestly:—  
"We beg that you and the ladies of your court will give 
us your prayers that the blessing of God may go with us and 
may give us success."  
At the mouth of the Dive, not so very far from the ford 
of Varaville, whence King Henry and his men had begun their 
wild flight from the land of the Normans, assembled the ships, 
seven hundred, one chronicler puts it; three thousand and 
more, others say. Ships came and men came, grave and 
dignified barons and wild, turbulent young adventurers; no 
easy horde to keep in order, but the duke was able to control 
the power that he had aroused. Plunder was forbidden, and the 
rule against it was enforced. The cattle and the cornfield of the 
peasant were untouched.  
So strict was the order maintained that a man who had 
hoped to make his way through the camp by his Norman dress 
and his knowledge of the Norman tongue, was captured at 
once and brought before the duke. He was an English spy, but 
William received him like a guest, treated him courteously, 
and finally sent him away with a message to Harold. "Tell 
your lord," said he, "to go where he thinks himself safest, and 
if he does not meet me there before the year ends, then need he 
never fear me while he lives."  
Harold had some reason to be comforted by the 
message, for day after day passed, and still the fleet was 
weather-bound at the mouth of the Dive. September came. The 
north wind blew and the rain fell and the surf pounded on the 
shore. No ship could go to sea in safety, and for one long 
month the whole fleet waited impatiently for the south wind 
that should speed the vessels on their way to England.  
Not only did the south wind fail, but provisions began 
to be scarce. It was easier to move the fleet than to bring food; 
and so, at the first breath of the west wind, William took the 
ships to Ponthieu, and anchored off the mouth of the river 
Somme. Still the south wind refused to blow. The soldiers 
murmured.  
"Where are the fertile lands that this great conqueror 
promised?" said one.  
"Here is land enough," said another, "I want to get out 
on the water;" and one who had been gazing out over the sea 
turned and said:—  
"The terrible comet that swept through the sky, we 
thought that it meant ruin to England, but it is borne in upon 
my mind that the two long fiery trains that trailed after it 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
72
portend rather that Normandy shall be divided and shattered 
by this evil plan of Duke William's to seize upon land that 
God's ocean has separated from us."  
"He is mad," said one. "His father had the same 
madness; and when he, too, set out to conquer England, the 
winds opposed him, just as they oppose Duke William. God is 
against him. Let us leave him and go to our homes."  
The little church of Saint Valéry was not far away, and 
William alternately offered prayers at its altar and watched the 
vane on its spire. Finally he arranged a solemn procession of 
the clergy of the church bearing the relics of their patron saint. 
Gold and silver and jewels were cast upon the shrine until it 
was almost buried beneath the offerings. Duke and army 
prayed, and at last, after six weeks of waiting, the wind blew 
from the south. The ships made ready to set sail for England.  
But a great warship was coming into the harbor. No 
one had ever seen it before. It was all a-glitter with its bright 
decorations, and its sails were of many colors.  
"I have no vassal," said William, "who could bring me 
a ship like that. It must be from some other country."  
"But there are the three lions of Normandy on her 
sails," cried Fitz-Osbern. As she came nearer, William saw 
that the figure-head was a child, a boy wrought all of gold, and 
in his hand was an ivory horn. As William looked at it he 
fancied that it was like his little son William; and so it was, 
and in the boat was the Duchess Matilda with her attendants. 
The name of the ship was the "Mora," the "Delay," and she 
was a gift from Matilda to her husband.  
"As you have been delayed by foul winds," said the 
duchess, "so now shall the 'Delay' fill her sails with fair winds 
and bear you swiftly to the land that is of right your own."  
"So shall it be," said William, "for the 'Mora' and no 
other vessel shall carry me across the water." The consecrated 
banner was run up to the masthead. Matilda said her farewell, 
and to the music of cymbals and pipes and many other 
instruments William set out for England.  
Harold's months on the English throne had not been 
easy. The Norwegians, aided by his own brother, Tostig, had 
descended upon the north coast, and he had been obliged to 
march beyond the Humber to repulse them. So it was that 
when William landed at Pevensey, not a blow was struck, 
though if the south wind had blown but a few days sooner, an 
army would have been ready to receive him. William was the 
first to spring ashore, but in his eagerness he fell at full length. 
A low groan of fear came from the soldiers.  
"It is a terrible omen," said one.  
"God is against us," said another; but William rose 
with a bit of turf in either hand and said jubilantly,—  
"So it is that I take seizin of my rightful kingdom." A 
soldier pulled a handful of thatch from the roof of a cottage.  
"Here, too, is seizin," he said, "of England and all that 
is within it."  
"I accept it," said the duke, "and may God be with us."  
After one day the whole force marched to Hastings, 
where provisions could more easily be procured. A wooden 
fortress was put up and a moat was dug. William did not wish 
to go far inland, so he set to work to harass the country round-
about that he might provoke Harold to come to him. By forced 
marches Harold came southward, and when he reached 
London, William's messenger met him.  
"This is the word of the Duke of Normandy," said the 
messenger: "By Edward's will and by your own oath I call 
upon you to give up the kingdom."  
"And this is the reply of the King of England," said 
Harold: "So long as a man lives, he has a right to alter his will, 
and in no court is an extorted oath held sacred. I offer you my 
friendship and costly gifts if you will depart from the land 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
73
without violence or harm; but if you persist in grasping for that 
which is not your own, then will I and my brave men meet you 
in battle on Saturday, and as we have just driven an invader 
from our northern coasts, so will we drive you from our 
southern."  
Few days were there before the one that was set for the 
battle, but Harold took a little time to go to his own church at 
Waltham. Many gifts he laid upon the altar, then he knelt in 
prayer for the forgiveness of his sins and for the welfare of his 
land. "I sought to do for the best," he prayed, "but it may be 
that I am entangled in the meshes of evil. Forgive me, and 
save my country from the usurper, and give the victory as shall 
be for her own best good."  
Harold went back to London and there met him his 
faithful brother Gyrth, who pleaded with him:—  
"Do you stay and defend London. A forced oath is not 
binding, but yet it is an oath, and I fear that God will be 
against you. No oath have I sworn. Let me go forth to meet the 
invader. If I am slain, then can you, the king, gather another 
army and avenge me; and let us now burn the houses and lay 
waste the harvest fields and leave this invader with nothing but 
the desert and the sea. So will he go to his ships and betake 
him to his own country." Then spoke Harold:—  
"No friend of mine," said he, "shall go forth to face 
danger that I ought to face. Never will I set fire to an English 
home or lay waste an English harvest field."  
And so it was that Harold of England went forth to 
meet William of Normandy.  
CHAPTER XIII 
"ENGLAND IS MINE" 
The strength of the Norman army was its horsemen; 
the strength of the English army was its foot soldiers. While 
William's forces were well fitted to make an attack, Harold's 
power lay in his ability to resist an attack. William was a great 
commander, for he knew when to advance; but Harold was 
hardly less great, for he knew when to stand still. He was 
familiar with southern England, and on his hurried march from 
the north he had mentally chosen his position. It was seven 
miles from Hastings and on the direct line from Hastings to 
London.  
Just below the summit of the hill of Senlac he arranged 
his men in order, those on either hand armed with clubs or 
javelins or forks or even stone hammers or sharp stakes. In the 
centre, where the first advance of the Normans was expected, 
were the veterans of the army, soldiers tried and true. Their 
shields and arms were much like those of the Normans, save 
for one terrible weapon, the great battle-axe. This had a longer 
handle than the Norman axe, and in the hands of a strong man 
it was the most deadly of weapons. In the midst of the veterans 
was the dragon banner of England, and the king's gonfalon 
bearing a warrior in full array. Near the banner stood Harold 
and his two faithful brothers, Gyrth and Leofwine. Stretching 
along in front of the line of soldiers was a strong palisade.  
This was the array which the Normans were advancing 
to attack. At the first sight of the English encampment they 
paused to put on their armor. William's coat of mail was 
brought out, and by mistake the front and back were reversed. 
The soldiers who were to bear their part so boldly in the battle 
trembled before the omen of evil, but again the quick-witted 
duke smiled at their fear and said:—  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
74
"I trust in God, not in signs and warnings; but if this is 
an omen of anything, it means that just as I change this 
hauberk about, so am I to be changed—changed from a duke 
into a king."  
William, too, had arranged his men in three divisions, 
the Normans in the centre. In the first line were the slingers 
and archers; then came the heavy-armed infantry; and behind 
them rode the knights in full armor with the lance and the 
sword. In the centre of the group the holy banner of the Pope 
waved in the breeze of the early morning, and under it were 
Robert of Mortain, a brave, faithful, kind-hearted man; and 
Odo, Bishop of Bayeux, who, forbidden by the church to bear 
sword or spear, solved the difficulty by arming himself with a 
war-club. These were the sons of Arletta and Heriwin of 
Conteville. Between them rode their half-brother, the great 
duke. No lance or javelin did he carry, but a heavy iron mace, 
as terrible a weapon as the axe of Harold.  
On toward the hill came the Norman array, but 
suddenly a man rode forth in front of the line. It was Taillefer, 
the minstrel. He sang songs of Roland and of Charlemagne; he 
made his horse curvet and caracole; he tossed his sword into 
the air and caught it as it fell. He chanted words of 
encouragement to the Normans and of threatening to the 
English. Both armies stood as if spellbound. The minstrel 
waved his sword to the duke.  
"Duke William," he said, "long ago, in happy Falaise, 
you promised me one day that whatever gift I should ask of 
you, you would grant. This is the gift—to strike the first blow 
against the usurper." Then, wheeling about, he dashed up to 
the English line, thrust his lance through one man, cut down 
another with his sword, and in a moment lay dead, struck 
down by many an English weapon.  
The Norman line advanced. Straight up the hill they 
charged. "God help us!" they shouted; while the English 
veterans cried, "Holy Cross! Holy Cross!" Harold had laid his 
plans well. The palisade, the wall of shields, the solid ranks of 
men—as long as these were unbroken the Norman onslaughts 
were as powerless as a shower beating upon an oak tree. Duke 
William and his men fell back. The ranks were in disorder. 
The whole invading force was panic-stricken.  
"Flee, my duke, save yourself!" shouted a soldier.  
"The duke is dead! The duke is dead!" cried some one, 
and the wild cry ran through the lines. William uncovered his 
face and pursued his men.  
"Come back," he called; "why do you flee? I live, and 
by the grace of God I will conquer. Come back, or with my 
own hand I will strike you down."  
At the head of the Normans William dashed forward 
for another attack. His horse fell under him. No matter, he 
could press nearer on foot. He struck down Gyrth, and his 
brother struck down Leofwine; and now the English fought for 
vengeance. William mounted another horse. It was slain. He 
mounted a third. The Norman forces pressed on. The wooden 
palisade was beginning to yield, but behind it were the deep 
ranks of brave Englishmen, and their firmly grasped shields 
were a stronger wall than any palisade.  
Something more than daring was needed. Part of the 
invading force advanced, turned, broke ranks and fled. The 
raw troops of the English rushed from their position and 
pursued, though the veterans at their left shouted "Back! 
back!" for this was the old trick which the Danes had played 
upon the English two centuries before, and which William had 
played upon the king of France. The Normans wheeled about, 
formed their lines anew, and cut down their scattered pursuers.  
It was almost twilight. Since nine in the morning the 
battle had raged. To attack the English behind the firm line of 
shields was like making an assault upon a fortress. William 
ordered his archers to shoot straight up into the air. There fell 
upon the English a storm of the deadly steel, the most terrible 
event of the day. Men held their shields high up to protect their 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
75
heads. Then was the moment for the Norman lance and the 
Norman sword.  
Harold fell, his eye pierced by an arrow. His own 
veterans fought to the death; not one was captured, but the less 
disciplined troops fled madly over the hills to the northward. 
They knew the country, but their pursuers were lost in the 
morass or fell headlong over the precipice; the land itself was 
avenging the death of her heroes. The English turned and took 
a fearful revenge on the invaders; but this was only a little 
company—the battle was lost. If those Englishmen who left 
their lines to pursue the pretended retreat of the enemy had 
been as true to Harold in deed as they were in heart, if they 
had been as obedient as they were courageous, then might the 
battle of Senlac have been an English victory instead of an 
English defeat.  
The body of Harold was probably buried by William's 
orders on the shore near Hastings, and sometime later removed 
to the dead king's church in Waltham; but there is a legend that 
many years after the battle there was seen in far-away Chester 
a monk blind in one eye, bent and bowed with trouble and 
sorrow, and that on his death-bed he owned that it was he who 
had once been called Harold and crowned king of England.  
After the battle the Normans returned to Hastings.  
"What is the duke going to do?" said one soldier. "Will 
he not march upon London?"  
"They say not," said another. "They say that he 
declares God has decided between him and Harold, and that he 
will remain in Hastings to receive the homage of the nobles of 
the land."  
"Will they come, do you think?"  
"Neither William nor I can tell that."  
"And what you two can't tell, no one knows," said the 
other with a laugh.  
The English knew that William might march directly 
upon London. A new king must be chosen at once, and the 
council met without delay. A strong leader might have united 
England and saved her; but there was none. Worse than that, 
there were several parties. One favored the child Edgar, son of 
the Outlaw; one said that the victory at Senlac was the 
judgment of God, and that to refuse to submit to William 
would be to resist God; and the northern earls stood aside, 
willing that the kingdom should be divided if only they might 
have a share. Finally Edgar was chosen as king; but he was a 
child, and the army had vanished.  
William waited five days in Hastings for the homage 
which did not come; then he set out on a march to the eastward 
as far as Dover, and from there directly to London. Wherever 
the English yielded, he was mild and gentle, and repaid 
generously any damage caused by his soldiers; but wherever 
there was the least resistance, he was so severe that many a 
town surrendered without a blow. The chief men of England 
met in London.  
"The Duke of Normandy is ravaging the country 
roundabout," said one. "Soon we shall have nothing around us 
but burned dwellings and fields laid waste. He is merciful 
where men yield, and brutal where they resist. I counsel that 
we yield."  
"Harold gave his life to repel the invader," said 
another, "and shall we so lightly resign the liberty for which he 
died?"  
"We do not resign it, it is already taken from us," said 
one; "the only question is whether we shall lose our lives as 
well as our liberty."  
"But is our liberty gone?" said another. "Canute came 
as a conqueror; but he ruled like an Englishman. Has not this 
duke made Normandy the power which she was not before his 
reign began?"  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
76
"True," said a thoughtful man who sat near him. 
"Canute came of a heathen race, but he was a good king. This 
William is a faithful son of the church and—"  
He may be a son of the church, but he is the grandson 
of a tanner," said one bitterly. "Such a disgrace has never 
before fallen upon the throne of England."  
"We cannot resist him," said one sadly; "we have no 
choice."  
"What should we do if we had a choice?" asked 
another, looking hopelessly about the room. "We chose 
Harold; he is dead, and there is no one to follow him. We 
chose Edgar, but he is a child. It may be that it would have 
been wise, even of our own free will, to choose this great 
commander, and hope that he would do for us what he has 
already done for Normandy."  
So it was that the crown was offered to William. He 
had fought for it fiercely, and he had put aside indignantly the 
suggestion that he should make a compromise for gold and 
treasure; but now that it was offered, he hesitated. He would 
have no weak point by which any one else might demand it of 
him as he had demanded it of Harold. He called a council of 
his chief officers.  
"England is mine," he said. "God has chosen between 
me and the usurper. In time to come, I shall rule every sod and 
every stream; but now my word is obeyed and my voice is 
feared over but a small part of the land. Shall I take the crown 
before I have won it?"  
"Then would a king ever have a crown?" asked a keen-
eyed councillor. "Is a king ever sure of his kingdom? Can he 
ever say that no insurrection will arise, no revolt that, however 
small, shall yet make him the less king until it be subdued?"  
"True," said the duke thoughtfully; "perhaps you are 
right, though when I am once come to my kingdom, I think 
there will be no revolts to fear. There is another reason why I 
should wish to delay the crowning. Do you remember that 
over the sea is your duchess, my own dearly beloved wife? It 
is she who has freed me from the care of my duchy that I 
might cross the water and claim that which is my right. 
Whatever I win of honors and glory belongs to her, and I 
would gladly have her beside me to share my crown."  
"If you are crowned at once," said another councillor, 
"it will be taking what is your own as soon as it is possible; but 
if you delay till you have conquered England step by step, then 
will you seem not like the rightful king kept out of his own for 
a time, but like an invader who seizes the land, field by field, 
and when he has grasped it all, then says that he is king."  
Arrangements were made for the coronation. It had 
long been the custom for the Archbishop of Canterbury to 
place the crown upon the head of the newly chosen king; but 
there was some doubt whether Stigand of Canterbury had been 
made an archbishop with all the due formalities, and as 
William meant that no one should ever question his legal right 
to the throne, he chose the Bishop of York to lay upon his 
head the new crown all ablaze with jewels which had been 
made for this occasion.  
English and Normans filled Westminster Abbey, 
waiting eagerly for the glittering procession. The clergy in 
their richest vestments, the English lords in their splendid 
mantles gorgeous in coloring and sparkling with gems, the 
royal guard in their brightly burnished armor, swept up toward 
the altar. There was a moment's break in the long line, and 
people held their breath to watch, for towering above the 
spectators, handsome, grave, and stately, came the great duke 
himself. On one side of him walked Stigand; on the other, 
Ealdred, Bishop of York.  
The Te Deum had been sung; there was silence. Then 
Ealdred of York and the Bishop of Coutances, who had come 
with William from Normandy, took their stand, one on either 
side of the altar. William came forward and stood before the 
multitude. Then spoke Ealdred of York:—  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
77
"This man who now stands before you is William, 
Duke of Normandy. I present him to you with the blessing of 
the church upon him. Is it your will, O you people of England, 
that the crown of England shall be laid upon his head?" Then 
spoke the Bishop of Coutances:—  
"And you, O you Normans, is it your will that he who 
is your duke shall rule a twofold empire? that he who governs 
the duchy of Normandy shall become the sovereign of the 
people of England?"  
"Yes! yes! King William! King William!" shouted the 
whole assembly. But William, who had so many times faced 
death on the field of battle, turned pale and trembled. There 
were wild shouts of "Fire! fire!" outside the church. Was it the 
Norman guards who heard the cries of assent within and 
mistook the clamor for an attack upon the duke, or was it one 
last effort of the English people to rid themselves of this 
foreign ruler? No one knows, but the buildings around the 
church had been fired, and the blaze shone through the many-
colored windows and cast a strange, weird light upon those 
who were within.  
The solemn ritual went on. There was prayer and litany 
and chanting of psalms. There was swinging of censers, till 
rich clouds of incense rose far above the altar. William kissed 
the cross which had been carried before him when he entered 
the church. Then he laid his hand upon the Gospels; and it may 
be that there came to him a thought of the oath which he had 
driven Harold to take, and that he trembled at the memory of 
this rather than at the fire and the tumult.  
'Do you solemnly swear," said the bishop, "that you 
will rule your people according to the laws of the land?  
"Do you swear that you will do justice and mercy to all 
that abide within your realm?  
"Do you swear to be true to the church, to watch over 
her interests, to guard and defend her?"  
William, still trembling, made the sacred promise. 
Then was he anointed with the consecrated oil, the glittering 
crown was laid upon his head, and the Duke of Normandy was 
also King of England.  
The coronation should have been followed by the 
ceremony of paying homage, but this had been prevented by 
the fire. William was as wise as he was bold, and he thought it 
best to withdraw to Barking; and there it was that one Saxon 
noble after another came to become "his man." William 
received them as his own beloved subjects, invited them to 
hunt and to hawk, and treated them like favored guests. As a 
rule, the nobles dwelling in that part of England which had 
submitted paid William a fee and received their lands again as 
a fresh grant from him. The northern earls seem to have been 
convinced that resistance would be useless, and they, too, did 
homage. William showed them special courtesy, and even 
promised one of them his little daughter in marriage. 
Nevertheless, he did not trust them to return to their distant 
north, where they might easily arouse rebellion, but he gave 
them each some high office that would keep them in his sight.  
To the child Edgar, and his mother and his sisters, 
William did not fail to show honor; and for the boy himself, 
who came so near to being king, he seemed to feel a sincere 
affection. The whole policy of William was to shed no blood, 
to arouse no unnecessary ill-will, to be just and even generous 
to those who yielded to him; but to be mercilessly severe in his 
treatment of those who opposed him.  
But there was a crowd of nobles from Normandy and 
the neighboring countries, and they would not fail to say:—  
"King William, when we helped you to gain possession 
of your kingdom, you said, 'The land that I win, it shall be 
yours.' Give us our land as you promised us then," and 
William gave.  
According to the ideas of the times, all land belonged 
to the king and was loaned by him to vassals on condition of 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
78
their fealty. Now William was the king, crowned and anointed; 
therefore all who had opposed him were rebels and their land 
belonged to him. Godwin's family held large tracts, and these 
he might lawfully appropriate. Besides this, there were many 
estates whose owners and owners' sons had died at Senlac, and 
these estates would return to the sovereign. William did not try 
to make the English poor and the Normans rich; but he took 
from those who opposed him and gave to those who were 
loyal to him.  
The king must have a well-fortified place of residence 
in London, and so it was that he began to build the Tower of 
London. At the same time, he gave the city a special charter. 
"Ye shall be worthy to enjoy all the laws ye were worth in 
King Edward's days," said William, and he kept his word. 
Nevertheless, the strong fortress arose, and it was well 
garrisoned with men from Normandy and the districts lying 
around it.  
But the king of England was also Duke of Normandy, 
and across the Channel were lands which ought not to be 
longer without their lord. William had landed in October and 
been crowned at Christmas. More than two months had passed 
since then. He began to feel that he might spend Easter in 
Normandy with his beloved wife and children.  
Nothing could seem wiser than his plan for the 
government of the kingdom during his absence. Those left in 
control were his half-brother Odo, the warlike Bishop of 
Bayeux, he who kept the letter of the church law by wearing 
no sword, but followed the desires of his own spirit by 
mounting a war-horse and galloping to battle armed with a 
war-club; and the second, William Fitz-Osbern, the old and 
tried friend who had first urged him to make his attack upon 
England, and who had tricked the Norman nobles not only into 
aiding him, but into aiding him to such an extent as they would 
never have dreamed of doing.  
Odo and Fitz-Osbern were strong men, but trouble 
might arise. Since William would not be in the kingdom to 
suppress any revolt, he very wisely carried those who might 
become leaders of a revolt with him to Normandy—not as 
captives, by any means, but as an escort of honor. Each one of 
the most dangerous of the great men among the English had 
received a message somewhat like this:—  
"William, king of England, is about to cross the sea. He 
would be escorted by men of mark in the kingdom over which 
he rules, and therefore he sends you courteous invitation to 
visit with him his duchy of Normandy."  
Probably every one who received this message knew 
that he was to be taken to Normandy as a hostage for the good 
behavior of the men who were left behind. If William had 
demanded their attendance, they might have refused, though 
the refusal would have been a signal for a revolt; but he had 
invited, and invited with such flattering courtesy, such 
apparent confidence in their loyalty, that to refuse would be 
not only ungracious, but a most unwise confession of hostility. 
They accepted the invitation; and the ship "Mora," that six 
months before had brought William and his army to the shores 
of England, now set out for a return, bearing not only a king of 
England, but a company of English nobles who to do him 
honor had left their own land and were coming to Normandy.  
Nor was English homage the only treasure on board the 
ships. Beautiful vessels of gold and of silver, adorned with 
precious stones, finer jewelry, more exquisite work of enamel 
and filigree of gold than the Normans could make in their own 
land, hanging lamps of iron and of the precious metals, the 
finest cloth of woollen and of linen, robes and vestments rich 
with embroidery, tapestries shining with gold thread, curtains 
made precious by the work of the needle—with such things as 
these the ships were loaded when he who had left his native 
land a duke returned to it a king. No wonder that he received a 
welcome. Here was the man who by his own hand had won 
glory for himself, had honored his duchy, had enriched his 
nobles, and had, as the weapon of the church, punished one 
whom the church deemed deserving of punishment.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
79
CHAPTER XIV 
"WILL YOU YIELD?" 
It was Lent when William landed in Normandy, but it 
became a season of rejoicing, for the whole land was wild with 
delight at the success of the duke. The Normans declared that 
he had brought over from England three times as much gold as 
there was in the whole of Gaul. Never had they seen such 
robes of state and such vestments for the church. They were 
especially curious to see the English nobles with their blue 
eyes, light flowing hair, long mustaches, and names that no 
Frenchman could pronounce. Most interesting of them all was 
the young Edgar. William did not recognize his claim to the 
throne, but he looked upon the boy as ranking highest among 
the English nobles, and treated him with special respect as 
well as affection.  
The great celebration of Easter was to be held at 
Fécamp, the pretty town nestling by the little stream that 
flowed between the two ranges of hills. Here the great mass of 
the treasures and curiosities was brought, and here assembled 
William and his family, the English nobles, the Norman 
knights and higher clergy, and William's many guests from 
among his allies who had helped him to win these treasures.  
At Fécamp was the old church built by William's great-
grandfather, Richard the Fearless, and here was the Easter 
rejoicing to be. Silken tapestries worked by English hands 
hung from the roof-beams. Flowers were placed in every little 
recess. In at the eastern windows the morning sunlight shone 
through the stained glass and cast slowly moving flecks of 
brilliant color upon the white and gold vestments of the clergy.  
All was light and brilliancy. The gleam of the precious 
stones that adorned the holy vessels of the altar was reflected 
in the vivid coloring of the dresses of the ladies of the court. 
One wore a long green garment edged with a band of gold 
embroidery. Over this was a tunic of deep blue with a gold belt 
fastened with a red cord and tassel, while a red mantle, with 
lining of white silk, served as the "dominical," or covering 
which women must wear when receiving the Holy 
Communion. Another wore a tunic of soft cream-colored 
woollen with a red belt. Her blue mantle was clasped at the 
neck with a golden clasp set with garnets. In her hand she 
carried a small blue bag. Over her head and falling down her 
back was a long white veil. Beside her was the wife of a noble 
in a pink tunic edged with purple and gold. Her mantle was of 
purple lined with light blue, and about her neck was a double 
string of softly gleaming pearls. Women usually wore their 
hair either flowing loosely or in four long braids falling in 
front, two on either side of the face. Often their foreheads were 
all ablaze with bands of jewels. The men were hardly less 
gorgeous, for their mantles were of every color that could be 
dreamed of, and they were fastened at the shoulder by clasps 
set with jewels from which the light flashed at every 
movement.  
Most of William's life had been spent on the battle-
field, in besieging the retreat of an enemy, or in the gloom of 
some dull gray castle, and it is no wonder that the hour of 
safety and quiet in the midst of joyful faces and brilliant gala 
attire gave him a happiness which it was not often his lot to 
enjoy.  
After the Easter service came the feast, and that was 
splendid with the spoils of England. The English guests 
winced when they saw the drinking cups made of the horns of 
the wild bull, and bound top and bottom with bands of gold, 
and the golden dishes, incrusted with glowing jewels of red 
and blue and green and yellow, which had been familiar to 
them in other scenes of feasting, brought forth to grace this 
celebration of their conqueror. They must bear and be silent; 
the time might come—who could tell?  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
80
Two months later the church which Matilda had built 
at Caen was to be dedicated, and this was another splendid 
ceremonial. Before the voyage to England, William and 
Matilda had vowed to devote their little daughter Cecily to a 
convent life, and on this day the child was brought to the altar, 
solemnly set apart from her brothers and sisters, and specially 
given up to the service of the church.  
The whole summer was a time of triumph and jubilee 
for duke and duchess. From one end of the duchy to the other 
they travelled, receiving everywhere the highest honor that the 
people could pay, and leaving all behind them rejoicing in the 
generosity of the gifts that William bestowed upon nobles and 
clergy, such gifts "as neither king nor emperor had ever made 
before," say the old chroniclers with delight. To the knights he 
gave horses richly caparisoned, each bearing a helmet and a 
shining coat of mail. There were beautiful mantles and 
jewelled swords, and hangings for their cold stone walls. Well 
might England tremble, for there seemed no end to his 
treasures. To the churches of Normandy he gave ingots of 
gold; copies of the Gospels, beautifully written on vellum, 
whose covers were inlaid with gold and precious stones; relics 
of saints and martyrs in cases that were worth a knight's 
ransom; censers of glowing copper of most elaborate 
workmanship, made in close imitation of the temple at 
Jerusalem or the great church at Rome. To the Pope were sent 
still greater gifts, and among them was the captured banner of 
Harold, representing to the Pope his own increasing power and 
the fealty of him who was the most powerful sovereign of 
western Europe.  
William had wished to remain in Normandy and spend 
Christmas with his family, but there was trouble in England. 
Although he was called king of the whole country, his actual 
rule was over only the southeastern portion. To leave a land, 
nominally his kingdom, but practically unsubmissive, in 
charge of two men who, however firm rulers they might be, 
despised the people who were in their care, and who permitted 
the Normans to rob and oppress them as they would, could 
hardly fail to bring about revolt, and revolt there was from one 
end of the land to the other.  
Fortunately for William, this rebellion had no general 
leader, and the revolters were not united. The feeling of 
bitterness was universal, but it showed itself first in one place 
and then in another, so that William could deal with the 
uprisings one by one. Matilda was already addressed as 
Queen, and he had hoped to carry her with him to England that 
she might be crowned; but this was no time for any coronation 
ceremonies, so once more he left her in Normandy as regent. 
His son Robert was thirteen, and William directed that she 
should rule in the name of the boy. Then he set sail for his 
kingdom.  
He did not meet the English as a conqueror who had 
returned hastily from another land to suppress an uprising, but 
as their king who was ready to show kindness to his loyal 
subjects. He held the usual Christmas court, and received with 
much courtesy all who came to it. He listened to their 
suggestions, and as far as possible gave them whatever they 
asked.  
The centre of the revolt in the west was the city of 
Exeter, and Exeter had shut itself up behind its strong old 
walls with their towers and battlements, and had made no 
acknowledgment of the Norman invader as its lawful king. It 
was a rich, haughty old city, with citizens who were proud of 
their independence, and were determined not to yield to this 
"no man's son" from over the seas.  
These citizens went at the business of a revolt with 
some idea of system and union. There were many foreign 
merchants dwelling in Exeter, and these they induced to join 
the struggle. To the neighboring districts they sent messages 
urging them to unite against the invader. In Exeter dwelt the 
mother of Harold, and her mourning for her three sons was a 
constant reminder of the destruction and death that had come 
with the coming of William.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
81
To this proud old city William sent a message:—  
"William, King of England, asks that his city of Exeter 
receive him within its walls, and that its citizens swear to be 
faithful to him." Then the citizens replied boldly:—  
"We will pay the tribute that we have been used to pay, 
but we will not take any oath to the king, nor will we admit 
him within our walls."  
"No subjects do I receive on such conditions," 
answered William, and rode straight toward Exeter, ravaging 
the land about the city.  
"The king is encamped for the night but four miles 
away," reported a spy. Then there was much debate within the 
town about what should be done.  
"Our walls are thick and strong," said one; "let him 
come."  
"The king is a terrible man," said another; "it is of no 
use to resist him. Never yet did he fail to work his will in 
whatever way he would."  
"It may be," said one of the older men, "that he does 
not understand that our city has always been independent. Let 
us send a company forth to meet him and parley with him; 
then can we tell better what there is for us to do." So a 
company of the older men went forth to meet the king and 
parley with him; but when they saw the array of soldiers, they 
hesitated; and when in the midst of the soldiers, with a strong 
guard on either hand, they saw the hostages, young men of 
their city, who had been sent to dwell with Harold as a proof 
of the good-will of the town, they stopped short.  
"That is my own son," said one of the men in horror, 
"the one in the blue tunic and the red mantle. Who knows what 
this cruel king will do to our children?"  
"He is angry," said another; "parleying will do no 
good." They went forward, but at the first sight of William's 
face they saw that parley would, indeed, be useless. For a 
moment they were silent. Then the father of the hostage came 
forward trembling and said:—  
"King William, we beg your forgiveness for the wild 
speeches that have been made. We are sent by the citizens of 
Exeter to meet you. The town will yield and open her gates 
when you come near."  
"Is this the speech of all?" asked William sternly.  
"Of all," they answered.  
"Then I will go forward, and if the city shall fling wide 
its gates and, man by man, shall swear fealty to me, then will I 
grant it a free pardon."  
The little group went back half in hope and half in fear.  
"What did he say?" called the citizens, crowding 
eagerly about them; but when they knew, then were they 
indignant.  
"You were not sent to surrender, but to parley," they 
said angrily.  
"But he has our hostages, and one of them is my own 
boy," said the old man huskily.  
"Your boy is no more to us than another," said the 
citizens brutally. "You have betrayed us. He is only the son of 
a traitor. Let what will come to a traitor's son." Then they piled 
up arrows and great stones and strengthened their walls and 
their gates. So it was that when William came near, the gates 
were closed, and on the top of the wall were men who shouted 
speeches of defiance to their king. William's face grew white 
with anger.  
"Bring forward a hostage," he ordered, and the young 
man in the red mantle was led forward in the sight of the 
citizens.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
82
"Put out his eyes," said the king. The soldiers hesitated. 
"Obey," said the king. "It may be that the city will yield. Let 
one die to save many."  
 
 
 
HEAVY STONES WERE ROLLED FROM THE WALLS  
An old man on the wall was listening intensely. "Take 
me," he cried, "King William, take me, and let my boy go." 
The agonized voice reached even to the ears of the king, but he 
shook his head. The old man's clasp on the battlement relaxed, 
and he fell dead at the foot of the wall.  
"Will you yield?" called the king, but the citizens 
answered by a volley of arrows.  
"Fire!" said William, and a fearful return was made. 
The citizens shot again, and were jubilant as they saw one 
soldier after another fall.  
"Bring boiling water and stones and spears and battle-
axes," the citizens shouted, for little companies of soldiers 
were creeping up to the wall. They held shields over their 
heads, and the shields were needed, for arrows were fired 
straight down at them, heavy stones were rolled from the 
walls, and boiling water was poured upon them; but the arrows 
glanced off from the stout shields, the heavy stones rolled 
harmless to the ground, and even the boiling water did little 
injury. These men were dragging ladders, and slowly and 
carefully they put them up against the wall. Then, still under 
the shelter of the shields, the soldiers swarmed up boldly; but 
the citizens thrust at them with their spears, and swung their 
terrible battle-axes. Not a man could get a footing on the walls.  
While all this hand-to-hand fighting was going on, 
William's men had brought up the unwieldy machines for 
slinging stones, and the arbalests, great crossbows on wheels, 
that would fire arrows with violence enough to send them 
through several persons. But the citizens, too, had slings and 
arbalests, and after seventeen days of such warfare William 
seemed no nearer victory than at first.  
Meanwhile, afar off from the fighting, some of the 
soldiers had been digging a deep hole in the ground. Then they 
dug a tunnel from this hole toward the city, supporting the 
earth above them by strong wooden props. When they were 
sure that they were well under the wall, all the men left but 
one, and he soon followed them, setting fire to each prop as he 
went. Then the soldiers were drawn up nearer the city.  
"See," cried the citizens on the wall, "he has stopped 
fighting. He will yield. William the conqueror is conquered. 
Let us—" But the wall was trembling under their feet. It 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
83
shuddered and fell. The king's soldiers dashed through the 
breach, and the city was taken.  
"What shall we do?" wailed the citizens. "He shows no 
mercy. Remember Alençon."  
"In the name of the church we will go to him and beg 
for mercy," said a priest; and out of the open gates there went 
forth a pitiable company. First came the clergy bearing the 
cross, the Gospels, and the sacred vessels and relics of the 
church. After them came old men and fair young maidens. 
Last came the fighters, and with them were their wives and 
little children, and they all fell down before the king and 
begged for mercy.  
Whether from policy or from kindness, William 
pardoned the repentant city, and forbade his soldiers to touch 
the property of the citizens. The only penalty that he 
demanded was an increase of tribute money and the 
destruction of two score of houses to make room for the castle 
which he intended to build. William marched on to the west 
through Devonshire and Cornwall. The land of those who 
rebelled was confiscated, and nearly all Cornwall, besides 
many rich manors of Devonshire and Somerset, was given to 
his brother Robert.  
At last the king ventured to send for his queen. Once 
more his favorite "Mora" crossed the Channel, this time with a 
noble embassy, and returned with Matilda and a goodly 
company of knights and lords and ladies of the court. Some 
three centuries earlier, because of the crime of a wicked queen, 
it had been decreed that she who held the highest place in the 
land should be known as the king's wife, and not as the queen; 
but all this was forgotten, and Matilda was crowned at 
Westminster.  
After the coronation there was a feast, and into the 
feasting hall came a newly appointed officer known as the 
"champion." Straight up and down the hall he rode, calling in a 
loud voice, "If any one denies that our most gracious sovereign 
lord William and his spouse Matilda are king and queen of 
England, he is a false-hearted traitor and a liar; and here I, as 
champion, do challenge him to single combat."  
Several months later two thegns were talking of the 
coronation.  
"No one ever heard before of a champion to prove that 
the king was king," said one.  
"No one would ever dare to say that he was not king," 
said the other.  
"Not without an army," said the first.  
"It may be that some day we shall have a king who was 
born among us, even if he is not of our own people."  
"Yes, after we and our children and our children's 
children are dead."  
"Before then, perhaps. Have you not heard that in our 
own Yorkshire the queen has given birth to a son?"  
"No," said the other; "is it true?"  
"It is true, and something else is true, for the king says 
this boy shall be brought up as an Englishman, and shall learn 
to speak our language as well as that smooth, silly talk that 
they use at court."  
"The king knows no English."  
"True, but he says he will learn it."  
"And so he would if it could be learned with a sword 
and a spear."  
All of England south of the Thames was now under 
William's control, but there was trouble in the north. The 
northern earls, Edwin and Morcar, were at William's court, as 
was the boy Edgar. To Edgar, Morcar came one day and 
whispered:—  
"Do you wish to be king?"  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
84
"Yes," said the boy.  
"The north is free, and the north calls for you as its 
king. Will you go?" The boy agreed, and he and the two earls 
stole away from the court. Edwin had a special grievance 
because King William had promised him one of his daughters 
in marriage and had not yet been willing to give the earl his 
bride. William pursued, capturing one town after another on 
his way. The earls yielded, and Edgar fled with a third earl to 
Scotland.  
Wherever William went, he conquered; and wherever 
he conquered, he distributed the forfeited land among his loyal 
subjects, generally Normans. All over the country rose the 
heavy, thick-walled castles with their square dungeon towers, 
saying ever to the helpless people, "Submit or be crushed."  
On and on marched William. Nottingham yielded, and 
at York the trembling citizens hastened to meet him even 
before he had come near the walls of the city, and brought 
hostages and begged him to accept the keys of their city gates. 
How much against their will this was, is shown by the 
eagerness with which they admitted Edgar and his party only a 
few months later.  
Now York was as important a town in the north as 
Exeter was in the south, and the king again hastened north and 
took a fearful revenge on the city. The story is that he would 
have marched on to Durham at break of day, but there was no 
break of day, for so heavy a darkness shut down upon the land 
that no man could see his neighbor. While the army stood in 
fear of what might happen, a voice chanted from out of the 
gloom:—  
"Durham is the town of the holy Saint Cuthbert, and he 
it is who forbids you to harm his sacred city or even to enter 
it." It is just possible that William did not care to go any 
farther at that time, and had arranged the matter of the ghostly 
voice coming from the darkness, as he did once before when 
he wished to drive King Henry from Normandy. At any rate, 
he returned to London, but to a lonely palace, for the queen 
and the royal children had returned to Normandy, whose 
claims could be no longer neglected.  
William might well have felt discouraged if he had 
known what the feeling was, for the sons of Harold came from 
Ireland and made an attempt to enter England from the west; 
and in the north the English were joyful over the coming of the 
Danes, whom they had been urging to join them as allies.  
The boy Edgar and Waltheof, Earl of Northampton, 
were at the head of the army that now marched upon York. 
They captured the city and the Norman garrison; and if they 
had only been united, they might possibly have held the north 
against the king. As it was, they soon separated; it may be 
because of William's secret bribes to the Danes. Earl Waltheof 
yielded and paid homage to the king. William restored him to 
his estate and soon afterward gave him his niece Judith in 
marriage.  
William had conquered the north, but the English who 
dwelt there might revolt at any moment, and at any moment 
the Humber might be filled with Danish ships. William's one 
purpose was to be master of England. Be the means harsh or 
gentle, he would be master. Never again should the north 
revolt. His favorite weapon was starvation rather than the 
sword. Starvation should meet every one who might venture to 
oppose his rule. He swept over the land like a flame of fire. To 
and fro, hither and thither, went the king and his men, leaving 
behind them ruined crops, smoking storehouses, and 
slaughtered animals. Property of every kind was burned. 
Pestilence came. Men sickened or starved, or became slaves to 
anyone that would give them a mouthful of food. Death was 
everywhere, but William had had his way, and never again did 
the north revolt.  
And in York, the miserable, half-burned city, did the 
king of England determine to celebrate his Christmas. It 
should be kept with all ceremony, too, and the crown and the 
royal robes were brought to York, and within the walls of the 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
85
half-ruined church, blackened by the fires of warfare, and with 
ruin and desolation and death on every side as far as the eye 
could see, the priests chanted the Christmas songs of gladness, 
and the king wore the crown which had been made sure by so 
fearful a sacrifice.  
CHAPTER XV 
A STERN RULE 
The king was seated firmly on his throne. The south 
was submissive; the north was a wilderness. Far to the 
northwest was one last stronghold, the city of Chester, and 
William now set out to subdue it, and so complete the circle of 
his conquests. He was at York, and it was not long after 
Christmas, in a bitter northern winter; but William gave the 
order to march to Chester, and the army marched.  
It was a terrible march. There were no roads. It was a 
wild, rough country at best, with streams, forests, valleys, and 
jagged hills, difficult in summer even for fresh, enthusiastic 
troops; but in the winter to make a way through valleys choked 
with snow, over hills bleak and slippery, and through forests 
that were masses of icy thorns and tangled icy boughs, would 
have been hard enough for men born and bred in the north. It 
was doubly hard for the soldiers from the sunny land of 
France, wearied by the previous campaigns, their first 
enthusiasm exhausted by this never satisfied commander, who 
was ever crying, "On, on," and it is no wonder that the 
murmurs grew louder and louder.  
"I wish I was back in my own Anjou," said one soldier 
under his breath to a man from Brittany.  
"Brittany isn't so bad a place," said the Breton. "We 
had enough to eat there, and here we may live on fogs and 
icicles or else starve."  
"If any one denies that I, a man from Maine, am a good 
fighter, he is a false-hearted traitor and a liar," said a man from 
Maine, looking cautiously around him, and then strutting up 
and down in grotesque imitation of the "champion." Every one 
laughed, but one said:—  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
86
"There's as much earnest as fun in that, my friend from 
Maine; for not many men would have been willing to go up 
the scaling ladder first as you did at Exeter."  
"Then if you will agree that I am not a coward, I will 
say that I don't want to fight any more of these English. They 
strike like demons."  
"I'd as soon fight a demon as anything else," said the 
man of Anjou; "and I'd go up two scaling ladders to eat a good 
dinner in a comfortable hall with a red fire on the hearth and 
plenty of tapestry to keep the wind out." More and more did 
such feelings spread, till at last some one was found bold 
enough to say to the king:—  
"King William, your soldiers would speak with you." 
Then the king went forth to his men, and one said, though not 
without some trembling:—  
"King William, we are tired of hunger and cold and of 
this continual marching on and on. Your orders are too hard 
for men to carry out. Give us our dismissal." Not a moment 
did the king hesitate. He stood before them and said:—  
"You who are faithful, follow me. You who are 
cowards, get you gone; it is nothing to me whether you follow 
or not." Now the soldiers could not make their way to France 
alone and without the resources of the king. They had hoped to 
make him turn back, or at least, to offer them higher wages, 
but the plan had failed. There was nothing to do but to follow 
him and by their bravery to try to make him forget their 
attempted desertion. They went on through forest and marsh, 
in the midst of snow and icy rain, and Chester was taken. The 
army marched south. On the plain of Sarum William reviewed 
his troops and rewarded them.  
England was quiet, but it was not all peace and 
happiness through the land. There was discontent and bitter 
hatred and sometimes revolt, but William was king; and revolt 
was no longer against a man seeking power, but against a man 
holding power. William was never intentionally cruel. He had 
no wish to maim, to starve, to slaughter; but having set before 
him the single aim of subduing England, he would allow 
nothing to stand in his way. He would tear down a rebellious 
castle and put its defenders to the sword; but afterward, and 
almost without being asked, he would grant a free pardon to 
the man who had closed the castle gates against him.  
Now that he was fairly settled in England, swarms of 
people came from the continent; for they looked upon England 
as a new country where, if a man was only a good soldier and 
vassal, he might receive broad stretches of land. Whole 
families came. An old rhyme says:—  
"William de Coningsby 
Came out of Brittany 
With his wife Tiffany 
And his maide Maufas 
And his dogge Hardigras." 
William never despised the English. He tried to learn 
their language, encouraged marriages between English and 
Normans, and when he was not engaged in subduing his new 
people, he did all that he could to make them friendly with his 
old subjects. Unfortunately, many of the conqueror's army and 
of those that came after them were men of low birth, and the 
English despised them even while they yielded.  
"These adventurers," said one English noble to another, 
"they are a rabble, and they follow a low-born king."  
"There is no place here for an Englishman," said the 
other, "and I mean to take my own good sword and cut my 
way to the east. The emperor will always give an Englishman 
a welcome."  
"So say I," said the other heartily. "My country is mine 
no longer; it belongs to these vagabonds. I will go to Denmark. 
The Danes were better friends to us than this great Norman 
with his haughty crew." So it was that while many people 
came to England, many left their country for foreign lands. 
Even if a man had sworn fealty to the king and was in his own 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
87
house, he knew not when some wild band of marauders might 
come upon him,—against the king's will, of course, but the 
king was far away. It was better to defend one's goods than to 
try to restore them; and so the houses were filled with 
weapons, and the doors were barred and bolted.  
Many hid themselves in the wide tracts of forests. 
Sometimes whole families with their servants, if they had any, 
went to the wild-wood. "The conqueror has stolen from us, 
why should we not take back what we can?" they said; and so 
they fell upon the Normans who came their way. The usual 
punishments did so little in preventing these assassinations 
that a law was made imposing a fine upon the people of every 
district in which a murdered man was found. To avoid this fine 
the English would, whenever a man was found dead, destroy 
his clothes and weapons, and then they would declare that the 
body was that of an Englishman. To meet this state of things, a 
law was made that every man found murdered should be 
regarded as a Frenchman unless two men and two women, all 
near relatives of the murdered man, should swear that he was 
English.  
Although the conquered people never felt the least 
affection for William, they admitted that he was a just man, if 
he was severe; but for his companions they seem to have felt 
only scorn and hatred. They were willing to fight under the 
king, and especially if they could fight Frenchmen, for they 
looked upon all who spoke the French language as belonging 
to their oppressors. William had subdued English with French, 
and now he would subdue French with English, for Maine had 
revolted. Le Mans, which he had conquered ten years before, 
was determined to be free.  
Matilda seems never to have made any long stay in 
England, for so long as William must be away from his duchy, 
so long must she and Robert stay in Normandy to rule over it. 
It was at their call that William crossed the Channel. He 
appeared before Le Mans with his army, and the conquest was 
only the old story repeated; for instead of fighting, he appealed 
to the men of Le Mans to surrender, that there might be no 
bloodshed. After one day's deliberation the town yielded, and 
William was as merciful as usual to his fallen foe.  
The one instance in which he seems to have shown no 
mercy is in the case of the great Earl Waltheof, to whom he 
had given his niece Judith in marriage. It seems that Roger, 
son of the king's old friend, Fitz-Osbern, wished his sister to 
marry a Breton noble. For some reason the king forbade the 
marriage. Nevertheless, there was a great wedding, and many 
prominent men were present, both English and Normans, 
although they knew that it was against the king's will. Very 
bold were they in their speeches.  
"He has stolen our land from us," said a Saxon.  
"And we," said a Norman, "what have we received? 
We put him on a throne—the grandson of a tanner on a 
throne—and he has rewarded us with half-barren tracts of 
land. The land in Normandy is rich with vineyards and with 
grain fields. This reward of ours is rich in fogs and forests." 
Then arose another Norman and turned to Earl Waltheof, who 
had sat silent, pouring the last drops of wine in his horn into 
another and then back again.  
"Earl Waltheof," said he, "all that you English need is a 
man to lead. You are the man. If you and we two Normans 
unite, we can bring back the days of Edward. We need do no 
harm to the king, but we can prevent the oppressions of his 
nobles. Moreover, William is in Normandy, he is fighting, and 
he may never be able to return, and—"  
"William not return?" said another Norman; "he has 
spent his life in battles and never yet has he received a wound. 
He'll return."  
"Let him, when we are ready to receive him," said the 
first Norman. "There may be another Senlac, and if there is we 
will finish Battle Abbey, but it shall be in memory of 
William's defeat, not of his victory. We do not all love him 
any more than you do." Waltheof seemed to have heard not a 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
88
word of this speech. At last he yielded against his will, and 
troops began to assemble.  
"Do not hasten to cross the seas," wrote William's chief 
adviser to the absent king. "It would be a shame for you to 
have to come to us to drive out a handful of traitors and 
robbers." The royal forces met the conspirators and subdued 
them after one battle. Waltheof might have escaped, but 
trusting in his comparative innocence, he crossed the Channel, 
went straight to William, and begged for his forgiveness. 
Instead of receiving pardon, he was executed—the last of the 
English earls, and the only man executed, save for crime, in 
the whole of William's reign.  
"And it was all his wicked wife," said an English 
thegn; "she wanted to get rid of her husband, and she told King 
William falsely that the earl had engaged a Danish fleet to 
come over to fight against him."  
"King William made her marry Waltheof," said 
another; "she did not wish to be his wife."  
"He was the best man in England," said the first.  
"Perhaps she is sorry now. At any rate, it was she who 
besought the king to let the earl's body be taken from the hole 
between the cross-roads and buried at the convent of 
Croyland."  
"She was afraid his spirit would trouble her," said the 
first, "and I don't wonder. The cousin of a friend of my wife's 
knows a man who has been at the convent, and he said that 
this Judith came there and brought a rich silken drapery, costly 
enough to be a prince's ransom, to throw over his tomb; but 
that whenever she tried to lay it down, an arm that no one 
could see would thrust it back as if a strong wind had blown it; 
and he says that at last she dropped the cloth on the ground 
and would never come near the tomb again."  
And what had become of Edgar, heir to the English 
throne, last of the male line of the old royal family? For a long 
while he seemed to be at the call of any one that wanted to use 
him as a figurehead for a revolt. Apparently William had no 
special fear of him so long as he remained in England, or was 
visiting his sister who had married the king of Scotland; but, 
finally, King Philip of France, not so young as he was, but 
fully as pert, and as jealous of William as ever, invited Edgar 
to make his home in a French castle; then, although William 
did not interfere, he kept a close watch of the English prince.  
Edgar set out for France in a finely decorated vessel 
laden with beautiful furs and many other rich presents from 
the Scotch king. If the vessel had been as seaworthy as it was 
handsome, the story might have had a different ending; but a 
great storm arose, and the ship was driven upon the coast of 
England. Without the load of gifts, Edgar and his men made 
their way back to Scotland as best they could.  
"It is the will of God," said the Scotch king. "He has 
sent His storm that you may not resist the man whom He has 
chosen to rule. Do not fight against the decree of God, but 
send messengers to William and ask that there may be peace 
between you."  
Edgar yielded, as he always did to whatever the last 
speaker advised. The messengers were sent, and King William 
replied with the utmost friendliness.  
"I would gladly show all kindness," said William, "to 
him who is first of the English nobles." Then William sent an 
honorable embassy to bring Edgar to Normandy. Edgar was 
now the guest of a king, and he travelled in as much luxury as 
the times would permit. At every castle on the way a feast was 
made for him and his party. This time the sea was kind to him, 
and he came to the Norman court in safety. The king gave him 
one silver pound a day, and for many years he lived at the 
Norman court, satisfied with his silver pound, his dogs and 
horses, and the small manors which William allowed him in 
England.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
89
There were three of William's deeds that especially 
aroused the wrath of the people,—the law of the curfew bell, 
the forming of the New Forest, and the compiling of the 
Doomsday Book. The curfew was a bell that rang at sunset in 
summer and at eight o'clock in winter, and when it struck, the 
fire on the hearth must be covered with ashes and the lights 
put out. This was an old regulation on the continent in order to 
prevent fires, and it was especially necessary in London, 
where there were only wooden houses; but it was new to the 
English, and though they were such early risers that few of 
them cared to sit up later or had lights good enough to make 
longer evenings a pleasure, they felt it a great act of tyranny to 
oblige them to blow out their candles at any fixed time.  
The curfew law hurt their pride rather than did them 
any real injury; but they had a more serious grievance in the 
forming of the New Forest, as it was called, and as it has been 
called for eight hundred years. William had chosen 
Winchester, the favorite home of the Saxon kings, as his own 
dwelling place. It is north of the Isle of Wight, and easily 
approached from the sea. A little to the southwest of the city, 
and bordering on the shore, was a fertile tract of land 
containing some sixty thousand acres. It was partly wooded 
and partly open, and in the open places were homes of some of 
the English and some small settlements. These people were 
driven away to find an abode where they could, and their 
houses were torn down. More trees were planted, so as to 
make it as nearly like a wild country as possible.  
No one knows just why William did this. It may have 
been in order to provide a place for the landing of his Norman 
forces that would be safe even in a time of general revolt. The 
deep forest would also be a good place for meetings of 
conspirators; and to prevent any dangers arising from such 
meetings there were most severe laws against carrying 
weapons into this region.  
This is what some say, but others recall the fact that the 
one amusement that seemed to give the king any pleasure was 
hunting, and they believe that his only reason for making this 
tract of land into a desert was that he might have near his 
home a good field for his chosen sport.  
Now among the earlier kings of England hunting had 
been as serious a business as repelling Danish invaders, and 
two hundred years before this time King Ethelwulf had feared 
lest some day England should be deserted and be given up to 
wild beasts. Only one hundred years before the coming of the 
Normans a certain Welsh prince was required to present every 
year a tribute of three hundred wolves' heads. Even in 
William's day, there were not only deer, but there were wolves 
and wild boars that must be killed for the safety of the flocks 
and herds. To destroy these would have been a praiseworthy 
deed; but to hunt merely for the pleasure of killing was not so 
common in England as in France, and many of the English 
looked upon William's enjoyment of the chase with a real 
horror. Whatever William's reasons were, the New Forest was 
made.  
The desire of the poor people to remain in their old 
home was looked upon by the Normans much as the desire of 
a horse to remain in the same place and with the master whom 
he knows and loves is often looked upon to-day. To drive 
these people out from home to live or die as they might, 
seemed to the Normans as innocent a deed as it seems to some 
people of to-day to drop a petted kitten in a strange street and 
abandon it to its fate. Even those among the English who were 
well-to-do would not look upon these evictions of the poor 
people as nearly so much of a crime as was the severity of the 
laws against trespassing within the limits of the king's hunting 
ground. William "loved the wild animals as if he was their 
father," says the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle with a touch of grim 
irony, and he decreed terrible penalties for every trespass. The 
man that shot a deer must lose both his eyes—a punishment 
which generally resulted in death. People stood aghast and 
whispered:—  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
90
"The hand of God will be upon him. A curse rests upon 
his forest. That he might have idle sport, he has made men 
suffer, and suffering will surely come to him and to his."  
The third deed of William which was especially 
objectionable to the English was the compilation of the 
Doomsday Book. The Danes had come many times, and might 
come again, and in any case it was necessary that the king 
should know what money he could collect for the expenses of 
the kingdom and for its protection. He had tried to levy a tax 
on land; but the value of land varied so widely in different 
places that the tax was not fairly apportioned, and so it was 
exceedingly hard to collect. There was another reason for the 
difficulty.  
"You told us," said the Norman nobles, "that the land 
which we should win with our swords should be our own, and 
now you tax us to increase your own hoard." William 
replied:—  
"You think of yourselves; I think of the country. You 
plan to raise flocks and cultivate the ground and make 
yourselves rich; I plan to strengthen the kingdom, lest some 
day an enemy fall upon us and we have not the means of 
defence."  
Whether the holders of land were pleased or not, the 
survey did not stop. Commissioners were appointed to go all 
over England except in the northern districts, where the land 
had perhaps been little cultivated since the great devastation. 
They did their work thoroughly. "How much woodland, 
meadow, pasture, and ploughed land is there?" the 
commissioners asked. "How many people? How many cows, 
oxen, sheep, swine? How much did the manor bring in when 
King Edward reigned? How much when King William gave 
it? How much does it bring in now?"  
The people, both English and Normans, were most 
indignant about this book. The curfew bell was not so serious 
a matter after all, and as for the New Forest, they could easily 
keep out of it; but this census was a different thing. The 
commissioners came to every house, and the people said:—  
"It is a shame for a great king to send men to peer into 
the private affairs of his people. What is it to him whether we 
have a hive of bees or not?" Nevertheless, the survey went on, 
and the records were put into a great book and kept in the 
king's treasury at Winchester. The Normans called this book 
the King's Roll, or the Winchester Roll; but the Saxons named 
it indignantly the Doomsday Book, or the book of final 
decisions.  
Early in the August of 1086, a remarkable meeting was 
held at Sarum. It was common on the continent for one man to 
pay homage to several persons. If dissensions arose between 
any two or three persons, it was sometimes a question with 
which one the vassal should stand. William meant to have no 
such trouble; and he called together his bishops, abbots, 
nobles, every man in the kingdom who held a piece of land, 
and required them to swear to obey him against all other men.  
In 1066, England had one conqueror; in 1070, one 
king; in 1086, the land became one country.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
91
CHAPTER XVI 
THE LAST YEAR 
In all these years of trouble and anxiety, of false 
friends and bitter enemies, William's one joy had been the 
companionship of his wife and children,—when he could have 
them with him in England, or could be with them in 
Normandy. Matilda shared his ambition, and endured the 
frequent separation as patiently as might be, trying to rule the 
duchy in such wise that her husband might be free for the 
difficulties of England.  
In the town of Bayeux, there is kept with the utmost 
care a piece of embroidery that Matilda and her court ladies 
are supposed to have wrought in William's honor during some 
of these absences. Embroidery was not looked upon in those 
days as a trivial amusement, it was a serious occupation; and it 
is quite possible that Matilda's excellent management of the 
turbulent duchy was not regarded with nearly so much respect 
and admiration as her skill in the use of the needle. Tapestry 
was not only the comfort that made life endurable in the 
draughty old castles; it was the family record, the history, the 
children's picture-book, and the grown folks' portrait gallery.  
This Bayeux tapestry, as it is called, is a piece of 
canvas about half a yard wide and nearly seventy yards long. It 
is covered with figures of men and horses and trees and ships 
and castles,—hundreds of them; and these pictures, together 
with a running inscription in Latin, tell the whole story of the 
Norman conquest, beginning with Harold's visit to Normandy, 
and ending with the battle at Senlac. While the stone castles 
have crumbled, and the steel weapons of the fighters have 
vanished, this fragile piece of linen has endured for eight 
hundred years. The care with which it is wrought suggests that 
it was a labor of love; and it seems a great pity that between 
the man who did such bold deeds and the woman who loved to 
chronicle them, dissension should have arisen. Dissension did 
arise, however, and it was on account of the one who was 
dearest to them both,—their eldest son, Robert.  
William had always been troubled lest the barons 
should revolt at his death and refuse their allegiance to his son. 
It was because of this fear that before he went to England he 
required all his vassals to do homage to Robert, who was then 
twelve years of age; and to make the matter even more sure, he 
called upon the king of France, as overlord, to confirm this 
transaction. Whenever William was in England, Robert's name 
was associated with his mother's in the government of the 
duchy, until, while he was yet a boy, he began to feel like a 
very great man; and when he was about twenty-three, he 
demanded that his father's domain should be limited to 
England, and that he himself should have the full control of 
Normandy.  
"I don't take off my clothes till I go to bed," said the 
conqueror. "Normandy is mine because I inherited it, and 
England is mine because I won it; but if I gave up Normandy, 
I could not hold England."  
"What am I to do, then?" asked Robert angrily. "How 
am I to pay my followers?"  
"Obey me," said William, "and wherever I have power, 
there shall you have power; wherever I have wealth, there 
shall you have wealth."  
"I won't be the hireling of any man," said Robert; "I 
want what belongs to me. You give me Normandy, and then 
you take it away. Normandy belongs to me, and I want it."  
"A son who does not know how to obey his father is 
not fit to rule a duchy," said William. "Go to Canterbury and 
ask Archbishop Lanfranc how a son should behave toward his 
father before you come to me for a duchy."  
"My lord the king," said Robert, "I did not come here 
to listen to lectures; I had enough of that from my tutors when 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
92
I was a boy. I came for the duchy of Normandy, which is mine 
by right. Will you give it to me, or will you not?"  
 
 
 
"A SON WHO DOES NOT KNOW HOW TO OBEY HIS FATHER IS NOT FIT 
TO RULE A DUCHY," SAID WILLIAM  
"I will not," thundered the king. "So long as I live, 
what is mine is mine."  
Robert went away in a rage. The more he thought of 
the matter, the more angry he grew, and the more ready to 
listen to his companions and to the messages of Philip of 
France that were ever urging him on to demand his rights. The 
younger sons, William Rufus and Henry, held by their father, 
and Robert's jealousy of them made him ready to quarrel on 
the slightest pretext.  
It soon came about that William went forth to quell a 
Norman revolt, and his three sons accompanied him, though 
Henry could hardly have been more than nine or ten years old. 
The little boy and William Rufus were playing at dice in the 
room directly over Robert, and either in malice or in mischief, 
they threw water down upon their brother and his friends 
below. Robert chose to regard the silly trick as a deliberate 
insult, and rushed upstairs with his drawn sword to take a 
fearful revenge. Fortunately, the king appeared and prevented 
violence, but that very night Robert and a company of his 
friends rode to Rouen and made an attempt to seize the castle. 
This was unsuccessful; and Robert then declared that he would 
stay no longer in a duchy which was his own and was unjustly 
kept from him by another; so out into the world he went, 
visiting wealthy knights and nobles, and arousing them against 
his father by telling them how unjustly he had been treated. 
There were many in Normandy who, in spite of their oath to 
William, would provide Robert with money on his promise to 
repay them liberally when he should come to his rights; and 
Philip of France was always ready to do anything that would 
work to the injury of William.  
Robert had yet another grievance; and that was that 
when he was a child his father had betrothed him to the little 
girl who was the heiress of Maine, on condition that the 
revenues of Maine were to belong to William till the children 
were old enough to be married. The little girl died; and as 
there was no one else who had a good title to the district, 
William kept it; and when Robert demanded it as his right, 
declared that there had been no marriage, and therefore Robert 
had no claim to the province.  

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
93
King William's love for his children was as strong as 
his manifestation of it was often unwise, and this rebellion 
would have been enough to make him unhappy; but worst of 
all, he found after a while that Matilda was secretly supporting 
Robert's rebellious plans by sending him the money that was 
increasing and arming the foes of her husband. Again and 
again he forbade it. The proud queen pleaded for her son. Then 
said the king:—  
"Could you have found a husband who would have 
loved you more than I, or have been more faithful to you? 
Where I am duke, you are duchess; where I am king, you are 
queen. My treasures are in your hand. Can it be that you are 
pouring them out to aid my enemy, that you whom I have 
loved best of all the world are the one that has betrayed me?" 
And Matilda answered:—  
"You have shared with me all that you have because 
you love me; and can you blame me that I share with Robert 
all that I have because I love him? If he was dead and buried 
in the earth seven feet deep, I would give my own heart's 
blood to bring him to life again. I cannot be so hard-hearted as 
to abandon my eldest son, and you must not lay such a 
command upon me." Then William declared that at least her 
messenger should be punished; but Matilda sent word to the 
man, and he fled to a convent, "and so saved at the same time 
his body and his soul," say the old chroniclers.  
Finally, there was a pitched battle between father and 
son and their followers. An arrow shot down the king's horse, 
and at the same moment William, who in all his battles had 
never before received a wound, was pierced through the arm 
by a spear thrust. It was Robert who bore the spear, and upon 
him his father pronounced a bitter curse. Afterwards, by the 
entreaties of the queen and the chief men of the duchy, a kind 
of reconciliation was brought about; but the thought that his 
queen was no longer one with him, and that to please a 
prodigal son she would aid his enemies, was perhaps the 
greatest grief of the king's whole life.  
One sorrow after another came to him. Not long after 
Robert's rebellion, a messenger stood before him with pale 
face and downcast eyes.  
"O King William," he said, "the prince was pursuing a 
deer in the New Forest, and his horse took fright and dashed 
him against a tree, and he is dead." Prince Richard was buried 
in the church at Winchester. After the funeral a little group of 
English lingered about the place.  
"It is not easy to lose a son," said one.  
"No, it is not," said an old man. "My son was killed at 
Senlac. If William had stayed in the land that God gave him, 
his son would not have been killed and neither would mine."  
"They say that the prince fell from his horse just where 
the altar of the church used to stand," said the first.  
"So I have heard," said the old man; "and I have also 
heard that every night as the curfew rings, the dead priests 
come out in white robes and walk around the place where their 
church used to be. One of them bears the golden pyx, and in it 
is the semblance of the Holy Wafer, and as they go, they 
chant, 'There shall be three, there shall be three.' This is the 
first; who will be the second?"  
"Perhaps the king himself," whispered the other 
fearfully. "Since the murder of Waltheof nothing has gone 
well with him. Then, too, he married against the will of the 
church, and it is only right that one should die and one rebel. 
When a man does wrong, he is sure to suffer."  
William's other two sons had stood by their father. Of 
his daughters, the little girl who had been promised to Harold 
had never crossed the water, for she died before the conquest. 
Cicely entered a convent, as did also a younger sister. One 
married the Count of Brittany, and another, the Count of Blois.  
A fine trait in William's character was his affection for 
his relatives on the side of his peasant mother. Of Arletta 
herself nothing is known, except that she married an honorable 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
94
knight, Herlwin de Conteville, and that William always treated 
her with great respect. Her two sons, Robert and Odo, had 
stood one on either side of William at the battle of Senlac. 
Robert was a brave, true, upright man, and he seems to have 
been one of the few whom William dared to trust; for while in 
giving land to other men, he was careful to scatter their 
manors about the kingdom, to Robert he gave nearly the whole 
of Cornwall and seventy-five manors in Devonshire, besides 
nearly five hundred more in different parts of the country. 
Robert fought not only with William, but for him, and was 
never tempted to have the least connection with the endless 
conspiracies that were made against his royal brother.  
Odo, the second son of Arletta, was of quite different 
material. He had been raised to the bishopric of Bayeux; but 
he was more of a warrior than a bishop, and he gladly dropped 
his staff and seized a war-club when the opportunity came to 
him to win great possessions in England. William made him 
Earl of Kent, and gave him a great number of manors; but not 
nearly so many as he gave Robert, and far more scattered.  
When William had to leave England for Normandy, the 
chief rule of the country was given to Odo, as has been said 
before. Wealth and power coming to him so suddenly were 
more than he could bear with wisdom. He began to think of 
aiming at the royal throne. Then some evil counsellor 
whispered to him:—  
"There is a soothsayer in Rome who says that the name 
of the next pope will be either Odo or Otto."  
"It shall be Odo," said the bishop to himself; and from 
that moment he was like one insane in his ambition to become 
pope. He bought himself a beautiful house in Rome; he sent 
munificent gifts to all whose influence might be of value; and 
he even planned to enter the holy city with so large an escort 
that it was almost like an army. But William had not been 
blind; and just when Odo was ready to set sail with his 
company, who should appear on the scene but the king of 
England. He straightway called an assembly of the chief men, 
and to them he said:—  
"Here is the man who has ruled England in my name, 
while I was quelling a revolt in my duchy and suppressing the 
rebellion of my unnatural son. He has robbed the poor and the 
church. He has planned to seize the popedom as he has seized 
the goods of my subjects. My knights who are needed in 
England he has persuaded to abandon their own country to the 
Danish hosts or to any marauders that may come, while they 
themselves guard his way to Rome that he may become pope. 
Here is the man. What is fitting to be done with him?" No one 
wished to speak. There was silence. Then said the king:—  
"No man who has done ill should be spared through 
favor. Seize this man and put him in ward." No one dared to 
seize a bishop. There upon William himself laid hold of him.  
"I am a priest," cried Odo, "a minister of the Lord. No 
one may condemn a bishop without the decree of the Pope."  
"A bishop?" said William. "I have nothing to do with a 
bishop. The bishop may go where he will. The one I have to 
do with is the Earl of Kent, he who has ill-treated my people, 
he who is my vassal and my earl." Then was the Earl of Kent 
carried away and put into prison. The Pope was indignant, but 
William replied only:—  
"Naught have I to do with the bishop, he may go free; 
but the earl remains in prison."  
Only one year after the trouble with Odo, the king was 
suddenly called to Normandy by the fatal illness of Matilda. 
He had met his other troubles bravely; but her loss was a 
crushing blow, and one from which he never recovered.  
Four years after the death of Matilda came the last year 
of William's life. It was a terrible time. There were disastrous 
fires in many of the chief towns of England, and the land was 
ravaged by fearful storms. Then came famine, and after famine 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
95
came sickness. With all this there was war as fierce as any that 
had been fought during the whole reign.  
A strip of territory called the Vexin had been given by 
France to Duke Robert, then seized again by France when 
William was a child. William demanded this land of Philip, 
but Philip, knowing that the king was not at all well, ventured 
to return no other reply than a coarse, impertinent jest. In a 
moment there flashed through William's mind the wrongs that 
he had endured from Philip's father, the insolence of Philip 
himself, and worst of all, the eager encouragement to rebellion 
that Philip had given to his son Robert. He sprang from his 
bed, assembled his troops, and whirled over the Vexin like a 
storm-wind, laying waste homes and harvest-fields. At last he 
came to Mantes; and there palace and church blazed alike, till 
the ground where the town had stood was only a bed of 
glowing embers. On one of these the horse of William 
stumbled. The king fell forward heavily upon the pommel of 
the saddle. He felt that his injury was mortal and sounded a 
retreat. He was taken to Rouen, and thence to the quiet priory 
of Saint Gervase on a hill to the west of the city.  
About him gathered bishops and abbots and men 
skilled in medicine. There, too, came his faithful brother 
Robert; and his two younger sons, William Rufus and Henry, 
who waited eagerly for the suffering man to declare his final 
will in regard to his property.  
"Who shall have Normandy?" they questioned.  
"Normandy was promised to Robert," said the king. 
"Ill fares the land that he rules, but the Normans have done 
him homage; they wish for him, and Normandy he must have."  
"And who is to have England?" cried William Rufus, 
with sparkling eyes; but his face fell when his father said 
slowly:—  
"Normandy is mine as it was my father's, but England I 
took by the sword. I give it back to God; the land is not mine 
to bestow." His eyes closed wearily, and William Rufus turned 
bitterly away.  
"My lord king," said one of the bishops, "is it well to 
leave the country to the strife and tumult that befall the land 
that has no ruler? Will you not name him to whom you would 
give your kingdom?"  
"It is not mine to give," said the king; "but if it was 
mine, I would give it to my son William. Yes, write a 
parchment to Lanfranc. Tell him my son has been obedient to 
me, and that if it please God, I would that he should have the 
kingdom. Tell Lanfranc to crown him if he thinks it right." The 
parchment was prepared, and William sealed it with his ring. 
Henry had been waiting impatiently. Now he broke forth:—  
"And what am I to have, if Robert has the duchy and 
William the kingdom? What is there left for me?"  
"I give you five thousand pounds in silver," said the 
king.  
"What can I do with that," said Henry, "if I have no 
place to dwell in?"  
"Be patient," said his father. "You are young; let those 
who are older go before you. The time may come when you 
will be greater than both of them."  
The two young men left their father's bedside: Henry to 
have his silver weighed and to put it into a place of safety; 
William Rufus to set out for England, lest some one seize the 
throne before him. Then William gave large sums of money to 
rebuild Mantes, to aid the church, and to help the poor of 
England. He named over one prisoner after another, and bade 
that they be released.  
"There is one more," said an abbot; "there is Bishop 
Odo. Will you not set him free?"  
"No," said the king; "bishop and brother I would gladly 
free, but the earl who has plundered and oppressed my people, 

Original Copyright 1901 by Eva March Tappan.  
 
Distributed by Heritage History 2010 
96
he shall not go free. Open every other prison door in 
Normandy and in England, but bar his more firmly." Then said 
Robert of Mortain, Earl of Cornwall:—  
"He is our brother, William, our own mother's son. Set 
him free, and I pledge all that you have given me that he will 
no longer oppress those who cannot resist. By your love for 
me, by your love for our mother, set him free."  
"Ruin and woe will follow him wherever he goes," said 
William; "but as you will. Set him free."  
One September morning a few days later the great bell 
on the church struck.  
"What is that?" asked William.  
"It is the bell for primes," said the attendant. William 
clasped his hands, and with a prayer for pardon his spirit 
passed away. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says:—  
"May Almighty God show mercy to his soul, and grant 
his sins forgiveness."  
As to William's greatness, there is no question. More 
than one man of resolute purpose has cut for himself a way to 
a throne with his own good sword, and that, indeed, is an 
achievement; but it is a greater when one placed at the head of 
a turbulent, rebellious state has reduced that state to order, and 
has extended his sway over a rich and powerful kingdom. Here 
is a man who began his reign as a little child, envied because 
of his princely father and despised because of his plebeian 
mother. Whoever chose might cast a glance of scorn at the boy 
of ignoble birth. Whoever aspired to a duchy might attempt his 
murder. Other children grew up amid love; he grew up amid 
hatred. Could one expect such a childhood to bring forth 
tenderness, gentleness, and mercy? Could one ask more than 
that those years should not make him bitter and malevolent?  
And yet this child proved to be a man of warmest 
affections. He clung to his low-born mother. To her he 
presented the first-fruits of his sword; to her son, of all the 
nobles that stood by him at Senlac, he gave the largest share of 
the conquered kingdom. He showed a savage cruelty more 
than once, it is true, but either to those who had taunted his 
mother, or to the king who had led astray his eldest son. Over 
and over again he forgave men who had revolted against him.  
An eleventh-century man should not be judged by 
twentieth-century ideas. The standard of goodness is higher, 
and the moral man of William's time would be looked upon to-
day as a dangerous character. What was then the simple course 
of justice would be to-day the most barbaric cruelty. It was a 
time of formalism. He who committed no great crime, 
performed the penances of the church, and gave to her freely, 
was looked upon as her faithful son. To take a false oath one's 
self 
was 
generally 
regarded 
as 
wrong 
under 
most 
circumstances, but to trick another into a sacred promise was a 
different matter. Hildebrand had come none too soon. Morality 
was low; the demands of the church were low. If William 
seized England wrongfully, he was at least fighting under the 
Pope's banner, and with the blessing of the Pope resting upon 
his head.  
Alfred the Great might well say, "I have sought to live 
my life worthily;" William the Conqueror could say, "I have 
given freely to the church; I have built many convents and 
many abbeys." Alfred was true to the spirit of the teachings of 
the church; William was true to the letter.  
 
 
 

