 
 
GLOSSARY OF ELECTRICAL INDUSTRY TERMS 
A 
ADD-A-DEPTH RING – a means of extending 
the walls of a device box to the wall surface, 
providing a barrier between a wiring device and 
the surrounding wall material. 
 
AIR PLENUM – a compartment or chamber to 
which one or more air ducts are connected and 
which forms part of the air distribution system. 
 
AMP (A) – a measurement of the amount of 
electrical current in a circuit at any moment. 
 
ARMOR – a metallic covering around the cable 
for mechanical protection. Typically interlocked 
steel or aluminum. 
 
ARMORED CABLE CLAMP – a means of 
securing armored cable to a box, providing an 
electrical ground. The clamp will accommodate 
two cables. 
 
B 
BX – see flexible armored cable. 
 
BAR HANGER – a means that is used to 
position a lighting fixture or fan between ceiling 
joists or studs. The bar hanger may be 
adjustable, and permits the electrical outlet box 
to be positioned along its length. 
 
BEAM CLAMP – a fastening means, usually 
made of malleable iron or steel, commonly 
used with hangers and a threaded rod to fasten 
a raceway to an I-beam. 
 
BELL BOX – a Hubbell Inc. trade name for the 
BELL® brand of weatherproof boxes. 
 
BLOCK-LOC ®– a Hubbell Inc. trade name for 
self-positioning masonry boxes and tile covers. 
 
BONDING – the permanent joining of metallic 
parts to form an electrically conductive path 
that will assure electrical continuity and the 
capacity to conduct safely any current likely to 
be imposed. 
 
BOX EXTENSION – see extension ring. 
 
BOX-LOC®– RACO trade name for our snap-
on metal stud bracket. 
 
BOX MOUNT – a term commonly used to 
denote where the screws of a cover attach. 
 
BUSHING – a fitting provided to protect wires 
from abrasion and intended for use where 
conductors enter or leave the raceway system. 
 
C 
CSA – see Canadian Standards Association. 
 
CABLE – two or more insulated conductors 
wrapped in metal or plastic sheathing. 
CABLE BOX – a box provided with clamps to 
accommodate either metallic or nonmetallic 
sheathed cable. 
 
CABLE CLAMP – generic name for a clamp 
that mechanically secures the cable to the 
electrical outlet box. 
 
CANADIAN STANDARDS ASSOCIATION 
(CSA) – an independent testing agency that 
certifies products to its established standards of 
safety and performance. 
 
CARPET FLANGE – a ring that is used with a 
floor box to provide a decorative finish. 
 
CHASE NIPPLE – a term used for a threaded 
nipple. 
 
CIRCUIT – the path of electrical flow from a 
power source through an outlet and back to 
ground. 
 
CLAMP BACK – a raceway fastening 
accessory typically used with a conduit strap to 
position a raceway away from a wall. 
 
CLASS I locations – are those locations in 
which flammable gases or vapors are or may 
be present in the air in quantities sufficient to 
produce explosive or ignitable mixtures. 
 
CLASS II locations – are those locations that 
are hazardous because of the present 
combustible dust. 
 
CLASS III locations – are those locations that 
are hazardous because of the presence of 
easily ignitable fibers or flyings, but in which the 
fibers or flyings are not likely to be in 
suspension in the air in quantities sufficient to 
produce ignitable mixtures. 
 
CLEAT HANGER – see bar hanger. 
 
CODEGUARD® – RACO trademark for 
weatherproof cover and Hubbell WRTR device. 
 
COMBINATION COUPLING – a coupling 
device used to join two dissimilar raceways (ie., 
rigid and flex). 
 
CONCENTRIC KNOCKOUT – a combination 
knockout where all the knockouts have the 
same center (eg., masonry boxes). 
 
CONCRETE BOX – a box intended for use in 
concrete and masonry block. It is not intended 
for installation in a floor. 
 
CONCRETE RING – see concrete box. 
 
CONCRETE-TIGHT FITTING – a fitting that, 
when assembled to conduit or tubing of the 
proper size, excludes concrete aggregate. 
 
CONDUCTOR FILL – refers to the number of 
current carrying and grounding conductors 
permitted by the National Electrical Code 
(NEC) to be used in conduit and tubing. 
 
CONDUCTORS – electrical term describing 
wires capable of carrying an electrical current 
or wire being used as a ground, usually 
sheathed with an insulating material. 
 
CONDUIT – (raceway) a pipe or tube designed 
to enclose and protect conductors or cables 
from moisture and physical damage. 
 
CONDUIT BODY – a portion of a conduit or 
tubing system that provides access through a 
removable cover(s) to the interior of the system 
at a junction of two or more sections of the 
system or at a terminal point of the system. 
 
CONDUIT CLAMP – a fastening clamp used to 
mount raceways. 
  
CONDUIT HANGER – a fastening means used 
to support conduit. 
 
CONDULET – a term used to refer to malleable 
or aluminum conduit bodies. 
 
CONNECTOR – a fitting intended to terminate 
a cable or raceway into a box, panel, etc. 
 
CORD GRIP (CG) – a connector used to 
terminate flexible cords and cables into an 
enclosure. 
 
COUPLING – a fitting intended to connect two 
lengths of raceway. 
 
D 
DAMP LOCATION – partially protected 
locations such as under canopies or roofed 
open porches, and interior locations subject to 
moderate degrees of moisture, such as 
basements, barns, and cold-storage 
warehouses. 
  
DEVICE EARS – ears or tabs with holes 
spaced to accommodate wiring devices. Device 
ears are found on plaster rings, switch boxes 
and handy boxes. 
 
DEVICE MOUNT – a term commonly used to 
denote where the screws of a device cover 
attach. 
 

 
 
GLOSSARY OF ELECTRICAL INDUSTRY TERMS 
DUPLEX RECEPTACLE – Electrical outlet 
device having two plug receptacles. 
 
DURALO® – is a trademark identifying a tri-
coat protective finish used on iron electrical 
conduit fittings for standard and hazardous 
locations. 
 
E 
8B – a 4 in. octagon box that is 1-1/2 in. deep. 
 
8B DEEP – a 4 in. octagon box that is 2-1/8 in. 
deep.  
 
ELBOW – a curved section of raceway 
intended to change the direction of the run. 
 
ELECTRICAL METALLIC TUBING (EMT OR 
THINWALL) – conduit called thinwall as a 
contrast to the “heavywall” of rigid or IMC. 
 
ELECTRICAL NONMETALLIC TUBING (ENT) 
– a plastic corrugated raceway of circular cross 
section that is resistant to moisture and 
chemical atmospheres, and that is flame 
retardant. 
 
ELECTROPLATING – a term used to describe 
the process of electrically depositing a layer of 
corrosion resistant material (i.e., zinc) onto 
steel or iron parts. 
 
EMT – see electrical metallic tubing. 
 
END RUN – that portion of the branch circuit 
that extends to the last fixture or device. 
 
ERICKSN® COUPLING – a registered trade 
name for a three-piece coupling used for 
rigid/IMC conduit. 
 
ETL –certification mark for Intertek Testing 
Services. ITS tests to the standards of UL, CSA 
and other international standards. 
 
EXPOSED WORK – boxes and branch circuits 
that are mounted external or exposed on walls, 
beams, columns, etc. 
 
EXTENSION RING – used to extend the box 
when it is recessed back in a wall. Also 
provides more cubic inch capacity for the box if 
needed.  
 
EXTRA DUTY® – a tradename applied to 
weatherproof while-in-use covers that have 
passed UL testing and are listed as “Extra 
Duty”. 
 
F 
FAN BOX – a box that is UL listed for the 
support of a ceiling (paddle) fan. 
  
FINISHED WALLS – studs, furring strips, 
joists, that are covered with wood paneling, 
drywall, plaster, Masonite or ceramic are 
considered finished. 
 
FIXTURE – a lighting assembly that is 
permanently attached to a building’s wiring 
system, usually to a ceiling box. 
 
FIXTURE EARS – ears or tabs with holes in 
them spaced 2- 3/4 in. or 3- 1/2 in. apart to 
accommodate lighting fixtures. 
 
FLEX – see flexible metal conduit. 
 
FLEXIBLE ARMORED CABLE (BX) – 
commonly called BX, a manufacturer’s trade 
name. It may be described as prewired flexible 
metallic conduit since it includes two or more 
current carrying conductors and can be 
supplied with a grounding conductor. 
 
FLEXIBLE METAL CONDUIT (GREENFIELD 
OR FLEX) – frequently called “Greenfield,” 
which is the trade name of one manufacturer of 
this flexible steel or aluminum raceway. It is 
used around machinery where vibration or 
movement exists or where complex routing of 
the raceway dictates a flexible conduit. 
 
FLOOR BOX – a box provided with means for 
flush mounting in a floor. The floor box may be 
used to provide power, telephone or data 
connections in office or store areas. 
 
FLUSH-FIT® – a Hubbell Inc. trade name for a 
device leveling plate that corrects loose and 
recessed devices.  
 
FORM 7 – a style of conduit body that requires 
a clip cover. 
 
FORM 8 – an “expanded volume” style of 
conduit body that requires a two screw cover. 
 
FORM 35 – a style of conduit body that 
requires a two screw cover. 
 
FURRING STRIPS – small wood strips 
attached to an existing wall to provide a means 
to attach paneling or drywall. 
 
G 
GFCI – see Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter. 
 
GANGABLE – box with a side that can be 
removed to allow the attachment of another box 
for installation of multiple devices. 
 
GAUGE – a term used to describe the physical 
size of a wire. 
 
GORILLA-RING®– a RACO® concrete ring UL 
approved for fixture and ceiling fan support. 
 
GOTCHA –term for a split hinge design ring 
used in Hubbell strain relief cord connectors. 
 
GREENFIELD – see flexible metal conduit. 
 
GRID-BRACE® – A Hubbell Inc. trade name for 
a ceiling support assembly designed for ceiling 
fan or fixture support for suspended ceilings. 
 
GRIP-LOK – refers to old work clips used to 
secure switch boxes with plaster ears in hollow 
walls. 
 
GROUND – a conducting connection between 
an electrical circuit or equipment and the earth, 
or to some conducting body that serves in 
place of the earth. Neutral wires carry the 
current to ground in all circuits. An additional 
grounding wire, or the sheathing of metal clad 
cable or conduit, protects against shock from a 
malfunctioning tool or other device. 
 
GROUND FAULT CIRCUIT INTERRUPTER 
(GFCI) – a safety device that senses shock 
hazard and automatically stops electrical flow in 
a circuit. 
 
GROUND FITTING – a fitting used to attach a 
grounding conductor to a ground pipe or rod. 
 
GROUND LUG – means used to connect a 
ground wire to a fitting, clamp, or enclosure. 
Generally made of copper, aluminum, brass or 
bronze. 
 
GROUND SCREW – a UL listed screw used to 
secure a grounding conductor to an enclosure. 
 
GROUND WIRE – the conductor used to 
connect the electrical equipment to ground (or 
earth) at the service entrance point, minimizing 
the potential for electrical shock. Usually clad in 
green insulation or unclad. 
 
H 
HANDY BOX – box designed for enclosing 
devices; usually surface mounted. 
 
HANDY ELL – a 90 degree elbow used either 
to connect two runs of conduit, or to connect a 
run of conduit to an enclosure. 
 
HAZARDOUS LOCATIONS – are those 
locations where fire or explosion hazards may 
exist due to flammable gases or vapors, 
flammable liquids, combustible dust, or 
ignitable fibers or flyings. 
 
HEAVYWALL – see rigid metal conduit. 
 

 
 
GLOSSARY OF ELECTRICAL INDUSTRY TERMS 
HICKEY – (1) a threaded extension for support 
of a lighting fixture. (2) conduit bending tool. 
 
HIDDEN WORK – residential and commercial 
construction where the electrical work is hidden 
by the finished wall; only the wiring device, 
switch, wall plate or light fixture is visible. 
 
HOT WIRE – the higher voltage conductor 
carrying electrical current (usually black) in a 
120V single phase system. 
 
I 
I.D. – inside diameter. 
 
IMC – see intermediate metal conduit. 
 
INSULATED THROAT CONNECTORS – 
insulated throat connectors have a 
thermoplastic line pressed or glued into the 
throat. This liner helps to prevent damage to 
the insulation when the conductors are pulled. 
 
INSULATION – sheathing or jacket of 
nonconducting material used to cover wires. 
 
INTERMEDIATE METAL CONDUIT (IMC) – 
a lighter weight, more economical version of 
rigid metal conduit. It has the same outside 
diameter (O.D.) with a thinner wall. 
 
J 
JAKE FITTING – a commonly used term for a 
screw-in type connector or coupling for flexible 
metal conduit. 
 
JIFFY BOX – old work switch box. 
 
JOIST – horizontal beams that extend from wall 
to wall and support the floor or ceiling – 
typically 2 in. x 10 in., 2 in. x 8 in. or 2 in. x 6 in. 
 
JUNCTION BOX – an enclosure used for 
splitting circuits into different branches. In a 
junction box, wires connect only to each other,  
never to a switch, receptacle, or fixture. 
 
K 
KELLEMS GRIP – name for a wire mesh grip. 
 
KILOWATT (KW) – one thousand watts, 
kilowatt measures power. 
 
KILOWATT-HOUR – the standard measure of 
electrical consumption or energy. 
 
KO (KNOCKOUT) – a circular tab on the side 
or bottom of a box pushed back in place with a 
small piece of steel remaining uncut to hold the 
tab in place until it is removed for installation of 
conduit or a connector. 
 
KORNS® CLAMP – A registered trademark for 
a right angle, parallel, or edge type conduit 
clamp, used to fasten conduit to I-beams. 
 
KWIK-BRACE® – a RACO® new work 
adjustable brace that is UL approved for fixture 
and ceiling fan support. 
 
KWIK-HANG® – a RACO® swivel fixture cover 
or box support hanger. 
 
L 
LAMPHOLDER – a current carrying device 
used to support, illuminate and protect lamps. 
 
LIQUIDTIGHT FLEXIBLE METAL CONDUIT – 
flexible metal conduit with a plastic outer jacket 
that protects the electrical system against 
sunlight, liquids, vapors or solids. 
 
LIQUIDTIGHT FLEXIBLE NONMETALLIC 
CONDUIT (NMLT) – liquidtight flexible 
nonmetal conduit is a raceway of circular cross 
section having a smooth inner surface with 
integral reinforcement within the conduit wall. 
 
LOAD BEARING – walls that are an integral 
part of the structure that supports the joists. 
 
LOCKNUT – an internally threaded barbed nut 
for use on conduit or fittings to prevent turning 
and to provide a secure joint. 
 
LOW VOLTAGE PARTITION – a barrier added 
inside an electrical box to separate 
communication and power circuits. Also 
required where voltage levels between adjacent 
switches exceed 300. 
 
LUG – see ground lug. 
 
M 
MC CABLE – metal clad cable. A UL 
classification indicating an assembly of 
insulated conductors with a metal cladding 
applied over the core and with grounding 
conductor(s) if the cladding is interlocked 
armor. 
 
MADISON HOLD ITS® – Registered trademark 
for #977 griplok old work brackets. 
 
MASONRY BOX – box installed in block walls 
as the blocks are being laid. The mason cuts 
the block to fit around the box. 
 
MOUNTING EARS – ears on a box which are 
used to mount a box cover, device or fixture. 
 
MOUSE HOUSE – a metallic or nonmetallic 
pedestal that can provide power or voice/data 
to a floor location. 
 
MUD RING – all rings are called mud rings 
regardless of the finish wall material used. 
There are two styles of rings, one for mounting 
a switch or receptacle, and one for mounting 
lighting fixtures. 
 
MYERS™ HUB – A trade name used to refer to 
a threaded hub for rigid/IMC conduit; provides a 
threaded hub in a KO. 
 
N 
NEC – see National Electrical Code. 
 
NEMA – see National Electrical Manufacturer’s 
Association. 
 
NM – see nonmetallic sheathed cable. 
 
NAIL-UP STRAPS – a fastening device used to 
mount raceways to wooden studs, siding, etc. 
 
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE (NEC) – a 
set of rules governing safe wiring methods 
drafted by the National Fire Protection 
Association. Local codes sometimes differ from 
and take precedence over NEC requirements. 
 
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL 
MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION (NEMA) – 
a US Manufacturers Organization which 
actively promotes standardized product 
specifications for electrical apparatus.  
 
NEUTRAL WIRE – a grounded conductor that 
completes a circuit by providing a return path to 
the source. Neutral wires are always identified 
by white or gray insulation. 
 
NEW WORK – electrical work that is completed 
before the drywall or plaster is installed. 
 
1900 – a 4 in. square box that is 1-1/2 in. deep. 
 
1900 DEEP – a 4 in. square box that is 2-1/8 in.  
deep. 
 
NIPPLE – an externally threaded fitting 
intended primarily to serve as a short raceway 
between close-spaced enclosures. 
 
NONMETALLIC SHEATHED CABLE 
(ROMEX®) – nonmetallic sheathed cable, 
popularly called by a manufacturer’s trade 
name of Romex, is two or more insulated 
conductors, usually copper, protected by an 
outer jacket or sheath of nonmetallic material. 
 
NMLT – see liquidtight flexible nonmetallic 
conduit. 
 
 

 
 
GLOSSARY OF ELECTRICAL INDUSTRY TERMS 
O 
O.D. – outside diameter (of conduit, etc.). 
 
OCTAGON BOX – a metal box used on a 
wiring system, usually at an outlet. It provides 
means for connection to a wiring system and is 
intended primarily to enclose splices and wiring 
devices or to support a fixture or other 
equipment intended for similar installation. 
 
OFFSET CONNECTORS – connects the 
conduit on the wall surface to a KO in the box 
where the KO and wall surface are on different 
planes. 
 
OLD WORK – electrical work that takes place 
after the drywall or plaster is in place. 
 
OUTLET – anything that allows access to the 
wiring system (eg., box, conduit body, etc.). 
 
P 
PAN – see pancake box. 
 
PANCAKE BOX – this round box is also 
referred to as a pan. The pancake box typically 
is the same depth as the finish wall material in 
which it is mounted. 
 
PARTITION WALLS – walls that are nonload 
bearing—typically interior walls of an office 
building that can be removed. 
 
PLASTER EARS – ears on switch boxes that 
prevent the box from falling back into the wall. 
 
PLASTER RING – see mud ring. 
 
PLENUM – a compartment or chamber to 
which one or more air ducts are connected to 
form part of the air distribution system. 
 
PLUG – a threaded means used to close 
unused threaded openings. 
 
PREGALVANIZED – the application of hot zinc 
to the exterior surfaces of steel. 
 
PRIOUT – a circle or pear shaped tab cut into 
the steel with a tie (a little piece of steel uncut) 
holding it in place; the priout has a slot in it 
where a screwdriver tip is inserted to pry out 
the tab, providing an opening for cable. 
 
Q 
QUICK-FIT – Keyhole mounting system. 
 
R 
RACE WAY – enclosed channel designed 
expressly for holding wire or cables. Conduit is 
a raceway; so is a duct. 
 
RAFTER – parallel beams that support a roof 
running from the top of the joist to the peak of 
the roof. 
 
RAINTIGHT – constructed so as to pass the UL 
rain test. 
 
RAYNGUARD® – RACO® trademark for extra 
duty weatherproof proof metallic while in use 
cover. 
 
RAYNTITE® – RACO® trademark for 
weatherproof device cover approved for use in 
wet locations. 
 
RAISED COVER – used for a job that is 
surface mounted. There are a variety of raised 
covers that may be used depending on the type 
of device being installed. 
 
REDI-LOC® – a registered RACO® trademark 
for MCI, AC and HCF cable connectors. 
 
RED SEAL COVER – see raised cover. 
 
REDUCING BUSHING – a threaded steel or 
malleable iron bushing used to make transitions 
from one trade size of rigid/IMC to another 
REDUCING WASHER – a stamped steel 
washer which, when used in pairs, reduces the 
size of an opening in an enclosure. 
 
RETRO-BRACE® – a RACO® old work 
adjustable brace for fixture or ceiling fan 
support. 
 
RETRO-RING® – a RACO® old work, steel 
mounting bracket for 4 in. square boxes. 
 
RIGID – see rigid metal conduit. 
 
RIGID METAL CONDUIT (RIGID OR 
HEAVYWALL) – rigid metal conduit is a 
raceway that provides a high degree of 
mechanical protection indoors or out, in dry or 
wet locations, exposed or concealed, in all 
kinds of atmospheric conditions, locations, and 
in hazardous locations such as explosion proof, 
vapor tight and dust tight. 
 
RIGID NONMETALLIC CONDUIT – three 
types of rigid nonmetallic conduit are listed by 
UL: (1) rigid nonmetallic plastic Schedule 40 
and 80 PVC; (2) rigid nonmetallic underground 
plastic; and (3) rigid nonmetallic underground 
other than plastic, fiber type. 
 
ROBERTSON HEAD SCREW – a type of 
screw with a square key that is popular in 
Canada. A special tool (called a Robbie) is 
required to drive the screw. 
 
ROMEX®– see nonmetallic sheathed cable. 
 
S 
SEAL-TITE® – A registered trademark used to 
refer to liquidtight metallic conduit and fittings. 
 
SERVICE DROP – service entrance 
conductors from the utility pole to the service 
entrance conductors of a building that has 
overhead service. The utility company usually 
supplies and connects the service drop. 
 
SERVICE ENTRANCE – the point at which 
electrical service enters a building. 
 
SERVICE ENTRANCE CABLE (SE) – service 
entrance cable can be compared to nonmetallic 
sheathed cable (Romex®) in large conductor 
sizes, with a weatherproof nonmetallic outer 
covering. It is often encased by rigid, IMC or 
EMT conduit for additional protection. 
 
SERVICE-ENTRANCE HEAD – an enclosed 
fitting intended for use at service entrances 
where open wiring is connected to a service-
entrance cable or raceway system. 
 
SET BACK – the distance a box is set forward 
on a stud to accommodate the thickness of the 
finished wall and leave the face of the box flush 
with the front surface of the wall. 
 
SET SCREW CONNECTOR – a fitting which 
terminates a run of conduit into an enclosure 
using set screws to secure the conduit. 
 
SET-UP BOX – trade term for an octagon box, 
factory installed on a bar hanger. 
 
SHEATH – material, usually an extruded plastic 
material applied outermost to a wire or cable. 
Often called a jacket. 
 
SHIELDED CABLE – a cable in which the 
insulated conductor(s) are enclosed in a 
conductive mesh envelope. The mesh is 
intended to protect the enclosed conductor(s) 
from external electrical interference. 
 
SPLICE – the joining of two or more 
conductors. 
 
SPLICE BOX – see junction box. 
 
SPLIT COUPLING – a term used to refer to a 
coupling used for rigid/IMC conduit. Used 
where the conduits to be coupled cannot be 
rotated. 
 
STAB-IT® – a RACO® trademark for our line 
of boxes with built-in cable connectors for 
flexible armored cable. 
 

 
 
GLOSSARY OF ELECTRICAL INDUSTRY TERMS 
STRAIN RELIEF – a term used to describe the 
sealing and gripping action of a cord connector. 
 
STRAPS – used to support conduit as required 
by Code. Beam and conduit clamps perform 
this function in industrial locations. 
 
STUD – 2 in. x 4 in. or 2 in. x 6 in. wood or 
steel used to construct walls. 
 
STUD MOUNT – name for mud rings that allow 
for quick installation to studs and eliminates the 
needs for far-side support. 
 
STUD WALL – wood or steel 2 in. x 4 in. 
spaced 16 in. or 24 in. on center — drywall or 
paneling typically is attached to the studs to 
finish the wall. 
 
SWITCH BOX – boxes with device ears for 
direct mounting of switches as opposed to 
boxes requiring mud rings for switch mounting. 
 
SWIVEL LOK – reference for multi-position 
liquidtight connectors for type B liquidtight 
flexible nonmetallic conduit and extra flexible 
liquidtight nonmetallic tubing. 
 
T 
THINWALL – see electrical metallic tubing. 
 
TIGER BOX – name for a patented switch box 
for old work applications. 
 
TILE COVER – a series of covers designed for 
use with tile. These covers are for mounting 
switches or receptacles. Rings are available in 
different depths depending on the finished wall 
thickness. 
 
TKO – references a combination 1/2 in. and 3/4 
in. knockout. The two knockouts are off-center 
to enable a 1/2 in. locknut to engage the box for 
proper grounding of the electrical system. 
 
TOGGLE SWITCH – a switch intended for use 
in general distribution and branch circuits. 
 
TOMBSTONE – see mouse house. 
 
TRADE SIZE – conduit is referred to by trade 
size according to its inside diameter. 
 
TYPE UF – see underground feeder cable. 
 
U 
U·CONDUIT – A Hubbell trade name for the 
Universal Conduit Body. The U·Conduit Body’s 
interchangeable plates/panels allow the body to 
be configured into any of the five standard 
conduit body types LB, LL, LR, T, and C, for 
EMT or Rigid/IMC conduit.  
 
UL – see Underwriters Laboratories. 
 
UNDERGROUND FEEDER CABLE – 
underground feeder cable (Type UF) is a group 
of conductors manufactured in the form of a 
cable assembly similar to Type NM (Romex®) 
but with the physical and electrical 
characteristics that allow for direct burial in the 
earth. 
 
UNDERWRITERS LABORATORIES (UL) – An 
independent testing agency that tests and lists 
electrical equipment to its established 
standards of safety and performance. 
 
UTILITY BOX – see handy box. 
 
V 
VOLT (v) – a unit of electromotive force. 
 
W 
WATT (w) – a measure of the power an 
electrical device consumes; [volts x amps = 
watts]. 
 
WEATHERHEAD – a term used to refer to a 
service entrance head. 
 
WEATHERPROOF – an enclosure constructed 
for outdoor use. 
 
WEATHERPROOF-WHILE-IN-USE 
(WEATHERPROOF-IN-USE, 
WEATHERPROOF HOOD, OR OUTLET BOX 
HOOD) – term commonly used to describe 
covers that are designed to be rain tight with 
cords installed. 
 
WET LOCATIONS – installations underground 
or in concrete slabs or masonry in direct 
contact with earth, and locations subject to 
saturation with water or other liquids, such as 
vehicle washing areas, and locations exposed 
to weather and unprotected. 
 
WRTR – an electrical device that is weather-
resistant and tamper-resistant. 

