 
 [Document reference] 
STRATEGIC BUSINESS PLAN (SBP) 
 
IEC/COMMITTEE: 
SECRETARIAT: 
DATE: 
1 
IEC Secretariat 
2022-10-07 
Please ensure this form is annexed to the Report to the Standardization Management Board if it has been 
prepared during a meeting or sent to the IEC Secretariat promptly after its contents have been agreed by the 
committee. 
A.  TC 1, TERMINOLOGY 
 
Scope of TC 1: 
To oversee the development and permanent maintenance of the IEC 60050 series, i.e., the International 
Electrotechnical Vocabulary (IEV, also known as Electropedia, the “IEV Online”, in reference to the website 
http://www.electropedia.org/) in accordance with its scope. 
To develop and maintain the "General concepts" parts of the IEV. 
To work with the other IEC and ISO/IEC committees  
• 
to provide assistance and methodological advice on all matters relating to IEC and ISO/IEC terminology, 
and 
• 
to integrate their terms and definitions that fall within the scope in the IEV, and in so doing to ensure 
to the greatest extent possible the correctness of the result (e.g., that the IEV terminological entries 
are consistent with each other, that each concept is identified by a single preferred term and different 
concepts are identified by distinct terms, and that the structural principles on which the IEV is based 
and other rules specified in the IEC Supplement to the ISO/IEC Directives, Annex SJ, are respected). 
To work with the IEC TC 1 Technical Officer to support and coordinate IEC's activities relating to terminology 
and to ensure that the IEV meets its goal. 
 
Scope of the IEV: 
The goal of the IEV is the standardization of the terms and definitions, in English and French, of 
internationally accepted concepts in all fields of activity of the IEC (as defined on http://www.iec.ch/). All 
standards within the IEV (IEC 60050 series) are horizontal publications in accordance with IEC Guide 108. 
Owing to the fact that the fields of activity of the IEC evolve over time, the content of the IEV is reviewed 
and extended on an ongoing basis, e.g., to incorporate new fields of activity. 
The IEV is “standardization-oriented”, and its primary goal is to help the standards' writers to prepare 
standards, and the standards' users to understand and implement them. Secondarily it is intended to be of 
use to the translators of technical texts, in technical literature, in teaching, in technical specifications and in 
commercial exchanges. 
It is not intended to cover all the concepts used in the various IEC standards, and is not meant to be a 
treatise on electrical engineering, but is rather a general purpose vocabulary, giving 
• 
the terms and definitions for the basic and reference concepts, and 
• 
for each domain covered by other committees, the terms and definitions that give the general (or 
system) engineer an overview of the techniques used by these committees and to allow inter-
operability with other technologies and standards. 
A number of IEC National Committees provide terms in their own languages for all or some of the definitions 
in the IEV. This is currently managed through the IEC Secretariat. 
Evolution: 
TC 1 through its AG 1 investigated the needs of both the IEC community and the outside users. The results 
of the online Survey on Electropedia (the “IEV Online”) — How do you use it today? How would you like to 
use it tomorrow? show that the great majority of respondents are generally satisfied with the current state 
of Electropedia, do not identify specific use-related or user-related criticalities, and only suggest incremental 
improvements in terms of a better and richer content together with a suggestion to include textbook writers 

and teachers in the target group of the IEV. There was also a proposal to add definitions in languages other 
than English and French; this topic goes beyond the scope of TC 1 and requires investigation with the IEC 
Secretariat. It was added as one of the requirements in the final Database Reference Group (DBRG) report 
to the SMB (SMB/7331/R). 
 
This should have no impact on the scope of other committees but could have a positive impact on their work 
activities. 
 
The 2021 edition of the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2, was amended to introduce the idea of “inclusive 
terminology”: a vocabulary is compliant with the principles of inclusive terminology if it is acceptable to 
everyone, regardless of their gender, ethnicity, skin colour, religion, etc. Most terms have a neutral 
meaning; the critical condition is that a vocabulary shall avoid terms whose meaning is felt as offensive or 
derogatory, called “excluding terms”. TC 1 carried out a survey (AC/23/2021) to ask for the contribution of 
IEC NCs and TCs and SCs to acquire opinions on the subject. The answers to this survey were circulated 
in 1/2506/INF. The IEC and ISO governing bodies agreed on the importance of developing jointly the 
guidance on inclusive terminology and are calling for experts and Co-Convenors in AC/19/2022 for a Joint 
Advisory Group (JAG) on Inclusive Terminology. 
B.  MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Figure 1: Overview on the management structure of TC 1 
C.  BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT 
 
Effective communication is more important than ever before in today's IEC in which we are increasingly 
moving towards a multiplicity and convergence of technologies, and ever-increasing needs for inter-
operability. 
 
Standards communicate provisions, and the communication of these provisions is primarily through the use 
of natural language (in our case English and French). Definitions are communication tools, and terms are 
the representations by which that communication is effected. 
 
To ensure within the IEC community that the message understood is identical to that being communicated, 
the IEV needs to be comprehensive (i.e., to cover all IEC technical domains), and to provide a central 
resource which, to the greatest extent possible, permits precise, concise and unambiguous communication. 
 
Note regarding the effectiveness of standards to the assessment of regulatory compliance: The IEV 
standards are not related directly to this topic. 

 
The content of the IEC 60050 series is available free of charge through the Electropedia web site. The 
Electropedia web site has approximately 344000 sessions per year, with an average of 6.64 pages per 
session, a bounce rate of 47 % and a percentage of total sessions vs location of user as shown below [usage 
data averaged for the previous 12 months, extracted 2022-09-26]: 
 
Figure 2: Electropedia usage by country of origin averaged for the previous 12 months (data extracted 
2022-09-26) 
D.  MARKET DEMAND 
 
The likely customers of the IEC 60050 standards and Electropedia web site are the IEC committees (and 
in particular experts responsible for the drafting of standards), the IEC National Committees, legal and 
regulatory authorities, trade and customs organizations, industry and other standards' users, translators, 
textbook writers and teachers, and the general public. 
E. 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS 
 
☒ 
GOAL 1: No Poverty 
☒ 
GOAL 2: Zero Hunger 
☒ 
GOAL 3: Good Health and Well-being 
☒ 
GOAL 4: Quality Education 
☒ 
GOAL 5: Gender Equality 
☒ 
GOAL 6: Clean Water and Sanitation 
☒ 
GOAL 7: Affordable and Clean Energy 
☒ 
GOAL 8: Decent Work & Economic Growth 
☒ 
GOAL 9: Industry, Innovation & Infrastructure 
☒ 
GOAL 10: Reduced Inequality 
☒ 
GOAL 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities 
☒ 
GOAL 12: Responsible Consumption & Production 
☒ 
GOAL 13: Climate Action 
☒ 
GOAL 14: Life Below Water 
☒ 
GOAL 15: Life on Land 
☒ 
GOAL 16: Peace, Justice Strong Institutions 
☒ 
GOAL 17: Partnerships to achieve the Goals 
 
 
F.  TRENDS IN TECHNOLOGY AND IN THE MARKET 
 
The current trends in the field of knowledge management include the increasing use of ontologies and 
automatically searchable and processable information structures, requirements for cross-domain and 
cross-organization harmonization of terminology and sharing of resources, open data, etc. 
G.  SYSTEMS APPROACH ASPECTS (SEE DIRECTIVES PART 1 ANNEX SP) 
 
By its nature, the IEV is relevant to the systems approach. It is an enabler for inter- and intra-domain 
communication, and impacts all IEC committees. 
In some technical domains, there is also a strong connection with ISO, as well as with other organizations 
(e.g., the CIE, the IAEA, etc.). 
In addition to the need for common terminology, some standards experts have requested that the IEC and 
other organization terminology resources be accessible through a common point of entry. 
JPT 3 is responsible for terminology relating to systems, and has coordination with SG12. 

H.  CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT  
 
For any IEV terminological entry that is judged to need validation with respect to conformity assessment 
aspects, advice from the CAB secretary is sought through the TC 1 Technical Officer. 
I.  
3-5 YEAR PROJECTED STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES, ACTIONS, TARGET DATES 
 
 
 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 3-5 YEARS 
ACTIONS TO SUPPORT  
THE STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 
TARGET DATE(S)  
TO COMPLETE THE ACTIONS 
Ensure the relevance (vs the 
scope) of all IEV content 
Review and make current all cross-
references. 
Update as necessary and 
harmonize the IEV content, remove 
duplications, etc. 
Ongoing 
Complete the domains covered by 
the IEV vs those covered by the 
committees 
Collaboration with the committees 
to add their terms and definitions. 
Provision of support to the 
committees through the 
establishment and proactive 
actions of liaison officers 
Ongoing 
Review the IEV structure, working 
procedures, requirements and 
supporting tools to respond to 
market needs 
As per the results of the online 
survey: 
a) AG 1 to seek how to improve the 
content through the addition of 
more examples, more references to 
external resources, etc., to revise 
Annex SK accordingly and to draw 
up a proposal for implementation. 
b) TC 1 officers to seek the 
approval of the SMB to include 
textbook writers and teachers in 
the target group of the primary goal 
of the IEV, to revise Annex SK 
accordingly and to draw up a 
proposal for implementation. 
c) TC 1 officers to investigate with 
the IEC Secretariat the proposal to 
add definitions in languages other 
than English and French. 
Ongoing 
To take the necessary steps that 
the IEV does not contain terms 
whose meaning is felt as offensive 
or derogatory 
The 2021 edition of the ISO/IEC 
Directives, Part 2, was amended to 
introduce the idea of “inclusive 
terminology”. 
TC 1 circulated a survey 
(AC/23/2021) to ask for the 
contribution of IEC NCs and TCs 
and SCs to acquire input on the 
subject. The answers to this survey 
were circulated in 1/2506/INF. 
Ongoing 
Note: The progress on the actions should be reported in the RSMB. 
 
 

