
Table of Contents
Cover
Copyright
Praise for Thomas Ligotti
About the Author
Teatro Grottesco
Derangements
Purity
The Town Manager
Sideshow, and Other Stories
The Clown Puppet
The Red Tower
Deformations
My Case for Retributive Action
Our Temporary Supervisor
In a Foreign Town, In a Foreign Land
The Damaged and the Diseased
Teatro Grottesco
Gas Station Carnivals
The Bungalow House
Severini
The Shadow, the Darkness

This eBook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used in any
way except as specifically permitted in writing by the publishers, as allowed
under the terms and conditions under which it was purchased or as strictly
permitted by applicable copyright law. Any unauthorised distribution or use of
this text may be a direct infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and
those responsible may be liable in law accordingly.
Version 1.0
Epub ISBN 9780753525173
www.randomhouse.co.uk

 
This paperback edition first published in Great Britain in 2008 by Virgin Books Ltd Thames Wharf Studios
Rainville Road London
W6 9HA
First published in hardback in the US in 2006 by Durtro.
Copyright © Thomas Ligotti 2008
The right of Thomas Ligotti to be identified as the Author of this Work has been asserted by him in
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988.
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired
out or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior written consent in any form of binding or cover
other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being
imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978 0 7535 13743 UK
Distributed in the USA by MacMillan, LLC, 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA The Random
House Group Limited supports The Forest Stewardship Council [FSC], the leading international forest
certification organisation. All our titles that are printed on Greenpeace approved FSC certified paper carry
the FSC logo. Our paper procurement policy can be found at www.rbooks.co.uk/environment
Typeset by TW Typesetting, Plymouth, Devon Printed and bound in Great Britain by CPI Bookmarque,
Croydon, CR0 4TD

PRAISE FOR THOMAS LIGOTTI
‘Thomas Ligotti is an absolute master of supernatural horror and weird fiction,
and is a true original. He pursues his unique vision with admirable honesty and
rigorousness and conveys it in prose as powerfully evocative as any writer in the
field. I’d say he might just be a genius.’ Ramsey Campbell ‘Ligotti is
wonderfully original; he has a dark vision of a new and special kind, a vision
that no one had before him.’ Interzone
‘[Ligotti’s] is a unique voice, which speaks with a profound elegance – and a
precious seriousness – of matters which few other literary voices have ever
touched – Ligotti is old-fashioned in the very best sense of the term and there is
nothing dated about his work, which is unmistakably contemporary.’ Brian
Stableford in Horror, Ghost & Gothic Writers
‘Ligotti gave me the first genuine frisson – in the literal sense of the term – that I
had received in years. His work made me realize why I had become a student of
weird fiction to begin with – it was to experience that indescribable sensation of
being unnerved.’ S. T. Joshi, author of The Modern Weird Tale, in Horror:
Another 100 Best Books
‘Ligotti is arguably the pre-eminent living writer of horror fiction.’ Matt Cardin
(in The Thomas Ligotti Reader) ‘Songs of a Dead Dreamer is full of inexplicable
and alarming delights . . . Put this volume on the shelf right between H. P.
Lovecraft and Edgar Allan Poe. Where it belongs.’ Michael Swanwick, The
Washington Post
‘Grimscribe confirms [Ligotti] as an accomplished conjuror of nightmares in the
tradition of H. P. Lovecraft.’ The Times
‘In Grimscribe Ligotti manages to write that secret book, presenting us with
stories that are paradoxically beautiful and horrific.’ San Francisco Chronicle
‘The most disturbing terror comes from within, springs unexpectedly from bland
or half-formed memories of the past. This is the terror that Ligotti cultivates in
the richly evocative tales of Noctuary.’ Booklist

‘My Work Is Not Yet Done displays a Thomas Ligotti at the height of his form –
in imaginative range, in verve of style and precision of language, and in
cumulative power and intensity.’ S. T. Joshi, Necrofile

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Thomas Ligotti was born in Detroit in 1953 and grew up in the nearby suburb of
Grosse Pointe Woods. He graduated from Wayne State University in 1978. From
1979 to 2001, Ligotti worked for a reference book publisher in the Detroit area,
serving as an editor on such titles as Twentieth-Century Literary Criticism and
Contemporary Authors. His first collection of stories, Songs of a Dead Dreamer,
was published in 1986, with an expanded version issued three years later. Other
collections include Grim-scribe (1991), Noctuary (1994), and My Work Is Not
Yet Done (2002).
Ligotti is the recipient of several awards, including the Horror Writers
Association Bram Stoker award for his omnibus collection The Nightmare
Factory (1996) and short novel My Work Is Not Yet Done. He has also written a
nonfiction book, The Conspiracy Against the Human Race: A Short Life of
Horror, which comprises an excursion through the darker byways of literature,
philosophy and psychology. A short film of Ligotti’s story The Frolic was
completed in 2006 and is scheduled to appear as a DVD. In addition, through an
agreement with Fox Studios’ subsidiary Fox Atomic, a graphic novel based on
his 
works 
was 
released 
in 
2007. 
For 
more 
information 
visit:
http://www.ligotti.net

CONTENTS
Derangements
Purity
The Town Manager
Sideshow, and Other Stories
The Clown Puppet
The Red Tower
Deformations
My Case for Retributive Action
Our Temporary Supervisor
In a Foreign Town, In a Foreign Land
The Damaged and the Diseased
Teatro Grottesco
Gas Station Carnivals
The Bungalow House
Severini
The Shadow, the Darkness

DERANGEMENTS

PURITY
W
e were living in a rented house, neither the first nor the last of a long succession
of such places that the family inhabited throughout my childhood years. It was
shortly after we had moved into this particular house that my father preached to
us his philosophy of ‘rented living.’ He explained that it was not possible to live
in any other way and that attempting to do so was the worst form of delusion.
‘We must actively embrace the reality of non-ownership,’ he told my mother, my
sister and me, towering over us and gesturing with his heavy arms as we sat
together on a rented sofa in our rented house. ‘Nothing belongs to us. Everything
is something that is rented out. Our very heads are filled with rented ideas passed
on from one generation to the next. Wherever your thoughts finally settle is the
same place that the thoughts of countless other persons have settled and have left
their impression, just as the backsides of other persons have left their impression
on that sofa where you are now sitting. We live in a world where every surface,
every opinion or passion, everything altogether is tainted by the bodies and
minds of strangers. Cooties – intellectual cooties and physical cooties from other
people – are crawling all around us and all over us at all times. There is no
escaping this fact.’
Nevertheless, it was precisely this fact that my father seemed most intent on
escaping during the time we spent in that house. It was an especially cootie-
ridden residence in a bad neighborhood that bordered on an even worse
neighborhood. The place was also slightly haunted, which was more or less the
norm for the habitations my father chose to rent. Several times a year, in fact, we
packed up at one place and settled into another, always keeping a considerable
distance between our locations, or relocations. And every time we entered one of
our newly rented houses for the first time, my father would declaim that this was
a place where he could ‘really get something accomplished.’ Soon afterward, he
would begin spending more and more time in the basement of the house,
sometimes living down there for weeks on end. The rest of us were banned from
any intrusion on my father’s lower territories unless we had been explicitly
invited to participate in some project of his. Most of the time I was the only

available subject, since my mother and sister were often away on one of their
‘trips,’ the nature of which I was never informed of and seldom heard anything
about upon their return. My father referred to these absences on the part of my
mother and sister as ‘unknown sabbaticals’ by way of disguising his ignorance or
complete lack of interest in their jaunts. None of this is to protest that I minded
being left so much to myself. (Least of all did I miss my mother and her
European cigarettes fouling the atmosphere around the house.) Like the rest of
the family, I was adept at finding ways to occupy myself in some wholly
passionate direction, never mind whether or not my passion was a rented one.
One evening in late autumn I was upstairs in my bedroom preparing myself
for just such an escapade when the doorbell rang. This was, to say the least, an
uncommon event for our household. At the time, my mother and sister were
away on one of their sabbaticals, and my father had not emerged from his
basement for many days. Thus, it seemed up to me to answer the startling sound
of the doorbell, which I had not heard since we had moved into the house and
could not remember hearing in any of the other rented houses in which I spent
my childhood. (For some reason I had always believed that my father
disconnected all the doorbells as soon as we relocated to a newly rented house.) I
moved hesitantly, hoping the intruder or intruders would be gone by the time I
arrived at the door. The doorbell rang again. Fortunately, and incredibly, my
father had come up from the basement. I was standing in the shadows at the top
of the stairs when I saw his massive form moving across the living room,
stripping himself of a dirty lab coat and throwing it into a corner before he
reached the front door. Naturally I thought that my father was expecting this
visitor, who perhaps had something to do with his work in the basement.
However, this was obviously not the case, at least as far as I could tell from my
eavesdropping at the top of the stairs.
By the sound of his voice, the visitor was a young man. My father invited him
into the house, speaking in a straightforward and amiable fashion that I knew
was entirely forced. I wondered how long he would be able to maintain this
uncharacteristic tone in conversation, for he bid the young man to have a seat in
the living room where the two of them could talk ‘at leisure,’ a locution that
sounded absolutely bizarre as spoken by my father.
‘As I said at the door, sir,’ the young man said, ‘I’m going around the
neighborhood telling people about a very worthy organization.’
‘Citizens for Faith,’ my father cut in.
‘You’ve heard of our group?’

‘I can read the button pinned to the lapel of your jacket. This is sufficient to
allow me to comprehend your general principles.’
‘Then perhaps you might be interested in making a donation,’ said the young
man.
‘I would indeed.’
‘That’s wonderful, sir.’
‘But only on the condition that you allow me to challenge these absurd
principles of yours – to really put them to the test. I’ve actually been hoping that
you, or someone like you, would come along. It’s almost as if a fortuitous
element of intervention brought you to this house, if I were to believe in
something so preposterous.’
So ended my father’s short-lived capitulation to straightforwardness and
amiability.
‘Sir?’ said the young man, his brow creasing a bit with incomprehension.
‘I will explain. You have these two principles in your head, and possibly they
are the only principles that are holding your head together. The first is the
principle of nations, countries, the whole hullabaloo of mother lands and father
lands. The second is the principle of deities. Neither of these principles has
anything real about them. They are merely impurities poisoning your head. In a
single phrase – Citizens for Faith – you have incorporated two of the three major
principles – or impurities – that must be eliminated, completely eradicated,
before our species can begin an approach to a pure conception of existence.
Without pure conception, or something approaching pure conception, everything
is a disaster and will continue to be a disaster.’
‘I understand if you’re not interested in making a donation, sir,’ said the young
man, at which point my father dug his hand into the right pocket of his trousers
and pulled out a wad of cash that was rolled into a tube and secured with a thick
rubber band. He held it up before the young man’s eyes.
‘This is for you, but only if you will give me a chance to take those heinous
principles of yours and clean them out of your head.’
‘I don’t believe my faith to be something that’s just in my head.’
Until this point, I thought that my father was taunting the young man for pure
diversion, perhaps as a means of distracting himself from the labors in which he
had been engaged so intensely over the past few days. Then I heard what to my
ears was an ominous shift in my father’s words, signifying his movement from
the old-school iconoclast he had been playing to something desperate and
unprincipled with respect to the young man.

‘Please forgive me. I didn’t mean to suggest that anything like that was only in
your head. How could such a thing be true when I know quite well that
something of the kind inhabits this very house?’
‘He is in every house,’ said the young man. ‘He is in all places.’
‘Indeed, indeed. But something like that is very much in this particular house.’
My suspicion was now that my father made reference to the haunted condition
– although it barely deserved the description – of our rented house. I myself had
already assisted him in a small project relevant to this condition and what its
actual meaning might be, at least insofar as my father chose to explain such
things. He even allowed me to keep a memento of this ‘phase-one experiment,’
as he called it. I was all but sure that this was the case when my father alluded to
his basement.
‘Basement?’ said the young man.
‘Yes,’ said my father. ‘I could show you.’
‘Not in my head but in your basement,’ said the young man as he attempted to
clarify what my father was claiming.
‘Yes, yes. Let me show you. And afterward I will make a generous donation to
your group. What do you say?’
The young man did not immediately say anything, and perhaps this was the
reason that my father quickly shouted out my name. I backed up a few steps and
waited, then descended the stairway as if I had not been eavesdropping all along.
‘This is my son,’ my father said to the young man, who stood up to shake my
hand. He was thin and wore a secondhand suit, just as I imagined him while I
was eavesdropping at the top of the stairs. ‘Daniel, this gentleman and I have
some business to conduct. I want you to see that we’re not disturbed.’ I simply
stood there as if I had every intention of obediently following these instructions.
My father then turned to the young man, indicating the way to the basement.
‘We won’t be long.’
No doubt my presence – that is, the normality of my presence – was a factor
in the young man’s decision to go into the basement. My father would have
known that. He would not know, nor would he have cared, that I quietly left the
house as soon as he had closed the basement door behind him and his guest. I
did consider lingering for a time at the house, if only to gain some idea of what
phase my father’s experimentation had now entered, given that I was a
participant in its early stages. However, that night I was eager to see a friend of
mine who lived in the neighborhood.
To be precise, my friend did not live in the bad neighborhood where my

family had rented a house but in the worse neighborhood nearby. It was only a
few streets away, but this was the difference between a neighborhood where
some of the houses had bars across their doors and windows and one in which
there was nothing left to protect or to save or to care about in any way. It was
another world altogether . . . a twisted paradise of danger and derangement . . . of
crumbling houses packed extremely close together . . . of burned-out houses
leaning toward utter extinction . . . of houses with black openings where once
there had been doors and windows . . . and of empty fields over which shone a
moon that was somehow different from the one seen elsewhere on this earth.
Sometimes there would be an isolated house hanging onto the edge of an open
field of shadows and shattered glass. And the house would be so contorted by
ruin that the possibility of its being inhabited sent the imagination swirling into a
pit of black mysteries. Upon closer approach, one might observe thin, tattered
bedsheets in place of curtains. Finally, after prolonged contemplation, the
miracle of a soft and wavering glow would be revealed inside the house.
Not long after my family moved into a vicinity where such places were not
uncommon, I found one particular house that was nothing less than the ideal of
the type of residence, so to speak, I have just described. My eyes became fixed
upon it, held as if they were witnessing some miraculous vision. Then one of the
bedsheets that covered the front window moved slightly, and the voice of a
woman called out to me as I stood teetering on the broken remnants of a
sidewalk.
‘Hey, you. Hey, boy. You got any money on you?’
‘Some,’ I replied to that powerful voice.
‘Then would you do something for me?’
‘What?’ I asked.
‘Would you go up to the store and get me some salami sticks? The long ones,
not those little ones. I’ll pay you when you come back.’
When I returned from the store, the woman again called out to me through the
glowing bedsheets. ‘Step careful on those porch stairs,’ she said. ‘The door’s
open.’
The only light inside the house emanated from a small television on a metal
stand. The television faced a sofa that seemed to be occupied from end to end by
a black woman of indefinite age. In her left hand was a jar of mayonnaise, and in
her right hand was an uncooked hot dog, the last one from an empty package
lying on the bare floor of the house. She submerged the hot dog into the
mayonnaise, then pulled it out and finished it off without taking her eyes from

the television. After licking away some mayonnaise from her fingers, she
screwed the lid back on the jar and set it to one side on the sofa, which appeared
to be the only piece of furniture in the room. I held out the salami sticks to her,
and she put some money in my hand. It was the exact amount I had paid, plus
one dollar.
I could hardly believe that I was actually standing inside one of the houses I
had been admiring since my family moved into the neighborhood. It was a cold
night, and the house was unheated. The television must have operated on
batteries, because it had no electrical cord trailing behind it. I felt as if I had
crossed a great barrier to enter an outpost that had been long abandoned by the
world, a place cut off from reality itself. I wanted to ask the woman if I might be
allowed to curl up in some corner of that house and never again leave it. Instead,
I asked if I could use the bathroom.
She stared at me silently for a moment and then reached down behind the
cushions of the sofa. What she brought forth was a flashlight. She handed it to
me and said, ‘Use this and watch yourself. It’s the second door down that hall.
Not the first door – the second door. And don’t fall in.’
As I walked down the hall I kept the flashlight focused on the gouged and
filthy wooden floor just a few feet ahead of me. I opened the second door, not
the first, then closed it behind me. The room in which I found myself was not a
toilet but a large closet. Toward the back of the closet there was a hole in the
floor. I shone the flashlight into the hole and saw that it led straight into the
basement of the house. Down there were the pieces of a porcelain sink and
commode, which must have fallen through the floor of the bathroom that was
once behind the first door I had passed in the hallway. Because it was a cold
night, and the house was unheated, the smell was not terribly strong. I knelt at
the edge of the hole and shone the flashlight into it as far its thin beam would
reach. But the only other objects I could see were some broken bottles stuck
within the strata of human waste. I thought about what other things might be in
that basement . . . and I became lost in those thoughts.
‘Hey, boy,’ I heard the woman call out. ‘Are you all right?’
When I returned to the front of the house, I saw that the woman had other
visitors. When they held up their hands in front of their faces, I realized that I
still had the shining flashlight in my hand. I switched it off and handed it back to
the woman on the sofa.
‘Thank you,’ I said as I maneuvered my way past the others and toward the
front door. Before leaving I turned to the woman and asked if I might come back

to the house.
‘If you like,’ she said. ‘Just make sure you bring me some of those salami
sticks.’
That was how I came to know my friend Candy, whose house I visited many
times since our first meeting on that thrilling night. On some visits, which were
not always at night, she would be occupied with her business, and I would keep
out of her way as a steady succession of people young and old, black and white,
came and went. Other times, when Candy was not so busy, I squeezed next to
her on the sofa, and we watched television together. Occasionally we talked,
although our conversations were usually fairly brief and superficial, stalling out
as soon as we arrived at some chasm that divided our respective lives and could
not be bridged by either of us. When I told her about my mother’s putrid
European cigarettes, for instance, Candy had a difficult time with the idea of
‘European,’ or perhaps with the very word itself. Similarly, I would often be
unable to supply a context from my own life that would allow me to comprehend
something that Candy would casually interject as we sat watching television
together. I had been visiting her house for at least a month when, out of nowhere,
Candy said to me, ‘You know, I had a little boy that was just about your age.’
‘What happened to him?’ I asked.
‘Oh, he got killed,’ she said, as if such an answer explained itself and
warranted no further elaboration. I never urged Candy to expand upon this
subject, but neither could I forget her words or the resigned and distant voice in
which she had spoken them.
Later I found out that quite a few children had been killed in Candy’s
neighborhood, some of whom appeared to have been the victims of a child-
murderer who had been active throughout the worst neighborhoods of the city
for a number of years before my family moved there. (It was, in fact, my mother
who, with outrageous insincerity, warned me about ‘some dangerous pervert’
stealthily engaged in cutting kids’ throats right and left in what she called ‘that
terrible neighborhood where your friend lives.’) On the night that I left our
rented house after my father had gone into the basement with the young man
who was wearing a secondhand suit, I thought about this child-murderer as I
walked the streets leading to Candy’s house. These streets gained a more intense
hold upon me after I learned about the child killings, like a nightmare that
exercises a hypnotic power forcing your mind to review its images and events
over and over no matter how much you want to forget them. While I was not
interested in actually falling victim to a child-murderer, the threat of such a thing

happening to me only deepened my fascination with those crowded houses and
the narrow spaces between them, casting another shadow over the ones in which
that neighborhood was already enveloped.
As I walked toward Candy’s house, I kept one of my hands in the pocket of
my coat where I carried something that my father had constructed to be used in
the event that, to paraphrase my irrepressibly inventive parent, anyone ever tried
to inflict personal harm upon me. My sister was given an identical gadget, which
looked something like a fountain pen. (Father told us not to say anything about
these devices to anyone, including my mother, who for her part had long ago
equipped herself with self-protection in the form of a small-caliber automatic
pistol.) On several occasions I had been tempted to show this instrument to
Candy, but ultimately I did not break the vow of secrecy on which my father had
insisted. Nevertheless, there was something else my father had given me, which
I carried in a small paper bag swinging at my side, that I was excited to show
Candy that night. No restrictions had been placed on disclosing this to anyone,
although it probably never occurred to my father that I would ever desire to do
so.
What I carried with me, contained in a squat little jar inside the paper bag, was
a by-product, one might say, of the first-phase experiment in which I had assisted
my father not long after we moved into our rented house. I have already
mentioned that, like so many of the houses where my family lived during my
childhood years, our current residence was imbued with a certain haunted aspect,
however mild it may have been in this instance. Specifically, this haunting was
manifested in a definite presence I sensed in the attic of the house, where I spent
a great deal of time before I became a regular visitant at Candy’s. As such things
go, in my experience, there was nothing especially noteworthy about this
presence. It seemed to be concentrated near the wooden beams which crossed
the length of the attic and from which, I imagined, some former inhabitant of the
house may once have committed suicide by hanging. Such speculation, however,
was of no interest to my father, who strongly objected to the possibility of
spooks or spirits of any kind or even the use of these terms. ‘There is nothing in
the attic,’ he explained to me. ‘It’s only the way that your head is interacting with
the space of that attic. There are certain fields of forces that are everywhere. And
these forces, for reasons unknown to me as yet, are potentiated in some places
more than others. Do you understand? The attic is not haunting your head – your
head is haunting the attic. Some heads are more haunted than others, whether
they are haunted by ghosts or by gods or by creatures from outer space. These

are not real things. Nonetheless, they are indicative of real forces, animating and
even creative forces, which your head only conceives to be some kind of spook
or who knows what. You are going to help me prove this by allowing me to use
my apparatus in the basement to siphon from your head that thing which you
believe is haunting the attic. This siphoning will take place in a very tiny part of
your head, because if I siphoned your whole head . . . well, never mind about
that. Believe me, you won’t feel a thing.’
After it was over, I no longer sensed the presence in the attic. My father had
siphoned it away and contained it in a small jar, which he gave to me once he
was through with it as an object of research, his first phase of experimentation in
a field in which, unknown to other scientists who have since performed similar
work, my father was the true Copernicus or Galileo or whomever one might care
to name. However, as may be obvious by now, I did not share my father’s
scientific temperament. And although I no longer felt the presence in the attic, I
was entirely resistant to abandoning the image of someone hanging himself from
the wooden beams crossing the length of a lonely attic and leaving behind him
an unseen guideline to another world. Therefore, I was delighted to find that the
sense of this presence was restored to me in the portable form of a small jar,
which, when I cupped it tightly in my hands, conveyed into my system an even
more potent sense of the supernatural than I had previously experienced in the
attic. This was what I was bringing to Candy on that night in late autumn.
When I entered Candy’s house, there was no business going on that might
distract us from what I had to show her. There were in fact two figures slumped
against the wall on the opposite side of the front room of the house, but they
seemed inattentive, if not completely oblivious, to what was happening around
them.
‘What did you bring for Candy?’ she said, looking at the paper bag I held in
my hand. I sat down on the sofa beside her, and she leaned close to me.
‘This is something . . .’ I started to say as I removed the jar from the bag,
holding it by its lid. Then I realized that I had no way to communicate to her
what it was I had brought. It was not my intention to distress her in any way, but
there was nothing I could say to prepare her. ‘Now don’t open it,’ I said. ‘Just
hold it.’
‘It looks like jelly,’ she said as I placed the jar in her meaty hands.
Fortunately, the contents of the jar presented no disturbing images, and in the
glowing light of the television they took on a rather soothing appearance. She
gently closed her grip on the little glass container as if she were aware of the

precious nature of what was inside. She seemed completely unafraid, even
relaxed. I had no idea what her reaction would be. I knew only that I wanted to
share with her something that she could not otherwise have known in this life,
just as she had shared the wonders of her house with me.
‘Oh my God,’ she softly exclaimed. ‘I knew it. I knew that he wasn’t gone
from me. I knew that I wasn’t alone.’
Afterward, it occurred to me that what I had witnessed was in accord with my
father’s assertions. Just as my head had been haunting the attic with the presence
of someone who had hanged himself, Candy’s head was now haunting the jar
with a presence of her own design, one which was wholly unlike my own. It
seemed that she wished to hold on to that jar forever. Typically, forever was
about to end. A nondescript car had just pulled up and stopped in front of
Candy’s house. The driver quickly exited the vehicle and slammed its door
behind him.
‘Candy,’ I said, ‘There’s some business coming.’
I had to tug at the jar to free it from her grasp, but she finally let it go and
turned toward the door. As usual, I wandered off to one of the back rooms of the
house, an empty bedroom where I liked to huddle in a corner and think about all
the sleeping bodies that had dreamed there throughout innumerable nights. But
on this occasion I did not huddle in a corner. Instead, I kept watch on what was
happening in the front room of the house. The car outside had come to a stop too
aggressively, too conspicuously, and the man in the long coat who walked
toward the house moved in a way that was also too aggressive, too conspicuous.
He pushed open the door of Candy’s house and left it open after he stepped
inside.
‘Where’s the white kid?’ said the man in the long coat.
‘No white people in here,’ said Candy, who held her eyes on the television.
‘Not including you.’
The man walked over to the two figures across the room and gave each of
them a nudge with his foot.
‘If you didn’t know, I’m the one who lets you do business.’
‘I know who you are, Mr Police Detective. You’re the one who took my boy.
You took other ones too, I know that.’
‘Shut up, fat lady. I’m here for the white kid.’
I took the pen out of my pocket and pulled off the top, revealing a short, thick
needle like the point of a pushpin. Holding the pen at my side and out of sight, I
walked back down the hallway.

‘What do you want?’ I said to the man in the long coat.
‘I’m here to take you home, kid.’
If there was anything I had ever known in my life as a cold, abstract certainty,
it was this: if I went with this man, I would not be going home.
‘Catch,’ I said as I threw the little jar at him.
He caught the jar with both hands, and for a moment his face flashed a smile. I
have never seen a smile die so quickly or so completely. If I had blinked, I would
have missed the distressed transition. The jar then seemed to jump out of his
hands and onto the floor. Recovering himself, he took a step forward and
grabbed me. I have no reason to think that Candy or the others in the room saw
me jab the pen into his leg. What they saw was the man in the long coat
releasing me and then crumbling into a motionless pile. Evidently the effect was
immediate. One of the two figures stepped out of the shadows and gave the
fallen man the same kind of contemptuous nudge that had been given to him.
‘He’s dead, Candy,’ said the one figure.
‘You sure?’
The other figure rose to his feet and mule-kicked the head of the man on the
floor. ‘Seems so,’ he said.
‘I’ll be damned,’ said Candy, looking my way. ‘He’s all yours. I don’t want no
part of him.’
I found the jar, which fortunately was unbroken, and went to sit on the sofa
next to Candy. In a matter of minutes, the two figures had stripped the other man
down to his boxer shorts. Then one of them pulled off the boxer shorts, saying,
‘They look practically new.’ However, he stopped pulling soon enough when he
saw what was under them. We all saw what was there, no doubt about that. But I
wondered if the others were as confused by it as I was. I had always thought
about such things in an ideal sense, a mythic conception handed down over the
centuries. But it was nothing like that.
‘Put him in the hole!’ shouted Candy, who had stood up from the sofa and was
pointing toward the hallway. ‘Put him in the goddamn hole!’
They dragged the body into the closet and dropped it into the basement. There
was a slapping sound made by the unclothed form as it hit the floor down there.
When the two figures came out of the closet, Candy said, ‘Now get rid of the rest
of this stuff and get rid of the car and get rid of yourselves.’
Before exiting the house, one of the figures turned back. ‘There’s a big hunk
of cash here, Candy. You’re going to need some traveling money. You can’t stay
here.’

To my relief, Candy took part of the money. I got up from the sofa and set the
jar on the cushion beside my friend.
‘Where will you go?’ I asked.
‘There are plenty of places like this one in the city. No heat, no electricity, no
plumbing. And no rent. I’ll be all right.’
‘I won’t say anything.’
‘I know you won’t. Good-bye, boy.’
I said good-bye and wandered slowly home, dreaming all the while about
what was now in Candy’s basement.
By the time I arrived at the house it was after midnight. My mother and sister
must have also returned because I could smell the stench from my mother’s
European cigarettes as soon as I took two steps inside. My father was lying on
the living-room sofa, clearly exhausted after so many days of working in the
basement. He also seemed quite agitated, his eyes wide open and staring upward,
his head moving back and forth in disgust or negation or both, and his voice
repeatedly chanting, ‘Hopeless impurities, hopeless impurities.’ Hearing these
words helped to release my thoughts from what I had seen at Candy’s. They also
reminded me that I wanted to ask my father about something he had said to the
young man in the secondhand suit who had visited the house earlier that night.
But my father’s condition at the moment did not appear to lend itself to such
talk. In fact, he betrayed no awareness whatever of my presence. Since I did not
yet feel up to confronting my mother and sister, who I could now hear were
moving about upstairs (probably still unpacking from their trip), I decided to
take this opportunity to violate my father’s sanctions against entering the
basement without his explicit authorization. This, I believed, would provide me
with something to take my mind off the troubling events of that night.
However, as I descended the stairs into my father’s basement, I felt my mind
and senses being pulled back into the dark region of Candy’s basement. Even
before I reached the bottom of the stairs, that underground place imposed upon
me its atmosphere of ruin and wreckage and of an abysmal chaos that, I was
thankful to discover, I still found captivating. And when I saw the state of things
down there, I was overcome with a trembling awe that I had never experienced
before.
Everything around me was in pieces. It looked as if my father had taken an ax
and hacked up the whole apparatus on which he had once placed all his hopes of
accomplishing some task that only he cared to envision. Wires and cords hung
from the ceiling, all of them chopped through and dangling like vines in a jungle.

A greasy, greenish liquid was running across the floor and sluicing into the
basement drain. I waded through an undergrowth of broken glass and torn
papers. I reached down and picked up some of the pages savagely ripped from
my father’s voluminous notebooks. Meticulous diagrams and graphs were
obscured by words and phrases written with a thick, black marker. Page after
page had the word ‘IMPURE’ scrawled over them like graffiti on the walls of a
public 
toilet. 
Other 
recurring exclamations 
were: 
‘NOTHING BUT
IMPURITIES,’‘IMPURE 
HEADS,’‘NOTHING 
REVEALED,’‘NO 
PURE
CONCEPTION,’‘IMPOSSIBLE IMPURITIES,’ and, finally, ‘THE FORCES
OF AN IMPURE UNIVERSE.’
At the far end of the basement I saw a hybrid contraption that looked as if it
were a cross between a monarch’s throne and an electric chair. Bound to this
device by straps confining his arms and legs and head was the young man in a
secondhand suit. His eyes were open, but they had no focus in them. I noticed
that the greasy, greenish liquid had its source in a container the size of a water-
cooler bottle that was upended next to the big chair. There was a label on the
container, written on masking tape, that read SIPHONAGE. Whatever spooks or
spirits or other entities had inhabited the young man’s head – and my father
appeared to have drained off a sizeable quantity of this stuff – were now making
their way into the sewer system. They must have lost something, perhaps grown
stale, once released from their container, because I felt no aura of the spectral –
either malignant or benign – emanating from this residual substance. I was
unable to tell if the young man was still alive in any conventional sense of the
word. He may have been. In any case, his condition was such that my family
would once again need to find another house in which in live.
‘What happened down here?’ said my sister from the other side of the
basement. She was sitting on the stairs. ‘Looks like another one of dad’s projects
took a bad turn.’
‘That’s the way it looks,’ I said, walking back toward the stairs.
‘Do you think that guy was carrying much money on him?’
‘I don’t know. Probably. He was here collecting for some kind of
organization.’
‘Good, because mom and I came back broke. And it’s not as if we spent all
that much.’
‘Where did you go?’ I said, taking a seat beside my sister.
‘You know I can’t talk about that.’
‘I had to ask.’

After a pause, my sister whispered, ‘Daniel, do you know what a
hermaphrodite is?’
I tried my best to conceal any reaction to my sister’s question, even though it
had caused a cyclone of images and emotions to arise within me. That was what
had confused me about the police detective’s body. In my imagination, I had
always pictured a neat separation of parts. But it was nothing like that, as I have
already pointed out. Everything was all mixed together. Thank you, Elisa.
Despite her adherence to my mother’s strict rule of silence, my sister always
managed to give away something of what they had been up to.
‘Why do ask that?’ I said, also whispering. ‘Did you meet someone like that
when you were with mom?’
‘Absolutely not,’ she said.
‘You have to tell me, Elisa. Did mom . . . did she talk about me . . . did she
talk about me to this person?’
‘I wouldn’t know. I really wouldn’t,’ said Elisa as she rose to her feet and
walked back upstairs. When she reached the top step, she turned around and
said, ‘How’s this thing between you and mom going to end? Every time I
mention your name, she just clams up. It doesn’t make any sense.’
‘The forces of an impure universe,’ I said rhetorically.
‘What?’ said my sister.
‘Nothing that drives anybody makes any sense, if you haven’t noticed that by
now. It’s just our heads, like dad’s always saying.’
‘Whatever that means. Anyway, you better keep your mouth shut about what I
said. I’m never telling you anything ever again,’ she finished and then went
upstairs.
I followed my sister into the living room. My father was now sitting up on the
sofa next to my mother, who was opening boxes and pulling things out of bags,
presumably showing what she had bought on her latest trip with Elisa. I sat
down in a chair across from them.
‘Hi, baby,’ said my mother.
‘Hi, Mom,’ I said, then turned to my father. ‘Hey, Dad, can I ask you
something?’ He still seemed a bit delirious. ‘Dad?’
‘Your father’s very tired, honey.’
‘I know. I’m sorry. I just want to ask him one thing. Dad, when you were
talking to that guy, you said something about three . . . you called them
principles.’
‘Countries, deities,’ said my father from a deep well of depression. ‘Obstacles

to pure conception.’
‘Yeah, but what was the third principle? You never said anything about that.’
But my father had faded out and was now gazing disconsolately at the floor.
My mother, however, was smiling. No doubt she had heard all of my father’s
talk many times over.
‘The third principle?’ she said, blowing a cloud of cigarette smoke in my
direction. ‘Why, it’s families, sweetheart.’

THE TOWN MANAGER
O
ne gray morning not long before the onset of winter, some troubling news swiftly
travelled among us: the town manager was not in his office and seemed nowhere
to be found. We allowed this situation, or apparent situation, to remain tentative
for as long as we could. This was simply how we had handled such
developments in the past.
It was Carnes, the man who operated the trolley which ran up and down Main
Street, who initially recognized the possibility that the town manager was no
longer with us. He was the first one who noticed, as he was walking from his
house at one end of town to the trolley station at the other end, that the dim lamp
which had always remained switched on inside the town manager’s office was
now off.
Of course, it was not beyond all credibility that the lightbulb in the lamp that
stood in the corner of the town manager’s desk had simply burned out or that
there had been a short circuit in the electrical system of the small office on Main
Street. There might even have been a more extensive power failure that also
affected the rooms above the office, where the town manager resided since he
had first arrived among us to assume his duties. Certainly we all knew the town
manager as someone who was in no way vigilant regarding the state of either his
public office or his private living quarters.
Consequently, those of us in the crowd that had gathered outside the town
manager’s office, and his home, considered both the theory of an expired
lightbulb and that of an electrical short circuit at some length. Yet all the while,
our agitation only increased. Carnes was the one whose anxiety over this matter
was the most severe, for the present state of affairs had afflicted him longer than
anyone else, if only by a few minutes. As I have already indicated, this was not
the first time that we had been faced with such a development. So when Carnes
finally called for action, the rest of us soon abandoned our refuge in the
theoretical. ‘It’s time to do something,’ said the trolley driver. ‘We have to
know.’
Ritter, who ran the local hardware store, jimmied open the door to the town

manager’s office, and several of us were soon searching around inside. The place
was fairly neat, if only by virtue of being practically unfurnished. There was
simply a chair, a desk, and the lamp on top of the desk. The rest of it was just
empty floor space and bare walls. Even the drawers of the desk, as some of the
more curious members of our search party discovered, were all empty. Ritter was
checking the wall socket into which the lamp’s cord was plugged, and someone
else was inspecting the fuse box at the back of the office. But these were merely
stall tactics. No one wanted to reach under the lampshade and click the switch to
find out whether the bulb had merely burned out or, more ominously, the place
had been given over to darkness by design. The latter action, as all of us were
aware, signaled that the tenure of any given town manager was no longer in
effect.
At one time, our nexus of public services and functions was a traditional town
hall rising up at the south end of Main Street. Rather than a small lamp clinging
to the edge of a time-worn desk, that impressive structure was outfitted with a
great chandelier. This dazzling fixture served as a beacon assuring us that the
town’s chief official was still with us. When the town hall fell into decay and
finally had to be abandoned, other buildings gave out their illumination – from
the upper floors of the old opera house (also vacated in the course of time) to the
present storefront office that had more recently served as the center of the town’s
civic administration. But there always came a day when, without notice to
anyone in the town, the light went out.
‘He’s not upstairs,’ Carnes yelled down to us from the town manager’s private
rooms. At that precise moment, I had taken it upon myself to try the light switch.
The bulb lit up, and everyone in the room went mute. After a time, somebody –
to this day I cannot recall who it was – stated in a resigned voice, ‘He has left
us.’
Those were the words that passed through the crowd outside the town
manager’s office . . . until everyone knew the truth. No one even speculated that
this development might have been caused by mischief or a mistake. The only
conclusion was that the old town manager was no longer in control and that a
new appointment would be made, if in fact this had not already been done.
Nonetheless, we still had to go through the motions. Throughout the rest of
that gray morning and into the afternoon, a search was conducted. Over the
course of my life, these searches were performed with increasingly greater speed
and efficiency whenever one town manager turned up missing as the prelude to
the installation of another. The buildings and houses comprising our town were

now far fewer than in my childhood and youth. Whole sections that had once
been districts of prolific activity had been transformed by a remarkable corrosion
into empty lots where only a few bricks and some broken glass indicated that
anything besides weeds and desiccated earth had ever existed there. During my
years of youthful ambition, I had determined that one day I would have a house
in a grand neighborhood known as The Hill. This area was still known as such, a
designation bitterly retained even though the real estate in question – now a
rough and empty stretch of ground – no longer rose to a higher elevation than the
land surrounding it.
After satisfying ourselves that the town manager was nowhere to be found
within the town, we moved out into the countryside. Just as we were going
through the motions when we searched inside the town limits, we continued
going through the motions as we tramped through the landscape beyond them.
As previously stated, the time of year was close to the onset of winter, and there
were only a few bare trees to obstruct our view in any direction as we wandered
over the hardening earth. We kept our eyes open, but we could not pretend to be
meticulous searchers.
In the past, no town manager had ever been found, either alive or dead, once
he had gone missing and the light in his office had been turned off. Our only
concern was to act in such a way that would allow us to report to the new town
manager, when he appeared, that we had made an effort to discover the
whereabouts of his predecessor. Yet this ritual seemed to matter less and less to
each successive town manager, the most recent of whom barely acknowledged
our attempts to locate the dead or living body of the previous administrator.
‘What?’ he said after he finally emerged from dozing behind the desk in his
office.
‘We did the best we could,’ repeated one of us who had led the search, which
on that occasion had taken place in early spring. ‘It stormed the entire time,’ said
another.
After hearing our report, the town manager merely replied, ‘Oh, I see. Yes,
well done.’ Then he dismissed us and returned to his nap.
‘Why do we even bother?’ said Leeman the barber when we were outside the
town manager’s office. ‘We never find anything.’
I referred him and the others to the section of the town charter, a brief
document to be sure, that required ‘a fair search of the town and its environs’
whenever a town manager went missing. This was part of an arrangement that
had been made by the founders and that had been upheld throughout succeeding

generations. Unfortunately, nothing in the records that had come to be stored in
the new opera house, and were subsequently lost to the same fire that destroyed
this shoddily constructed building some years before, had ever overtly stated
with whom this arrangement had been made. (The town charter itself was now
only a few poorly phrased notes assembled from recollections and lore, although
the specifics of this rudimentary document were seldom disputed.) At the time,
no doubt, the founders had taken what seemed the best course for the survival
and prosperity of the town, and they forged an arrangement that committed their
descendants to this same course. There was nothing extraordinary about such
actions and agreements.
‘But that was years ago,’ said Leeman on that rainy spring afternoon. ‘I for
one think that it’s time to find out just who we’re dealing with.’
Others agreed with him. I myself did not disagree. Nonetheless, we never did
manage to broach the subject with the old town manager. But as we walked
across the countryside on that day so close to the onset of winter, we talked
among ourselves and vowed that we would pose certain questions to the new
town manager, who usually arrived not long after the disappearance or
abdication of the previous administrator, sometimes on the very same day.
The first matter we wished to take up was the reason we were required to
conduct a futile search for missing town managers. Some of us believed that
these searches were merely a way of distracting us, so that the new town
manager could take office before anyone had a chance to observe by what means
he arrived or from what direction he came. Others were of the opinion that these
expeditions did in fact serve some purpose, although what that may have been
was beyond our understanding. Either way, we were all agreed that it was time
for the town – that is, what there was left of it – to enter a new and more
enlightened era in its history. However, by the time we reached the ruined
farmhouse, all our resolutions dissolved into the grayness in which that day had
been enveloped.
Traditionally, the ruined farmhouse, along with the wooden shed that stood
nearby, marked the point at which we ended our search and returned to town. It
was now close to sundown, which would give us just enough time to be back in
our homes before dark once we had made a perfunctory inspection of the
farmhouse and its shed. But we never made it that far. This time we kept our
distance from that farmhouse, which was no more than a jagged and tilting
outline against the gray sky, as well as from the shed, a narrow structure of thin
wooden planks that someone had hammered together long ago. There was

something written across those weathered boards, markings that none of us had
ever seen before. They were scored into the wood, as if with a sharp blade. Some
of the letters were either missing or unreadable in the places where they were
gouged into planks that had separated from one another. Carnes the trolley man
was standing at my side.
‘Does that say what I think it says?’ he said to me, almost in a whisper.
‘I think so.’
‘And the light inside?’
‘Like smoldering embers,’ I said concerning the reddish glow that was shining
through the wooden slats of the shed.
Having recognized the arrival of the new town manager – from whatever
direction and by whatever means he may have come – we all turned away and
walked silently toward town, pacing slowly through the gray countryside that
day by day was being seized by the coming winter.
Despite what we had come across during our search, we soon reconciled
ourselves to it, or at least we had reached a point where we no longer openly
expressed our anxiety. Did it really matter if, rather than occupying a building on
Main Street with a sign that read TOWN MANAGER over the door, the one who now
held this position chose to occupy a shed whose rotting wooden planks had
roughly the same words inscribed upon them with a sharp blade? Things had
always been moving in that direction. At one time the town manager conducted
business from a suite of offices in the town hall and lived in a fine house in The
Hill district of town. Now this official would be working out of a weather-beaten
shed next to a ruined farmhouse. Nothing remained the same for very long.
Change was the very essence of our lives.
My own situation was typical. As previously mentioned, I had ambitions of
owning a residence in The Hill district. For a time I operated a delivery business
that almost certainly would have led to my attaining this goal. However, by the
time the old town manager arrived, I was sweeping the floors at Leeman’s
barbershop and taking whatever odd jobs came along. In any case, my drive to
build up a successful delivery business was all but extinguished once The Hill
district had eroded away to nothing.
Perhaps the general decline in the conditions of the town, as well as the
circumstances of its residents, could be attributed to poor officiating on the part
of our town managers, who in many ways seemed to be less and less able in their
duties as one succeeded another over the years. Whatever apprehensions we had
about the new town manager, it could not be said that the old town manager had

been a model administrator. For some time before his term came to an end, he
had spent the whole of each working day asleep behind his desk.
On the other hand, every town manager could be credited with introducing
some element of change, some official project of one kind or another, that was
difficult to condemn as wholly detrimental. Even if the new opera house had
never been anything but a shoddily constructed firetrap, it nonetheless
represented an effort at civic rehabilitation, or at least gave this impression. For
his part, the old manager had been responsible for the trolley which ran up and
down Main Street. In the early days of his administration, he had brought in
workers from outside the town to construct this monument to his spirit of
innovation. Not that there had ever been a great outcry for such a conveyance in
our town, which could easily be traversed from one end to the other either on
foot or by bicycle without causing the least exertion to those of us who were in
reasonably good health. Nevertheless, once the trolley had been built, most of us
rode the thing at one time or another, if only for the novelty of it. Some people,
for whatever reason, made regular use of this new means of transportation and
even seemed to depend on it to carry them the distance of only a few blocks. If
nothing else, the trolley provided Carnes with regular employment, which he had
not formerly enjoyed.
In brief, we had always managed to adapt to the ways of each town manager
who had been sent to us. The difficult part was waiting for new administrators to
reveal the nature of their plans for the town and then adjusting ourselves to
whatever form they might take. This was the system in which we had functioned
for generations. This was the order of things into which we had been born and to
which we had committed ourselves by compliance. The risk of opposing this
order, of plunging into the unknown, was simply too much for us to contemplate
for very long. But we did not foresee, despite having witnessed the spectacle of
the shed beside the ruined farmhouse, that the town was about to enter a
radically new epoch in its history.
The first directive from the new town manager was communicated to us by a
torn piece of paper that came skipping down the sidewalk of Main Street one day
and was picked up by an old woman, who showed it to the rest of us. The paper
was made from a pulpy stock and was brownish in color. The writing on the
paper looked as if it had been made with charred wood and resembled the same
hand that had written those words across the old boards of the town manager’s
shed. The message was this: DUSTROY TROLY.
While the literal sense of these words was apparent enough, we were reluctant

to act upon a demand that was so obscure in its point and purpose. It was not
unprecedented for a new town manager to obliterate some structure or symbol
that marked the administration of the one who had come before him, so that the
way might be cleared for him to erect a defining structure or symbol of his own,
or simply to efface any prominent sign of the previous order and thereby display
the presence of a new one. But usually some reason was offered, some excuse
was made, for taking this action. This obviously was not the case with the town
manager’s instruction to destroy the trolley. So we decided to do nothing until
we received some enhancement regarding this matter. Ritter suggested that we
might consider composing a note of our own to request further instructions. This
note could be left outside the door of the town manager’s shed. Not surprisingly,
there were no volunteers for this mission. And until we received a more detailed
notice, the trolley would remain intact.
The following morning the trolley came tooting down Main Street for its first
run of the day. However, it made no stops for those waiting along the sidewalk.
‘Look at this,’ Leeman said to me as he stared out the front window of his
barbershop. Then he went outside. I set my broom against a wall and joined him.
Others were already standing on the street, watching the trolley until it finally
came to rest at the other end of town. ‘There was no one at the switch,’ said
Leeman, an observation that a number of persons echoed. When it seemed that
the trolley was not going to make a return trip, several of us walked down the
street to investigate. When we entered the vehicle, we found the naked body of
Carnes the trolley driver lying on the floor. He had been severely mutilated and
was dead. Burned into his chest were the words: DUSTROY TROLY.
We spent the next few days doing exactly that. We also pulled up the tracks
that ran the length of the town and tore down the electrical system that had
powered the trolley. Just as we were completing these labors, someone spotted
another piece of that torn, brownish paper. It was being pushed about by the
wind in the sky above us, jerking about like a kite. Eventually it descended into
our midst. Standing in a circle around the piece of paper, we read the scrawled
words of the message. ‘GUD,’ it said. ‘NXT YUR JBS WULL CHNG.’
Not only did our jobs change, but so did the entire face of the town. Once
again, workmen came from outside with orders to perform various kinds of
construction, demolition, and decoration that began along Main Street and
ultimately extended into the outlying neighborhoods. We had been instructed by
the usual means not to interfere with them. Throughout the deep gray winter,
they worked on the interiors of the town’s buildings. With the coming of spring,

they finished off the exteriors and were gone. What they left behind them was a
place that did not resemble a town as much as it did a carnival funhouse. And
those of us who lived there functioned as sideshow freaks once we had been
notified, by the usual method, of exactly how our jobs had changed.
For example, Ritter’s Hardware had been emptied of its traditional
merchandise and restructured as an elaborate maze of lavatories. Upon entering
the front door you immediately found yourself standing between a toilet and a
sink. Built into one of the walls of this small room was another door that opened
upon another lavatory that was somewhat larger in dimensions. This room had
two doors that led to further lavatories, some of which could be reached only by
ascending a spiral staircase or walking down a long, narrow corridor. Each
lavatory differed somewhat in size and décor. None of the lavatories was
functional. The exterior of Ritter’s Hardware was given a new façade
constructed of large stone blocks and a pair of fake towers standing on either
side of the building and rising some distance above it. A sign above the front
door designated the former hardware store COMFORT CASTLE. Ritter’s new job
was to sit in a chair on the sidewalk outside his former place of business wearing
a simple uniform with the word ATTENDANT displayed in sewn lettering below the
left shoulder.
Leeman the barber was even less fortunate in the new career that had been
assigned to him. His shop, renamed ‘Baby Town,’ had been refurbished into a
gigantic playpen. Amid stuffed animals and an array of toys, Leeman was
required to languish in infants’ clothing sized for an adult.
All of the businesses along Main Street had been transformed in some manner,
although their tone was not always as whimsical as Ritter’s Comfort Castle or
Leeman’s Baby Town. A number of the buildings appeared simply as abandoned
storefronts – until one explored the interior and discovered that the back room
was actually a miniature movie theater where foreign cartoons were projected
upon a bare wall or that hidden in the basement was an art gallery filled entirely
with paintings and sketches of questionable taste. Sometimes these abandoned
storefronts were precisely what they appeared to be, except you would find
yourself locked inside once the door had closed, forcing you to exit out the back.
Behind the stores of Main Street was a world of alleys where it was
perpetually night, an effect created by tunnellike arcades enclosing this vast area.
Dim lamps were strategically placed so that no stretch of alley was entirely in
darkness as you wandered between high wooden fences or brick walls. Many of
the alleys ended up in someone’s kitchen or living room, allowing an escape

back into the town. Some of them kept growing more and more narrow until no
further progress was possible and every step leading to this point needed to be
retraced. Other alleys gradually altered as one walked along their length,
eventually presenting a complete change of scene from that of a small town to
one of a big city where screams and sirens could be heard in the distance,
although these sounds were only recordings piped in through hidden speakers. It
was in just such a vicinity, where painted theatrical backdrops of tall tenement
buildings with zig-zagging fire escapes rose up on every side, that I worked at
my own new job.
At the terminus of an obscure alley where steam was pumped through the
holes of a false sewer grating, I had been stationed in a kiosk where I sold soup
in paper cups. To be more accurate, it was not actually soup that I was given to
sell but something more like bouillon. Behind the counter that fronted my kiosk
there was a thin mattress on the floor where I could sleep at night, or whenever I
felt like sleeping, since it seemed unlikely that any customers would venture
through that labyrinth of alleys so that I might serve them. I subsisted on my
own bouillon and the water I used to concoct this desolate repast. It seemed to
me that the new town manager would finally succeed in the task which his
predecessors had but lazily pursued over the years: that of thoroughly bleeding
the town of the few resources that had been left to it. I could not have been more
wrong in this assessment.
Within a matter of weeks, I had a steady stream of customers lined up outside
my bouillon concession who were willing to pay an outrageous price for my
watery, yellowish liquid. These were not my fellow citizens but people from
outside. I noticed that nearly all of them carried folded brochures which either
extruded from their pockets or were grasped in their hands. One of these was left
behind on the counter that fronted my kiosk, and I read it as soon as business
slowed down. The cover of the brochure bore the words HAVE A FUN TIME IN
FUNNY TOWN. Inside were several captioned photographs of the various
‘attractions’ that our town had to offer to the curious tourist. I was in awe of the
town manager’s scheme. Not only had this faceless person taken our last penny
to finance the most extensive construction project the town had ever seen, from
which there was no doubt a considerable amount of kickback involved, but this
ingenious boondoggle had additionally brought an unprecedented flood of
revenue into our town.
Yet the only one who truly prospered was the town manager. Daily, sometimes
hourly, collections were made at each of the town’s attractions and concessions.

These were carried out by solemn-faced strangers who were visibly armed with
an array of weapons. In addition, I noticed that spies had been integrated among
the tourists, just to insure that none of us withheld more than a meager allotment
of the profits that derived from the town’s new enterprise. Nonetheless, whereas
we had once had reason to expect nothing less than total impoverishment under
the governance of the town manager, it now appeared that we would at least
survive.
One day, however, the crowds of tourists began to thin out. In short order, the
town’s new business dwindled to nothing. The solemn-faced men no longer
bothered to make their collections, and we began to fear the worst. Hesitantly,
we started to emerge from our places and gathered together on Main Street under
a sagging banner that read WELCOME TO FUNNY TOWN.
‘I think that’s it,’ said Ritter, who was still wearing his bathroom attendant’s
uniform.
‘Only one way to be sure,’ said Leeman, now back in adult clothes.
Once again we tramped out to the countryside under a gray sky some weeks
before the onset of winter. It was approaching dusk, and long before we reached
the town manager’s shed we could see that no reddish light glowed inside.
Nevertheless, we searched the shed. Then we searched the farmhouse. There was
no town manager. There was no money. There was nothing.
When the rest of them turned away and began to head back to town, I stayed
behind. Another town manager would arrive before long, and I did not wish to
see what form the new administration would take. This was the way it had
always been – one town manager succeeding another, each of them exhibiting
signs of greater degeneracy, as if they were festering away into who knows what.
And there was no telling where it would all end. How many others would come
and go, taking with them more and more of the place where I had been born and
was beginning to grow old? I thought about how different that place had been
when I was a child. I thought about my youthful dream of having a home in The
Hill district. I thought about my old delivery business.
Then I walked in the opposite direction from the town. I walked until I came
to a road. And I walked down that road until I came to another town. I passed
through many towns, as well as large cities, doing clean-up work and odd jobs to
keep myself going. All of them were managed according to the same principles
as my old home town, although I came upon none that had reached such an
advanced stage of degeneracy. I had fled that place in hopes of finding another
that had been founded upon different principles and operated under a different

order. But there was no such place, or none that I could find. It seemed the only
course of action left to me was to make an end of it.
Not long after realizing the aforementioned facts of my existence, I was sitting
at the counter of a crummy little coffee shop. It was late at night, and I was
eating soup. I was also thinking about how I might make an end of it. The coffee
shop may have been in a small town or a large city. Now that I think of it, the
place stood beneath a highway overpass, so it must have been the latter. The only
other customer in the place was a well-dressed man sitting at the other end of the
counter. He was drinking a cup of coffee and, I noted, directing a sidelong glance
at me every so often. I turned my head toward him and gave him a protracted
stare. He smiled and asked if he could join me at my end of the counter.
‘You can do whatever you like. I’m leaving.’
‘Not just yet,’ he said as he sat down at the counter stool next to mine. ‘What
business are you in?’
‘None in particular. Why?’
‘I don’t know. You just seem like someone who knows his way around.
You’ve been some places, am I right?’
‘I suppose so,’ I said.
‘I thought as much. Look, I’m not just interested in chit-chat here. I work on
commission finding people like you. And I think you’ve got what it takes.’
‘For what?’ I asked.
‘Town management,’ he replied.
I finished off the last few spoonfuls of my soup. I wiped my mouth with a
paper napkin. ‘Tell me more,’ I said.
It was either that or make an end of it.

SIDESHOW, AND OTHER STORIES
FOREWORD
A
t the time I met the man who authored the stories that follow, I had reached a
crisis point in my own work as a writer of fiction. This gentleman, who was
considerably older than I, was several steps ahead of me along the same path. ‘I
have always desired to escape,’ he said, ‘from the grip of show business.’ He said
these words to me across the table in a corner booth of the coffee shop where all
our meetings took place in the late hours of the night.
We had been first introduced by a waitress working the night shift who
noticed we were both insomniacs who came into the coffee shop and sat for
many hours smoking cigarettes (the same brand), drinking the terrible
decaffeinated coffee they served in that place, and every so often jotting
something in the respective notebooks which we both kept at hand. ‘All of the
myths of mankind are nothing but show business,’ the other man said to me
during our initial meeting. ‘Everything that we supposedly live by and
supposedly die by – whether it’s religious scriptures or makeshift slogans – all of
it is show business. The rise and fall of empires – show business. Science,
philosophy, all of the disciplines under the sun, and even the sun itself, as well as
all those other clumps of matter wobbling about in the blackness up there –’ he
said to me, pointing out the window beside the coffee-shop booth in which we
sat, ‘show business, show business, show business.’ ‘And what about dreams?’ I
asked, thinking I might have hit upon an exception to his dogmatic view, or at
least one that he would accept as such. ‘You mean the dreams of the sort we are
having at this moment or the ones we have when we’re fortunate enough to
sleep?’ I told him his point was well taken and withdrew my challenge, having
only half-heartedly advanced it in the first place. The conversation nevertheless
proceeded along the same course – he submitting one example after another of
show business phenomena; I attempting to propose plausible exceptions to the
idiosyncratic doctrine with which he seemed hopelessly obsessed – until we
went our separate ways just before dawn.

That first meeting set the tone and fixed the subject matter of my subsequent
encounters in the coffee shop with the gentleman I would come to regard as my
lost literary father. I should say that I deliberately encouraged the gentleman’s
mania and did all I could to keep our conversations focused on it, since I felt that
his show-business obsession related in the most intimate way with my own
quandary, or crisis, as a writer of fiction. What exactly did he mean by ‘show
business’? Why did he find the ‘essentially show-business nature’ of all
phenomena to be problematic? How did his work as an author coincide with, or
perhaps oppose, what he called the ‘show-business world’?
‘I make no claims for my writing, nor have any hopes for it as a means for
escaping the grip of show business,’ he said. ‘Writing is simply another action I
perform on cue. I order this terrible coffee because I’m in a second-rate coffee
shop. I smoke another cigarette because my body tells me it’s time to do so.
Likewise, I write because I’m prompted to write, nothing more.’
Seeing an entrance to a matter more closely related to my own immediate
interest, or quandary or crisis, I asked him about his writing and specifically
about what focus it might be said to have, what ‘center of interest,’ as I put it.
‘My focus, or center of interest,’ he said, ‘has always been the wretched show
business of my own life – an autobiographical wretchedness that is not even
first-rate show business but more like a series of sideshows, senseless episodes
without continuity or coherence except that which, by virtue of my being the
ringmaster of this miserable circus of sideshows, I assign to it in the most bogus
and show-businesslike fashion, which of course fails to maintain any genuine
effect of continuity or coherence, inevitably so. But this, I’ve found, is the very
essence of show business, all of which in fact is no more than sideshow business.
The unexpected mutations, the sheer baselessness of beings, the volatility of
things . . . By necessity we live in a world, a sideshow world, where everything
is ultimately peculiar and ultimately ridiculous.’
‘By what standard?’ I interjected before his words – which had arrived at the
very heart of the crisis, quandary, and suffocating cul-de-sac of my existence as a
writer of fiction – veered away. ‘I said by what standard,’ I repeated, ‘do you
consider everything peculiar and ridiculous?’
After staring at me in a way that suggested he was not only considering my
question, but was also evaluating me and my entire world, he replied: ‘By the
standard of that unnameable, unknowable, and no doubt nonexistent order that is
not show business.’
Without speaking another word he slid out of the corner booth, paid his check

at the counter cash register, and walked out of the coffee shop.
That was the last occasion on which I spoke with this gentleman and fellow
writer. The next time I visited the coffee shop and sat in the corner booth, the
waitress who worked the night shift presented me with a small sheaf of pages.
‘He said to give these to you and that he wouldn’tbe back for them.’
‘That’s all he said?’ I asked.
‘That’s all,’ she answered.
I thanked her, ordered a decaffeinated coffee, lit a cigarette, and began to read
the tales that follow.
I. THE MALIGNANT MATRIX
For years I had been privileged to receive frequent and detailed communications
regarding the most advanced scientific and metaphysical studies. This
information was of a highly specialized nature that seemed to be unknown to the
common run of scientists and metaphysicians, yet was nevertheless attainable by
such avid non-specialists as myself, providing of course that one possessed a
receptive temperament and willingly opened oneself to certain channels of
thought and experience.
One day I received a very special communication whereby I learned that an
astounding and quite unexpected breakthrough had been achieved – the
culmination, it appeared, of many years of intense scientific and metaphysical
study. This breakthrough, the communication informed me, concerned nothing
less than the discovery of the true origins of all existential phenomena, both
physical and metaphysical – the very source, as I understood the claims being
made, of existence in the broadest possible sense. This special communication
also told me that I had been selected to be among those who would be allowed a
privileged view of everything involved in this startling breakthrough discovery,
and therefore would be guaranteed a rare insight into the true origins of all
existential phenomena. Since I was an individual who was highly receptive in
temperament to the matter at hand, I need only present myself at the particular
location where this incredible advance in scientific and metaphysical knowledge
had occurred.
Scrupulously I followed the directions communicated to me, even though, for
reasons that were not explained, I was not fully apprised of the specifics of my
actual destination. Nevertheless, I could not help imagining that I would
ultimately find myself a visitor at a sophisticated research facility of some kind,

a shining labyrinth of the most innovative devices and apparatus of extraordinary
complexity. The place where I finally arrived, however, in no way conformed to
my simple-minded and deplorably conventional expectations. This scientific and
metaphysical installation, as I thought of it, was located in a large building, but
one that was very old. I entered it, according to my instructions, through a small
door that I found at the end of a dark and narrow alley that ran along the side of
the old building. I opened the door and stepped inside, barely able to see two
paces in front of me, for by now it was the middle of the night. There was a faint
click as the door closed behind my back, and all I could do was wait for my
eyesight to adjust to the darkness.
Moonlight shone down through a window somewhere above me and spread
dimly across a dirty concrete floor. I could see that I was standing at the bottom
of an empty stairwell. I heard faint sounds of something dragging itself directly
toward me. Then I saw what it was that emerged from a shadowy area of that
empty stairwell. It was a head supported by a short length of neck on which it
pulled itself along like a snail, moving by inches upon the concrete floor. Its
features were indistinct yet nonetheless seemed deformed or mutilated, and it
was making sounds whose meaning I could not comprehend, its angular jaw
opening and closing mechanically. Before the head moved very close to me I
noticed there was something else in another, even more shadowy corner of that
bleak, moonlit stairwell. Not much larger than the head that was approaching me
across the floor, this other object was to my eyes an almost wholly shapeless
mass, quite pale, which I was able to identify as animated tissue only because,
every so often, it opened itself up like a giant bivalved mollusk found at great
suboceanic depths. And it made the same sound as the crawling head was
making, both of them crying out at the bottom of that dim and empty stairwell,
the place, I had been informed, where I might confront the source of all
existential phenomena.
I thought that I might have been misled, as I stood there listening to the cries
of those creatures at the bottom of that empty stairwell, and I left that place
through the door by which I had entered it. But just as that door was closing
behind me I realized how much those sounds I heard reminded me of the tiny
voices of things which, however imperfect their form, have been newly thrust
into the world of phenomenal existence.
II. PREMATURE COMMUNICATION

Early one winter morning during my childhood, while I was still lying in bed
upstairs, watching a few snowflakes floating outside my bedroom window, I
heard a voice from downstairs say these words: ‘The ice is breaking up on the
river.’ This voice was like no other that was familiar to me. It was very harsh and
yet very quiet at the same time, as though a heap of rusted machinery had
whispered something from the shadows of an old factory. Nothing else was said
by this voice.
When I left my room and went downstairs, I found my parents in the kitchen
as they usually were at that time on winter mornings, my father reading the
newspaper and my mother preparing breakfast while the same snowflakes which
were floating outside the window of my room upstairs were now floating so
slowly outside the kitchen window. Before I could say anything to either of my
parents, my mother suddenly told me that I would have to stay inside the house
for the rest of the day, offering no reason for making this demand. In reaction I
asked, in the words of a child, if my confinement to the house that day had
anything to do with the words that the voice had spoken, that ‘the ice was
breaking up on the river.’ From across the kitchen my father looked up at my
mother, neither of them saying a word. In that moment I realized for the first
time how many things in the world were entirely unknown to me, how reticent,
often wholly silent, were the people and places of my small childhood world.
I have no memory of the explanation my mother or my father might have
offered me as the reason why I had to stay in the house the rest of that day.
Actually I had no desire to go outdoors that winter morning, not while that voice,
whose mystery remained undispelled by my mother or my father, continued to
speak to me in its harsh and quietly distant tone from all the dim corners of the
house, as the snowflakes floated outside every window, repeating over and over
that the ice was breaking up on the river.
It was not many days afterward that my parents placed me in a hospital where
I was administered several potent medications and other forms of treatment. On
the way to the hospital my father restrained me in the back seat of the car while
my mother served as driver, and I calmed down only during those brief moments
when we passed across an old bridge that was built over a fairly wide river
which I had never before seen.
During my stay in the hospital I found that it was the medications I was given,
rather than the other forms of treatment, that allowed me to grasp the nature of
the voice which I had heard on a particular winter morning. I knew that my

parents would be crossing that old bridge whenever they came to visit me at the
hospital, so on the day when my doctor and a close relative of mine appeared in
my room to explain to me the details of a certain ‘tragic event,’ I was the first
one to speak. Before they could tell me of my mother and father’s fate, and the
way in which it had all happened, I said to them: ‘The ice has broken up on the
river.’
And the voice speaking these words was not the voice of a child but a harsh
yet whispery voice emanating from the depths of that great and ancient
machinery which powered, according to its own faulty and unknown
mechanisms, the most infinitesimal movements of the world as I knew it. Thus,
as my doctor and a close relative of mine explained further what had happened
to my parents, I only stared out the window, watching the machinery (into which
I had now been assimilated) as it produced each snowflake that fell one by one
outside the window of my hospital room.
III. THE ASTRONOMIC BLUR
Along a street of very old houses there was a building that was not a house at all
but a little store which kept itself open for business at all hours of the day and
night, every single day of the year. At first the store appeared to me as merely
primitive, a throwback to some earlier time when a place of business might be
allowed to operate in an otherwise residential district, however decayed the
houses of the neighborhood may have been. But it was much more than
primitive in the usual sense, for the little store declared no name for itself,
offered no outward sign to give an indication of its place in the world around it.
It was only the local residents who called it ‘the little store,’ when they spoke of
it at all.
There was a small window beside the dark wooden door of the building, but if
one tried to peer through the foggy glass of this window, nothing recognizable
could ever be seen – only a swirling blur of indefinite shapes. And although the
building’s interior lights were always left on, even in the middle of the night, it
was not the bright steady illumination of electricity that seemed to shine through
the window of the place but a dim, vaguely flickering glow. Neither was anyone
spied who might have been regarded as the proprietor of the little store, and no
one was ever seen either going into or coming out of it, least of all the people in
the surrounding neighborhood. Even if a passing car stopped in front and
someone got out of the vehicle with the apparent intention of entering the store,

they would never get farther than the sidewalk before turning around, getting
back inside their car, and driving away. The children in the area always crossed
to the opposite side of the street when walking by the little store.
Of course I was curious about this building from the time I first moved into
one of the old houses in the neighborhood. I immediately noticed what I then
considered the primitive, virtually primal nature of the little store, and I would at
great length observe this darkly luminous structure whenever I went out walking,
as I often did, in the late hours of the night. I followed this practice for some
time, never noticing any change in the little store, never seeing anything that I
had not seen the first night I began observing the place.
Then one night something did change in the little store, and something also
changed in the neighborhood around it. It was only for a moment that the dim
glow burning within the little store seemed to flare up before returning to its
usual state of a dull, smoldering flicker. This was all that I saw. Nevertheless,
that night I did not return to my home, because it was now glowing with the
same primordial light as that within the little store. All the old houses in the
neighborhood were lit up in the same way, all of their little windows glowing
dimly at that late hour. No one will ever again emerge from those houses, I
thought as I abandoned the streets of that neighborhood. Nor will anyone ever
desire to enter them.
Perhaps I had seen too deeply into the nature of the little store, and it was
simply warning me to look no further. On the other hand, perhaps I had been an
accidental witness to something else altogether, some plan or process whose
ultimate stage is impossible to foresee, although there still comes to me, on
certain nights, the dream or mental image of a dark sky in which the stars
themselves burn low with a dim, flickering light that illuminates an indefinite
swirling blur wherein it is not possible to observe any definite shapes or signs.
IV. THE ABYSS OF ORGANIC FORMS
For years I lived with my half-brother, who had been confined to a wheelchair
since childhood due to a congenital disease of the spine. Although placid much
of the time, my brother, or rather half-brother, would frequently gaze upon me
with a bitter and somehow brutish stare. His eyes were such a strange shade of
gray, so pale and yet so luminous, that they were the first thing one noticed upon
approaching him, and the fact that he inhabited a wheelchair always took second
place to the unusual, the truly demonic character of his eyes, in which there was

something that I could never bring myself to name.
It was only on rare occasions that my half-brother left the house in which he
and I lived together, and these were almost exclusively those times when, at his
insistence, I took him to a local racecourse where horses ran most afternoons
during the racing season. There we watched the animals come parading out onto
the track and run every race from first to last on a given day, never placing a
single wager on any of them, although we always brought home a racing
program which contained the names and performance statistics relating to all the
horses we had seen. For years I observed my brother, as he sat in his wheelchair
just behind the fence that bordered the racetrack, and I noticed how intensely he
gazed upon those horses, his gray eyes displaying a different aspect altogether
from the bitter and brutish quality they always assumed when we were at home.
On days when we did not visit the racecourse, he would pore over the old racing
programs containing the names of countless horses and the complex statistics
relating to their competitive performance, as well as information regarding their
physical nature, including the age of the horses and their various colors, whether
brown or bay, roan or gray.
One day I returned to the house where I had lived for many years with my
half-brother and found his wheelchair empty in the middle of our living room.
Surrounding it in a circle were pieces of paper torn from the old racing programs
that my brother collected. A rather considerable mound of these scraps of paper
were heaped around my brother’s, my half-brother’s, wheelchair, and on each of
them was printed the name of one of the many horses we had seen on our visits
to the racecourse. I myself was quite familiar with these names: Avatara, Royal
Troubadour, Hallview Spirit, Mechanical Harry T, and so on. Then I noticed that
there was a trail of these torn pieces of paper which seemed to lead away from
the wheelchair and toward the front door. I followed them outside the house,
where I found a few more fragments of old racing programs out on the porch.
But the trail ended even before I reached the sidewalk, the small scraps of paper
having been dispersed by the brisk winds of a cold September day. After
investigating for some time, I could find nothing to indicate what had become of
my brother – that is, my half-brother – and nor could anyone else. No
explanation by any agency or person ever sufficiently illuminated the reason for
or method of his disappearance.
It was not long after this incident that, for the first time in my life, I went
alone to the racecourse which my brother and I had visited together on so many
previous occasions. There I watched the horses come parading out onto the track

for each race from first to last.
Following the final race of the day, as the horses were leaving the track to
return to the area where they were kept in barns, I saw that one of these animals,
a roan stallion, had eyes that were the palest and most peculiar shade of gray.
When this particular horse passed the spot where I was standing, these eyes
turned upon me, staring directly into my own eyes in a way that seemed bitter
and thoroughly brutish and which conveyed to me the sense of something
unusual, something truly demonic that I could never bring myself to name.
V. THE PHENOMENAL FRENZY
For a time I had been looking to buy a house in which, barring unforeseen
developments, I was planning to live out the rest of my life. During this period
of house-searching, I found myself considering properties that were increasingly
distant from those nearest to them, until ultimately my search for a house in
which to live out the rest of my life took place entirely in remote areas miles
from the most out-of-the-way towns. I myself was sometimes surprised at the
backroad landscapes in which I ventured to investigate some old place where a
real estate agent had sent me or upon which I simply happened in the course of
wandering farther and farther from any kind of developed region, or even one
that had the least proximity to other houses.
It was while driving my car through one of these backroad landscapes, on a
windy November afternoon, that I discovered the sort of isolated house which at
that point was the only conceivable place where I could live out the rest of my
life with any chance of being at peace in the world. Although this two-story
frame structure stood in a relatively level and austere backroad landscape, with a
few bare trees and a ruined water tower intervening between it and the dull
autumnal horizon, I did not become aware of its presence until I had nearly
passed it by. There was no sign of landscaping immediately surrounding the
house, only the same grayish scrub grass that covered the ground everywhere
else in the area as far as the eye could see. Yet the house itself seemed relatively
new in its construction, and was not exactly the type of run-down place in which
I expected to live out the rest of my life in decayed seclusion.
I have already mentioned that it was a windy day, and, as I stood
contemplating that spectacularly isolated house, the atmosphere of that vast
backroad landscape became almost cyclonic. Furthermore, the sky was
beginning to darken at the edges of the horizon, even though there were no

clouds to be seen and several hours remained until the approach of twilight. As
the force of the winds grew stronger, the only other features in that backroad
landscape – the few bare trees and the ruined water tower – seemed to be
receding into the distance away from me, while the house before which I stood
appeared to loom closer and closer. In a thoughtless moment of panic I ran back
to my car, struggling to open the door as the wind pounded against it. As soon as
I was inside the car, I started the engine and drove as fast as conditions would
allow. Nevertheless, it seemed that I was making no progress along the route by
which I had come to that region: the horizon was still darkening and receding
ahead of me while the house in my rear-view mirror remained constant in its
looming perspective. Eventually, however, things began to change and that
backroad landscape, along with the isolated two-story house, diminished behind
me.
Only later did I ask myself where I would live out the rest of my life if not in
that backroad landscape, that remote paradise in which a house had been erected
that seemed perfectly designed for me. But this same place, a true resting place
in which I should have been able to live out the rest of my life in some kind of
peace, was now only one more thing that I had to fear.
AFTERWORD
In addition to the five stories presented here, I also found notes, mostly in the
form of unconnected phrases, for a sixth story with the apparent working title of
‘Sideshow.’ Following the manner of the other pieces, this story similarly
seemed destined to be no more than a dreamlike vignette, an episode of ‘peculiar
and ridiculous show business,’ to quote from the author’s notes. There were
other unique phrases or ideas that appeared in these notes which had also
emerged in my conversations with the author as we sat in the corner booth of
that coffee shop throughout the course of several nights. For example, such
phrases as ‘the volatility of things’ and ‘unexpected mutations’ appeared
repeatedly, as if these were to serve as the guiding principles of this presumably
abandoned narrative.
I suppose I should not have been surprised to find that the author of the
aborted narrative had made references to myself, since he had clearly
characterized his work to me as ‘autobiographical wretchedness.’ In these notes I
am fairly designated as the ‘other man in the coffee shop’ and as a ‘pitiful

insomniac who manufactures artistic conundrums for himself in order to distract
his mind from the sideshow town in which he has spent his life.’ The words
‘sideshow town’ appear earlier in what seems to be the intended opening
sentence of the aborted, or perhaps deliberately abandoned, story. This particular
sentence is interesting in that it directly suggests a continuity with one of the
other stories, something that, in my notice, is otherwise absent among these
feverish, apparently deranged fragments. ‘After failing to find a house in which I
might live out the rest of my life,’ the sentence begins, ‘I began to travel
frantically from one sideshow town to another, each of them descending further
than the one before it into the depths of a show-business world.’
Given the incomplete nature of the notes for the story called ‘Sideshow,’ not
to mention the highly elliptical quality that was conspicuous even in the author’s
completed works which I had read, I did not search very long for the modicum
of ‘coherence and continuity’ that he claimed to assign to the ‘senseless
episodes’ forming the fundamental stratum of both his writings and his
experience of the world. And at some point these notes ceased to resemble a
rough outline for a work-in-progress and took on the tone of a journal or private
confession. ‘Told X [a reference to myself, I assumed] that I wrote when I was
prompted,’ he wrote.
‘Didn’t mention what might constitue such a prompt, and he didn’t ask. Very
strange, since he seemed to display all the subtle qualities of a highly receptive
temperament, not to mention those far less subtle traits which were evident from
our first meeting. Like gazing into a funhouse mirror: the glaring likeness of our
literary pursuits, our shared insomnia, even the brand of cigarette which we both
smoked, often lighting up at the same time. I wasn’t going to draw attention to
these details, but why didn’t he?’
I recalled that one night I had questioned the meaning of my companion’s
statement that everything (in a ‘sideshow world,’ that is) was ‘ultimately peculiar
and ultimately ridiculous.’ In his notes, or confession, he wrote: ‘No standard
exists for the peculiarity and ridiculousness of things, not even one that is
unspeakable or unknowable, words which are merely a front or a subterfuge.
These qualities – the peculiar and the ridiculous – are immanent and absolute in
all existence and would be in any conceivable existent order . . .’ This last
sentence is transcribed thus from the author’s notes, truncated by ellipsis so that
he could immediately jump to his next thought, which was written on the same
line. ‘Why didn’t X challenge this assertion? Why did he allow so many things
to remain on the surface that might easily have gone so much deeper?’ And on

the line directly below that, he wrote: ‘Some peculiar and ridiculous fate in a
sideshow town.’
After I finished reading the five completed stories and the notes-cum-journal
or confession relating to a sixth tale, I left the coffee shop, eager not to allow
even the faintest touch of the approaching dawn to catch me sitting in that corner
booth, a circumstance that I always found intensely depressing for some reason.
I followed my usual course of backstreets and alleys home, pausing every so
often to admire the suggestive glow in the window of a little store or the network
of sagging wires that was everywhere strung above me, the power surging within
them seeming to pull me along and put each of my steps in place. This was
indeed a sideshow town in every way, peculiar and ridiculous in its essence,
though no more so than any other place. I think that my coffee-shop companion
might at one time have had a profound appreciation for this state of affairs but
had somehow lost it. In the end it seemed that he could not attain even an
attitude of resignation, let alone the strength to let himself be carried along by
the immanent and absolute realities, the great inescapable matters which he had
been privileged to glimpse, so to speak, at the bottom of a dim and empty
stairwell.
I was almost home when I heard a commotion in a pile of debris beneath the
silvery-blue luminescence of a streetlight in an alley. Looking deep into the
mound of empty paint cans, bicycle wheels stripped of their tires, rusty curtain
rods, and the like, I saw the little creature. It was something that might have
come from a jar in a museum exhibit or a carnival sideshow. What I most clearly
remember is the impression made on me by its pale gray eyes, which I had
already guessed were a family trait and which had looked at me numerous times
from the other side of a corner booth in a coffee shop. These eyes now stared at
me accusingly over a bundled stack of old newspapers, those heaping chronicles
of the sideshow world. As I began to walk away, the shrunken creature tried to
call out to me, but the only sound it managed to make was a coarse raspy noise
that briefly echoed down the alley. ‘No,’ he had written in his notes to the
unfinished sixth story. ‘I refuse to be a scribe for this show-business
phenomenon any longer.’ I, on the other hand, had triumphed over my literary
crisis and wanted nothing more than to get back to my desk, my brain practically
vibrating with an unwonted energy in spite of passing another night without any
sleep.

THE CLOWN PUPPET
I
t has always seemed to me that my existence consisted purely and exclusively of
nothing but the most outrageous nonsense. As long as I can remember, every
incident and every impulse of my existence has served only to perpetrate one
episode after another of conspicuous nonsense, each completely outrageous in its
nonsensicality. Considered from whatever point of view – intimately close,
infinitely remote, or any position in between – the whole thing has always
seemed to be nothing more than some freak accident occurring at a painfully
slow rate of speed. At times I have been rendered breathless by the impeccable
chaoticism, the absolutely perfect nonsense of some spectacle taking place
outside myself, or, on the other hand, some spectacle of equally senseless
outrageousness taking place within me. Images of densely twisted shapes and
lines arise in my brain. Scribbles of a mentally deranged epileptic, I have often
said to myself. If I may allow any exception to the outrageously nonsensical
condition I have described – and I will allow none – this single exception would
involve those visits which I experienced at scattered intervals throughout my
existence, and especially one particular visit that took place in Mr Vizniak’s
medicine shop.
I was stationed behind the counter at Mr Vizniak’s modest establishment very
late one night. At that hour there was practically no business at all, none really,
given the backstreet location of the shop and its closet-like dimensions, as well
as the fact that I kept the place in almost complete darkness both outside and
inside. Mr Vizniak lived in a small apartment above the medicine shop, and he
gave me permission to keep the place open or close it up as I liked after a certain
hour. It seemed that he knew that being stationed behind the counter of his
medicine shop at all hours of the night, and in almost complete darkness except
for a few lighting fixtures on the walls, provided my mind with some distraction
from the outrageous nonsense which might otherwise occupy it. Later events
more or less proved that Mr Vizniak indeed possessed a special knowledge and
that there existed, in fact, a peculiar sympathy between the old man and myself.
Since Mr Vizniak’s shop was located on an obscure backstreet, the neighborhood

outside was profoundly inactive during the later hours of the night. And since
most of the streetlamps in the neighborhood were either broken or defective in
some way, the only thing I could see through the small front window of the shop
was the neon lettering in the window of the meat store directly across the street.
These pale neon letters remained lit throughout the night in the window of the
meat store, spelling out three words: beef, pork, goat. Sometimes I would stare at
these words and contemplate them until my head became so full of meat
nonsense, of beef and pork and goat nonsense, that I had to turn away and find
something to occupy myself in the back room of the medicine shop, where there
were no windows and thus no possibility of meat-store visions. But once I was in
the back room I would become preoccupied with all the medicines which were
stored there, all the bottles and jars and boxes upon boxes stacked from floor to
ceiling in an extremely cramped area. I had learned quite a bit about these
medicines from Mr Vizniak, although I did not have a license to prepare and
dispense them to customers without his supervision. I knew which medicines
could be used to most easily cause death in someone who had ingested them in
the proper amount and proper manner. Thus, whenever I went into the back
room to relieve my mind from the meat nonsense brought on by excessive
contemplation of the beef-pork-and-goat store, I almost immediately became
preoccupied with fatal medicines; in other words, I would then become obsessed
with death nonsense, which is one of the worst and most outrageous forms of all
nonsense. Usually I would end up retreating to the small lavatory in the back
room, where I could collect myself and clear my head before returning to my
station behind the counter of Mr Vizniak’s medicine shop.
It was there – behind the medicine shop counter, that is – that I experienced
one of those visits, which I might have allowed as the sole exception to the
intensely outrageous nonsense of my existence, but which in fact, I must say,
were the nadir of the nonsensical. This was my medicine-shop visit, so called
because I have always experienced only a single visitation in any given place –
after which I begin looking for a new situation, however similar it may actually
be to my old one. Each of my situations prior to Mr Vizniak’s medicine shop was
essentially a medicine-shop situation, whether it was a situation working as a
night watchman who patrolled some desolate property, or a situation as a
groundskeeper for a cemetery in some remote town, or a situation in which I
spent endless gray afternoons sitting in a useless library or shuffling up and
down the cloisters of a useless monastery. All of them were essentially medicine-
shop situations, and each of them sooner or later involved a visit – either a

monastery visit or a library visit, a cemetery visit or a visit while I was
delivering packages from one part of town to another in the dead of the night. At
the same time there were certain aspects to the medicine-shop visit that were
unlike any of the other visits, certain new and unprecedented elements which
made this visit unique.
It began with an already familiar routine of nonsense. Gradually, as I stood
behind the counter late one night at the medicine shop, the light radiated by the
fixtures along the walls changed from a dim yellow to a rich reddish-gold. I have
never developed an intuition that would allow me to anticipate when this is
going to happen, so that I might say to myself: ‘This will be the night when the
light changes to reddish-gold. This will be the night of another visit.’ In the new
light (the rich reddish-gold illumination) the interior of the medicine shop took
on the strange opulence of an old oil painting; everything became transformed
beneath a thick veneer of gleaming obscurity. And I have always wondered how
my own face appears in this new light, but at the time I can never think about
such things because I know what is about to happen, and all I can do is hope that
it will soon be over.
After the business with the tinted illumination, only a few moments pass
before there is an appearance, which means that the visit itself has begun. First
the light changes to reddish-gold, then the visit begins. I have never been able to
figure out the reason for this sequence, as if there might be a reason for such
nonsense as these visits or any particular phase of these visits. Certainly when
the light changes to a reddish-gold tint I am being forewarned that an appearance
is about to occur, but this has never enabled me to witness the actual
manifestation, and I had given up trying by the time of the medicine-shop visit. I
knew that if I looked to my left, the appearance would take place in the field of
vision to my right; conversely, if I focused on the field of vision to my right, the
appearance would take place, in no time at all, on my left. And of course if I
simply gazed straight ahead, the appearance would take place just beyond the
edges of my left or right fields of vision, silently and instantaneously. Only after
it had appeared would it begin to make any sound, clattering as it moved directly
in front of my eyes, and then, as always happened, I would be looking at a
creature that I might say had all the appearances of an antiquated marionette, a
puppet figure of some archaic type.
It was almost life-sized and hovered just far enough above the floor of the
medicine shop that its face was at the same level as my own. I am describing the
puppet creature as it appeared during the medicine-shop visit, but it always took

the form of the same antiquated marionette hovering before me in a reddish-gold
haze. Its design was that of a clown puppet in pale pantaloons overdraped by a
kind of pale smock, thin and pale hands emerging from the ruffled cuffs of its
sleeves, and a powder-pale head rising above a ruffled collar. I always found it
difficult at first to look directly at the face of the puppet creature whenever it
appeared, because the expression which had been created for that face was so
simple and bland, yet at the same time so intensely evil and perverse. In the
observation of at least one commentator on puppet theater, the expressiveness of
a puppet or marionette resides in its arms, hands, and legs, never in its face or
head, as is the case with a human actor. But in the case of the puppet thing
hovering before me in the medicine shop, this was not true. Its expressiveness
was all in that face with its pale and pitted complexion, its slightly pointed nose
and delicate lips, and its dead puppet eyes – eyes that did not seem able to fix or
focus themselves upon anything but only gazed with an unchanging expression
of dreamy malignance, an utterly nonsensical expression of stupefied
viciousness and cruelty. So whenever this puppet creature first appeared I
avoided looking at its face and instead looked at its tiny feet which were covered
by a pair of pale slippers and dangled just above the floor. Then I always looked
at the wires which were attached to the body of the puppet thing, and I tried to
follow those wires to see where they led. But at some point my vision failed me;
I could visually trace the wires only so far along their neat vertical path . . . and
then they became lost in a thick blur, a ceiling of distorted light and shadow that
always formed some distance above the puppet creature’s head – and my own –
beyond which my eyes could perceive no clear image, nothing at all except a
vague sluggish movement, like a layer of dense clouds seen from far away
through a gloomy reddish-gold twilight. This phenomenon of the wires
disappearing into a blur supported my observation over the years that the puppet
thing did not have a life of its own. It was solely by means of these wires, in my
view, that the creature was able to proceed through its familiar motions. (The
term ‘motions,’ as I bothered myself to discover in the course of my useless
research into the subject, was commonly employed at one time, long ago, to
refer to various types of puppets, as in the statement: ‘The motions recently
viewed at St Bartholomew’s Fair were engaged in antics of a questionable
probity before an audience which might have better profited by deep
contemplation of the fragile and uncertain destiny of their immortal souls.’) The
puppet swung forward toward the counter of the medicine shop behind which I
stood. Its body parts rattled loosely and noisily in the late-night quiet before

coming to rest. One of its hands was held out to me, its fingers barely grasping a
crumpled slip of paper.
Of course I took the tiny page, which appeared to have been torn from an old
pad used for writing pharmaceutical prescriptions. I had learned through the
years to follow the puppet creature’s cues obediently. At one time, years before
the visit at the medicine shop, I was crazy or foolish enough to call the puppet
and its visits exactly what they were – outrageous nonsense. Right to the face of
that clown puppet I said, ‘Take your nonsense somewhere else,’ or possibly, ‘I’m
sick of this contemptible and disgusting nonsense.’ But this outburst counted for
nothing. The puppet simply waited until my foolhardy craziness had passed and
then continued through the motions which had been prepared for that particular
visit. So I examined the prescription form the creature had passed across the
counter to me, and I noticed immediately that what was written upon it was
nothing but a chaos of scrawls and scribbles, which was precisely the sort of
nonsense I should have expected during the medicine-shop visit. I knew that it
was my part to play along with the clown puppet, although I was never precisely
certain what was expected of me. From previous experience I had learned that it
was futile to guess what would eventually transpire during a particular visit,
because the puppet creature was capable of almost anything. For example, once
it visited me when I was working through the night at a skid-row pawn shop. I
told the thing that it was wasting my time unless it could produce an exquisitely
cut diamond the size of a yo-yo. Then it reached under its pale smocklike
garment and rummaged about, its hand seeking deep within its pantaloons.
‘Well, let’s see it,’ I shouted at the clown puppet. ‘As big as a yo-yo,’ I repeated.
Not only did it come up with an exquisitely cut diamond that was, generally
speaking, as large as a yo-yo, but the object that the puppet thing flashed before
my eyes – brilliant in the pawn-shop dimness – was also made in the form of a
yo-yo . . . and the creature began to lazily play with the yo-yo diamond right in
front of me, spinning it slowly on the string that was looped about one of those
pale puppet-fingers, throwing it down and pulling it up over and over while the
facets of that exquisitely cut diamond cast a pyrotechnic brilliance into every
corner of the pawn shop.
Now, as I stood behind the counter of the medicine shop staring at the scrawls
and scribbles on that page torn from an old prescription pad, I knew that it was
pointless to test the clown puppet in any way or to attempt to guess what would
occur during this particular visit, which would be unlike previous visits in
several significant ways. Thus I tried only to play my part, my medicine-shop

part, as close as possible to the script that I imagined had already been written,
though by whom or what I could have no idea.
‘Could you please show me some proper identification?’ I asked the creature,
while at the same time looking away from its pale and pasty clown face and its
dead puppet eyes, gazing instead through the medicine-shop window and
focusing on the sign in the window of the meat store across the street. Over and
over I read the words BEEF-PORK-GOAT, BEEF-PORK-GOAT, filling my head with
meat nonsense, which was infinitely less outrageous than the puppet nonsense
with which I was now confronted. ‘I cannot dispense this prescription,’ I said
while staring out the medicine-shop window. ‘Not unless you can produce
proper identification.’ And all the time I had no idea what to do once the puppet
thing reached into its pantaloons and came up with what I requested.
I continued to stare out the medicine-shop window and think about the meat
nonsense, but I could still see the clown puppet gyrating in the reddish-gold
light, and I could hear its wooden parts clacking against one other as it struggled
to pull up something that was cached away inside its pantaloons. With stiff but
unerring fingers the creature was now holding what looked like a slim booklet of
some kind, waving it before me until I turned and accepted the object. When I
opened the booklet and looked inside I saw that it was an old passport, a foreign
passport with no words that I recognized save those of its rightful owner: Ivan
Vizniak. The address below Mr Vizniak’s name was a very old address, because
I knew that many years had passed since Mr Vizniak had emigrated from his
homeland, opened the medicine shop, and moved into the rooms directly above
it. I also noticed that the photograph had been torn away from its designated
place in the document belonging to Mr Vizniak.
Nothing like this had ever occurred during one of these puppet visits: no one
else had ever been involved in any of the encounters I had had over the years
with the clown puppet, and I was now at a loss for my next move. The only thing
that occupied my mind was the fact that Mr Vizniak lived in the rooms above the
medicine shop, and here in my hands was his passport, which the puppet
creature had given me when I asked it to provide some identification so that I
could fill the prescription it had given me, or rather, go through the motions of
filling such a prescription, since I had no hope of deciphering the scrawls and
scribbles on that old prescription form. And all of this was nothing but the most
outrageous nonsense, as I well knew from past experience. I was actually on the
verge of committing some explosive action, some display of violent hysterics by
which I might bring about an end, however unpleasant, to this intolerable

situation. The eyes of the puppet creature were so dark and so dead in the
reddish-gold light that suffused the medicine shop; its head was bobbing slightly
and also quivering in a way that caused my thought processes to race out of
control, becoming all tangled in a black confusion. But exactly at the moment
when I approached my breaking point, the head of the puppet thing turned away
from me and its eyes seemed to be looking toward the curtained doorway that
led to the back room of the medicine shop. Then it began to move in the
direction of the curtained doorway, its limbs swinging freely with the sort of
spastic and utterly mindless gestures of playfulness that only puppets can make.
Nothing like this had ever happened before in the course of the creature’s
previous visits: it had never left my presence in this manner. And as soon as it
disappeared entirely behind the curtain of the doorway leading to the back room,
I heard a voice calling to me from the street outside the medicine shop. It was
Mr Vizniak. ‘Open the door,’ he said. ‘Something has happened.’
I could see him through the paned windows of the front door, the eyes of his
thin face squinting into the dimness of the medicine shop. With his right hand he
kept beckoning, as if this incessant gesturing alone could bring me to open the
door for him. Another person is about to enter the place where one of these visits
is occurring, I thought to myself. But there seemed to be nothing I could do,
nothing I could say, not with the clown puppet only a few feet away in the back
room. I stepped around the counter of the medicine shop, unlocked the front
door, and let Mr Vizniak inside. As the old man shuffled in I could see that he
was wearing an old robe with torn pockets and a pair of old slippers.
‘Everything is all right,’ I whispered to him. And then I pleaded: ‘Go back to
bed. We can talk about it in the morning.’
But Mr Vizniak seemed to have heard nothing that I said to him. From the
moment he entered the medicine shop he appeared to be in some unusual state of
mind. His whole manner had lost the vital urgency he displayed when he was
rapping at the door and beckoning to me. He pointed one of his pale, crooked
fingers upward and slowly gazed around the shop. ‘The light . . . the light,’ he
said as the reddish-gold illumination shone on his thin, wrinkled face, making it
look as if he were wearing a mask that had been hammered out of some strange
metal, some ancient mask behind which his old eyes were wide and bright with
fear.
‘Tell me what happened,’ I said, trying to distract him. I had to repeat myself
several times before he finally responded. ‘I thought I heard someone in my
room upstairs,’ he said in a completely toneless voice. ‘They were going through

my things. I thought I might have been dreaming, but I was awake when I heard
something going down the stairs. Not footsteps,’ he said. ‘Just something quietly
brushing against the stairs. I wasn’t sure. I didn’t come down right away.’
‘I didn’t hear anyone come down the stairs,’ I said to Mr Vizniak, who now
seemed lost in a long pause of contemplation. ‘I didn’t see anyone on the street
outside. You were probably just dreaming. Why don’t you go back to bed and
forget about everything,’ I said. But Mr Vizniak no longer seemed to be listening
to me. He was staring at the curtained doorway leading to the back room of the
medicine shop.
‘I have to use the toilet,’ he said while continuing to stare at the curtained
doorway.
‘You can go back to your room upstairs,’ I suggested.
‘No,’ he said. ‘Back there. I have to use the toilet.’ Then he began shuffling
toward the back room, his old slippers lightly brushing against the floor of the
medicine shop. I called to him, very quietly, a number of times, but he continued
to move steadily toward the back room, as if he were in a trance. In a few
moments he had disappeared behind the curtain.
I thought that Mr Vizniak might not find anything in the back room of the
medicine shop. I thought that he might see only the bottles and jars and boxes
upon boxes of medicines. Perhaps the visit has already ended, I thought. It
occurred to me that the visit could have ended the moment the puppet creature
went behind the curtain of the doorway leading to the back room. I thought that
Mr Vizniak might return from the back room, after having used the toilet, and go
upstairs again to his rooms above the medicine shop. I thought all kinds of
nonsense in the last few moments of that particular visit from the clown puppet.
But in a number of its significant aspects this was unlike any of the previous
puppet visits I had experienced. I might even claim that I was not the one whom
the puppet creature was visiting on this occasion, or at least not exclusively so.
Even though I had always felt that my encounters with the clown puppet were
nothing but the most outrageous nonsense, the very nadir of the nonsensical, as I
have said, I nonetheless always had the haunting sense of being singled out in
some way from all others of my kind, of being cultivated for some special fate.
But after Mr Vizniak disappeared behind the curtained doorway I discovered
how wrong I had been. Who knows how many others there were who might say
that their existence consisted of nothing but the most outrageous nonsense, a
nonsense that had nothing unique about it at all and that had nothing behind it or
beyond it except more and more nonsense – a new order of nonsense, perhaps an

utterly unknown nonsense, but all of it nonsense and nothing but nonsense.
Every place I had been in my life was only a place for puppet nonsense. The
medicine shop was only a puppet place like all the others. I came there to work
behind the counter and wait for my visit, but I had no idea until that night that
Mr Vizniak was also waiting for his. Upon reflection, it seemed that he knew
what was behind the curtained doorway leading to the back room of the
medicine shop, and that he also knew that there was no longer any place to go
except behind that curtain, since any place he went in his life would only be
another puppet place. Yet it still seemed he was surprised by what he found back
there. And this is the most outrageously nonsensical thing of all – that he should
have stepped behind the curtain and cried out with such profound surprise as he
did. You, he said, or rather cried out. Get away from me. These were the last
words that I heard clearly before Mr Vizniak’s voice faded quickly out of
earshot, as though he were being carried away at incredible velocity toward
some great height. Now he would see, I thought during that brief moment. Mr
Vizniak would see what controlled the strings of the clown puppet.
When morning finally came, and I looked behind the curtain, there was no one
there. I told myself, as if for the sake of reassurance, that I would not be so
surprised when my time came. No doubt Mr Vizniak had told himself, at some
point in his life, the same, utterly nonsensical thing.

THE RED TOWER
T
he ruined factory stood three stories high in an otherwise featureless landscape.
Although somewhat imposing on its own terms, it occupied only the most
unobtrusive place within the gray emptiness of its surroundings, its presence
serving as a mere accent upon a desolate horizon. No road led to the factory, nor
were there any traces of one that might have led to it at some time in the distant
past. If there had ever been such a road it would have been rendered useless as
soon as it arrived at one of the four, red-bricked sides of the factory, even in the
days when the facility was in full operation. The reason for this was simple: no
doors had been built into the factory; no loading docks or entranceways allowed
penetration of the outer walls of the structure, which was solid brick on all four
sides without even a single window below the level of the second floor. The
phenomenon of a large factory so closed off from the outside world was a point
of extreme fascination to me. It was almost with regret that I ultimately learned
about the factory’s subterranean access. But of course that revelation in its turn
also became a source for my truly degenerate sense of amazement, my decayed
fascination.
The factory had long been in ruins, its innumerable bricks worn and
crumbling, its many windows shattered. Each of the three enormous stories that
stood above the ground level was vacant of all but dust and silence. The
machinery, which had densely occupied the three floors of the factory as well as
considerable space beneath it, is said to have evaporated – I repeat, evaporated –
soon after the factory ceased operation, leaving behind only a few spectral
outlines of deep vats and tanks, twisting tubes and funnels, harshly grinding
gears and levers, giant belts and wheels that could be most clearly seen at
twilight – and later, not at all. According to these strictly hallucinatory accounts,
the whole of the Red Tower, as the factory was known, had always been subject
to fadings at certain times. This phenomenon, in the delirious or dying words of
several witnesses, was due to a profound hostility between the noisy and
malodorous operations of the factory and the desolate purity of the landscape
surrounding it, the conflict occasionally resulting in temporary erasures, or

fadings, of the former by the latter.
Despite their ostensibly mad or credulous origins, these testimonies, it seemed
to me, deserved more than a cursory hearing. The legendary conflict between the
factory and the grayish territory surrounding it may very well have been a
fabrication of individuals who were lost in the advanced stages of either physical
or psychic deterioration. Nonetheless, it was my theory, and remains so, that the
Red Tower was not always that peculiar color for which it ultimately earned its
fame. Thus the encrimsoning of the factory was a betrayal, a breaking-off, for it
is my postulation that this ancient structure was in long-forgotten days the same
pale hue as the world which encompassed it. Furthermore, with an insight born
of dispassion to the point of total despair, I envisioned that the Red Tower was
never solely devoted to the lowly functions of an ordinary factory.
Beneath the three soaring stories of the Red Tower were two, possibly three,
other levels. The one immediately below the first floor of the factory was the
nexus of a unique distribution system for the goods which were manufactured on
all three of the floors above. This first subterranean level in many ways
resembled, and functioned in the manner of, an old-fashioned underground mine.
Elevator compartments enclosed by a heavy wire mesh, twisted and corroded,
descended far below the surface into an expansive chamber which had been
crudely dug out of the rocky earth and was haphazardly perpetuated by a dense
structure of supports, a criss-crossing network of posts and pillars, beams and
rafters, that included a variety of materials – wood, metal, concrete, bone, and a
fine sinewy webbing that was fibrous and quite firm. From this central chamber
radiated a system of tunnels that honeycombed the land beneath the gray and
desolate country surrounding the Red Tower. Through these tunnels the goods
manufactured by the factory could be carried, sometimes literally by hand, but
more often by means of small wagons and carts, reaching near and far into the
most obscure and unlikely delivery points.
The trade that was originally produced by the Red Tower was in some sense
remarkable, but not, at first, of an extraordinary or especially ambitious nature.
This was a gruesome array of goods that could perhaps best be described as
novelty items. In the beginning there was a chaotic quality to the objects and
constructions produced by the machinery at the Red Tower, a randomness that
yielded formless things of no consistent shape or size or apparent design.
Occasionally there might appear a peculiar ashen lump that betrayed some
semblance of a face or clawing fingers, or perhaps an assemblage that looked
like a casket with tiny irregular wheels, but for the most part the early

productions seemed relatively innocuous. After a time, however, things began to
fall into place, as they always do, rejecting a harmless and uninteresting disorder
– never an enduring state of affairs – and taking on the more usual plans and
purposes of a viciously intent creation.
So it was that the Red Tower put into production its new, more terrible and
perplexing, line of unique novelty items. Among the objects and constructions
now manufactured were several of an almost innocent nature. These included
tiny, delicate cameos that were heavier than their size would suggest, far heavier,
and lockets whose shiny outer surface flipped open to reveal a black reverberant
abyss inside, a deep blackness roaring with echoes. Along the same lines was a
series of lifelike replicas of internal organs and physiological structures, many of
them evidencing an advanced stage of disease and all of them displeasingly
warm and soft to the touch. There was a fake disembodied hand on which
fingernails would grow several inches overnight and insistently grew back
should one attempt to clip them. Numerous natural objects, mostly bulbous
gourds, were designed to produce a long, deafening scream whenever they were
picked up or otherwise disturbed in their vegetable stillness. Less scrutable were
such things as hardened globs of lava into whose rough, igneous forms were set
a pair of rheumy eyes that perpetually shifted their gaze from side to side like a
relentless pendulum. And there was also a humble piece of cement, a fragment
broken away from any street or sidewalk, that left a most intractable stain,
greasy and green, on whatever surface it was placed. But such fairly simple
items were eventually followed, and ultimately replaced, by more articulated
objects and constructions. One example of this complex type of novelty item
was an ornate music box that, when opened, emitted a brief gurgling or sucking
sound in emulation of a dying individual’s death rattle. Another product
manufactured in great quantity at the Red Tower was a pocket watch in a gold
casing which opened to reveal a curious timepiece whose numerals were
represented by tiny quivering insects while the circling ‘hands’ were reptilian
tongues, slender and pink. But these examples hardly begin to hint at the range
of goods that came from the factory during its novelty phase of production. I
should at least mention the exotic carpets woven with intricate abstract patterns
that, when focused upon for a certain length of time, composed themselves into
fleeting phantasmagoric scenes of a kind which might pass through a fever-
stricken or even permanently damaged brain.
As it was revealed to me, and as I have already revealed to you, the means of
distributing the novelty goods fabricated at the Red Tower was a system of

tunnels located on the first level, not the second (or, possibly, third), that had
been excavated below the three-story factory building itself. It seems that these
subterranean levels were not necessarily the foundation of the original plan of
the factory but were in fact a perverse and unlikely development that might have
occurred only as the structure known as the Red Tower underwent, over time, its
own mutation from some prior state until it finally became a lowly site for
manufacturing. This mutation apparently demanded the excavation – whether
from above or below I cannot say – of a system of tunnels as a means for
distributing the novelty goods which, for a time, the factory produced.
As the unique inventions of the Red Tower achieved their final forms, they
seemed to be assigned specific locations to which they were destined to be
delivered, either by hand or by small wagons or carts pulled over sometimes
great distances through the system of underground tunnels. Where they might
ultimately pop up was anybody’s guess. It might be in the back of a dark closet,
buried under a pile of undistinguished junk, where some item of the highest and
most extreme novelty would lie for quite some time before it was encountered
by sheer accident or misfortune. Conversely, the same invention, or an entirely
different one, might be placed on the night-table beside someone’s bed for near-
immediate discovery. Any delivery point was possible; none was out of the reach
of the Red Tower. There has even been testimony, either intensely hysterical or
semi-conscious, of items from the factory being uncovered within the shelter of
a living body, or one not long deceased. I know that such an achievement was
within the factory’s powers, given its later production history. But my own
degenerate imagination is most fully captured by the thought of how many of
those monstrous novelty goods produced at the Red Tower had been
scrupulously and devoutly delivered – solely by way of those endless
underground tunnels – to daringly remote places where they would never be
found, nor ever could be. Truly, the Red Tower worked in mysterious ways.
Just as a system of distribution tunnels had been created by the factory when it
developed into a manufacturer of novelty goods, an expansion of this system
was required as an entirely new phase of production gradually evolved. Inside
the wire-mesh elevator compartment that provided access between the upper
region of the factory and the underground tunnels, there was now a special lever
installed which, when pulled back, or possibly pushed forward (I do not know
such details), enabled one to descend to a second subterranean level. This latterly
excavated area was much smaller, far more intimate, than the one directly above
it, as could be observed the instant the elevator compartment came to a stop and

a full view of things was attained. The scene which now confronted the uncertain
minds of witnesses was in many ways like that of a secluded graveyard,
surrounded by a rather crooked fence of widely spaced pickets held together by
rusty wire. The headstones inside the fence all closely pressed against one
another and were quite common, though somewhat antiquated, in their design.
However, there were no names or dates inscribed on these monuments – nothing
at all, in fact, with the exception of some rudimentary and abstract
ornamentation. This could be verified only when the subterranean graveyard was
closely approached, for the lighting at this level was dim and unorthodox,
provided exclusively by the glowing stone walls enclosing the area. These walls
seemed to have been covered with phosphorescent paint which bathed the
graveyard in a cloudy, grayish haze. For the longest time – how long I cannot
say – my morbid reveries were focused on this murky vision of a graveyard
beneath the factory, a subterranean graveyard surrounded by a crooked picket
fence and suffused by the highly defective illumination given off by
phosphorescent paint applied to stone walls. For the moment I must emphasize
the vision itself, without any consideration paid to the utilitarian purposes of this
place, that is, the function it served in relation to the factory above it.
The truth is that at some point all of the factory’s functions were driven
underground to this graveyard level. Long before the complete evaporation of
machinery in the Red Tower, something happened to require the shut-down of all
operations in the three floors of the factory which were above ground level. The
reasons for this action are deeply obscure, a matter for contemplation only when
a state of hopeless and devouring curiosity has reached its height, when the
burning light of speculation becomes so intense that it threatens to incinerate
everything on which it shines. To my own mind it seems entirely valid to
reiterate at this juncture the longstanding tensions that existed between the Red
Tower, which I believe was not always stigmatized by such a hue and such a
title, and the grayish landscape of utter desolation that surrounded this structure
on all sides, looming around and above it for quite incalculable distances. But
below the ground level of the factory was another matter: it was here that its
operations at some point retreated; it was here, specifically at this graveyard
level, that they continued.
Clearly the Red Tower had committed some violation or offense, its clamoring
activities and unorthodox products – perhaps its very existence – constituting an
affront to the changeless quietude of the world around it. In my personal
judgment there had been a betrayal involved, a treacherous breaking of a bond. I

can certainly picture a time before the existence of the factory, before any of its
features blemished the featureless country that extended so gray and so desolate
on every side. Dreaming upon the grayish desolation of that landscape, I also
find it quite easy to imagine that there might have occurred a lapse in the
monumental tedium, a spontaneous and inexplicable impulse to deviate from a
dreary perfection, perhaps even an unconquerable desire to risk a move toward a
tempting defectiveness. As a concession to this impulse or desire out of nowhere,
as a minimal surrender, a creation took place and a structure took form where
there had been nothing of its kind before. I picture it, at its inception, as a barely
discernable irruption in the landscape, a mere sketch of an edifice, possibly
translucent when making its first appearance, a gray density rising in the
grayness, embossed upon it in a most tasteful and harmonious design. But such
structures or creations have their own desires, their own destinies to fulfill, their
own mysteries and mechanisms which they must follow at whatever risk.
From a gray and desolate and utterly featureless landscape a dull edifice had
been produced, a pale, possibly translucent tower which, over time, began to
develop into a factory and to issue, as if in the spirit of the most grotesque
belligerence, a line of quite morbid, quite wonderfully disgusting novelty goods.
In an expression of defiance, at some point, it reddened with an enigmatic
passion for betrayal and perversity. On the surface the Red Tower might have
seemed a splendid complement to the grayish desolation of its surroundings,
making a unique, picturesque composition that served to define the glorious
essence of each of them. But in fact there existed between them a profound and
ineffable hostility. An attempt was made to reclaim the Red Tower, or at least to
draw it back toward the formless origins of its being. I am referring, of course, to
that show of force which resulted in the evaporation of the factory’s dense
arsenal of machinery. Each of the three stories of the Red Tower had been
cleaned out, purged of its offending means of manufacturing novelty items, and
the part of the factory that rose above the ground was left to fall into ruins.
Had the machinery in the Red Tower not been evaporated, I believe that the
subterranean graveyard, or something very much like it, would nonetheless have
come into existence at some point or another. This was the direction in which the
factory had been moving, a fact suggested by some of its later models of novelty
items. Machines were becoming obsolete as the diseased mania of the Red
Tower intensified and evolved into more experimental, even visionary projects. I
have previously reported that the headstones in the factory’s subterranean
graveyard were absent of any names of the interred and were without dates of

birth and death. This truth has been confirmed by numerous accounts rendered in
borderline gibberish. The reason for these blank headstones is entirely evident as
one gazes upon them standing crooked and closely packed together in the
phosphorescent haze given off by the stone walls covered with luminous paint.
None of these graves, in point of fact, could be said to have anyone buried in
them whose names and dates of birth and death would require inscription on the
headstones. These were not what might be called burying graves. This is to say
that these were in no sense graves for burying the dead. Quite the contrary: these
were graves of a highly experimental design from which the newest productions
of the Red Tower were to be born.
From its beginnings as a manufacturer of novelty items of an extravagant
nature, the factory had now gone into the business of creating what came to be
known as ‘hyper-organisms.’ These new productions were also of a
fundamentally extreme nature, representing an even greater divergence on the
part of the Red Tower from the bland and gray desolation in the midst of which
it stood. As implied by their designation as hyper-organisms, this line of goods
displayed the most essential qualities of their organic nature, which meant, of
course, that they were wildly conflicted in their two basic features. On the one
hand, they manifested an intense vitality in all aspects of their form and function;
on the other hand, and simultaneously, they manifested an ineluctable element of
decay in these same areas. To state this matter in the most lucid terms: each of
these hyper-organisms, even as they scintillated with an obscene degree of vital
impulses, also, and at the same time, had degeneracy and death written deeply
upon them. In accord with a tradition of dumbstruck insanity, it seems the less
said about these offspring of the birthing graves, or any similar creations, the
better. I myself have been almost entirely restricted to a state of seething
speculation concerning the luscious particularities of all hyper-organic
phenomena produced in the subterranean graveyard of the Red Tower. Although
we may reasonably assume that such creations were not to be called beautiful,
we cannot know for ourselves the mysteries and mechanisms of, for instance,
how these creations moved throughout the hazy luminescence of that
underground world; what creaky or spasmic gestures they might have been
capable of executing, if any; what sounds they might have made or the organs
used for making them; how they might have appeared when awkwardly
emerging from deep shadows or squatting against those nameless headstones;
what trembling stages of mutation they almost certainly would have undergone
following the generation of their larvae upon the barren earth of the graveyard;

what their bodies might have produced or emitted in the way of fluids and
secretions; how they might have responded to the mutilation of their forms for
reasons of an experimental or entirely savage nature. Often I picture to myself
what frantically clawing efforts these creations probably made to deliver
themselves from that confining environment which their malformed or
nonexistent brains could not begin to understand. They could not have
comprehended, any more than can I, for what purpose they were bred from those
graves, those incubators of hyper-organisms, minute factories of flesh that
existed wholly within and far below the greater factory of the Red Tower.
It was no surprise, of course, that the production of hyper-organisms was not
allowed to continue for very long before a second wave of destruction was
visited upon the factory. This time it was not merely the fading and ultimate
evaporation of machinery that took place; this time it was something far more
brutal. Once again, forces of ruination were directed at the factory, specifically
the subterranean graveyard located at its second underground level, its three-
story structure that stood above ground having already been rendered an echoing
ruin. Information on what remained of the graveyard, and of its cleverly
blasphemous works, is available to my own awareness only in the form of
shuddering and badly garbled whispers of mayhem and devastation and
wholesale sundering of the most unspeakable sort. These same sources also seem
to regard this incident as the culmination, if not the conclusion, of the
longstanding hostilities between the Red Tower and that grayish halo of
desolation that hovered around it on all sides. Such a shattering episode would
appear to have terminated the career of the Red Tower.
Nevertheless, there are indications that, appearances to the contrary, the
factory continues to be active despite its status as a silent ruin. After all, the
evaporation of the machinery which turned out countless novelty items in the
three-story red-brick factory proper, and the ensuing obsolescence of its
sophisticated system of tunnels at the first underground level, did not prevent the
factory from pursuing its business by other and more devious means. The work
at the second underground level (the graveyard level) went very well for a time.
Following the vicious decimation of those ingenious and fertile graves, along
with the merchandise they produced, it may have seemed that the manufacturing
history of the Red Tower had been brought to a close. Yet there are indications
that below the three-story above-ground factory, below the first and the second
underground levels, there exists a third level of subterranean activity. Perhaps it
is only a desire for symmetry, a hunger for compositional balance in things, that

has led to a series of the most vaporous rumors anent this third underground
level, in order to provide a kind of complementary proportion to the three stories
of the factory that rise into the gray and featureless landscape above ground. At
this third level, these rumors maintain, the factory’s schedule of production is
being carried out in some new and strange manner, representing its most
ambitious venture in the output of putrid creations, ultimately consummating its
tradition of degeneracy, reaching toward a perfection of defect and disorder,
according to every polluted and foggy rumor concerned with this issue.
Perhaps it seems that I have said too much about the Red Tower, and perhaps
it has sounded far too strange. Do not think that I am unaware of such things.
But as I have noted throughout this document, I am only repeating what I have
heard. I myself have never seen the Red Tower – no one ever has, and possibly
no one ever will. And yet wherever I go, people are talking about it. In one way
or another they are talking about the nightmarish novelty items or about the
mysterious and revolting hyper-organisms, as well as babbling endlessly about
the subterranean system of tunnels and the secluded graveyard whose headstones
display no names and no dates designating either birth or death. Everything they
are saying is about the Red Tower, in one way or another, and about nothing else
but the Red Tower. We are all talking and thinking about the Red Tower in our
own degenerate way. I have only recorded what everyone is saying (though they
may not know they are saying it), and sometimes what they have seen (though
they may not know they have seen it). But still they are always talking, in one
deranged way or another, about the Red Tower. I hear them talk of it every day
of my life. Unless, of course, they begin to speak about that gray and desolate
landscape, that hazy void in which the Red Tower – the great and industrious
Red Tower – is so precariously nestled. Then the voices grow quiet until I can
barely hear them as they attempt to communicate with me in choking scraps of
post-nightmare trauma. Now is just such a time when I must strain to hear the
voices. I wait for them to reveal to me the new ventures of the Red Tower as it
proceeds into even more corrupt phases of production, including the creations
being turned out by the shadowy workshop of its third subterranean level. I must
keep still and listen for the voices; I must remain quiet for a terrifying moment.
Then I will hear the news of the factory starting up its operations once more.
Then I will be able to speak again of the Red Tower.

DEFORMATIONS

MY CASE FOR RETRIBUTIVE ACTION
I
t was my first day working as a processor of forms in a storefront office. As soon
as I entered the place – before I had a chance to close the door behind me or take
a single step inside – this rachitic individual wearing mismatched clothes and
eyeglasses with frames far too small for his balding head came hopping around
his desk to greet me. He spoke excitedly, his words tumbling over themselves,
saying, ‘Welcome, welcome. I’m Ribello. Allow me, if you will, to help you get
your bearings around here. Sorry there’sno coat rack or anything. You can just
use that empty desk.’
Now, I think you’ve known me long enough, my friend, to realize that I’m
anything but a snob or someone who by temperament carries around a superior
attitude toward others, if for no other reason than that I simply lack the surplus
energy required for that sort of behavior. So I smiled and tried to introduce
myself. But Ribello continued to inundate me with his patter. ‘Did you bring
what they told you?’ he asked, glancing down at the briefcase hanging from my
right hand. ‘We have to provide our own supplies around here, I’m sure you
were told that much,’ he continued before I could get a word in. Then he turned
his head slightly to sneak a glance around the storefront office, which consisted
of eight desks, only half of them occupied, surrounded by towering rows of
filing cabinets that came within a few feet of the ceiling. ‘And don’t make any
plans for lunch,’ he said. ‘I’m going to take you someplace. There are some
things you might want to know. Information, anecdotes. There’s one particular
anecdote . . . but we’ll let that wait. You’ll need to get your bearings around
here.’
Ribello then made sure I knew which desk I’d been assigned, pointing out the
one closest to the window of the storefront office. ‘That used to be my desk.
Now that you’re with us I can move to one of the desks farther back.’
Anticipating Ribello’s next query, I told him that I had already received
instructions regarding my tasks, which consisted entirely of processing various
forms for the Quine Organization, a company whose interests and activities
penetrate into every enterprise, both public and private, on this side of the

border. Its headquarters are located far from the town where I secured a job
working for them, a drab outpost, one might call it, that’s even quite distant from
any of the company’s regional centers of operation. In such a place, and many
others like it, the Quine Organization also maintains offices, even if they are just
dingy storefront affairs permeated by a sour, briny odor. This smell could not be
ignored and led me to speculate that before this building had been taken over as
a facility for processing various forms relating to the monopolist Q. Org, as it is
often called for shorthand, it had long been occupied by a pickle shop. You
might be interested to know that this speculation was later confirmed by Ribello,
who had taken it upon himself to help me get my bearings in my new job, which
was also my first job since arriving in this little two-street town.
As I sat down at my desk, where a lofty stack of forms stood waiting to be
processed, I tried to put my encounter with Ribello out of my head. I was very
much on edge for reasons that you well know (my nervous condition and so
forth), but in addition I was suffering from a lack of proper rest. A large part of
the blame for my deprivation of sleep could be attributed to the woman who ran
the apartment house where I lived in a single room on the top floor. For weeks
I’d been pleading with her to do something about the noises that came from the
space underneath the roof of the building, which was directly above the ceiling
of my room. This was a quite small room made that much smaller because one
side of it was steeply slanted in parallel to the slanted roof above. I didn’t want
to come out and say to the woman that there were mice or some other kind of
vermin living under the roof of the building which she ran, but that was my
implication when I told her about the ‘noises.’ In fact, these noises suggested
something far more sizeable, and somehow less identifiable, than a pack of run-
of-the-mill vermin. She kept telling me that the problem would be seen to,
although it never was. Finally, on the morning which was supposed to be the first
day of my new job – after several weeks of struggling with inadequate sleep in
addition to the agitations deriving from my nervous condition – I thought I
would just make an end of it right there in that one-room apartment on the top
floor of a building in a two-street town on the opposite side of the border from
the place where I had lived my whole life and to where it seemed I would never
be able to return. For the longest time I sat on the edge of my bed holding a
bottle of nerve medicine, shifting it from one hand to the other and thinking,
‘When I stop shifting this bottle back and forth – an action that seemed to be
occurring without the intervention or control of my own mind – if I find myself
holding it in my left hand I’ll swallow the entire contents and make an end of it,

and if I find myself holding it in my right hand I’ll go and start working in a
storefront office for the Quine Organization.’
I don’t actually recall in which hand the bottle ended up, or whether I dropped
it on the floor in passing it from hand to hand, or what in the world happened.
All I know is that I turned up at that storefront office, and, as soon as I stepped
inside, Ribello was all over me with his nonsense about how he would help me
get my bearings. And now, while I was processing forms one after another like a
machine, I also had to anticipate going to lunch with this individual. None of the
other three persons in the office – two middle-aged men and an elderly woman
who sat in the far corner – had exercised the least presumption toward me, as
had Ribello, whom I already regarded as an unendurable person. I credited the
others for their consideration and sensitivity, but of course there might have been
any number of reasons why they left me alone that morning. I remember that the
doctor who was treating both you and me, and whom I take it you are still
seeing, was fond of saying, as if in wise counsel, ‘However much you may
believe otherwise, nothing in this world is unendurable – nothing.’ If he hadn’t
gotten me to believe that, I might have been more circumspect about him and
wouldn’t be in the position I am today, exiled on this side of the border where
fogs configure themselves with an astonishing regularity. These fogs are thick
and gray; they crawl down my throat and all but cut off my breathing.
Throughout that morning I tried to process as many forms as possible, if only
to keep my mind off the whole state of affairs that made up my existence, added
to which was having to go to lunch with Ribello. I had brought along something
to eat, something that would keep in my briefcase without going rotten too soon.
And for some hours the need to consume these few items I had stored in my
briefcase was acutely affecting me, yet Ribello gave no sign that he was ready to
take me to this eating place he had in mind. I didn’t know exactly what time it
was, since there wasn’t a clock in the office and none of the others seemed to
have taken a break for lunch, or anything else for that matter. But I was
beginning to feel light-headed and anxious. Even more than food, I needed the
medication that I had left behind in my one-room apartment.
Outside the front window I couldn’t see what was going on in the street due to
an especially dense fog that formed sometime around mid-morning and hung
about the town for the rest of the day. I had almost finished processing all the
forms that were on my desk, which was far more work than I had initially
calculated I would be able to accomplish in a single day. When there were only a
few forms left, the elderly woman who sat in the corner shuffled over to me with

a new stack that was twice the size of the first, letting them fall on my desk with
a thump. I watched her limp back to her place in the corner, her breath now
audibly labored from the effort of carrying such a weighty pile of forms. While I
was turned in my seat, I saw Ribello smiling and nodding at me as he pointed at
his wristwatch. Then he pulled out a coat from underneath his desk. It seemed
that it was finally time for us to go to lunch, although none of the others budged
or blinked as we walked past them and left the office through a back door that
Ribello pointed me toward.
Outside was a narrow alley which ran behind the storefront office and
adjacent structures. As soon as we were out of the building I asked Ribello the
time, but his only reply was, ‘We’ll have to hurry if we want to get there before
closing.’ Eventually I found that it was almost the end of the working day, or
what I would have considered to be such. ‘The hours are irregular,’ Ribello
informed me as we rushed down the alley. There the back walls of various
structures stood on one side and high wooden fences on the other, the fog
hugging close to both of them.
‘What do you mean, irregular?’ I said.
‘Did I say irregular? I meant to say indefinite,’ he replied. ‘There’s always a
great deal of work to be done. I’m sure the others were as glad to see you arrive
this morning as I was, even if they didn’t show it. We’re perpetually
shorthanded. All right, here we are,’ said Ribello as he guided me toward an
alley door with a light dimly glowing above it.
It was a small place, not much larger than my apartment, with only a few
tables. There were no customers other than ourselves, and most of the lights had
been turned off. ‘You’re still open, aren’t you?’ said Ribello to a man in a dirty
apron who looked as if he hadn’t shaved for several days.
‘Soon we close,’ the man said. ‘You sit there.’
We sat where we were told to sit, and in short order a woman brought two
cups of coffee, slamming them in front of us on the table. I looked at Ribello and
saw him pulling a sandwich wrapped in wax paper out of his coat pocket.
‘Didn’t you bring your lunch?’ he said. I told him that I thought we were going
to a place that served food. ‘No, it’s just a coffeehouse,’ Ribello said as he bit
into his sandwich. ‘But that’s all right. The coffee here is very strong. After
drinking a cup you won’t have any appetite at all. And you’ll be ready to face all
those forms that Erma hauled over to your desk. I thought she was going to drop
dead for sure.’
‘I don’t drink coffee,’ I said. ‘It makes me –’ I didn’t want to say that coffee

made me terribly nervous, you understand. So I just said that it didn’t agree with
me.
Ribello set down his sandwich for a moment and stared at me. ‘Oh dear,’ he
said, running a hand over his balding head.
‘What’s wrong?’
‘Hatcher didn’t drink coffee.’
‘Who is Hatcher?’
Taking up his sandwich once again, Ribello continued eating while he spoke.
‘Hatcher was the employee you were hired to replace. That’s the anecdote I
wanted to relate to you in private. About him. Now it seems I might be doing
more harm than good. I really did want to help you get your bearings.’
‘Nevertheless,’ I said as I watched Ribello finish off his sandwich.
Ribello wiped his hands together to shake free the crumbs clinging to them.
He adjusted the undersized eyeglasses which seemed as if they might slip off his
face at any moment. Then he took out a pack of cigarettes. Although he didn’t
offer me any of his sandwich, he did offer me a cigarette.
‘I don’t smoke,’ I told him.
‘You should, especially if you don’t drink coffee. Hatcher smoked, but his
brand of cigarettes was very mild. I don’t suppose it really matters, your not
being a smoker, since they don’t allow us to smoke in the office anymore. We
received a memo from headquarters. They said that the smoke got into the
forms. I don’t know why that should make any difference.’
‘What about the pickle smell?’ I said.
‘For some reason they don’t mind that.’
‘Why don’t you just go out into the alley to smoke?’
‘Too much work to do. Every minute counts. We’re shorthanded as it is.
We’ve always been shorthanded, but the work still has to get done. They never
explained to you about the working hours?’
I was hesitant to reveal that I had gotten my position not by applying to the
company, but through the influence of my doctor, who is the only doctor in this
two-street town. He wrote down the address of the storefront office for me on his
prescription pad, as if the job with Q. Org were another type of medication he
was using to treat me. I was suspicious, especially after what happened with the
doctor who treated us both for so long. His therapy, as you know from my
previous correspondence, was to put me on a train that traveled clear across the
country and over the border. This was supposed to help me overcome my dread
of straying too far from my own home, and perhaps effect a breakthrough with

all the other fears accompanying my nervous condition. I told him that I couldn’t
possibly endure such a venture, but he only repeated his ridiculous maxim that
nothing in the world is unendurable. To make things worse, he wouldn’t allow
me to bring along any medication, although of course I did. But this didn’t help
me in the least, not when I was traveling through the mountains with only
bottomless gorges on either side of the train tracks and an infinite sky above. In
those moments, which were eternal I assure you, I had no location in the
universe, nothing to grasp for that minimum of security which every creature
needs merely to exist without suffering from the sensation that everything is
spinning ever faster on a cosmic carousel with only endless blackness at the edge
of that wheeling ride. I know that your condition differs from mine, and
therefore you have no means by which to fully comprehend my ordeals, just as I
cannot fully comprehend yours. But I do acknowledge that both our conditions
are unendurable, despite the doctor’s second-hand platitude that nothing in this
world is unendurable. I’ve even come to believe that the world itself, by its very
nature, is unendurable. It’s only our responses to this fact that deviate: mine
being predominantly a response of passive terror approaching absolute panic;
yours being predominantly a response of gruesome obsessions that you fear you
might act upon. When the train that the doctor put me on finally made its first
stop outside of this two-street town across the border, I swore that I would kill
myself rather than make the return trip. Fortunately, or so it seemed at the time, I
soon found a doctor who treated my state of severe disorientation and acute
panic. He also assisted me in attaining a visa and working papers. Thus, after
considering the matter, I ultimately told Ribello that my reference for the
position in the storefront office had in fact come from my doctor.
‘That explains it, then,’ he said.
‘Explains what?’
‘All doctors work for the Quine Organization. Sooner or later he would have
brought you in. That’s how Hatcher was brought in. But he couldn’t persevere.
He couldn’t take the fact that we were shorthanded and that we would always be
shorthanded. And when he found out about the indefinite hours . . . well, he
exploded right in the office.’
‘He had a breakdown?’ I said.
‘I suppose you could call it that. One day he just jumped up from his desk and
started ranting about how we were always shorthanded . . . and the indefinite
hours. Then he became violent, turning over several of the empty desks in the
office and shouting, “We won’t be needing these.” He also pulled out some file

drawers, throwing their contents all over the place. Finally he started tearing up
the forms, ones that hadn’t yet been processed. That’s when Pilsen intervened.’
‘Which one is he?’
‘The large man with the mustache who sits at the back of the office. Pilsen
grabbed Hatcher and tossed him into the street. That was it for Hatcher. Within a
few days he was officially dismissed from the company. I processed the form
myself. There was no going back for him. He was completely ruined,’ said
Ribello as he took a sip of coffee and then lit another cigarette.
‘I don’t understand. How was he ruined?’ I said.
‘It didn’t happen all at once,’ explained Ribello. ‘These things never do. I told
you that Hatcher was a cigarette smoker. Very mild cigarettes that he special-
ordered. Well, one day he went to the store where he purchased his cigarettes
and was told that the particular brand he used, which was the only brand he
could tolerate, was no longer available.’
‘Not exactly the end of the world,’ I said.
‘No, not in itself,’ said Ribello. ‘But that was just the beginning. The same
thing that happened with his cigarettes was repeated when he tried to acquire
certain foods he needed for his special diet. Those were also no longer available.
Worst of all, none of his medications were in stock anywhere in town, or so he
was told. Hatcher required a whole shelf of pharmaceuticals to keep him going,
far more than anyone else I’ve ever known. Most important to him were the
medications he took to control his phobias. He especially suffered from a severe
case of arachnophobia. I remember one day in the office when he noticed a
spider making its way across the ceiling. He was always on the lookout for even
the tiniest of spiders. He practically became hysterical, insisting that one of us
exterminate the spider or he would stop processing forms. He had us crawling
around on top of the filing cabinets trying to get at the little creature. After Pilsen
finally caught the thing and killed it, Hatcher demanded to see its dead body and
to have it thrown out into the street. We even had to call in exterminators, at the
company’s expense, before Hatcher would return to work. But after he was
dismissed from the company, Hatcher was unable to procure any of the old
medications that had allowed him to keep his phobias relatively in check. Of
course the doctor was no help to him, since all doctors are also employees of Q.
Org.’
‘What about doctors on the other side of the border?’ I said. ‘Do they also
work for the company?’
‘I’m not sure,’ said Ribello. ‘It could be. In any case, I saw Hatcher while I

was on my way to the office one day. I asked him how he was getting along,
even though he was obviously a complete wreck, almost totally ruined. He did
say that he was receiving some kind of treatment for his phobias from an old
woman who lived at the edge of town. He didn’t specify the nature of this
treatment, and since I was in a hurry to get to the office I didn’t inquire about it.
Later I heard that the old woman, who was known to make concoctions out of
various herbs and plants, was treating Hatcher’s arachnophobia with a medicine
of sorts which she distilled from spider venom.’
‘A homeopathic remedy of sorts,’ I said.
‘Perhaps,’ said Ribello in a distant tone of voice.
At this point the unshaven man came over to the table and told us that he was
closing for the day. Since Ribello had invited me to lunch, such as it was, I
assumed that he would pay for the coffee, especially since I hadn’t taken a sip of
mine. But I noted that he put down on the table only enough money for himself,
and so I was forced to do the same. Then, just before we turned to leave, he
reached for my untouched cup and quickly gulped down its contents. ‘No sense
in it going to waste,’ he said.
Walking back to the office through the narrow, fog-strewn alley, I prompted
Ribello for whatever else he could tell me about the man whose position in the
storefront office I had been hired to fill. His response, however, was less than
enlightening and seemed to wander into realms of hearsay and rumor. Ribello
himself never saw Hatcher again after their meeting in the street. In fact, it was
around this time that Hatcher seemed to disappear entirely – the culmination, in
Ribello’s view, of the man’s ruin. Afterward a number of stories circulated
around town that seemed relevant to Hatcher’s case, however bizarre they may
have been. No doubt others aside from Ribello were aware of the treatments
Hatcher had been taking from the old woman living on the edge of town. This
seemed to provide the basis for the strange anecdotes which were being spread
about, most of them originating among children and given little credence by the
average citizen. Prevalent among these anecdotes were sightings of a ‘spider
thing’ about the size of a cat. This fabulous creature was purportedly seen by
numerous children as they played in the streets and back alleys of the town.
They called it the ‘nobby monster,’ the source of this childish phrase being that,
added to the creature’s resemblance to a monstrous spider, it also displayed a
knob-like protrusion from its body that looked very much like a human head.
This aspect of the story was confirmed by a few older persons whose testimony
was invariably dismissed as the product of the medications that had been

prescribed for them, even though practically everyone in town could be
discredited for the same reason, since they were all – that is, we were all – taking
one kind of drug or another in order to keep functioning in a normal manner.
There came a time, however, when sightings of the so-called nobby monster
ceased altogether, both among children and older, heavily medicated persons.
Nor was Hatcher ever again seen around town.
‘He just abandoned his apartment, taking nothing with him,’ said Ribello just
as we reached the alley door of the office. ‘I believe he lived somewhere near
you, perhaps even in the same building. I hear that the woman who ran the
apartment house wasn’t put out at all by Hatcher’s disappearance, since he was
always demanding that she accommodate his phobias by bringing in
exterminators at least once a week.’
I held the door open for Ribello but he didn’t take a step toward the building.
‘Oh no,’ he said. ‘My work’s done for the day. I’m going home to get some
sleep. We have to rest sometime if we’re to process the company’s forms at an
efficient pace. But I’ll be seeing you soon.’
After a few moments Ribello could no longer be seen at all through the fog. I
went back inside the office, my mind fixed on only one thing: the items of food
stashed within my briefcase. But I wasn’t two steps inside when I was cornered
by Pilsen near the lavatory. ‘What did Ribello say to you?’ he said. ‘It was about
the Hatcher business, wasn’t it?’
‘We just went out for a cup of coffee,’ I said, for some reason concerned to
keep Ribello’s confidence.
‘But you didn’t bring your lunch. You’ve been working all day, and you
haven’t had anything to eat. It’s practically dark now, your first day on the job.
And Ribello doesn’t make sure you take your lunch?’
‘How do you know we didn’t go somewhere to eat?’
‘Ribello only goes to that one place,’ Pilsen said. ‘And it doesn’t serve food.’
‘Well, I admit it. We went to the place that doesn’t serve food, and now I’m
famished. So if I could just return to my desk . . .’
But Pilsen, a large man with a large mustache, grabbed the collar of my coat
and pulled me back toward the lavatory.
‘What did Ribello say about the Hatcher business?’
‘Why don’t you ask him?’
‘Because he’s a congenital liar. It’s a sickness with him – one of many. You
see how he dresses, how he looks. He’s a lunatic, even if he is a very good
worker. But whatever he told you about Hatcher is completely false.’

‘Some of it did sound far-fetched,’ I said, now caught between the confidences
of Ribello, who may have been no more than a congenital liar, and Pilsen, who
was a large man and probably someone I didn’t want to offend.
‘Far-fetched is right,’ said Pilsen. ‘The fact is that Hatcher was promoted to
work in one of the company’s regional centers. He may even have moved on to
company headquarters by now. He was very ambitious.’
‘Then there’s nothing to say. I appreciate your straightening me out
concerning this Hatcher business. Now, if you don’t mind, I’d like to go back to
my desk. I’m really very hungry.’
Pilsen didn’t say another word, but he watched me as I walked to my desk.
And I felt that he continued to watch me from his place at the back of the office.
As I ate the few items of food I kept in my briefcase, I also made it quite
conspicuous that I was processing forms at the same time, not lagging behind in
my work. Nevertheless, I wasn’t sure that this ferocious display of form
processing was even necessary, as Ribello had implied was the case, due to the
monumental quantity of work we needed to accomplish with a perpetually
shorthanded staff. I wondered if Pilsen wasn’t right about Ribello. Specifically, I
wondered if Ribello’s assertion that our working schedule was ‘indefinite’ had
any truth to it. Yet several more hours passed and still no one, except Ribello,
had gone home since I arrived at the office early that morning. Finally I heard
one of the three persons sitting behind me stand up from his, or possibly her,
desk. Moments later, Pilsen walked past me wearing his coat. He was also
carrying a large briefcase, so I surmised that he was leaving for the day – it was
now evening – when he exited the office through the front door. After waiting a
short while, I did the same.
I had walked only a block or so from the storefront office when I saw Ribello
heading toward me. He was now wearing a different set of mismatched clothes.
‘You’re leaving already?’ he said when he stopped in front of me on the
sidewalk.
‘I thought you were going home to get some sleep,’ I said.
‘I did go home, and I did get some sleep. Now I’m going back to work.’
‘I talked to Pilsen, or rather he talked to me.’
‘I see,’ said Ribello. ‘I see very well. And I suppose he asked what I might
have said about Hatcher.’
‘In fact he did,’ I said.
‘He told you that everything I said was just nonsense, that I was some kind of
confirmed malcontent who made up stories that showed the company in a bad

light.’
‘Something along those lines,’ I said.
‘That’s just what he would say.’
‘Why is that?’
‘Because he’s a company spy. He doesn’t want you hearing what’s what on
your first day. Most of all he doesn’t want you to hear about Hatcher. He was the
one who informed on Hatcher and started the whole thing. He was the one who
ruined Hatcher. That old woman I told you about who lives on the edge of town:
she works for the company’s chemical division, and Pilsen keeps an eye on her
too. I heard from someone who works at one of the regional centers that the old
woman was assigned to one of the company’s biggest projects – a line of drugs
that would treat very specific disorders, such as Hatcher’s arachnophobia. It
would have made Q. Org twice the company it is today, and on both sides of the
border. But there was a problem.’
‘I don’t think I want to hear any more.’
‘You should hear this. The old woman was almost taken off the company
payroll because she was using more than just her esoteric knowledge of herbs
and plants. The chemical engineers at company headquarters gave her detailed
instructions to come up with variations on their basic formula. But she was
moving in another direction entirely and following completely unsanctioned
practices, primarily those of an occult nature.’
‘You said she was almost taken off the company payroll.’
‘That’s right. They blamed her for Hatcher’s disappearance. Hatcher was very
important to them as an experimental subject. Everything was set up to make
him a guinea pig – denying him his usual brand of cigarettes, taking him off his
special diet and his medications. They went to a great deal of trouble. Hatcher
was being cleansed for what the old woman, along with the company’s chemical
engineers, intended to put into him. The spider venom made some kind of sense.
But, as I said, the old woman was also following practices that weren’t
sanctioned by the company. And they needed someone to blame for Hatcher’s
disappearance. That’s why she was almost taken off the payroll.’
‘So Hatcher was an experiment,’ I said.
‘That’s what happens when you explode the way he did, ranting about the
unending workload we were expected to handle and how the company always
left us shorthanded. The question remains, however. Was the Hatcher experiment
a success or a failure?’
Ribello then looked at his wristwatch and said that we would talk further

about Hatcher, the Quine Organization, and a host of other matters he wanted to
share with me. ‘I was so glad to see you walk into the office this morning. We
have so many forms to process. So I’ll be seeing you in, what, a few hours or
so?’ Without waiting for my response, Ribello rushed down the sidewalk toward
the storefront office.
When I reached the door to my one-room apartment, everything within me
was screaming out for sleep and medication. But I paused when I heard footsteps
moving toward me from the end of the dim hallway. It was the woman who
operated the apartment house, and she was carrying in her arms what looked like
a bundle of dirty linen.
‘Cobwebs,’ she said without my asking her. She turned and pointed her head
back toward a set of stairs down the hallway, the kind of pull-down steps that
lead up to an attic. ‘We do keep our houses clean here, no matter what some
people from across the border may think. It’s quite a job but at least I’ve made a
start.’
I couldn’t help but stare in silence at the incredible wadding of cobwebs the
woman bore in her arms as she began to make her way downstairs. Some vague
thoughts occurred to me, and I called to the woman. ‘If you’re finished for the
time being I can put up those stairs to the attic.’
‘That’s good of you, thanks,’ she shouted up the stairwell. ‘I’ll bring in the
exterminator soon, just as you asked. I don’t know exactly what’s up there but
I’m sure it’s more than I can deal with myself.’
I understood what she meant only after I ascended into the attic and saw for
myself what she had seen. At the top of the stairs there was only a single
lightbulb which didn’t begin to illuminate those vast and shadowed spaces. What
I did see were the dead bodies, or parts of bodies, of more than a few rats. Some
of these creatures looked as if they had escaped from just the sort of thick,
heaping cobwebs which I had seen the woman who ran the apartment house
carrying in her arms. They clung to the bodies of the rodents just as the dense,
gray fog clung to everything in this town. Furthermore, all of these bodies
seemed to be in a state of deformity . . . or perhaps transition. When I looked
closely at them I could see that, in addition to the four legs normally allowed
them by nature, there were also four other legs that had begun sprouting from
their undersides. Whatever had killed these vermin had also begun to change
them.
But not all of the affected rodents had died or been partially eaten. Later
investigations I made into the attic, once I had persuaded the woman who ran the

apartment house to defer calling in the exterminator, revealed rats and other
vermin with physical changes even more advanced. These changes explained the
indefinable noises I had heard since moving into my one-room apartment just
beneath the roof of the building, with the attic between.
Some of the things I saw had eight legs of equal length and were able to
negotiate the walls of the attic and even crawl across the slanted ceiling just
under the roof. Others had even begun making webs of their own. I think you
would have recognized much of this, my friend, as something out of your own
gruesome obsessions. Fortunately my own fears did not include arachnophobia,
as was the case with Hatcher. (Nonetheless, I did ingest heavy doses of my
medication before proceeding into the attic.) When I finally located him in the
most remote corner of the attic I saw the knob-like head of a human being
protruding from the pale, puffy body of a giant spider, or spider-thing. He was in
the act of injecting his own venom into another verminous citizen of the attic. As
soon as his pin-point eyes noticed mine he released the creature, which squeaked
away to begin its own transformation.
I couldn’t imagine that Hatcher desired to continue his existence in that state.
As I approached him he made no move of either aggression or flight. And when
I took out the carving knife I had brought with me it seemed that he lifted his
head and showed me his tiny throat. He had made his decision, just as I had
made mine: I never returned to the storefront office to process forms for the
Quine Organization, in whose employ are all the doctors on this side of the
border . . . and perhaps also on your side. It is now my conviction that our own
doctor has long been working for this company. At the very least I blame him for
my exile to this remote, two-street town of fog and nightmares. At worst, I think
it was his intention to deliver me across the border to become another slave or
experimental subject for the company he serves.
I prepared two vials of the venom I extracted from Hatcher’s body. The first
I’ve already used on the doctor who has been treating me on this side of the
border, even if the culmination of that treatment was to be imprisoned in a
storefront office processing folders for an indefinite number of hours lasting the
remainder of my indefinite existence. I’m still watching him suffer his painful
mutations while I help myself to all the medications I please from the cabinets in
his office. Before morning comes I’ll put him out of his misery, and his
medications will put me out of mine.
The second vial I offer to you, my friend. For so long you have suffered from
such gruesome obsessions which our doctor did not, or would not, alleviate. Do

with this medicine what you must. Do with it what your obsessions dictate. You
might even consider, at just the right moment, giving the doctor my greetings . . .
and reminding him that nothing in this world is unendurable – nothing.

OUR TEMPORARY SUPERVISOR
I
have sent this manuscript to your publication across the border, assuming that it
ever arrives there, because I believe that the matters described in this personal
anecdote have implications that should concern even those outside my homeland
and beyond the influence, as far as I know, of the Quine Organization. These two
entities, one of which may be designated a political entity and the other being a
purely commercial entity, are very likely known to someone in your position of
journalistic inquiry as all but synonymous. Therefore, on this side of the border
one might as well call himself a citizen of the Quine Organization, or a Q. Org
national, although I think that even someone like yourself cannot appreciate the
full extent of this identity, which in my own lifetime has passed the point of
identification between two separate entities and approached total assimilation of
one by the other. Such a claim may seem alarmist or whimsical to those on your
side of the border, where your closest neighbors – I know this – are often
considered as a somewhat backward folk who inhabit small, decaying towns
spread out across a lowlying landscape blanketed almost year round by dense
grayish fogs. This is how the Quine Organization, which is to say in the same
breath my homeland, would deceptively present itself to the world, and this is
precisely why I am anxious (for reasons that are not always explicit or
punctiliously detailed) to relate my personal anecdote.
To begin with, I work in a factory situated just outside one of those small,
decaying towns layered over with fogs for most of the year. The building is a
nondescript, one-story structure made entirely of cinder blocks and cement.
Inside is a working area that consists of a single room of floor space and a small
corner office with windows of heavily frosted glass. Within the confines of this
office are a few filing cabinets and a desk where the factory supervisor sits while
the workers outside stand at one of several square ‘assembly blocks.’ Four
workers are positioned, one on each side of the square blocks, their only task
being the assembly, by hand, of pieces of metal which are delivered to us from
another factory. No one whom I have ever asked has the least notion of the larger
machinery, if in fact it is some type of machinery, for which these pieces are

destined.
When I first took this job at the factory it was not my intention to work there
very long, for I once possessed higher hopes for my life, although the exact
nature of these hopes remained rather vague in my youthful mind. While the
work was not arduous, and my fellow workers congenial enough, I did not
imagine myself standing forever at my designated assembly block, fitting
together pieces of metal into other pieces of metal, with a few interruptions
throughout the day for breaks that were supposed to refresh our minds from the
tedium of our work or for meal breaks to allow us to nourish our bodies.
Somehow it never occurred to me that the nearby town where I and the others at
the factory lived, traveling to and from our jobs along the same fog-strewn road,
held no higher opportunities for me or anyone else, which no doubt accounts for
the vagueness, the wispy insubstantiality, of my youthful hopes.
As it happened, I had been employed at the factory only a few months when
there occurred the only change that had ever disturbed its daily routine of piece-
assembly, the only deviation from a ritual which had been going on for nobody
knew how many years. The meaning of this digression in our working lives did
not at first present any great cause for apprehension or anxiety, nothing that
would require any of the factory’s employees to reconsider the type or dosage of
the medication which they were prescribed, since almost everyone on this side of
the border, including myself, takes some kind of medication, a fact that is
perhaps due in some part to an arrangement in my country whereby all doctors
and pharmacists are on the payroll of the Quine Organization, a company which
maintains a large chemical division.
In any case, the change of routine to which I have alluded was announced to
us one day when the factory supervisor stepped out of his office and made one of
his rare appearances on the floor where the rest of us stood positioned, in rather
close quarters, around our designated assembly blocks. For the first time since I
had taken this job, our work was called to a halt between those moments of
pause when we took breaks for either mental refreshment or to nourish our
bodies. Our supervisor, a Mr Frowley, was a massive individual, though not
menacingly so, who moved and spoke with a lethargy that perhaps was merely a
consequence of his bodily bulk, although his sluggishness might also have been
caused by his medication, either as a side effect or possibly as the primary effect.
Mr Frowley laboriously made his way to the central area of the factory floor and
addressed us in his slow-mannered way.
‘I’m being called away on company business,’ he informed us. ‘In my absence

a new supervisor will be sent to take over my duties on a temporary basis. This
situation will be in place tomorrow when you come to work. I can’t say how
long it will last.’
He then asked if any of us had questions for him regarding what was quite a
momentous occasion, even though at the time I hadn’t been working at the
factory long enough to comprehend its truly anomalous nature. No one had any
questions for Mr Frowley, or none that they voiced, and the factory supervisor
then proceeded back to his small corner office with its windows of heavily
frosted glass.
Immediately following Mr Frowley’s announcement that he was being called
away on company business and that in the interim the factory would be managed
by a temporary supervisor, there were of course a few murmurings among my
fellow workers about what all of this might mean. Nothing of this sort had ever
happened at the factory, according to the employees who had worked there for
any substantial length of time, including a few who were approaching an age
when, I presumed, they would be able to leave their jobs behind them and enter a
period of well-earned retirement after spending their entire adult lives standing
at the same assembly blocks and fitting together pieces of metal. By the end of
the day, however, these murmurings had long died out as we filed out of the
factory and began making our way along the foggy road back to our homes in
town.
That night, for no reason I could name, I was unable to fall asleep, something
which previously I had had no trouble doing after being on my feet all day
assembling pieces of metal in the same configuration one after the other. This
activity of assemblage now burdened my mind, as I tossed about in my bed, with
the full weight of its repetitiousness, its endlessness, and its disconnection from
any purpose I could imagine. For the first time I wondered how those metal
pieces that we assembled had come to be created, my thoughts futilely
attempting to pursue them to their origins in the crudest form of substance
which, I assumed, had been removed from the earth and undergone some process
of refinement, then taken shape in some factory, or series of factories, before
they arrived at the one where I was presently employed. With an even greater
sense of futility I tried to imagine where these metal pieces were delivered once
we had fitted them together as we had been trained to do, my mind racing in the
darkness of my room to conceive of their ultimate destination and purpose. Until
that night I had never been disturbed by questions of this kind. There was no
point in occupying myself with such things, since I had always possessed higher

hopes for my life beyond the time I needed to serve at the factory in order to
support myself. Finally I got out of bed and took an extra dose of medication.
This allowed me at least a few hours of sleep before I was required to be at my
job.
When we entered the factory each morning, it was normal procedure for the
first man who passed through the door to switch on the cone-shaped lamps
which hung down on long rods from the ceiling. Another set of lights was
located inside the supervisor’s office, and Mr Frowley would switch those on
himself when he came into work around the same time as the rest of us. That
morning, however, no lights were on within the supervisor’s office. Since this
was the first day that a new supervisor was scheduled to assume Mr Frowley’s
duties, if only on a temporary basis, we naturally assumed that, for some reason,
this person was not yet present in the factory. But when daylight shone through
the fog beyond the narrow rectangular windows of the factory, which included
the windows of the supervisor’s office, we now began to suspect that the new
supervisor – that is, our temporary supervisor – had been inside his office all
along. I use the word ‘suspect’ because it simply was not possible to tell – in the
absence of the office lights being switched on, with only natural daylight shining
into the windows through the fog – whether or not there was someone on the
other side of the heavily frosted glass that enclosed the supervisor’s office. If the
new supervisor that the Quine Organization had sent to fill in temporarily for Mr
Frowley had in fact taken up residence in the office situated in a corner of the
factory, he was not moving about in any way that would allow us to distinguish
his form among the blur of shapes which could be detected through the heavily
frosted glass of that room.
Even if no one said anything that specifically referred either to the new
supervisor’s presence or absence within the factory, I saw that nearly everyone
standing around their assembly blocks had cast a glance at some point during the
early hours of the day in the direction of Mr Frowley’s office. The assembly
block that served as my station was located closer than most to the supervisor’s
office, and we who were positioned there would seem to have been able to
discern if someone was in fact inside. But those of us standing around the
assembly block to which I was assigned, as well as others at blocks even closer
to the supervisor’s office, only exchanged furtive looks among ourselves, as if
we were asking one another, ‘What do you think?’ But no one could say
anything with certainty, or nothing that we could express in sensible terms.
Nevertheless, all of us behaved as if that corner office were indeed occupied

and conducted ourselves in the manner of employees whose actions were subject
to profound scrutiny and the closest supervision. As the hours passed it became
more and more apparent that the supervisor’s office was being inhabited,
although the nature of its new resident had become a matter for question. During
the first break of the day there were words spoken among some of us to the
effect that the figure behind the heavily frosted glass could not be seen to have a
definite shape or to possess any kind of stable or solid form. Several of my
fellow workers mentioned a dark ripple they had spied several times moving
behind or within the uneven surface of the glass which enclosed the supervisor’s
office. But whenever their eyes came to focus on this rippling movement, they
said, it would suddenly come to a stop or simply disperse like a patch of fog. By
the time we took our meal break there were more observations shared, many of
them in agreement about sighting a slowly shifting outline, some darkish and
globulant form like a thunderhead churning in a darkened sky. To some it
appeared to have no more substance than a shadow, and perhaps that’s all it was,
they argued, although they had to concede that this shadow was unlike any other
they had seen, for at times it moved in a seemingly purposeful way, tracing the
same path over and over behind the frosted glass, as if it were a type of creature
pacing about in a cage. Others swore they could discern a bodily configuration,
however elusive and aberrant. They spoke only in terms of its ‘head part’ or
‘arm-protrusions,’ although even these more conventional descriptions were
qualified by admissions that such quasi-anatomical components did not manifest
themselves in any normal aspect inside the office. ‘It doesn’t seem to be sitting
behind the desk,’ one man asserted, ‘but looks more like it’s sticking up from the
top, sort of sideways too.’ This was something that I too had noted as I stood at
my assembly block, as had the men who worked to the left and right of me. But
the employee who stood directly across the block from where I was positioned,
whose name was Blecher and who was younger than most of the others at the
factory and perhaps no more than a few years older than I was, never spoke a
single word about anything he might have seen in the supervisor’s office.
Moreover, he worked throughout that day with his eyes fixed upon his task of
fitting together pieces of metal, his gaze locked at a downward angle, even when
he moved away from the assembly block for breaks or to use the lavatory. Not
once did I catch him glancing in the direction of that corner of the factory which
the rest of us, as the hours dragged by, could barely keep our eyes from. Then,
toward the end of the work day, when the atmosphere around the factory had
been made weighty by our spoken words and unspoken thoughts, when the sense

of an unknown mode of supervision hung ominously about us, as well as within
us (such that I felt some inner shackles had been applied that kept both my body
and my mind from straying far from the position I occupied at that assembly
block), Blecher finally broke down.
‘No more,’ he said as if speaking only to himself. Then he repeated these
words in a louder voice and with a vehemence that suggested something of what
he had been holding within himself throughout the day. ‘No more!’ he shouted as
he moved away from the assembly block and turned to look straight at the door
of the supervisor’s office, which, like the office windows, was a frame of heavily
frosted glass.
Blecher moved swiftly to the door of the office. Without pausing for a
moment, not even to knock or in any way announce his entrance, he stormed
inside the cube-shaped room and slammed the door behind him. All eyes in the
factory were now fixed on the office in the corner. While we had suffered so
many confusions and conflicts over the physical definition of the temporary
supervisor, we had no trouble at all seeing the dark outline of Blecher behind the
heavily frosted glass and could easily follow his movements. Afterward,
everything happened very rapidly, and the rest of us stood as if stricken with the
kind of paralysis one sometimes experiences in a dream.
At first Blecher stood rigid before the desk inside the office, but this posture
lasted only for a moment. Soon he was rushing about the room as if in flight
from some pursuing agency, crashing into the filing cabinets and finally falling
to the floor. When he stood up again he appeared to be fending off a swarm of
insects, waving his arms wildly to forestall the onslaught of a cloudy and shifting
mass that hovered about him like a trembling aura. Then his body slammed hard
against the frosted glass of the door, and I thought he was going to break
through. But he scrambled full about and came stumbling out of the office,
pausing a second to stare at the rest of us, who were staring back at him. There
was a look of derangement and incomprehension in his eyes, while his hands
were shaking.
The door behind Blecher was left half open after his furious exit, but no one
attempted to look inside the office. He seemed unable to move away from the
place where he stood with the half-open office door only a few feet behind him.
Then the door finally began to close slowly behind him, although no visible
force appeared to be causing it to do so, however deliberately it moved on its
hinges. A little click sounded when the door pushed back into its frame. But it
was the sound of the lock being turned on the other side of the door that stirred

Blecher from his frozen stance, and he went running out of the factory. Only
seconds later the bell signaling the close of the work day rang with all the
shrillness of an alarm, even though it was not quite time for us to leave our
assembly blocks behind us.
Startled back into a fully wakened state, we exited the factory as a
consolidated group, proceeding with a measured pace, unspeaking, until we had
all filed out of the building. Outside there was no sign of Blecher, although I
don’t think that anyone expected to see him. In any case, the grayish fog was
especially dense along the road leading back to town, and we could hardly see
one another as we made our way home, none of us saying a word about what had
happened, as if we were bound by a pact of silence. Any mention of the Blecher
incident would have made it impossible, at least to my mind, to go back to the
factory. And there was no other place we could turn to for our living.
That evening I went to bed early, taking a substantial dose of medication to
insure that I would drop right off to sleep and not spend hour upon hour with my
mind racing, as it had been the previous night, with thoughts about the origins
(somewhere in the earth) and subsequent destination (at some other factory or
series of factories) of the metal pieces I spent my days assembling. I awoke
earlier than usual, but rather than lingering about my room, where I was likely to
start thinking about the events of the day before, I went to a small diner in town
which I knew would be open for breakfast at that time of the morning.
When I stepped inside the diner I saw that it was unusually crowded, the
tables and booths and stools at the counter occupied for the most part by my
fellow workers from the factory. For once I was glad to see these men whom I
had previously considered ‘lifers’ in a job which I never intended to work at for
very long, considering that I still possessed higher hopes of a vague sort for my
future. I greeted a number of the others as I walked toward an unoccupied stool
at the counter, but no one returned more than a nod to me, nor were they much
engaged in talking with one another.
After taking a seat at the counter and ordering breakfast, I recognized the man
on my right as someone who worked at the assembly block beside the one where
I was positioned day after day. I was fairly sure that his name was Nohls,
although I didn’t use his name and simply said ‘Good morning’ to him in the
quietest voice I could manage. For a moment Nohls didn’t reply but simply
continued to stare into the plate in front of him from which he was slowly and
mechanically picking up small pieces of food with his fork and placing them into
his mouth. Without turning to face me, Nohls said, in a voice even quieter than

my own had been, ‘Did you hear about Blecher?’
‘No,’ I whispered. ‘What about him?’
‘Dead,’ said Nohls.
‘Dead?’ I responded in voice that was loud enough to cause everyone else in
the diner to turn and look my way. Resuming our converation in extremely quiet
tones, I asked Nohls what had happened to Blecher.
‘That rooming house where he lives. The woman who runs the place said that
he was acting strange after – after he came back from work yesterday.’
Later on, Nohls informed me, Blecher didn’t show up for dinner. The woman
who operated the boarding house took it upon herself to check up on Blecher,
who didn’t answer when she knocked on his door. Concerned, she asked one of
her other male residents to look in on Mr Blecher. He was found lying face down
on his bed, and on the nightstand were several open containers of the various
medications which he was prescribed. He hadn’t consumed the entire contents of
these containers but had nevertheless died of an overdose of medication. Perhaps
he simply wanted to put the events of the day out of his mind and get a decent
night’s sleep. I had done this myself, I told Nohls.
‘Could be that’s what happened,’ Nohls replied. ‘I don’t suppose that anyone
will ever know for sure.’
After finishing my breakfast, I kept drinking refill after refill of coffee, as I
noticed others in the diner, including Nohls, were doing. We still had time before
we needed to be at our jobs. Eventually, however, other patrons began to arrive
and, as a group, we left for work.
When we arrived at the factory in the darkness and fog some hours before
dawn, there were several other employees standing outside the door. None of
them, it seemed, wanted to be the first to enter the building and switch on the
lights. Only after the rest of us approached the factory did anyone go inside. It
was then we found that someone had preceded us into work that morning, and
had switched on the lights. His was a new face to us. He was standing in
Blecher’s old position, directly opposite mine at the same assembly block, and
he had already done a considerable amount of work, his hands moving furiously
as he fitted those small metal pieces together.
As the rest of us walked onto the floor of the factory to take position at our
respective assembly blocks, almost everyone cast a suspicious eye upon the new
man who was standing where Blecher used to stand and who, as I remarked, was
working at a furious pace. But in fact it was only his hands that were working in
a furious manner, manipulating those small pieces of metal like two large spiders

spinning the same web. Otherwise he stood quite calmly and was very much a
stock figure of the type of person that worked at the factory. He was attired in
regulation gray work clothes that were well worn and was neither conspicuously
older nor conspicuously younger than the other employees. The only quality that
singled him out was the furiousness he displayed in his work, to which he gave
his full attention. Even when the factory began to fill with other men in gray
work clothes, almost all of whom cast a suspicious eye on the new man, he never
looked up from the assembly block where he was manipulating those pieces of
metal with such intentness, such complete absorption, that he gave no notice to
anyone else around him.
If the new man seemed an unsettling presence, appearing as he did the
morning after Blecher had taken an overdose of medication and standing in
Blecher’s position directly across from me at the same assembly block, at least
he served to distract us from the darkened office which was inhabited by our
temporary supervisor. Whereas the day before we were wholly preoccupied with
this supervisory figure, our attention was now primarily drawn to the new
employee among us. And even though he filled our minds with various
speculations and suspicions, the new man did not contribute to the atmosphere of
nightmarish thoughts and perceptions that had caused Blecher to become entirely
deranged and led him to take action in the way he did.
Of course we could forbear for just so long before someone addressed the new
man about his appearance at the factory that day. Since my fellow workers who
stood to the right and left of me at the assembly block were doing their best to
ignore the situation, the task of probing for some answers, I felt, had fallen upon
me.
‘Where are you from?’ I asked the man who stood directly across from me
where Blecher once stood on his side of the assembly block.
‘The company sent me,’ the man responded in a surprisingly forthcoming and
casual tone, although he didn’t for a second look up from his work.
I then introduced myself and the other two men at the assembly block, who
nodded and mumbled their greetings to the stranger. That was when I discovered
the limitations of the new man’s willingness to reveal himself.
‘No offense,’ he said. ‘But there’s a lot of work that needs to be done around
here.’
During our brief exchange the new man had continued to manipulate those
pieces of metal before him without interruption. However, even though he kept
his head angled downward, as Blecher had done for most of the previous day, I

saw that he did allow his eyes to flash very quickly in the direction of the
supervisor’s office. Seeing that, I did not bother him any further, thinking that
perhaps he would be more talkative during the upcoming break. In the meantime
I let him continue his furious pace of work, which was far beyond the measure of
productivity anyone else at the factory had ever attained.
Soon I observed that the men standing to the left and right of me at the
assembly block were attempting to emulate the new man’s style of so deftly
fitting together those small metal pieces and even to compete with the incredibly
productive pace at which he worked. I myself followed suit. At first our efforts
were an embarrassment, our own hands fumbling to imitate the movements of
his, which were so swift that our eyes could not follow them, nor our minds
puzzle out a technique of working quite different from the one we had always
practiced. Nevertheless, in some way unknown to us, we began to approach, if
somewhat remotely, the speed and style of the new man’s method of fitting
together his pieces of metal. Our efforts and altered manner of working did not
go unnoticed by the employees at the assembly blocks nearby. The new
technique was gradually taken up and passed on to others around the factory. By
the time we stopped for our first break of the day, everyone was employing the
new man’s methodology.
But we didn’t stop working for very long. After it became obvious that the
new man was not pausing for a second to join us in our scheduled break period,
we all returned to our assembly blocks and continued working as furiously as we
could. We surprised ourselves in the performance of what once seemed a dull
and simple task, eventually rising to the level of virtuosity displayed by a man
whose name we did not even know. I now looked forward to speaking to him
about the change he had brought about in the factory, expecting to do so when
the time came for our meal break. Yet the rest of us at the factory never
anticipated the spectacle that awaited us when that time finally arrived.
For, rather than leaving his position at the assembly block during the meal
break that the company had always sanctioned, the new man continued to work,
consuming his meal with one hand while still assembling those metal pieces,
although at a somewhat slower pace, with the other. This performance
introduced the rest of us at the factory to a hitherto unknown level of virtuosity
in the service of productivity. At first there was some resistance to this
heightened level of dedication to our work to which the new man, without any
ostentation, was leading us. But his purpose soon enough became evident. And it
was simple enough: those employees who ceased working entirely during the

meal break found themselves once again preoccupied, even tormented, by the
troubling atmosphere that pervaded the factory, the source of which was
attributed to the temporary supervisor who inhabited the office with heavily
frosted windows. On the other hand, those employees who continued working at
their assembly blocks seemed relatively unbothered by the images and
influences which, although there was no consensus as to their exact nature, had
plagued everyone the day before. Thus, it wasn’t long before all of us learned to
consume our meals with one hand while continuing to work with the other. It
goes without saying that when the time came for our last break of the day, no one
budged an inch from his assembly block.
It was only when the bell rang to signal the end of the work day, sounding
several hours later than we were accustomed to hearing it, that I had a chance to
speak with the new employee. Once we were outside the factory, and everyone
was proceeding in a state of silent exhaustion back to town, I made a point of
catching up to him as he strode at a quick pace through the dense, grayish fog. I
didn’t mince words. ‘What’s going on?’ I demanded to know.
Unexpectedly he stopped dead in his tracks and faced me, although we could
barely see each other through the fog. Then I saw his head turn slightly in the
direction of the factory we had left some distance behind us. ‘Listen, my friend,’
he said, his voice filled with a grave sincerity. ‘I’m not looking for trouble. I
hope you’re not either.’
‘Wasn’t I working right along with you?’ I said. ‘Wasn’t everyone?’
‘Yes. You all made a good start.’
‘So I take it you’re working with the new supervisor.’
‘No,’ he said emphatically. ‘I don’t know anything about that. I couldn’t tell
you anything about that.’
‘But you’ve worked under similar conditions before, isn’t that true?’
‘I work for the company, just like you. The company sent me here.’
‘But something must have changed at the company,’ I said. ‘Something new is
happening.’
‘Not really,’ he replied. ‘The Quine Organization is always making
adjustments and refinements in the way it does business. It just took some time
for it to reach you out here. You’re a long way from company headquarters, or
even the closest regional center.’
‘There’s more of this coming, isn’t there?’
‘Possibly. But there really isn’t any point in discussing such things. Not if you
want to continue working for the company. Not if you want to stay out of

trouble.’
‘What trouble?’
‘I have to go. Please don’t try to discuss this matter with me again.’
‘Are you saying that you’re going to report me?’
‘No,’ he said, his eyes looking back at the factory. ‘That’s not necessary these
days.’
Then he turned and walked off at a quick pace into the fog.
The next morning I returned to the factory along with everyone else. We
worked at an even faster rate and were even more productive. Part of this was
due to the fact that the bell that signaled the end of the work day rang later than
it had the day before. This lengthening of the time we spent at the factory, along
with the increasingly fast rate at which we worked, became an established
pattern. It wasn’t long before we were allowed only a few hours away from the
factory, only a few hours that belonged to us, although the only possible way we
could use this time was to gain the rest we needed in order to return to the
exhausting labors which the company now demanded of us.
But I had always possessed higher hopes for my life, hopes that were
becoming more and more vague with each passing day. I have to resign my
position at the factory. These were the words that raced through my mind as I
tried to gain a few hours of rest before returning to my job. I had no idea what
such a step might mean, since I had no other prospects for earning a living, and I
had no money saved that would enable me to keep my room in the apartment
building where I lived. In addition, the medications I required, that almost
everyone on this side of the border requires to make their existence at all
tolerable, were prescribed by doctors who were all employed by the Quine
Organization and filled by pharmacists who also operated only at the sufferance
of this company. All of that notwithstanding, I still felt that I had no choice but
to resign my position at the factory.
At the end of the hallway outside my apartment there was a tiny niche in
which was located a telephone for public use by the building’s tenants. I would
have to make my resignation using this telephone, since I couldn’t imagine doing
so in person. I couldn’t possibly enter the office of the temporary supervisor, as
Blecher had done. I couldn’tgo into that room enclosed by heavily frosted glass
behind which I and my fellow workers had observed something that appeared in
various forms and manifestations, from an indistinct shape that seemed to shift
and churn like a dark cloud to something more defined that appeared to have a
‘head part’ and ‘arm-protrusions.’ Given this situation, I would use the telephone

to call the closest regional center and make my resignation to the appropriate
person in charge of such matters.
The telephone niche at the end of the hallway outside my apartment was so
narrow that I had to enter it sideways. In the confines of that space there was
barely enough room to make the necessary movements of placing coins in the
telephone that hung on the wall and barely enough light to see what number one
was dialing. I remember how concerned I was not to dial a wrong number and
thereby lose a portion of what little money I had. After taking every possible
precaution to insure that I would successfully complete my phone call, a process
that seemed to take hours, I reached someone at the closest regional center
operated by the company.
The phone rang so many times that I feared no one would ever answer. Finally
the ringing stopped and, after a pause, I heard a barely audible voice. It sounded
thin and distant.
‘Quine Organization, Northwest Regional Center.’
‘Yes,’ I began. ‘I would like to resign my position at the company,’ I said.
‘I’m sorry, did you say that you wanted to resign from the company? You
sound so far away,’ said the voice.
‘Yes, I want to resign,’ I shouted into the mouthpiece of the telephone. ‘I want
to resign. Can you hear me?’
‘Yes, I can hear you. But the company is not accepting resignations at this
time. I’m going to transfer you to our temporary supervisor.’
‘Wait,’ I said, but the transfer had been made and once again the phone began
ringing so many times that I feared no one would answer.
Then the ringing stopped, although no voice came on the line. ‘Hello,’ I said.
But all I could hear was an indistinct, though highly reverberant, noise – a low
roaring sound that alternately faded and swelled as if it were echoing through
vast spaces deep within the caverns of the earth or across a clouded sky. This
noise, this low and bestial roaring, affected me with a dread I could not name. I
held the telephone receiver away from my ear, but the roaring noise continued to
sound within my head. Then I felt the telephone quivering in my hand, pulsing
like something that was alive. And when I slammed the telephone receiver back
into its cradle, this quivering and pulsing sensation continued to move up my
arm, passing through my body and finally reaching my brain where it became
synchronized with the low roaring noise which was now growing louder and
louder, confusing my thoughts into an echoing insanity and paralyzing my
movements so that I could not even scream for help.

I was never sure that I had actually made that telephone call to resign my
position at the company. And if in fact I did make such a call, I could never be
certain that what I experienced – what I heard and felt in that telephone niche at
the end of the hallway outside my apartment – in any way resembled the dreams
which recurred every night after I stopped showing up for work at the factory.
No amount of medication I took could prevent the nightly onset of these dreams,
and no amount of medication could efface their memory from my mind. Soon
enough I had taken so much medication that I didn’t have a sufficient amount
left to overdose my system, as Blecher had done. And since I was no longer
employed, I could not afford to get my prescription refilled and thereby acquire
the medication I needed to tolerate my existence. Of course I might have done
away with myself in some other manner, should I have been so inclined. But
somehow I still retained higher hopes for my life. Accordingly, I returned to see
if I could get my job back at the factory. After all, hadn’t the person I spoke with
at the regional center told me that the Quine Organization was not accepting
resignations at this time?
Of course I couldn’t be sure what I had been told over the telephone, or even
if I had made such a call to resign my position with the company. It wasn’t until
I actually walked onto the floor of the factory that I realized I still had a job there
if I wanted one, for the place where I had stood for such long hours at my
assembly block was unoccupied. Already attired in my gray work clothes, I
walked over to the assembly block and began fitting together, at a furious pace,
those small metal pieces. Without pausing in my task I looked across the
assembly block at the person I had once thought of as the ‘new man.’
‘Welcome back,’ he said in a casual voice.
‘Thank you,’ I replied.
‘I told Mr Frowley that you would return any day now.’
For a moment I was overjoyed at the implicit news that the temporary
supervisor was gone and Mr Frowley was back managing the factory. But when I
looked over at his office in the corner I noticed that behind the heavily frosted
glass there were no lights on, although the large-bodied outline of Mr Frowley
could be distinguished sitting behind his desk. Nevertheless, he was a changed
man, as I discovered soon after returning to work. No one and nothing at the
factory would ever again be as it once was. We were working practically around
the clock now. Some of us began to stay the night at the factory, sleeping for an
hour or so in a corner before going back to work at our assembly blocks.
After returning to work I no longer suffered from the nightmares that had

caused me to go running back to the factory in the first place. And yet I
continued to feel, if somewhat faintly, the atmosphere of those nightmares,
which was so like the atmosphere our temporary supervisor had brought to the
factory. I believe that this feeling of the overseeing presence of the temporary
supervisor was a calculated measure on the part of the Quine Organization,
which is always making adjustments and refinements in the way it does
business.
The company retained its policy of not accepting resignations. It even
extended this policy at some point and would not allow retirements. We were all
prescribed new medications, although I can’t say exactly how many years ago
that happened. No one at the factory can remember how long we’ve worked
here, or how old we are, yet our pace and productivity continues to increase. It
seems as if neither the company nor our temporary supervisor will ever be done
with us. Yet we are only human beings, or at least physical beings, and one day
we must die. This is the only retirement we can expect, even though none of us
is looking forward to that time. For we can’t keep from wondering what might
come afterward – what the company could have planned for us, and the part our
temporary supervisor might play in that plan. Working at a furious pace, fitting
together those small pieces of metal, helps keep our minds off such things.

IN A FOREIGN TOWN, IN A FOREIGN LAND
HIS SHADOW SHALL RISE TO A HIGHER HOUSE
I
n the middle of the night I lay wide awake in bed, listening to the dull black
drone of the wind outside my window and the sound of bare branches scraping
against the shingles of the roof just above me. Soon my thoughts became fixed
upon a town, picturing its various angles and aspects, a remote town near the
northern border. Then I remembered that there was a hilltop graveyard that
hovered not far beyond the edge of town. I have never told a soul about this
graveyard, which for a time was a source of great anguish for those who had
retreated to the barren landscape of the northern border.
It was within the hilltop graveyard, a place that was far more populated than
the town over which it hovered, that the body of Ascrobius had been buried.
Known throughout the town as a recluse who possessed an intensely
contemplative nature, Ascrobius had suffered from a disease that left much of his
body in a grossly deformed condition. Nevertheless, despite the distinguishing
qualities of his severe deformity and his intensely contemplative nature, the
death of Ascrobius was an event that passed almost entirely unnoticed. All of the
notoriety gained by the recluse, all of the comment I attached to his name,
occurred sometime after his disease-mangled body had been housed among the
others in the hilltop graveyard.
At first there was no specific mention of Ascrobius, but only a kind of twilight
talk – dim and pervasive murmurs that persistently revolved around the
graveyard outside of town, often touching upon more general topics of a morbid
character, including some abstract discourse, as I interpreted it, on the
phenomenon of the grave. More and more, whether one moved about the town
or remained in some secluded quarter of it, this twilight talk became familiar and
even invasive. It emerged from shadowed doorways along narrow streets, from
half-opened windows of the highest rooms of the town’s old houses, and from
the distant corners of labyrinthine and resonant hallways. Everywhere, it
seemed, there were voices that had become obsessed to the point of hysteria with
a single subject: the ‘missing grave.’ No one mistook these words to mean a

grave that somehow had been violated, its ground dug up and its contents
removed, or even a grave whose headstone had absconded, leaving the resident
of some particular plot in a state of anonymity. Even I, who was less intimate
than many others with the peculiar nuances of the northern border town,
understood what was meant by the words ‘a missing grave’ or ‘an absent grave.’
The hilltop graveyard was so dense with headstones and its ground so riddled
with interments that such a thing would be astonishingly apparent: where there
once had been a grave like any other, there was now, in the same precious space,
only a patch of virgin earth.
For a certain period of time, speculation arose concerning the identity of the
occupant of the missing grave. Because there existed no systematic record-
keeping for any particular instance of burial in the hilltop graveyard – when or
where or for whom an interment took place – the discussions over the occupant
of the missing grave, or the former occupant, always degenerated into outbursts
of the wildest nonsense or simply faded into a vaporous and sullen confusion.
Such a scene was running its course in the cellar of an abandoned building where
several of us had gathered one evening. It was on this occasion that a gentleman
calling himself Dr Klatt first suggested ‘Ascrobius’ as the name upon the
headstone of the missing grave. He was almost offensively positive in this
assertion, as if there were not an abundance of headstones on the hilltop
graveyard with erroneous or unreadable names, or none at all.
For some time Klatt had been advertising himself around town as an
individual who possessed a distinguished background in some discipline of a
vaguely scientific nature. This persona or imposture, if it was one, would not
have been unique in the history of the northern border town. However, when
Klatt began to speak of the recent anomaly not as a missing grave, even an
absent grave, but as an uncreated grave, the others began to listen. Soon enough
it was the name of Ascrobius that was mentioned most frequently as the
occupant of the missing – now uncreated – grave. At the same time the
reputation of Dr Klatt became closely linked to that of the deceased individual
who was well known for both his grossly deformed body and his intensely
contemplative nature.
During this period it seemed that anywhere in town one happened to find
oneself, Klatt was there holding forth on the subject of his relationship to
Ascrobius, whom he now called his ‘patient.’ In the cramped back rooms of
shops long gone out of business or some other similarly out-of-the-way locale –
a remote street corner, for instance – Klatt spoke of the visits he had made to the

high backstreet house of Ascrobius and of the attempts he had made to treat the
disease from which the recluse had long suffered. In addition, Klatt boasted of
insights he had gained into the deeply contemplative personality whom most of
us had never met, let alone conversed with at any great length. While Klatt
appeared to enjoy the attention he received from those who had previously
dismissed him as just another impostor in the northern border town, and perhaps
still considered him as such, I believe he was unaware of the profound suspicion,
and even dread, that he inspired due to what certain persons called his
‘meddling’ in the affairs of Ascrobius. ‘Thou shalt not meddle’ was an unspoken,
though seldom observed, commandment of the town, or so it seemed to me. And
Klatt’s exposure of the formerly obscure existence of Ascrobius, even if the
doctor’s anecdotes were misleading or totally fabricated, would be regarded as a
highly perilous form of meddling by many longtime residents of the town.
Nonetheless, nobody turned away whenever Klatt began talking about the
diseased, contemplative recluse: nobody tried to silence or even question
whatever claims he made concerning Ascrobius. ‘He was a monster,’ said the
doctor to some of us who were gathered one night in a ruined factory on the
outskirts of the town. Klatt frequently stigmatized Ascrobius as either a
‘monster’ or a ‘freak,’ though these epithets were not intended simply as a
reaction to the grotesque physical appearance of the notorious recluse. It was in a
strictly metaphysical sense, according to Klatt, that Ascrobius should be viewed
as most monstrous and freakish, qualities that emerged as a consequence of his
intensely contemplative nature. ‘He had incredible powers available to him,’ said
the doctor. ‘He might even have cured himself of his diseased physical
condition; who can say? But all of his powers of contemplation, all of those
incessant meditations that took place in his high backstreet house, were directed
toward another purpose altogether.’ Saying this much, Dr Klatt fell silent in the
flickering, makeshift illumination of the ruined factory. It was almost as if he
were waiting for one of us to prompt his next words, so that we might serve as
accomplices in this extraordinary gossip over his deceased patient, Ascrobius.
Eventually someone did inquire about the contemplative powers and
meditations of the recluse, and toward what end they might have been directed.
‘What Ascrobius sought,’ the doctor explained, ‘was not a remedy for his
physical disease, not a cure in any usual sense of the word. What he sought was
an absolute annulment, not only of his disease but of his entire existence. On rare
occasions he even spoke to me,’ the doctor said, ‘about the uncreation of his
whole life.’ After Dr Klatt had spoken these words there seemed to occur a

moment of the most profound stillness in the ruined factory where we were
gathered. No doubt everyone had suddenly become possessed, as was I, by a
single object of contemplation – the absent grave, which Dr Klatt described as an
uncreated grave, within the hilltop graveyard outside of town. ‘You see what has
happened,’ Dr Klatt said to us. ‘He has annulled his diseased and nightmarish
existence, leaving us with an uncreated grave on our hands.’ Nobody who was at
the ruined factory that night, nor anyone else in the northern border town,
believed there would not be a price to pay for what had been revealed to us by
Dr Klatt. Now all of us had become meddling accomplices in those events which
came to be euphemistically described as the ‘Ascrobius escapade.’
Admittedly the town had always been populated by hysterics of one sort or
another. Following the Ascrobius escapade, however, there was a remarkable
plague of twilight talk about ‘unnatural repercussions’ that were either in the
making or were already taking place throughout the town. Someone would have
to atone for that uncreated existence, or such was the general feeling as it was
expressed in various obscure settings and situations. In the dead of night one
could hear the most reverberant screams arising at frequent intervals from every
section of town, particularly the backstreet areas, far more than the usual
nocturnal outbursts. And upon subsequent overcast days the streets were all but
deserted. Any talk confronting the specifics of the town’s night terrors was either
precious or entirely absent: perhaps, I might even say, it was as uncreated as
Ascrobius himself, at least for a time.
It was inevitably the figure of Dr Klatt who, late one afternoon, stepped
forward from the shadows of an old warehouse to address a small group of
persons assembled there. His shape barely visible in the gauzy light that pushed
its way through dusty windowpanes, Klatt announced that he might possess the
formula for solving the new-found troubles of the northern border town. While
the warehouse gathering was as wary as the rest of us of any further meddling in
the matter of Ascrobius, they gave Klatt a hearing in spite of their reservations.
Included among this group was a woman known as Mrs Glimm, who operated a
lodging house – actually a kind of brothel – that was patronized for the most part
by out-of-towners, especially business travelers stopping on their way to some
destination across the border. Even though Klatt did not directly address Mrs
Glimm, he made it quite clear that he would require an assistant of a very
particular type in order to carry out the measures he had in mind for delivering
us all from those intangible traumas that had lately afflicted everyone in some
manner. ‘Such an assistant,’ the doctor emphasized, ‘should not be anyone who

is exceptionally sensitive or intelligent.
‘At the same time,’ he continued, ‘this person must have adefinite
handsomeness of appearance, even a fragile beauty.’ Further instructions from
Dr Klatt indicated that the requisite assistant should be sent up to the hilltop
graveyard that same night, for the doctor fully expected that the clouds which
had choked the sky throughout the day would linger long into the evening, thus
cutting off the moonlight that often shone so harshly on the closely huddled
graves. This desire for optimum darkness seemed to be a conspicuous giveaway
on the doctor’s part. Everyone present at the old warehouse was of course aware
that such ‘measures’ as Klatt proposed were only another instance of meddling
by someone who was almost certainly an impostor of the worst sort. But we
were already so deeply implicated in the Ascrobius escapade, and so lacking in
any solutions of our own, that no one attempted to discourage Mrs Glimm from
doing what she could to assist the doctor with his proposed scheme.
So the moonless night came and went, and the assistant sent by Mrs Glimm
never returned from the hilltop graveyard. Yet nothing in the northern border
town seemed to have changed. The chorus of midnight outcries continued and
the twilight talk now began to focus on both the ‘terrors of Ascrobius’ and the
‘charlatan Dr Klatt,’ who was nowhere to be found when a search was conducted
throughout every street and structure of the town, excepting of course the high
backstreet house of the dreadful recluse. Finally a small party of the town’s least
hysterical persons made its way up the hill which led to the graveyard. When
they approached the area of the absent grave, it was immediately apparent what
‘measures’ Klatt had employed and the fashion in which the assistant sent by
Mrs Glimm had been used in order to bring an end to the Ascrobius escapade.
The message which those who had gone up to the graveyard carried back to
town was that Klatt was nothing but a common butcher. ‘Well, perhaps not a
common butcher,’ said Mrs Glimm, who was among the small graveyard party.
Then she explained in detail how the body of the doctor’s assistant, its skin
finely shredded by countless incisions and its parts numerously dismembered,
had been arranged with some calculation on the spot of the absent grave: the raw
head and torso were propped up in the ground as if to serve as the headstone for
a grave, while the arms and legs were disposed in a way that might be seen to
demarcate the rectangular space of a graveyard plot. Someone suggested giving
the violated body a proper burial in its own gravesite, but Mrs Glimm, for some
reason unknown even to herself, or so she said, persuaded the others that things
should be left as they were. And perhaps her intuition in this matter was

felicitous, for not many days later there was a complete cessation of all terrors
associated with the Ascrobius escapade, however indefinite or possibly
nonexistent such occurrences might have been from the start. Only later, by
means of the endless murmurs of twilight talk, did it become apparent why Dr
Klatt might have abandoned the town, even though his severe measures seemed
to have worked the exact cure which he had promised.
Although I cannot say that I witnessed anything myself, others reported signs
of a ‘new occupation,’ not at the site of the grave of Ascrobius, but at the high
backstreet house where the recluse once spent his intensely contemplative days
and nights. There were sometimes lights behind the curtained windows, these
observers said, and the passing figure outlined upon those curtains was more
outlandishly grotesque than anything they had ever seen while the resident of
that house had lived. But no one ever approached the house. Afterward all
speculation about what had come to be known as the ‘resurrection of the
uncreated’ remained in the realm of twilight talk. Yet as I now lie in my bed,
listening to the wind and the scraping of bare branches on the roof just above
me, I cannot help remaining wide awake with visions of that deformed specter of
Ascrobius and pondering upon what unimaginable planes of contemplation it
dreams of another act of uncreation, a new and far-reaching effort of great power
and more certain permanence. Nor do I welcome the thought that one day
someone may notice that a particular house appears to be missing, or absent,
from the place it once occupied along the backstreet of a town near the northern
border.
THE BELLS WILL SOUND FOREVER
I was sitting in a small park on a drab morning in early spring when a gentleman
who looked as if he should be in a hospital sat down on the bench beside me. For
a time we both silently stared out at the colorless and soggy grounds of the park,
where things were still thawing out and signs of a revived natural life remained
only tentative, the bare branches of trees finely outlined against a gray sky. I had
seen the other man on previous visits to the park and, when he introduced
himself to me by name, I seemed to remember him as a businessman of some
sort. The words ‘commercial agent’ came to my mind as I sat gazing up at the
thin dark branches and, beyond them, the gray sky. Somehow our quiet and
somewhat halting conversation touched upon the subject of a particular town

near the northern border, a place where I once lived. ‘It’s been many years,’ the
other man said, ‘since I was last in that town.’ Then he proceeded to tell me
about an experience he had had there in the days when he often traveled to
remote locales for the business firm he represented and which, until that time, he
had served as a longterm and highly dedicated employee.
It was late at night, he told me, and he needed a place to stay before moving
on to his ultimate destination across the northern border. I knew, as a one-time
resident of the town, that there were two principal venues where he might have
spent the night. One of them was a lodging house on the west side of town that,
in actuality, functioned primarily as a brothel patronized by travelling
commercial agents. The other was located somewhere on the east side of town in
a district of once-opulent, but now for the most part unoccupied houses, one of
which, according to rumor, had been converted into a hostel of some kind by an
old woman named Mrs Pyk, who was reputed to have worked in various carnival
sideshows – first as an exotic dancer, and then later as a fortune-teller – before
settling in the northern border town. The commercial agent told me that he could
not be sure if it was misdirection or deliberate mischief that sent him to the east
side of town, where there were only a few lighted windows here and there. Thus
he easily spotted the vacancy sign that stood beside the steps leading up to an
enormous house which had a number of small turrets that seemed to sprout like
so many warts across its façade and even emerged from the high peaked roof
that crowned the structure. Despite the grim appearance of the house (a
‘miniature ruined castle,’ as my companion in the park expressed it), not to
mention the generally desolate character of the surrounding neighborhood, the
commercial agent said that he was not for a moment deterred from ascending the
porch steps. He pressed the doorbell, which he said was a ‘buzzer-type bell,’ as
opposed to the type that chimed or tolled its signal. However, in addition to the
buzzing noise that was made when he pressed the button for the doorbell, he
claimed that there was also a ‘jingle-jangle sound’ similar to that of sleigh bells.
When the door finally opened, and the commercial agent confronted the heavily
made-up face of Mrs Pyk, he simply asked, ‘Do you have a room?’
Upon entering the vestibule to the house, he was made to pause by Mrs Pyk,
who gestured with a thin and palsied hand toward a registration ledger which
was spread open on a lectern in the corner. There were no other visitors listed on
the pages before him, yet the commercial agent unhesitatingly picked up the
fountain pen that lay in the crux of the ledger book and signed his name: Q. H.
Crumm. Having done this, he turned back toward Mrs Pyk and stooped down to

retrieve the small suitcase he had brought in with him. At that moment he first
saw Mrs Pyk’s left hand, the non-palsied hand, which was just as thin as the
other but which appeared to be a prosthetic device resembling the pale hand of
an old mannikin, its enameled epidermis having flaked away in several places. It
was then that Mr Crumm fully realized, in his own words, the ‘deliriously
preposterous’ position in which he had placed himself. Yet he said that he also
felt a great sense of excitation relating to things which he could not precisely
name, things which he had never imagined before and which it seemed were not
even possible for him to imagine with any clarity at the time.
The old woman was aware that Crumm had taken note of her artificial hand.
‘As you can see,’ she said in a slow and raspy voice, ‘I’m perfectly capable of
taking care of myself, no matter what some fool tries to pull on me. But I don’t
receive as many gentleman travelers as I once did. I’m sure I wouldn’t have any
at all, if it were up to certain people,’ she finished. Deliriously preposterous, Mr
Crumm thought to himself. Nevertheless, he followed Mrs Pyk like a little dog
when she guided him into her house, which was so poorly lighted that one was at
a loss to distinguish any features of the décor, leaving Crumm with the heady
sensation of being enveloped by the most sumptuous surroundings of shadows.
This feeling was only intensified when the old woman reached out for a small
lamp that was barely glowing in the darkness and, with a finger of her real hand,
turned up its wick, the light pushing back some of the shadows while
grotesquely enlarging many others. She then began escorting Crumm up the
stairs to his room, holding the lamp in her real hand while simply allowing her
artificial hand to hang at her side. And with each step that Mrs Pyk ascended, the
commercial agent seemed to detect the same jingle-jangle of bells that he had
first heard when he was standing outside the house, waiting for someone to
answer his ring. But the sound was so faint, as if heavily muffled, that Mr
Crumm willingly believed it to be only the echo of a memory or his wandering
imagination.
The room in which Mrs Pyk finally deposited her guest was on the highest
floor of the house, just down a short, narrow hallway from the door leading to
the attic. ‘By that time there seemed nothing at all preposterous in this
arrangement,’ Mr Crumm told me as we sat together on the park bench looking
out at that drab morning in early spring. I replied that such lapses in judgment
were not uncommon where Mrs Pyk’s lodging house was concerned; at least
such were the rumors I had heard during the period when I was living in the
town near the northern border.

When they had reached the hallway of the highest floor of the house, Crumm
informed me, Mrs Pyk set aside the lamp she was carrying on a table positioned
near the top of the last flight of stairs. She then extended her hand and pushed a
small button that protruded from one of the walls, thereby activating some
lighting fixtures along either wall. The illumination remained dismal – actively
dismal, as Crumm described it – but served to reveal the densely patterned
wallpaper and the even more densely patterned carpeting of the hallway which
led, in one direction, to the opening onto the attic and, in the other direction, to
the room in which the commercial agent was supposed to sleep that night. After
Mrs Pyk unlocked the door to this room and pushed another small button upon
the wall inside, Crumm observed how cramped and austere was the chamber in
which he was being placed, unnecessarily so, he thought, considering the
apparent spaciousness, or ‘dark sumptuousness,’ as he called it, of the rest of the
house. Yet Crumm made no objection (nor felt any, he insisted), and with mute
obedience set down his suitcase beside a tiny bed which was not even equipped
with a headboard. ‘There’sa bathroom just a little way down the hall,’ Mrs Pyk
said before she left the room, closing the door behind her. And in the silence of
that little room, Crumm thought that once again he could hear the jingle-jangle
sound of bells fading into the distance and the darkness of that great house.
Although he had put in quite a long day, the commercial agent did not feel in
the least bit tired, or possibly he had entered into a mental state beyond the
boundaries of absolute fatigue, as he himself speculated when we were sitting on
that bench in the park. For some time he lay on the undersized bed, still fully
clothed, and stared at a ceiling that had several large stains spread across it. After
all, he thought, he had been placed in a room that was directly below the roof of
the house, and apparently this roof was damaged in some way which allowed the
rain to enter freely through the attic on stormy days and nights. Suddenly his
mind became fixed in the strangest way upon the attic, the door to which was
just down the hall from his own room. The mystery of an old attic, Crumm
whispered to himself as he lay on that miniature bed in a room at the top of an
enormous house of enveloping shadows. Feelings and impulses that he had never
experienced before arose in him as he became more and more excited about the
attic and its mysteries. He was a traveling commercial agent who needed his rest
to prepare himself for the next day, and yet all he could think about was getting
up from his bed and walking down the dimly lighted hallway toward the door
leading to the attic of Mrs Pyk’s shadowy house. He could tell anyone who cared
to know that he was only going down the hall to use the bathroom, he told

himself. But Crumm proceeded past the door to the bathroom and soon found
himself helplessly creeping into the attic, the door to which had been left
unlocked.
The air inside smelled sweet and stale. Moonlight entered by way of a small
octagonal window and guided the commercial agent among the black clutter
toward a lightbulb that hung down from a thick black cord. He reached up and
turned a little dial that protruded from the side of the lightbulb fixture. Now he
could see the treasures surrounding him, and he was shaking with the excitation
of his discovery. Crumm told me that Mrs Pyk’s old attic was like a costume
shop or the dressing room of a theater. All around him was a world of strange
outfits spilling forth from the depths of large open trunks or dangling in the
shadows of tall open wardrobes. Later he became aware that these curious
clothes were, for the most part, remnants from Mrs Pyk’s days as an exotic
dancer, and subsequently a fortune-teller, for various carnival sideshows. Crumm
himself remembered observing that mounted along the walls of the attic were
several faded posters advertising the two distinct phases of the old woman’s
former life. One of these posters portrayed a dancing girl posed in mid-turn
amidst a whirl of silks, her face averted from the silhouetted heads representing
the audience at the bottom of the picture, a mob of bald pates and bowler hats
huddled together. Another poster displayed a pair of dark staring eyes with long
spidery lashes. Above the eyes, printed in a serpentine style of lettering, were the
words: Mistress of Fortune. Below the eyes, spelled in the same type of letters,
was a simple question: WHAT IS YOUR WILL?
Aside from the leftover garments of an exotic dancer or a mysterious fortune
teller, there were also other clothes, other costumes. They were scattered all over
the attic – that ‘paradise of the past,’ as Crumm began to refer to it. His hands
trembled as he found all sorts of odd disguises lying about the floor or draped
across a wardrobe mirror, elaborate and clownish outfits in rich velvets and
shiny, colorful satins. Rummaging among this delirious attic-world, Crumm
finally found what he barely knew he was seeking. There it was, buried at the
bottom of one of the largest trunks – a fool’s motley complete with soft slippers
turned up at the toes and a two-pronged cap that jangled its bells as he pulled it
over his head. The entire suit was a mad patchwork of colored fabrics and fitted
him perfectly, once he had removed all of the clothing he wore as a commercial
agent. The double peaks of the fool’s cap resembled the twin horns of a snail,
Crumm noticed when he looked at his image in the mirror, except that they
drooped this way and that whenever he shook his head to make the bells jangle.

There were also bells sewn into the turned-up tips of the slippers and hanging
here and there upon the body of the jester’s suit. Crumm made them all go
jingle-jangle, he explained to me, as he pranced before the wardrobe mirror
gazing upon the figure that he could not recognize as himself, so lost was he in a
world of feelings and impulses he had never before imagined. He no longer
retained the slightest sense, he said, of his existence as a travelling commercial
agent. For him, there was now only the jester’s suit hugging his body, the jingle-
jangle of the bells, and the slack face of a fool in the mirror.
After a time he sank face-down upon the cold wooden floor of the attic,
Crumm informed me, and lay absolutely still, exhausted by the contentment he
had found in that musty paradise. Then the sound of the bells started up again,
although Crumm could not tell from where it was coming. His body remained
unmoving upon the floor in a state of sleepy paralysis, and yet he heard the
sound of the jangling bells. Crumm thought that if he could just open his eyes
and roll over on the floor he could see what was making the sound of the bells.
But soon he lost all confidence in this plan of action, because he could no longer
feel his own body. The sound of the bells became even louder, jangling about his
ears, even though he was incapable of making his head move in any way and
thus shaking the bells on his two-pronged fool’s cap. Then he heard a voice say
to him, ‘Open your eyes . . . and see your surprise.’ And when he opened his
eyes he finally saw his face in the wardrobe mirror: it was a tiny face on a tiny
fool’s head . . . and the head was at the end of a stick, a kind of baton with stripes
on it like a candy cane, held in the wooden hand of Mrs Pyk. She was shaking
the striped stick like a baby’s rattle, making the bells on Crumm’s tiny head go
jingle-jangle so wildly. There in the mirror he could also see his body still lying
helpless and immobile upon the attic floor. And in his mind was a single
consuming thought: to be a head on a stick held in the wooden hand of Mrs Pyk.
Forever . . . forever.
When Crumm awoke the next morning, he heard the sound of raindrops on the
roof just above the room in which he lay fully clothed on the bed. Mrs Pyk was
shaking him gently with her real hand, saying, ‘Wake up, Mr Crumm. It’s late
and you have to be on your way. You have business across the border.’ Crumm
wanted to say something to the old woman then and there, confront her with
what he described to me as his ‘adventure in the attic.’ But Mrs Pyk’s brusque,
businesslike manner and her entirely ordinary tone of voice told him that any
inquiries would be useless. In any case, he was afraid that openly bringing up
this peculiar matter with Mrs Pyk was not something he should do if he wished

to remain on good terms with her. Soon thereafter he was standing with his
suitcase in his hand at the door of the enormous house, lingering for a moment to
gaze upon the heavily made-up face of Mrs Pyk and secure another glimpse of
the artificial hand which hung down at her side.
‘May I come to stay again?’ Crumm asked.
‘If you wish,’ answered Mrs Pyk, as she held open the door for her departing
guest.
Once he was outside on the porch Crumm quickly turned about-face and
called out, ‘May I have the same room?’
But Mrs Pyk had already closed the door behind him, and her answer to his
question, if it actually was one, was a faint jingle-jangle sound of tiny bells.
After consummating his commercial dealings on the other side of the northern
border, Mr Crumm returned to the location of Mrs Pyk’s house, only to find that
the place had burned to the ground during the brief interval he had been away. I
told him, as we sat on that park bench looking out upon a drab morning in early
spring, that there had always been rumors, a sort of irresponsible twilight talk,
about Mrs Pyk and her old house. Some persons, hysterics of one sort or another,
suggested that Mrs Glimm, who operated the lodging house on the west side of
town, was the one behind the fire which brought to an end Mrs Pyk’s business
activities on the east side. The two of them had apparently been associates at one
time, in a sense partners, whose respective houses on the west and east sides of
the northern border town were operated for the mutual benefit of both women.
But a rift of some kind appeared to turn them into bitter enemies. Mrs Glimm,
who was sometimes characterized as a ‘person of uncanny greed,’ became
intolerant of the competition posed by her former ally in business. It came to be
understood throughout the town near the northern border that Mrs Glimm had
arranged for someone to assault Mrs Pyk in her own house, an attack which
culminated in the severing of Mrs Pyk’s left hand. However, Mrs Glimm’s plan
to discourage the ambitions of her competitor ultimately backfired, it seemed,
for after this attack on her person Mrs Pyk appeared to undergo a dramatic
change, as did her method of running things at her east side house. She had
always been known as a woman of exceptional will and extraordinary gifts, this
one-time exotic dancer and later Mistress of Fortune, but following the
dismemberment of her left hand, and its replacement by an artificial wooden
hand, she seemed to have attained unheard-of powers, all of which she directed
toward one aim – that of putting her ex-partner, Mrs Glimm, out of business. It
was then that she began to operate her lodging house in an entirely new manner

and in accordance with unique methods, so that whenever traveling commercial
agents who patronized Mrs Glimm’s west side lodging house came to stay at
Mrs Pyk’s, they always returned to Mrs Pyk’s house on the east side and never
again to Mrs Glimm’s west-side place.
I mentioned to Mr Crumm that I had lived in that northern border town long
enough to have been told on various occasions that a guest could visit Mrs Pyk
just so many times before he discovered one day that he could never leave her
again. Such talk, I continued, was to some extent substantiated by what was
found in the ruins of Mrs Pyk’s house after the fire. It seemed there were rooms
all over the house, and even in the farthest corners of its vast cellar regions,
where the charred remains of human bodies were found. To all appearances,
given the intensely destructive nature of that conflagration, each of the
incinerated corpses was dressed in some outlandish clothing, as if the whole
structure of the house were inhabited by a nest of masqueraders. In light of all
the stories we had heard in the town, no one bothered to remark on how unlikely
it was, how preposterous even, that none of the lodgers at Mrs Pyk’s house had
managed to escape. Nevertheless, as I disclosed to Crumm, the body of Mrs Pyk
herself was never found, despite a most diligent search that was conducted by
Mrs Glimm.
Yet even as I brought all of these facts to his attention as we sat on that park
bench, Crumm’s mind seemed to have drifted off to other realms and more than
ever he looked as if he belonged in a hospital. Finally he spoke, asking me to
confirm what I had said about the absence of Mrs Pyk’s body among those found
in the ashes left by the fire. I confirmed the statement I had made, begging him
to consider the place and the circumstances which were the source of this and all
my other remarks, as well as his own, that were made that morning in early
spring. ‘Remember your own words,’ I said to Crumm.
‘Which words were those?’ he asked.
‘Deliriously preposterous,’ I replied, trying to draw out the sound of each
syllable, as if to imbue them with some actual sense or at least a dramatic force
of some kind. ‘You were only a pawn,’ I said. ‘You and all those others were
nothing but pawns in a struggle between forces you could not conceive. Your
impulses were not your own. They were as artificial as Mrs Pyk’s wooden hand.’
For a moment Crumm seemed to become roused to his senses. Then he said,
as if to himself, ‘They never found her body.’
‘No, they did not,’ I answered.
‘Not even her hand,’ he said in a strictly rhetorical tone of voice. Again I

affirmed his statement.
Crumm fell silent after that juncture in our conversation, and when I left him
that morning he was staring out at the drab and soggy grounds of that park with
the look of someone in a hysterical trance, remaining quietly attentive for some
sound or sign to reach his awareness. That was the last time I saw him.
Occasionally, on nights when I find it difficult to sleep, I think about Mr
Crumm the commercial agent and the conversation we had that day in the park. I
also think about Mrs Pyk and her house on the east side of a northern border
town where I once lived. In these moments it is almost as if I myself can hear the
faint jingle-jangle of bells in the blackness, and my mind begins to wander in
pursuit of a desperate dream that is not my own. Perhaps this dream ultimately
belongs to no one, however many persons, including commercial agents, may
have belonged to it.
A SOFT VOICE WHISPERS NOTHING
Long before I suspected the existence of the town near the northern border, I
believe that I was in some way already an inhabitant of that remote and desolate
place. Any number of signs might be offered to support this claim, although
some of them may seem somewhat removed from the issue. Not the least of
them appeared during my childhood, those soft gray years when I was stricken
with one sort or another of life-draining infirmity. It was at this early stage of
development that I sealed my deep affinity with the winter season in all its
phases and manifestations. Nothing seemed more natural to me than my impulse
to follow the path of the snow-topped roof and the ice-crowned fence-post,
considering that I, too, in my illness, exhibited the marks of an essentially
hibernal state of being. Under the plump blankets of my bed I lay freezing and
pale, my temples sweating with shiny sickles of fever. Through the frosted panes
of my bedroom window I watched in awful devotion as dull winter days were
succeeded by blinding winter nights. I remained ever awake to the possibility, as
my young mind conceived it, of an ‘icy transcendence.’ I was therefore cautious,
even in my frequent states of delirium, never to indulge in a vulgar sleep, except
perhaps to dream my way deeper into that landscape where vanishing winds
snatched me up into the void of an ultimate hibernation.
No one expected I would live very long, not even my attending physician, Dr
Zirk. A widower far along into middle age, the doctor seemed intensely

dedicated to the well-being of the living anatomies under his care. Yet from my
earliest acquaintance with him I sensed that he too had a secret affinity with the
most remote and desolate locus of the winter spirit, and therefore was also allied
with the town near the northern border. Every time he examined me at my
bedside he betrayed himself as a fellow fanatic of a disconsolate creed,
embodying so many of its stigmata and gestures. His wiry, white-streaked hair
and beard were thinning, patchy remnants of a former luxuriance, much like the
bare, frost-covered branches of the trees outside my window. His face was of a
coarse complexion, rugged as frozen earth, while his eyes were overcast with the
cloudy ether of a December afternoon. And his fingers felt so frigid as they
palpated my neck or gently pulled at the underlids of my eyes.
One day, when I believe that he thought I was asleep, Dr Zirk revealed the
extent of his initiation into the barren mysteries of the winter world, even if he
spoke only in the cryptic fragments of an overworked soul in extremis. In a
voice as pure and cold as an arctic wind the doctor made reference to
‘undergoing certain ordeals,’ as well as speaking of what he called ‘grotesque
discontinuities in the order of things.’ His trembling words also invoked an
epistemology of ‘hope and horror,’ of exposing once and for all the true nature of
this ‘great gray ritual of existence’ and plunging headlong into an ‘enlightenment
of inanity.’ It seemed that he was addressing me directly when in a soft gasp of
desperation he said, ‘To make an end of it, little puppet, in your own way. To
close the door in one swift motion and not by slow, fretful degrees. If only this
doctor could show you the way of such cold deliverance.’ I felt my eyelashes
flutter at the tone and import of these words, and Dr Zirk immediately became
silent. Just then my mother entered the room, allowing me a pretext to display an
aroused consciousness. But I never betrayed the confidence or indiscretion the
doctor had entrusted to me that day.
In any case, it was many years later that I first discovered the town near the
northern border, and there I came to understand the source and significance of Dr
Zirk’s mumblings on that nearly silent winter day. I noticed, as I arrived in the
town, how close a resemblance it bore to the winterland of my childhood, even if
the precise time of year was still slightly out of season. On that day, everything –
the streets of the town and the few people traveling upon them, the store
windows and the meager merchandise they displayed, the weightless pieces of
debris barely animated by a half-dead wind – everything looked as if it had been
drained entirely of all color, as if an enormous photographic flash had just gone
off in the startled face of the town. And somehow beneath this pallid façade I

intuited what I described to myself as the ‘all-pervasive aura of a place that has
offered itself as a haven for an interminable series of delirious events.’
It was definitely a mood of delirium that appeared to rule the scene, causing
all that I saw to shimmer vaguely in my sight, as if viewed through the gauzy
glow of a sickroom: a haziness that had no precise substance, distorting without
in any way obscuring the objects behind or within it. There was an atmosphere
of disorder and commotion that I sensed in the streets of the town, as if its
delirious mood were only a soft prelude to great pandemonium. I heard the
sound of something that I could not identify, an approaching racket that caused
me to take refuge in a narrow passageway between a pair of high buildings.
Nestled in this dark hiding place I watched the street and listened as that
nameless clattering grew louder. It was a medley of clanging and creaking, of
groaning and croaking, a dull jangle of something unknown as it groped its way
through the town, a chaotic parade in honor of some special occasion of
delirium.
The street that I saw beyond the narrow opening between the two buildings
was now entirely empty. The only thing I could glimpse was a blur of high and
low structures which appeared to quiver slightly as the noise became louder and
louder, the parade closing in, though from which direction I did not know. The
formless clamor seemed to envelop everything around me, and then suddenly I
could see a passing figure in the street. Dressed in loose white garments, it had
an egg-shaped head that was completely hairless and as white as paste, a clown
of some kind who moved in a way that was both casual and laborious, as if it
were strolling underwater or against a strong wind, tracing strange patterns in the
air with billowed arms and pale hands. It seemed to take forever for this
apparition to pass from view, but just before doing so it turned to peer into the
narrow passage where I had secreted myself, and its greasy white face was
wearing an expression of bland malevolence.
Others followed the lead figure, including a team of ragged men who were
harnessed like beasts and pulled long bristling ropes. They also moved out of
sight, leaving the ropes to waver slackly behind them. The vehicle to which
these ropes were attached – by means of enormous hooks – rolled into the scene,
its great wooden wheels audibly grinding the pavement of the street beneath
them. It was a sort of platform with huge wooden stakes rising from its perimeter
to form the bars of a cage. There was nothing to secure the wooden bars at the
top, and so they wobbled with the movement of the parade.
Hanging from the bars, and rattling against them, was an array of objects

haphazardly tethered by cords and wires and straps of various kinds. I saw masks
and shoes, household utensils and naked dolls, large bleached bones and the
skeletons of small animals, bottles of colored glass, the head of a dog with a
rusty chain wrapped several times around its neck, and sundry scraps of debris
and other things I could not name, all knocking together in a wild percussion. I
watched and listened as that ludicrous vehicle passed by in the street. Nothing
else followed it, and the enigmatic parade seemed to be at an end, now only a
delirious noise fading into the distance. Then a voice called out behind me.
‘What are you doing back here?’
I turned around and saw a fat old woman moving toward me from the
shadows of that narrow passageway between the two high buildings. She was
wearing a highly decorated hat that was almost as wide as she was, and her
already ample form was augmented by numerous layers of colorful scarves and
shawls. Her body was further weighted down by several necklaces which hung
like a noose around her neck and many bracelets about both of her chubby
wrists. On the thick fingers of either hand were a variety of large gaudy rings.
‘I was watching the parade,’ I said to her. ‘But I couldn’t see what was inside
the cage, or whatever it was. It seemed to be empty.’
The woman simply stared at me for some time, as if contemplating my face
and perhaps surmising that I had only recently arrived in the northern border
town. Then she introduced herself as Mrs Glimm and said that she ran a lodging
house. ‘Do you have a place to stay?’ she asked in an aggressively demanding
tone. ‘It should be dark soon,’ she said, glancing slightly upward. ‘The days are
getting shorter and shorter.’
I agreed to follow her back to the lodging house. On the way I asked her about
the parade. ‘It’s all just some nonsense,’ she said as we walked through the
darkening streets of the town. ‘Have you seen one of these?’ she asked, handing
me a crumpled piece of paper that she had stuffed among her scarves and shawls.
Smoothing out the page Mrs Glimm had placed in my hands, I tried to read in
the dimming twilight what was printed upon it.
At the top of the page, in capital letters, was a title: METAPHYSICAL LECTURE I.
Below these words was a brief text which I read to myself as I walked with Mrs
Glimm. ‘It has been said,’ the text began, ‘that after undergoing certain ordeals –
whether ecstatic or abysmal – we should be obliged to change our names, as we
are no longer who we once were. Instead the opposite rule is applied: our names
linger long after anything resembling what we were, or thought we were, has
disappeared entirely. Not that there was ever much to begin with – only a few

questionable memories and impulses drifting about like snowflakes in a gray and
endless winter. But each soon floats down and settles into a cold and nameless
void.’
After reading this brief ‘metaphysical lecture,’ I asked Mrs Glimm where it
came from. ‘They were all over town,’ she replied. ‘Just some nonsense, like the
rest of it. Personally I think this sort of thing is bad for business. Why should I
have to go around picking up customers in the street? But as long as someone’s
paying my price I will accommodate them in whatever style they wish. In
addition to operating a lodging house or two, I am also licensed to act as an
undertaker’s assistant and a cabaret stage manager. Well, here we are. You can
go inside – someone will be there to take care of you. At the moment I have an
appointment elsewhere.’ With these concluding words, Mrs Glimm walked off,
her jewelry rattling with every step she took.
Mrs Glimm’s lodging house was one of several great structures along the
street, each of them sharing similar features and all of them, I later discovered, in
some way under the proprietorship or authority of the same person – that is, Mrs
Glimm. Nearly flush with the street stood a series of high and almost styleless
houses with institutional façades of pale gray mortar and enormous dark roofs.
Although the street was rather wide, the sidewalks in front of the houses were so
narrow that the roofs of these edifices slightly overhung the pavement below,
creating a sense of tunnel-like enclosure. All of the houses might have been
siblings of my childhood residence, which I once heard someone describe as an
‘architectural moan.’ I thought of this phrase as I went through the process of
renting a room in Mrs Glimm’s lodging house, insisting that I be placed in one
that faced the street. Once I was settled into my apartment, which was actually a
single, quite expansive bedroom, I stood at the window gazing up and down the
street of gray houses, which together seemed to form a procession of some kind,
a frozen funeral parade. I repeated the words ‘architectural moan’ over and over
to myself until exhaustion forced me away from the window and under the
musty blankets of the bed. Before I fell asleep I remembered that it was Dr Zirk
who had used this phrase to describe my childhood home, a place that he had
visited so often.
So it was of Dr Zirk that I was thinking as I fell asleep in that expansive
bedroom in Mrs Glimm’s lodging house. And I was thinking of him not only
because he had used the phrase ‘architectural moan’ to describe the appearance
of my childhood home, which so closely resembled those high-roofed structures
along that street of gray houses in the northern border town, but also, and even

primarily, because the words of the brief metaphysical lecture I had read some
hours earlier reminded me so much of the words, those fragments and
mutterings, that the doctor had spoken as he sat upon my bed and attended to the
life-draining infirmities from which everyone expected I would die at a very
young age. Lying under the musty blankets of my bed in that strange lodging
house, with a little moonlight shining through the window to illuminate the
dreamlike vastness of the room around me, I once again felt the weight of
someone sitting upon my bed and bending over my apparently sleeping body,
ministering to it with unseen gestures and a soft voice. It was then, while
pretending to be asleep as I used to do in my childhood, that I heard the words of
a second ‘metaphysical lecture.’ They were whispered in a slow and resonant
monotone.
‘We should give thanks,’ the voice said to me, ‘that a poverty of knowledge
has so narrowed our vision of things as to allow the possibility of feeling
something about them. How could we find a pretext to react to anything if we
understood . . . everything? None but an absent mind was ever victimized by the
adventure of intense emotional feeling. And without the suspense that is
generated by our benighted state – our status as beings possessed by our own
bodies and the madness that goes along with them – who could take enough
interest in the universal spectacle to bring forth even the feeblest yawn, let alone
exhibit the more dramatic manifestations which lend such unwonted color to a
world that is essentially composed of shades of gray upon a background of
blackness? Hope and horror, to repeat merely two of the innumerable conditions
dependent on a faulty insight, would be much the worse for an ultimate
revelation that would expose their lack of necessity. At the other extreme, both
our most dire and most exalted emotions are well served every time we take
some ray of knowledge, isolate it from the spectrum of illumination, and then
forget it completely. All our ecstasies, whether sacred or from the slime, depend
on our refusal to be schooled in even the most superficial truths and our
maddening will to follow the path of forgetfulness. Amnesia may well be the
highest sacrament in the great gray ritual of existence. To know, to understand in
the fullest sense, is to plunge into an enlightenment of inanity, a wintry
landscape of memory whose substance is all shadows and a profound awareness
of the infinite spaces surrounding us on all sides. Within this space we remain
suspended only with the aid of strings that quiver with our hopes and our
horrors, and which keep us dangling over the gray void. How is it that we can
defend such puppetry, condemning any efforts to strip us of these strings? The

reason, one must suppose, is that nothing is more enticing, nothing more vitally
idiotic, than our desire to have a name – even if it is the name of a stupid little
puppet – and to hold on to this name throughout the long ordeal of our lives as if
we could hold on to it forever. If only we could keep those precious strings from
growing frayed and tangled, if only we could keep from falling into an empty
sky, we might continue to pass ourselves off under our assumed names and
perpetuate our puppet’s dance throughout all eternity . . .’
The voice whispered more words than this, more than I can recall, as if it
would deliver its lecture without end. But at some point I drifted off to sleep as I
had never slept before, calm and gray and dreamless.
The next morning I was awakened by some noise down in the street outside
my window. It was the same delirious cacophony I had heard the day before
when I first arrived in the northern border town and witnessed the passing of that
unique parade. But when I got up from my bed and went to the window, I saw no
sign of the uproarious procession. Then I noticed the house directly opposite the
one in which I had spent the night. One of the highest windows of that house
across the street was fully open, and slightly below the ledge of the window,
lying against the gray façade of the house, was the body of a man hanging by his
neck from a thick white rope. The cord was stretched taut and led back through
the window and into the house. For some reason this sight did not seem in any
way unexpected or out of place, even as the noisy thrumming of the unseen
parade grew increasingly loud and even when I recognized the figure of the
hanged man, who was extremely slight of build, almost like a child in physical
stature. Although many years older than when I had last seen him, his hair and
beard now radiantly white, clearly the body was that of my old physician, Dr
Zirk.
Now I could see the parade approaching. From the far end of the gray, tunnel-
like street, the clown creature strolled in its loose white garments, his egg-shaped
head scanning the high houses on either side. As the creature passed beneath my
window it looked up at me for a moment with that same expression of bland
malevolence, and then passed on. Following this figure was the formation of
ragged men harnessed by ropes to a cage-like vehicle that rolled along on
wooden wheels. Countless objects, many more than I saw the previous day,
clattered against the bars of the cage. The grotesque inventory now included
bottles of pills that rattled with the contents inside them, shining scalpels and
instruments for cutting through bones, needles and syringes strung together and
hung like ornaments on a Christmas tree, and a stethoscope that had been looped

about the decapitated dog’s head. The wooden stakes of the caged platform
wobbled to the point of breaking with the additional weight of this cast-off
clutter. Because there was no roof covering this cage, I could see down into it
from my window. But there was nothing inside, at least for the moment. As the
vehicle passed directly below, I looked across the street at the hanged man and
the thick rope from which he dangled like a puppet. From the shadows inside the
open window of the house, a hand appeared that was holding a polished steel
straight razor. The fingers of that hand were thick and wore many gaudy rings.
After the razor had worked at the cord for a few moments, the body of Dr Zirk
fell from the heights of the gray house and landed in the open vehicle just as it
passed by. The procession which was so lethargic in its every aspect now seemed
to disappear quickly from view, its muffled riot of sounds fading into the
distance.
To make an end of it, I thought to myself – to make an end of it in whatever
style you wish.
I looked at the house across the street. The window that was once open was
now closed, and the curtains behind it were drawn. The tunnel-like street of gray
houses was absolutely quiet and absolutely still. Then, as if in answer to my own
deepest wish, a sparse showering of snowflakes began to descend from the gray
morning sky, each one of them a soft whispering voice. For the longest time I
continued to stare out from my window, gazing upon the street and the town that
I knew was my home.
WHEN YOU HEAR THE SINGING, YOU WILL KNOW IT IS TIME
I had lived in the town near the northern border long enough so that, with the
occult passing of time, I had begun to assume that I would never leave there, at
least not while I was alive.
I would die by my own hand, I might have believed, or possibly by the more
usual means of some violent misadventure or some wasting disease. But
certainly I had begun to assume that my life’s end, as if by right, would take
place either within the town itself or in close proximity to its outskirts, where the
dense streets and structures of the town started to thin out and eventually
dissolved into a desolate and seemingly endless countryside. Following my
death, I thought, or had begun unwittingly to assume, I would be buried in the
hilltop graveyard outside the town. I had no idea that there were others who
might have told me that it was just as likely I would not die in the town and

therefore would not be buried, or interred in any way whatsoever, within the
hilltop graveyard. Such persons might have been regarded as hysterics of some
kind, or possibly some type of impostor, since everyone who was a permanent
resident of the northern border town seemed to be either one or the other and
often both of them at once. These individuals might have suggested to me that it
was also entirely possible neither to die in the town nor ever to leave it. I began
to learn how such a thing might happen during the time I was living in a small
backstairs apartment on the ground floor of a large rooming house located in one
of the oldest parts of town.
It was the middle of the night, and I had just awakened in my bed. More
precisely, I had started into wakefulness, much as I had done throughout my life.
This habit of starting into wakefulness in the middle of the night enabled me to
become aware, on that particular night, of a soft droning sound which filled my
small, one-room apartment and which I might not have heard had I been the sort
of person who remains asleep all night long. The sound was emanating from
under the floorboards and rose up to reverberate in the moonlit darkness of the
entire room. After a few moments sitting up in my bed, and then getting out of
bed to step quietly around my small apartment, it seemed to me that the soft
droning sound I heard was made by a voice, a very deep voice, which spoke as if
it were delivering a lecture of some kind or addressing an audience with the self-
assured inflections of authority. Yet I could not discern a single word of what the
voice was saying, only its droning intonations and its deeply reverberant quality
as it rose up from beneath the floorboards of my small backstairs apartment.
Until that night I had not suspected that there was a cellar below the rooming
house where I lived on the ground floor. I was even less prepared to discover, as
I eventually did, that hidden under a small, worn-down carpet, which was the
only floor covering in my room, was a trap door – an access, it seemed, to
whatever basement or cellar might have existed (beyond all my suspicions)
below the large rooming house. But there was something else unusual about this
trap door, aside from its very presence in my small apartment room and the fact
that it implied the existence of some type of rooming-house cellar. Although the
trap door was somehow set into the floorboards of my room, it did not in any
way appear to be of a piece with them. The trap door, as I thought of it, did not at
all seem to be constructed of wood but of something that was more of a leathery
consistency, all withered and warped and cracked in places as though it did not
fit in with the roughly parallel lines of the floorboards in my room but clearly
opposed them both in its shape and its angles, which were highly irregular by

any standards that might conceivably apply to a rooming-house trap door. I
could not even say if this leathery trap door had four sides to it or possibly five
sides or more, so elusive and misshapen was its crude and shriveled
construction, at least as I saw it in the moonlight after starting into wakefulness
in my small backstairs apartment. Yet I was absolutely certain that the deeply
reverberant voice which continued to drone on and on as I inspected the trap
door was in fact emanating from a place, a cellar or basement of some kind,
directly below my room. I knew this to be true because I placed my hand, very
briefly, on the trap door’s leathery and irregular surface, and in that moment I
could feel that it was pulsing in a way that corresponded to the force and
rhythms of the voice which echoed its indecipherable words throughout the rest
of that night, fading only moments before daylight.
Having remained awake for most of the night, I left my backstairs apartment
and began to wander the streets of the northern border town on a cold and
overcast morning in late autumn. Throughout the whole of that day I saw the
town, where I had already lived for some time, under an aspect I had not known
before. I have stated that this town near the northern border was a place where I
had assumed I would one day die, and I may even say it was a place where I
actually desired to make an end of it, or such was the intention or wish that I
entertained at certain times and in certain places, including my residence in one
of the oldest sections of the town. But as I wandered the streets on that overcast
morning in late autumn, and throughout the day, my entire sense of my
surroundings, as well as my intuition that my existence would be terminated
within those surroundings, had become altered in a completely unexpected
manner. The town had, of course, always displayed certain peculiar and often
profoundly surprising qualities and features. Sooner or later everyone who was a
permanent resident there was confronted with something of a nearly
insupportable oddity or corruption.
As I wandered along one byway or another throughout that morning and into
late afternoon, I recalled a specific street near the edge of town, a dead-end street
where all the houses and other buildings seemed to have grown into one another,
melding their diverse materials into a bizarre and jagged conglomerate of
massive architectural proportions, with peaked roofs and soaring chimneys or
towers visibly swaying and audibly moaning even in the calm of an early
summer twilight. I had thought that this was the absolute limit, only to find out
at exactly the moment of having this thought that there was something further
involved with this street, something that caused persons living in the area to

repeat a special slogan or incantation to whomever would listen. When you hear
the singing, they said, you will know it is time. These words were spoken, and I
heard them myself, as if the persons uttering them were attempting to absolve or
protect themselves in some way that was beyond any further explication. And
whether or not one heard the singing or had ever heard what was called the
singing, and whether or not that obscure and unspeakable time ever came, or
would ever come to those who arrived in that street with its houses and other
buildings all mingled together and tumbling into the sky, there nevertheless
remained within you the feeling that this was still the place – the town near the
northern border – where you came to live and where you might believe you
would be a permanent resident until either you chose to leave it or until you died,
possibly by violent misadventure or some wasting disease, if not by your own
hand. Yet on that overcast morning in late autumn I could no longer maintain
this feeling, not after having started into wakefulness the night before, not after
having heard that droning voice which delivered some incomprehensible sermon
for hours on end, and not after having seen that leathery trap door which I placed
my hand upon for only a brief moment and thereafter retreated to the furthest
corner of my small apartment until daylight.
And I was not the only one to notice a change within the town, as I discovered
when twilight drew on and more of us began to collect on street corners or in
back alleys, as well as in abandoned storefront rooms or old office buildings
where most of the furniture was badly broken and out-of-date calendars hung
crooked on the walls. It was difficult for some persons to refrain from observing
that there seemed to be fewer of us as the shadows of twilight gathered that day.
Even Mrs Glimm, whose lodging house-plus-brothel was as populous as ever
with its out-of-town clientele, said that among the permanent residents of the
northern border town there was a ‘noticeably diminished’ number of persons.
A man named Mr Pell (sometimes Doctor Pell) was to my knowledge the first
to use the word ‘disappearances’ in order to illuminate, during the course of one
of our twilight gatherings, the cause of the town’s slightly reduced population.
He was sitting in the shadows on the other side of an overturned desk or
bookcase, so his words were not entirely audible as he whispered them in the
direction of a darkened doorway, perhaps speaking to someone who was
standing, or possibly lying down, in the darkness beyond the aperture. But once
this concept – of ‘disappearances,’ that is – had been introduced, it seemed that
quite a few persons had something to say on the subject, especially those who
had lived in the town longer than most of us or who had lived in the oldest parts

of the town for more years than I had. It was from one of the latter, a veteran of
all kinds of hysteria, that I learned about the demonic preacher Reverend Cork,
whose sermonizing I had apparently heard during the previous night as it
reverberated through the leathery trap door in my apartment room. ‘You didn’t
happen to open that trap door, did you?’ the old hysteric asked in a somewhat
coy tone of voice. We were sitting, just the two of us, on some wooden crates we
had found in the opening to a narrow alley. ‘Tell me,’ he urged as the light from
a streetlamp shone upon his thin face in the darkening twilight. ‘Tell me that you
didn’t just take a little peek inside that trap door.’ I then told him I had done
nothing of the sort. Suddenly he began to laugh hysterically in a voice that was
both high-pitched and extremely coarse. ‘Of course you didn’t take a little peek
inside the trap door,’ he said when he finally settled down. ‘If you had, then you
wouldn’tbe here with me, you would be there with him.’
The antics and coy tone of the old hysteric notwithstanding, there was a
meaning in his words that resonated with my experience in my apartment room
and also with my perception that day of a profound change in the town near the
northern border. At first I tended to conceive of the figure of Reverend Cork as a
spirit of the dead, someone who had ‘disappeared’ by wholly natural means. In
these terms I was able to think of myself as having been the victim of a haunting
at the large rooming house where, no doubt, many persons had ended their lives
in one way or another. This metaphysical framework seemed to apply nicely to
my recent experiences and did not conflict with what I had been told in that
narrow alley as twilight turned into evening. I was indeed here, in the northern
border town with the old hysteric, and not there, in the land of the dead with
Reverend Cork the demonic preacher.
But as the night wore on, and I moved among other residents of the town who
had lived there far longer than I, it became evident that Reverend Cork, whose
voice I had heard ‘preaching’ the night before, was neither dead, in the usual
sense of the word, nor among those who had only recently ‘disappeared,’ many
of whom, I learned, had not disappeared in any mysterious way at all but had
simply abandoned the northern border town without notifying anyone. They had
made this hasty exodus, according to several hysterics or impostors I spoke with
that night, because they had ‘seen the signs,’ even as I had seen that leathery trap
door whose existence in my apartment room was previously and entirely
unsuspected.
Although I had not recognized it as such, this trap door, which appeared to
lead to a cellar beneath the rooming house where I lived, was among the most

typical of the so-called ‘signs.’ All of them, as numerous persons hysterically
avowed, were indications of some type of threshold – doorways or passages that
one should be cautious not to enter, or even to approach. Most of these signs, in
fact, took the form of doors of various types, particularly those which might be
found in odd, out-of-the-way places, such as a miniature door at the back of a
broom closet or a door appearing on the inner wall of a fireplace, and even doors
that might not seem to lead to any sensible space, as would be the case with a
trap door in an apartment on the ground floor of a rooming house that did not
have a cellar, nor had ever had one that could be accessed in such a way. I did
hear about other such ‘threshold-signs,’ including window frames in the most
queer locations, stairways that spiraled downward into depths beneath a common
basement or led below ground level along lonely sidewalks, and even entrances
to streets that were not formerly known to exist, with perhaps a narrow gate
swinging open in temptation.
Yet all of these signs or thresholds gave themselves away by their distinctive
appearance, which, according to many of those knowledgeable of such things,
was very much like that withered and leathery appearance of the trap door in my
apartment room, not to mention displaying the same kind of shapes and angles
that were strikingly at odds with their surroundings.
Nevertheless, there were still those who, for one reason or another, chose to
ignore the signs or were unable to resist the enticements of thresholds that
simply cropped up overnight in the most unforeseen places around the northern
border town. To all appearances, at that point, the demonic preacher Reverend
Cork had been one of the persons who had ‘disappeared’ in this way. I now
became aware, as the evening progressed into a brilliantly star-filled night, that I
had not been the victim of a haunting, as I had earlier supposed, but had actually
witnessed a phenomenon of quite a different sort.
‘The reverend has been gone since the last disappearances,’ said an old
woman whose face I could barely see in the candlelight that illuminated the
enormous, echoing lobby of a defunct hotel where some of us had gathered after
midnight. But someone took issue with the old woman, or ‘idiot-hag,’ as this
person called her. The preacher, this other person contended in exactly the
following words, was old town. This was my first exposure to the phrase ‘old
town,’ but before I could take in its full meaning or implications it began to
undergo a metamorphosis among those gathered after midnight in the lobby of
that defunct hotel. While the person who called the old woman an idiot-hag
continued to speak of the ‘old town,’ where he said Reverend Cork resided or

was originally from, the old woman and a few of those who sided with her spoke
only about the other town. ‘No one is from the other town,’ the woman said to
the person who was calling her an idiot-hag. ‘There are only those who
disappear into the other town, among them the demonic preacher Reverend
Cork, who may have been a ludicrous impostor but was never what anyone
would call demonic until he disappeared into that trap door in the room where
this gentleman,’ she said, referring to me, ‘heard him preaching only last night.’
‘You idiot-hag,’ said the other person, ‘the old town existed on the very spot
where this northern border town now exists . . . until the day when it
disappeared, along with everyone who lived in it, including the demonic
preacher Reverend Cork.’
Then someone else, who was lying deep in the cushions of an old divan in the
lobby, added the following words: ‘It was a demon town and was inhabited by
demonic entities of all sorts who made the whole thing invisible. Now they
throw out these thresholds as a way to lure another group of us who only want to
live in this town near the northern border and not in some intolerable demon
town.’
Nonetheless, the old woman and the few others who sided with her persisted
in speaking not about an old town or an invisible demon town, but about the
other town, which, they all agreed, never had any concrete existence to speak of,
but was simply a metaphysical backdrop to the northern border town that we all
knew and that was a place where many of us fervently desired to make an end of
our lives. Whatever the facts in this matter, one point was hammered into my
brain over and over again: there was simply no peace to be had no matter where
you hid yourself away. Even in a northern border town of such intensely chaotic
oddity and corruption there was still some greater chaos, some deeper insanity,
than one had counted on, or could ever be taken into account – wherever there
was anything, there would be chaos and insanity to such a degree that one could
never come to terms with it, and it was only a matter of time before your world,
whatever you thought it to be, was undermined, if not completely overrun, by
another world.
Throughout the late hours of that night the debates and theories and fine
qualifications continued regarding the spectral towns and the tangible thresholds
that served to reduce the number of permanent residents of the northern border
town, either by causing them to disappear through some out-of-the-way door or
window or down a spiraling stairway or phantom street, or by forcing them to
abandon the town because, for whatever reason, it had become, or seemed to

become, something quite different from the place they had known it to be, or
believed it to be, for so long. Whether or not they arrived at a resolution of their
conflicting views I will never know, since I left the defunct hotel while the
discussion was still going strong. But I did not go back to my small apartment in
one of the oldest parts of town. Instead I wandered out to the hilltop graveyard
outside of town and stood among the graves until the following morning, which
was as cold and overcast as the one before it. I knew then that I would not die in
the northern border town, either by means of a violent misadventure or a wasting
disease, or even by my own hand, and therefore I would not be buried in the
hilltop graveyard where I stood that morning looking down on the place where I
had lived for so long. I had already wandered the streets of the northern border
town for the last time and found, for whatever reason, that they had become
something different from what they had been, or had once seemed to be. This
was the only thing that was now certain in my mind. For a moment I considered
returning to the town and seeking out one of the newly appeared thresholds in
order to enter it before all of them mysteriously disappeared again, so that I
might disappear along with them into the other town, or the old town, where
perhaps I might find once more what I seemed to have lost in the northern border
town. Possibly there might have been something there – on the other side of the
town – that was like the dead-end street where, it was said, ‘When you hear the
singing, you will know it is time.’ And while I might never be able to die in the
town near the northern border, neither would I ever have to leave it. To have
such thoughts was, of course, only more chaos and insanity. But I had not slept
for two nights. I was tired and felt the ache of every broken dream I had ever
carried within me. Perhaps I would one day seek out another town in another
land where I could make an end of it, or at least where I could wait in a fatalistic
delirium for the end to come. Now it was time to just walk away in silence.
Years later I learned there was a movement to ‘clean up’ the northern border
town of what was elsewhere perceived to be its ‘contaminated’ elements. On
arriving in the town, however, the investigators assigned to this task discovered a
place that was all but deserted, the only remaining residents being a few
hysterics or impostors who muttered endlessly about ‘other towns’ or ‘demon
towns,’ and even of an ‘old town.’ Among these individuals was a large and
gaudily attired old woman who styled herself as the owner of a lodging house
and several other properties. These venues, she said, along with many others
throughout the town, had been rendered uninhabitable and useless for any
practical purpose. This statement seemed to capsulize the findings of the

investigators, who ultimately composed a report that was dismissive of any
threat that might be posed by the town near the northern border, which, whatever
else it may have been, or seemed to be, was always a genius of the most
insidious illusions.

THE DAMAGED AND THE DISEASED

TEATRO GROTTESCO
T
he first thing I learned was that no one anticipates the arrival of the Teatro. One
would not say, or even think, ‘The Teatro has never come to this city – it seems
we’re due for a visit,’ or perhaps, ‘Don’t be surprised when you-know-what
turns up. It’s been years since the last time.’ Even if the city in which one lives is
exactly the kind of place favored by the Teatro, there can be no basis for
predicting its appearance. No warnings are given, no fanfare to announce that a
Teatro season is about to begin, or that another season of that sort will soon be
upon us. But if a particular city possesses what is sometimes called an ‘artistic
underworld,’ and if one is in close touch with this society of artists, the chances
are optimal for being among those who discover that things have already started.
This is the most one can expect.
For a time it was all rumors and lore, hearsay and dreams. Anyone who failed
to show up for a few days at the usual club or bookstore or special artistic event
was the subject of speculation. But most of the crowd I am referring to led
highly unstable, even precarious lives. Any of them might have packed up and
disappeared without notifying a single soul. And almost all of the supposedly
‘missing ones’ were, at some point, seen again. One such person was a
filmmaker whose short movie Private Hell served as the featured subject of a
local one-night festival. But he was nowhere to be seen either during the
exhibition or at the party afterward. ‘Gone with the Teatro,’ someone said with a
blasé knowingness, while others smiled and clinked glasses in a sardonic
farewell toast.
Yet only a week later the filmmaker was spotted in one of the back rows of a
pornographic theater. He later explained his absence by insisting he had been in
the hospital following a thorough beating at the hands of some people he had
been filming who did not consent or desire to be filmed. This sounded plausible,
given the subject matter of the man’s work. But for some reason no one believed
his hospital story, despite the evidence of bandages he was still required to wear.
‘It has to be the Teatro,’ argued a woman who always dressed in shades of purple
and who was a good friend of the filmmaker. ‘His stuff and Teatro stuff,’ she

said, holding up two crossed fingers for everyone to see.
But what was meant by ‘Teatro stuff’? This was a phrase I heard spoken by a
number of persons, not all of them artists of a pretentious or self-dramatizing
type. Certainly there is no shortage of anecdotes that have been passed around
which purport to illuminate the nature and workings of this ‘cruel troupe,’ an
epithet used by those who are too superstitious to invoke the Teatro Grottesco by
name. But sorting out these accounts into a coherent profile, never mind their
truth value, is another thing altogether.
For instance, the purple woman I mentioned earlier held us all spellbound one
evening with a story about her cousin’s roommate, a self-styled ‘visceral artist’
who worked the night shift as a stock clerk for a supermarket chain in the
suburbs. On a December morning, about an hour before sun-up, the artist was
released from work and began his walk home through a narrow alley that ran
behind several blocks of various stores and businesses along the suburb’s main
avenue. A light snow had fallen during the night, settling evenly upon the
pavement of the alley and glowing in the light of a full moon which seemed to
hover just at the alley’s end. The artist saw a figure in the distance, and
something about this figure, this winter-morning vision, made him pause for a
moment and stare. Although he had a trained eye for sizing and perspective, the
artist found this silhouette of a person in the distance of the alley intensely
problematic. He could not tell if it was short or tall, or even if it was moving –
either toward him or away from him – or was standing still. Then, in a moment
of hallucinated wonder, the figure stood before him in the middle of the alley.
The moonlight illuminated a little man who was entirely unclothed and who
held out both of his hands as if he were grasping at a desired object just out of
his reach. But the artist saw that something was wrong with these hands. While
the little man’s body was pale, his hands were dark and were too large for the
tiny arms on which they hung. At first the artist believed the little man to be
wearing oversized mittens. His hands seemed to be covered by some kind of
fuzz, just as the alley in which he stood was layered with the fuzziness of the
snow that had fallen during the night. His hands looked soft and fuzzy like the
snow, except that the snow was white and his hands were black.
In the moonlight the artist came to see that the mittens worn by this little man
were more like the paws of an animal. It almost made sense to the artist to have
thought that the little man’s hands were actually paws which had only appeared
to be two black mittens. Then each of the paws separated into long thin fingers
that wriggled wildly in the moonlight. But they could not have been the fingers

of a hand, because there were too many of them. So what appeared to be fingers
could not have been fingers, just as the hands were not in fact hands nor the
paws really paws – no more than they were mittens. And all of this time the little
man was becoming smaller and smaller in the moonlight of that alley, as if he
were moving into the distance far away from the artist who was hypnotized by
this vision. Finally a little voice spoke which the artist could barely hear, and it
said to him: ‘I cannot keep them away from me anymore, I am becoming so
small and weak.’ These words suddenly made this whole winter-morning
scenario into something that was too much even for the self-styled ‘visceral
artist.’
In the pocket of his coat the artist had a tool which he used for cutting open
boxes at the supermarket. He had cut into flesh in the past, and, with the
moonlight glaring upon the snow of that alley, the artist made a few strokes
which turned that white world red. Under the circumstances what he had done
seemed perfectly justified to the artist, even an act of mercy. The man was
becoming so small.
Afterward the artist ran through the alley without stopping until he reached the
rented house where he lived with his roommate. It was she who telephoned the
police, saying there was a body lying in the snow at such and such a place and
then hanging up without giving her name. For days, weeks, the artist and his
roommate searched the local newspapers for some word of the extraordinary
thing the police must have found in that alley. But nothing ever appeared.
‘You see how these incidents are hushed up,’ the purple woman whispered to
us. ‘The police know what is going on. There are even special police for dealing
with such matters. But nothing is made public, no one is questioned. And yet,
after that morning in the alley, my cousin and her roommate came under
surveillance and were followed everywhere by unmarked cars. Because these
special policemen know that it is artists, or highly artistic persons, who are
approached by the Teatro. And they know whom to watch after something has
happened. It is said that these police may be party to the deeds of that “company
of nightmares.”’
But none of us believed a word of this Teatro anecdote told by the purple
woman, just as none of us believed the purple woman’s friend, the filmmaker,
when he denied all innuendos that connected him to the Teatro. On the one hand,
our imaginations had sided with this woman when she asserted that her friend,
the creator of the short movie Private Hell, was somehow in league with the
Teatro; on the other hand, we were mockingly dubious of the story about her

cousin’s roommate, the self-styled visceral artist, and his encounter in the snow-
covered alley.
This divided reaction was not as natural as it seemed. Never mind that the
case of the filmmaker was more credible than that of the visceral artist, if only
because the first story was lacking the extravagant details which burdened the
second. Until then we had uncritically relished all we had heard about the Teatro,
no matter how bizarre these accounts may have been and no matter how much
they opposed a verifiable truth or even a coherent portrayal of this phenomenon.
As artists we suspected that it was in our interest to have our heads filled with all
kinds of Teatro craziness. Even I, a writer of nihilistic prose works, savored the
inconsistency and the flamboyant absurdity of what was told to me across a table
in a quiet library or a noisy club. In a word, I delighted in the unreality of the
Teatro stories. The truth they carried, if any, was immaterial. And we never
questioned any of them until the purple woman related the episode of the
visceral artist and the small man in the alley.
However, this new disbelief was not in the least inspired by our sense of
reason or reality. It was in fact based solely on fear; it was driven by the will to
negate what one fears. No one gives up on something until it turns on them,
whether or not that thing is real or unreal. In some way all of this Teatro business
had finally worn upon our nerves; the balance had been tipped between a
madness that intoxicated us and one that began to menace our minds. As for the
woman who always dressed herself in shades of purple . . . we avoided her. It
would have been typical of the Teatro, someone said, to use a person like that for
their purposes.
Perhaps our judgment of the purple woman was unfair. No doubt her theories
concerning the ‘approach of the Teatro’ made us all uneasy. But was this reason
enough to cast her out from that artistic underworld which was the only society
available to her? Like many societies, of course, ours was founded on fearful
superstition, and this is always reason enough for any kind of behavior. She had
been permanently stigmatized by too closely associating herself with something
unclean in its essence. Because even after her theories were discredited by a
newly circulated Teatro tale, her status did not improve.
I am now referring to a story that was going around in which an artist was not
approached by the Teatro but rather took the first step toward the Teatro, as if
acting under the impulse of a sovereign will.
The artist in this case was a photographer of the I-am-a-camera type. He was a
studiedly bloodless specimen who quite often, and for no apparent reason, would

begin to stare at someone and to continue staring until that person reacted in
some manner, usually by fleeing the scene but on occasion by assaulting the
photographer, who invariably pressed charges. It was therefore not entirely
surprising to learn that he tried to engage the services of the Teatro in the way he
did, for it was his belief that this cruel troupe could be hired to, in the
photographer’s words, ‘utterly destroy someone.’ And the person he wished to
destroy was his landlord, a small balding man with a mustache who, after the
photographer had moved out of his apartment, refused to remit his security
deposit, perhaps with good reason but perhaps not.
In any case, the photographer, whose name incidentally was Spence, made
inquiries about the Teatro over a period of some months. Following up every
scrap of information, no matter how obscure or suspect, the tenacious Spence
ultimately arrived in the shopping district of an old suburb where there was a
two-story building that rented space to various persons and businesses, including
a small video store, a dentist, and, as it was spelled out on the building’s
directory, the Theatre Grottesco. At the back of the first floor, directly below a
studio for dancing instruction, was a small suite of offices whose glass door
displayed some stencilled lettering that read: tg ventures. Seated at a desk in the
reception area behind the glass door was a young woman with long black hair
and black-rimmed eyeglasses. She was thoroughly engrossed in writing
something on a small blank card, several more of which were spread across her
desk. The way Spence told it, he was undeterred by all appearances that seemed
to suggest the Teatro, or Theatre, was not what he assumed it was. He entered
the reception area of the office, stood before the desk of the young woman, and
introduced himself by name and occupation, believing it important to
communicate as soon as possible his identity as an artist, or at least imply as best
he could that he was a highly artistic photographer, which undoubtedly he was.
When the young woman adjusted her eyeglasses and asked, ‘How can I help
you?’ the photographer Spence leaned toward her and whispered, ‘I would like
to enlist the services of the Teatro, or Theatre if you like.’ When the receptionist
asked what he was planning, the photographer answered, ‘To utterly destroy
someone.’ The young woman was absolutely unflustered, according to Spence,
by this declaration. She began calmly gathering the small blank cards that were
spread across her desk and, while doing this, explained that TG Ventures was, in
her words, an ‘entertainment service.’ After placing the small blank cards to one
side, she removed from her desk a folded brochure outlining the nature of the
business, which provided clowns, magicians, and novelty performances for a

variety of occasions, their specialty being children’s parties.
As Spence studied the brochure, the receptionist placidly sat with her hands
folded and gazed at him from within the black frames of her eyeglasses. The
light in that suburban office suite was bright but not harsh; the pale walls were
incredibly clean and the carpeting, in Spence’s description, was conspicuously
new and displayed the exact shade of purple found in turnips. The photographer
said that he felt as if he were standing in a mirage. ‘This is all a front,’ Spence
finally said, throwing the brochure on the receptionist’s desk. But the young
woman only picked up the brochure and placed it back in the same drawer from
which it had come. ‘What’s behind that door?’ Spence demanded, pointing
across the room. And just as he pointed at that door there was a sound on the
other side of it, a brief rumbling as if something heavy had just fallen to the
floor. ‘The dancing classes,’ said the receptionist, her right index finger pointing
up at the floor above. ‘Perhaps,’ Spence allowed, but he claimed that this sound
that he heard, which he described as having an ‘abysmal resonance,’ caused a
sudden rise of panic within him. He tried not to move from where he was
standing, but his body was overwhelmed by the impulse to leave that suite of
offices. The photographer turned away from the receptionist and saw his
reflection in the glass door. She was watching him from behind the lenses of
black-framed eyeglasses, and the stencilled lettering on the glass door read
backward, as if in a mirror. A few seconds later Spence was outside the building
in the old suburb. All the way home, he asserted, his heart was pounding.
The following day Spence paid a visit to his landlord’s place of business,
which was a tiny office in a seedy downtown building. Having given up on the
Teatro, he would have to deal in his own way with this man who would not
return his security deposit. Spence’s strategy was to plant himself in his
landlord’s office and stare him into submission with a photographer’s unnerving
gaze. After he arrived at his landlord’s rented office on the sixth floor of what
was a thoroughly depressing downtown building, Spence seated himself in a
chair looking across a filthy desk at a small balding man with a mustache. But
the man merely looked back at the photographer. To make things worse, the
landlord (whose name was Herman Zick) would lean toward Spence every so
often and in a quiet voice say, ‘It’s all perfectly legal, you know.’ Then Spence
would continue his staring, which he was frustrated to find ineffective against
this man Zick, who of course was not an artist, nor even a highly artistic person,
as were the usual victims of the photographer. Thus the battle kept up for almost
an hour, the landlord saying, ‘It’s all perfectly legal,’ and Spence trying to hold a

fixed gaze upon the man he wished to utterly destroy.
Ultimately Spence was the first to lose control. He jumped out of the chair in
which he was sitting and began to shout incoherently at the landlord. Once
Spence was on his feet, Zick swiftly maneuvered around the desk and physically
evicted the photographer from the tiny office, locking him out in the hallway.
Spence said that he was in the hallway for only a second or two when the doors
opened to the elevator that was directly across from Zick’s sixth-floor office. Out
of the elevator compartment stepped a middle-aged man in a dark suit and black-
framed eyeglasses. He wore a full, well-groomed beard which, Spence observed,
was slightly streaked with gray. In his left hand the gentleman was clutching a
crumpled brown bag, holding it a few inches in front of him. He walked up to
the door of the landlord’s office and with his right hand grasped the round black
doorknob, jiggling it back and forth several times. There was a loud click that
echoed down the hallway of that old downtown building. The gentleman turned
his head and looked at Spence for the first time, smiling briefly before admitting
himself to the office of Herman Zick.
Again the photographer experienced that surge of panic he had felt the day
before when he visited the suburban offices of TG Ventures. He pushed the
down button for the elevator, and while waiting he listened at the door of the
landlord’s office. What he heard, Spence claimed, was that terrible sound that
had sent him running out into the street from TG Ventures, that ‘abysmal
resonance,’ as he defined it. Suddenly the gentleman with the well-groomed
beard and black-rimmed glasses emerged from the tiny office. The door to the
elevator had just opened, and the man walked straight past Spence to board the
empty compartment. Spence himself did not get in the elevator but stood outside,
helplessly staring at the bearded gentleman, who was still holding that small
crumpled bag. A split second before the elevator doors slid closed, the gentleman
looked directly at Spence and winked at him. It was the assertion of the
photographer that this wink, executed from behind a pair of black-framed
eyeglasses, made a mechanical clicking sound which echoed down the dim
hallway. Prior to his exit from the old downtown building, leaving by way of the
stairs rather than the elevator, Spence tried the door to his landlord’s office. He
found it unlocked and cautiously stepped inside. But there was no one on the
other side of the door.
The conclusion to the photographer’s adventure took place a full week later.
Delivered by regular post to his mail box was a small square envelope with no
return address. Inside was a photograph. He brought this item to Des Esseintes’

Library, a bookstore where several of us were giving a late-night reading of our
latest literary efforts. A number of persons belonging to the local artistic
underworld, including myself, saw the photograph and heard Spence’s rather
frantic account of the events surrounding it. The photo was of Spence himself
staring stark-eyed into the camera, which apparently had taken the shot from
inside an elevator, a panel of numbered buttons being partially visible along the
right-hand border of the picture. ‘I could see no camera,’ Spence kept repeating.
‘But that wink he gave me . . . and what’s written on the reverse side of this
thing.’ Turning over the photo Spence read aloud the following handwritten
inscription: ‘The little man is so much littler these days. Soon he will know
about the soft black stars. And your payment is past due.’ Someone then asked
Spence what they had to say about all this at the offices of TG Ventures. The
photographer’s head swivelled slowly in exasperated negation. ‘Not there
anymore,’ he said over and over. With the single exception of myself, that night
at Des Esseintes’ Library was the last time anyone would see Spence.
After the photographer ceased to show up at the usual meeting places and
special artistic events, there were no cute remarks about his having ‘gone with
the Teatro.’ We were all of us beyond that stage. I was perversely proud to note
that a degree of philosophical maturity had now developed among those in the
artistic underworld of which I was a part. There is nothing like fear to
complicate one’s consciousness, inducing previously unknown levels of
reflection. Under such mental stress I began to organize my own thoughts and
observations about the Teatro, specifically as this phenomenon related to the
artists who seemed to be its sole objects of attention.
Whether or not an artist was approached by the Teatro or took the initiative to
approach the Teatro himself, it seemed the effect was the same: the end of an
artist’s work. I myself verified this fact as thoroughly as I could. The filmmaker
whose short movie Private Hell so many of us admired had, by all accounts,
become a full-time dealer in pornographic videos, none of them his own
productions. The self-named visceral artist had publicly called an end to those
stunts of his which had gained him a modest underground reputation. According
to his roommate, the purple woman’s cousin, he was now managing the
supermarket where he had formerly labored as a stock clerk. As for the purple
woman herself, who was never much praised as an artist and whose renown
effectively began and ended with the ‘cigar box assemblage’ phase of her career,
she had gone into selling real estate, an occupation in which she became quite a
success. This roster of ex-artists could be extended considerably, I am sure of

that. But for the purposes of this report or confession (or whatever else you
would like to call it) I must end my list of no-longer-artistic persons with myself,
while attempting to offer some insights into the manner in which the Teatro
Grottesco could transform a writer of nihilistic prose works into a non-artistic,
more specifically a post-artistic being.
It was after the disappearance of the photographer Spence that my intuitions
concerning the Teatro began to crystallize and become explicit thoughts, a
dubious process but one to which I am inescapably subject as a prose writer.
Until that point in time, everyone tacitly assumed that there was an intimacy of
kind between the Teatro and the artists who were either approached by the Teatro
or themselves approached this cruel troupe by means of some overture, as in the
case of Spence, or perhaps by gestures more subtle, even purely noetic (I retreat
from writing unconscious, although others might argue with my intellectual
reserve). Many of us even spoke of the Teatro as a manifestation of super-art, a
term which we always left conveniently nebulous. However, following the
disappearance of the photographer, all knowledge I had acquired about the
Teatro, fragmentary as it was, became configured in a completely new pattern. I
mean to say that I no longer considered it possible that the Teatro was in any
way related to a super-art, or to an art of any kind – quite the opposite in fact. To
my mind the Teatro was, and is, a phenomenon intensely destructive of
everything that I conceived of as art. Therefore, the Teatro was, and is, intensely
destructive of all artists and even of highly artistic persons. Whether this
destructive force is a matter of intention or is an epiphenomenon of some
unrelated, perhaps greater design, or even if there exists anything like an
intention or design on the part of the Teatro, I have no idea (at least none I can
elaborate in comprehensible terms). Nonetheless, I feel certain that for an artist
to encounter the Teatro there can be only one consequence: the end of that
artist’s work. Strange, then, that knowing this fact I still acted as I did.
I cannot say if it was I who approached the Teatro or vice versa, as if any of
that stupidness made a difference. The important thing is that from the moment I
perceived the Teatro to be a profoundly anti-artistic phenomenon I conceived the
ambition to make my form of art, by which I mean my nihilistic prose writings,
into an anti-Teatro phenomenon. In order to do this, of course, I required a
penetrating knowledge of the Teatro Grottesco, or of some significant aspect of
that cruel troupe, an insight of a deeply subtle, even dreamlike variety into its
nature and workings.
The photographer Spence had made a great visionary advance when he

intuited that it was in the nature of the Teatro to act on his request to utterly
destroy someone (although the exact meaning of the statement ‘he will know
about the soft black stars,’ in reference to Spence’s landlord, became known to
both of us only sometime later). I realized that I would need to make a similar
leap of insight in my own mind. While I had already perceived the Teatro to be a
profoundly anti-artistic phenomenon, I was not yet sure what in the world would
constitute an anti-Teatro phenomenon, nor how in the world I could turn my own
prose writings to such a purpose.
Thus, for several days I meditated on these questions. As usual, the psychic
demands of this meditation severely taxed my bodily processes, and in my
weakened state I contracted a virus, specifically an intestinal virus, which
confined me to my small apartment for a period of one week. Nonetheless, it was
during this time that things fell into place regarding the Teatro and the insights I
required to oppose this company of nightmares in a more or less efficacious
manner.
Suffering through the days and nights of an illness, especially an intestinal
virus, one becomes highly conscious of certain realities, as well as highly
sensitive to the functions of these realities, which otherwise are not generally
subject to prolonged attention or meditation. Upon recovery from such a virus,
the consciousness of these realities and their functions necessarily fades, so that
the once-stricken person may resume his life’s activities and not be driven to
insanity or suicide by the acute awareness of these most unpleasant facts of
existence. Through the illumination of analogy, I came to understand that the
Teatro operated in much the same manner as the illness from which I had
recently suffered, with the consequence that the person exposed to the Teatro-
disease becomes highly conscious of certain realities and their functions, ones
quite different of course from the realities and functions of an intestinal virus.
However, an intestinal virus ultimately succumbs, in a reasonably healthy
individual, to the formation of antibodies (or something of that sort). But the
disease of the Teatro, I now understood, was a disease for which no
counteracting agents, or antibodies, had ever been created by the systems of the
individuals – that is, the artists – it attacked. An encounter with any disease,
including an intestinal virus, serves to alter a person’s mind, making it intensely
aware of certain realities, but this mind cannot remain altered once this
encounter has ended or else that person will never be able to go on living in the
same way as before. In contrast, an encounter with the Teatro appears to remain
within one’s system and to alter a person’s mind permanently. For the artist the

result is not to be driven into insanity or suicide (as might be the case if one
assumed a permanent mindfulness of an intestinal virus) but the absolute
termination of that artist’s work. The simple reason for this effect is that there are
no antibodies for the disease of the Teatro, and therefore no relief from the
consciousness of the realities which an encounter with the Teatro has forced
upon an artist.
Having progressed this far in my contemplation of the Teatro – so that I might
discover its nature or essence and thereby make my prose writings into an anti-
Teatro phenomenon – I found that I could go no further. No matter how much
thought and meditation I devoted to the subject I did not gain a definite sense of
having revealed to myself the true realities and functions that the Teatro
communicated to an artist and how this communication put an end to that artist’s
work. Of course I could vaguely imagine the species of awareness that might
render an artist thenceforth incapable of producing any type of artistic efforts. I
actually arrived at a fairly detailed and disturbing idea of such an awareness – a
world-awareness, as I conceived it. Yet I did not feel I had penetrated the
mystery of ‘Teatrostuff.’ And the only way to know about the Teatro, it seemed,
was to have an encounter with it. Such an encounter between myself and the
Teatro would have occurred in any event as a result of the discovery that my
prose writings had been turned into an anti-Teatro phenomenon: this would
constitute an approach of the most outrageous sort to that company of
nightmares, forcing an encounter with all its realities and functions. Thus it was
not necessary, at this point in my plan, to have actually succeeded in making my
prose writings into an anti-Teatro phenomenon. I simply had to make it known,
falsely, that I had done so.
As soon as I had sufficiently recovered from my intestinal virus I began to
spread the word. Every time I found myself among others who belonged to the
so-called artistic underworld of this city I bragged that I had gained the most
intense awareness of the Teatro’s realities and functions, and that, far from
finishing me off as an artist, I had actually used this awareness as inspiration for
a series of short prose works. I explained to my colleagues that merely to exist –
let alone create artistic works – we had to keep certain things from
overwhelming our minds. However, I continued, in order to keep these things,
such as the realities of an intestinal virus, from overwhelming our minds we
attempted to deny them any voice whatsoever, neither a voice in our minds nor,
certainly, a precise and clear voice in works of art. The voice of madness, for
instance, is barely a whisper in the babbling history of art because its realities are

themselves too maddening to speak of for very long – and those of the Teatro
have no voice at all, given their imponderably grotesque nature. Furthermore, I
said, the Teatro not only propagated an intense awareness of these things, these
realities and functionings of realities – it was identical with them. And I, I
boasted, had allowed my mind to be overwhelmed by all manner of Teatro stuff,
while also managing to use this experience as material for my prose writings.
‘This,’ I practically shouted one day at Des Esseintes’ Library, ‘is the super-art.’
Then I promised that in two days’ time I would give a reading of my series of
short prose pieces.
Nevertheless, as we sat around on some old furniture in a corner of Des
Esseintes’ Library, several of the others challenged my statements and assertions
regarding the Teatro. One fellow writer, a poet, spoke hoarsely through a cloud
of cigarette smoke, saying to me: ‘No one knows what this Teatro stuff is all
about. I’m not sure I believe it myself.’ But I answered that Spence knew what it
was all about, thinking that very soon I too would know what he knew. ‘Spence!’
said a woman in a tone of exaggerated disgust (she once lived with the
photographer and was a photographer herself). ‘He’s not telling us about
anything these days, never mind the Teatro.’ But I answered that, like the purple
woman and the others, Spence had been overwhelmed by his encounter with the
Teatro, and his artistic impulse had been thereby utterly destroyed. ‘And your
artistic impulse is still intact,’ she said snidely. I answered that, yes, it was, and
in two days I would prove it by reading a series of prose works that exhibited an
intimacy with the most overwhelmingly grotesque experiences and gave voice to
them. ‘That’s because you have no idea what you’re talking about,’ said
someone else, and almost everyone supported this remark. I told them to be
patient, wait and see what my prose writings revealed to them. ‘Reveal?’ asked
the poet. ‘Hell, no one even knows why it’s called the Teatro Grottesco.’ I did
not have an answer for that, but I repeated that they would understand much
more about the Teatro in a few days, thinking to myself that within this period of
time I would have either succeeded or failed in my attempt to provoke an
encounter with the Teatro and the matter of my nonexistent anti-Teatro prose
writing would be immaterial.
On the very next day, however, I collapsed in Des Esseintes’ Library during a
conversation with a different congregation of artists and highly artistic persons.
Although the symptoms of my intestinal virus had never entirely disappeared, I
had not expected to collapse the way I did and ultimately to discover that what I
thought was an intestinal virus was in fact something far more serious. As a

consequence of my collapse, my unconscious body ended up in the emergency
room of a nearby hospital, the kind of place where borderline indigents like
myself always end up – a backstreet hospital with dated fixtures and a staff of
sleepwalkers.
When I next opened my eyes it was night. The bed in which they had put my
body was beside a tall paned window that reflected the dim fluorescent light
fixed to the wall behind me, creating a black glare in the windowpanes that
allowed no view of anything beyond them, only a broken image of myself and
the room where I had been assigned for treatment. There was a long row of these
tall paned windows and several other beds in the ward, each of them supporting
a sleeping body that, like mine, was damaged in some way and therefore had
been committed to that backstreet hospital.
I felt none of the extraordinary pain that had caused me to collapse in Des
Esseintes’ Library. At that moment, in fact, I could feel nothing of the
experiences of my past life: it seemed I had always been an occupant of that dark
hospital wards and always would be. This sense of estrangement from both
myself and everything else made it terribly difficult to remain in the hospital bed
where I had been placed. At the same time I felt uneasy about any movement
away from that bed, especially any movement that would cause me to approach
the open doorway which led into a half-lighted backstreet hospital corridor.
Compromising between my impulse to get out of my bed and my fear of moving
away from the bed and approaching that corridor, I positioned myself so that I
was sitting on the edge of the mattress with my bare feet grazing the cold
linoleum floor. I had been sitting on the edge of that mattress for quite a while
before I heard the voice out in the corridor.
The voice came over the public address system, but it was not a particularly
loud voice. In fact I had to strain my attention for several minutes simply to
discern the peculiar qualities of the voice and to decipher what it said. It sounded
like a child’s voice, a sing-song voice full of taunts and mischief. Over and over
it repeated the same phrase – paging Dr Groddeck, paging Dr Groddeck. The
voice sounded incredibly hollow and distant, garbled by all kinds of interference.
Paging Dr Groddeck, it giggled from the other side of the world.
I stood up and slowly approached the doorway leading out into the corridor.
But even after I had crossed the room in my bare feet and was standing in the
open doorway, that child’s voice did not become any louder or any clearer. Even
when I actually moved out into that long dim corridor with its dated lighting
fixtures, the voice that was calling Dr Groddeck sounded just as hollow and

distant. And now it was as if I were in a dream in which I was walking in my
bare feet down a backstreet hospital corridor, hearing a crazy voice that seemed
to be eluding me as I moved past the open doorways of innumerable ward full of
damaged bodies. But then the voice died away, calling to Dr Groddeck one last
time before fading like the final echo in a deep well. At the same moment that
the voice ended its hollow outcrying, I paused somewhere toward the end of that
shadowy corridor. In the absence of the mischievous voice I was able to hear
something else, a sound like quiet, wheezing laughter. It was coming from the
room just ahead of me along the right-hand side of the corridor. As I approached
this room I saw a metal plaque mounted at eye level on the wall, and the words
displayed on this plaque were these: Dr T. Groddeck.
A strangely glowing light emanated from the room where I heard that quiet
and continuous wheezing laughter. I peered around the edge of the doorway and
saw that the source of the laughter was an old gentleman seated behind a desk,
while the strangely glowing light was coming from a large globular object
positioned on top of the desk directly in front of him. The light from this object –
a globe of solid glass, it seemed – shone on the old gentleman’s face, which was
a crazy-looking face with a neatly clipped beard that was pure white and a pair
of spectacles with slim rectangular lenses resting on a slender nose. When I
moved to stand in the doorway of that office, the eyes of Dr Groddeck did not
gaze up at me but continued to stare into the strange, shining globe and at the
things that were inside it.
What were these things inside the globe that Dr Groddeck was looking at? To
me they appeared to be tiny star-shaped flowers evenly scattered throughout the
glass, just the thing to lend a mock-artistic appearance to a common
paperweight. Except that these flowers, these spidery chrysanthemums, were
pure black. And they did not seem to be firmly fixed within the shining sphere,
as one would expect, but looked as if they were floating in position, their
starburst of petals wavering slightly like tentacles. Dr Groddeck appeared to
delight in the subtle movements of those black appendages. Behind rectangular
spectacles his eyes rolled about as they tried to take in each of the hovering
shapes inside the radiant globe on the desk before him.
Then the doctor slowly reached down into one of the deep pockets of the lab
coat he was wearing, and his wheezing laughter grew more intense. From the
open doorway I watched as he carefully removed a small paper bag from his
pocket, but he never even glanced at me. With one hand he was now holding the
crumpled bag directly over the globe. When he gave the bag a little shake, the

things inside the globe responded with an increased agitation of their thin black
arms. He used both hands to open the top of the bag and quickly turned it upside
down.
From out of the bag something tumbled onto the globe, where it seemed to
stick to the surface. It was not actually adhering to the surface of the globe,
however, but sinking into the interior of the glass. It squirmed as those soft black
stars inside the globe gathered to pull it down to themselves. Before I could see
what it was that they had captured, the show was over. Afterward they returned
to their places, floating slightly once again within the glowing sphere.
I looked at Dr Groddeck and saw that he was finally looking back at me. He
had stopped his asthmatic laughter, and his eyes were staring frigidly into mine,
completely devoid of any readable meaning. Yet somehow these eyes provoked
me. Even as I stood in the open doorway of that hideous office in a backstreet
hospital, Dr Groddeck’s eyes provoked in me an intense outrage, an
astronomical resentment of the position I had been placed in. Even as I had
consummated my plan to encounter the Teatro and experience its most
devastating realities and functions (in order to turn my prose works into an anti-
Teatro phenomenon) I was outraged to be standing where I was standing and
resentful of the staring eyes of Dr Groddeck. It no longer mattered whether I had
approached the Teatro, the Teatro had approached me, or we had both
approached each other. I realized that there is such a thing as being approached
in order to force one’s hand into making what only appears to be an approach,
which is actually a non-approach that negates the whole concept of approaching.
It was all a fix from the start because I belonged to an artistic underworld,
because I was an artist whose work would be brought to an end by an encounter
with the Teatro Grottesco. And so I was outraged by the eyes of Dr Groddeck,
which were the eyes of the Teatro, and I was resentful of all the insane realities
and the excruciating functions of the Teatro. Although I knew that the
persecutions of the Teatro were not exclusively focused on the artists and highly
artistic persons of the world, I was nevertheless outraged and resentful to be
singled out for special treatment. I wanted to punish those persons in this world
who are not the object of such special treatment. Thus, at the top of my voice, I
called out in the dim corridor – I cried out the summons for others to join me
before the stage of the Teatro. Strange that I should think it necessary to
compound the nightmare of all those damaged bodies in that backstreet hospital,
as well as its staff of sleepwalkers who moved within a world of outdated
fixtures. But by the time anyone arrived Dr Groddeck was gone, and his office

became nothing more than a room full of dirty laundry.
My escapade that night notwithstanding, I was soon released from the
hospital, even though the results of several tests I had been administered were
still pending. I was feeling as well as ever, and the hospital, like any hospital,
always needed bed space for more damaged bodies. They said I would be
contacted in the next few days.
It was in fact on the following day that I was informed of the outcome of my
stay in the hospital. ‘Hello again,’ began the letter, which was typed on a plain,
though waterstained sheet of paper. ‘I was so pleased to finally meet you in
person. I thought your performance during our interview at the hospital was
really first rate, and I am authorized to offer you a position with us. There is an
opening in our organization for someone with your resourcefulness and
imagination. I’m afraid things didn’t work out with Mr Spence. But he certainly
did have a camera’s eye, and we have gotten some wonderful pictures from him.
I would especially like to share with you his last shots of the soft black stars, or
S.B.S., as we sometimes refer to them. Veritable super-art, if there ever was such
a thing!
‘By the way, the results of your tests – some of which you have yet to be
subjected to – are going to come back positive. If you think an intestinal virus is
misery, just wait a few more months. So think fast, sir. We will arrange another
meeting with you in any case. And remember – you approached us. Or was it the
other way around?
‘As you might have noticed by now, all this artistic business can only keep
you going so long before you’re left speechlessly gaping at the realities and
functions of . . . well, I think you know what I’m trying to say. I was forced into
this realization myself, and I’m quite mindful of what a blow this can be. Indeed,
it was I who invented the appellative for our organization as it is currently
known. Not that I put any stock in names, nor should you. Our company is so
much older than its own name, or any other name for that matter. (And how
many it’s had over the years – The Ten Thousand Things, Anima Mundi,
Nethescurial.) You should be proud that we have a special part for you to play,
such a talented artist. In time you will forget yourself entirely in your work, as
we all do eventually. Myself, I go around with a trunkful of aliases, but do you
think I can say who I once was really? A man of the theater, that seems
plausible. Possibly I was the father of Faust or Hamlet – or merely Peter Pan.
‘In closing, I do hope you will seriously consider our offer to join us. We can
do something about your medical predicament. We can do just about anything.

Otherwise, I’m afraid that all I can do is welcome you to your own private hell,
which will be as unspeakable as any on earth.’
The letter was signed Dr Theodore Groddeck, and its prognostication of my
physical health was accurate: I have taken more tests at the backstreet hospital
and the results are somewhat grim. For several days and sleepless nights I have
considered the alternatives the doctor proposed to me, as well as others of my
own devising, and have yet to reach a decision on what course to follow. The one
conclusion that keeps forcing itself upon me is that it makes no difference what
choice I make or do not make. You can never anticipate the Teatro – or anything
else. You can never know what you are approaching or what is approaching you.
Soon enough my thoughts will lose all clarity, and I will no longer be aware that
there was ever a decision to be made. The soft black stars have already begun to
fill the sky.

GAS STATION CARNIVALS
O
utside the walls of the Crimson Cabaret was a world of rain and darkness. At
intervals, whenever someone entered or exited through the front door of the club,
one could actually see the steady rain and was allowed a brief glimpse of the
darkness. Inside it was all amber light, tobacco smoke, and the sound of the
raindrops hitting the windows, which were all painted black. On such nights, as I
sat at one of the tables in that drab little place, I was always filled with an
infernal merriment, as if I were waiting out the apocalypse and could not care
less about it. I also liked to imagine that I was in the cabin of an old ship during
a really vicious storm at sea or in the club car of a luxury passenger train that
was being rocked on its rails by ferocious winds and hammered by a demonic
rain. Sometimes, when I was sitting in the Crimson Cabaret on a rainy night, I
thought of myself as occupying a waiting room for the abyss (which of course
was exactly what I was doing) and between sips from my glass of wine or cup of
coffee I smiled sadly and touched the front pocket of my coat where I kept my
imaginary ticket to oblivion.
However, on that particular rainy November night I was not feeling very well.
My stomach was slightly queasy, as if signalling the onset of a virus or even
food poisoning. Another source for my malaise, I thought to myself, might well
have been my longstanding nervous condition, which fluctuated from day to day
but was always with me in some form and manifested itself in a variety of
symptoms both physical and psychic. I was in fact experiencing a faint sensation
of panic, although this in no way ruled out the possibility that the queasiness of
my stomach was due to a strictly physical cause, either viral or toxic. Neither did
it rule out a third possibility which I was trying to ignore at that point in the
evening. Whatever the etiology of my stomach disorder, I felt the need to be in a
public place that night, so that if I should collapse – an eventuality I often feared
– there would be people around who might attend to me, or at least shuttle my
body off to the hospital. At the same time I was not seeking close contact with
any of these people, and I would have been bad company in any case, sitting
there in the corner of the club drinking mint tea and smoking mild cigarettes out

of respect for my ailing stomach. For all these reasons I had brought my
notebook with me that night and had it lying open on the table before me, as if to
say that I wanted to be left alone to mull over some literary matters. But when
Stuart Quisser entered the club at approximately ten o’clock, the sight of me
sitting at a corner table with my open notebook, drinking mint tea and smoking
mild cigarettes so that I might stay on top of the situation with my queasy
stomach, did not in the least discourage him from walking directly to my table
and taking the seat across from me. A waitress came over to us. Quisser ordered
some kind of white wine, while I asked for another cup of mint tea.
‘So now it’s mint tea,’ Quisser said as the girl left us.
‘I’m surprised you’re showing your face around here,’ I said by way of reply.
‘I thought I might try to make up with the old crimson woman.’
‘Make up? That doesn’t sound like you.’
‘Nevertheless, have you seen her tonight?’
‘No, I haven’t. You humiliated her at that party. I haven’t seen her since, not
even in her own club. I don’t know if you’re aware of this, but she’s not
someone you want to have as an enemy.’
‘Meaning what?’ he asked.
‘Meaning that she has connections you know absolutely nothing about.’
‘And of course you know all about it. I’ve read your stories. You’re a
confessed paranoid, so what’s your point?’
‘My point,’ I said, ‘is that there’s hell in every handshake, never mind an
outright and humiliating insult.’
‘I had too much to drink, that’s all.’
‘You called her a deluded no-talent.’
Quisser looked up at the waitress as she approached with our drinks, and he
made a hasty hand-signal to me for silence. When she was gone he said, ‘I
happen to know that our waitress is very loyal to the crimson woman. She will
very probably inform her about my visiting the club tonight. I wonder if she
would be willing to act as a go-between with her boss and deliver a second-hand
apology from me.’
‘Look around at the walls,’ I said.
Quisser set down his glass of wine and scanned the room.
‘Hmm,’ he said when he had finished looking. ‘This is more serious than I
thought. She’s taken down all her old paintings. And the new ones don’t look
like her work at all.’
‘They’re not. You humiliated her.’

‘And yet she seems to have done up the stage since I last saw it. New paint job
or something.’
The so-called stage to which Quisser referred was a small platform in the
opposite corner of the club. This area was entirely framed by four long panels,
each of them painted with black and gold sigils against a glossy red background.
Various events occurred on this stage: poetry readings, tableaux vivants, playlets
of sundry types, puppet shows, artistic slideshows, musical performances, and so
on. That night, which was a Tuesday, the stage was dark. I observed nothing
different about it and asked Quisser what he imagined he thought was new.
‘I can’t say exactly, but something seems to have been done. Maybe it’s those
black and gold ideographs or whatever they’re supposed to be. The whole thing
looks like the cover of a menu in a Chinese restaurant.’
‘You’re quoting yourself,’ I said.
‘What do you mean?’
‘The Chinese menu remark. You used that in your review of the Marsha
Corker exhibit last month.’
‘Did I? I don’t remember.’
‘Are you just saying you don’t remember, or do you really not remember?’ I
asked this question in the spirit of trivial curiosity, my queasy stomach
discouraging the strain of any real antagonism on my part.
‘I remember, all right? Which reminds me, there’s something I wanted to talk
to you about. It came to me the other day, and I immediately thought of you and
your . . . stuff,’ he said, gesturing toward my notebook of writings open on the
table between us. ‘I can’t believe it’s never come up before. You of all people
should know about them. No one else seems to. It was years ago, but you’re old
enough to remember them. You’ve got to remember them.’
‘Remember what?’ I asked, and after the briefest pause he replied:
‘The gas station carnivals.’
And he said these words as if he were someone delivering a punchline to a
joke, the proud bringer of a surprising and profound hilarity. I was supposed to
express an astonished recognition, that much I knew. It was not a phenomenon
of which I was entirely ignorant, and memory is such a tricky thing. This, at
least, is what I told Quisser. But as Quisser told me his memories, trying to
arouse mine, I gradually realized the true nature and purpose of the so-called gas
station carnivals. During this time it was all I could do to conceal how badly my
stomach was acting up on me, queasy and burning. I kept telling myself, as
Quisser was talking about his memories of the gas station carnivals, that I was

certainly experiencing the onset of a virus, if in fact I had not been the victim of
food poisoning. Quisser, nevertheless, was so caught up in his story that he
seemed not to notice my agony.
Quisser said that his recollections of the gas station carnivals derived from his
early childhood. His family, meaning his parents and himself, would go on long
vacations by car, often driving great distances, to a variety of destinations. Along
the way, naturally, they would need to stop at any number of gas stations that
were located in towns and cities, as well as those that they came upon in more
isolated, rural locales. These were the places, Quisser said, where one was most
likely to discover those hybrid enterprises which he called gas station carnivals.
Quisser did not claim to know when or how these specialized carnivals, or
perhaps specialized gas stations, came into existence, nor how widespread they
might have been. His father, whom Quisser believed would be able to answer
such questions, had died some years ago, while his mother was no longer
mentally competent, having suffered a series of psychic catastrophes not long
after the death of Quisser’s father. Thus, all that remained to Quisser was the
memory of these childhood excursions with his parents, during which they
would find themselves in some rural area, perhaps at the crossroads of two
highways (and often, he seemed to recall, around sunset), and discover in this
isolated location one of those curiosities which he described to me as gas station
carnivals.
They were invariably filling stations, Quisser emphasized, and not service
stations, which might have facilities for doing extensive repairs on cars and
other vehicles. There would be, in those days, four gas pumps at most, often only
two, and some kind of modest building which usually had so many signs and
advertisements applied to its exterior that no one could say if anything actually
stood beneath them. Quisser said that as a child he always took special notice of
the signs that advertised chewing tobacco, and that as an adult, in his capacity as
an art critic, he still found the sight of chewing-tobacco packages very appealing,
and he could not understand why some artist had not successfully exploited their
visual and imaginative qualities. It seemed to me, as we sat that night in the
Crimson Cabaret, that this chewing-tobacco material was intended to lend
greater credence to Quisser’s story. This detail was so vivid to him. But when I
asked Quisser if he recalled any particular brands of chewing tobacco being
advertised at these filling stations which had carnivals attached to them, he
became slightly defensive, as if my question were intended to challenge the
accuracy of his childhood recollection. He then shifted the focus of the issue I

had raised by asserting that the carnival aspect of these places was not exactly
attached to the gas station aspect, but that they were never very far away from
each other and there was definitely a commercial liaison between them. His
impression, which had been instilled in him like some founding principle of a
dream, was that a substantial purchase of gasoline allowed the driver and
passengers of a given vehicle free access to the nearby carnival.
At this point in his story Quisser became anxious to explain that these gas
station carnivals were by no means elaborate – quite the opposite, in fact.
Situated on some empty stretch of land that stood alongside, or sometimes
behind, a rural filling station, they consisted of only the remnants of fully
fledged carnivals, the bare bones of much larger and grander entertainments.
There was usually a tall, arched entranceway with colored lightbulbs that
provided an eerie contrast to the vast and barren landscape surrounding it.
Especially around sunset, which was usually, or possibly always, when Quisser
and his parents found themselves in one of these remote locales, the colorful
illumination of a carnival entranceway created an effect that was both festive and
sinister. But once a visitor had gained admittance to the actual grounds of the
carnival, there came a moment of letdown at the thing itself – that spare
assemblage of equipment that appeared to have been left behind by a travelling
amusement park in the distant past.
There were always only a few carnival rides, Quisser said, and these were
very seldom in actual operation. He supposed that at some time they had been in
functioning order, probably when they were first installed as an annex to the gas
stations. But this period, he speculated, could not have lasted long. And no doubt
at the earliest sign of malfunction each of the rides had been shut down. Quisser
said that he himself had never been on a single ride at a gas station carnival,
though he insisted that his father once allowed him to sit atop one of the wooden
horses on a defunct merry-go-round. ‘It was a miniature merry-go-round,’
Quisser told me, as if that gave his recollected experience an aura of meaning or
substance. All the rides, it seemed, were miniature, he asserted – small-scale
versions of carnival rides he had elsewhere known and had actually ridden upon.
Beside the miniature merry-go-round, which never moved an inch and always
stood dark and silent in a remote rural landscape, there would be a miniature
ferris wheel (no taller than a bungalow-style house, Quisser said), and
sometimes a miniature tilt-a-whirl or a miniature roller coaster. And they were
always closed down because once they had malfunctioned, if in fact any of them
were ever in operation, they were never subsequently repaired. Possibly they

never could be repaired, Quisser thought, given the antiquated parts and
mechanisms of these miniature carnival rides.
Yet there was a single, quite crucial amusement that one could almost always
expect to see open to the public, or at least to those whose car had been filled
with the requisite amount of gasoline and who were therefore free to pass
through the brightly lit entranceway upon which the word carnival was
emblazoned in colored lights against a vast and haunting sky at sundown
somewhere out in a rural wasteland. Quisser posed to me a question: how could
a place advertise itself as a carnival, even a gas station carnival, if it did not
include that most vital carnivalesque feature – a sideshow? Perhaps there was
some special law or ordinance regulating such matters, Quisser imagined out
loud, an old statute of some kind that would have particular force in remote areas
where certain traditions have an endurance unknown to urban centers. This
would account for the fact that, except under extraordinary circumstances (such
as dangerously bad weather), there was always some type of sideshow
performance at these gas station carnivals, even though everything else on the
grounds stood dark and damaged.
Of course these sideshows, as Quisser described them, were not terribly
sophisticated, even by the standards of the average carnival, let alone those that
served as commercial enticements for some out-of-the-way gas station. There
would be only a single sideshow attraction at a given site, and outwardly they
each presented the same image to the carnival’s patrons: a small tent of torn and
filthy canvas. At some point along the perimeter of the tent would be a loose flap
of material through which Quisser and his parents, though sometimes only
Quisser himself, would gain entrance to the sideshow. Inside the tent were a few
wooden benches that had sunk a little bit into the hard dirt beneath them and,
some distance away, a small stage area that was raised perhaps just a foot or so
above ground level. Illumination was provided by two ordinary floor lamps –
one on either side of the stage – that were without lampshades or any other kind
of covering, so that their bare lightbulbs burned harshly and cast dramatic
shadows throughout the interior of the tent. Quisser said that he always noticed
the frayed electrical cords that trailed off from the base of each lamp and, by
means of several extension cords, ultimately found a source of power at the gas
station – that is, from within the small brick building which was obscured by so
many signs advertising chewing tobacco and other products.
When visitors to a gas station carnival entered the sideshow tent and took their
places on one of the benches in front of the stage, they were not usually alerted

to the particular nature of the performance or spectacle that they would witness.
Quisser remarked that there was no marquee or billboard of any type that might
offer such a notice to the carnival-goers either before they entered the sideshow
tent or after they were inside and seated on one of the old wooden benches.
However, with one important exception, each of the performances, or spectacles,
was much the same rigmarole. The audience would settle itself on the wooden
benches, most of which were about to collapse or (as Quisser observed) were so
unevenly sunk into the ground that it was impossible to sit on them, and the
show would begin.
The attractions varied from sideshow to sideshow, and Quisser said he was
unable to remember all of the ones he had seen. He did recall what he described
as the Human Spider. This was a very brief spectacle during which someone in a
clumsy costume scuttled from one side of the stage to the other and back again,
exiting through a slit at the back of the tent. The person wearing the costume,
Quisser added, was presumably the attendant who pumped gas, washed
windows, and performed various services around the filling station. In many
sideshow performances, such as that of the Hypnotist, Quisser remembered that
a gas station attendant’s uniform (greasy gray or blue coveralls) was quite visible
beneath the performer’s stage clothes. Quisser did admit that he was unsure why
he designated this particular sideshow act the ‘Hypnotist,’ since there was no
hypnotism involved in the performance, and of course no marquee or billboard
existed either outside the tent or within it that might lead the public to expect any
kind of mesmeric routines. The performer was simply clothed in a long, loose
overcoat and wore a plastic mask, which was a plain, very pale replica of a
human face, with the exception that instead of eyes (or eyeholes) there were two
large discs with spiral designs painted upon them. The Hypnotist would
gesticulate chaotically in front of the audience for some moments, no doubt
because his vision was obscured by the spiral-patterned discs over the eyes of his
mask, and then stumble offstage.
There were numerous other sideshow acts that Quisser claimed to have seen,
including the Dancing Puppet, the Worm, the Hunchback, and Dr Fingers. With
one important exception, the routine was always the same: Quisser and his
parents would enter the sideshow tent and sit upon one of the rotted benches,
soon after which some performer would appear briefly on the small stage that
was lit up by two ordinary floor lamps. The single deviation from this routine
was an attraction that Quisser called the Showman.
Whereas every other sideshow act began and ended after Quisser and his

parents had entered the special tent and seated themselves, the one called the
Showman always seemed to be in progress. As soon as Quisser stepped inside
the tent – invariably preceding his parents, he claimed – he saw the figure
standing perfectly still upon the small stage with his back to the audience. For
whatever reason, there were never any other patrons when Quisser and his
parents stopped at twilight and visited one of these gas station carnivals – with
their second-hand, defective amusements – eventually making their way into the
sideshow tent. This situation did not seem strange or troubling to the young
Quisser except on those occasions when he entered the sideshow tent and saw
that it was the Showman onstage with his back to a few rows of empty benches
that looked as if they might break up altogether if one attempted to sit on them.
Whenever faced with this scene, Quisser immediately wanted to turn around and
leave the place. But then his parents would come pushing into the tent behind
him, he said, and before he knew it they would all be sitting on one of the
benches in the very first row looking at the Showman. His parents never knew
how terrified he was of this peculiar sideshow figure, Quisser repeated several
times. Furthermore, visiting these gas station carnivals, and especially taking in
the sideshows, was all done for Quisser’s benefit, since his father and mother
would have preferred simply filling up the family car with gasoline and moving
on toward whatever vacation spot was next on their itinerary.
Quisser contended that his parents actually enjoyed watching him sit in terror
before the Showman, until he could not stand it any longer and asked to go back
to the car. At the same time he was quite transfixed by the sight of this sideshow
character, who was unlike any other he could remember. There he was, Quisser
said, standing with his back to the audience and wearing an old top hat and a
long cape that touched the dirty floor of the small stage on which he stood.
Sticking out from beneath the top hat were the dense and lengthy shocks of the
Showman’s stiff red hair, Quisser said, which looked like some kind of sickening
vermin’s nest. When I asked Quisser if this hair might actually have been a wig,
deliberately testing his memory and imagination, he gave me a contemptuous
look, as if to stress that I was not the one who had seen the stiff red hair; he was
the one who had seen it sticking out from beneath the Showman’s old top hat.
The only other features that were visible to the audience, Quisser continued,
were the fingers of the Showman which grasped the edges of his long cape.
These fingers appeared to Quisser to be somehow deformed, curling together
into little claws, and were a pale greenish color. Apparently, as Quisser viewed
it, the entire stance of the figure was calculated to suggest that at any moment he

might twirl about and confront the audience full-face, his moldy fingers lifting
up the edges of his cape, reaching to the height of his stiff red hair. Yet the figure
never budged. Sometimes it did seem to Quisser that the Showman was moving
his head a little to the left or a little to the right, threatening to reveal one side of
his face or the other, playing a horrible game of peek-a-boo. But ultimately
Quisser concluded that these perceived movements were illusory and that the
Showman was always posed in perfect stillness, a nightmarish mannikin that
invited all kinds of imaginings by its very forbearance of any gesture.
‘It was all a nasty pretense,’ Quisser said to me and then paused to finish off
his glass of wine.
‘But what if he had turned around to face the audience?’ I asked. While
awaiting his response, I sipped some of my mint tea, which did not seem to be
doing much good for my queasy stomach, yet at the same time was causing no
harm either. I lit one of the mild cigarettes that I was smoking on that occasion.
‘Did you hear what I said?’ I said to Quisser, who had been looking toward the
stage located in the opposite corner of the Crimson Cabaret. ‘The stage is the
same,’ I said to Quisser quite sternly, attracting some glances from persons
sitting at the other tables in the club. ‘The panels are the same and the designs on
them are also the same.’
Quisser played nervously with his empty wine glass. ‘When I was very
young,’ he said, ‘there were certain occasions on which I would see the
Showman, but he wasn’t in his natural habitat, so to speak, of the sideshow tent.’
‘I think I’ve heard enough tonight,’ I interjected, my hand pressing against my
queasy stomach.
‘What are you saying?’ asked Quisser. ‘You remember them, don’t you? The
gas station carnivals. Maybe just a faint memory. I was sure you would be the
one to know about them.’
‘I think I can say,’ I said to Quisser, ‘I’ve heard enough of your gas station
carnival story to know what it’s all about.’
‘What do you mean, “what it’s all about”?’ asked Quisser, who was still
looking over at the small stage across the room.
‘Well, for one thing, your later memories, your purported memories, of that
Showman character. You were about to tell me that throughout your childhood
you repeatedly saw this figure at various times and in various places. Perhaps
you saw him in the distance of a schoolyard, standing with his back to you. Or
you saw him on the other side of a busy street, but when you crossed the street
he wasn’t there any longer.’

‘Something like that, yes.’
‘And you were then going to tell me that lately you’ve been seeing this figure,
or faint suggestions of this figure – sketchy reflections in store windows along
the sidewalk, flashing glimpses in the rear-view mirror of your car.’
‘It’s very much like one of your stories.’
‘In some ways it is,’ I said, ‘and in some ways it isn’t. You feel that if you ever
see the Showman figure turn his head around to look at you . . . that something
terrible will happen, most likely that you’ll perish on the spot from some kind of
monumental shock.’
‘Yes,’ agreed Quisser. ‘An unsustainable horror. But I haven’t told you the
strangest part. You’re right that lately I have had glimpses of . . . that figure, and
I did see him during my childhood, outside of the sideshow tent, I mean. But the
strangest part is that I remember seeing him in other places even before I first
saw him at the gas station carnivals.’
‘This is just my point,’ I said.
‘What is?’
‘That there are no gas station carnivals. There never were any gas station
carnivals. Nobody remembers them because they never existed. The whole idea
is preposterous.’
‘But my parents were there with me.’
‘Exactly – your dead father and your mentally incompetent mother. Do you
remember ever discussing with them your vacation experiences at these special
gas stations with the carnivals supposedly annexed to them?’
‘No, I don’t.’
‘That’s because you never went to any such places with them. Think about
how ludicrous it all sounds. That there should be filling stations out in the sticks
that entice customers with free admission to broken-down carnivals – it’s all so
ridiculous. Miniature carnival rides? Gas station attendants doubling as sideshow
performers?’
‘Not the Showman,’ interrupted Quisser. ‘He was never a gas station
attendant.’
‘No, of course he wasn’t a gas station attendant, because he was a delusion.
The whole thing is an outrageous delusion, but it’s also a very particular type of
delusion.’
‘And what type would that be?’ asked Quisser, who was still sneaking glances
at the stage area across the room of the Crimson Cabaret.
‘It’s not some type of common psychological delusion, if that’s what you were

thinking I was about to say. I have no interest at all in such things. But I am very
interested when someone is suffering from a magical delusion. Even more
precisely, I am interested in delusions that are a result of art-magic. And do you
know how long you’ve been under the influence of this art-magic delusion?’
‘You’ve lost me,’ said Quisser.
‘It’s simple,’ I said. ‘How long have you imagined all this nonsense about the
gas station carnivals, and specifically about this character you describe as the
Showman?’
‘I guess it would be more or less absurd at this point to insist to you that I’ve
seen this figure since childhood, even if that’s exactly how it seems and that’s
exactly what I remember.’
‘Of course it would be absurd, because you’re definitely delusional.’
‘So I’m delusional about the Showman, but you’re not delusional about . . .
what do you call it?’
‘Art-magic. For as long as you’ve been a victim of this particular art-magic,
this is how long you’ve been delusional about the gas station carnivals and all
related phenomena.’
‘And how long is that?’ asked Quisser.
‘Since you humiliated the crimson woman by calling her a deluded no-talent.
I told you that she had connections you knew absolutely nothing about.’
‘I’m talking about something from my childhood, something I’ve remembered
my entire life. You’re talking about a matter of days.’
‘That’s because a matter of days is exactly the term that you’ve been
delusional. Don’t you see that through her art-magic she has caused you to suffer
from the worst kind of delusion, which might be called a retroactive delusion.
And it’s not only you who’s been afflicted in the past days and weeks and even
months. Everyone around here has sensed the threat of this art-magic for some
time now. I’m beginning to think that I’ve found out about it too late myself,
much too late. You know what it is to suffer from a delusion of the retroactive
type, but do you know what it’s like to be the victim of a severe stomach
disorder? I’ve been sitting here in the crimson woman’s club drinking mint tea
served by a waitress who is the crimson woman’s friend, thinking that mint tea is
just the thing for my stomach when it very well may be aggravating my
condition or even causing it to transform, in accordance with the principles of
art-magic, into something more serious and more strange. But the crimson
woman is not the only one practicing this art-magic. It’s happening everywhere
around here. It drifted in unexpectedly like a fog at sea, and so many of us are

becoming lost in it. Look at the faces in this room and then tell me that you alone
are the victim of a horrible art-magic. The crimson woman has quite a few
adversaries, just as she is connected with powerful allies. How can I say exactly
who they are – some group specializing in art-magic, no doubt, but I can’t just
say, with a fatuous certainty, “Yes, it must be some particular gang of illuminati,”
or esoteric scientists, as so many have begun styling themselves these days.’
‘But it all sounds like one of your stories,’ Quisser protested.
‘Of course it does, don’t you think she knows that? But I’m not the one with
that grotesque yarn about the gas station carnivals and the sideshow tent with a
small stage not unlike the stage on the opposite side of this room. You can’t keep
your eyes off it, I can see that and so can the other people around the room. And
I know what you think you’re seeing over there.’
‘Assuming you know what you’re talking about,’ said Quisser, who was now
forcing himself to look away from the stage area across the room, ‘what am I
supposed to do about it?’
‘You can start by keeping your eyes off that stage across the room. There’s
nothing you can see over there except an art-magic delusion. There is nothing
necessarily fatal or permanent about the affliction. But you must believe that you
will recover, just as you would if you were suffering from some non-fatal
physical disease. Otherwise these delusions may turn into something far more
deadly, on either a physical level or a psychic level, or both. Take my advice, as
someone who dabbles in tales of extraordinary doom, and walk away from all of
this madness. There are enough fatalities of a mundane sort. Find a quiet place
and wait for one of them to carry you off.’
I could now see that the intense conviction carried by my words had finally
had its effect on Quisser. His gaze was no longer drawn toward the small stage
on the opposite side of the room but was directed full upon me. He did remain
somewhat distraught in the face of the truth about his delusion, yet he seemed to
have settled down considerably.
I lit another of my mild cigarettes and glanced around the room, not looking
for anything or anyone in particular but merely gauging the atmosphere. The
tobacco smoke drifting through the club was so much thicker, the amber light
several shades darker, and the sound of raindrops still played against the black
painted windows of the Crimson Cabaret. I was now back in the cabin of that old
ship as it was being cast about in a vicious storm at sea, utterly insecure in its
bearings and profoundly threatened by uncontrollable forces. Quisser excused
himself to go to the rest room, and his form passed across my field of vision like

a shadow through dense fog.
I have no idea how long Quisser was gone from the table. My attention
became fully absorbed by the other faces in the club and the deep anxiety they
betrayed to me, an anxiety that was not of the natural, existential sort but one
that was caused by peculiar concerns of an uncanny nature. What a season is
upon us, these faces seemed to say. And no doubt their voices would have
spoken directly of certain peculiar concerns had they not been intimidated into
weird equivocations and double entendres by the fear of falling victim to the
same kind of unnatural affliction that had made so much trouble in the mind of
the art critic Stuart Quisser. Who would be next? What could a person say these
days, or even think, without feeling the dread of repercussion from powerfully
connected groups and individuals? I could almost hear their voices asking, ‘Why
here, why now?’ But of course they could have just as easily been asking, ‘Why
not here, why not now?’ It would not occur to this crowd that there were no
special rules involved; it would not occur to them, even though they were a
crowd of imaginative artists, that the whole thing was simply a matter of
random, purposeless terror that converged upon a particular place at a particular
time for no particular reason. On the other hand, it would also not have occurred
to them that they might have wished it all upon themselves, that they might have
had a hand in bringing certain powerful forces and connections into our district
simply by wishing them to come. They might have wished and wished for an
unnatural evil to fall upon them but, for a while at least, nothing happened. Then
the wishing stopped, the old wishes were forgotten yet at the same time gathered
in strength, distilling themselves into a potent formula (who can say!), until one
day the terrible season began. Because had they really told the truth, this artistic
crowd might also have expressed what a sense of meaning (although of a
negative sort), not to mention the vigorous thrill (although of an excruciating
type), this season of unnatural evil had brought to their lives. What does it mean
to be alive except to court disaster and suffering at every moment? For every
diversion, for every thrill our born nature requires in this carnival world, even to
the point of apocalypse, there are risks to be taken. No one is safe, not even art-
magicians or esoteric scientists, who are the most deluded among us because
they are the most tempted by amusements of an uncanny and unnatural kind,
fumbling as any artist or scientist does with the inherent chaos of things. It was
during the moments that I was looking at all the faces in the Crimson Cabaret,
and thinking my own thoughts about those faces, that a shadow again passed
across my foggy field of vision. While I expected to find that this shadow was

Quisser, my table companion for that evening, on the way back from his trip to
the rest room, I instead found myself confronted by the waitress who Quisser
had claimed was so loyal to the crimson woman. She asked if I wanted to order
yet another cup of mint tea, saying it in exactly these words, yet another cup of
mint tea. Trying not to become irritated by her queerly sarcastic tone of voice,
which would only have further aggravated my already queasy stomach, I
answered that I was just about to leave for the night. Then I added that perhaps
my friend wanted to drink yet another glass of wine, pointing across the table to
indicate the empty glass Quisser had left behind when he excused himself to use
the rest room. But there was no empty wine glass across the table; there was only
my empty cup of mint tea. I immediately accused the waitress of taking away the
empty wine glass while I was distracted by my reverie upon the faces in the
Crimson Cabaret. But she denied ever serving any glass of wine to anyone at my
table, insisting that I had been alone from the moment I arrived at the club and
sat down at the table across the room from the small stage area. After a thorough
search of the rest room, I returned and tried to find someone else in the club who
had seen the art critic Quisser talking to me at great length about his gas station
carnivals. But all of them said they had seen no one of the kind.
Even Quisser himself, when I tracked him down the next day to a hole-in-the-
wall art gallery, maintained that he had not seen me the night before. He said that
he had spent the entire evening at home by himself, claiming that he had suffered
some indisposition – some bug, he said – from which he had since fully
recovered. When I called him a liar, he stepped right up to me as we stood in the
middle of that hole-in-the-wall art gallery, and in a tense whisper he said that I
should ‘Watch my words.’ I was always shooting off my mouth, he said, and in
the future I should use more discretion in what I said and to whom I said it. He
then asked me if I really thought it was wise to open my mouth at a party and
call someone a deluded no-talent. There were certain persons, he said, that had
powerful connections, and I, of all people, he said, should know better,
considering my awareness of such things and the way I displayed this awareness
in the stories I wrote. ‘Not that I disagreed with what you said about you-know-
who,’ he said. ‘But I would not have made such an open declaration. You
humiliated her. And these days such a thing can be very perilous, if you know
what I mean.’
Of course I did know what he meant, though I did not yet understand why he
was now saying these words to me, rather than I to him. Was it not enough, I
later thought, that I was still suffering a terrible stomach disorder? Did I also

have to bear the burden of another’s delusion? But even this explanation
eventually fell to pieces upon further inquiry. The stories multiplied about the
night of that party, accounts proliferated among my acquaintances and peers
concerning exactly who had committed the humiliating offence and even who
had been the offended party. ‘Why are you telling me these things?’ the crimson
woman said to me when I proffered my deepest apologies. ‘I barely know who
you are. And besides, I’ve got enough problems of my own. That bitch of a
waitress here at the club has taken down all my paintings and replaced them with
her own.’
All of us had problems, it seemed, whose sources were untraceable, crossing
over one another like the trajectories of countless raindrops in a storm, blending
to create a fog of delusion and counter-delusion. Powerful forces and
connections were undoubtedly at play, yet they seemed to have no faces and no
names, and it was anybody’s guess what we – a crowd of deluded no-talents –
could have possibly done to offend them. We had been caught up in a season of
hideous magic from which nothing could offer us deliverance. More and more I
found myself returning to those memories of gas station carnivals, seeking an
answer in the twilight of remote rural areas where miniature merry-go-rounds
and ferris wheels lay broken in a desolate landscape.
But there is no one here who will listen even to my most abject apologies,
least of all the Showman, who may be waiting behind any door (even that
leading to the rest room of the Crimson Cabaret). And any room that I enter may
become a sideshow tent where I must take my place upon a rickety old bench on
the verge of collapse. Even now the Showman stands before my eyes. His stiff
red hair moves a little toward one shoulder, as if he is going to turn his gaze
upon me, and moves back again; then his head moves a little toward the other
shoulder in this never-ending game of horrible peek-a-boo. I can only sit and
wait, knowing that one day he will turn full around, step down from his stage,
and claim me for the abyss I have always feared. Perhaps then I will discover
what it was I did – what any of us did – to deserve this fate.

THE BUNGALOW HOUSE
E
arly last September I discovered among the exhibits in a local art gallery a sort
of performance piece in the form of an audiotape. This, I later learned, was the
first of a series of tape-recorded dream monologues by an unknown artist. The
following is a brief and highly typical excerpt from the opening section of this
work. I recall that after a few seconds of hissing tape noise, the voice began
speaking: ‘There was far more to deal with in the bungalow house than simply
an infestation of vermin,’ it said, ‘although that too had its questionable aspects.’
Then the voice went on: ‘I could see only a few of the bodies where the
moonlight shone through the open blinds of the living-room windows and fell
upon the carpet. Only one of the bodies seemed to be moving, and that very
slowly, but there may have been more that were not yet dead. Aside from the
chair in which I sat in the darkness there was very little furniture in the room, or
elsewhere in the bungalow house for that matter. But a number of lamps were
positioned around me, floor lamps and table lamps and even two tiny lamps on
the mantel above the fireplace.’
A brief pause occurred here in the opening section of the tape-recorded dream
monologue, as I remember it, after which the voice continued: ‘The bungalow
house was built with a fireplace, I said to myself in the darkness, thinking how
long it had been since anyone had made use of this fireplace, or anything else in
the house. Then my attention returned to the lamps, and I began trying each of
them one by one, twisting their little grooved switches in the darkness. The
moonlight fell upon the lampshades without shining through them, so I could see
that none of the lamps was equipped with a lightbulb, and each time I turned the
switch of a floor lamp or a table lamp or one of the tiny lamps on the mantel,
nothing changed in the dark living room of the bungalow house: the moonlight
shone through the dusty blinds and revealed the bodies of insects and other
vermin on the pale carpet.’
‘The challenges and obstacles facing me in that bungalow house were
becoming more and more oppressive,’ whispered the voice on the tape. ‘There
was something so desolate about being in that place in the dead of night, even if

I did not know precisely what time it was. And to see upon the pale, threadbare
carpet those verminous bodies, some of which were still barely alive; then to try
each of the lamps and find that none of them was in working order – everything,
it seemed, was in opposition to my efforts, everything aligned against my taking
care of the problems I faced in the bungalow house. For the first time I noticed
that the bodies lying for the most part in total stillness on the moonlit carpet
were not like any species of vermin I had ever seen,’ the voice on the tape
recording said. ‘Some of them seemed to be deformed, their naturally revolting
forms altered in ways I could not discern. I knew that I would require specialized
implements for dealing with these creatures, an arsenal of advanced tools of
extermination. It was the idea of poisons – the toxic solutions and vapors I
would need to use in my assault upon the bungalow hordes – that caused me to
become overwhelmed by the complexities of the task before me and the paucity
of my resources for dealing with them.’
At this point, and many others on the tape (as I recall), the voice became
nearly inaudible. ‘The bungalow house,’ it said, ‘was such a bleak environment
in which to make a stand: the moonlight through the dusty blinds, the bodies on
the carpet, the lamps without any lightbulbs. And the incredible silence. It was
not the absence of sounds that I sensed, but the stifling of innumerable sounds
and even voices, the muffling of all the noises one might expect to hear in an old
bungalow house in the dead of night, as well as countless other sounds and
voices. The forces required to accomplish this silence filled me with awe. The
infinite terror and dreariness of an infested bungalow house, I whispered to
myself. A bungalow universe, I then thought without speaking aloud. Suddenly I
was overcome by a feeling of euphoric hopelessness which passed through my
body like a powerful drug and held all my thoughts and all my movements in a
dreamy, floating suspension. In the moonlight that shone through the blinds of
that bungalow house I was now as still and as silent as everything else.’
The title of the tape-recorded artwork from which I have just quoted was The
Bungalow House (Plus Silence). I discovered this and other dream monologues
by the same artist at Dalha D. Fine Arts, which was located in the near vicinity
of the public library (main branch) where I was employed in the Language and
Literature department. Sometimes I spent my lunch breaks at the gallery, even
consuming my brown-bag meals on the premises. There were a few chairs and
benches on the floor of the gallery, and I knew that the woman who owned the
place did not discourage any kind of traffic, however lingering. Her actual
livelihood was in fact not derived from the gallery itself. How could it have

been? Dalha D. Fine Arts was a hole in the wall. One would think it no trouble at
all to keep up the premises where there was so little floor space, just a single
room that was by no means overcrowded with artworks or art-related
merchandise. But no attempt at such upkeeping seemed ever to have been made.
The display window was so filmy that someone passing by could barely make
out the paintings and sculptures behind it (the same ones year after year). From
the street outside, this tiny front window presented the most desolate
hallucination of bland colors and shapeless forms, especially on late November
afternoons. Further inside the gallery, things were in a similar state – from the
cruddy linoleum floor, where some cracked tiles revealed the concrete
foundation, to the rather high ceiling, which occasionally sent down small chips
of plaster. If every artwork and item of art-related merchandise had been cleared
out of that building, no one would think that an art gallery had once occupied
this space and not some enterprise of a lesser order. But as many persons were
aware, if only through second-hand sources, the woman who operated Dalha D.
Fine Arts did not make her living by dealing in those artworks and related items,
which only the most desperate or scandalously naïve artist would allow to be put
on display in that gallery. By all accounts, including my own brief lunchtime
conversations with the woman, she had pursued a variety of careers in her time.
She herself had worked as an artist at one point, and some of her works – messy
assemblages inside old cigar boxes – were exhibited in a corner of her gallery.
But evidently her art gallery business was not self-sustaining, despite minimal
overhead, and she made no secret of her true means of income.
‘Who wants to buy such junk?’ she once explained to me, gesturing with long
fingernails painted emerald green. This same color also seemed to dominate her
wardrobe of long, loose garments, with many of her outfits featuring incredible
scarves or shawls that dragged along the floor as she moved about the art gallery.
She paused and with the pointed toe of one of her emerald-green shoes gave a
little kick at a wire wastebasket that was filled with the miniature limbs of dolls,
all of them individually painted in a variety of colors. ‘What are people thinking
when they make these things? What was I thinking with those stupid cigar
boxes? But no more of that, definitely no more of that sort of thing.’
And she made no secret, beyond a certain reasonable caution, of what sort of
thing now engaged her energies as a businesswoman. The telephone was always
ringing at her art gallery, always upsetting the otherwise dead calm of the place
with its cracked, warbling voice that called out from the back room. She would
then quickly disappear behind a curtain that hung in the doorway separating the

front and back sections of the art gallery. I might be eating a sandwich or a piece
of fruit, and then suddenly, for the fourth or fifth time in a half-hour, the
telephone would scream from the back room, eventually summoning this woman
behind the curtain. But she never answered the telephone with the name of the
art gallery or employed any of the stock phrases of business protocol. Not so
much as a ‘Good afternoon, may I help you?’ did I ever hear from the back room
as I sat eating my midday meal in the front section of the art gallery. She always
answered the telephone in the same way with the same quietly expectant tone in
her voice. This is Dalha, she always said.
Before I had known her very long even I found myself using her name in the
most familiar way. The mere saying of this name instilled in me a sense of
access to what she offered all those telephone-callers, not to mention those
individuals who personally visited the art gallery to make or confirm an
appointment. Whatever someone was eager to try, whatever step someone was
willing to take – Dalha could arrange it. This was the true stock in trade of the
art gallery, these arrangements. When I returned to the library after my lunch
break, I continued to imagine Dalha back at the art gallery, racing between the
front and back sections of the building, making all kinds of arrangements over
the telephone, and sometimes in person.
On the day that I first noticed the new artwork entitled The Bungalow House,
Dalha’s telephone was extremely vocal. While she was talking to her clients in
the back section of the art gallery, I was left alone in the front section. Just for a
thrill I went over to the wire wastebasket full of dismembered doll parts and
helped myself to one of the painted arms (emerald green!), hiding it in the inner
pocket of my sportcoat. It was then that I spotted the old audiotape recorder on a
small plastic table in the corner. Beside the machine was a business card on
which the title of the artwork had been hand-printed, along with the following
instructions: PRESS PLAY. PLEASE REWIND AFTER LISTENING. DO NO REMOVE TAPE.
I placed the headphones over my ears and pressed the PLAY button. The voice
that spoke through the headphones, which were enormous, sounded distant and
was somewhat distorted by the hissing of the tape. Nevertheless, I was so
intrigued by the opening passages of this dream monologue, which I have
already transcribed, that I sat down on the floor next to the small plastic table on
which the tape recorder was positioned and listened to the entire tape, exceeding
my allotted lunchtime by over half an hour. By the time the tape had ended I was
in another world – that is, the world of the infested bungalow house, with all its
dreamlike crumminess and foul charms.

‘Don’t forget to rewind the tape,’ said Dalha, who was now standing over me,
her long gray hair, like steel wool, almost brushing against my face.
I pressed the REWIND button on the tape recorder and got up from the floor.
‘Dalha, may I use your lavatory?’ I asked. She pointed to the curtain leading to
the back section of the art gallery. ‘Thank you,’ I said.
The effect of listening to the first dream monologue was very intense for
reasons I will soon explain. I wanted to be alone for a few moments in order to
preserve the state of mind which the voice on the tape had induced in me, much
as one might attempt to hold on to the images of a dream just after waking.
However, I felt that the lavatory at the library, despite its peculiar virtues which I
have appreciated over the years, would somehow undermine the sensations and
mental state created by the dream monologue, rather than preserving this
experience and even enhancing it, as I hoped the lavatory in the back section of
Dalha’s art gallery would do.
The very reason why I spent my lunchtimes in the surroundings of Dalha’s art
gallery, which were so different from those of the library, was exactly why I now
wanted to use the lavatory in the back section of that art gallery and definitely
not the lavatory at the library, even if I was already overdue from my lunch
break. And, indeed, this lavatory had the same qualities as the rest of the art
gallery, as I hoped it would. The fact that it was located in the back section of the
art gallery, a region of mysteries to my mind, was significant. Just outside the
door of the lavatory stood a small, cluttered desk upon which was positioned the
telephone that Dalha used in her true business of making arrangements. The
telephone was centered in the weak light of a desk lamp, and I noticed, as I
passed into the lavatory, that it was an unwieldy object with a straight – that is,
uncoiled – cord connecting the receiver to the telephone housing, with its
enormous circular dial. But although Dalha answered several calls during the
time I was in the lavatory, these seemed to be entirely legitimate conversations
having to do either with her personal life or with practical matters relating to the
art gallery.
‘How long are you going to be in there?’ Dalha asked through the door of the
lavatory. ‘I hope you’re not sick, because if you’re sick you’ll have to go
somewhere else.’
I called out that there was nothing wrong (quite the opposite) and a moment
later emerged from the lavatory. I was about to ask for details of the art
performance tape I had just heard, anxious to know about the artist and what it
would cost me to own the work entitled The Bungalow House, as well as any

similar works that might exist. But the phone began ringing again. Dalha
answered it with her customary greeting as I stood by in the back section of the
art gallery, which was a dark, though relatively uncluttered space that now put
me in mind of the living room of the bungalow house that I had heard described
on the tape-recorded dream monologue. The conversation in which Dalha was
engaged (another non-arrangement call) seemed interminable, and I was
becoming nervously aware how long past my lunch break I had stayed at the
storefront art gallery.
‘I’ll see you tomorrow,’ I said to Dalha, who responded with a look from her
emerald eyes while continuing to speak to the other party on the telephone. And
she was smiling at me, like muted laughter, I remember thinking as I passed
through the curtained doorway into the front section of the art gallery. I glanced
at the tape recorder standing on the plastic table but decided against taking the
audiocassette back to the library (and afterward home with me). It would be
there when I visited on my lunch break the following day. Hardly anyone ever
bought anything out of the front section of Dalha’s art gallery.
For the rest of the day – both at the library and at my home – I thought about
the bungalow house tape. Especially while riding the bus home from the library,
I thought of the images and concepts described on the tape, as well as the voice
that described them and the phrases it used throughout the dream monologue on
the bungalow house. Much of my commute from my home to the library, and
back home again, took me past numerous streets lined from end to end with
desolate-looking houses, any of which might have been the inspiration for the
bungalow house audiotape. I say that these streets were lined from ‘end to end’
with such houses, even though the bus never turned down any of them, and I
therefore never actually viewed even a single street from ‘end to end.’ In fact, as
I looked through the window next to my seat on the bus – on either side of the
bus I always sat in the window seat, never in the aisle seat – the streets I saw
appeared endless, vanishing from my sight toward an infinity of old houses,
many of them derelict houses and a great many of them being dwarfish and
desolate-looking houses of the bungalow type.
The tape-recorded dream monologue, as I recalled it that day while riding
home on the bus and staring out the window, described several features of the
infested bungalow house – the dusty window blinds through which the
moonlight shone, the lamps with all their lightbulb sockets empty, the threadbare
carpet, and the dead or barely living vermin that littered the carpet. Thus, I was
afforded an interior view of the bungalow house by the voice on the tape, not a

view from the exterior. Conversely, the houses I gazed upon with such intensity
as I rode the bus to and from the library were seen by me only from an exterior
perspective, their interiors being visible solely in my imagination. Of course my
sense of these interiors, being entirely an imaginative projection, was highly
vague, lacking the precise physical layout provided by the bungalow house
audiotape. Similarly, the dreams I often had of these houses were highly vague.
Yet the sensations and the mental state created by my imaginative projections
into and my dreams of these houses perfectly corresponded to those I had
experienced at Dalha’s art gallery when I listened to the tape entitled The
Bungalow House. That feeling of being in a trance while occupying, all alone,
the most bleak and pathetic surroundings of an old bungalow house was
communicated to me in the most powerful way by the voice on the tape, which
described a silent and secluded world where one existed in a state of abject
hypnosis. While sitting on the floor of the art gallery listening to the voice as it
spoke through those enormous headphones, I had the sense that I was not simply
hearing the words of that dream monologue but also reading them. What I mean
is that whenever I have the occasion to read words on a page, any words on any
page, the voice that I hear saying these words in my head is always recognizable
in some way as my own, even though the words are those of another. Perhaps it
is even more accurate to say that whenever I read words on a page, the voice in
my head is my own voice as it becomes merged (or lost) within the words that I
am reading. Conversely, when I have the occasion to write words on a page,
even a simple note or memo at the library, the voice that I hear dictating these
words does not sound like my own – until, of course, I read the words back to
myself, at which time everything is all right again. The bungalow house tape was
the most dramatic example of this phenomenon I had ever known. Despite the
poor overall quality of the recording, the distorted voice reading this dream
monologue became merged (or lost) within my own perfectly clear voice in my
head, even though I was listening to its words over a pair of enormous
headphones and not reading the words on a page. As I rode the bus home from
the library, observing street after street of houses so reminiscent of the one
described on the tape-recorded dream monologue, I regretted not having
acquired this artwork on the spot or at least discovered more about it from
Dalha, who had been occupied with what seemed an unusual number of
telephone calls that afternoon.
The following day at the library I was anxious for lunchtime to arrive so that I
could get over to the art gallery and find out everything I possibly could about

the bungalow house tape, as well as discuss terms for its acquisition. Entering
the art gallery, I immediately looked toward the corner where the tape recorder
had been set on the small plastic table the day before. For some reason I was
relieved to find the exhibit still in place, as if any artwork in that gallery could
possibly have come and gone in a single day.
I walked over to the exhibit with the purpose of verifying that everything I had
seen (and heard) the previous day was exactly as I remembered it. I checked that
the audiocassette was still inside the recording machine and picked up the little
business card on which the title of the exhibit was given, along with instructions
for properly operating the tape-recorded artwork. It was then that I realized that
this was a different card from the first one. Printed on this card was the title of a
new artwork, which was called The Derelict Factory with a Dirt Floor and
Voices.
While I was very excited to find a new work by this artist, I also felt intense
apprehension at the absence of the bungalow house dream monologue, which I
had planned to purchase with some extra money I brought with me to the art
gallery that day. Just at that moment in which I experienced the dual sensations
of excitement and apprehension, Dalha emerged from behind the curtain
separating the back and front sections of the art gallery. I had intended to be
thoroughly blasé in negotiating the purchase of the bungalow house artwork, but
Dalha caught me off-guard in a state of disoriented conflict.
‘What happened to the bungalow house tape that was here yesterday?’ I asked,
the tension in my voice betraying desires that were all to her advantage.
‘That’s gone now,’ she replied in a frigid tone as she walked slowly and
pointlessly about the gallery, her emerald skirt and scarves dragging along the
floor.
‘I don’t understand. It was an artwork exhibited on that small plastic table.’
‘Yes,’ she agreed.
‘Now, after only a single day on exhibit, it’s gone?’
‘Yes, it’s gone.’
‘Somebody bought it,’ I said, assuming the worst.
‘No,’ she said, ‘that one was not for sale. It was a performance piece. There
was a charge, but you didn’t pay.’
A sickly confusion now became added to the excitement and disappointment
already mingling inside me. ‘There was no notice of a charge for listening to the
dream monologue,’ I insisted. ‘As far as I knew, as far as anyone could know, it
was an item for sale like everything else in this place.’

‘The dream monologue, as you call it, was an exclusive piece. The charge was
on the back of the card on which the title was written, just as the charge is on the
back of that card you are holding in your hand.’
I turned the card to the reverse side, where the words ‘twenty-five dollars’
were written in the same hand that appeared on all the price tags around the
gallery. Speaking in the tones of an outraged customer, I said to Dalha, ‘You
wrote the price only on this card. There was nothing written on the bungalow
house card.’ But even as I said these words I lacked the conviction that they were
true. In any case, I knew that if I wanted to hear the tape recording about the
derelict factory I would have to pay what I owed, or what Dalha claimed I owed,
for listening to the bungalow house tape.
‘Here,’ I said, removing my wallet from my back pocket, ‘ten, twenty, twenty-
five dollars for the bungalow house, and another twenty-five for listening to the
tape now in the machine.’
Dalha stepped forward, took the fifty dollars I held out to her, and in her
coldest voice said, ‘This only covers yesterday’s tape about the bungalow house,
which was clearly priced at fifty dollars. You must still pay twenty-five dollars if
you wish to listen to the tape today.’
‘But why should the bungalow house tape cost twenty-five dollars more than
the tape about the derelict factory?’
‘That is simply because this is a less ambitious work than the one dealing with
the bungalow house.’
In fact the tape recording entitled The Derelict Factory with a Dirt Floor and
Voices was of shorter duration than The Bungalow House (Plus Silence), but I
found it no less wonderful in picturing the same ‘infinite terror and dreariness.’
For approximately fifteen minutes (on my lunch break) I embraced the degraded
beauty of the derelict factory – a narrow ruin that stood isolated upon a vast
plain, its broken windows allowing only the most meager haze of moonlight to
shine across its floor of hard-packed dirt where dead machinery lay buried in a
grave of shadows and languished in the echoes of hollow, senseless voices. How
utterly desolate, yet all the same wonderfully comforting, was the voice that
communicated its message to me through the medium of a tape recording. To
think that another person shared my love for the icy bleakness of things. The
satisfaction I felt at hearing that monotonal and somewhat distorted voice
speaking so intimately of scenes and sensations that perfectly echoed certain
aspects of my own deepest nature – this was an experience that even then, as I
sat on the floor of Dalha’s art gallery listening to the tape through enormous

headphones, might have been heartbreaking. But I wanted to believe that the
artist who created these dream monologues about the bungalow house and the
derelict factory had not set out to break my heart or anyone’s heart. I wanted to
believe that this artist had escaped the dreams and demons of all sentiment in
order to explore the foul and crummy delights of a universe where everything
had been reduced to three stark principles: first, that there was nowhere for you
to go; second, that there was nothing for you to do; and third, that there was no
one for you to know. Of course I knew that this view was an illusion like any
other, but it was also one that had sustained me so long and so well – as long and
as well as any other illusion and perhaps longer, perhaps better.
‘Dalha,’ I said when I had finished listening to the tape recording, ‘I want you
to tell me what you know about the artist who made these dream monologues.
He doesn’t even sign his works.’
From across the front section of the art gallery Dalha spoke to me in a strange,
somewhat flustered voice. ‘Well, why should you be surprised that he doesn’t
sign his name to his works – that’s how artists are these days. All over the place
they are signing their works only with some idiotic symbol or a piece of chewing
gum or just leaving them unsigned altogether. Why should you care what his
name is? Why should I?’
‘Because,’ I answered, ‘perhaps I can persuade him to allow me to buy his
works instead of sitting on the floor of your art gallery and renting these
performances on my lunch break.’
‘So you want to cut me out entirely,’ Dalha shouted back in her old voice. ‘I
am his dealer, I tell you, and anything he has to sell you will buy through me.’
‘I don’t know why you’re getting so upset,’ I said, standing up from the floor.
‘I’m willing to give you a percentage. All I ask is that you arrange something
between myself and the artist.’
Dalha sat down in a chair next to the curtained doorway separating the front
and back sections of the art gallery. She pulled her emerald shawl around herself
and said, ‘Even if I wished to arrange something I could not do it. I have no idea
what his name is myself. A few nights ago he walked up to me on the street
while I was waiting for a cab to take me home.’
‘What does he look like?’ I had to ask at that moment.
‘It was late at night and I was drunk,’ Dalha replied, somehow evasively it
seemed to me.
‘Was he a younger man, an older man?’
‘An older man, yes. Not very tall, with bushy white hair like a professor of

some kind. And he said that he wanted to have an artwork of his delivered to my
gallery. I explained to him my usual terms as best I could, since I was so drunk.
He agreed and then walked off down the street. And that’s not the best part of
town to be walking around all by yourself. Well, the next day a package arrived
with the tape-recording machine and so forth. There were also some instructions
which explained that I should destroy each of the audiotapes before I leave the
art gallery at the end of the day, and that a new tape would arrive the following
day and each day thereafter. No return address is provided on these packages.’
‘And did you destroy the bungalow house tape?’ I asked.
‘Of course,’ said Dalha with some exasperation, but also with insistence.
‘What do I care about some crazy artist’s work or how he conducts his career?
Besides, he guaranteed I would make some money on the deal, and here I am
already with seventy-five dollars.’
‘So why not sell me this dream monologue about the derelict factory? I won’t
say anything.’
Dalha was quiet for a moment, and then said, ‘He told me that if I didn’t
destroy the tapes each day he would know about it and that he would do
something. I’ve forgotten exactly what he said, I was so drunk that night.’
‘But how could he know?’ I asked, and in reply Dalha just stared at me in
silence. ‘All right, all right,’ I said. ‘But I still want you to make an arrangement.
You have his money for the bungalow house tape and the tape about the derelict
factory. If he’s any kind of artist, he’ll want to be paid. When he gets in touch
with you, that’s when you make the arrangement for me. I won’t cheat you out of
your percentage. I give you my word on that.’
‘Whatever that’s worth,’ Dalha said bitterly.
But she did agree that she would try to arrange something between myself and
the tape-recording artist. I left the art gallery immediately after these
negotiations, before Dalha could have any second thoughts. That afternoon,
while I was working in the Language and Literature department of the library, I
could think about nothing but the derelict factory that was so enticingly pictured
on the new audiotape. The bus that takes me to and from the library each day of
the working week always passes such a structure, which stands isolated in the
distance just as the artist described it in his dream monologue.
That night I slept badly, thrashing about in my bed, not quite asleep and not
quite awake. At times I had the feeling there was someone else in my bedroom
who was talking to me, but of course I could not deal with this perception in any
realistic way, since I was half-asleep and half-awake, and thus, for all practical

purposes, I was out my mind.
Around three o’clock in the morning the telephone rang. In the darkness I
reached for my eyeglasses, which were on the nightstand next to the telephone,
and noted the luminous face of my alarm clock. I cleared my throat and said
hello. The voice on the other end was Dalha’s.
‘I talked to him,’ she said.
‘Where did you talk to him?’ I asked. ‘On the street?’
‘No, no, not on the street,’ she said, giggling a little. I think she must have
been drunk. ‘He called me on the telephone.’
‘He called you on the telephone?’ I repeated, imagining for a moment what it
would be like to have the voice of that artist speak to me over the telephone and
not merely on a recorded audiotape.
‘Yes, he called me on the telephone.’
‘What did he say?’
‘Well, I could tell you if you would stop asking so many questions.’
‘Tell me.’
‘It was only a few minutes ago that he called. He said that he would meet you
tomorrow at the library where you work.’
‘You told him about me?’ I asked, and then there was a long silence. ‘Dalha?’
I prompted.
‘I told him that you wanted to buy his tape recordings. That’s all.’
‘Then how did he know that I worked at the library?’
‘Ask him yourself. I have no idea. I’ve done my part.’
Then Dahla said good-bye and hung up before I could say good-bye back to
her.
After talking to Dalha I found it impossible to sleep anymore that night, even
if it was only a state of half-sleeping and half-waking. All I could think about
was meeting the artist of the dream monologues. So I got myself ready to go to
work, rushing as if I were late, and walked up to the corner of my street to wait
for the bus.
It was very cold as I sat waiting in the bus shelter. There was a sliver of moon
high in the blackness above, with several hours remaining before sunrise.
Somehow I felt that I was waiting for the bus on the first day of a new school
year, since after all the month was September, and I was so filled with both fear
and excitement. When the bus finally arrived I saw that there were only a few
other early risers headed for downtown. I took one of the back seats and stared
out the window, my own face staring back at me in black reflection.

At the next shelter we approached I noticed that another lone bus rider was
seated on the bench waiting to be picked up. His clothes were dark-colored
(including a long, loose overcoat and hat), and he sat up very straight, his arms
held close to his body and his hands resting on his lap. His head was slightly
bowed, and I could not see the face beneath his hat. His physical attitude, I
thought to myself as we approached the lighted bus shelter, was one of
disciplined repose. I was surprised that he did not stand up as the bus came
nearer to the shelter, and ultimately we passed him by. I wanted to say something
to the driver of the bus but a strong feeling of both fear and excitement made me
keep my silence.
The bus finally dropped me off in front of the library, and I ran up the tiered
stairway that led to the main entrance. Through the thick glass doors I could see
that only a few lights illuminated the spacious interior of the library. After
rapping on the glass for a few moments I saw a figure dressed in a maintenance
man’s uniform appear in the shadowy distance inside the building. I rapped some
more and the man slowly proceeded down the library’s vaulted central hallway.
‘Good morning, Henry,’ I said as the door opened.
‘Hello, sir,’ he replied without standing aside to allow my entrance to the
library. ‘You know I’m not supposed to open these doors before it’s time for
them to be open.’
‘I’m a little early, I realize, but I’m sure it will be all right to let me inside. I
work here, after all.’
‘I know you do, sir. But a few days ago I got talked to about these doors being
open when they shouldn’t be. It’s because of the stolen property.’
‘What property is that, Henry? Books?’
‘No, sir. I think it was something from the media department. Maybe a video
camera or a tape recorder. I don’t know exactly.’
‘Well, you have my word – just let me through the door and I’ll go right
upstairs to my desk. I’ve got a lot of work to do today.’
Henry eventually obliged my request, and I did as I told him I would do.
The library was a great building as a whole, but the Language and Literature
department (second floor) was located in a relatively small area – narrow and
long with a high ceiling and a row of tall, paned windows along one wall. The
other walls were lined with books, and most of the floor space was devoted to
long study tables. For the most part, though, the room in which I worked was
fairly open from end to end. Two large archways led to other parts of the library,
and a normal-sized doorway led to the stacks where most of the bibliographic

holdings were stored, millions of volumes standing silent and out of sight along
endless rows of shelves. In the pre-dawn darkness the true dimensions of the
Language and Literature department were now obscure. Only the moon shining
high in the blackness through those tall windows revealed to me the location of
my desk, which was in the middle of the long narrow room.
I found my way over to my desk and switched on the small lamp that years
ago I had brought from home. (Not that I required the added illumination as I
worked at my desk at the library, but I did enjoy the bleakly old-fashioned
appearance of this object.) For a moment I thought of the bungalow house where
none of the lamps were equipped with lightbulbs and moonlight shone through
the windows upon a carpet littered with vermin. Somehow I was unable to call
up the special sensations and mental state that I associated with this dream
monologue, even though my present situation of being alone in the Language
and Literature department some hours before dawn was intensely dreamlike.
Not knowing what else to do, I sat down at my desk as if I were beginning my
normal workday. It was then that I noticed a large envelope lying on top of my
desk, although I could not recall its being there when I left the library the day
before. The envelope looked old and faded under the dim light of the desk lamp.
There was no writing on either side of the envelope, which was bulging slightly
and had been sealed.
‘Who’s there?’ a voice called out that barely sounded like my own. I had seen
something out of the corner of my eye while examining the envelope at my desk.
I cleared my throat. ‘Henry?’ I asked the darkness without looking up from my
desk or turning to either side. No answer was offered in reply, but I could feel
that someone else had joined me in the Language and Literature department of
the library.
I slowly turned my head to the right and focused on the archway some
distance across the room. At the center of this aperture, which led to another
room where moonlight shone through tall, paned windows, stood a figure in
silhouette. I could not see his face but immediately recognized the long, loose
overcoat and hat. It was indeed the statue-like individual whom I had seen in the
bus shelter as I rode to the library in the pre-dawn darkness. Now he was there to
meet me that day in the library, as he had told Dalha he would do. At that
moment it seemed beside the point to ask how he had gotten into the library or
even to bother about introductions. I simply launched into a monologue that I
had been constantly rehearsing since Dalha telephoned me earlier that morning.
‘I’ve been wanting to meet you,’ I started. ‘Your dream monologues, which is

what I call them, have impressed me very much. That is to say, your artworks
are like nothing else I have ever experienced, either artistically or extra-
artistically. It seems incredible to me how well you have expressed subject
matter with which I myself am intimately familiar. Of course, I am not referring
to the subject matter as such – the bungalow house and so on – except as it calls
forth your underlying vision of things. When – in your tape-recorded
monologues – your voice speaks such phrases as “infinite terror and dreariness”
or “ceaseless negation of color and life,” I believe that my response is exactly
that which you intend for those who experience your artworks.’
I continued in this vein for a while longer, speaking to the silhouette of
someone who betrayed no sign that he heard anything I said. At some point,
however, my monologue veered off in a direction I had not intended it to take.
Suddenly I began to say things that had nothing to do with what I had said before
and that even contradicted my former statements.
‘For as long as I can remember,’ I said, continuing to speak to the figure
standing in the archway, ‘I have had an intense and highly aesthetic perception
of what I call the icy bleakness of things. At the same time I have felt a great
loneliness in this perception. This conjunction of feelings seems paradoxical,
since such a perception, such a view of things, would seem to preclude the
emotion of loneliness, or any sense of a killing sadness, as I think of it. All such
heartbreaking sentiment, as usually considered, would seem to be on its knees
before artworks such as yours, which so powerfully express what I have called
the icy bleakness of things, submerging or devastating all sentiment in an
atmosphere potent with desolate truths, permeated throughout with a visionary
stagnation and lifelessness. Yet I must observe that the effect, as I now consider
it, has been just the opposite. If it was your intent to evoke the icy bleakness of
things with your dream monologues, then you have totally failed on both an
artistic and an extra-artistic level. You have failed your art, you have failed
yourself, and you have also failed me. If your artworks had really evoked the
true bleakness of things, then I would not have felt this need to know who you
are, this killing sadness that there was actually someone who experienced the
same sensations and mental states as I did and who could share them with me in
the form of tape-recorded dream monologues. Who are you that I should feel this
need to go to work hours before the sun comes up, that I should feel this was
something I had to do and that you were someone that I had to know? This
behavior violates every principle by which I have lived for as long as I can
remember. Who are you to cause me to violate these long-lived principles? I

think it’s all becoming clear to me now. Dalha put you up to this. You and Dalha
are in a conspiracy against me and against my principles. Every day Dalha is on
the telephone making all kinds of arrangements for profit, and she cannot stand
the idea that all I do is sit there in peace, eating my lunch in her hideous art
gallery. She feels that I’m cheating her somehow because she’s not making a
profit from me, because I never paid her to make an arrangement for me. Don’t
try to deny what I now know is true. But you could say something, in any case.
Just a few words spoken with that voice of yours. Or at least let me see your
face. And you could take off that ridiculous hat. It’s like something Dalha would
wear.’
By this time I was on my feet and walking (staggering, in fact) toward the
figure that stood in the archway. All the while I was walking, or staggering,
toward the figure I was also demanding that he answer my accusations. But as I
walked forward between the long study tables toward the archway, the figure
standing there receded backward into the darkness of the next room, where
moonlight shone through tall, paned windows. The closer I came to him the
farther he receded into the darkness. And he did not recede into the darkness by
taking steps backward, as I was taking steps forward, but moved in some other
way that even now I cannot specify, as though he were floating.
Just before the figure disappeared completely into the darkness he finally
spoke to me. His voice was the same one that I had heard over those enormous
headphones in Dalha’s art gallery, except now there was no interference, no
distortion in the words that it spoke. These words, which resounded in my brain
as they resounded in the high-ceilinged rooms of the library, were such that I
should have welcomed them, for they echoed my very own, deeply private
principles. Yet I took no comfort in hearing another voice tell me that there was
nowhere for me to go, nothing for me to do, and no one for me to know.
The next voice I heard was that of Henry, who shouted up the wide stone
staircase from the ground floor of the library. ‘Is everything all right, sir?’ he
asked. I composed myself and was able to answer that everything was all right. I
asked him to turn the lights on for the second floor of the library. In a minute the
lights were on, but by then the man in the hat and long, loose overcoat was gone.
When I confronted Dalha at her art gallery later that day, she was not in the
least forthcoming with respect to my questions and accusations. ‘You’re crazy,’
she screamed at me. ‘I want nothing more to do with you.’
When I asked Dalha what she was talking about, she said, ‘You really don’t
know, do you? You really are a crazy man. You don’t remember that night you

came up to me on the street while I was waiting for a cab to show up.’
When I told her I recalled doing nothing of the kind, she continued her
anecdote of that night, along with an account of subsequent events. ‘I’m standing
there so drunk I can hardly understand what you’re saying to me about some
little game you are playing. Then you send me the tapes. Then you come in and
pay to listen to the tapes, exactly as you said you would. Just in time I remember
that I’m supposed to lie to you that the tapes are the work of a white-haired old
man, when in fact you’re the one who’s making the tapes. I knew you were
crazy, but this was the only money I ever made off you, even though day after
day you come and eat your pathetic lunch in my gallery. When I saw you that
night, I couldn’t tell at first who it was walking up to me on the street. You did
look different, and you were wearing that stupid hat. Soon enough, though, I can
see that it’s you. And you’re pretending to be someone else, but not really
pretending, I don’t know. And then you tell me that I must destroy the tapes, and
if I don’t destroy them something will happen. Well, let me tell you, crazy man,’
Dalha said, ‘I did not destroy those tape recordings. I let all my friends hear
them. We sat around getting drunk and laughing our heads off at your stupid
dream monologues. Here, another one of your artworks arrived in the mail
today,’ she said while walking across the floor of the art gallery to the tape
machine that was positioned on the small plastic table. ‘Why don’t you listen to
it and pay me the money you promised. This looks like a good one,’ she said,
picking up the little card that bore the title of the work. ‘The Bus Shelter, it says.
That should be very exciting for you – a bus shelter. Pay up!’
‘Dalha,’ I said in a laboriously calm voice, ‘please listen to me. You have to
make another arrangement. I need to have another meeting with the tape-
recording artist. You’re the only one who can arrange for this to happen. Dalha,
I’m afraid for both of us if you don’t agree to make this arrangement. I need to
speak with him again.’
‘Then why don’t you just go talk into a mirror. There,’ she said, pointing to
the curtain that separated the front section from the back section of the art
gallery. ‘Go into the bathroom like you did the other day and talk to yourself in
the mirror.’
‘I didn’t talk to myself in the bathroom, Dalha.’
‘No? What were you doing then?’
‘Dalha, you have to make the arrangement. You are the go-between. He will
contact you if you agree to let him.’
‘Who will contact me?’

This was a fair question for Dalha to ask, but it was also one that I could not
answer. I told her that I would return to talk to her the next day, hoping she
would have calmed down by then.
Unfortunately, I never saw Dalha again. That night she was found dead on the
street. Presumably she had been waiting for a cab to take her home from a bar or
a party or some other human gathering place where she had gotten very drunk.
But it was not her drinking or her exhausting bohemian social life that killed
Dalha. She had, in fact, choked to death while waiting for a cab very late at
night. Her body was taken to a hospital for examination. There it was discovered
that an object had been lodged inside her. Someone, it appeared, had violently
thrust something down her throat. The object, as described in a newspaper
article, was the ‘small plastic arm of a toy doll.’ Whether this doll’s arm had
been painted emerald green, or any other color, was not mentioned in the article.
Surely the police searched through Dalha D. Fine Arts and found many more
such objects arranged in a wire wastebasket, each of them painted different
colors. No doubt they also found the exhibit of the dream monologues with its
unsigned artworks and tape recorder stolen from the library. But they could
never have made the connection between these tape-recorded artworks and the
grotesque death of the gallery owner.
After that night I no longer felt the desperate need to possess the monologues,
not even the final bus shelter tape, which I have never heard. I was now in
possession of the original handwritten manuscripts from which the tape-
recording artist had created his dream monologues and which he had left for me
in a large envelope on my desk at the library. Even then he knew, as I did not
know, that after our first meeting we would never meet again. The handwriting
on the manuscript pages is somewhat like my own, although the slant of the
letters betrays a left-handed writer, whereas I am right-handed. Over and over I
read the dream monologues about the bus shelter and the derelict factory and
especially about the bungalow house, where the moonlight shines upon a carpet
littered with the bodies of vermin. I try to experience the infinite terror and
dreariness of a bungalow universe in the way I once did, but it is not the same as
it once was. There is no comfort in it, even though the vision and the underlying
principles are still the same. I know in a way I never knew before that there is
nowhere for me to go, nothing for me to do, and no one for me to know. The
voice in my head keeps reciting these old principles of mine. The voice is his
voice, and the voice is also my voice. And there are other voices, voices I have
never heard before, voices that seem to be either dead or dying in a great moonlit

darkness. More than ever, some sort of new arrangement seems in order, some
dramatic and unknown arrangement – anything to find release from this
heartbreaking sadness I suffer every minute of the day (and night), this killing
sadness that feels as if it will never leave me no matter where I go or what I do
or whom I may ever know.

SEVERINI
I
was the only one among a local circle of acquaintances and associates who had
never met Severini. Unlike the rest of them I was not in the least moved to visit
him along with the others at that isolated residence which had become known as
‘Severini’s Shack.’ There was a question of my deliberately avoiding an
encounter with this extraordinary individual, but even I myself had no idea
whether or not this was true. My curiosity was just as developed as that of the
rest of them, more so in fact. Yet some kind of scruple or special anxiety kept me
away from what the others celebrated as the ‘spectacle of Severini.’
Of course I could not escape a second-hand knowledge of their Severini visits.
Each of these trips to that lonesome hovel some distance outside the city where I
used to live was a great adventure, they reported, an excursion into the most
obscure and idiosyncratic nightmares. The figure that presided over these salon-
like gatherings was extremely unstable and inspired in his visitors a sense of
lurid anticipation, an unfocused expectation that sometimes reached the pitch of
lunacy. Afterward I would hear detailed accounts from one person or another of
what had occurred during a particular evening within the confines of the
notorious shack, which was situated at the edge of a wildly overgrown and
swampy tract of land known as St Alban’s Marsh, a place that some claimed had
a sinister pertinence to Severini himself. Occasionally I would make notes of
these accounts, indulging myself in a type of imaginative and also highly
analytical record-keeping. For the most part, however, I simply absorbed all of
these Severini anecdotes in a wholly natural and organic fashion, much as I
assimilated so many things in the world around me, without any awareness – or
even a possibility of awareness – that these things might be nourishing or
noxious or purely neutral. From the beginning, I admit, it was my tendency to be
highly receptive to whatever someone might have to say regarding Severini, his
shack-like home, and the marshy landscape in which he had ensconced himself.
Then, during private moments when I returned to the small apartment in which I
resided during this period of my life, I would recreate in my imagination the
phenomena that had been related to me in conversations held at diverse places

and times. It was rare that I actively urged the others to elaborate on any specific
aspect of their adventures with Severini, but several times I did betray myself
when the subject arose of his past life before he set himself up in a marshland
shack.
According to first-hand witnesses (that is, persons who had actually made the
pilgrimage to that isolated and crumbling shack), Severini could be quite
talkative about his personal history, particularly the motives and events that most
directly culminated in his present life. Nevertheless, these persons also admitted
that the ‘marvelous hermit’ (Severini) displayed a conspicuous disregard for
common facts and for truths of a literal sort. Thus he was often given to speaking
about himself by way of ambiguous parables and metaphors, not to mention
outrageous anecdotes, the facts of which always seemed to cancel out one
another, as well as outright lies which afterward he himself would sometimes
expose as such. But much of the time – and in the opinion of some, all of the
time – Severini’s speech took the form of total nonsense, as though he were
talking in his sleep. Despite these obstacles to both credibility and coherence, all
of the individuals who spoke to me on the subject somehow conveyed to my
mind a remarkably focused portrait of the hermit Severini, an amalgam of
hearsay that attained the status of a potent legend.
This impression of a legendary Severini was no doubt bolstered by what
certain persons described as ‘Exhibits from the Imaginary Museum.’ The
entourage of visitors to the hermit’s dilapidated shack was composed of more or
less artistic persons, or at least individuals with artistic leanings, and their
exposure to Severini proved a powerful inspiration that resulted in numerous
artworks in a variety of media and genres. There were sculptures, paintings and
drawings, poems and short prose pieces, musical compositions sometimes
accompanied by lyrics, conceptual works that existed only in schematic or
anecdotal form, and even an architectural plan for a ‘ruined temple on a jungle
island somewhere in the region of the Philippines.’ While on the surface these
productions appeared to have their basis in a multitude of dubious sources, each
of them claimed the most literalistic origins in Severini’s own words, his
sleeptalking, as they called it. Indeed, I myself could perceive a definite unity
among these artworks and their integral relationship to the same unique figure of
inspiration that was Severini himself, although I had never met this fantastical
person and had no desire to do so. Nevertheless, these so-called ‘exhibits’ helped
me to recreate in my imagination not only those much-discussed visits to that
shack in the marsh country but also the personal history of its lone inhabitant.

As I now think about them – that is, recreate them in my imagination – these
Severini-based artworks, however varied in their genres and techniques, brought
to the surface a few features that were always the same and were always treated
in the same way. I was startled when I first began to recognize these common
features, because somehow they closely replicated a number of peculiar images
and concepts that I myself had already experienced in moments of imaginative
daydreaming and especially during episodes of delirium brought on by physical
disease or excessive psychic turmoil.
A central element of such episodes was the sense of a place possessing
qualities that were redolent, on the one hand, of a tropical landscape, and, on the
other hand, of a common sewer. The aspect of a common sewer emerged in the
feeling of an enclosed but also vastly extensive space, a network of coiling
passages that spanned incredible distances in an underworld of misty darkness.
As for the quality of a tropical landscape, this shared much of the same kind of
darkly oozing ferment as the sewer aspect, with the added impression of the
most exotic forms of life spawning on every side, things multiplying and also
incessantly mutating like a time-lapse film of spreading fungus or multi-colored
slime molds totally unrestricted in their form and expansion. While I
experienced the most intense visions of this place, this tropical sewer, as it
recreated itself in my delirious imagination year after year, I was always outside
it at some great remove, not caught within as if I were having a nightmare. But
still I maintained an awareness (as in a nightmare) that something had happened
in this place, some unknown event had transpired that had left these images
behind it like a trail of slime. And then a certain feeling came over me and a
certain concept came to my mind.
It was this feeling and its companion concept that so vividly arose within my
being when the others began telling me about their strange visits to the Severini
place and showing me the various artworks that this strange individual had
inspired them to create. One by one I viewed paintings or sculptures in some
artist’s studio, or heard music being performed in a club that was frequented by
the Severini crowd, or read literary works that were being passed around – and
each time the sense of that tropical sewer was revived in me, although not with
the same intensity as the delirious episodes I experienced while suffering from a
physical disease or during periods of excessive psychic turmoil. The titles of
these works alone might have been enough to provoke the particular feeling and
the concept that were produced by my delirious episodes. The concept to which I
have been referring may be stated in various ways, but it usually occurred to my

mind as a simple phrase (or fragment), almost a chant that overwhelmed me with
vile and haunting suggestions far beyond its mere words, which are as follows:
the nightmare of the organism. The vile and haunting suggestions underlying (or
inspired by) this conceptual phrase were, as I have said, called up by the titles of
those Severini-based artworks, those Exhibits from the Imaginary Museum.
While I have difficulty recalling the type of work to which each title was
attached – whether a painting or a sculpture, a poem or a performance piece – I
am still able to cite a number of the titles themselves. One of them that easily
emerges in recollection is the following: No Face Among Us. Here is another:
Defiled and Delivered. And now many more of them are coming to my mind:
The Way of the Lost, On Viscous and Sacred Ground (a.k.a. The Tantric
Doctors), In Earth and Excreta, The Black Spume of Existence, Integuments in
Eruption, and The Descent into the Fungal. All of these titles, as my artistic
acquaintances and associates informed me, were taken from selected phrases (or
fragments) spoken by Severini during his numerous episodes of sleeptalking.
Every time I heard one of these titles and saw the particular artwork that it
named, I was always reminded of that tropical sewer of my delirious episodes. I
would also feel myself on the verge of realizing what it was that had happened in
this place, some wonderful or disastrous event that was intimately related to the
conceptual phrase which I have given as the nightmare of the organism. Yet
these artworks and their titles allowed me only a remote sense of some vile and
haunting revelation. And it was simply not possible for the others to illuminate
this matter fully, given that their knowledge of Severini’s past history was
exclusively derived from his own nonsensical or questionable assertions. As
nearly as they were willing to speculate, it appeared that this deranged and all-
but-incognito person known as Severini was the willing subject of what was
variously referred to as an ‘esoteric procedure’ or an ‘illicit practice.’ At this
point in my discoveries about the strange Severini I found it difficult to inquire
about the exact nature of this procedure, or practice, while at the same time
pretending a lack of interest in actually meeting the resident of that ruined shack
out in the marshland backroads some distance outside the city where I used to
live. It did seem, however, that this practice or procedure, as nearly as anyone
could speculate, was not a medical treatment of any known variety. Rather, they
thought that the procedure (or practice) in question involved occult or mystical
traditions that, in their most potent form, are able to exist inconspicuously in
only a few remaining parts of the world. Of course, all of this speculation could
have been a cover-up orchestrated by Severini or by his disciples – for that is

what they had become – or by all of them together. In fact, for some time I had
suspected that Severini’s disciples, despite their parade of artworks and
outlandish accounts of their visits to the marshland shack, were nevertheless
concealing from me some vital element of their new experiences. There seemed
to be some truth of which they had knowledge and I had not. Yet they also
seemed to desire that, in due course, I might share with them this truth.
My suspicions of the others’ deception derived from a source that was
admittedly subjective. This was my imaginative recreation, as I sat in my
apartment, of the spectacle of Severini as it was related to me by those who had
participated in the visits to his residence in the marsh. In my mind I pictured
them seated upon the floor of that small, unfurnished shack, the only
illumination being the hectic light of candles that they brought with them and
placed in a circle, at the center of which was the figure of Severini. This figure
always spoke to them in his uniquely cryptic way, his sleeptalking voice
fluctuating in its qualities and even seeming to emanate from places other than
his own body, as though he were practicing a hyper-ventriloquism. Similarly, his
body itself, as I was told and as I later imagined to myself in my apartment,
appeared to react in concert with the fluctuations in his voice. These bodily
changes, the others said, were sometimes subtle and sometimes dramatic, but
they were consistently ill-defined – not a matter of clear transformation as much
as a breakdown of anatomical features and structures, the result being something
twisted and tumorous like a living mound of diseased clay or mud, a heap of
cancerous matter that slowly thrashed about in the candlelight which illuminated
the old shack. These fluctuations in both Severini’s voice and his body, the
others explained to me, were not in any way under his own guidance but were a
totally spontaneous phenomenon to which he submitted as the result of the
esoteric procedure or illicit practice worked upon him in some unknown place
(possibly ‘in the region of the Philippines’). It was now his destiny, the others
elaborated, to comply with whatever was demanded of his flesh by what could
only be seen as utterly mindless and chaotic forces, and even his consciousness
itself – they asserted – was as amorphous and mutable as his bodily form. Yet as
they spoke to me about these particulars of Severini’s condition, none of them
conveyed any real sense of the nightmarish quality of the images and processes
they were describing. Awestruck, yes; passionate, yes; somewhat demented, yes.
But nightmarish – no. Even as I listened to their account of a given Severini
meeting, I too failed to grasp fully their nightmarish qualities and aspects. They
would say to me, referring to one of Severini’s metamorphoses, ‘The naked

contours of his form writhed about like a pool of snakes, or twitched like a mass
of newly hatched spiderlings.’ Nevertheless, upon hearing statement after
statement of this kind I sat relatively undisturbed, accepting without revulsion or
outrage these revolting and outrageous remarks. Perhaps, I thought at the time, I
was simply under the powerful spell of social decorum, which so often may
explain otherwise incomprehensible feelings (or lack of feelings) and behaviors
(or lack of behaviors). But once I was alone in my apartment, and began to
imaginatively recreate what I had heard about the spectacle of Severini, I was
overwhelmed by its nightmarish essence and several times lapsed into one of my
delirious episodes with all of its terrible sensations of a tropical sewer and all the
nightmares of exotic lifeforms breaking out everywhere like rampant pustules
and suppurations. It was this discrepancy between my public response (or lack of
response) to the purportedly objective data with which I was being inundated
regarding the whole Severini business and my private response (or hyper-
response) to this data that ultimately led me to suspect that I was being deceived,
even if the deception was as much on my part as it was on the others’. Then I
considered that I was not as much the victim of a deception as I was the subject
of a manipulation – a process of seduction that would culminate in my entering
as a full-fledged initiate into the Severini cult. In either case, it remained my
conviction that some vital element had been withheld from me concerning the
recluse of St Alban’s Marsh until a propitious moment had arrived and I was
prepared to confront the truth that was hitherto denied me, or that I was willfully
denying to myself.
Finally, on a rainy afternoon, as I was working alone in my apartment (making
Severini notes), the buzzer signaled that someone was downstairs. The voice
over the intercom belonged to a woman named Carla, who was a sculptress and
whom I barely knew. When I let her in my apartment she was wet from walking
in the rain without a coat or umbrella, although her straight black hair and all-
black clothes looked very much the same whether wet or dry. I offered her a
towel but she refused, saying she ‘kind of liked feeling soggy and sickish,’ and
we went on from there. The reason for her visit to my apartment, she revealed,
was to invite me to the first ‘collective showing’ of the Exhibits from the
Imaginary Museum. When I asked why I should be receiving this personal
invitation in my apartment on a rainy afternoon, she said: ‘Because the showing
is going to be at his place, and you’ve never wanted to go there.’ I said that I
would think seriously about attending the showing and asked her if that was all
she had to say. ‘No,’ she said as she dug into one of the pockets of her tight

damp slacks. ‘He was really the one who wanted me to invite you to the exhibit.
We never told him about you, but he said that he always felt someone was
missing, and for some reason we assumed it was you.’ After extracting a piece of
paper that had been folded several times, she opened it up and held it before her
eyes. ‘I wrote down what he said,’ she said while holding the limp and wrinkled
note close to her face with both hands. Her eyes glanced up at me for a moment
over the top edge of the unfolded page (her heavy mascara was running down
her cheeks in black rivulets), and then she looked down to read the words
Severini had told her to write. ‘He says, “You and Severini” – he always calls
himself Severini, as if that were someone else –“you and Severini are
sympathetic . . .” something – I can hardly read this. It was dark when I wrote it
down. Here we go: “You and Severini are sympathetic organisms.”’ She paused
to push away a few strands of black, rain-soaked hair that had fallen across her
face. She was smiling somewhat idiotically.
‘Is that it?’ I asked.
‘Hold on, he wanted me to get it right. Just one more thing. He said, “Tell him
that the way into the nightmare is the way out.”’ She folded the paper once again
and crammed it back into the pocket of her black slacks. ‘Does any of that mean
anything to you?’ she asked.
I said that it meant nothing at all to me. After promising that I would most
seriously consider attending the exhibit at Severini’s place, I let Carla out of my
apartment and back into that rainy afternoon.
I should say that I had never spoken to either Carla or the others about my
delirious episodes, with their sensations of a tropical sewer and the emergent
concept of the ‘nightmare of the organism.’ I had never told anyone. I had
thought that these episodes and the concept of the nightmare of the organism
were strictly a private hell, even one that was unique. Until that rainy afternoon,
I had considered it only a coincidence that the artworks inspired by Severini, as
well as the titles of these works, served to call up the sensations and suggestions
of my delirious episodes. Then I was sent a message by Severini, through Carla,
that he and I were ‘sympathetic organisms’ and that ‘the way into the nightmare
is the way out.’ For some time I had dreamed of being delivered from the
suffering of my delirious episodes, and from all the suggestions and sensations
that went along with them – the terrible vision that exposed all living things,
including myself, as no more than a fungus or a collection of bacteria, a kind of
monumental slime mold quivering across the landscape of this planet (and very
likely others). Any deliverance from such a nightmare, I thought, would involve

the most drastic (and esoteric) procedures, the most alien (and illicit) practices.
And, ultimately, I never believed that this deliverance, or any other, was really
possible. It was simply too good, or too evil, to be true – at least this is how it
seemed to my mind. Yet all it took was a few words from Severini, as they
reached me through Carla, and I began to dream of all kinds of possibilities. In a
moment everything had changed. I now became ready to take those steps toward
deliverance; in fact, not to do so seemed intolerable to me. I absolutely had to
find a way out of the nightmare, it seemed, whatever procedures or practices
were involved. Severini had taken those steps – I was convinced of that – and I
needed to know where they had led him.
As might be imagined, I had worked myself into quite a state even before the
night of the showing of the Exhibits of the Imaginary Museum. But it was more
than my frenzy of dreams and anticipation that affected my experiences that
night and now affects my ability to relate what occurred at the tumble-down
shack on the edge of St Alban’s Marsh. My delirious episodes previous to that
night were nothing (that is, they were the perfection of lucidity) when compared
to the delirium that overtakes me every time I attempt to sort out what happened
at the marshland shack, my thoughts disintegrating little by little until I pass into
a kind of sleeptalking of my own. I saw things with my own eyes and other
things with other eyes. And everywhere there were voices . . .
It was all weedy shadows and frogs croaking in the blackness as I walked
along the narrow path that, according to the directions given to me, led to
Severini’s place. I left my car parked alongside the road where I saw the vehicles
of the others. They had all arrived before me, although I was not in the least bit
late for this scheduled artistic event. But they had always been anxious, I had
long before noticed, whenever a Severini visit was planned, all that day fidgeting
with some restless impulse until nightfall came and they could leave the city and
go out to St Alban’s Marsh.
I expected to see a light ahead as I walked along that narrow path, but all I
heard were frogs croaking in the blackness. The full moon in a cloudless sky
revealed to me where I should next step along the path leading to the shack at the
edge of the marsh. But even before I reached the clearing where the old shack
supposedly stood, my sense of everything around me began to change. A warm
mist drifted in from either side of the path like a curtain closing in front of my
eyes, and I felt something touch my mind with images and concepts that were
from elsewhere. ‘We are sympathetic organisms,’ I heard from the mist. ‘Draw
closer.’ But that narrow path seemed to have no end to it, like those passages in

my delirious episodes which extended such great distances in the misty darkness
of a tropical landscape, where on every side of me there were exotic forms of life
spawning and seething without restraint. I must go to that place, I thought as if
these were my own words and not the words of another voice altogether, a voice
full of desperate intensity and confused aspirations. ‘Calm yourself, Mr Severini,
if you insist I still address you by that name. As your therapist I cannot advise
you to pursue this route . . . chasing miracles, if that is what you imagine . . . this
“temple,” as you call it, is an escape from any authentic confrontation with . . .’
But he did find his way to freedom, although without properly being
discharged from the institution, and he went to that place.
‘Documentes. Passportas! ’ Looking around at those yellow-brown faces, you
were finally there. You went to that jungle island, that tropical sewer, a great
temple looming out of the misty darkness in your dreams. It rained in every
town, the streets streaming like sewers. ‘Disentaría,’ pronounced the attending
physician. But he was not like any of the doctors whom you sought in that place.
Amoebic dysentery – there it was, the nightmare continued, so many forms it
could take. The way into the nightmare is the way out. And you were willing to
follow that nightmare as far as you needed in order to find your way out, just as I
was following that narrow path toward your shack on the edge of St Alban’s
Marsh to enter that same nightmare you had brought back with you. The
Exhibits of the Imaginary Museum. Your shack was now a gallery of the
nightmares you had inspired in the others with your sleeptalking and the
fluctuations of your form, those outrageous miracles which had not outraged
anyone. Only when I was alone in my apartment, imaginatively recreating what
the others had told me, could I see those miracles as the nightmares they were. I
knew this because of my delirious episodes, which none of the others had
known. They were the sympathetic organisms, not I. I was antagonistic to you,
not sympathetic. Because I would not go into the nightmare, as you had gone.
The Temple of Tantric Medicine, this is what you dreamed you would find in
that tropical sewer – a place where miracles might happen, where that sect of
‘doctors’ could minister with the most esoteric procedures and could carry out
their illicit practices. But what did you find instead? ‘Disentaría,’ pronounced
the attending physician. Then a small group of those yellow-brown faces told
you, told us, about that other temple which had no name. ‘For the belly
sickness,’ they said. Amoebic dysentery, simply another version of the nightmare
of the organism from which none of the doctors you had seen in the past could
deliver you. ‘How can the disease be cured of itself?’ you asked them. ‘My body

– a tumor that was once delivered from the body of another tumor, a lump of
disease that is always boiling with its own disease. And my mind – another
disease, the disease of a disease. Everywhere my mind sees the disease of other
minds and other bodies, these other organisms that are only other diseases, an
absolute nightmare of the organism. Where are you taking me!’ you screamed
(we screamed) at the yellow-brown faces. ‘Fix the belly sickness. We know, we
know.’ They chanted these words along the way, it seemed, as the town
disappeared behind the trees and the vines, behind the giant flowers that smelled
like rotting meat, and the fungus and muck of that tropical sewer. They knew the
disease and the nightmare because they lived in that place where the organism
flourished without restraint, its forms so varied and exotic, its fate inescapable.
‘Disentaría,’ pronounced the attending physician. They knew the way through
the stonework passages, the walls seeping with slime and soft with mold as they
coiled toward the central chamber of the temple without a name. Inside the
ruined heart of the temple there were candles burning everywhere; their
flickering light revealed an array of temple art and ornamentation. Intricate
murals appeared along the walls, mingling with the slime and the mold of that
tropical sewer. Sculptures of every size and all shapes projected out of the damp,
viscous shadows. At the center of the chamber was a large circular altar, an
enormous mandala composed of countless jewels, precious stones, or simply bits
of glass that gleamed in the candlelight like a pool of multi-colored slime molds.
They laid your body upon the altar; they knew what to do with you (us) – the
words to say, the songs to sing, and the esoteric procedures to follow. It was
almost as if I could understand the things that they chanted in voices of tortured
solemnity. Deliver the self that knows the sickness from the self that does not
know. There are two faces which must never confront each other. There is only
one body which must struggle to contain them both. And the phantom clutch of
that sickness, that amoebic dysentery, seemed to reach me as I walked along that
narrow path leading to Severini’s shack at the edge of St Alban’s Marsh. Inside
the shack were all the Exhibits of the Imaginary Museum, the paintings lining
the damp wood of the walls and the sculptures projecting out of the shadows cast
by the candles which always lighted the single room of that ruined hovel. I had
imaginatively recreated the interior of Severini’s shack many times according to
the accounts related to me by the others about this place and its incredible
inhabitant. I imagined how you could forget yourself in such a place, how you
could be delivered from the nightmares and delirious episodes that tortured you
in other places, even becoming someone else (or something else) as you gave

yourself up entirely to the fluctuations of the organism at the edge of St Alban’s
Marsh. You needed that marsh because it helped you to imaginatively recreate
that tropical sewer (where you were taken into the nightmare), and you needed
those artworks in order to make the crumbling shack into that temple (where you
were supposed to find your way out of the nightmare). But most of all you
needed them, the others, because they were sympathetic organisms. I, on the
other hand, was now an antagonistic organism who wanted nothing more to do
with your esoteric procedures and illicit practices. Deliver the self that knows the
sickness from the self that does not know. The two faces . . . the one body. You
wanted them to enter the nightmare, who did not even know the nightmare as we
knew it. You needed them and their artworks to go into the nightmare of the
organism to its very end, so that you could find your way out of the nightmare.
But you could not go to the very end of the nightmare unless I was with you, I
who was now an antagonistic organism without any hope that there was a way
out of the nightmare. We were forever divided, one face from the other,
struggling within the body – the organism – which we shared.
I never arrived at the shack that night; I never entered it. As I walked along
that narrow path in the mist I became feverish. (‘Amœbic dysentery,’
pronounced the doctor whom I visited the following day.) The face of Severini
appeared at the shack that night, not mine. It was always his face that the others
saw on such nights when they came to visit. But I was not there with them; that
is, my face was not there. His face was the one they saw as they sat among all
the Exhibits from the Imaginary Museum. But it was my face which returned to
the city; it was my body which I now fully possessed as an organism that
belonged to my face alone. But the others never returned from the shack on the
edge of St Alban’s Marsh. I never saw them again after that night, because on
that night he took them with him into the nightmare, with the candle flames
flickering upon those artworks and the fluctuations of form which to the others
appeared as a pool of twisting snakes or a mass of spiderlings newly hatched. He
showed them the way into the nightmare, but he could not show them the way
out. There is no way out of the nightmare once you have gone so far into its
depths. That is where he is lost forever, he and the others he has taken with him.
But he did not take me into the marsh with him to exist as a fungus exists or as
a foam of multi-colored slime mold exists. That is how I see it in my new
delirious episodes. Only at these times when I suffer from a physical disease or
excessive psychic turmoil do I see how he exists now, he and the others. Because
I never looked directly into the pools of oozing life when I stopped at the shack

on the edge of St Alban’s Marsh. I was on my way out of the city the night I
stopped, and I was only there long enough to douse the place in gasoline and set
it ablaze. It burned with all the brilliance of the nightmares that were still
exhibited inside, casting its illumination upon the marsh and leaving the most
obscure image of what was back there – a vast and vague impression of that
great black life from which we have all emerged and of which we are all made.

THE SHADOW, THE DARKNESS
I
t seemed that Grossvogel was charging us entirely too much money for what he
was offering. Some of us – we were about a dozen in all – blamed ourselves and
our own idiocy as soon as we arrived in that place which one neatly dressed old
gentleman immediately dubbed the ‘nucleus of nowhere.’ This same gentleman,
who a few days before had announced to several persons his abandonment of
poetry due to the lack of what he considered proper appreciation of his
innovative practice of the ‘Hermetic lyric,’ went on to say that such a place as
the one in which we found ourselves was exactly what we should have expected,
and probably what we idiots and failures deserved. We had no reason to expect
anything more, he explained, than to end up in the dead town of Crampton, in a
nowhere region of the country, of the world in fact, during a dull season of the
year that was pinched between such a lavish and brilliant autumn and what
promised to be an equally lavish and brilliant wintertime. We were trapped, he
said, completely stranded for all practical purposes, in a region of the country,
and of the entire world, where all the manifestations of that bleak time of year, or
rather its absence of manifestations, were so evident in the landscape around us,
where everything was absolutely stripped to the bone, and where the pathetic
emptiness of forms in their unadorned state was so brutally evident. When I
pointed out that Grossvogel’s brochure for this excursion, which he deemed a
‘physical-metaphysical excursion,’ did not strictly misrepresent our destination I
received only evil looks from several of the others at the table where we sat, as
well as from the nearby tables of the small, almost miniature diner in which the
whole group of us were now packed, filling it to capacity with the presence of
exotic out-of-towners who, when they stopped bickering for a few moments,
simply stared with a killing silence out the windows at the empty streets and
broken-down buildings of the dead town of Crampton. The town was further
maligned as a ‘drab abyss,’ the speaker of this phrase being a skeletal individual
who always introduced himself as a ‘defrocked academic.’ This self-designation
would usually provoke a query addressed to him as to its meaning, after which
he would, in so many words, elaborate on how his failure to skew his thinking to
the standards of, as he termed it, the ‘intellectual marketplace,’ along with his
failure to conceal his unconventional studies and methodologies, had resulted in

his longtime inability to secure a position within a reputable academic
institution, or within any sort of institution or place of business whatever. Thus,
in his mind, his failure was more or less his ultimate distinction, and in this sense
he was typical of those of us who were seated at the few tables and upon stools
along the counter of that miniature diner, complaining that Grossvogel had
charged us entirely too much money and to some degree misrepresented, in his
brochure, the whole value and purpose of the excursion to the dead town of
Crampton.
Taking my copy of Grossvogel’s brochure from the back pocket of my
trousers, I unfolded its few pages and laid them before the other three people
who were seated at the same table as I. Then I removed my fragile reading
glasses from the pocket of the old cardigan I was wearing beneath my even older
jacket in order to scrutinize these pages once again, confirming the suspicions I
had had about their meaning.
‘If you’re looking for the fine print –’ said the man seated to my left, a
‘photographic portraitist’ who often broke into a spate of coughing whenever he
began to speak, as he did on this occasion.
‘What I think my friend was going to say,’ said the man seated on my right,
‘was that we have been the victims of a subtle and intricate swindle. I say this on
his behalf because this is the direction in which his mind works, am I right?’
‘A metaphysical swindle,’ confirmed the man on my left, who had ceased
coughing for the moment.
‘Indeed, a metaphysical swindle,’ repeated the other man somewhat
mockingly. ‘I would never have imagined myself being taken in by such a thing,
given my experience and special field of knowledge. But this, of course, was
such a subtle and intricate operation.’
While I knew that the man on my right was the author of an unpublished
philosophical treatise entitled An Investigation into the Conspiracy against the
Human Race, I was not sure what he meant by the mention of his ‘experience
and special field of knowledge.’ Before I could inquire about this issue, I was
brashly interrupted by the woman seated across the table from me.
‘Mr Reiner Grossvogel is a fraud, it’s as simple as that,’ she said loud enough
for everyone in the diner to hear. ‘I’ve been aware of his fraudulent character for
some time, as you know. Even before his so-called “metamorphic experience,”
or whatever he calls it –’
‘Metamorphic recovery,’ I said by way of correction.
‘Fine, his metamorphic recovery, whatever that’s supposed to mean. Even

before that time I could see that he was somebody who had all the makings of a
fraud. He only required the proper conjunction of circumstances to bring this
trait out in him. And then along came that supposedly near-fatal illness of his
that he says led to that, I can barely say it, metamorphic recovery. After that he
was able to realize all his unused talents for being the fraud he was always
destined to be and always wanted to be. I joined in this farcical excursion, or
whatever it is, only for the satisfaction of seeing everyone else find out what I
always knew and always maintained about Reiner Grossvogel. You’re all my
witnesses,’ she finished, her wrinkled and heavily made-up eyes scanning our
faces, and those of the others in the diner, for the affirmation she sought.
I knew this woman only by her professional name of Mrs Angela. Until
recently she had operated what everyone among our circle referred to as a
‘psychic coffeehouse’ which, in addition to other goods and services, was known
for its excellent pastries that she made herself, or at least claimed that she made,
off the premises. Nevertheless, the business never seemed to prosper either on
the strength of its psychic readings, which were performed by several persons in
Mrs Angela’s employ, or on the strength of its excellent pastries and somewhat
overpriced coffee. It was Mrs Angela who first complained about the quality of
both the service and the modest fare being offered to us in the Crampton diner.
Not long after we arrived that afternoon and immediately packed ourselves into
what seemed to be the town’s only active place of business, Mrs Angela called
out to the young woman whose lonely task it was to cater to our group. ‘This
coffee is incredibly bitter,’ she shouted at the girl, who was dressed in what
appeared to be a brand-new white uniform. ‘And these donuts are stale, every
one of them. What kind of place is this? I think this whole town and everything
in it is a fraud.’
When the girl came over to our table and stood before us I noticed that her
uniform resembled that of a nurse more than it did an outfit worn by a waitress
in a diner. Specifically it reminded me of the uniforms that I saw worn by the
nurses at the hospital where Grossvogel was treated for, and ultimately recovered
from, what appeared at the time to be a very serious illness. While Mrs Angela
was berating the waitress over the quality of the coffee and donuts we had been
served, which were included in the travel package that Grossvogel’s brochure
described as the ‘ultimate physical-metaphysical excursion,’ I was reviewing my
memories of Grossvogel in that stark and conspicuously out-of-date hospital
where he had been treated, however briefly, some two years preceding our visit
to the dead town of Crampton. He had been admitted to this wretched facility

through its emergency room, which was simply the rear entrance to what was not
so much a hospital, properly speaking, but more a makeshift clinic set up in an
old building located in the decayed neighborhood where Grossvogel and most of
those who knew him were forced to live due to our limited financial means. I
myself was the one who took him, in a taxi, to this emergency room and
provided the woman at the admittance desk with all the pertinent information
regarding Grossvogel, since he was in no condition to do so himself. Later I
explained to a nurse – whom I could not help looking upon merely as an
emergency-room attendant in a nurse’s uniform, given that she seemed somehow
lacking in medical expertise – that Grossvogel had collapsed at a local art gallery
during a modest exhibit of his works. This was his first experience, I told the
nurse, both as a publicly exhibited artist and as a victim of a sudden physical
collapse. However, I did not mention that the art gallery to which I referred
might have been more accurately depicted as an empty storefront that now and
then was cleaned up and used for exhibitions or artistic performances of various
types. Grossvogel had been complaining throughout the evening of abdominal
pains, I informed the nurse, and then repeated to an emergency-room physician,
who also struck me as another medical attendant rather than as a legitimate
doctor of medicine. The reason these abdominal pains had increased throughout
that evening, I speculated to both the nurse and the doctor, was perhaps
Grossvogel’s increasing sense of anxiety at seeing his works exhibited for the
first time, since he had always been notoriously insecure about his talents as an
artist and, in my opinion, had good reason to be. On the other hand there might
possibly have been a serious organic condition involved, I allowed when
speaking with the nurse and later with the doctor. In any case, Grossvogel had
finally collapsed on the floor of the art gallery and had been unable to do
anything but groan somewhat pitifully and, to be honest, somewhat irritatingly
since that time.
After listening to my account of Grossvogel’s collapse, the doctor instructed
the artist to lie down upon a gurney that stood at the end of a badly lighted
hallway, while both the doctor and the nurse walked off in the opposite direction.
I stood close by Grossvogel during the time that he lay upon this gurney in the
shadows of that makeshift clinic. It was the middle of the night by then, and
Grossvogel’s moaning had abated somewhat, only to be replaced by what I
understood at that time as a series of delirious utterances. In the course of this
rhetorical delirium, the artist mentioned several times something that he called
the ‘pervasive shadow.’ I told him that it was merely the poor illumination of the

hallway, my own words sounding somewhat delirious to me due to the fatigue
brought on by the events of that night, both at the art gallery and in the
emergency room of that tawdry hospital. Afterward I just stood there listening to
Grossvogel murmur at intervals, no longer responding to his delirious and
increasingly elaborate utterances about the ‘pervasive shadow that causes things
to be what they would not be’ or the ‘all-moving darkness that makes things do
what they would not do.’
After an hour or so of listening to Grossvogel, I noticed that the doctor and
nurse were now standing close together at the other end of that dark hallway.
They seemed to be conferring with each other for the longest time and every so
often one or both of them would look in the direction where I was standing close
by the prostrate and murmuring Grossvogel. I wondered how long they were
going to carry on with what seemed to me a medical charade, a clinical
dumbshow, while the artist lay moaning and now more frequently murmuring on
the subject of the shadow and the darkness. Perhaps I dozed off on my feet for a
moment, because it seemed that from out of nowhere the nurse was suddenly at
my side and the doctor was no longer anywhere in sight. The nurse’s white
uniform now appeared almost luminous in the dingy shadows of that hallway.
‘You can go home now,’ she said to me. ‘Your friend is going to be admitted to
the hospital.’ She then pushed Grossvogel on his gurney toward the doors of an
elevator at the end of the hallway. As soon as she reached these elevator doors
they opened quickly and silently, pouring the brightest light into that dim
hallway. When the doors were fully opened I could see the doctor standing
inside. He pulled Grossvogel’s stretcher into the brilliantly illuminated elevator
while the nurse pushed the stretcher from behind. As soon as they were all
inside, the elevator doors closed quickly and silently, and the hallway in which I
was still standing seemed even darker and more dense with shadows than it had
before.
The following day I visited Grossvogel at the hospital. He had been placed in
a small private room in a distant corner of the institution’s uppermost floor. As I
walked toward this room, looking for the number I had been given at the
information desk downstairs, it seemed to me that none of the other rooms on
that floor had any patients occupying them. It was only when I found the number
I sought that I looked inside and actually saw a bed that was occupied,
conspicuously so, since Grossvogel was a rather large-bodied individual who
took up the full length and breadth of an old and sagging mattress. He seemed
quite giantlike lying on that undersized, institutional mattress in that small,

windowless room. There was barely enough space for me to squeeze myself
between the wall and the bedside of the artist, who seemed to be still in much the
same delirious condition as he had been the night before. There was no sign of
recognition on his part that I was in the same room, although we were so close
that I was practically on top of him. Even after I spoke his name several times
his teary gaze betrayed no notice of my presence. However, as I began to sidle
away from his bedside I was startled when Grossvogel firmly grabbed my arm
with his enormous left hand, which was the hand he used for painting and
drawing the works of his which had been exhibited in the storefront art gallery
the previous evening. ‘Grossvogel,’ I said expectantly, thinking that finally he
was going to respond, if only to speak about the pervasive shadow (that causes
things to be what they would not be) and the all-moving darkness (that causes
things to do what they would not do). But a few seconds later his hand became
limp and fell from my arm onto the very edge of the misshapen institutional
mattress on which his body again lay still and unresponsive.
After some moments I made my way out of Grossvogel’s private room and
walked over to the nurse’s station on the same floor of the hospital to inquire
about the artist’s medical condition. The sole nurse in attendance listened to my
request and consulted a folder with the name Reiner Grossvogel typed in one of
its upper corners. After studying me some time longer than she had studied the
pages concerning the artist, and now hospital patient, she simply said, ‘Your
friend is being observed very closely.’
‘Is that all you can tell me?’ I asked.
‘His tests haven’t been returned. You might ask about them later.’
‘Later today?’
‘Yes, later today,’ she said, taking Grossvogel’s folder and walking away into
another room. I heard the squeaking sound of a drawer in an old filing cabinet
being opened and then suddenly being slammed shut again. For some reason I
stood there waiting for the nurse to emerge from the room where she had taken
Grossvogel’s medical folder. Finally I gave up and returned home.
When I called the hospital later that day I was told that Grossvogel had been
released. ‘He’s gone home?’ I said, which was the only thing that occurred to me
to say. ‘We have no way of knowing where he’s gone,’ the woman who answered
the phone replied just before hanging up on me. Nor did anyone else know
where Grossvogel had gone, for he was not at his home, and no one among our
circle had any knowledge of his whereabouts.
It was several weeks, perhaps more than a month, after Grossvogel’s release

from the hospital, and apparent disappearance, that several of us had gathered,
purely by chance, at the storefront art gallery where the artist had collapsed
during the opening night of his first exhibit. By this time even I had ceased to be
concerned in any way with Grossvogel or the fact that he had without warning
simply dropped out of sight. Certainly he was not the first to do so among our
circle, all of whom were more or less unstable, sometimes dangerously volatile
persons who might involve themselves in questionable activities for the sake of
some artistic or intellectual vision, or simply out of pure desperation of spirit. I
think that the only reason any of us mentioned Grossvogel’s name as we drifted
about the art gallery that afternoon was the fact that his works still remained on
exhibit, and wherever we turned we were confronted by some painting or
drawing of his which, in a pamphlet issued to accompany the show, I myself had
written were ‘manifestations of a singularly gifted artistic visionary,’ when in
fact they were without exception quite run-of-the-mill specimens of the sort of
artistic nonsense that, for reasons unknown to all concerned, will occasionally
gain a measure of success or even a high degree of prominence for their creator.
‘What am I supposed to do with all this junk?’ complained the woman who
owned, or perhaps only rented, the storefront building that had been set up as an
art gallery. I was about to say to her that I would take responsibility for removing
Grossvogel’s works from the gallery, and perhaps even store them somewhere
for a time, when the skeletal person who always introduced himself as a
defrocked academic interjected, suggesting to the agitated owner (or least
operator) of the art gallery that she should send them to the hospital where
Grossvogel had ‘supposedly been treated’ after his collapse. When I asked why
he had used the word ‘supposedly,’ he replied, ‘I’ve long believed that place to
be a dubious institution, and I’m not the only one to hold this view.’ I then asked
if there was any credible basis for this belief of his, but he only crossed his
skeletal arms and looked at me as if I had just insulted him in some way. ‘Mrs
Angela,’ he said to a woman who was standing nearby, studying one of
Grossvogel’s paintings as if she were seriously considering it for purchase. At
that time Mrs Angela’s psychic coffeehouse had yet to prove itself a failed
venture, and possibly she was thinking that Grossvogel’s works, although
inferior from an artistic standpoint, might in some way complement the
ambience of her place of business, where patrons could sit at tables and receive
advice from hired psychic counselors while also feasting on an array of excellent
pastries.
‘You should listen to what he says about that hospital,’ Mrs Angela said to me

without taking her eyes off that painting of Grossvogel’s. ‘I’ve had a strong
feeling about that place for a long time. There is some aspect of it that is
extremely devious.’
‘Dubious,’ corrected the defrocked academic.
‘Yes,’ answered Mrs Angela. ‘It’s not by any means someplace I’d like to
wake up and find myself.’
‘I wrote a poem about it,’ said the neatly dressed gentleman who all this time
had been marauding about the floor of the gallery, no doubt waiting for the most
propitious moment to approach the woman who owned or rented the storefront
building and persuade her to sponsor what he was forever touting as an ‘evening
of Hermetic readings,’ which of course would prominently feature his own
works. ‘I once read that poem to you,’ he said to the gallery owner.
‘Yes, you read it to me,’ she replied with barely any vocal inflection.
‘I wrote it after being treated in the emergency room of that place very late
one night,’ explained the poet.
‘What were you treated for?’ I asked him.
‘Oh, nothing serious. I went home a few hours later. I was never admitted as a
patient, I’m glad to say. It was, and I quote from my poem on the subject, the
“nucleus of the abysmal.”’
‘That’s fine to say that,’ I said. ‘But could we possibly speak in more explicit
terms?’
However, before I could draw out a response from the self-styled writer of
Hermetic lyrics, the door of the art gallery was suddenly pushed open with a
conspicuous force that all of us inside instantly recognized. A moment later we
saw standing before us the large-bodied figure of Reiner Grossvogel. Physically
he appeared to be, for the most part, much the same person I recalled prior to his
collapse on the floor of the art gallery not more than a few feet from where I was
now standing, bearing none of the traits of that moaning, delirious creature
whom I had taken in a taxi to the hospital for emergency treatment.
Nevertheless, there did seem to be something different about him, a subtle but
thorough change in the way he looked upon what lay before him: whereas the
gaze of the artist had once been characteristically downcast or nervously averted,
his eyes now seemed completely direct in their focus and filled with a calm
purpose.
‘I’m taking away all of this,’ he said, gesturing broadly but quite gently
toward the artworks of his that filled the gallery, none of which had been sold
either on the opening night of his show or during the subsequent period of his

disappearance. ‘I would appreciate your assistance, if you will give it,’ he added
as he began taking down paintings and drawings from along the walls.
The rest of us joined him in this endeavor without question or comment, and
laden with artworks both large and small we followed him out of the gallery
toward a battered pick-up truck parked at the curb in front. Grossvogel casually
hurled his works into the back of the rented, or possibly borrowed, truck (since
the artist had never been known to possess any kind of vehicle before that day),
exhibiting no concern for the damage that might be incurred on what he had
once considered the best examples of his artistic output to date. There was a
moment’s hesitation on the part of Mrs Angela, who was perhaps still
considering how one or more of these works would look in her place of business,
but ultimately she too began carrying Grossvogel’s works out of the gallery and
hurling them into the back of the truck where they piled up like refuse, until the
gallery’s walls and floor space were entirely cleared and the place looked like
any other disused storefront. Grossvogel then got into the truck while the rest us
stood in wondering silence outside the emptied art gallery. Putting his head out
the open window of the rented or borrowed truck, he called to the woman who
ran the gallery. She walked over to the driver’s side of the truck and exchanged a
few words with the artist before he started the engine of the vehicle and drove
off. Returning to where we had remained standing on the sidewalk, she
announced to us that, a few weeks hence, there would be a second exhibit of
Grossvogel’s work at the gallery.
This, then, was the message that was passed among the circle of persons with
whom I was associated at the time: that Grossvogel, after physically collapsing
from an undisclosed ailment or attack at the first, highly unsuccessful exhibit of
his works, was now going to present a second exhibit after summarily cleaning
out the art gallery of those rather worthless paintings and drawings of his already
displayed to the public and hauling them away in the back of a pick-up truck.
Grossvogel’s new exhibit was unusually well advertised by the woman who
owned the art gallery and who stood to gain financially from the sale of what, in
a phrase used in the promotional copy for the event, were somewhat awkwardly
called ‘radical and revisionary works by the celebrated artistic visionary Reiner
Grossvogel.’ Nevertheless, due to the circumstances surrounding both the artist’s
previous and upcoming exhibits, the whole thing almost immediately devolved
into a fog of delirious and sometimes lurid gossip and speculation. This
development was wholly in keeping with the nature of those who comprised that
circle of dubious, not to mention devious artistic and intellectual persons of

which I had unexpectedly become a central figure. After all, it was I who had
taken Grossvogel to the hospital following his collapse at the first exhibit of his
works, and it was the hospital – already a subject of strange repute, as I
discovered – that loomed so prominently within the delirious fog of gossip and
speculation surrounding Grossvogel’s upcoming exhibit. There was even talk of
some special procedures and medications to which the artist had been exposed
during his brief confinement at this institution that would account for his
unexplained disappearance and subsequent re-emergence in order to perpetrate
what many presumed would be a startling ‘artistic vision.’ No doubt it was this
expectation, this desperate hope for something of brilliant novelty and lavishly
colorful imagination – which in the minds of some overly excitable persons
promised to exceed the domain of mere aesthetics, and even extend the bounds
of artistic expression – that led to the acceptance among our circle of the
unorthodox nature of Grossvogel’s new exhibit, as well as accounting for the
emotional letdown that followed for those of us in attendance that opening night.
And, in fact, what occurred at the gallery that night in no way resembled the
sort of exhibit we were accustomed to attending: the floor of the gallery and the
gallery’s walls remained as bare as the day when Grossvogel appeared with a
pick-up truck to cart off all his works from his old art show, while the new one,
we soon discovered after arriving, was to take place in the small back room of
the storefront building. Furthermore, we were charged a rather large fee in order
to enter this small back room, which was illuminated by only a few lightbulbs of
extremely low wattage dangling here and there from the ceiling. One of the
lightbulbs was hung in a corner of the room directly above a small table which
had a torn section of a bedsheet draped over it to conceal something that was
bulging beneath it. Radiating out from this corner with its dim lightbulb and
small table were several loosely arranged rows of folding chairs. These
uncomfortable chairs were eventually occupied by those of us, about a dozen in
all, who were willing to pay the large fee for what seemed to be an event more in
the style of a primitive stageshow than anything resembling an art exhibit. I
could hear Mrs Angela in one of the seats behind me saying over and over to
those around her, ‘What the hell is this?’ Finally she leaned forward and said to
me, ‘What does Grossvogel think he’s doing? I’ve heard that he’s been
medicated to the eyeballs ever since his stay in that hospital.’ Yet the artist
appeared lucid enough when a few moments later he made his way through the
loosely arranged rows of folding chairs and stood beside the small table with the
torn bedsheet draped over it and the low-watt lightbulb dangling above. In the

confines of the art gallery’s back room, the large-bodied Grossvogel seemed
almost gigantic, just as he had when lying upon that institutional mattress in his
private room at the hospital. Even his voice, which was usually quiet, even
somewhat wispy, seemed to be enlarged when he began speaking to us.
‘Thank you all for coming here tonight,’ he began. ‘This shouldn’t take very
long. I have only a few things to say to you and then something that I would like
to show you. It’s really no less than a miracle that I’m able to stand here and
speak to you in this way. Not too long ago, as some of you may recall, I suffered
a terrible attack in this very art gallery. I hope you won’t mind if I tell you a few
things about the nature of this attack and its consequences, things which I feel
are essential to appreciating what I have to show you tonight.
‘Well then, let me start by saying that, on one level, the attack I suffered in
this art gallery during the opening night of an exhibit of my works was in the
nature of a simple gastrointestinal upheaval, even if it was a quite severe episode
of its type. For some time this gastrointestinal upheaval, the result of a disorder
of my digestive system, had been making its progress within me. Over a period
of many years this disorder had been progressively and insidiously developing,
on one level, in the depths of my body and, on another level altogether, in the
darkest aspect of my being. This period coincided with, and in fact was directly a
consequence of, my involvement with the creation of artworks – my intense
desire to make art, which is to say, my desire to do something and my desire to
be something, that is, an artist. I was attempting during this period I speak of –
and for that matter throughout my entire life – to make something with my mind,
specifically to create works of art by the only possible means I believed were
available to me, which was by using my mind, or by using my imagination or
my creative faculties, some force or function of what people would call a soul or
a spirit or simply a personal self. But when I found myself collapsed upon the
floor of this art gallery, and later at the hospital, experiencing the most acute
abdominal agony, I was overwhelmed by the realization that I had no mind or
imagination that I could use, that there was nothing I could call a soul or self –
those things were all nonsense and dreams. I realized, in my severe
gastrointestinal distress, that the only thing that had any existence at all was this
larger-than-average physical body of mine. And I realized that there was nothing
for this body to do except to function in physical pain and that there was nothing
for it to be except what it was – not an artist or creator of any kind but solely a
mass of flesh, a system of tissues and bones and so forth, suffering the agonies of
a disorder of its digestive system, and that anything that did not directly stem

from these facts, especially producing works of art, was profoundly and utterly
false and unreal. At the same time I also became aware of the force that was
behind my intense desire to do something and to be something, particularly my
desire to create utterly false and unreal works of art. In other words, I became
aware of what in reality was activating my body. This realization was not made
with my mind or imagination, and certainly it was not made through any such
medium as my soul or self, all which are entirely nonsense and dreams. This
realization of what was activating my body and its desires was made by the only
means possible, this being by way of the human body itself and its organs of
physical sensation. This is precisely how the world of non-human bodies has
always functioned and functioned so much more successfully than the world of
human bodies, which is forever obstructed by all the nonsense we fabricate
about having minds and having souls or selves. The world of non-human bodies
is activated directly in accord with the commands of that terrible force
underlying all existence which issues only a few simple desires, none of which
have to do with anything as nonsensical and dreamlike as creating works of art
or of being an artist, of doing or being anything like these profoundly false and
unreal things. Thus the world of non-human bodies never need suffer the pains
of pursuing false and unreal desires, because such feelings have no relevance for
those bodies and never arise within them.’
Before continuing with the introductory talk that comprised the first part of his
art exhibit, or artistic stageshow, as I thought of it, Grossvogel paused and for a
moment seemed to be surveying the faces of the small audience seated in the
back room of the gallery. What he had expressed to us concerning his body and
its digestive malfunctions was on the whole comprehensible enough, even if
certain points he was articulating seemed at the time to be questionable and his
overall discourse somewhat unengaging. Yet we put up with Grossvogel’s words,
I believe, because we had thought that they were leading us into another,
possibly more engaging phase of his experience, which somehow we already
sensed was not wholly alienated from our own, whether or not we identified with
its peculiarly gastrointestinal nature. Therefore we remained silent, almost
respectfully so, considering the unorthodox proceedings of that night, as
Grossvogel continued with what he had to tell us before the moment came when
he unveiled what he had brought to show us.
‘It is all so very, very simple,’ the artist continued. ‘Our bodies are but one
manifestation of the energy, the activating force that sets in motion all the
objects, all the bodies of this world and enables them to exist as they do. This

activating force is something like a shadow that is not on the outside of all the
bodies of this world but is inside of everything and thoroughly pervades
everything – an all-moving darkness that has no substance in itself but that
moves all the objects of this world, including those objects which we call our
bodies. While I was in the throes of my gastrointestinal episode at the hospital
where I was treated I descended, so to speak, to that deep abyss of entity where I
could feel how this shadow, this darkness was activating my body. I could also
hear its movement, not only within my body but in everything around me,
because the sound that it made was not the sound of my body – it was the sound
of this shadow, this darkness, which is not like any other sound. Likewise I was
able to detect the workings of this pervasive and all-moving force through the
sense of smell and the sense of taste, as well as the sense of touch with which my
body is equipped. Finally I opened my eyes, for throughout much of this
agonizing ordeal of my digestive system my eyelids were clenched shut in pain.
And when I opened my eyes I found that I could see how everything around me,
including my own body, was activated from within by this pervasive shadow,
this all-moving darkness. And nothing looked as I had always known it to look.
Before that night I had never experienced the world purely by means of my
organs of physical sensation, which are the direct point of contact with that deep
abyss of entity that I am calling the shadow, the darkness. My false and unreal
works as an artist were merely the evidence of what I concocted with my mind
or my imagination, which are basically nonsensical and dreamlike fabrications
that only interfere with the workings of our senses. I believed that somehow
these works of art reflected in some way the nature of my self or my soul, when
in actuality they only reflected my deranged and useless desires to do something
and to be something, which always means to do and to be something false and
unreal. Like everything else, these desires had been activated by the same
pervasive shadow, the all-moving darkness which, due to the self-annihilating
agony of my gastrointestinal distress, I could now experience directly by means
of my sense organs and without the interference of my imaginary mind or my
imaginary self.
‘I should confess that prior to my physical collapse at this very art gallery I
had undergone a psychic collapse – a collapse of something false and unreal, of
something nonsensical and dreamlike, it goes without saying, although it was all
very genuine and real to me at the time. This collapse of my mind and my self
was the result of how poorly my works of art were being received by those
attending the opening night of my first exhibit, of how profoundly unsuccessful

they were as artistic creations, miserably unsuccessful even in the sphere of false
and unreal artistic creations. This unsuccessful exhibit demonstrated to me how
thoroughly I had failed in my efforts to be an artist. Everyone at the exhibit
could see how unsuccessful my artworks proved to be, and I could see everyone
in the very act of witnessing my unmitigated failure as an artist. This was the
psychic crisis which precipitated my physical crisis and the eventual collapse of
my body into spasms of gastrointestinal torment. Once my mind and my
personal sense of self had broken down, all that was left in operation were my
organs of physical sensation, by means of which I was able for the first time to
experience directly that deep abyss of entity that is the shadow, the darkness
which had activated my intense desire to be a success at doing something and at
being something, and thereby also activated my body as it moved within this
world, just as all bodies are likewise activated. And what I experienced through
direct sensory channels – the spectacle of the shadow inside of everything, the
all-moving darkness – was so appalling that I was sure I would cease to exist. In
some way, because of the manner in which my senses were now functioning,
especially my visual sense, I did in fact cease to exist as I had existed before that
night. Without the interference of my mind and my imagination, all that
nonsensical dreaming about my soul and my self, I was forced to see things
under the aspect of the shadow inside them, the darkness which activated them.
And it was wholly appalling, more so than my words could possibly tell you.’
Nevertheless, Grossvogel went on to explain in detail to those of us who had
paid the exorbitant price to see his stageshow exhibit the appalling way in which
he was forced to see the world around him, including his own body in its
gastrointestinal distress, and how convinced he was that this vision of things
would soon be the cause of his death, despite the measures taken to save him
during his hospital sojourn. It was Grossvogel’s contention that his only hope of
survival was for him to perish completely, in the sense that the person (or the
mind or self) that had once been Grossvogel would actually cease to exist. This
necessary condition for survival, he maintained, prompted his physical body to
undergo a ‘metamorphic recovery.’ Within a matter of hours, Grossvogel told us,
he no longer suffered from the symptoms of acute abdominal pains which had
initiated his crisis, and furthermore he was now able to tolerate the way in which
he was permanently forced to see things, as he put it, ‘under the aspect of the
shadow inside them, the darkness which activated them.’ Since the person who
had been Grossvogel had perished, as Grossvogel explained to us, the body of
Grossvogel was able to continue as a successful organism untroubled by the

imaginary torments that had once been inflicted upon him by his fabricated mind
and his false and unreal self. As he put it in his own words, ‘Iam no longer
occupied with myself or my mind.’ What we in the audience now saw before us,
he said, was Grossvogel’s body speaking with Grossvogel’s voice and using
Grossvogel’s neurological circuitry but without the interference of the
‘imaginary character’ known as Grossvogel: all of his words and actions, he said,
now emanated directly from that same force which activates every one of us if
we could only realize it in the way he had been compelled to do in order to keep
his body alive. The artist emphasized in his own terribly calm way that in no
sense had he chosen his unique course of recovery. No one would willingly
choose such a thing, he contended. Everyone prefers to continue their existence
as a mind and a self, no matter what pain it causes them, no matter how false and
unreal they might be, than to face the quite obvious reality of being only a body
set in motion by this mindless, soulless, and selfless force which he designated
the shadow, the darkness. Nonetheless, Grossvogel disclosed to us, this was
exactly the reality that he needed to admit into his system if his body was to
continue its existence and to succeed as an organism. ‘It was purely a matter of
physical survival,’ he said. ‘Everybody should be able to understand that.
Anyone would do the same.’ Moreover, the famous metamorphic recovery in
which Grossvogel the person died and Grossvogel the body survived was so
successful, he informed his stageshow audience, that he immediately embarked
upon a strenuous period of travel, mostly by means of inexpensive buslines that
took him great distances across and around the entire country, so that he could
look at various people and places while exercising his new faculty of being able
to see the shadow that pervaded them, the all-moving darkness that activated
them, since he was no longer subject to the misconceptions about the world that
are created by the mind or imagination – those obstructing mechanisms which
were now removed from his system – and nor did he mistakenly imagine anyone
or anything to possess a soul or a self. And everywhere he went he witnessed the
spectacle that had previously so appalled him to the point of becoming a life-
threatening medical condition.
‘I could now know the world directly through the senses of my body,’
Grossvogel continued. ‘And I saw with my body what I could never have seen
with my mind or imagination during my career as a failed artist. Everywhere I
travelled I saw how the pervasive shadow, the all-moving darkness, was using
our world. Because this shadow, this darkness has nothing of its own, no way to
exist except as an activating force or energy, whereas we have our bodies, we are

only our bodies, whether they are organic bodies or non-organic bodies, human
or non-human bodies, makes no difference – they are all simply bodies and
nothing but bodies, with no component whatever of a mind or a self or a soul.
Hence the shadow, the darkness uses our world for what it needs to thrive upon.
It has nothing except its activating energy, while we are nothing except our
bodies. This is why the shadow, the darkness causes things to be what they
would not be and to do what they would not do. Because without the shadow
inside them, the all-moving blackness activating them, they would be only what
they are – heaps of matter lacking any impulse, any urge to flourish, to succeed
in this world. This state of affairs should be called what it is – an absolute
nightmare. That is exactly what I experienced in the hospital when I realized,
due to my intense gastrointestinal suffering, that I had no mind or imagination,
no soul or self – that these were nonsensical and dreamlike intermediaries
fabricated to protect human beings from realizing what it is we really are: only a
collection of bodies activated by the shadow, the darkness. Those among us who
are successful organisms to any degree, including artists, are so only by virtue of
the extent to which we function as bodies and by no means as minds or selves.
This is exactly the manner in which I had failed so exceptionally, since I was
profoundly convinced of the existence of my mind and my imagination, my soul
and my self. My only hope lay in my ability to make a metamorphic recovery, to
accept in every way the nightmarish order of things so that I could continue to
exist as a successful organism even without the protective nonsense of the mind
and the imagination, the protective dream of having any kind of soul or self.
Otherwise I would have been annihilated by a fatally traumatic insanity brought
on by the shock of this shattering realization. Therefore the person who was
Grossvogel had to perish in that hospital – and good riddance – so that the body
of Grossvogel could be free of its gastrointestinal crisis and go on to travel in all
directions by various means of transportation, primarily the inexpensive
transportation provided by interstate buslines, witnessing the spectacle of the
shadow, the darkness using our world of bodies for what it needs to thrive upon.
And after witnessing this spectacle it was inevitable that I should portray it in
some form, not as an artist who has failed because he is using some nonsense
called the mind or the imagination, but as a body that has succeeded in
perceiving how everything in the world actually functions. That is what I have
come to show you, to exhibit to you this evening.’
I, who had been lulled or agitated by Grossvogel’s discourse as much as
anyone in the audience, was for some reason surprised, and even apprehensive,

when he suddenly ended his lecture or fantasy monologue or whatever I
construed his words to be at the time. It seemed that he could have gone on
speaking forever in the back room of that art gallery where low-watt lightbulbs
hung down from the ceiling, one of them directly above the table that was
covered with a torn section of bedsheet. And now Grossvogel was lifting one
corner of the torn bedsheet to show us, at last, what he had created, not by using
his mind or imagination, which he claimed no longer existed in him any more
than did his soul or self, but by using only his body’s organs of physical
sensation. When he finally uncovered the piece completely and it was fully
displayed in the dull glow of the lightbulb which hung directly above it, none of
us demonstrated either a positive or negative reaction to it at first, possibly
because our minds were so numbed by all the verbal build-up that had led to this
moment of unveiling.
It appeared to be a sculpture of some kind. However, I found it initially
impossible to give this object any generic designation, either artistic or non-
artistic. It might have been anything. The surface of the piece was uniformly of a
shining darkness, having a glossy sheen beneath which was spread a swirling
murk of shades that almost seemed to be in motion, an effect which seemed quite
credibly the result of some swaying of the lightbulb dangling above. There
appeared to be a resemblance in its general outline to some kind of creature,
perhaps a grossly distorted version of a scorpion or a crab, since it displayed
more than a few clawlike extensions reaching out from a central, highly
shapeless mass. But it also appeared to have elements poking upward, peaks or
horns that jutted at roughly vertical angles and ended sometimes in a sharp point
and sometimes in a soft, headlike bulge. Because Grossvogel had spoken so
much about bodies, it was natural to see such forms, in some deranged fashion,
as the basis of the object or as being incorporated into it somehow – a chaotic
world of bodies of every kind, of shapes activated by the shadow inside them,
the darkness that caused them to be what they would not be and to do what they
would not do. And among these body-like shapes I recognized distinctly the
large-bodied figure of the artist himself, although the significance of the fact that
Grossvogel had implanted himself therein escaped me as I sat contemplating this
modest exhibit.
Whatever Grossvogel’s sculpture may have represented in its parts or as a
whole, it contained more than a suggestion of that ‘absolute nightmare’ which
the artist, so to speak, had elucidated during his lecture or fantasy monologue
earlier that evening. Yet this quality of the piece, even for an audience that had

more than a slight appreciation of nightmarish subjects and contours, was not
enough to offset the high price we had been required to pay for the privilege of
hearing about Grossvogel’s gastrointestinal ordeal and self-proclaimed
metamorphic recovery. Soon after the artist unveiled his work to us, each of our
bodies rose out of those uncomfortable folding chairs and excuses for departing
the premises were being spoken on all sides. Before making my own exit I
noticed that inconspicuously displayed next to Grossvogel’s sculpture was a
small card upon which was printed the title of the piece. TSALAL NO. 1, it read.
Later I learned something about the meaning of this term, which, in the way of
words, both illuminated and concealed the nature of the thing that it named.
The matter of Grossvogel’s sculpture – he subsequently put out a series of
several hundred, each of them with the same title followed by a number that
placed it in a sequence of artistic production – was discussed at length as we sat
waiting in the diner situated on the main street of the dead town of Crampton.
The gentleman seated to my left at one of the few tables in the diner reiterated
his accusations against Grossvogel.
‘First he subjected us to an artistic swindle,’ said this person who was prone to
sudden and protracted coughing spells, ‘and now he has subjected us to a
metaphysical swindle. It was unheard of, charging us such a price for that
exhibition of his, and now charging us so outrageously once again for this
“physical-metaphysical excursion.” We’ve all been taken in by that –’
‘That absolute fraud,’ said Mrs Angela when the man on my left was unable to
complete his statement because he had broken into another fit of coughing. ‘I
don’t think he’s even going to show up,’ she continued. ‘He induces us to come
to this hole-in-the-wall town. He says that this is the place where we need to
gather for this excursion of his. But he doesn’t show his face anywhere around
here. Where did he find this place, on one of those bus tours he was always
talking about?’
It seemed that we had only ourselves and our own idiocy to blame for the
situation we were in. Even though no one openly admitted it, the truth was that
those of us who were present had been very much impressed with Grossvogel on
the day when he entered the art gallery and had us assist him in throwing all of
his works on exhibit into the back of a battered pick-up truck. None of us in our
small circle of artists and intellectuals had ever done anything remotely like that
or even dreamed of doing something so drastic and full of drama. From that day
it became our unspoken conviction that Grossvogel was on to something and our
disgraceful secret that we desired to attach ourselves to him in order to profit in

some way by our association with him. At the same time, of course, we also
resented Grossvogel’s daring behavior and were perfectly ready to welcome
another failure on his part, perhaps even another collapse on the floor of the
gallery where he and his artworks had already once failed to everyone’s
thorough satisfaction. Such a confusion of motives was more than enough reason
for us to pay the exorbitant fee that Grossvogel charged for his new exhibit,
which we afterward dismissed in one way or another.
Following the show that night I stood on the sidewalk outside the art gallery,
listening once again to Mrs Angela’s implications regarding the true source of
Grossvogel’s metamorphic recovery and artistic inspiration. ‘Mr Reiner
Grossvogel has been medicated to the eyeballs ever since he came out of that
hospital,’ she said to me as if for the first time. ‘I know one of the girls who
works at the drugstore that fills his prescriptions. She’s a very good customer of
mine,’ she added, her wrinkled and heavily made-up eyes flashing with self-
satisfaction. Then she continued her scandalous revelations. ‘I think you might
know the kind of medications prescribed for someone with Grossvogel’s medical
condition, which really isn’t a medical condition at all but a psychophysical
disorder that I or any of the people who work for me could have told him about a
long time ago. Grossvogel’s brain has been swimming in all kinds of
tranquilizers and anti-depressants for months now, and not only that. He’s also
been taking an anti-spasmodic compound for that condition of his that he’s
supposed to have recovered from by such miraculous means. I’m not surprised
he doesn’t think he has a mind or any kind of self, which is all just an act in any
case.
‘Anti-spasmodic,’ Mrs Angela hissed at me as we stood on the sidewalk
outside the art gallery following Grossvogel’s exhibit. ‘Do you know what that
means?’ she asked me and then quickly answered her own question. ‘It means
belladonna, a poisonous hallucinogenic. It means phenobarbital, a barbiturate.
The girl from the drugstore told me all about it. He’s been overdosing himself on
all of these drugs, do you understand? That’s why he’s been seeing things in that
peculiar way he would have us believe. It’s not some shadow or whatever he
says that’s activating his body. I would know about something like that, now
wouldn’t I? I have a special gift that provides me with insight into things like
that.’
But despite her gifts, along with her excellent pastries, Mrs Angela’s psychic
coffeehouse did not thrive as a business and ultimately went under altogether. On
the other hand, Grossvogel’s sculptures, which he produced at a prolific pace,

were an incredible success, both among local buyers of artistic products and
among art merchants and collectors across the country, even reaching an
international market to some extent. Reiner Grossvogel was also celebrated in
feature articles that appeared in major art magazines and non-artistic
publications alike, although he was usually portrayed, in the words of one critic,
as a ‘one-man artistic and philosophical freakshow.’ Nevertheless, Grossvogel
was by any measure now functioning as a highly successful organism. And it
was due to this success, which had never been approached by anyone else within
our small circle of artists and intellectuals, that those of us who had abandoned
Grossvogel upon hearing him lecture on his metamorphic recovery from a severe
gastrointestinal disorder and viewing the first in his prodigious Tsalal series of
sculptures now once again attached ourselves and our failed careers to him and
his unarguably successful body without a mind or a self. Even Mrs Angela
eventually became conversant with the ‘realizations’ that Grossvogel had first
espoused in the back room of that storefront art gallery and now disseminated in
what seemed an unending line of philosophical pamphlets, which became almost
as sought after by collectors as his series of Tsalal sculptures. Thus, when
Grossvogel issued a certain brochure among the small circle of artists and
intellectuals which he had never abandoned even after he had achieved such
amazing financial success and celebrity, a brochure announcing a ‘physical-
metaphysical excursion’ to the dead town of Crampton, we were more than
willing once more to pay the exorbitant price he was asking.
This was the brochure to which I referred the others seated at the table with
me in the Crampton diner: the photographic portraitist who was subject to
coughing jags on my left, the author of the unpublished philosophical treatise An
Investigation into the Conspiracy against the Human Race on my right, and Mrs
Angela directly across from me. The man on my left was still reiterating, with
prolonged interruptions of his coughing (which I will here delete), the charge
that Grossvogel had perpetrated a ‘metaphysical swindle’ with his high-priced
‘physical-metaphysical excursion.’
‘All of Grossvogel’s talk about that business with the shadow and the
blackness and the nightmare world he purportedly was seeing . . . and then
where do we end up – in some godforsaken town that went out of business a
long time ago, and in some part of the country where everything looks like an
overexposed photograph. I have my camera with me ready to create portraits of
faces that have looked upon Grossvogel’s shadowy blackness, or whatever he
was planning for us to do here. I’ve even thought of several very good titles and

concepts for these photographic portraits which I imagine would have a good
chance of being published together as a book, or at least a portfolio in a leading
photography magazine. I thought that at the very least I might have taken back
with me a series of photographic portraits of Grossvogel, with that huge face of
his. I could have placed that with almost any of the better art magazines. But
where is the celebrated Grossvogel? He said he would be here to meet us. He
said we would find out everything about that shadow business, as I understood
him. Furthermore, I have my head prepared for those absolute nightmares that
Grossvogel prattled on about in his pamphlets and in that highly deceptive
brochure of his.’
‘This brochure,’ I said during one of the man’s more raucous intervals of
hacking, ‘makes no explicit promises about any of those things you’ve imagined
to be contained there. It specifically announces that this is to be an excursion,
and I quote, to a “dead town, a finished town, a failed town, a false and unreal
setting that is the product of unsuccessful organisms and therefore a town that is
exemplary of that extreme state of failure that may so distress human organic
systems, particularly the gastrointestinal system, to the point of weakening its
delusional and totally fabricated defenses – e.g. the mind, the self – and thus
precipitating a crisis of nightmare realization involving . . . ,” and I think we’re
all familiar with the shadow-and darkness talk which follows. The point is,
Grossvogel promises nothing in this brochure except an environment redolent of
failure, a sort of hothouse for failed organisms. The rest of it is entirely born of
your own imaginations . . . and my own, I might add.’
‘Well,’ said Mrs Angela, pulling the brochure I had placed on the table toward
her, ‘did I imagine reading that, and I quote, “suitable dining accommodations
will be provided”? Bitter coffee and stale donuts are not what I consider suitable.
Grossvogel is now a rich man, as everybody knows, and this is the best he can
do? Until the day I closed down my business for good, I served superlative
coffee, not to mention superlative pastries, even if I now admit that I didn’t make
them myself. And my psychic readings, mine and those of all my people, were
as breathtaking as they come. Meanwhile, the rich man and that waitress there
are practically poisoning us with this bitter coffee and these incredibly stale, cut-
rate donuts. What I could use at this moment is some of that anti-spasmodic
medicine Grossvogel’s been taking in such liberal doses for so long. And I’m
sure he’ll have plenty of it with him if he ever shows his face around here, which
I doubt he will after making us sick with his suitable dining accommodations. If
you will excuse me for a moment.’

As Mrs Angela made her way toward the lavatory on the other side of the
diner, I noticed that there were already a few others lined up outside the single
door labelled REST ROOM. I glanced around at those still seated at the few tables
or upon the stools along the counter of the diner, and there seemed to be a
number of persons who were holding their hands upon their stomachs, some of
them tenderly massaging their abdominal region. I, too, was beginning to feel
some intestinal discomfort which might have been attributable to the poor
quality of the coffee and donuts we had been served by our waitress, who now
appeared to be nowhere in sight. The man sitting on my left had also excused
himself and made his way across the diner. Just as I was about to get up from the
table and join him and the others who were lining up outside the rest room, the
man seated on my right began telling me about his ‘researches’ and his
‘speculations’ which formed the basis for his unpublished philosophical treatise
An Investigation into the Conspiracy against the Human Race and how these
related to his ‘intense suspicions’ concerning Grossvogel.
‘I should have known better than to have entered into this . . . excursion,’ the
man said. ‘But I felt I needed to know more about what was behind Grossvogel’s
story. I was intensely suspicious with respect to his assertions and claims about
his metamorphic recovery and about so many other things. For instance, his
assertion – his realization, as he calls it – that the mind and the imagination, the
soul and the self, are all simply nonsense and dreams. And yet he contends that
what he calls the shadow, the darkness – the Tsalal, as his artworks are entitled –
is not nonsense and dreams, and that it uses our bodies, as he claims, for what it
needs to thrive upon. Well, really, what is his basis for dismissing his mind and
imagination and so forth, but embracing the reality of his Tsalal, which seems no
less the product of some nonsensical dream?’
I found the man’s suspicious interrogations to be a welcome distraction from
the intestinal pressure now building up inside me. In response to his question I
said that I could only reiterate Grossvogel’s explanation that he was no longer
experiencing things, that is, no longer seeing things with his supposedly illusory
mind and self, but with his body, which as he further contended was activated,
and entirely occupied, by the shadow that is the Tsalal. ‘This isn’t by any means
the most preposterous revelation of its kind, at least in my experience,’ I said in
defense of Grossvogel.
‘Nor is it in mine,’ he said.
‘Besides,’ I continued, ‘Grossvogel’s curiously named sculptures, in my
opinion, have a merit and interest apart from a strictly metaphysical context and

foundation.’
‘Do you know the significance of this word – Tsalal – that he uses as the sole
title for all his artworks?’
‘No, I’m afraid I have no notion of its origin or meaning,’ I regretfully
confessed. ‘But I suppose you will enlighten me.’
‘Enlightenment has nothing to do with this word, which is ancient Hebrew. It
means “to become darkened . . . to become enshadowed,” so to speak. This term
has emerged not infrequently in the course of my researches for my treatise An
Investigation into the Conspiracy against the Human Race. It occurs, of course,
in numerous passages throughout the Old Testament – that potboiler of
apocalypses both major and minor.’
‘Maybe so,’ I said. ‘But I don’t agree that Grossvogel’s use of a term from
Hebrew mythology necessarily calls into question the sincerity of his assertions,
or even their validity, if you want to take it that far.’
‘Yes, well, I seem not to be making myself clear to you. What I’m referring to
emerged quite early in my researches and preliminary speculations for my
Investigation. Briefly, I would simply say that it’s not my intention to cast doubt
on Grossvogel’s Tsalal. My Investigation would prove me to be quite explicit
and unequivocal on this phenomenon, although I would never employ the rather
showy, and somewhat trivial approach that Grossvogel has taken, which to some
extent could account for the fabulous success of his sculptures and pamphlets, on
the one hand, and, on the other, the abysmal failure of my treatise, which will
remain forever unpublished and unread. All that aside, my point is not that this
Tsalal of Grossvogel’s isn’t in some way an actual phenomenon. I know only too
well that the mind and the imagination, the soul and the self are not only the
nonsensical dreams that Grossvogel makes them out to be. They are in fact no
more than a cover-up – as false and unreal as the artwork Grossvogel was
producing before his medical ordeal and recovery. Grossvogel was able to
penetrate this fact by some extremely rare circumstance which no doubt had
something to do with his medical ordeal.’
‘His gastrointestinal disorder,’ I said, feeling more and more the symptoms of
this malady in my own body.
‘Exactly. It’s the precise mechanics of this experience of his that interested me
enough to invest in his excursion. This is what remains so obscure. There is
nothing obvious, if I may say, about his Tsalal or its mechanism, yet Grossvogel
is making what to my mind are some fascinating claims and distinctions with
such overwhelming certitude. But he is certainly mistaken, or possibly being

devious, on one point at least. I say this because I know that he has not been
entirely forthcoming about the hospital where he was treated. In the research
pertaining to my Investigation I have looked into such places and how they
operate. I know for a fact that the hospital where Grossvogel was treated is an
extremely rotten institution, an absolutely rotten institution. Everything about it
is a sham and a cover-up for the most gruesome goings-on, the true extent of
which I’m not sure even those involved with such places realize. It’s not a matter
of any sort of depravity, so to speak, or of malign intent. There simply develops
a sort of . . . collusion, a rotten alliance on the part of certain people and places.
They are in league with . . . well, if only you could read my Investigation you
would know the sort of nightmare that Grossvogel was faced with in that
hospital, a place reeking of nightmares. Only in such a place could Grossvogel
have confronted those nightmarish realizations he has discoursed upon in his
countless pamphlets and portrayed in his series of Tsalal sculptures, which he
says were not the product of his mind or imagination, or his soul or his self, but
only the product of what he was seeing with his body and its organs of physical
sensation – the shadow, the darkness. The mind and all that, the self and all that,
are only a cover-up, only a fabrication, as Grossvogel says. They are that which
cannot be seen with the body, which cannot be sensed by any organ of physical
sensation. This is because they are actually non-existent cover-ups, masks,
disguises for the thing that is activating our bodies in the way Grossvogel
explained – activating them and using them for what it needs to thrive upon.
They are the work, the artworks in fact, of the Tsalal itself. Oh, it’s impossible to
simply tell you. I wish you could read my Investigation. It would have explained
everything, it would have revealed everything. But how could you read what was
never written in the first place?’
‘Never written?’ I inquired. ‘Why was it never written?’
‘Why?’ he said, pausing for a moment and grimacing in pain. ‘The answer to
that is exactly what Grossvogel has been preaching in both his pamphlets and his
public appearances. His entire doctrine, if it can even be called that, if there
could ever be such a thing in any sense whatever, is based on the non-existence,
the imaginary nature of everything we believe ourselves to be. Despite his efforts
to express what has happened to him, he must know very well that there are no
words that are able to explain such a thing. Words are a total obfuscation of the
most basic fact of existence, the very conspiracy against the human race that my
treatise might have illuminated. Grossvogel has experienced the essence of this
conspiracy first-hand, or at least has claimed to have experienced it. Words are

simply a cover-up for this conspiracy. They are the ultimate means for the cover-
up, the ultimate artwork of the shadow, the darkness – its ultimate artistic cover-
up. Because of the existence of words, we think that there exists a mind, that
some kind of soul or self exists. This is just another of the infinite layers of the
cover-up. There is no mind that could have written An Investigation into the
Conspiracy against the Human Race – no mind that could write such a book and
no mind that could read such a book. There is no one at all who can say anything
about this most basic fact of existence, no one who can betray this reality. And
there is no one to whom it could ever be conveyed.’
‘That all seems impossible to comprehend,’ I objected.
‘It just might be, if only there actually were anything to comprehend, or
anyone to comprehend it. But there are no such beings.’
‘If that’s the case,’ I said, wincing with abdominal discomfort, ‘then who is
having this conversation?’
‘Who indeed?’ he answered. ‘Nevertheless, I would like to continue speaking.
Even if this is only nonsense and dreams, I feel the need to perpetuate it all.
Especially at this moment, when this pain is taking over my mind and my self.
Pretty soon none of this will make any difference. No,’ he said in a dead voice.
‘It doesn’t matter now.’
I noticed that he had been staring out the front window of the diner for some
time, gazing at the town. Some of the others in the diner were doing the same,
dumbstruck at what they saw and agonized, as I was, by the means by which
they were seeing it. The vacant scene of the town’s empty streets and the
desolate season that had presided over the surrounding landscape, that place we
had complained was absent of any manifestations of interest when we first
arrived there, was undergoing a visible metamorphosis to the eyes of many of us,
as though an eclipse were occurring. But what we were now seeing was not a
darkness descending from far skies but a shadow which was arising from within
the dead town around us, as if a torrent of black blood had begun roaring through
its pale body. I realized that I had suddenly and unknowingly joined in the
forefront of those who were affected by the changes taking place, even though I
literally had no idea what was happening, no knowledge that came to my mind,
which had ceased to function in the way it had only moments before, leaving my
body in a dumb state of agony, its organs of sensation registering the gruesome
spectacle of things around me: other bodies eclipsed by the shadow swirling
inside their skins, some of them still speaking as though they were persons who
possessed a mind and a self, imaginary entities still complaining in human words

about the pain they were only beginning to realize, crying out for remedies as
they entered the ‘nucleus of the abysmal,’ and still seeing with their minds even
up to the very moment when their minds abandoned them entirely, dissipating
like a mirage, able to say only how everything appeared to their minds, how the
shapes of the town outside the windows of the diner were turning all crooked
and crabbed, reaching out toward them as if with claws and rising up like strange
peaks and horns into the sky, no longer pale and gray but swirling with the
pervasive shadow, the all-moving darkness that they could finally see so
perfectly because now they were seeing with their bodies, only with their bodies
pitched into a great black pain. And one voice called out – a voice that both
moaned and coughed – that there was a face outside, a ‘face across the entire
sky,’ it said. The sky and town were now both so dark that perhaps only someone
preoccupied with the photographic portraiture of the human face could have seen
such a thing among that world of churning shadows outside the windows of the
diner. Soon after that the words all but ceased, because bodies in true pain do not
speak. The very last words I remember were those of a woman who screamed
for someone to take her to a hospital. And this was a request which, in the
strangest way, had been anticipated by the one who had induced us into making
this ‘physical-metaphysical excursion’ and whose body had already mastered
what our bodies were only beginning to learn – the nightmare of a body that is
being used and that knows what is using it, making things be what they would
not be and do what they would not do. I sensed the presence of a young woman
who had worn a uniform as white as gauze. She had returned. And there were
others like her who moved among us, and who knew how to minister to our
pains in order to effect our metamorphic recovery. We did not need to be brought
to their hospital, since the hospital and all its rottenness had been brought to us.
And as much as I would like to say everything that happened to us in the town
of Crampton (whose deadness and desolation seem an illusion of paradise after
having its hidden life revealed to our eyes) – as much as I would like to say how
it was that we were conveyed from that region of the country, that nucleus of
nowhere, and returned to our distant homes – as much as I would like to say
precisely what assistance and treatments we might have received that delivered
us from that place and the pain we experienced there, I cannot say anything
about it at all. Because when one is saved from such agony, the most difficult
thing in the world is to question the means of salvation: the body does not know
or care what takes away its pain and is incapable of questioning these things. For
that is what we have become, or what we have all but become – bodies without

the illusion of minds or imaginations, bodies without the distractions of souls or
selves. None of us among our circle questioned this fact, although we have never
spoken of it since our . . . recovery. Nor have we spoken of the absence of
Grossvogel from our circle, which does not exist in the way it once did, that is to
say, as an assemblage of artists and intellectuals. We became the recipients of
what someone designated the ‘legacy of Grossvogel,’ which was more than a
metaphorical expression, since the artist had in fact bequeathed to each of us, on
the condition of his ‘death or disappearance for a stipulated period of time,’ a
share in the considerable earnings he had amassed from the sales of his works.
But this strictly monetary inheritance was only the beginning of the success
that all of us from that abolished circle of artists and intellectuals began to
experience, the seed from which we began to grow out of our existence as failed
minds and selves into our new lives as highly successful organisms, each in our
own field of endeavor. Of course we could not have failed, even if we tried, in
attaining whatever end we pursued, since everything we have experienced and
created was a phenomenon of the shadow, the darkness which reached outward
and reached upward from inside us to claw and poke its way to the heights of a
mountainous pile of human and non-human bodies. These are all we have and all
we are; these are what is used and thrived upon. I can feel my own body being
used and cultivated, the desires and impulses that are pulling it to succeed, that
are tugging it toward every kind of success. There is no means by which I could
ever oppose these desires and impulses, now that I exist solely as a body which
seeks only its efficient perpetuation so that it may be thrived upon by what needs
it. There is no possibility of my resisting what needs to thrive upon us, no
possibility of betraying it in any way. Even if this little account of mine, this
little chronicle seems to disclose secrets that might undermine the nightmarish
order of things, it does nothing but support and promulgate that order. Nothing
can resist or betray this nightmare because nothing exists that might do anything,
that might be anything that could realize a success in that way. The very idea of
such a thing is only nonsense and dreams.
There could never be anything written about the ‘conspiracy against the
human race’ because the phenomenon of a conspiracy requires a multiplicity of
agents, a division of sides, one of which is undermining the other in some way
and the other having an existence that is able to be undermined. But there is no
such multiplicity or division, no undermining or resistance or betrayal on either
side. What exists is only this pulling, this tugging upon all of the bodies of this
world. But these bodies have a collective existence only in a taxonomic or

perhaps a topographical sense and in no way constitute a collective entity, an
agency that might be the object of a conspiracy. And a collective entity called the
human race cannot exist where there is only a collection of non-entities, of
bodies which are themselves only provisional and will be lost one by one, the
whole collection of them always approaching nonsense, always dissolving into
dreams. There can be no conspiracy in a void, or rather in a black abyss. There
can only be this tugging of all these bodies toward that ultimate success which it
seems my large-bodied friend realized when he was finally used to the fullest
extent, and his body used up, entirely consumed by what needed it to thrive.
‘There is only one true and final success for the shadow that makes things
what they would not be,’ Grossvogel proclaimed in the very last of his
pamphlets. ‘There is only one true and final success for the all-moving blackness
that makes things do what they would not do,’ he wrote. And these were the very
last lines of that last pamphlet. Grossvogel could not explain himself or anything
else beyond these inconclusive statements. He had run out of the words that (to
quote someone who shall remain as nameless as only a member of the human
race can be) are the ultimate artwork of the shadow, the darkness – its ultimate
artistic cover-up. Just as he could not resist it as his body was pulled toward that
ultimate success, he could not betray it with his words.
It was during the winter following the Crampton excursion that I began fully
to see where these last words of Grossvogel were leading. Late one night I stood
gazing from a window as the first snow of the season began to fall and become
increasingly prolific throughout each dark hour that I observed its progress with
my organs of physical sensation. By that time I could see what was inside the
falling flakes of snow, just as I could see what was inside all other things,
activating them with its force. And what I saw was a black snow falling from a
black sky. There was nothing recognizable in that sky – certainly no familiar
visage spread out across the night and implanted into it. There was only this
blackness above and this blackness below. There was only this consuming,
proliferating blackness whose only true and final success was in merely
perpetuating itself as successfully as it could in a world where nothing exists that
could ever hope to be anything else except what it needs to thrive upon . . . until
everything is entirely consumed and there is only one thing remaining in all
existence and it is an infinite body of blackness activating itself and thriving
upon itself with eternal success in the deepest abyss of entity. Grossvogel could
not resist or betray it, even if it was an absolute nightmare, the ultimate physical-
metaphysical nightmare. He ceased to be a person so that he could remain a

successful organism. ‘Anyone would do the same,’ he said.
And no matter what I say I cannot resist or betray it. No one could do so
because there is no one here. There is only this body, this shadow, this darkness.

