
i
chapter title
Technological Revolutions
and Financial Capital

Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
ii
To my mother
Carlota Arenas
the artist
whose joy of work
nourished my own

iii
chapter title
Technological
Revolutions
and Financial Capital
Carlota Perez
Edward Elgar
Cheltenham, UK • Northampton, MA, USA.
The Dynamics of Bubbles and Golden Ages
Honorary Research Fellow, SPRU – Science and Technology
Policy Research, University of Sussex, UK
Adjunct Senior Research Fellow, INTECH, Maastricht,
The Netherlands
Visiting Scholar 2002, Cambridge University, UK
International Consultant and Lecturer on change strategies and
technology policy, Eureka A.C., Caracas, Venezuela

Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
iv
© Carlota Perez
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical or
photocopying, recording, or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
Published by
Edward Elgar Publishing Limited
Glensanda House
Montpellier Parade
Cheltenham
Glos GL50 1UA
UK
Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc.
136 West Street
Suite 202
Northampton
Massachusetts 01060
USA
A catalogue record for this book
is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data
ISBN  1 84064 922 4
06

v
chapter title
Contents
v
List of tables
vii
List of figures
viii
Preface Chris Freeman
ix
Acknowledgments
xiii
Introduction: An Interpretation
xvii
PART I
TECHNOLOGICAL REVOLUTIONS AS
SUCCESSIVE  GREAT SURGES OF DEVELOPMENT
1.
The Turbulent Ending of the Twentieth Century
3
2.
Technological Revolutions and Techno-Economic Paradigms
8
3.
The Social Shaping of Technological Revolutions
22
4.
The Propagation of Paradigms: Times of Installation, Times
of Deployment
36
5.
The Four Basic Phases of Each Surge of Development
47
6.
Uneven Development and Time-Lags in Diffusion
60
PART II
TECHNOLOGICAL REVOLUTIONS AND
THE CHANGING BEHAVIOR OF FINANCIAL CAPITAL
7.
Financial Capital  and Production Capital
71
8.
Maturity: Financial Capital Planting the Seeds of Turbulence at
the End of the Previous Surge
81
9.
Irruption: The Love Affair of Financial Capital with
the Technological Revolution
90
10.
Frenzy: Self-Sufficient Financial Capital Governing the Casino
99
11.
The Turning Point:  Rethinking, Regulation and Changeover
114
12.
Synergy: Supporting the Expansion of the Paradigm  across
the Productive Structure
127
13.
The Changing Nature of Financial and Institutional Innovations
138

Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
vi
PART III
THE RECURRING SEQUENCE, ITS CAUSES
AND IMPLICATIONS
14.
The Sequence and its Driving Forces
151
15.
The Implications for Theory and Policy
159
Epilogue: The World at the Turning Point
167
Bibliography
173
Index
183
Contents

vii
chapter title
2.1
Five successive technological revolutions, 1770s to 2000s
11
2.2
The industries and infrastructures of each technological
revolution
14
2.3
A different techno-economic paradigm for each technological
revolution; 1770 to 2000s
18
8.1
Fluctuations in UK foreign investment (at current prices) as
percentage of total net capital formation, 1855–1914
84
13.1
A tentative typology of financial innovations
139
13.2
The shifting behavior of financial capital from phase to phase
of each surge
141
List of Tables
vii

Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
viii
2.1
The double nature of technological revolutions
9
3.1
The life cycle of a technological revolution
30
4.1
Two different periods in each great surge
37
4.2
Steel displacing iron as the main engineering material  from
the second to the third surge
38
4.3
 Decoupling of the system: the differing performance of the
‘high-tech’ sector and the rest of the economy in the USA,
1989–96
40
4.4
Oil and automobile industries replacing steel as engines of
growth from the third to the fourth surge
45
5.1
Recurring phases of each great surge in the core countries
48
5.2
Approximate dates of the installation and deployment periods
of each great surge of development
57
6.1
The geographic outspreading of technologies as they mature
64
7.1
The recurring sequence in the relationship  between financial
capital (FK) and production capital (PK)
74
7.2
Five successive surges, recurrent parallel periods and major
financial crises
78
8.1
The recurrence of loan fever and default: the Latin American
case
87
10.1
The diverging growth of the New York Stock Market and
US GDP, 1971–99
112
11.1
The rise and fall of the NASDAQ bubble, 1971–2001
119
14.1
Development by surges: the elements of the model and their
recurring changes
152
14.2
The dynamics of the system:  three spheres of change in
constant reciprocal action
156
15.1
Paradigm shift and political cleavage
164
List of Figures
viii

ix
chapter title
ix
Carlota Perez has made several highly original contributions to the
understanding of long-term technological transformations and the way in which
such changes interact with wider economic, social and political changes. This
book is perhaps her most original and controversial contribution. Her intense
interest in these deep processes was aroused in the 1970s when, as a young
researcher, she was studying the oil industry, then and still today of critical
importance for her own native country, Venezuela. In trying to explain the
causes and consequences of the so-called OPEC crisis of 1973, she became
convinced that the global economy had begun a long-term transition from a
mass-production economy based on cheap oil to an ‘information economy’
based on cheap micro-electronics. The arrival of the microprocessor – a
‘computer on a chip’ – served as a ‘big-bang’ announcing this probability and
she was able to develop her theory at this time through a period of postgraduate
research in California – a state which was already then at the forefront of the
Information Revolution.
As a result of this research and her subsequent work with government and
industry, she was able to publish in 1983 a paper that became an influential
landmark in this field. It was entitled ‘Structural Change and the Assimilation
of New Technologies in the Economic and Social System’ and the title ad-
equately reflects the content. It became influential for three main reasons. First
of all, it demonstrated that very big changes in technology entailed not just the
extraordinarily rapid growth of a few new industries, but also, over a more
prolonged period, the rejuvenation of many ‘old’ industries, which found ways
to use the new technology and to make changes in their organization and man-
agement, influenced by the new industries. She designated this combination
of new ways of thinking about the productive system, including its organiza-
tion, its techniques and its interdependencies as a change of ‘techno-economic
paradigm’. This concept of a paradigm change, with each major technological
revolution, has become very widely accepted, particularly since Alan Greenspan
began to use the expression in the 1990s to explain the upsurge in the Ameri-
can economy at that time.
The second major contribution which Carlota Perez made in that paper was
to point out that such a ‘meta-paradigm’ change, affecting the entire economy
entailed the very widespread use of new inputs. In each technological revolu-
tion, whether in earlier times with iron, coal, steel, or oil or with chips today, it
Preface

Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
x
was possible to make very great economies of scale in the production of these
inputs, and frequently such a steep decline in price followed that they became
very attractive for economic as well as for purely technical reasons.
Finally, she showed up some of the fallacies of what is known to historians
as ‘technological determinism’ by her insistence that any transformation in
technology could only take place through an interactive and accompanying
process of social, political and managerial change. This meant that the change
of paradigm affected not only management and organization at the level of the
firm but it affected and was affected by the entire system of social and political
regulation. This is particularly obvious in such areas as education and training,
where the strong demand for new skills drives the changes, but it is also appar-
ent in the intellectual property regime (trademarks, patents and so on) and the
framework of company law, safety regulation and, even more, in international
trade and competition. All this has become particularly evident with the growth
of the institutions of the ‘information society’. Carlota Perez made the vital
point that countries and regions vary in their capacity and their desire to make
such institutional changes, depending on social and political factors, the par-
ticular historical circumstances and other social and political conflicts and ideas.
In this book, she makes an even more original and seminal contribution.
She examines the interaction between that part of the economy commonly
known as financial capital and the upsurge of new technologies from their first
beginnings to the time when they predominate in the structure and behavior of
the economy. In his major work, Business Cycles (1939), Joseph Schumpeter,
whilst interpreting the major waves of economic growth and technological
transformation as ‘successive industrial revolutions’, insisted that these clus-
ters of radical innovations also depended on financial capital. In fact, more
space is devoted to finance in his book than to technology but, rather strangely,
his followers – often known as ‘neo-Schumpeterians’ – neglected this aspect
of his work. With characteristic boldness, Carlota Perez has attempted to fill
this gap. The Internet ‘bubble’ has made the gap especially apparent but she
began her work long before this.
Like Schumpeter, she believes that the early upsurge of a new technology is
a period of explosive growth, leading to great turbulence and uncertainty in
the economy. Venture capitalists, delighted at the new possibility of very high
profits first demonstrated by early applications (aptly designated by Carlota
Perez as the ‘big-bang’) rush to invest in the new activities and often in new
firms. However, the uncertainty which inevitably accompanies such revolu-
tionary developments, means that many of the early expectations will be dis-
appointed, leading to the collapse of bubbles created by financial speculation
as well as technological euphoria or ‘irrational exuberance’. The explosive
upsurge of the new industries and firms takes place within an environment still
dominated by the ‘old’ institutions, so that this is inevitably a time of great
contrasts, designated by many economists as a phase of ‘structural adjustment’.
Preface

xi
chapter title
Carlota Perez puts the accent on the process of propagation of the new tech-
nologies and calls it the ‘installation period’. She further divides it into two
phases: ‘Irruption’ and ‘Frenzy’. In the later period, financial capital spurs
investment in the new industries, activities and infrastructures so intensely
that they become quite strong and the need for a new regime of regulation is
more clearly apparent, at least in the leading countries.
In the end, as experience of political and social changes accumulates and as
many firms grow accustomed to the new technology so that it becomes everyday
‘common sense’, the turbulence of the installation period may give way to a
period of more harmonious growth, designated by Carlota Perez as
‘Deployment’ and again subdivided into two phases: ‘Synergy’ and ‘Maturity’.
The deployment period can be a time of relatively stable and prosperous
development based on a good match between technology and the institutional
framework. Whereas structural unemployment is likely to be a feature of the
installation period, high levels of employment may well be attained in many
countries during ‘deployment’. This factor leads people to think of deployment
as a ‘golden age’ or ‘belle époque’, even though measured GDP growth may
actually have been higher in some countries during the frenzy phase of the
installation period. However, in the maturity phase of the deployment period,
diminishing returns set in for the (now) older and mature technologies. Arthritis
may set in for some of the once vigorous new firms and activities. This
phenomenon of diminishing returns has been observed by both engineers and
economists and it leads to a new period of installation as attention switches to
the next generation of radical innovations, which now begin to offer more
exciting prospects, both for the engineers and the financiers.
The theory is certainly not intended as a straitjacket in which to force the
untidy pattern of real historical events. As Goethe observed in ‘Faust’,
Grey my friend is all theory,
Green the golden tree of life.
Carlota Perez is very well aware of the complexity of the world of finance,
technology and political change. Her model of four phases is not a reductionist
model, it is rather a way of ordering and examining historical processes in
order to illuminate some recurrent tendencies which may be present and may
help us to interpret and understand better both the past and the present. A green
tree is a beautiful sight in spring and summer, but deciduous trees in winter
can reveal more of their structure and sources of growth by their spare and
elegant fundamental features.
I strongly commend this fascinating book, not only to historians and econo-
mists but to engineers, scientists, managers, trade unionists and policy makers
– indeed to all those interested in the past and future evolution of our complex
social system. In one other respect, it also offers ideas which go beyond what
Preface

Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
xii
Schumpeter and most of his followers have discussed: it deals very effectively
with the way in which new technologies spread to the ‘third’ world and the
role of finance and of debt in this diffusion. Altogether, it is a thought-provok-
ing and stimulating book, which should be widely read in all parts of the world
economy.
Chris Freeman,
SPRU, University of Sussex
January 2002
Preface

xiii
chapter title
The seeds of this book were planted years ago, in 1997, when Erik Reinert
invited me to contribute a paper to a seminar in Oslo about financial and pro-
ductive capital. The topic had been in my mind for a long time, and I was
extremely glad to finally be able to approach it with a contract and an inter-
ested audience. Since then, both the original paper and my interest grew and
grew until they resulted in the present book. My thanks go then, to Erik for the
invitation and for his constant support and time for reading and commenting
throughout the various versions and to his wife, Fernanda, who found time to
support me, while fulfilling her fantastically efficient role as ‘ground crew’ for
Erik and for The Other Canon project. My thanks also go to Norsk
Investorforum, the Norwegian organization that generously funded my par-
ticipation in two consecutive seminars on the topic.
In The Other Canon project, I was fortunate to come in contact with Wolfgang
Drechsler, who patiently read the whole manuscript, gave me valuable sug-
gestions, comments and criticisms and willingly discussed many of my doubts
and even minor decisions.
Many other colleagues and friends heard presentations, read chapters or
whole versions along the way. Their reactions and critical comments and ad-
vice were always welcome: Andrew Tylecote, Brian Arthur, Dafne Gil, Despina
Kanellou, Francisco Louçã, Gabriel Palma, Giovanni Dosi, Giulio Santosuosso,
Gustavo Núñez, Ha-Joon Chang, Howie Rush, Jan Fagerberg, Jan Toporowski,
Jorge Solé, Jose Antonio Ocampo, Jürgen Backhaus, Lars Mjøset, Luc Soete,
Lynn Mytelka, Mike Hobday, Morley Lipsett, Nick Von-Tunzelmann, Rafael
Fuentes, Rafael Rengifo, Roger Lloyd Jones, Salvador Lluch, Simón Parisca,
Slavo Radosevic and Stephanie Griffith-Jones. Those who work in similar re-
search fields commented on the contents; those from other fields of research
or endeavor, tried to help me make the book accessible to a wider range of
readers. I am extremely grateful to all for their incisive questions and useful
suggestions.
Very special thanks go to Benjamin Sagalovsky and Maria Elena Corrales
who, with their extreme sensitivity and subtle intelligence, tried to keep me
from straying into either mechanistic or voluntaristic paths. Since I didn’t al-
ways heed their wisdom, they are not to blame if I did go astray. But their
efforts were infinitely valuable to me.
I have left for last the deepest feeling of gratitude. Chris Freeman has cer-
Acknowledgments
xiii

Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
xiv
tainly helped me enormously with this particular book, by reading and re-
reading one version after another, by discussing with me, in person, on paper
and by phone across the ocean, the many questions and difficulties involved in
the model presented here. But this is only the most recent part of his support of
my work, which has been untiring and constantly stimulating, ever since we
met in 1983. Throughout all these years I have had the pleasure and the privi-
lege of having him as a mentor and colleague, of working with him in joint
papers, of following his work and of counting upon him to support my own.
He has done this intensely, both in his approval and in his sometimes very
strong criticism. The first has strengthened my self-confidence; the second has
saved me from some of the worst pitfalls and forced me to strive harder and
harder to improve the results.
Neither Chris nor any of the others mentioned above are at fault for the
remaining errors and weaknesses.
Sometimes the size of a book can be deceptive regarding the amount of
work involved. During the four years in which this particular book was nur-
tured and constructed, with many long periods when it was crowded out by
other work and some stretches of complete concentration, I have counted upon
the invaluable help of several wonderful people, research assistants, computer
specialists and other support staff. Asli Gok and Federico Giammusso helped
me doing research in the library while they were doing their PhD at SPRU;
Lorena Araujo, in the first phase of work, made infinite versions of the figures;
Susan Lees and Cynthia Little showed inexhaustible patience with the E-mail
versions going back and forth from Caracas to England; my sister Maria
Garford, with her experience of book writing, helped me keep out of chaos
and provided constant spiritual support; my aunt Elena Pérez Arenas kept my
paper files in order and gave me secretarial help; Francine O’Sullivan, Joanne
Broom, Emma Meldrum and Karen McCarthy, guiding the process at Edward
Elgar, and Luz Márquez and Nuncia Moccia, preparing the camera ready in
Venezuela, all made sure that the manuscript would result in a beautifully printed
book. Mike Bennet, over the Internet from California, generously shared with
me his long experience in the difficult job of index making. Finally, Marcela
Elgueda, my assistant during the last few months, accompanied every aspect
of the process, with immense dedication, professional competence and care.
To all of them my warmest thanks.
Caracas, June 2002
Acknowledgments

xv
chapter title
Every concept originates through our equating what is unequal.
No leaf ever wholly equals another, and the concept ‘leaf’ is formed
 through an arbitrary abstraction from the individual differences,
 through forgetting the distinctions;
and now it gives rise to the idea that in nature there might
 be something besides the leaves which would be ‘leaf’
 – some kind of original form after which all leaves have been woven,
marked, copied, coloured, curled, and painted,
 but by unskilled hands,
 so that no copy turned out to be a correct, reliable,
 and faithful image of the original form …
Friedrich Nietzsche, 1873
A theory that denies that what is happening can happen,
 that sees unfavorable events as the work of outside forces
(such as the oil crisis) rather than as the result
 of characteristics of the economic mechanism,
 may satisfy the politicians’ need for a villain or scapegoat,
but such a theory offers no useful guide to the solution of a problem.
Hyman Minsky, 1986, p. 4.
xv

Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
xvi

xvii
chapter title
The last quarter of the twentieth century witnessed the apparently boundless
rise of two forces: the information revolution and financial markets. Many
have chanted the virtues of the one for increasing productivity and of the other
for unleashing the drive for wealth that moves the economy forward. In fact,
the twenty-first century was inaugurated with claims about the advent of a
‘new economy’ characterized by the flourishing of both those forces and ca-
pable of relentless growth.
The collapse of the Internet bubble and the ensuing recession have shaken
these beliefs and led to doubt and confusion.
This book will argue that similar productivity explosions and bursts of fi-
nancial excitement leading to economic euphoria and subsequent collapses of
confidence have occurred together before. They are interrelated and interde-
pendent phenomena; they share the same root cause and are in the nature of
the system and its workings. They originate in the way technologies evolve by
revolutions, in the peculiar manner in which these great upsurges of wealth-
creating potential are assimilated by the economic and social system and in
the functional separation of financial and production capital.
The main contention is that the full fruits of the technological revolutions
that occur about every half century are only widely reaped with a time-lag.
Two or three decades of turbulent adaptation and assimilation elapse, from the
moment when the set of new technologies, products, industries and infrastruc-
tures make their first impact to the beginning of a ‘golden age’ or ‘era of good
feeling’ based on them.
For each technological revolution, that time-lag is characterized by strong
divergence in the rates of growth of industries, countries and regions as well as
a worsening of the trends in income distribution that had previously prevailed.
Historically, those decades have brought the greatest excitement in financial
markets, where brilliant successes and innovations share the stage with great
manias and outrageous swindles. They have also ended with the most virulent
crashes, recessions and depressions, later to give way, through the establish-
ment of appropriate institutions, to a period of widespread prosperity, based
on the potential of that particular set of technologies.
This book will develop a model to explain why this is so and why, in spite
of the unquestionable uniqueness of each historical period, there is a certain
sequence of events that recurs about every half century.
Introduction: An Interpretation
xvii

Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
xviii
It will be held that the full deployment of the enormous wealth-creating
potential brought forth by each technological revolution requires, each time,
the establishment of an adequate socio-institutional framework. The existing
framework, created to handle growth based on the previous set of technolo-
gies, is unsuited to the new one. Thus, in the first decades of installation of the
new industries and infrastructures, there is an increasing mismatch between
the techno-economic and the socio-institutional spheres, as well as an internal
decoupling of the economic system, between the new and the old technolo-
gies. The process of re-establishing a good match and creating conditions both
for recoupling and full deployment of the new potential is complex, protracted
and socially painful.
Financial capital plays a crucial role all along. It first supports the develop-
ment of the technological revolution, it then contributes to deepen the mis-
match leading to a possible crash, it later becomes a contributing agent in the
deployment process once the match is achieved and, when that revolution is
spent, it helps give birth to the next.
In this respect there is a surprising lack of connection between economists
studying finance on the one hand and technical change on the other. The fol-
lowers of the Schumpeterian lead have neglected the financial aspects of the
economic process, although they would be the first to acknowledge that the
diffusion of radical innovations is inevitably a question of investment and that
the role of such new technologies as engines of the economy cannot be played
without the financial fuel. Yet the relationship has been consistently ignored.
And this has been so, though Schumpeter himself was very clear about the two
roles, that of the entrepreneur and that of the financier as the interdependent
wheels turning innovation forward.1
On the other hand, those who have studied finance – and in particular finan-
cial crises – have seldom given attention to the real economy of the production
of goods and services (or what Schumpeter called ‘Güterwelt’), nor have they
dealt much with technology and its relation with investment opportunities.
Using the framework to be presented here, one could suggest that this neglect
stems from the fact that the biggest bubbles tend to occur when financial capi-
tal has practically decoupled from the real economy and taken off on its own.
Nevertheless, an economist like Hyman Minsky, who does put innovation in
financial services at the core of his explanation of crises, does not make any
links between the types of financial innovation made and the specific tech-
nologies of the period in question.2
This book attempts to weave these two issues together within a wider inter-
disciplinary perspective, beyond the boundaries of economics.
1.
Schumpeter (1939) p. 104.
2.
Minsky (1975 and 1982).

xix
chapter title
The argument will be developed in two main parts. Part I is devoted to the
discussion of great surges of technology and technological revolutions, their
nature, the social process involved in their assimilation and the recurrent
sequence of events which describes their diffusion, including the role of finance.
This then becomes the frame of reference for examining – in Part II – the
changing and also recurrent behavior of financial capital in its relation to
technological revolutions. The sections in this part present a narrative of this
behavior for each of the phases, illustrated with examples from the present
information revolution and from the four previous ones. Part III briefly discusses
the internal forces that produce the recurring sequence, summarizes the model
and explores some of the implications for theory and policy.
This book is a ‘think-piece,’ the spelling out of an interpretation, with enough
illustrations to strengthen the case and stimulate discussion. In most cases the
stylized narrative is the chosen manner of presentation. This, apart from being
an efficient way of transmitting a thought model, seems particularly suited to
the type of explanation proposed, where a recurrent historical sequence has
unique manifestations each time around.
Introduction: An Interpretation


chapter title
1
PART ONE
Technological Revolutions
as Successive Great Surges of Development

Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
2

3
The Turbulent Ending of the Twentieth Century
On a day like any other in November 1971, a small event in Santa Clara Cali-
fornia was about to change the history of the world. Bob Noyce and Gordon
Moore launched Intel’s first microprocessor, the precursor of the computer on
a chip. It was the big-bang of a new universe, that of all-pervasive computing
and digital telecommunications. Chips were powerful, they were cheap and
they opened innumerable technological and business possibilities.
At that time not many people had heard of venture capital or ‘angels’. Though
many common citizens in the USA had stocks and bonds, few followed the
daily changes in the stock market. The word ‘derivative’ was generally con-
fined to mathematics. Most middle-class people kept their money in the bank
or in the savings and loan society and the self-made millionaires, although a
core element of the American dream, were few and far between. In the de-
cades to follow, all this was to change radically. Millionaires would abound
and finance was to become the central concern of people with old and new
wealth. By the end of the 1990s, even people with modest salaries had turned
into hopeful ‘investors’.
Henry Ford had been the central character in a similar event in 1908. The
low-cost Model-T, with its internal combustion engine powered by cheap gaso-
line, was the big-bang opening the world of the automobile and of mass pro-
duction and mass consumption.
By the mid-1920s, the New York Stock Market was perceived as the engine
moving the American economy and even the world’s. As was to happen later,
in the 1980s and 1990s, financial geniuses appeared by the dozens and invest-
ment in stocks or real estate seemed almost guaranteed to grow and grow in an
unending bull market. Great wealth for the players was the result; irrational
exuberance was the mood. By the end of the 1920s even widows, small farm-
ers and shoe-shine boys were putting their money into that glorified casino.
The crash was unexpected; the following recession and depression were ex-
ceptionally deep and prolonged.
This sequence had happened three times before in a similar – though each
time specific – manner. A decade after the first industrial revolution opened
the world of mechanization in England and led to the rapid extension of the
network of roads, bridges, ports and canals to support a growing flow of trade,
there was canal mania and, later, canal panic. About 15 years after the Liverpool–
1. The Turbulent Ending of the Twentieth
Century
3

Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
4
Manchester rail line inaugurated the Age of Steam and Railroads, there was an
amazing investment boom in the stock of companies constructing railways, a
veritable ‘railway mania’ which ended in panic and collapse in 1847. After
Andrew Carnegie’s Bessemer steel mill in 1875 gave the big-bang for the Age
of Steel and heavy engineering, a huge transformation began to change the
economy of the whole world, with transcontinental trade and travel, by rail
and steamship, accompanied by international telegraph and electricity. The
growth of the stock markets in the 1880s and 1890s was now, not only in
railways but also in industry, not mainly national but more and more truly
international. The crashes happened, in different forms, in the USA and
Argentina, in Italy and France and in many other parts of the world.
Each technological revolution has led to the massive replacement of one set
of technologies by another, either by outright substitution or through the mod-
ernization of existing equipment, processes and ways of operation. Each in-
volved profound changes in people, organizations and skills in a sort of habit-
breaking hurricane. Each led to an explosive period in the financial markets.
New actors, usually young, burst into action shaking a firmly established
and complacent world. Investment in the new industries is carried out by new
entrepreneurs while the young financial tycoons create a whirlpool that sucks
in huge amounts of the world’s wealth to reallocate it in more adventurous or
reckless hands: some for speculation in real estate or in whatever is amenable
at the time, some for buying existing assets and some for new investment. A
part of this goes to new industries, another to expand the new infrastructure,
another to modernize all the established industries, but most of it is moved
about in a frenzy of money-making money, which creates asset inflation and
provides a gambling atmosphere within an ever-expanding bubble. Eventually
it has to collapse. But when it does, the changeover has been made. New in-
dustries have grown, a new infrastructure is in place; new millionaires have
appeared; the new way of doing things with the new technologies has become
‘common sense’. One crucial thing is still missing: a systematic articulation of
the new regulatory framework and of the appropriate institutions, capable of
steering and facilitating the functioning of the new economy in a socially and
economically sustainable manner.
Each time around, what can be considered a ‘new economy’ takes root where
the old economy had been faltering. But it is all achieved in a violent, wasteful
and painful manner. The new wealth that accumulates at one end is often more
than counterbalanced by the poverty that spreads at the other end. This is in
fact the period when capitalism shows its ugliest and most callous face. It is
the time depicted by Charles Dickens and Upton Sinclair, by Friedrich Engels
and Thorstein Veblen; the time when the rich get richer with arrogance and the
poor get poorer through no fault of their own; when part of the population
celebrates prosperity and the other portion (generally much larger) experiences

5
The Turbulent Ending of the Twentieth Century
outright deterioration and decline. It is certainly a broken society, a two-faced
world. But while the poor can usually see the conspicuous consumption of the
ostentatious members of the new ‘leisure class’, to these, the poor are often
hidden from view. In the globalized world of the information economy, this is
all the more true, given that the cleavage between the excessively rich and the
extremely poor is basically international. Were it not for satellite TV and mass
illegal migrations, the invisibility could be almost total.
When the financial breakdown comes, the party is over and the time comes
for analyzing what went wrong and how it can be prevented from happening
again. Though the debate about the causes and the culprits can go on forever,
the more practical task of setting up an adequate regulatory system and a set of
effective safeguards is soon undertaken. Thanks to the crash and the recession,
there is a newfound readiness to accept such rules on the part of the – until
recently arrogant – financial wizards, now sobered up.
If, at this turning point, the institutional adjustment is successfully achieved,
what follows may be a golden age. It can be a period of full employment and
widespread productive investment, a period when production is at center stage,
when at last the benefits of the system begin to spread down and an era of
‘good feeling’ sets in. The best face of capitalism can then be seen. It is the
face of progress and of relative coincidence between individual and collective
interests. Financial capital goes out of public sight into boardrooms and of-
fices. It increasingly supports big production companies that are generating
real wealth, and grows with them and at the pace they set. By this time, the
main companies may already be the result of mergers and would have become
what in each period would be considered big corporations, often operating as
oligopolies.3 This reduces the previous ferocity of competition and leads to a
common interest in having comfortable profit margins and in enlarging the
target markets by widening the consumer base. As the improvement in income
distribution allows, consumption grows and expands. The new style of living,
just established by the nouveaux riches, begins to diffuse down from one so-
cial stratum to another in more ‘popular’ versions. These are the times when
capitalism is identified with progress and the idea that it can achieve social
justice becomes more credible. Hope grows high. In the next phase, though,
the unfulfilled expectations will lead to frustration and protests.
This book holds that the sequence technological revolution–financial
bubble–collapse–golden age–political unrest recurs about every half century
and is based on causal mechanisms that are in the nature of capitalism. These
3.
In the first and second revolutions personal or family firms were still typical and their size,
though seen as large by contemporaries, was typically small in relation to the industry as a
whole. The truly giant corporations and the formation of oligopolies and cartels only be-
came a feature of the system with the third revolution, from the end of the nineteenth cen-
tury.

Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
6
mechanisms stem from three features of the system, which interact with and
influence one another:
1.
the fact that technological change occurs by clusters of radical innova-
tions forming successive and distinct revolutions that modernize the whole
productive structure;
2.
the functional separation between financial and production capital, each
pursuing profits by different means; and
3.
the much greater inertia and resistance to change of the socio-institutional
framework in comparison with the techno-economic sphere, which is
spurred by competitive pressures.
Obviously the recurring sequence is hidden under many layers of unique
factors, events and circumstances. These layers happen to be some of the most
important aspects in the history of any country and of the world: culture, poli-
tics, leading personalities, wars, gold discoveries, natural catastrophes and so
on. In addition, because of uneven development, itself an outstanding feature
of capitalism, such regularities are mainly visible in the core countries of the
world system, which also change over time (as when the USA took the lead
from Britain in the twentieth century).
Yet the dynamic regularities presented in this model can be identified from
many angles. When A.C. Pigou, Alfred Marshall’s successor in Cambridge,
observed the changing views about money in the first half of the twentieth
century he was precisely picking up the sequence in question:
In the years preceding the First World War there were in common use among econo-
mists a number of metaphors … ‘Money is a wrapper in which goods come’; ‘Money
is the garment draped round the body of economic life’; ‘money is a veil behind
which the action of real economic forces is concealed’…
 During the 1920s and 1930s … money, the passive veil, took on the appearance of
an evil genius; the garment became a Nessus shirt; the wrapper a thing liable to
explode. Money, in short, after being little or nothing, was now everything …
Then with the Second World War, the tune changed again. Manpower, equipment
and organization once more came into their own. The role of money dwindled to
insignificance …4
However, this effort at identifying the recurrent phenomena is not aimed at
simplifying history or at applying mechanistic models to its infinite complex-
ity and unpredictability. It is mainly aimed at serving two useful purposes in
relation to policy, growth and development:
4.
Pigou (1949) pp. 18–19.

7
The Turbulent Ending of the Twentieth Century
1.
To help recognize the dynamic and changing nature of capitalism in order
to avoid extrapolating any particular period – be it good or bad – as ‘the end of
history’ or as the final crisis of capitalism or as the arrival of unstoppable
progress or as any ‘new’ and permanent nature of the system, from then on.
2.
To help see ahead to the next phase of the sequence, in order to design
timely actions to make the best of the impending opportunities.
According to the model that will be presented here, achieving this second
purpose also requires a deep understanding of the nature of the particular tech-
nological revolution being deployed. One of the main ideas to be put forth is
that each of these revolutions is accompanied by a set of ‘best-practice’ prin-
ciples, in the form of a techno-economic paradigm, which breaks the existing
organizational habits in technology, the economy, management and social in-
stitutions. The particular manner in which these principles are applied each
time and in each case is strongly influenced by all the layers mentioned above.
Therefore, the modes of growth adopted, while formally applying similar struc-
tural principles, can be profoundly different in their social content.5
The world is once again at a crossroads where explanations and guiding
criteria are sorely needed. The twentieth century left a turbulent legacy that
after chanting the advent of a ‘new economy’ has to cope with unraveling the
meaning of the implosion of the Internet bubble and its aftermath. Compre-
hending some of the underlying causes of the stagflation and debt crises of the
1980s and of the financial boom of the 1990s, could be helpful for overcoming
the consequences of the collapse that began in 2000. It is hoped that the model
to be presented will provide a contribution to such an understanding. The pos-
sibilities open are very different: it can be a world for the few or a world for
the many. Perhaps a fruitful debate about the structural causes of such chang-
ing conditions can guide positive action towards constructing the next golden
age, and maximizing its social benefits in the core countries and globally.
Technological revolutions and the unfolding of their potential play a central
role in the model. The following chapter is devoted to defining them and iden-
tifying the five revolutions that have shaped the last two centuries. It will also
define the two associated concepts that play a major role in the model to be
presented. One is techno-economic paradigm, which stands for the new ‘com-
mon sense’ guiding the diffusion of each revolution. The other is great surge
of development, which represents the process of installation and deployment
of each revolution and its paradigm in the economic and social system.
5.
The mass-production revolution, which marked most of the institutions of the twentieth
century, underlay the centralized governments and massive consumption patterns of the
four great modes of growth that were set up to take advantage of those technologies: the
Keynesian democracies, Nazi-fascism, Soviet socialism and State developmentalism in the
so-called ‘Third World,’ each with very wide-ranging specificities.

8
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
A technological revolution can be defined as a powerful and highly visible
cluster of new and dynamic technologies, products and industries, capable of
bringing about an upheaval in the whole fabric of the economy and of propel-
ling a long-term upsurge of development. It is a strongly interrelated constel-
lation of technical innovations, generally including an important all-pervasive
low-cost input,6 often a source of energy, sometimes a crucial material, plus
significant new products and processes and a new infrastructure. The latter
usually changes the frontier in speed and reliability of transportation and com-
munications, while drastically reducing their cost.
The irruption of such significant clusters of innovative industries in a short
period of time would certainly be enough reason to label them as ‘technologi-
cal revolutions.’ Yet what warrants the title for the present purposes is that
each of those sets of technological breakthroughs spreads far beyond the con-
fines of the industries and sectors where they originally developed. Each pro-
vides a set of interrelated generic technologies and organizational principles
that allows and fosters a quantum jump in potential productivity for practi-
cally all economic activities. This leads each time to the modernization and
regeneration of the whole productive system, so that the general level of effi-
ciency rises to a new height every 50 years or so (see Figure 2.1).
The main vehicle of diffusion of that set of generic ‘tools’ – hard, soft and
ideological – which together modify the best-practice frontier for all, is what
the author has termed a ‘techno-economic paradigm’.7 It is ‘economic’ best
practice because each technological transformation brings with it a major shift
in the relative price structure that guides economic agents toward the intensive
use of the more powerful new inputs and technologies. It is a ‘paradigm,’ in
2. Technological Revolutions and Techno-
Economic Paradigms
6.
The role of the low-cost input is discussed in Perez (1983).
7.
Perez (1985), Freeman and Perez (1988). The term ‘technological paradigm,’ as a Kuhnian
analogy in the area of technical change, was first used by Giovanni Dosi (1982) to refer to
the guiding logic of the trajectory of individual technologies, products and industries. The
author (Perez 1985) proposed using that concept in a more overarching ‘techno-economic’
– and organizational – sense, to mean a sort of meta-paradigm, encompassing the main
principles shared by the individual trajectories of a period. Today, however, the term para-
digm is very widely used in a rather loose sense to mean a ‘mind set’ about something. So,
a revision of the terminology could eventually be wise, in order to avoid further confusion.
8

9
Technological Revolutions and Techno-Economic Paradigms
the Kuhnian sense,8 because it defines the model and the territory for ‘normal’
innovative practice, promising success to those that follow the principles in-
carnate in the core industries of the revolution.
Each technological revolution, then, is an explosion of new products, in-
dustries and infrastructures that gradually gives rise to a new techno-economic
paradigm, which guides entrepreneurs, managers, innovators, investors and
consumers, both in their individual decisions and in their interactions, for the
whole period of propagation of that set of technologies.
A.
Five Technological Revolutions in Two Hundred Years
At several moments in his thinking about development, Simon Kuznets ex-
plored the notion of epochal innovations as those capable of inducing signifi-
cant changes in the direction of growth. In his Nobel lecture in 1971, he stated:
The major breakthroughs in the advance of human knowledge, those that consti-
tuted the dominant sources of sustained growth over long periods and spread to a
substantial part of the world, may be termed epochal innovations. And the chang-
ing course of economic history can perhaps be subdivided into economic epochs,
each identified by the epochal innovation with the distinctive characteristics of
growth that it generated.9
In that particular instance he was mainly referring to the epochs that lasted
several centuries, of which capitalism since the first industrial revolution would
8.
Kuhn (1962).
9.
Kuznets (1971) in 1973 p. 166.
Figure 2.1
The double nature of technological revolutions
A CLUSTER OF NEW DYNAMIC
PRODUCTS, TECHNOLOGIES
INDUSTRIES AND
INFRASTRUCTURES.
generating explosive growth
and structural change
NEW INTERRELATED 
GENERIC TECHNOLOGIES
AND ORGANIZATIONAL
PRINCIPLES
capable of rejuvenating and
upgrading mature industries
A CHANGE OF TECHNO-ECONOMIC PARADIGM
New engines of growth
for a long-term
upsurge
of development
A higher level
of potential productivity
for the whole
productive system
Source:      Based on Perez (1998) p. 68

10
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
be one. However, on that same year, Kuznets suggested that it was ‘difficult to
conceive of a stage as static, as part of a process in which its emergence and
eventual disappearance are the only relevant and major changes.’ Thus, he
considered ‘sequences within each stage’ as ‘an indispensable part of a com-
plete stage theory’.10
What is held in this book is that economic growth since the end of the
eighteenth century has indeed gone through five distinct stages, associated
with five successive technological revolutions. This has been captured by
popular imagination when naming the relevant periods in relation to the most
impressive technologies. The Industrial Revolution was the name given to the
irruption of the machine and the inauguration of the Industrial Age. It was
common in the mid-nineteenth century for people to refer to their time as the
Age of Steam and Railways and, later on, when steel replaced iron and science
transformed industry, the name was the Age of Steel and Electricity. By the
1920s it was the Age of the Automobile and Mass Production and, since the
1970s, the terms Information Age or Knowledge Society are in increasingly
common usage. Table 2.1 identifies the five technological revolutions.
Each of these revolutionary clusters irrupts in a particular country, some-
times even in a particular region. Lancashire was as much the cradle and the
symbol of the key industries of the first industrial revolution as Silicon Valley
has been for the microelectronics revolution. In fact, each technological revo-
lution originally develops in a core country, which acts as the world economic
leader for the duration of that stage. There, it is fully deployed; from there, it
propagates to other countries. The first two revolutions were led by Britain,
the fourth and the present fifth by the USA. The third was characterized by a
complex triple core, formed by the old – and still immensely powerful – Brit-
ish giant and the two dynamic challengers, Germany and the United States
(see column 3, Table 2.1). This is particularly important because, although the
surges of development propelled by each technological revolution are in the
long run worldwide phenomena, the propagation of change occurs gradually,
moving from core to periphery. This means the dating of deployment is not the
same for all countries and can be delayed as much as two or three decades in
some cases. (See Chapters 5, section F and 6, section B.)
Before coming together as a constellation and being recognized as such,
each technological revolution goes through a gestation period that can be very
long, so that many of the contributing innovations have probably been around
for quite a while. This makes it difficult to find an appropriate beginning date
for each revolution and a reasonable option is to indicate a broad period.11
10.
Kuznets (1973) p. 215 (original emphasis).
11.
This is what Chris Freeman and the author did in a paper in Dosi et al. (1988). It was also
what Andrew Tylecote (1992) did in his book on the subject.

11
Technological Revolutions and Techno-Economic Paradigms
Table 2.1     Five successive technological revolutions, 1770s to 2000s
FIRST
SECOND
THIRD
FOURTH
FIFTH
The ‘Industrial
Revolution’
Age of Steam and
Railways
Age of Steel,
Electricity and
Heavy Engineering
Age of Oil, the
Automobile and
Mass Production
Age of Information
and Telecommuni-
cations
Britain
Britain (spread-
ing to Continent
and USA)
USA and
Germany forging
ahead and
overtaking
Britain
USA (with
Germany at first
vying for world
leadership), later
spreading to
Europe
USA (spreading
to Europe and
Asia)
Arkwright’s mill opens
in Cromford
Test of the ‘Rocket’
steam engine for the
Liverpool–Manchester
railway
The Carnegie Bessemer
steel plant opens in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylva-
nia
First Model-T comes
out of the Ford plant in
Detroit, Michigan
The Intel microproces-
sor is announced in
Santa Clara, California
1771
1829
1875
1908
1971
Year
Big-bang initiating
the revolution
Core country or
countries
Popular name
for the period
Technological
revolution
Nevertheless, it is suggested here that for society to veer strongly in the direc-
tion of a new set of technologies, a highly visible ‘attractor’ needs to appear,
symbolizing the whole new potential and capable of sparking the technologi-
cal and business imagination of a cluster of pioneers. This attractor is not only
a technical breakthrough. What makes it so powerful is that it is also cheap or
that it makes it clear that business based on the associated innovations will be
cost-competitive. That event is defined here as the big-bang of the revolution
(Column 4, Table 2.1).
When Arkwright’s Cromford mill opened in 1771, the future paths to cost-
reducing mechanization of the cotton textile and other industries were power-
fully visible. Sixty years later, in 1829, the world of railways and steam power
was announced by Stephenson’s ‘Rocket’ steam locomotive winning the con-
test for the Liverpool–Manchester railway. In 1875, Carnegie’s highly effi-
cient Bessemer steel plant went on stream, inaugurating the Age of Steel. Of
course, it is only with hindsight that these events can be singled out, not only

12
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
because at the time they are obvious only to a narrow community of entrepre-
neurs and technical people, but also because whether they flourish or not in a
particular country will depend on a complex set of circumstances. In the case
of the third revolution, for example, it was by no means clear in the 1870s that
England would fall behind and that it would be the USA and Germany that
would fully exploit the new wealth-generating potential to catch up and forge
ahead. In fact, it could be argued that two big-bang events, one for each of the
countries involved in propelling that surge, should perhaps be identified. Other
choices are less controversial. Ford’s Model-T is an obvious choice for the
Age of Oil, the Automobile and Mass-Production. Nevertheless, the precise
dating could be an issue. The truly mass-produced Model-T, from a full mov-
ing assembly line, only came out in 1913. However, even without a complete
line, the first Model-T in 1908 was already the clear prototype of the standard-
ized, identical products that were to characterize future production patterns. It
also prefigured the decreasing costs that would make it accessible to the mass
of the population. Finally, Intel’s first microprocessor in 1971, the original and
simplest ‘computer on a chip’,  can be seen as the birth of the Information Age,
based on the amazing power of low-cost microelectronics.
So, pinpointing the date of the big-bang12 of each technological revolution
is a useful device to facilitate the understanding of the chain of processes that
follow. The event in question, though apparently small and relatively isolated,
is experienced by the pioneers of the time as the discovery of a new territory,
as a powerful announcement of what those technologies can offer far into the
future and as a call for entrepreneurial action.
By contrast, any attempt at indicating an ending date for each revolution
would be relatively meaningless. It is true that certain events can be felt by
society as announcing the ‘end of an era’, such as the 1973 oil crisis and the
1971 breakdown of the Bretton Woods agreement on the dollar. Nevertheless,
as will be discussed in the next chapter, each set of technologies undergoes a
difficult and prolonged period of stretching when the impending exhaustion of
its potential becomes increasingly visible. This phenomenon is crucial to the
present interpretation. When each technological revolution irrupts, the logic
and the effects of its predecessor are still fully dominant and exert powerful
resistance. The generalized shift into ‘the logic of the new’ requires two or
three turbulent decades of transition from one to the other, when the successful
installation of the new superior capacities accentuates the decline of the old.
By the time the process has fully taken place, the end of the previous revolu-
tion is little more than a whimper.
12.
Unfortunately this cosmological metaphor was also chosen to signal financial deregula-
tion in the 1980s. In spite of the risk of confusion, it was still kept here because of its
appropriateness to describe a point in time that explodes into an expanding universe of
opportunities.

13
Technological Revolutions and Techno-Economic Paradigms
B.
Five Constellations of New Industries and Infrastructures
Each technological revolution results from the synergistic interdependence of
a group of industries with one or more infrastructural networks. Table 2.2 iden-
tifies the constellations conforming each of the five revolutions.
The technologies and products involved are not only those where the major
breakthroughs have occurred. It is often the interlinking of some of the new
and some of the old that generates the revolutionary potential. In fact, many of
the products and industries coming together into the new constellation had
already existed for some time, either in a relatively minor economic role or as
important complements for the prevailing industries. This was the case of coal
and iron, which after a long history of usage during and before the Industrial
Revolution, were transformed by the steam engine into the motive industries
of the Age of Railways. Oil was developed for many uses since the 1880s by
an extremely active industry; the same can be said about the internal combus-
tion engine and for the automobile, which was produced as a luxury vehicle
for quite some time. But it is the conjunction of all three with mass production
that makes them become part of a veritable revolution. Electronics existed
since the early 1900s and in some ways was crucial in the 1920s; transistors,
semiconductors, computers and controls were already important technologies
in the 1960s and even earlier. Yet it is only in 1971, with the microprocessor,
that the vast new potential of cheap microelectronics is made visible; the no-
tion of ‘a computer on a chip’ flares the imagination and all the related tech-
nologies of the information revolution come together into a powerful cluster.
It has often been suggested that biotechnology, bioelectronics and
nanotechnology might conform the next technological revolution. Indeed, they
are already developing intensely within the logic of the information society.
They seem to be at a stage equivalent to the oil industry and the automobile at
the end of the nineteenth century or to electronics in the 1940s and 1950s, with
vacuum-TV, radar and analog control equipment and telecommunications. The
key breakthrough that would make it cheap to harness the forces of life and the
power hidden in the infinitely small is still unpredictable. Apart from the ethical
questions that are likely to shape the rhythm and the direction of the search, that
event is more likely to happen, as will be discussed in Chapter 3, when the current
information revolution approaches limits to its wealth-generating potential.
So every revolution combines truly new industries and products with others
that are redefined. It is when the critical technological breakthroughs articu-
late them into a powerful, interacting and coherent set of profitable business
avenues, influencing the whole economy, that their joint impact can become
truly all-pervasive.
In relation to existing infrastructures there can also be extensions in scope
that make a significant qualitative difference. The iron railways of the second

14
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Note:
*
These traditional industries acquire a new role and a new dynamism when serving
as the material and the fuel of the world of railways and machinery.
Table 2.2 The industries and infrastructures of each technological revolution
Technological
revolution
New technologies and new or
redefined industries
New or redefined
infrastructures
FIRST:
From 1771
The ‘Industrial
Revolution’; Britain
SECOND:
From 1829
Age of Steam and
Railways
In Britain and
spreading to
Continent and USA
THIRD:
From 1875
Age of Steel,
Electricity and
Heavy Engineering
USA and Germany
overtaking Britain
FOURTH:
From 1908 Age of
Oil, the Automobile
and Mass Production
In USA and
spreading to Europe
FIFTH:
From 1971
Age of Information
and Telecommunica-
tions
In USA, spreading to
Europe and Asia
Mechanized cotton industry
Wrought iron
Machinery
Steam engines and machinery
(made in iron; fueled by coal)
Iron and coal mining
(now playing a central role in
growth)*
Railway construction
Rolling stock production
Steam power for many industries
(including textiles)
Cheap steel (especially Bessemer)
Full development of steam engine
for steel ships
Heavy chemistry and civil
engineering
Electrical equipment industry
Copper and cables
Canned and bottled food
Paper and packaging
Mass-produced automobiles
Cheap oil and oil fuels
Petrochemicals (synthetics)
Internal combustion engine for
automobiles, transport, tractors,
airplanes, war tanks and electricity
Home electrical appliances
Refrigerated and frozen foods
The information revolution:
Cheap microelectronics.
Computers, software
Telecommunications
Control instruments
Computer-aided biotechnology
and new materials
Canals and waterways
Turnpike roads
Water power (highly improved
water wheels)
Railways (Use of steam engine)
Universal postal service
Telegraph (mainly nationally
along railway lines)
Great ports, great depots and
worldwide sailing ships
City gas
Worldwide shipping in rapid
steel steamships (use of Suez
Canal)
Worldwide railways (use of
cheap steel rails and bolts in
standard sizes).
Great bridges and tunnels
Worldwide Telegraph
Telephone (mainly nationally)
Electrical networks (for
illumination and industrial use)
Networks of roads, highways,
ports and airports
Networks of oil ducts
Universal electricity (industry
and homes) Worldwide analog
telecommunications (telephone,
telex and cablegram) wire and
wireless
World digital telecommunica-
tions (cable, fiber optics, radio
and satellite)
Internet/ Electronic mail and
other e-services
Multiple source, flexible use,
electricity networks
High-speed physical transport
links (by land, air and water)

15
Technological Revolutions and Techno-Economic Paradigms
technological revolution led to national networks of rail transport and tele-
graph. The steel railways of the third revolution created transcontinental net-
works that, together with the steel steamships and worldwide telegraph, facili-
tated the functioning of truly international markets. Regarding electricity, the
setting up of the basic electrical networks made the electrical equipment in-
dustry into one of the main engines of growth of the third technological revo-
lution; whereas, during the fourth, it was its role as a ‘utility’, as a universal
service encompassing every firm and every home, that made it a crucial infra-
structure for the diffusion of the mass-production revolution.
Finally, it is important to note that each constellation contains several tech-
nology systems that develop at different rhythms and in a sequence that often
depends on feedback loops. The information revolution begins with the explo-
sion in chips and hardware, the growth of which leads to a flourishing in soft-
ware and telecommunications equipment followed by the Internet boom and
so on, each benefitting from the technical and market advances previously
made by the others, while in turn favoring their further development. The same
was seen in the unfolding of the potential of the third, where the impact of
cheap steel is first felt in railways, ships and civil engineering and later in
equipping the new chemical and electrical industries. The individual impor-
tance of some of these technology systems and their sequential visibility can
make them appear as separate revolutions rather than interdependent systems
under a wider umbrella.
C.
Five Techno-Economic Paradigms; Five Changes in
Organizational ‘Common Sense’
The irruption of a set of powerful and dynamic new industries accompanied
by a facilitating infrastructure will obviously have enormous consequences
both in the industrial structure and in the preferred direction of investment in
that period. But, as indicated before, the old organizational models cannot cope
with or take full advantage of the new potential. The new possibilities and
their requirements also unleash a profound transformation in ‘the way of do-
ing things’ across the whole economy and beyond. Thus each technological
revolution inevitably induces a paradigm shift.
A techno-economic paradigm is, then, a best-practice model made up of a
set of all-pervasive generic technological and organizational principles, which
represent the most effective way of applying a particular technological revolu-
tion and of using it for modernizing and rejuvenating the whole of the economy.
When generally adopted, these principles become the common-sense basis for
organizing any activity and for structuring any institution.
The appearance of a new techno-economic paradigm affects behaviors re-
lated to innovation and investment in a way that could be compared to a gold

16
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
rush or the discovery of a vast new territory. It is the opening of a wide design,
product and profit space13 that rapidly fires the imagination of engineers, en-
trepreneurs and investors, who in their trial and error experiments applying
the new wealth-creating potential, generate the successful practices and be-
haviors that gradually define the new best-practice frontier.
The action of these pioneering agents blazes the trail, giving rise to increas-
ing externalities and conditionings – including production experience and the
training of consumers – that make it easier and easier for others to follow suit.
Their success becomes a powerful signal in the direction of the most profit-
able windows of opportunity. That is how the new paradigm14 eventually be-
comes the new generalized ‘common sense’, which gradually finds itself em-
bedded in social practice, legislation and other components of the institutional
framework, facilitating compatible innovations and hindering incompatible
ones. This inclusion–exclusion mechanism is at the root of technical change
by revolutions, as will be discussed in Chapter 3.
The techno-economic paradigm is a much more elusive and difficult con-
cept to grasp than that of technological revolution. It is nonetheless as power-
ful, if not more, in guiding the major transformation that follows each big-
bang. Its analysis and description, in each particular case, is crucial for identi-
fying two important features of the direction of change in terms of organiza-
tional discontinuities: the first is the set of common principles behind the un-
derstanding that grows among the contemporary actors in their decisions and
interactions; the second is the isomorphism in the changes occurring across
the most diverse institutions, beginning with firms.
The task is demanding. A techno-economic paradigm, being a sort of mental
map of best-practice options, is made up as much of an understanding of actual
generic technologies with nearly all-pervasive applicability as of general
common-sense principles that enter the culture of the period. The generic
technologies are easy to identify, of course: mechanization, steam power,
electricity, mass production, ICTs (information and telecommunications
technologies) and so on. The principles and guidelines are less obvious, though
at least in the present Information Era thousands of consultants have made
‘before and now’ tables to indicate the precise direction of change in competitive
best practice. Something similar happened with the third paradigm when the
societies of mechanical engineers were developing optimal practice,
establishing standards and propagating them among industrialists.15 At that
13.
The concept of ‘design space’ was proposed by Stankiewicz (2000) referring to individual
wide-ranging technologies.
14.
Throughout the text the term ‘paradigm’ alone will sometimes be used as a short reference
for techno-economic paradigm.
15.
Chandler (1977) pp. 281–3.

17
Technological Revolutions and Techno-Economic Paradigms
time they taught modified versions of Taylor’s early ideas. Decades later, with
the mass-production paradigm, the assembly-line version of Taylorism, called
‘scientific management’ (in its ‘Fordist’16 form), was taught and applied across
the industrial spectrum.
The task becomes harder the further one goes into the past, because in real
life the paradigm is mostly an imitative model, made up of implicit principles
that soon become unconscious ‘talent’ and later get subsumed into ‘rules of
thumb’.17 So, an explicit identification of such guidelines might not be readily
found in the historical record. They can, however, be abstracted from the logic
of the generic technologies of the period and from the behavior of firms, as
described in contemporary accounts and in historical analyses. A good ex-
ample of the latter is Chandler’s18 Visible Hand, an amply documented de-
scription of the changing structure and practice of enterprise, from the early
personal firm to the modern managerial corporation.
The lists given in Table 2.3 are illustrative and indicative of the type of
general guidelines that constitute a techno-economic paradigm and do not at-
tempt to be exhaustive.
The reader will note that the principles listed are not strictly limited to the
organization of production but stretch to involve the structure of the firms, the
forms of geographic propagation, the structure of the geo-political and social
space and something which approaches the ‘ideals’ of the period. In fact, the
logic of a paradigm reaches well beyond the economic sphere to become the
general and shared organizational common sense of the period. It could then
be called an organizational paradigm. Eventually the socio-institutional frame-
work that will accommodate and enable the full deployment of that techno-
logical revolution will follow those basic principles. Thus the mental maps for
efficiency guiding both economic and non-economic activities will be congruent.
As an example, one could observe the process of organizational change
brought by the information revolution. Until the 1980s, the prevalent organi-
zation was the one that served as the optimal framework for deploying the
mass-production revolution: the centralized, hierarchical pyramid with func-
tional compartments. This structure was applied in the economy by almost
every corporation, but was also replicated in any other organization confronted
with a large and complex task in government, in hospitals, in universities, in
trade unions and political parties, in the West and in the Soviet system, in
16.
The term ‘Fordism’ has been popularized to refer to the mass-production model of organi-
zation. However, in the sense introduced by the French ‘Regulation’ School, the concept
goes beyond the forms of organization or norms of production, to also include the patterns
(or mode) of consumption and the institutional context that enables them. See Aglietta
(1976); Boyer (1988); Coriat (1978).
17.
This is analogous to how Kuhn saw the establishment of the principles guiding ‘normal
science.’ Kuhn (1962) Ch.II.
18.
Chandler (1977).

18
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Table 2.3
A different techno-economic paradigm for each technological
revolution, 1770 to 2000s
Technological revolution
Country of initial
development
FIRST
The ‘Industrial
Revolution’
Britain
SECOND
Age of Steam
and Railways
In Britain and
spreading to
Continent and USA
THIRD
Age of Steel,
Electricity and
Heavy Engineering
USA and Germany
overtaking Britain
FOURTH
Age of Oil, the
Automobile
and Mass Production
In USA and spreading
to Europe
FIFTH
Age of Information and
Telecommunications
In USA spreading
to Europe and Asia
Techno-economic paradigm ‘Common-sense’ innovation
principles
Factory production
Mechanization
Productivity/time keeping and time saving
Fluidity of movement (as ideal for machines with water-power
and for transport through canals and other waterways)
Local networks
Economies of agglomeration/Industrial cities/National markets
Power centers with national networks
Scale as progress
Standard parts/machine-made machines
Energy where needed (steam)
Interdependent movement (of machines and of means of
transport)
Giant structures (steel)
Economies of scale of plant/vertical integration
Distributed power for industry (electricity)
Science as a productive force
Worldwide networks and empires (including cartels)
Universal standardization
Cost accounting for control and efficiency
Great scale for world market power/‘small’ is successful, if
local
Mass production/mass markets
Economies of scale (product and market volume)/
horizontal integration
Standardization of products
Energy intensity (oil based)
Synthetic materials
Functional specialization/hierarchical pyramids
Centralization/metropolitan centers–suburbanization
National powers, world agreements and confrontations
Information-intensity (microelectronics-based ICT)
Decentralized integration/network structures
Knowledge as capital/intangible value added
Heterogeneity, diversity, adaptability
Segmentation of markets/proliferation of niches
Economies of scope and specialization combined with scale
Globalization/interaction between the global and the local
Inward and outward cooperation/clusters
Instant contact and action/instant global communications

19
Technological Revolutions and Techno-Economic Paradigms
developed and developing countries. With the advent of computers and the
Internet, large pyramids now appear rigid and clumsy. In its place, the decen-
tralized flexible network structure, with a strategic core and a rapid communi-
cation system, has shown its capacity for accommodating much larger and
more complex global organizations as well as smaller ones.19 Its common sense
or the logic that facilitates its smooth functioning, reinforced by the nature and
capabilities of the available information technologies, has been diffusing gradu-
ally and will eventually encompass a very wide range of institutions, probably
including those of global and local government.20
It is important to note that the techno-economic paradigm serves both as a
propeller of diffusion and as a delaying force. It is a propeller because it pro-
vides a model that can be followed by all, but its configuration takes time –
about a decade or more after the big-bang – and, given that each revolution is
by definition different from the previous one, the new principles will have to
be socially learned. But this learning must overcome the forces of inertia that
stem from the success of the previous paradigm. Its prevalence is the main
obstacle for the diffusion of the next revolution. These counteracting forces,
these battles between the new and the old, are at the core of the whole interpre-
tation presented here.
Thus, the range of transformations induced by technological revolutions
goes far beyond the economy, penetrating the sphere of politics and even ide-
ology.21 These, in turn, will influence the direction in which the potential is
deployed. This mutual influence between technology and politics does not
happen by chance, but by necessity. This will be discussed in Chapter 3, which
shows how the socio-institutional framework needs to change in order to ac-
commodate the transformations that occur in the techno-economic sphere, every
time a technological revolution irrupts on the scene.
19.
Castells (Vol. 1, 1996) went deeply and widely into the multiple consequences on all spheres
of life of this shift to network organizations. See also in Vol. 2 (1997) Ch. 1 and Conclu-
sion and in Vol. 3 (1998), Ch. 5.
20.
An interesting comparison of the characteristics of the British-led paradigms of the nine-
teenth century and those of the twentieth, led by the USA, is found in Von-Tunzelmann
(1997).
21.
For a complete panorama of the multiple social, cultural, economic and political implica-
tions of a change of paradigm on all areas of life, the reader can refer to the vast analysis
of the present ‘Information Age’ carried out by Manuel Castells (1996, 1997 and 1998).

20
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
D.
Revolutions, Paradigms and Great Surges of Development
The commonly held view of constant progress through linear and cumulative
development is as inadequate as the idea that technological change is continu-
ous and random. Both processes can, of course, be seen as regularly increasing
by putting the accent on the long-term trends and ignoring the many minor and
major variations. There are some purposes for which this is adequate. How-
ever, once the impact of successive technological revolutions is recognized,
the emphasis moves toward the complex set of interrelated changes involved
and a very different understanding emerges. Development is a step process
that takes place by huge leaps or surges of about five or six decades, each one
leading to deep structural changes within the economy and in society at large.
A great surge of development is defined here as the process by which a
technological revolution and its paradigm propagate across the economy, lead-
ing to structural changes in production, distribution, communication and con-
sumption as well as to profound and qualitative changes in society. The pro-
cess evolves from small beginnings, in restricted sectors and geographic re-
gions, and ends up encompassing the bulk of activities in the core country or
countries and diffusing out towards further and further peripheries, depending
on the capacity of the transport and communications infrastructures.
So each great surge represents another stage in the deepening of capitalism
in people’s lives and in its expansion across the planet. Each revolution incor-
porates new aspects of life and of production activities into the market mecha-
nism; each surge widens the group of countries that conforms the advanced
core of the system and each stretches the penetration of capitalism to further
corners of the world, inside and across countries.
In addition, a technological revolution, through the paradigm that takes shape
in its wake, sets a new higher level for the average productivity and quality
that can be achieved across the board. The great surge of development, which
results from the full social assimilation of this potential, ends up pulling the
whole group of core economies involved onto that higher productivity plateau.
Essentially what this means is that bringing to fruition the wealth-generat-
ing forces of each new paradigm requires massive and matching changes in
the patterns of investment, in the organizational models for maximum effi-
ciency, in the mental maps of all the social actors and in the institutions that
regulate and enable the economic and social processes. It also means that
progress can involve significant changes in direction; that accumulation may
require ‘disaccumulation’ from time to time; that what is installed may have to
be ‘uninstalled’, that continued advance along certain paths could lead to dead
ends, when others are already jumping onto the new bandwagons; that learn-
ing the new can require unlearning much of the old.

21
Technological Revolutions and Techno-Economic Paradigms
On the other hand, these changes in direction can be advantageous periods
for newcomers. A paradigm shift opens the necessary windows of opportunity
for forging ahead and catching up, while the front-runners are also learning.22
They are also the times when excess inertia may result in falling behind. Thus
the capacity for structural change in the most advantageous direction is a highly
valuable societal skill in order to reach development, and then to be able to
preserve and increase the gains as the context and the opportunities change.
The role of financial capital is crucial in enabling the massive shifts in in-
vestment required with each revolution. How this occurs, together with its
contradictory consequences, will be discussed in Part II of the book.
22.
Perez and Soete (1988).

22
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
If technological revolutions remained as forces of change in the economic
sphere and society adapted gradually and easily to the new products and means
of transport and communication the whole process could be described simply
as the form taken by ‘progress’ and technology could be treated as an exog-
enous variable. Such changes, however, are far from smooth. Societies are
profoundly shaken and shaped by each technological revolution and, in turn,
the technological potential is shaped and steered as a result of intense social,
political and ideological confrontations and compromises. It is precisely this
systemic character that makes the whole question of technical change so cru-
cial in understanding capitalist development.
A.
From Technological Innovations to Institutional
Revolutions
The notion of ‘creative destruction’, very much influenced by Nietzsche, was
a significant element in the European Zeitgeist of the early twentieth century,
as the nature of progress by innovation. Much in the same spirit as that of the
Renaissance, it was seen as Mankind’s noble and pleasurable duty to invent,23
to break the forces of inertia that threatened to chain and enslave society in a
cult of status quo. It was the German economist Werner Sombart, in his Krieg
und Kapitalismus, who first used the term ‘the creative spirit of destruction’ in
economics.24
Today we usually credit Schumpeter with the notion of ‘creative destruc-
tion’ as the way to describe the contradictory nature of technological revolu-
tions.25 In fact, he understood innovation, be it new products, new processes or
simply new ways of doing things, as the very essence of the capitalist engine
of growth. He saw capitalism as a ‘process of industrial mutation ... that inces-
3. The Social Shaping of Technological
Revolutions
22
23.
For a discussion of this tradition, see Reinert and Daastøl (1997).
24.
Sombart (1913) p. 207.
25.
Schumpeter (1942:1975) Ch. VII, p. 83.

23
The Social Shaping of Technological Revolutions
santly revolutionizes the economic structure from within, incessantly destroy-
ing the old one, incessantly creating a new one.’26
Due to the double nature of the process of creative destruction, Schumpeter
saw innovation not only as the force propelling progress but also as the cause
of recurring recessions and in general of the cyclical behavior of growth rates
and other economic magnitudes. Yet, in spite of his awareness of social and
institutional factors, Schumpeter remained very much attached to market equi-
librium forces as the determining factor and to the economy alone as the place
where the transformation was absorbed. Be it the 3–5 year Kitchin cycles or
the 7–11 year Juglars or the 45–60 year Kondratiev long waves,27 they would
all be related to deviations from equilibrium due to bursts of innovation. When
defining the longest – 45–60-year – cycles, or long waves, he referred to
each as ‘the irruption of a technological revolution and the absorption of
its effects’.28
Explaining the shorter ‘inventory’ and ‘investment’ cycles mainly in terms
of economic forces may possibly be justified. However, this is certainly not
warranted in the case of the longer-term phenomena usually called ‘long waves’,
which should be understood as much more complex, society-wide processes.29
In fact, in this book a different label has been chosen in order to definitely
distance the concept and the object itself from any narrowly defined purely
economic cycle. The term ‘great surges of development’ was introduced in the
previous chapter to represent the turbulent process of diffusion of each tech-
nological revolution, lasting half a century or more. The intention is to take the
accent away from the symptoms and endeavor to understand the underlying
causes.30
These difficult long-term processes of transformation are in the nature of
the capitalist system and involve intense interactions between the economy
and social institutions as well as profound changes in both. Each technological
revolution is received as a shock, and its diffusion encounters powerful resis-
tance both in the established institutions and in people themselves. Hence, the
full unfolding of its wealth-creating potential at first has rather chaotic and
26.
Schumpeter (1942:1975) Ch. VII, p. 84 (original emphasis).
27.
Kondratiev (1926).
28.
Schumpeter (1942:1975), p. 67.
29.
Perez (1983), p. 359.
30.
Since 1983, and up to now, the author herself had used the term ‘long waves’, though
attempting to mark the distance. The change of label now emphasizes the difference in
concept. Kondratiev, Schumpeter and most followers measured each wave from trough to
trough, which in practice meant encompassing the second half of one revolution and the
first half of the next. Here they are identified – though not measured – from peak to peak,
covering the complete life cycle of a single revolution. This is the reason why the present
model follows the deployment of each surge and the structural transformations it induces
across the economy and society, rather than examine growth statistics.

24
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
contradictory social effects, it later will demand a significant institutional
recomposition. This will include changes in the regulatory framework affect-
ing all markets and economic activities as well as the redesign of a whole
range of institutions, from government, through financial regulation, to educa-
tion, as well as modifications in social behaviors and ideas. It is thanks to that
restructuring of the context to fit the potential of the revolution that ‘golden
ages’ can occur.
The Victorian boom, from the mid-nineteenth century, materialized two
decades after the ‘Rocket’ steam engine showed its power to pull the Liverpool
to Manchester railway and not before a network of railroads had been installed,
before and during a mania that led to a financial panic. That prosperity was
brought about on the basis of a whole set of new institutions that ordered na-
tional markets and regulated the national banking and financial worlds. These
facilitated the continued expansion of the railway system and the network of
steam-powered factories in the growing industrial cities.
Two decades after the big-bang of the Age of Steel, profound changes had
to be made again. The ‘belle époque’ based on the unleashing of the full poten-
tial of the third paradigm, with its truly international markets, required world-
wide regulation (from the general acceptance of the London-based Gold Stan-
dard to universal agreements on measurement, patents, insurance, transport,
communications and shipping practices), while the structural changes in pro-
duction, including the growth of important science-related industries had to be
facilitated by deep educational reforms and social legislation.
The unleashing of the ‘golden age’ based on the mass-production technolo-
gies of the fourth paradigm that had been diffusing since the 1910s and 1920s
demanded institutions facilitating massive consumption, by the people or by
the governments. Only in such a context could full flourishing be achieved. At
the time, Fascism, Socialism and Keynesian democracies were set up as very
different socio-political models giving impulse to growth processes based on
mass production and consumption.31 They all tended first to homogenize con-
sumption patterns within national markets and then to use these as a platform
for international expansion.
Creating the appropriate context for cohesive growth, based on the poten-
tial of the information revolution, would seem to require a global network of
institutions, involving the supranational, national and local regulatory levels.
Thus, each technological revolution brings with it, not only a full revamp-
ing of the productive structure but eventually also a transformation of the in-
stitutions of governance, of society and even of ideologies and culture, so deep
that one can speak about the construction of successive and different modes of
31.
These examples point to the variety of possibilities with each paradigm and to the impor-
tance of the socio-political processes for defining the specific mode of growth.

25
The Social Shaping of Technological Revolutions
growth in the history of capitalism.32 The process of creative destruction oc-
curs then, every 50 or 60 years, both in the economy and in the socio-political
framework. 33
Such changes tend to be forced by a mixture of pressures coming at first
from the requirements of the rapidly changing economy and later from the
consequences of the turbulent manner in which the new technology diffuses,
leading to intense and sometimes violent social tensions. Ultimately, the most
effective pressure for institutional change, and especially for some form of
state intervention in the economy, comes from the recession following the col-
lapse of the financial economy, which tends to occur a couple of decades after
the initial big-bang.
It is in such a period that Keynes made his case for the state to implement
countercyclical policies.34 And even Schumpeter was willing to suspend his
faith in the healing powers of the pure market and to recognize that ‘the case
for government action was incomparably stronger’,35 when it was a question
of pulling the economy out of a depression.
In fact, though technological revolutions are indeed profound transforma-
tions of the economy, the working of markets cannot by itself explain the re-
currence of major crashes and depressions or the appearance of long-lasting
centrifugal trends, turbulence and chaos, much less to account for the return to
prosperity. To explain the emergence of such wider phenomena affecting the
very fabric of society the analysis must bring into the picture the tensions,
resistance, obstacles and misalignments that arise from within the wider social
and institutional scene.
B.
The Absorption of Technological Revolutions as
Decoupling and Recoupling of the System
It is precisely the need for reforms and the inevitable social resistance to them
that lies behind the deeper crises and longer-term cyclical behavior of the sys-
tem. Each technological revolution, originally received as a bright new set of
32.
The concept is somewhat akin to that of mode of production proposed by Marx (Marx and
Engels, 1847) for long-term historical changes. Mode of growth has a much narrower
sense and refers to systemic institutional changes within capitalism.
33.
From Daniel Bell (1973), through Toffler (1980) to Castells (1996, 1997 and 1998), many
voices have been hailing the present changes as leading to a different society, a ‘post-
industrial’ one. This seems to happen with each technological revolution (the term ‘revo-
lution’ is not used lightly!). For those who witness the upheaval it certainly appears each
time like a fundamental discontinuity. Nevertheless, it is fair to concede that, this time, the
growing share of intangibles in production and trade strengthens the case for interpreting
it as a deeper break.
34.
Keynes, (1936).
35.
Schumpeter (1939) Vol. I, p. 155.

26
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
opportunities, is soon recognized as a threat to the established way of doing
things in firms, institutions and society at large.
The new techno-economic paradigm gradually takes shape as a different
‘common sense’ for effective action in any area of endeavor. But while com-
petitive forces, profit seeking and survival pressures help diffuse the changes
in the economy, the wider social and institutional spheres where change is also
needed are held back by strong inertia stemming from routine, ideology and
vested interests. It is this difference in rhythm of change, between the techno-
economic and the socio-institutional spheres, that would explain the turbulent
period following each big-bang and therefore the lag in taking full social ad-
vantage of the new potential.
It is thus that the first 20 or 30 years of diffusion of each technological
revolution lead to an increasing mismatch between the economy and the social
and regulatory systems. The latter were developed to fit the requirements of
the previous paradigm and cannot cope with the new conditions. In addition,
the changes occurring in the techno-economic sphere imply a huge social cost
in loss of jobs and skills as well as in geographic displacement of activities.
The previous framework is unlikely to be prepared to absorb or counterbal-
ance those costs. Thus, as the mismatch increases, centrifugal tensions and
decoupling processes rip apart the fabric of the economy, leading to problems
of governance and to questioning the legitimacy of the established institu-
tional framework. There can be persistent social demands or violent outbreaks,
which can take many different forms as was seen in the 1848 revolutions in
Europe or much later in the various revolts, the coups d’état and the acute
social tensions of the 1920s and 1930s. The demonstrations against the global
free market policies of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in their Seattle
meeting, in November 1999, may well have marked the beginning of growing
open international political pressure to change the so-called ‘Washington con-
sensus’.
Whatever the manifestation, the political pressures calling for action finally
propel the required changes. The financial collapse that usually marks the end
of this period is the final and often the strongest instrument of persuasion to
bring about the necessary changes. Once the new ‘match’ has been achieved
through the articulation of an appropriate mode of growth, a process of
recoupling and convergence ensues. The following 20 or 30 years witness the
full deployment of the new paradigm in intensity and extension, from sector to
sector and across regions and countries.
By statistical measures these ‘eras of good feeling’ are not necessarily the
times when rhythm of growth is highest, yet they are the periods generally felt
and accepted as ‘golden ages’, for they represent a more harmonious growth
process, involving most sectors of the economy. They can also be a time of
improvement in the lot of larger and larger groups of the population, espe-

27
The Social Shaping of Technological Revolutions
cially in those countries centrally involved in the diffusion of the paradigm
and where the most appropriate institutional frameworks have been set up.36
The sequence of ‘good and bad times’ would thus have its origin in the
interaction between the dynamics of the economy, as such, and that of society
as a whole. Further still, this very phenomenon is one of the main factors
explaining why what appears as continuous technical evolution occurs inside
the successive envelopes of different revolutions.
C.
Why Technical Change Occurs by Revolutions
Kuznets cast doubt on Schumpeter’s causal link between the clustering of in-
novations that form technological revolutions and the bunching of entrepre-
neurial abilities.37 Indeed, this is a key question for all proponents of innova-
tion-based economic fluctuations. It will be suggested here that these bursts of
entrepreneurship actually do occur, but that they do so in response to opportu-
nity explosions. Such bunching of opportunities occurs with the appearance of
a new techno-economic paradigm, which defines a new and wide design, prod-
uct and profit space that can inflame the imagination of potential innovators.
In other words, the great clusters of talent come forth after the revolution is
visible and because it is visible.
That raises two crucial questions. One is, if talents are always there to come
forth, then why is change not continuous, why does it occur by revolutions?
The other, derived from that, is the issue of the prime mover, or how do the
few breakthroughs that initiate the revolution come together?
The favorable conditions for the next revolution are created when the po-
tential of the previous one approaches exhaustion. The process involves a com-
plex set of inclusion–exclusion mechanisms resulting from the nature of so-
cial adaptation to each paradigm. The full assimilation of a technological revo-
lution and its techno-economic paradigm occurs when society has accepted its
common sense, put in place the appropriate regulatory framework and other
institutions and learned to gear the new potential to its ends. This leads to two
conditions that favor compatible innovations and filter out incompatible ones.
On the one hand, the social and institutional environment has become highly
conducive to the unfolding of any opportunity and possibility compatible with
the paradigm. Externalities of all sorts are so overwhelmingly favorable to it
that engineers, designers, managers, entrepreneurs and investors ‘naturally’
follow certain common principles as obvious good business. A thousand plas-
36.
These qualitative aspects of growth are rarely included in the usual interpretations of ‘long
waves’.
37.
Kuznets (1940) pp. 261–2.

28
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
tics followed the first breakthroughs in synthetic materials, wired houses could
take on dozens of successive new electrical appliances, the agricultural revo-
lution could combine the use of oil-driven machinery of increasing variety and
specialization with any number of petrochemical pesticides and fertilizers. The
same has occurred this time with computer games, with software packages,
with the various generations of personal computers and then with ‘dot com’
services in the Internet. Once the path has been successfully signaled, growing
bunches can join the bandwagon. And so it goes with each of the interrelated
systems that conform a particular technological revolution and its associated
‘common-sense’ paradigm.
That is in fact the technological and business equivalent of what Kuhn de-
fined as ‘normal science’.38 Once the valid trajectories for new products and
processes as well as for their improvement are known, successive and success-
ful innovations will follow. They will be compatible among themselves, they
will interact smoothly, they will find the required supplies, qualified personnel
and market channels and will encounter increasing social acceptance based on
learning with the previous products.
On the other hand, these favorable conditions become a powerful exclusion
mechanism for all possible innovations that are incompatible or not well geared
to the existing framework. Attempts to introduce such innovations could be
rejected by investors or customers or, as often turns out to be the case, could be
successfully adapted in a minor way to the prevailing paradigm. Such adapta-
tions can nevertheless lead to the growth of important industries that will be-
come central in a future paradigm. For the moment, they grow restricted to
whatever uses fit well in the existing fabric of the economy before their most
important uses are even surmised. Railways were first developed to help get
coal out of the mines; their real significance as the main means of transport of
people and goods was difficult to even imagine in a world of canals, turnpikes
and horses. Oil refining and the internal combustion engine developed within
the steam-engine world of the third revolution, being used mainly for luxury
automobiles. Semiconductors, in the form of transistors, served to stretch the
market for radios and other basic appliances of the mass-production paradigm
by making them portable, before anyone could possibly conceive of a micro-
computer.
The most conspicuous exception to the exclusion mechanism is war-related
expenditure. The application of political and military criteria, rather than eco-
nomic logic, opens avenues of research, technology and production that could
lead far from the reigning techno-economic paradigm, usually involving ex-
travagant costs that could not be normally recovered in the market. When the
war takes place in the maturity phase of the paradigm, these voluntaristic ex-
38.
Kuhn (1962:1970) pp. 10 and 24.

29
The Social Shaping of Technological Revolutions
cursions into new technological territory could become a seedbed for the next
technological revolution. The 1960s Space and Arms Race is, of course, the
most notorious example of such expenditures.
Whatever their origin, the real possibilities of a radical innovation can be so
difficult to envisage, before the appropriate paradigm is there, that even those
who carry them out may grossly underestimate their potential. Edison thought
the phonograph he invented in the 1870s would be useful for recording dying
people’s wills; in the 1950s the boss of IBM still thought a few computers
would cover the world’s total demand, and so on.39 Those innovators who do
see far into the future can have great difficulty in being understood by others,
as happened to Alexander Graham Bell, with his still primitive telephone in a
world of efficient telegraph.40
By contrast, when an innovation is within the natural trajectory41 of the
prevailing paradigm, then everybody – from engineers through investors to
consumers – understands what the product is good for and can probably sug-
gest what to improve. Even such minor and doubtfully useful products as the
electric can-opener or the electric carving knife are thought worth designing,
producing, buying and using in a world that is already accustomed to dozens
of electrical appliances in the kitchen. The same happens with the successive
applications of the general principles of the prevailing paradigm. In the case of
continuous mass production, for example, after manufacturing had fully de-
veloped all its principles and refined its organizational practices, the task of
applying the model to any other activity became straightforward. Mass tour-
ism, of the ‘assembly-line’ type, moving people from airplane to bus, from bus
to hotel and from hotel to bus, was obvious to conceive, easy to put into prac-
tice and readily accepted by consumers at the time.
Yet, trajectories are not eternal. The potential of a paradigm, no matter how
powerful, will eventually be exhausted. Technological revolutions and para-
digms have a life cycle of about half a century, which more or less follows the
type of logistic curve characteristic of any innovation.
As shown in Figure 3.1, in phase one, after the big-bang, there comes a
period of explosive growth and rapid innovation in the new industries. New
products follow one another revealing the principles that define their further
trajectory. Thus the paradigm is configured and its ‘common sense’ can guide
the propagation of the revolution.
Phase two is one of fast diffusion, seeing the flourishing of the new indus-
tries, technology systems and infrastructures with intensive investment and
39.
There are of course cases of foresight such as Diebold (1952), who from very early on
wrote about the future potential of computers.
40.
Mackay (1997).
41.
Nelson and Winter (1977, pp. 36–76) used the expression ‘natural trajectory’ to refer to
the path which appears to be naturally followed by successive innovations to a technology.

30
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
market growth. Fast growth continues in phase three with the full deployment
of the paradigm across the productive structure.
Phase four is the encroachment of maturity. At a certain point, the potential
of the revolution begins to confront limits. There are still new products being
introduced, new industries being born and even whole technology systems,
though they are fewer and less important. But the core industries that had served
as the engines of growth begin to encounter market saturation and decreasing
returns to technological innovation. This announces the approaching maturity
of those industries and the gradual exhaustion of the dynamism of that whole
revolution. 42
When the potential of a paradigm begins to reach limits, when the space
opened by a paradigm becomes constricted, productivity, growth and profits
are seriously threatened. Thus the need and the effective demand appear for
new solutions, for radical innovations, for stepping out of the well-trodden
paths.43 Yet, by this time, after decades of successful development under the
established paradigm, the environment has over-adapted. Not only firms but
Figure 3.1    The life cycle of a technological revolution
42.
The phenomenon is similar to Wolf’s (1912) Law of diminishing returns to investment in
incremental innovations to individual products and processes. It is also akin to the product
life-cycle theory developed by Hirsch (1965 and 1967), Vernon (1966) and others.
43.
Kuznets (1953, p. 113) had already suggested something of this sort, when trying to un-
derstand Schumpeter’s point about clustering: ‘we may say that electricity did not become
available sooner because it had to wait until the potentialities of steam power were ex-
hausted by the economic system’.

31
The Social Shaping of Technological Revolutions
also people and society as a whole have accepted and adopted the logic of the
established paradigm as the ‘common-sense’ criterion. Yet the way forward
along that route is now barred by impending exhaustion.
The core industries of the technological revolution, now maturing, are reap-
ing the last benefits of economies of scale and are probably tied up with huge
fixed investment.44 They are also likely to be in a very strong position (oli-
gopoly or near-monopoly), which gives them the means to seek effective solu-
tions to break out of the trap. These probably include mergers, migration and
some unorthodox practices that will be discussed in Chapter 8 in relation to
financial capital. For the present purpose, however, the significant processes
are those that lead to the next technological revolution. Of these, one of the
most important is the willingness to try out truly radical innovations as im-
provements that will stretch the life cycle of established technologies or re-
duce the cost of peripheral activities.
Crude versions of the high pressure engine were tried in the early 1800s to
increase the productivity of textile machinery; ‘scientific management’ of work
organization, which is the core of mass production, was first developed by
Taylor at the turn of the century to increase the productivity of moving steel
products in the steel yards; automation was given trial runs by the automobile
industry in the early 1960s, control instruments in their pre-digital forms went
far in development in the process industries from early on, numerical control
machine tools were introduced in shoe manufacturing and aerospace in the
1960s and 1970s. So, the introduction of some truly new technologies can be
tied to revitalizing mature industries in trouble.
There can also be a readiness to introduce radical innovations that widen
the range of technologies already in the market, as was the case with transis-
tors in audio products that, by allowing portability, opened huge new markets
from the late 1950s.
The more sectors and firms confront maturity and saturation, the more in-
tense the various trial and error activities become. As in Kuhn’s model of ‘revo-
lutionary science’, breaking the trend and searching in new directions is fos-
tered and facilitated by the confrontation of limits and crises in the established
paradigm.45 The specific obstacles encountered by each techno-economic para-
digm as it is developed to its ultimate consequences, will serve as powerful
guidelines in the search for the new set of technologies.46 Yet, in order for a
technological revolution to emerge, radical new paths have to be opened and
crucial breakthroughs have to be made.
44.
Soete (1985) made this point in support of the possibility of catching up for newcomers
who are not bogged down by heavy investment in the old technologies. It was taken up
again in Perez and Soete (1988).
45.
Kuhn (1962) Ch. VII–VIII.
46.
Freeman and Perez (1988), Table 3.1 Column 7, pp. 50–53.

32
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Radical innovations can occur at any time, though their gestation period
can be long. Due to the relative autonomy of the production of science and
technology, there are always potential innovations in various fields waiting in
the wings. At any point in time, therefore, the spaces of the scientifically con-
ceivable and the technologically possible are much wider than those of the
economically viable or the socially acceptable. Hence, many major technolo-
gies at various stages of development can already be in the economy, in minor
or narrow uses. The real potential of some will become fully visible once they
converge to form a revolution (others may have to wait many more decades or
never be fully exploited). So, given the appropriate conditions of pressure and
demand, a new constellation of radical technologies can gradually come to-
gether from already available developments.47
Thus, technology evolves by revolutions because the prevalence of a spe-
cific paradigm, with its vast interrelated opportunities, induces deep social
adaptation to its characteristics. This creates powerful inclusion–exclusion
mechanisms, which avoid radical departures from the prevailing paradigm until
the huge potential of that revolution has been spent and approaches exhaus-
tion.48 It is then that entrepreneurial abilities of the sort that nurture radical
innovations are more likely to be in demand. However, just as there is a high
likelihood that the successful candidates to become the new paradigm in a
particular science might be found by practitioners from another science, so the
radical new departures in technology are likely to come from ‘outsiders’, from
technologists or entrepreneurs who were not imbued with the previous para-
digm, who may well be young and outside the powerful established firms like
Carnegie or Alexander Graham Bell, Edison or Ford, Noyce, Steve Jobs or
Bill Gates.
In order to understand how the gates break open so the excluded can enter
in a throng, the role of financial capital needs to be examined.
47.
Gerhard Mensch (1979) advanced a very similar hypothesis, suggesting that a ‘stalemate
in technology’ was at the origin of recessions (such as the stagflation which began around
the early 1970s). Unfortunately his method of proving this was counting and comparing
the radical innovations made at various periods to identify clusters coinciding with reces-
sions. So he took the actual date of first introduction as the full birth of an innovation. This
made him open to criticism from Freeman et al. (1982) who showed that radical innova-
tions can be scattered widely in time and that what really matters for significant growth
impact is diffusion of combinations of innovations.
48.
The identification of such an exclusion mechanism was one of the conditions demanded of
long-wave proponents by Rosenberg and Frischtak (1984).

33
The Social Shaping of Technological Revolutions
D.
The Role of Financial Capital in the Emergence of New
Paradigms
In contrast with the scientific world, commercial innovation is made with profit
in mind. Whether the innovator works in the laboratory of a big firm or in his/
her garage, someone will have to see it as a possible source of huge profit and
be willing to put up the required investment money to test the process, launch
the product or expand production. It is here that, as Schumpeter says, the insti-
tution of credit, in one form or another, plays a crucial role.49
Someone’s money has to be available to break the routine trajectories and
make radical changes. The big established firms, as they face paradigm con-
striction, will probably put forward money to try stretching solutions to their
own products and processes, which could involve, as they often do, minor
uses of radical new technologies. They might also try to widen the range of
known technologies and do research in new directions. All these activities can
lead to completely new products and technologies (as was the case of Bell labs
with the transistor, for example). Yet, they are not likely to fund true ‘outsiders’.
It is here that the separation between financial and production capital has its
most fruitful consequences. It is because there is available money looking for
profit in the hands of non-producers that the new entrepreneurs can bring their
ideas into commercial reality. It is here that the possibility of operating with
borrowed money becomes a truly dynamic force. Financial capital will back
the new entrepreneurs and it will be more likely to do so, in spite of the high
risks, the more exhausted the possibilities are for investing in the accustomed
directions.50
As the low-risk investment opportunities in the established paradigm begin
to diminish, either in innovation or in market expansion, there is a growing
mass of idle capital looking for profitable uses and willing to venture in new
directions. Thus, the exhaustion of a paradigm brings with it both the need for
radical entrepreneurship and the idle capital to take the high risks of trial and
error.
Under these conditions several strands of innovation come together, some
from the big firms overcoming obstacles, others from novel entrepreneurs with
new ideas and others associated with the many underutilized or marginalized
innovations that had been introduced before. These are likely to incorporate
part of the vast pool of applicable knowledge waiting in the wings or to bring
49.
Schumpeter (1939:1982) Vol. 2, Ch. III, pp. 109–18.
50.
This was one of the main points made by Mensch (1979). His formulation came quite
early in the debate, just as venture capital was being made available to Silicon Valley and
other innovators.

34
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
forth new knowledge. Eventually, the necessary breakthroughs are made – or
recognized – and brought together with other new or redefined technologies to
conform the next technological revolution. From then on, financial capital is
even more widely available for entrepreneurs to innovate exploiting the novel
trajectories of the new paradigm. As will be discussed later (Chapters 9 and
13), new financial instruments are developed at this time to accommodate the
peculiarities of the new products and their diffusion.
There is probably no easy way of testing whether during other times there
are as many would-be entrepreneurs trying to get their innovations funded as
there are at the end of the life cycle of a paradigm. What one can say with little
risk of erring is that, once the design, product and profit space of a new para-
digm is made visible, the imagination of a vast number of potential engineers,
designers and entrepreneurs is fired to innovate within the new general trajec-
tories. As available finance makes their projects possible and as their astound-
ing successes makes the paradigm even more visible and attractive to a greater
number of people, the ranks of those that feel the calling will invariably swell.51
So, the signs of exhaustion of the prevailing paradigm create the demand
for profitable new innovation trajectories, pent-up supply of technological
options begins to flourish, idle financial capital provides the fertilizer, the en-
suing articulation of new technologies eventually leads to crucial breakthroughs,
the new paradigm multiplies the supply of innovative entrepreneurs, their suc-
cesses bring forth more financial capital and more entrepreneurs and so on.
Thus, there is certainly variability in entrepreneurship as Schumpeter held,
but the origin of this variability is in the changing conditions and opportunities
surrounding it. This is not to be understood as claiming that only ‘outsiders’
are real innovators. On the contrary, if it were mainly a question of numbers,
over time one would probably find that the great majority of innovations are
made inside existing firms, not only the minor and major modifications of
technologies in use but also the introduction of many new products and pro-
cesses. Even some of the crucial breakthroughs (such as the precursor of the
integrated circuit in Bell Labs, already mentioned) can occur inside estab-
lished firms or are acquired and introduced by them.
Nevertheless, long-standing firms are the main carriers of the prevailing
paradigm. As discussed before, the paradigm is such a powerful guiding model
that it becomes an inclusion–exclusion mechanism, strongly reinforced by so-
cial adaptation and gradual overadaptation. Therefore, in technological terms,
one could say that the most powerful firms at the time of the exhaustion of a
particular paradigm are likely to become the most conservative forces. Al-
though some intelligent firms may make major innovations, their heavy in-
vestment in some of the now mature technologies makes them prefer to avoid
51.
Schumpeter’s (1942) bandwagon effect.

35
The Social Shaping of Technological Revolutions
truly revolutionary change, which might make their equipment and practices
obsolete. Yet, ironically, since their productivity, market and profit growth rates
are probably stagnating, their main hope for revitalization lies in radical change.
Thus, existing large firms are likely to be both agents and victims of para-
digm closure. Breaking out of it is bound to demand the participation of out-
siders. When they appear, idle financial capital allows them to manifest them-
selves fully and fructify.52
52.
One could wonder if the reason why Soviet socialism was unable to make the innovations
that would have helped it overcome paradigm constriction since the 1970s was not in part
the lack of an institution capable of providing equivalent flexibility to facilitate change.
See Gomulka (1990).

36
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
In real life, the trajectory of a technological revolution is not as smooth and
continuous as the stylized curve presented in Figure 3.1. The process of instal-
lation of each new techno-economic paradigm in society begins with a battle
against the power of the old, which is ingrained in the established production
structure and embedded in the socio-cultural environment and in the institu-
tional framework. Only when that battle has been practically won can the para-
digm really diffuse across the whole economy of the core nations and later
across the world. As defined in Chapter 2, the complex processes of propaga-
tion of technological revolutions and techno-economic paradigms through the
economy and society are the great surges that make development discontinuous.
In very broad terms, each surge goes through two periods of a very different
nature, each lasting about three decades. As shown in Figure 4.1, the first half
can be termed the installation period. It is the time when the new technologies
irrupt in a maturing economy and advance like a bulldozer disrupting the es-
tablished fabric and articulating new industrial networks, setting up new infra-
structures and spreading new and superior ways of doing things. At the begin-
ning of that period, the revolution is a small fact and a big promise; at the end,
the new paradigm is a significant force, having overcome the resistance of the
old paradigm and being ready to serve as propeller of widespread growth.
The second half is the deployment period, when the fabric of the whole
economy is rewoven and reshaped by the modernizing power of the trium-
phant paradigm, which then becomes normal best practice, enabling the full
unfolding of its wealth generating potential.
The turning point from Installation to Deployment is a crucial crossroads,
usually a serious recession, involving a recomposition of the whole system, in
particular of the regulatory context that enables the resumption of growth and
the full fructification of the technological revolution. As will be discussed in
Chapters 10 and 11, towards the end of the installation period, there is a phase
of frantic investment in the new industries and the infrastructure, stimulated
by a stock market boom that usually becomes a bubble that inevitably col-
lapses in one way or another. As represented in Figure 4.1, this frenzy involves
an untenable acceleration of the diffusion of the paradigm. The recession cre-
ates the conditions for institutional restructuring and for re-routing growth
onto a sustainable path.
4. The Propagation of Paradigms: Times of
Installation, Times of Deployment
36

37
The Propagation of Paradigms: Times of Installation, Times of Deployment
Figure 4.1    Two different periods in each great surge
This chapter takes a broad look at the interrelated technological, economic
and institutional changes involved in the process.
A.
Creative Destruction and Social Polarization
Schumpeter’s notion of ‘creative destruction’ aptly portrays the effects of radical
innovations. When the core products of a technological revolution start com-
ing together, they inevitably clash with the established environment and the
ingrained ways of doing things. Arkwright’s water frame was a clear threat to
hand spinners both in England and in India. The Liverpool–Manchester rail-
way announced the demise of the horse-drawn carriage for long-distance pas-
senger travel, affecting various occupations from innkeepers to veterinarians.53
The Suez Canal practically eliminated sailing ships from the route to India,
while, by cutting travel time from three months to one, it made obsolete the
network of huge cargo depots in England, threatening the power of the big
53.
Contrary to what one would have expected, the number of horses actually increased for
more than 50 years because of the need for horse transport from railway stations to ships,
houses, inns and so on. This is similar to the unfulfilled expectations of a paperless office
in the wake of the ICT revolution.
Turning
point
DEPLOYMENT PERIOD
Degree of diffusion of the technological revolution
big-bang
Next
big-bang
Time
INSTALLATION PERIOD

38
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
trading companies and opening opportunities for smaller ones.54 Cheap Besse-
mer steel was a clear menace to wrought iron producers (see Figure 4.2). The
fast, powerful steel steamships with refrigerated cargo opened the world meat
and produce markets of the North to competition from the countries of the
southern hemisphere. The mass-produced automobile was a clear foreboding
of the displacement of steam-powered trains and horse-drawn carriages as the
main means of passenger travel.
Of course, these threats take time to become a reality and resistance from
those affected may prolong the transition. But the fact is that once a truly
superior technology is available, with higher productivity and clear growth
potential, the outcome in the medium term is practically inevitable. This is all
the more so, given that, as suggested above, these revolutionary developments
generally occur when the profitable investment opportunities attached to the
previous paradigm are nearly exhausted.
What these big-bangs inaugurate is a new direction and a powerful attractor
for investment. Successful radical innovations receive and promise extraordi-
nary profits in a sluggish mature industrial landscape. The new products and
54.
Wells (1889:1893) p. 32.
Source:      Ayres (1989). Surge indications by the author.
Figure 4.2    Steel displacing iron as the main engineering material from the
second to the third surge
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1860
1870
1880
1890
1990
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
PERCENT OF IRON AND STEEL PRODUCTS
2nd G.S.
Third Great Surge
Fourth Great Surge
Steel
Cast iron
and Wrought iron

39
The Propagation of Paradigms: Times of Installation, Times of Deployment
infrastructures experience amazing rates of growth. Soon, the new generic tech-
nologies and the organizational innovations that accompany them allow other
products and industries to join the bandwagon through modernization. This
new lease of life is particularly welcome by the still powerful firms in the core
industries of the previous revolution, which are likely to be facing serious
paradigm constriction by this time. Railways changed to steel rails and im-
proved steel engines as soon as they were able in the 1870s and 1880s. The
maturing automobile industry in the 1970s and 1980s incorporated electronic
chips in vehicles, computer-controlled production equipment and the flexible
organization model, first developed by the Japanese. In general, it was the
mature giant corporations in the 1960s and 1970s that tried to increase admin-
istrative control and white-collar productivity by trying out the early comput-
ers and minicomputers.
Thus, the irruption of the technological revolution also signals a cleavage
in the fabric of the economy along several lines of tension:
●
between the new industries and the mature ones;
●
between the modern firms – whether new or upgraded by the new meth-
ods – and the firms that stay attached to the old ways;
●
regionally, between the strongholds of the now old industries and the
new spaces occupied or favored by the new industries;
●
in capabilities, between those that are trained to participate in the new
technologies and those whose skills become increasingly obsolete;
●
in the working population, between those that work in the modern firms
or live in the dynamic regions and those that remain in the stagnant ones
and are threatened with unemployment or uncertain incomes;
●
structurally, between the thriving new industries and the old regulatory
system, and
●
internationally, between the fortunes of those countries that ride the wave
of the new technologies and those that are left behind.
These polarizing trends worsen as the firms wedded to the previous para-
digm increasingly confront exhaustion, in the form of depleted innovative tra-
jectories, diminishing profits and stagnation of productivity and markets, while
the new ones display extraordinary profits, growing productivity and rapid
market penetration. Depending on the institutional and macroeconomic frame-
work of the particular period, the declining industries face either deflation or
inflation in their constricted markets.55 The regions where they predominate
55.
Those economists who believe the economic sphere to be self-contained will probably
cringe at the thought that the same fundamental cause can lead to deflation in a period of
unrestrained markets, such as the 1870s and 1880s, and to inflation in economies shaped
by oligopolies and state intervention such as those of the twentieth century.

40
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
will decline; their labor force will face growing unemployment. The contrast
between the dynamism of modern firms and the sluggishness and deteriora-
tion of the laggards ends up translated into a polarized income distribution.
Worse still, when changes are made that suit the flourishing of the new tech-
nologies, the situation for those not modernized becomes even more difficult.
Figure 4.3 shows how Business Week saw the US economy gradually decoupling
from the late 1980s to the mid-1990s, differentiating the ‘high-tech’ sector,
belonging to the so-called information economy, from the rest.
Figure 4.3
Decoupling of the system: the differing performance of the ‘high-
tech’ sector and the rest of the economy in the USA, 1989–96
Source:      Mandel (1997) Reprinted from the March 31, 1997 issue of Business Week, Latin
American Edition, by special permission, copyright © 1997 by McGraw-Hill.
NON SUPERVISORY AND PRODUCTION WORKERS
DATA BUREAU OF ECONOMIC ANALYSIS, BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS BUSINESS WEEK ©BW

41
The Propagation of Paradigms: Times of Installation, Times of Deployment
These diverging fortunes are reflected in the stock market where, as will be
discussed in Part II, a bubble tends to develop around the new technology
firms and their associated new infrastructure.
Gradually, as the rich and the successful get richer and more successful,
while the poor or weak get poorer and weaker, the legitimacy of the estab-
lished political regimes comes increasingly under question and pressures for
reversing the centrifugal trends become stronger and clearer. Hence, the first
two or three decades of creative destruction after the big-bang are increasingly
turbulent and the benefits of growth are very unevenly distributed. As men-
tioned above, the protests that are likely to develop can take highly different
specific forms, from the explosive social revolts of 1848 in the early days of
industrialization in Europe to the transnationally organized demonstrations
against globalization in Seattle, Genoa and elsewhere. The political responses
also vary enormously, depending on the particular historical context. Simi-
larly desperate social conditions facilitated Hitler’s rise to power in Germany
and inspired Roosevelt’s New Deal in the United States in the 1930s.
B.
Installation and Deployment Periods: Decoupling and
Recoupling of the Economy and Institutions
To accommodate each technological revolution, then, many changes need to
occur at different levels. In the first place, the new technologies will require
the establishment of a whole network of interconnected services such as the
specific infrastructure and the specialized suppliers, distribution channels,
maintenance capabilities and others that provide the territorial externalities to
facilitate diffusion. Without roads, gasoline stations and mechanics, people
cannot use automobiles, yet only enough automobiles on the road will make it
profitable to run a station or a garage. So diffusion occurs through intricate
feedback loops.
Then, there is the cultural adaptation to the logic of the technologies in-
volved. A vast learning process must take place among engineers, managers,
sales and service people and obviously consumers, about the production and
use of the new products. This not only supposes learning to drive a car, use a
radio or a washing machine, but also an understanding of the direction of inno-
vation, so that novelties can easily be adopted and accepted. The progression
from desktop to laptop to palm top is gradually understood as the ‘normal’
sequence of change both in production and in consumption. Adaptation also
involves acquiring the organizational notions embodied in the corresponding
paradigm. These begin transforming the enterprise and gradually spread out to
more and more non-economic activities.

42
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Finally there is the wider set of institutional enablers, involving rules and
regulations, specialized training and education, standards, supervisory bodies,
financial innovations and so on. The traffic code and consumer credit for
monthly payment of automobiles and electrical appliances were equally nec-
essary for the growth of the respective markets of the fourth surge.
Of course this adaptation is not passive. The specific ways in which a soci-
ety transforms the context to assimilate a technological potential will, in turn,
shape the direction the technologies will take and the intensity of their diffu-
sion. An extreme case of these variations was seen with the Western democra-
cies and the Soviet system, which both adopted mass production, the automo-
bile, Taylorism, mass electrification, synthetics and most of the other tech-
nologies associated with the fourth technological revolution, but the resulting
lifestyles and production profiles were very different.
However similar or varied, the process of social assimilation of a techno-
logical revolution shapes and adapts the environment and the economy so that,
when it is done, there is near complete coherence between all spheres of soci-
ety. It becomes the reign of a particular paradigm to the point where it is be-
lieved to be universal common sense and becomes unconscious and invisible.
At this point, it is important to note that this process of deep adoption of a
paradigm, though tending to inhibit truly revolutionary change outside the scope
of the particular technological revolution being deployed, facilitates the full
diffusion of each surge. By this inclusion–exclusion mechanism, the system
permits reaping the full fruits of the vast investment made in infrastructure,
equipment, technological development, training, experience and social learn-
ing associated with that paradigm. All this economic and social effort becomes
a set of externalities for further investment and wealth creation based on mar-
ket expansion and compatible innovations. Thus there is a virtuous cycle of
self-reinforcement for the widest possible use and diffusion of the available
potential. It is when signs of exhaustion appear that the terrain is ready for its
replacement.
When the economy is shaken again by a powerful set of new opportunities
with the emergence of the next technological revolution, society is still strongly
wedded to the old paradigm and its institutional framework. The world of com-
puters, flexible production and the Internet has a different logic and different
requirements from those that facilitated the spread of the automobile, syn-
thetic materials, mass production and the highway network. Suddenly, in rela-
tion to the new technologies, the old habits and regulations become obstacles,
the old services and infrastructures are found wanting, the old organizations
and institutions are inadequate. A new context must be created; a new ‘com-
mon sense’ must emerge and propagate.
This means that a painful and difficult process of learning and adaptation
must take place, involving creative destruction across all spheres. It also ex-
plains why the fruits of that new growth potential cannot be fully reaped in the

43
The Propagation of Paradigms: Times of Installation, Times of Deployment
first decades, when the accommodation and mutual shaping of society and the
new economy occur, pushed by the profit motive in spite of institutional iner-
tia and human resistance.
Hence, increasing polarization and decoupling both inside the economy and
between the new economy and the old social framework characterize the ini-
tial diffusion of a technological revolution. So, the installation period is one of
tense coexistence of two paradigms, one declining and the other occupying
more and more space on the ground, in the market and in the minds of people.
These diverging processes are bound to shake, challenge and change the insti-
tutional environment. These spells of turbulent structural transformation have
historically lasted from 20 to 30 years, beginning with the big-bang of the
revolution and usually coming to an abrupt end with a crash or a panic. As will
be discussed in Part II, the advent of a technological revolution attracts finan-
cial capital by enormously raising profit expectations, which eventually lead
to asset inflation and a financial bubble that ends in collapse.
This financial frenzy is a powerful force in propagating the technological
revolution, in particular its infrastructure, and enhancing – even exaggerating
– the superiority of the new products, industries and generic technologies. The
ostentation of success pushes the logic of the new paradigm to the fore and
makes it into the contemporary ideal of vitality and dynamism. It also contrib-
utes to institutional change, at least concerning the ‘destruction’ half of cre-
ative destruction.
At the same time, as mentioned before, all this excitement divides society,
widening the gap between rich and poor and making it less and less tenable in
social terms. The economy also becomes unsustainable, due to the appearance
of two growing imbalances. One is the mismatch between the profile of de-
mand and that of potential supply. The very process by which intense invest-
ment was made possible by concentrating income at the upper end of the spec-
trum becomes an obstacle for the expansion of production of any particular
product and for the attainment of full economies of scale. The other is the rift
between paper values and real values. So the system is structurally unstable
and cannot grow indefinitely along that path.
With the collapse comes recession – sometimes depression – bringing fi-
nancial capital back to reality. This, together with mounting social pressure,
creates the conditions for institutional restructuring. In this atmosphere of ur-
gency many of the social innovations, which gradually emerged during the
period of installation, are likely to be brought together with new regulation in
the financial and other spheres, to create a favorable context for recoupling
and full unfolding of the growth potential. This crucial recomposition happens
at the turning point which leaves behind the turbulent times of installation and
paradigm transition to enter the ‘golden age’ that can follow, depending on the
institutional and social choices made.

44
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
The following two or three decades, characterized by the generalization of
the now triumphant new paradigm, constitute the deployment period. When it
arrives, the surge of development, based on the full diffusion of the higher
levels of productivity, becomes clearly visible across the whole economy. The
new common sense embraces all activities, from business, through regulation
and education, to government. As a result, an era of general ‘good feeling’ sets
in, characterized by increasing coherence within the economy. The institu-
tional set-up that enables full deployment includes means of expanding de-
mand to accommodate the enormous potential of increase in production, al-
ready installed. This can occur in many ways and has tended to involve the
spreading of the benefits of growth to successive layers of the population.
By this time the original industries of the technological revolution have
become the engines of growth for the whole economy and the country where
they developed stands at the core of the world system. Together, these indus-
tries represent a significant portion of the national product of that core and the
main firms have usually by then become the largest in that country and prob-
ably in the world. Figure 4.4 uses Chandler’s data on the ten largest US corpo-
rations by asset size,56 from 1917 to 1948, to illustrate the shift of power from
the third to the fourth surge. Steel continues to be extremely important for the
automobile and other products of the fourth technological revolution but the
real investment boom is in the latter and they soon far outpace the steel com-
panies and crowd them out from the top.
Furthermore, during the period of deployment, a process of internal catch-
ing up takes place within the economy. The dynamic pioneers of the revolu-
tion slow down, from sheer size, while those now joining the paradigm band-
wagon accelerate. It is a question of relative weights and rates. The new indus-
tries that had developed explosively in the installation period are now giants
growing at a ‘normal’ rhythm, whereas later industries, products and systems
within the revolution – or those modernized or induced by it – may be reach-
ing the same or faster rates of productivity increase and market growth. So
employment rises steadily and, depending on the institutional framework set
up, there can be a shared feeling of pending improvement in the general qual-
ity of life, very different from the centrifugal fortunes of the installation period.
Nevertheless, as these times of prosperity wear on, the potential of the tech-
nological revolution is gradually depleted. Technological maturity and satura-
tion of markets begin to restrain the growth of productivity and production in
the core industries, while widespread market and production experience shorten
56.
No attempt is made to turn current values to constant ones for two reasons. First, the
object is to see relative proportions at each point in time and this can be done well in
current values. Second, the period spanned is one of great economic turbulence including
also the depression and a major war at each end, so all attempts at standardizing would be
both heroic and doubtful.

45
The Propagation of Paradigms: Times of Installation, Times of Deployment
the life cycles of the later products. This increasing constriction reduces the
capacity of the system to fulfill its promises of constant progress, though the
signs of an affluent society are still strong and visible. This, in turn, leads to
labor and political unrest. Historically, some of the major strike waves have
taken place towards the end of the deployment period.
A historian of the British Trade Union Movement refers to such final peri-
ods of the second and third surges thus:
The late 1860s and early 1870s were, indeed, exciting years for the trade unions.
The Trades Union Congress was effectively formed … in 1868. The Amalgamated
Society of Engineers57 struck for the nine-hour day … and the Yorkshire miners
Notes:
* Steel and meatpacking.
** Oil, automobiles, agricultural machinery, organic chemicals and electrical appliances.
Source:     Our classification of data in Chandler (1990) pp. 639–57
Figure 4.4
Oil and automobile industries replacing steel as engines of growth
from the third to the fourth surge
The top 10 US firms by asset size in 1917, 1930 and 1948,
grouped by technological revolution (TR)
57.
At that time the term ‘Engineers’ referred to qualified engine drivers, mainly in railways.
Assets of firms in core of 4th TR**
1917
1930
1948
52%
7 firms
48%
3 firms
36%
3 firms
64%
7 firms
14%
one 
firm
3,97
3,67
3.85
6.97
2.54
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Bn$
Assets of firms in core of 3rd TR *
15.41
86%
9 firms

46
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
58.
Laybourn (1991) p. 53.
59.
Laybourn (1991) p.104. As Hobsbawm remarks, the ‘belle époque’ in most of Europe
incorporated the middle classes into prosperity but did not reach the working classes
Hobsbawm (1987:1989) p. 55. This is consistent with the observation made in section 5F
above that the whole of the third surge in Britain had some features of a maturity phase.
became particularly aggressive in their demand for wage increases …58
Industrial conflict began to increase dramatically on the eve of the First World War
… Improved economic conditions encouraged trade unions to attempt to win back
the wage reductions they had suffered in the previous decade …59
So what begins promising a golden age ends up in economic trouble and
intense political confrontation. Both will contribute to the coming together of
the next technological revolution and the cycle will begin all over again in
another unique and specific manner.

47
The Four Basic Phases of Each Surge of Development
This chapter will take a closer look at the installation and deployment periods,
distinguishing two different phases in each. As shown in Figure 5.1, the period
of installation of each techno-economic paradigm goes through an early
irruption phase, just after the big-bang, when the new products and
technologies, backed by financial capital, are showing their future potential
and making powerful inroads in a world still basically shaped by the previous
paradigm. The second half is the frenzy phase, when financial capital drives
the intense build-up of the new infrastructure and the new technologies, so, in
the end, the potential of the new paradigm is strongly installed in the economy
and ready for full deployment. But this phase develops growing structural
tensions in the system, which make it unsustainable. Thus, full deployment
cannot be unleashed without overcoming such tensions. There is then a turning
point, usually in the recession that follows the collapse of the financial bubble,
when the required regulatory changes are made to facilitate and shape the period
of deployment. This period begins with a synergy phase, when all conditions
are favorable to production and to the full flourishing of the new paradigm,
now clearly predominant. It ends with a maturity phase, when the last industries,
products, technologies and improvements are introduced while signs of
dwindling investment opportunities and stagnating markets appear in the main
industries of the revolution.
The sequence being described involves profound changes that upset people’s
lives and views of the world, and motivate some to get deeply involved in
taking advantage of the opportunities while others, who feel negatively af-
fected, will strongly resist the changes. This will condition the political tone of
each phase and define a climate or a ‘feeling’ of the times. The character of
each of the phases is presented below in a stylized narrative, including such
features. The narrative will concentrate on the core country or countries where
the technological revolution originally develops (Britain in the first two, the
USA in the last two and a mixed triple core in the third). In the next chapter,
there will be a brief discussion of what happens in the peripheries and how it
contributes to blur the regularities being depicted here.
5. The Four Basic Phases of Each Surge
of Development
47

48
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Figure 5.1    Recurring phases of each great surge in the core countries
Institutional 
recomposition
Crash
big-bang
FRENZY
IRRUPTION
SYNERGY
Golden Age
Coherent growth
with increasing
externalities
Production and 
employment
Next
big-bang
Time
Next
Great 
Surge
Previous
Great 
Surge
Turning 
point
Degree of diffusion of the technological revolution
INSTALLATION PERIOD
DEPLOYMENT PERIOD
Socio-political split
Last products and industries
Market saturation and
technological maturity
of main industries
Disappointment vs. complacency
Techno-economic split 
Irruption of the technological revolution
Decline of old industries
Unemployment
Financial bubble time
Intensive investment in the revolution
Decoupling of the whole system
Polarization of rich and poor
Gilded Age
MATURITY
48

49
The Four Basic Phases of Each Surge of Development
Before going on, it should be clear that what is being constructed is a heu-
ristic device, not a straitjacket to force upon history. In spite of the regularities
and the isomorphism the model claims to be identifying, there is full aware-
ness that the subject matter rebels and refuses. It is full of exceptions and of
huge independent events that constantly twist and break the proposed regular-
ity. Wars, droughts and gold discoveries, are not included in the ‘clean’ model,
nor are many other significant social and political occurrences. The sequence
has been stripped of all those events not causally related to the absorption of
technologies, which leads inevitably to streamlined simplifications that hardly
ever occur as such. Nevertheless, this risky attempt at gleaning the strains of
causal order underlying chaos, at structuring the unwieldy mass of historical
events into a meaningful sequence, is still worthwhile. After this job is done –
if it ever can be – the infinite enrichment of real life can be brought back in,
but this time with the benefit of an organizing background, which highlights
even more all the unique unexplained events.
With those caveats in mind, the reader can approach the stylized descrip-
tion that follows. The historical illustrations included are meant to bring forth
images that can facilitate the transmission of the model to the reader. In the
final section of this chapter, the approximate dates of the phases of each surge
will be indicated (Figure 5.2) with a brief discussion of the differences, speci-
ficities and uniqueness involved in real history.
A.
The Irruption Phase: A Time for Technology
The irruption phase inaugurates the surge. It begins with the big-bang of the
technological revolution amidst a world threatened with stagnation, as in Brit-
ain in the 1830s and 1870s or the USA in the 1970s. The new design, product
and profit universe of possibilities inflames the imagination of young entre-
preneurs, while the industries of the old paradigm are technologically mature,
facing saturated markets and looking for solutions.
There is a mass of potential investment money in the market, still being
generated by the firms of the old paradigm. These are looking for opportuni-
ties and migrating further and further away, together with industry or alone.
Soon the amazing growth and productivity feats of the new industries attract
investors and the new products, ever better and ever cheaper, begin massively
to attract consumers and new competing entrepreneurs. The very intense ac-
tivity of the new paradigm carriers contrasts more and more with the decline
of the old industries. A techno-economic split takes place from then on, threat-
ening the survival of the obsolete and creating the conditions that will force
modernization.
The period is marked by increasing unemployment stemming from various
sources, ranging from economic stagnation, through rationalization efforts, to

50
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
technological replacement. The bulk of the old economy also exhibits per-
verse price behavior, either persistent deflation as in the 1870s and 1880s or
runaway inflation as in the 1970s and 1980s, depending on the institutional
framework conditioning the economy of the period.
Despair and impotence affect those losing out, be they workers who lost
their jobs, industries with declining profits and markets or decision-makers in
government whose policies no longer work. For those wedded to the old model
and especially to the ideas and ideals of the established paradigm these are
times of bewilderment. The world seems to be falling apart and the old behav-
iors and policies are impotent to save it. Meanwhile, the new entrepreneurs are
gradually articulating the new ideas and successful behaviors into a new best-
practice frontier that serves as the guiding model or techno-economic para-
digm.
Divergence between the new and the old characterizes this phase. Inside
political parties, both left and right, a cleavage takes place between the mod-
ernizers and the nostalgic, sometimes leading to divisions, recompositions or
completely new movements. There is also a marked revival of the stock mar-
ket, first in relation to the new industries and soon with new instruments and
various forms of speculation.
B.
The Frenzy Phase: A Time for Finance
Frenzy is the later phase of the installation period. It is a time of new million-
aires at one end and growing exclusion at the other, as in the 1880s to 1890s,
the 1920s and the 1990s. In this phase, financial capital takes over; its imme-
diate interests overrule the operation of the whole system. The paper economy
decouples from the real economy, finance decouples from production while
there is a growing rift between the forces in the economy and the regulatory
framework, turned impotent.
It is the time of Veblen’s scathing portrait of the ‘leisure class’,60 a phase
characterized by very strong centrifugal trends in society at large. A small but
growing portion at the top is rich and getting richer while there is deterioration
and growing outright poverty at the bottom. It is what Engels61 depicted with
pain and outrage in the 1840s. The same happens with regions within coun-
tries and across the world between nations. Some flourish, others wane. Mas-
sive migrations move with great hopes from the poor to the rich areas, some-
times welcome on arrival, at other times ruthlessly rejected.
60.
Veblen (1899).
61.
Engels (1845).

51
The Four Basic Phases of Each Surge of Development
It is also a time of speculation, corruption and unashamed (even widely
celebrated) love of wealth. Perhaps ‘The Gilded Age’ is the most appropriate
label for this period, with its appearance of shining prosperity and its socially
insensitive inside of base metal. The term is used by American historians to
distinguish the period from the end of the Civil War to the turn of the century
(which in the present model would roughly correspond to the installation pe-
riod). It was taken from the 1873 novel of that title by Mark Twain and C.D.
Warner62 portraying what they saw as the corrupt money-mad alliance between
financiers and politicians of their time.
Yet the frenzy phase is also one of intense exploration of all the possibilities
opened up by the technological revolution. Through bold and diversified trial
and error investment, the potential of the diffusing paradigm for creating new
markets and for rejuvenating old industries is fully discovered and firmly in-
stalled in the economy and in the mental maps of investors. Hence the produc-
tivity explosion reaches more and more activities, inducing a process of re-
structuring in the productive sphere where the new or renewed prosper and the
old wilt or die. The process is intensified by the availability of the new infra-
structure, which at this time achieves enough coverage to provide clear exter-
nalities and promise more.
This is a phase of fierce ‘free’ competition, perhaps the closest to what the
textbooks say, though gradually leading in the end, and depending on the gen-
eral degree of concentration of the epoch, to oligopolies or cartels by industry.63
Individualism flourishes both in business and in political thinking, some-
times confronted by anti-technology or anti-system ideas or groups. But the
turbulent nature of this period emerges from its fundamental tensions. The
wealth that has grown and concentrated in relatively few hands is greater than
can be absorbed by real investment. Much of this excess money is poured into
furthering the technological revolution, especially its infrastructure (canal
mania, railway mania, Internet mania), often leading to overinvestment that
might not fulfill expectations. So at this time there tends to be a sort of gam-
bling economy with asset inflation in the stock market,64 looking like a mi-
raculous multiplication of wealth. Confidence in the brilliance of financial
geniuses grows and attempts at regulation are seen as hindering the way to a
successful society.65 This new capacity of money to make money attracts more
62.
Twain and Warner (1873).
63.
Here the accent is on what happens within the leading country or countries and on what
they try to impose on others. Those countries that feel threatened by free competition in
their effort to catch up or forge ahead often take strong protectionist measures at this time.
Such was the case in the USA in the transition periods of the second and third surges, and
also the case of many European countries, particularly Germany, in that of the third, when
trying to develop in the face of British competition.
64.
Toporowski (2000).
65.
Galbraith (1990).

52
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
and more people to get a piece of the action; so late Frenzy is financial bubble
time.
C.
The Turning Point: Rethinking and Rerouting Development
The notion of a ‘turning point’ is a conceptual device to represent the funda-
mental changes required to move the economy from a Frenzy mode, shaped
by financial criteria, to a Synergy mode, solidly based on growing production
capabilities. The turning point then is neither an event nor a phase; it is a
process of contextual change. It can take any amount of time, from a few months
to several years, it can be marked by clear-cut events such as the Bretton Woods
meetings, enabling the orderly international Deployment of the fourth surge,
or the repeal of the Corn Laws in Britain, facilitating the Synergy of the sec-
ond. It could also be happening in the background with a series of changes that
seem to come together as deployment begins.
The turning point has to do with the balance between individual and social
interests within capitalism. It is the swing of the pendulum from the extreme
individualism of Frenzy to giving greater attention to collective well being,
usually through the regulatory intervention of the state and the active partici-
pation of other forms of civil society. What is held here is that this switch does
not occur for ideological or voluntaristic reasons but as the result of the way in
which the installation of a new paradigm takes place. The unsustainable struc-
tural tensions that build up in the economy and society, especially during Frenzy,
must be overcome by a recomposition of the conditions for growth and devel-
opment.
Such tensions are behind the bursting of the financial bubble that marks the
end of Frenzy, of the serious recession that is likely to follow and of the politi-
cal unrest and violent protests that erupt at these times.
The turning point is then a space for social rethinking and reconsidering. It
is an important crossroads for socio-institutional decision making. It is the
time when the leading actors in the economy, society and government recog-
nize the excesses as well as the unsustainability of recent practices and trends,
however wonderful they may have seemed until then. The imbalances between
the profile of potential production and that of existing demand lead to prema-
ture market saturation and become an increasing obstacle to growth. The so-
cial unrest and the indignation at injustice that had begun to manifest them-
selves during Frenzy hang over decision makers. The hard conditions that were
already present for the poor worsen considerably after the collapse and can
turn to desperation and anger.
Conditions are ripe for regulation to be conceived, implemented and ac-
cepted, both to put order in financial markets and to move towards full market

53
The Four Basic Phases of Each Surge of Development
expansion and greater social cohesion. But nothing guarantees that decision
makers will take this route. This is, in fact, a time of indetermination, when the
particular mode of growth that will shape the world of the next two or three
decades is defined. Its characteristics will be within the range made viable by
the potential of the paradigm, but the choice within that wide range will de-
pend on the interests, lucidity, relative power and effectiveness of the social
forces participating in the process.
The resulting framework can enable a ‘golden age’ or only a modified, but
still unstable version of the ‘gilded age’.66 It can establish institutions for in-
creasing social cohesiveness, improving income distribution and general well-
being or it can try to reinstate the ‘selfish prosperity’ of the frenzy phase, though
more closely connected with real production and finding some means to ex-
pand demand.
This rerouting of the system is rarely clearly conceived as such. The struc-
tural tensions tend to be interpreted as temporary setbacks and it is when the
usual recipes to confront them fail, that intuition finds new paths and alterna-
tive proposals are considered and applied. So, the mode of growth adopted
will often be incomplete and far from perfect. Reform and further enrichment
and consolidation of the institutional structure are likely to continue well into
the deployment period. This is especially so if the recomposition has not been
deep enough to overcome social tensions and structural instability.
D.
The Synergy Phase: A Time for Production
Synergy is the early half of the deployment period. This phase can be the true
‘golden age’. It is likely to be the closest the system ever comes to conver-
gence within the economy of the core countries of the system. It can be an era
of good feeling and of pride in the structure of society, as in Victorian England
after the Great Exhibition and America after the Second World War.
The basic externalities for the build-out of the revolution – especially the
infrastructure – were installed during the frenzy phase, as well as the basic
investment in the industries that serve as engines of growth. So conditions are
there for dynamic expansion and economies of scale. Given the appropriate
framework, growth will tend to be steady and harmonious while not necessar-
66.
After the panic of 1893, the power of the robber barons and the great financiers in the USA
was so overwhelming that they practically took control of the economy. Even regulation
set up to constrain them was either not applied or deviated in practice (Sobel 1965). So,
the ‘gilded age’ practices continued at least until 1907. Nevertheless, American historians
have labeled the period the ‘Progressive Era’, putting the accent on the political changes
and on the many attempts at controlling the trusts and establishing greater social justice,
as opposed to the preceding callousness.

54
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
ily as exuberant as in Frenzy. It can be felt across society and proceed at a
healthy rhythm. Full employment – or the nearest thing to it, depending on the
period – may become a realized possibility.
When a mode of growth based on social cohesiveness is established, moral
principles are in force, ideas of confidence flourish and business is satisfied
about its positive social role. It is a time of advance in labor laws and other
measures for social protection of the weak, a time for income redistribution in
one form or another, leading to enlarged consumption markets. It is above all
the reign of the ‘middle class’. Fast and easy millionaires are rare, though
investment and work lead to persistent accumulation of wealth. Production is
the key word in this phase.
The renovating power of the paradigm and the advantages of its new infra-
structure – by now very much in place and rapidly achieving full coverage –
are such that they naturally favor the spreading of the new higher levels of
productivity and quality across all sectors of the economy, even the most tradi-
tional. Therefore, even if the mode of growth continues to be shaped by the
interests of financial capital, it is now more directly tied to production than in
the frenzy phase and a certain amount of prosperity will trickle down to the
various layers of society through diverse channels.67
The new paradigm now governs supreme; its logic permeates every activ-
ity, from business to government and education. Technology is seen as a posi-
tive force and, in the best of cases, so is finance, which now becomes the true
support of production capital. It is a time of promise, work and hope. For
many, the future looks bright.
E.
The Maturity Phase: A Time for Questioning Complacency
This is the twilight of the golden age, though it shines with false splendor. It is
the drive to maturity of the paradigm and to the gradual saturation of markets.
The last technology systems and the last products in each of them have very
short life cycles, since accumulated experience leads to very rapid learning
and saturation curves. Gradually the paradigm is taken to its ultimate conse-
quences until it shows up its limitations (Jevons68 worries about the exhaus-
tion of cheap coal sources in the 1860s; the Meadows Report on the Limits to
67.
Sobel (1965) remarks that, in the first years of the twentieth century, there was  significant
industrial and agricultural prosperity in the USA, spurred by extraordinary crops, the de-
mands of the Russo-Japanese war, increased gold production and rising wages ‘so the
worker had his share of the general prosperity and his purchases could keep the factories
humming’ (p. 186).
68.
In his book The Coal Question, Jevons (1866) warned about the end of low cost coal and
the danger it could pose to economic growth.

55
The Four Basic Phases of Each Surge of Development
Growth,69 published in 1972, reinforces the environmental concerns voiced in
the 1960s, with data about depletion of natural resources).
Yet, all the signs of prosperity and success are still around. Those who reaped
the full benefits of the ‘golden age’ (or of the gilded one) continue to hold on
to their belief in the virtues of the system and to proclaim eternal and unstop-
pable progress, in a complacent blindness, which could be called the ‘Great
Society syndrome’. But the unfulfilled promises had been piling up, while
most people nurtured the expectation of personal and social advance. The re-
sult is an increasing socio-political split.
The acts of machine breaking (Luddism) of the 1810s or the protests against
the Corn Laws and demands for universal suffrage that led to the ‘Peterloo’
massacre in Britain in 1819 are widely separated historically and ideologically
from the violent protests of May 1968 in the main countries of continental
Europe.70 However, the dissatisfaction and frustration driving them both is of
a fundamentally similar origin: capitalism had been making too many prom-
ises about social progress and not delivering enough, showing too much ca-
pacity for wealth creation and not distributing enough. The workers’ protests
seeking salary increases and greater security or participation, are sometimes
echoed and magnified by those of others who may also feel defrauded by the
system such as women, immigrants and any others who feel marginalized from
the wealth of what some claim is a ‘great society’. The young, who open their
adult eyes to a world that proclaims it is all right, while to them it appears ‘all
wrong’, stage their rebellions and romantic protests, together with artists and
other non-conformists. The most recent case of the romanticism that tends to
emerge in this phase is the ‘hippie’ movement in the USA and some aspects of
May 1968 in Europe.
So this is a time when deep questions about the system are being asked in
many quarters; the climate is favorable for politics and ideological confronta-
tions to come to the fore. The social ferment can become intense and is some-
times quelled with social reforms.
Meanwhile, in the world of big business, markets are saturating and tech-
nologies maturing, therefore profits begin to feel the productivity constriction.
Ways are being sought for propping them up, which often involve concentra-
tion through mergers or acquisitions, as well as export drives and migration of
activities to less-saturated markets abroad. Their relative success makes firms
amass even more money without profitable investment outlets. The search for
69.
Meadows et al. (1972).
70.
Historically major strike waves have concentrated in two periods: in the Installation Pe-
riod, when they can be interpreted as anger about unemployment and extreme inequality;
and in the maturity phase, when the source may be frustration of expectations (while feel-
ing that there is enough wealth to fulfill promises). For statistics, dates and discussion of
this issue, see Freeman and Louçã (2001) pp. 355–63.

56
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
technological solutions lifts the implicit ban on truly new technologies outside
the logic of the now exhausted paradigm. The stage is set for the decline of the
whole mode of growth and for the next technological revolution.
F.
Recurring Sequence; Parallel Phases
The preceding narrative is the stylized presentation of the model, where the
illustrations serve to make the basic connection with history. In this section the
sequence described will be located in real time. Beginning with the original
‘Industrial Revolution’, Figure 5.2 places the five great surges of development
in parallel strips, beginning with the big-bang of each. The tentative dates for
the phases are also indicated. The continuation of each of the strips, beyond
what seems like the ‘end’ of the surge, is a reminder that each revolution con-
tinues until its final exhaustion, while the next one is being installed.
As should be expected when models try to slice up living history, the pic-
tures fit some periods better than others and there are significant differences in
the length of the surges and of each of the phases. These vary from about eight
to fifteen or more years and there is no inherent reason for them – or for the
surges – to be of the same duration. The processes of diffusion and assimila-
tion are taking place in different circumstances, with multiple unique inter-
vening factors. The passages from one phase to another are more likely to be
continuous and invisible to contemporaries. With the exception of such events
as big crashes or great wars that mark significant changes in conditions, phases
naturally overlap. In fact, the choice of a particular year as the beginning or
end of a phase is a question of judgment and, in this case, is meant more as an
aid to clarify the concepts.
The places where overlaps have been pointed out in the figure are those that
do matter for the model, which are the ones that occur between successive
surges. For instance, the tentative dating of the third and fourth surges shows
that between 1908 and 1918, the maturity phase of the third surge and the
irruption phase of the fourth coincide. Something similar happens between
1971 and 1974 between the fourth and fifth surges. And, in the case of the
second and third surges, there is a gap between 1873 and 1875. This is to be
expected. As soon as there are signs of maturity of a technological revolution,
by a reduction of investment opportunities, conditions become favorable for
the next big-bang to emerge. That still leaves a very high element of random-
ness, and the presence of many other determinants, regarding the moment of
occurrence of the necessary breakthrough. Whether earlier or later, the over-
lap and coexistence of two technological revolutions – one rising, one declin-
ing – is what normally happens in the irruption phase, leading to the character-
istic decoupling of the installation period.

57
The Four Basic Phases of Each Surge of Development
Figure 5.2
Approximate dates of the installation and deployment periods  of each great surge of development
Note:     * Observe phase overlaps between successive surges.
Technological
revolution
INSTALLATION
DEPLOYMENT
IRRUPTION
FRENZY
SYNERGY
MATURITY
Turning 
Point
20??
Institutional
recomposition
Crash
1971
1908
1875
1829
1771
1770s and 
early 1980s
big-bang
Age of Information
and Telecommunications
USA (spreading
to Europe and Asia)
Age of Oil, Automobiles
and Mass Production
USA (spreading to Europe)
Age of Steel, Electricity 
and Heavy Engineering
USA and Germany
overtaking Britain
Age of Steam
and Railways
Britain (spreading
to continent and USA)
The Industrial
Revolution
Britain
Core Country
GREAT
SURGE
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
late 1780s and 
early 1790s
1798-1812
1813-1829
1830s
1840s
2001-??
1850-1857
1857-1873
1875-1884
1884-1893
1895-1907
1908-1918*
1908-1920*
1920-1929
1943-1959
1960-1974*
1971-1987*
1987-2001
1793-97
1848-50
1893-95
Europe
1929-33
USA
1929-43
57

58
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
71.
Sobel (1965) p. 202.
72.
For the German case, see Berghahn (1994) pp. 1–42; for Britain, Cain and Hopkins (1993);
for the USA, Wiebe (1967).
73.
Hobsbawm (1962) pp. 212–14.
Yet, the particular case of the third surge merits special attention. As men-
tioned before, this is the surge during which Britain loses its leadership to the
USA and Germany, which are forging ahead. The 30 years from the end of the
American Civil War and the Franco-Prussian War to the belle époque synergy,
around 1900, constitute a very special type of installation period, with an un-
declared triple battle for the core. Britain, whose immense imperial power was
underpinned by its control of the Gold Standard, of world finance and of trans-
continental trade routes, did not consider investment in the new steel, electri-
cal and chemical technologies a priority for wealth generation. She was the
queen of the seas and the City was the financial center to the empire and to
most other countries. So British financial capital installed the transcontinental
infrastructures – rails, ships and telegraph – and supported the development of
mining and agriculture across the world, while neglecting her own build-up of
the key industries of the technological revolution. Meanwhile her two chal-
lengers – each recently unified – were becoming technologically and economi-
cally stronger and decidedly forging ahead. By the turn of the century, both the
USA and Germany had overtaken Britain in steel production and were clearly
ahead in the electrical industry. By 1907, Wall Street was in a position to chal-
lenge Lombard Street as the financial center of the world71 and Germany felt
strong enough to defy Britain’s naval leadership.
Thus, the whole of the third surge in Britain had some of the flavor and the
features of a maturity phase; whereas in the USA there were features of the
implantation period throughout, including in the synergy phase.72
Some similarities can be found between the forging-ahead countries in the
third surge and the recent experience of Japan in the fifth. This country made
an early leap to the front ranks, going through a production-centered phase
that had features of Synergy, while the USA as core of the system, was going
through the maturity and irruption phases. After that, Japan had an earlier and
extreme frenzy phase followed from 1990 by a protracted collapse and a long
recession, while Frenzy in the core was only beginning. A subtle parallel can
also be made between the sources of the decline of British technological lead-
ership in the third surge and what happened to France in the second. French
financial capital in the 1840s founded the gas companies of several European
and African countries and Paris operated as the second financial center in the
world, while its own potential for industrial power fell irreversibly behind.73
All this suggests that, though the model emphasizes the sequence in the coun-
tries that act as the core of the revolution, there is wide scope for enriching it,

59
The Four Basic Phases of Each Surge of Development
through exploring the possible regularities in the cases of catching up, forging
ahead and falling behind.74 In Chapters 6 and 11 below, some additional ele-
ments will be brought into the picture.
Naturally, the fit of the impressionistic periodization proposed becomes
fuzzier the further one goes back in time, because development of capitalist
institutions and behaviors has only gradually encompassed whole countries,
and even more slowly the whole world system. The ‘Industrial Revolution’,
for instance, took place only in some parts of Britain and within a fundamentally
pre-capitalist world. Besides, the synergy phase occurred during the Napoleonic
Wars, while Maturity was the difficult aftermath. Financial capital in the first
surge was rather a disconnected set of commercial and banking agents plus
wealthy individuals willing to invest, quite different from the institutionalized
financial world of the third surge and onwards. So, depth of development and
penetration of the system have to be taken into account, together with
outstanding conditioning events and factors, when assessing the operation of
regularities.
In general, the model makes abstraction of the long-term trends that have
brought the small capitalist world, concentrated in some corners of Britain and
Europe at the end of the eighteenth century, to the gigantic global capitalist
economy of the twenty-first century. The sheer change in dimensions produces
qualitative differences that obviously cannot be ignored when doing the analy-
sis of a concrete period. The claim is that there are basic causal chains that
operate in any scale and that the long-term changes are achieved through dis-
continuous leaps of creative destruction, with processes of propagation of about
half a century.
Hence, this effort at isomorphism and selective categorization is indeed a
‘strong’ stylization and purposely so. What are being identified are causal
mechanisms that are in the nature of the system. This will become clearer
when the above sequence is used as a framework in Part II, for analyzing the
changing relationship between financial and production capital and the conse-
quences that stem from it.
Before going into that, two important points will be briefly addressed. One
is the difference between the present model and that of most ‘long-wave’ pro-
ponents. The other, connected with the first, has to do with the unequal spread
and the uneven rhythm of propagation of each surge across the world. This
will help understand why such recurrent sequences are not easy to identify in
the economic data series. In fact if things were really as simple and straightfor-
ward as the previous narrative could be seen to imply, the process would be
obvious to everyone and the debate about long waves, of one form or another,
would have been solved in favor of them long ago.
74.
The terms and the distinctions were introduced by Abramovitz (1986).

60
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Since the end of the nineteenth century, there have been several attempts at
recognizing and explaining the occurrence of 50–60-year cycles or long waves
in economic growth, generally associated with the name of Nicolai Kondratiev,
who in the 1920s made an attempt at systematically measuring the phenom-
enon.75 The debates have continued ever since, both about their very existence
and about their possible causes.76 On the whole, long-wave interpretations have
been bogged down by three conceptual shortcomings involving expectations
that cannot be fulfilled:
1. the attempt to confine the analysis of the long wave within a narrowly de-
fined economic system and to search for endogenous causes;
2. the insistence on finding regular up and downswings in GNP and other
aggregate variables; and
3. the conviction that such cycles must be simultaneous worldwide phenomena.
The model being presented here avoids these three ideas considering them
misleading directions of research.
The first point has already been addressed by suggesting that long waves
are not economic cycles but a much wider systemic phenomenon where social
and institutional factors play a key role by first resisting and then facilitating
the unfolding of the potential of each technological revolution. This difference
led to proposing the term ‘great surges’ to shift the focus from economic mea-
surement to the qualitative understanding of the complex tensions and forces
involved in the process of assimilating change.77 Moreover, the very occur-
rence of those big revolutionary leaps in technology has been explained here
6. Uneven Development and Time-Lags in
Diffusion
75.
Kondratiev (1926).
76.
For a discussion of the various positions in the long-wave debate and a reassessment of the
data and the dating, see Van Duijn (1983). For collections of the main papers, with intro-
ductions about the different approaches, see Freeman (ed.) (1996) and Louçã and Reijnders
(eds) (1999).
77.
Freeman and Louçã (2001) also express dissatisfaction with the long-wave metaphor but
continue to use the expression because it has become the established framework for the
discussion of long-term structural change.
60

61
Uneven Development and Time-Lags in Diffusion
by a combination of economic pressures and social ‘overadaptation’. The other
two points will be addressed below.
A.
Uneven and Differentiated Growth Patterns Rather than
Long Swings in the Aggregate
In the present model there is no expectation of neat upswings and downswings
in GNP or in any other economic aggregate. This coincides with Schumpeter’s
own view that aggregate figures conceal more than they reveal.78 In fact, it is
not even likely that the turbulent process by which new paradigms are assimi-
lated should lead to regular up and down trends in the economy as a whole.
The phenomenon being analyzed can only express itself in the inner work-
ings of the economy, where increasing differentiation takes place. Some new
branches will be growing at astonishingly high rates while many others will be
declining, stagnating or growing slowly. So the expectation would be of an
internal loss of synchrony between new and old branches as a feature of the
two or three decades of the installation period and of resynchronizing and
synergy as the mark of the deployment period (especially in the early phase).
After the irruption of the technological revolution, a divergence in trends would
be observed between the modern or modernized activities and those that have
become old and traditional. This divergence would slowly decrease during
Frenzy, as more and more firms adopt the paradigm. Whether the sum of these
differing trends comes out as a ‘downswing’ or not depends on the changing
relative weights and relative growth rates.79
A further complication arises from the fact that most of the measuring at-
tempts use money values (sometimes with constructed ‘constant’ values). This
is not valid for a simple reason: the quantum jump in productivity brought
about by a technological revolution leads during the period of installation to
the coexistence of ‘two moneys’ operating under the guise of one. The change
in the relative price structure is radical and centrifugal. Money buying elec-
tronics and telecommunications today does not have the same value as money
buying furniture or automobiles, and the difference has been growing since
the early 1970s. The price of steel, in the installation period of the third surge,
came down because of immense increases in productivity, while that of iron
was forced down by competition in the market.80
Rates of inflation or deflation during installation periods are chaotic and all
78.
Schumpeter (1939) Vol.1, pp. 43–4.
79.
Chris Freeman has often remarked that ignoring the weight–rate relationship is behind
many of the arguments about whether technological revolutions or long waves really oc-
cur and whether they can be measured in the statistics.
80.
Wells (1889:1893) p. 43.

62
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
statistical efforts to construct constant money series, in spite of their sophisti-
cation, are doubtful to say the least. Volume, which is the usual way of at-
tempting constancy, is an elusive measure in many cases. How do you com-
pare one computer in the 1960s with one in the 1970s, in the 1980s and now?
How do you measure the volume of communications? In the nineteenth cen-
tury, was money paying for transport by railway comparable to that by horses?
Was telegraph or telephone to India comparable to mail by ship? When costs
are violently decreasing and qualities increasing and changing, comparability
is quite impossible and aggregates are disparate. People living through the
period of paradigm transition experience great uncertainty as to the ‘right’
price of things (including that of stocks, of course). It is only when the produc-
tivity levels become comparable across the economy, during the deployment
period, that the single money economy returns, the relations between compo-
nents of the relative cost structure become stable again and constant money
indexes can be safely constructed (at least for a while).
It would in fact be justified to assert that long-term aggregate series, truly
long-term ones, attempting to span two or three paradigms in terms of money,
are senseless. Thus, the efforts at testing the long-wave hypothesis through
manipulating such series are in a trap. Yet, the sort of disaggregated statistics
that would be appropriate are rarely available.
Nevertheless, the present interpretation does expect a set of increasingly
coherent trends in the synergy phase, with a certain level of stability of the
relative productivities of groups of branches (some consistently higher, some
consistently lower; most growing), which could appear as an ‘upswing’ in the
aggregate.
But such clean figures do not last long in the unstable scene of the capitalist
economy. By the maturity phase, there is a mixture of dynamic growth in the
latecomer branches and sluggish growth in the now ‘traditional’ core indus-
tries of the paradigm (although this difference might not be obvious in profit
terms, due to oligopolistic price behavior and market manipulation on the part
of the larger firms). So, even what might look like peak overall growth already
contains contradictory trends.
B.
Delayed Sequences in the Spread of Technologies Across
the World
The third misleading direction of some long-wave proponents is to expect the
phenomenon to coincide in time worldwide. Kondratiev himself tended to be-
lieve in this near synchronicity. After asserting that the long waves he had
established, ‘relative to the series most important in economic life, are interna-
tional; and the timing of these cycles corresponds fairly well for European

63
Uneven Development and Time-Lags in Diffusion
capitalist countries’, he added that, though the USA may have peculiarities,
‘we can venture ... that the same timing holds also for the United States’.81
What is held in this book is that, though major crises tend to be nearly
simultaneous across industries and the world, because of instant transmission
of the violent contraction of markets, most diffusion processes are sequential
and lagged, taking the form of wider and wider ripples of propagation. As
paradigms mature in the core countries, investment opportunities move fur-
ther and further out, seeking comparative advantages, different conditions and
possibilities for outstretching saturated markets.
It would seem that each paradigm spreads in ripple-like fashion,82 both from
sector to sector across the industrial structure and geographically inside each
country and across the world.
In terms of its sectoral impact, each technological revolution begins with a
group of core industries, usually involving some energy source or another all-
pervasive input, a new infrastructure and a few main products and processes.83
From there it spreads to the most closely connected industries forming a strongly
interactive constellation with very high synergy and intensive feedback ef-
fects. This helps the generic elements of the paradigm become clear and well
tested, facilitating their adoption by a wider circle of industries and activities.
This, in turn, strengthens the externalities and lowers the cost of adoption for
an ever-wider circle and, as institutional conditions become favorable, the whole
fabric of the economy tends to adopt the paradigm following its general inno-
vative trajectories until they are seen as the ‘natural way’ of doing things ef-
fectively, efficiently and profitably.
Geographically the process has been rather similar. The revolution has
generally irrupted in the core country of the previously prevailing paradigm,
and spreads there first and then propagates to the periphery. The third surge,
however, is an example of how the processes of either forging ahead and vying
for pre-eminence or catching up from behind, which are more likely to happen
when riding the new technologies from the beginning, can modify the expected
sequences. From the 1870s the technological revolution diffused much faster
and went much deeper in the USA and Germany than in Britain, which was
still the financial, commercial, political and military world leader. This created
an uneasy triple core for several decades. Whichever the core, the installation
period is very much marked by the polarization between the front-running
81.
Kondratiev (1926:1979) p. 535.
82.
There are problems with metaphors such as waves and ripples because they suggest an
underlying steady state. For a discussion, see Freeman and Louçã (2001) Ch. 4.
83.
The actual process of gestation of each technological revolution goes far back before its
big-bang, though for the present purposes the visible crystallization is the most important.
For the complete sequence of the life cycle, see Freeman and Louçã (2001) p. 146.

64
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
country or countries, where the new industries are being deployed, and those
areas of the world that are left out and falling behind.
During Synergy, investment concentrates in the core countries, where the
whole economy is flourishing and opportunities across the complete industrial
spectrum now abound. It is a time of aggressive exports from the core coun-
tries and the growth that occurs in the far peripheries is generally tied to the
production of inputs for the requirements of that paradigm (cotton, metals,
grain, meat, oil and so on).
When Maturity arrives, though, as technologies gradually lose dynamism
and markets begin to stagnate, the surge of growth moves to the near periphery
and later even to the farther peripheries that had had little chance of industrial-
izing until then.
The process is akin to what Wells depicted in his diagram (Figure 6.1) in
relation to single products in the USA economy (and referring to observations
made in the years before 1972, which are those of Maturity).
Figure 6.1     The geographic outspreading of technologies as they mature
A schematic presentation of the US trade position in the product life cycle
This means that the ‘miracles’ of synergy, intensive growth and prosperity
fueled by each technological revolution, move out to further and further rings,
from the areas of maximum development towards the least developed. This
could be considered as the last manifestations of widespread world conver-
gence with the final stage of diffusion of that particular paradigm. Though
divergence is, by then, beginning to differentiate the core, where the next tech-
Source:     Wells (ed.) (1972), p.15. Reprinted by permission of the publisher Copyright ©
1972 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College.

65
Uneven Development and Time-Lags in Diffusion
nological revolution has irrupted, and its elements are being installed. This is
soon to annul some of the advances achieved in the periphery.
The earlier manifestations of the phenomenon can be gleaned from the data
relating to the first surge, based on the mechanization of cotton in Britain.
During the installation period at the end of the eighteenth century, the bulk of
cotton production was for home consumption. By 1805, during Synergy, a
third of British cotton textiles went to export markets. By 1814 the proportion
was approaching a half. As exports continued growing, they went further and
further away. In 1820, in the maturity phase of the first surge, 61 per cent of
British textiles went to Europe and the USA, and 39 per cent to Spanish America,
China, the East Indies, Africa and others. By 1840, when British production
had tripled, 71 per cent was already being sold to the periphery. 84 In the mean-
time, in Europe and the USA great efforts were being made to increase their
manufacturing capacity by copying and developing British technology, often
with the help of skilled immigrants.85
Yet, in the earlier surges, deployment to the periphery, from Maturity on-
wards, took two main forms: exports and communications. What spread to the
periphery were some aspects of the consumption patterns and the infrastruc-
tures, such as canals, ports, railways, telegraph, telephone and other modern-
izing investments that, apart from their own profitability, increased markets
for the mature industries of the core, by making medium- or long-distance
commerce easier, faster and less costly. They also unwittingly prepared the
territory for industrialization.
It is not the object of the present book to analyze what happens in the
periphery with each successive technological revolution. For this reason, the
discussion has concentrated on the phases of diffusion in the core countries.
Great surges, however, are better described as consisting of six, rather than
four phases. The first one would be gestation, or the time of preparation for
irruption, which is of indefinite duration. Then would come the four being
discussed here, which characterize diffusion in the core countries. Finally, the
last phase would be the time of stretching and spreading to successive
peripheries. In that final period, the last possibilities offered by the prevailing
paradigm serve to propagate capitalism across the world. But those two later
phases take place in parallel with the first two of the next technological
revolution. So each great surge rolls out to the periphery supporting development
with the last wealth-producing capacities of its mature technologies, meeting
at the end its final defeat (or transformation) by the new paradigm.
The mass-production paradigm is the most recent example. The 1950s was
a period of expansion in the USA, which served to pull the front-running
84.
Hobsbawm (1962) pp. 53 and 373.
85.
Landes (1969) Ch. 3.

66
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
European countries. By the 1960s the main dynamism moved towards Europe
and Asia, producing the so-called ‘miracles’ in Germany, Italy and Japan. In
the 1970s, it was Brazil, Taiwan and Korea that had taken over the baton. After
the mid-1970s, some of the oil countries were able to attempt growth using the
mature energy-intensive technologies in aluminum, petrochemicals and so on.
But by then, the information revolution was already taking force in the USA
and other core countries and the organizational revolution was catapulting Japan
to the front ranks86 while the stagflation of the irruption phase was entering the
scene of the old advanced countries.87 Soon globalization was defining
international market survival. This meant that, in the developing countries, the
mature technologies had to be modernized with the new paradigm. By the
1990s, in the casino prosperity of the frenzy phase in the North, joining global
firms was made possible by the modernization of mature technologies.88 This
has very much been the case of the North of Mexico, further spurred by the
North American Free Trade Association (NAFTA) between the United States,
Canada and Mexico, which attracted competitive investment from Japan and
Europe to take advantage of Mexican conditions plus easy access to the US
market.89
Another phenomenon worth analyzing in this respect is the case of periph-
eral countries leaping ahead and catching up in development during the period
of installation in the core, such as Argentina in the 1880s and the ‘Asian Ti-
gers’ in the 1980s and 1990s. These instances will be discussed in Chapter 10,
in relation to the behavior of financial capital in the frenzy phase.
It is important to note, however, that the current surge is likely to be world-
wide in character in every phase. Since a key feature of the current Informa-
tion Age is the establishment of a globalized economy, the spreading of both
production and trade networks across core and peripheral countries began from
86.
The fact that the main organizational concepts (such as networks, enriched tasks, flexibil-
ity, adaptability and so on), which came together with information technology to conform
the presently diffusing paradigm, were developed by the Japanese within the old mass-
production technologies is an interesting phenomenon to analyze. A possible explanation
lies in the peculiar factor endowment of Japan when catching up using a materials-inten-
sive paradigm (no raw materials, plenty of cheap labor, long-distance to export markets),
which stimulated innovation to overcome the limits and use the advantages in a different
direction from the USA. See Womack et al. (1990).
87.
No such process of relocation and rejuvenation to overcome internal decline and decay
was part of the functioning of the overcentralized Soviet system and this lack may have
been an important part of the causal chain that led to its collapse.
88.
Perez (2001).
89.
It is worth noting that outspreading to the periphery will not happen automatically or
evenly. Much will depend upon intelligent policies for attracting the technologies and for
absorbing them. Whether success in this will actually lead to a leap in development is
likely to depend upon the ability of each particular country to use each advance as a plat-
form to innovate and to take advantage of successive windows of opportunity. See Perez
(2001).

67
Uneven Development and Time-Lags in Diffusion
the early installation period. This feature is likely to distinguish this surge
from all previous ones in terms of rhythm of propagation to non-core areas.
So again, and not surprisingly, nothing in the capitalist system is clear and
simple. What the model suggests is that the overlapping surges will make the
analysis of each period very fuzzy, with some countries experiencing late
miracles of synergy with one paradigm while others are already going through
the turbulence and tensions provoked by the next technological revolution.

68
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital

69
Uneven Development and Time-Lags in Diffusion
PART II
Technological Revolutions
and the Changing Behavior
of Financial Capital

70
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital

71
Financial Capital and Production Capital
A.
Different Functions; Different Criteria
The time has come to make explicit the definitions of finance and production
capital, which have been implicit in the previous discussion. Neither refers to
the actual capital (which is both paper and real at the same time), but rather to
the agents and their purposes. In both cases, the term ‘capital’ is used here to
embody the motives and criteria that lead certain people to perform – or hire
others to perform – a particular function in the process of wealth creation within
the capitalist system.90
Thus, financial capital represents the criteria and behavior of those agents
who possess wealth in the form of money or other paper assets. In that condi-
tion, they will perform those actions that, in their understanding, are most
likely to increase that wealth. In the process, they may acquire deposits, stocks,
bonds, oil futures, derivatives, diamonds or whatever. They may receive inter-
est, dividends or capital gains, but in the end, by whatever means, their pur-
pose remains tied to having wealth in the form of money (‘liquid’ or quasi-
liquid) and making it grow. To achieve this purpose, they use the services of
banks, brokers and other intermediaries who provide information, perform the
contracts and in general embody the drive to make paper wealth grow. It is the
behavior of these intermediaries while fulfilling the function of making money
from money that can be observed and analyzed as the behavior of financial
capital. In essence, financial capital serves as the agent for reallocating and
redistributing wealth.
By contrast, the term ‘production capital’ embodies the motives and behav-
iors of those agents who generate new wealth by producing goods or perform-
ing services (including transport, trade and other enabling activities). By ana-
7. Financial Capital and Production Capital
71
90.
This is somewhat akin to Schumpeter’s distinction of the financial and the entrepreneurial
function (1939, Vol. 1, Ch. III). In this case, however, the routine functions of production
are being encompassed together with the innovative ones in the concept of production
capital (approaching the more conventional distinction between money economy and real
economy). Although recognizing the enormous importance of Schumpeter’s distinction
when referring to innovation and extraordinary profits, in this case, all agents of direct
production, innovative or routinized, will be considered as production capital. The present
distinction is therefore more in line with Veblen’s (1904) view of the difference – and even
opposition – between the ‘captains of finance’ and the ‘engineers.’

72
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
lytical definition, these agents do this with borrowed money from financial
capital and then share the generated wealth. If they are using their own money,
they are then performing both functions. Their purpose as production capital is
to produce in order to be able to produce more. They are essentially builders.
Their objective is to accumulate greater and greater profit-making capacity,
by growing through investment in innovation and expansion. They can be owner
managers or employed managers and directors. Their power stems from the
power of the specific firm and their personal wealth will depend on the suc-
cess of their actions as producers.
The object here is to clearly distinguish between the actual process of wealth
creation and the enabling mechanisms, such as finance, which influence its
possibility and shape the ultimate distribution of its results. This functional
distinction is essential to the nature of the capitalist system.91
Schumpeter defined capitalism as ‘that form of private property economy
in which innovations are carried out by means of borrowed money’.92 So, the
separation between the agents and their roles leads to complementary though
very different behaviors.
Financial capital is mobile by nature while production capital is basically
tied to concrete products, both by installed equipment with specific opera-
tional capabilities and by linkages in networks of suppliers, customers or dis-
tributors in particular geographic locations. Financial capital can successfully
invest in a firm or a project without much knowledge of what it does or how it
does it. Its main question is potential profitability (sometimes even just the
perception others may have about it). For production capital, knowledge about
product, process and markets is the very foundation of potential success. The
knowledge can be scientific and technical expertise or managerial experience,
it can be innovative talent or entrepreneurial drive, but it will always be about
specific areas and only partly mobile. Both financial capital and production
capital face risks that vary with circumstances from great to minimal. Yet,
while financial capital can choose widely how to invest its money, avoiding or
withdrawing from risks which it deems too high for the likely returns, most
agents of production capital are in path-dependent situations and must find
alternative actions within a limited range, often needing to lure financial capi-
tal or face failure. As far as truly new ventures are concerned, innovators may
91.
Nevertheless, the distinction being made here, between financial and production capital,
serves the purposes of the specific model being presented. Hilferding’s (1910:1981) no-
tion of finance capital, as the fusion of industrial and financial capital, is a category in a
different theoretical framework. Another level of discourse, which is not attempted here,
is the distinction between the changing forms of capital in the process of wealth creation
and accumulation, especially of the role of money as motivation and instrument in its
different forms and transformations. For such an in-depth analysis, see Wolfgang Drechsler
(2002).
92.
Schumpeter (1939) p. 223.

73
Financial Capital and Production Capital
have brilliant ideas for which they are willing to take huge risks, devoting
their whole lives to bringing their projects to reality, but if finance is not forth-
coming they can do nothing.
All these distinctions lead to a fundamental difference in level of commit-
ment. Financial capital is footloose by nature; production capital has roots in
an area of competence and even in a geographic region. Financial capital will
flee danger; production capital has to face every storm by holding fast, duck-
ing down or innovating its way forward or sideways. Yet, though the notion of
progress and innovation is associated with production capital – and rightly so
– ironically when it comes to radical change, incumbent production capital
can become conservative and then it is the role of financial capital (whether
from family, banks or ‘angels’) to enable the rise of the new entrepreneurs.
B.
The Changing Relationship Between Financial and
Production Capital
According to the present interpretation, continuous technical change takes place
within discontinuous surges, diffusing successive technological revolutions.
The types and amounts of profit-making opportunities vary significantly along
the life cycle of each technological revolution. Now is the time to analyze how
the relationship between financial and production capital changes along the
phases of each surge.
The same sequence that was described in Chapters 4 and 5, from the stand-
point of technological change and its assimilation by the economic and social
system, will now be viewed concentrating on the behavior of financial capital.
Figure 7.1 summarizes the sequence.
The love affair of the irruption phase
In the period immediately following the big-bang that announces a technological
revolution, financial capital begins a passionate relationship with the emerging
production capital. The new revolutionary entrepreneurs soon outstrip the profit-
making potential of all the established production sectors and there is a rush of
financial capital towards them, readily developing new appropriate instruments
whenever necessary. The agents of financial capital (brokers, banks and other
financial institutions) are quick to adopt whatever innovations facilitate and
widen their range of operations, in particular those associated with
communications and transport.
Thus, the role financial capital plays in this period is to help spread the
revolution. As discussed in Chapter 3, the functional separation between pro-
duction and financial capital facilitates the movement of investment money

74
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Figure 7.1
The recurring sequence in the relationship between financial capital (FK) and production capital (PK)
Financial Revolution
Intense funding of the new technologies
Disdain of old assets
Institutional 
recomposition
Crash
big-bang
Bubble economy
Divorce between paper and real value
Asset inflation
FRENZY
Decoupling 
FK-PK
IRRUPTION
Love affair of
FK with
revolution
SYNERGY
Recoupling
FK-PK
MATURITY
Signs of
Separation
Financial capital
searching on its own
Decreasing investment
opportunities
'Idle money' moving to new 
areas, sectors and regions
Next
big-bang
Time
Next
Great 
Surge
Previous
Great 
Surge
Turning 
point
Degree of diffusion of the technological revolution
INSTALLATION PERIOD
DEPLOYMENT PERIOD
Production capital at the helm
Recoupling of real and paper wealth
Coherent growth
74

75
Financial Capital and Production Capital
towards a new breed of technological entrepreneurs, who might not have had
any financial connections before. This movement is all the more likely at this
time, given that the revolution crystallizes partly because the opportunities for
profitable investment with the now old paradigm have been approaching ex-
haustion. So there is ‘idle money’ in search of profitable use.
Old production capital is facing diminishing returns to innovation as well
as market saturation. By comparison with the new sectors, its profits become
uninteresting and financial capital tends to flee from them. This deepening
techno-economic split was behind the ‘stagflation’ experienced by the advanced
countries in the 1980s. Soon, however, it becomes clear to financial capital
that no matter how high the rate of growth of the new sectors they are still only
a small fraction of the economy. Yet the habit of obtaining high yields has
caught on and become the normal level of expectations. In order to achieve the
same high yield from all investments as from the successful new sectors, fi-
nancial capital becomes highly ‘innovative’. Imagination moves from real es-
tate to paintings, from loans in far away countries to pyramid schemes, from
hostile takeovers to derivatives or whatever.
Decoupling in the frenzy phase
After the growing confidence acquired in the previous phase, financial capital
becomes convinced it can live and thrive on its own. Brilliant successes in a
sort of gambling world make it believe itself capable of generating wealth by
its own actions, almost like having invented magic rules for a new sort of
economy. Production capital, including the revolutionary industries, becomes
one more object of manipulation and speculation; the decoupling between fi-
nancial and production capital is almost complete.
Nevertheless, this is a time of innovation for production capital; the new
paradigm opens vast opportunities for new products, processes and services as
well as for rejuvenating the old. It is also – and especially – the time of fast
development of the infrastructure of the new paradigm, which facilitates a
host of other related innovations. So during this period, financial capital gen-
erates a powerful magnet to attract investment into the new areas, hence accel-
erating the hold of the paradigm on what becomes the ‘new economy’. Finan-
cial capital then acts as the agent of massive creative destruction.
The entrepreneurs of new firms as much as the management of the old
(whether modernizing or not) are forced to do whatever is necessary to attract
the players in the casino and then worry as much – or more – about the perfor-
mance of their stock valuations as about their actual profits. Financial capital
reigns arrogant and production capital has no alternative but to adapt to the
new rules; some agents with glee, others with horror.
In a world of capital gains, real estate bubbles and foreign adventures with
money, all notion of the real value of anything is lost. Uncontrollable asset

76
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
inflation sets in while debt mounts at a reckless rhythm; much of it to enter the
casino. Thus grows the vast disproportion between paper wealth and real wealth,
between real profits or dividends and capital gains. But the illusion cannot last
forever and these tensions are bound to end in collapse. This can happen in a
series of partial crises in one market after another, in one huge crash or a com-
bination of both; however it happens, the bubble needs to burst.
Collapse and recession: The turning point
The painful processes of implosion that mark the end of the frenzy phase bring
paper values in line with real values and, through their consequences, are likely
to bring reluctant financial capital back to reality. What follows can be a time
of reckoning and acceptance, when regulation of various sorts is put in place
or generalized, in particular that which puts order in the behavior of financial
capital and tends to re-establish the proper connections with production capi-
tal. An adequate institutional readjustment is needed, all the more urgently
given the difficult recessive situation that usually follows. The basic task of
institutional recomposition involves creating the conditions for expanding
markets and putting production capital in control. The length of the recession
will depend on the social and political capacity to establish and channel the
institutional changes that will restore confidence and will put the accent on
real wealth creation.
The happy marriage of the synergy phase
Once the appropriate conditions have been created, the period of deployment
begins. In this early phase, the recoupling of financial and production capital
can lead to a happy and harmonious marriage, where production capital, based
on the by now prevailing paradigm, is clearly recognized as the wealth-creating
agent and financial capital as the facilitator. When this is effectively achieved,
innovation and growth can take place across the whole productive spectrum
and financial wealth may take its share in the profits in what is clearly a positive
sum game. Less harmonious frameworks (as suggested before, rather than a
golden age, a gilded age), still under the aegis of financial capital, can occur,
maintaining some of the previous tensions. But the ferocious competition of
the frenzy phase has by this time led production capital to form oligopolies
and to begin favoring the expansion of markets. So whatever the institutional
set-up, the renewed link between financial capital and actual production will
increasingly involve real growth and real dividends.
Hence, the role of financial capital when the period of deployment begins is
to strengthen production capital across the economy and to give support to the
real growth process. This is the time when the theoretical notion of financial
capital as an intermediary comes closer to being realized in practice.

77
Financial Capital and Production Capital
Trouble again in maturity
In the late phase of deployment comes disappointment. Some of the erstwhile
fastest-growing and highly profitable sectors of production capital begin to
reach limits to growth in both productivity and markets. Technological out-
stretching and geographic migration are some of the routes followed by pro-
duction capital, still supported by financial capital. The profits that continue to
flow from this ailing part of the economy and from the still dynamic firms and
sectors, find a decreasing spectrum of outlets for fruitful investment and be-
come ‘idle money’. Thus financial capital is under pressure from eager money
growing faster than good opportunities and begins to look around for other
profitable or exciting things. These include loans to distant places and radi-
cally new technologies. The first will later lead to debt crises; the second, to
the next technological revolution.
C.
Recurrent Phases and Financial Crises
The framework so far presented does not claim that all financial collapses are
of the same nature or that they all follow a strict causal sequence connected
with the diffusion of technological revolutions. What is suggested is that among
the many mechanisms at play in any particular crisis, there are causal chains
that have their origin in the role of technological life cycles in providing changing
amounts and qualities of investment and profit opportunities. They may thus
act as background causes for what appears to be happening merely in the fi-
nancial sphere.
There is one type of collapse, though, which is directly connected with tech-
nological revolutions. It is the crash – or series of mini-crashes – that tends to
close the casino bubble at the end of the frenzy phase, when the decoupling
between financial and production capital is extreme, when paper values are
mainly related to the asset inflation game and break loose from the expected
dividends or other measures of actual performance. This is the crisis that most
directly enters the causal links being discussed here and it is both its occur-
rence and its outcome – or even its possible absence – that can play a deter-
mining role in shaping the institutions of the world to come after it. At the
same time, the specific way in which this crisis is overcome will strongly in-
fluence the directions taken by the potential of the paradigm during the ensu-
ing deployment period.
Figure 7.2 locates the main financial crises of the two centuries being ana-
lyzed in the corresponding phases of each technological wave. The purpose is
to help the reader identify the isomorphs, locate the approximate dates of the
parallel phases being discussed, as well as to open the record for the analysis
of the various crises.

78
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Note: *  Phase overlaps between successive surges.
Source:      Dates of crises are from Kindleberger (1978:1996), Appendix B.
Figure 7.2
Five successive surges, recurrent parallel periods and major financial crises
78
Technological
revolution
INSTALLATION
DEPLOYMENT
IRRUPTION
FRENZY
SYNERGY
MATURITY
1810
1819
1825
1857
1866
1873
1907
1903
1960
"Oil crisis"
Turning 
Point
US
'Rich man's panic'
20??
?
Institutional
recomposition
Crash
"Oil crisis"
1974*
1989 1997
2000
Collapse
2nd World NASDAQ
Asia
US stock
mania
Argentina
(Baring)
USA
The "Great
Depression"
Railway
mania
Revolutions 1848
Panic
1929
1971
1908
1875
1829
1771
1890
1847
1793
1797
Canal
mania
Panic
big-bang
Age of Information
and Telecommunications
USA (spreading
to Europe and Asia)
Age of Oil, Automobiles
and Mass Production
USA (spreading to Europe)
Age of Steel, Electricity 
and Heavy Engineering
USA and Germany
overtaking Britain
Age of Steam
and Railways
Britain (spreading
to continent and USA)
The Industrial
Revolution
Britain
Core Country
GREAT
SURGE
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
1893
1836
1987
1920*
1974 *
1920 *
1930s
and WWII

79
Financial Capital and Production Capital
The figure shows the truly major collapses located about two or three decades
after the big-bang of each revolution. Apart from the relatively regular timing,
it is interesting to note that these particular bubbles have tended to bear the
name of the infrastructure of the corresponding revolution: canal mania, railway
mania and now the Internet bubble, so that in these cases the ‘main objects of
speculation,’ as defined in the Kindleberger model,93 happen to be of a
technological nature.
Other regularities are worth noting:
●
collapses are less likely during Irruption and Synergy,94 though frequent
at the passage from the installation to the deployment period and vice
versa;
●
there is a bunching of crises in the turbulent economy of the frenzy phase
and in the decelerating economy of the maturity phase; and
●
the passage from the early to the late phase of each period is sometimes
marked by a financial crisis.
There is a certain amount of circularity in all these observations, because the
phases have been dated taking the occurrence of crises into account. It is in the
nature of the model being presented that these features should roughly hold.
*  *  *
Having briefly defined the characteristics of the recurring sequence, the next
chapters enter into a detailed analysis of the behavior of financial capital in
each of the phases of propagation of the technological revolution. This will be
done following the discussion about changing investment opportunities put
forward in Part I. As up to now, a stylized narrative will be used.
The narrative will not begin in the irruption phase, with the big-bang of the
technological revolution. Instead, it goes back a decade or so to begin with the
description of the maturity phase, which is the time when the previous para-
digm begins to confront the limits to its potential. This choice is fundamental
because the model requires starting from the period of gestation of the next
technological revolution. That is the time when the conditions are created for
financial capital to play a role in sowing the seeds for its emergence. From
then on, the narrative follows the changing performance of financial capital
93.
Kindleberger (1978) pp. 6 and 38–41. Following Minsky, Kindleberger identifies the ele-
ments that combine for each of the big mania-type panics: an exogenous shock that sets
off the mania, a specific object of speculation (commodities, real estate, bonds, stocks and
so on) and a particular source of monetary expansion.
94.
The crisis of 1903 only lasted about four months. It was called ‘rich man’s panic’ because
it hit mainly the biggest investors. Sobel (1965) pp. 981–2.

80
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
with each phase of diffusion of the paradigm. As far as possible, the arguments
will be illustrated with examples from parallel phases of different surges.

81
Maturity: Planting the Seeds of Turbulence
The preparation for the big-bang of each technological revolution occurs in
the very contradictory context of the previous maturity phase, though some of
the contributing technologies could have a long previous history.
Maturity is the end of the deployment period. As discussed before, it is a
phase that combines signs of exhaustion in many of the original core indus-
tries of the prevailing paradigm, with very high growth rates in the last few
new industries within that same paradigm. While the older industries find it
difficult to increase productivity or markets, the success of the newer ones is
marred by the rapidity with which they reach maturity and saturation. The
accumulated experience and the already well-developed infrastructure and
business practices create very favorable conditions for the fast diffusion of the
last products and industries exploiting the established externalities. They are
also routinized enough to make it relatively easy to begin spreading out geo-
graphically, reaching for peripheral markets or for lower-cost production.
Financial capital, which after the successful experience of the synergy phase
had re-established the habit of profitable cooperation with production capital,
is behind the swift flourishing of the last sectors and the last regions. It also
accompanies the most powerful firms in their attempt to prop up their threat-
ened profits. These firms have by now become huge and are facing increasing
difficulty in finding fruitful investment for their mass of profit. This pushes
them into buying up smaller competitors to increase market share, trying un-
tested technologies for stretching their trajectories and venturing into distant
markets or production locations.95 Paradoxically, the more successful they are
8. Maturity: Financial Capital Planting
the Seeds of Turbulence at the End
of the Previous Surge
81
95.
There is a long-standing discussion among some of the long-wave proponents (see, for
example, Mandel 1975, Shaikh 1992) about whether a decrease in profit rates is behind
the onset of recessions. Proving or disproving this hypothesis would involve distinguish-
ing between the total profits received, by whatever means, and those that come from ‘real’
productivity and market growth. It would also have to look at profit distribution between
sectors and among firms. This is an extremely difficult task. According to the present
interpretation, to detect a profit squeeze, one should look at the industries that had been
serving as the engines of growth to detect signs of decreasing productivity growth, market
stagnation and diminishing investment. Other telling signs would be the appearance of

82
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
in these attempts, the more profits accumulate and become idle capital desper-
ately looking for alternative investment. So, financial capital begins to over-
flow and to search for other outlets. The behavior it exhibits at this time plants
the seed of both the future debt crises and the emergence of the next techno-
logical revolution. What follows is a brief overview of the typical practices of
financial capital during the maturity phase of each paradigm.
A.
‘Power-Seeking’ Behavior
After years of prosperous and successful synergy, financial capital continues
supporting the strategies of production capital, especially that of the ‘blue chip’
sort. Its behavior in this period continues to be closely attached to that of its
strongest production clients (often partners), who are likely to be among the
first to reach the limits of the paradigm.
One of the early solutions that the most powerful firms find to confront the
signs of exhaustion is increasing market control. This is achieved by various
means: through mergers, as were the railroad ‘amalgamations’ of the 1860s in
Britain,96 by squeezing out of the market or buying up smaller competitors to
create closed oligopolies or by acquiring firms in other sectors to build diver-
sified giants, as with the conglomerate wave in the USA in the 1960s.97
This type of drive for monopoly power is a response to dwindling market
growth. It should be distinguished from the concentration trends that will hap-
pen later, towards the end of the frenzy phase of the next paradigm. In that
period, markets will be growing strongly in ferocious competition, so mergers
and acquisitions seek, among other things, to reduce both the number of com-
petitors and the intensity of price competition. By contrast, in the maturity
phase being discussed now, economies of scale are sought to capture a larger
share of saturated and diminishing markets.
Yet, the financial concentration of production capital within and across sec-
tors and countries, which occurs in the twilight of the paradigm, turns out to be
only a band-aid solution to the crunch, because it cannot overcome the pro-
ductivity and profitability problems brought about by paradigm constriction.
It should be noted that the massive war expenditures of the First World War
came to the rescue of investment opportunities and profits in the maturity phase
of the third surge in the main advanced countries. Later, the Vietnam war, plus
new behaviors that indicate that the firms are seeking unorthodox ways to search for ben-
efits. This would apply to the maturity phase but not to the mid-surge recessions after the
major financial bubbles. Their signs and meaning will be discussed below, in Chapter 11.
96.
Dyos and Aldcroft (1969) p. 205.
97.
Blair (1972) Ch. 11.

83
Maturity: Planting the Seeds of Turbulence
the intensification of the Cold War and the Space Race, had a similar effect for
the US economy during Maturity in the fourth surge. By contrast, the Napole-
onic wars actually ended as the maturity phase was setting in, so they boosted
growth during Synergy in the first surge in Britain and their end aggravated
the market constriction of Maturity. In that case (as in many others), war also
served to spread technology among the adversaries and thus create future peace-
time competitors.98 So, although wars have been explicitly excluded from the
causal chains discussed in the model, their major impact on the economy and
the different roles they can play, depending on the phase, have to be taken into
account when analyzing specific historical periods.
B.
Redeployment: Investing Away from the Core Countries
and Sectors
The mixture of market saturation, technological exhaustion and political un-
rest in their traditional strongholds, drives firms in mature industries to at-
tempt to spread out from the established areas of investment, sectoral and geo-
graphic. Financial capital starts to support investment in marginalized sectors,
sales to new distant clients, and the moving of production to cheaper loca-
tions. Among the early investment opportunities abroad are those related to
the transport and telecommunications infrastructure that will accompany the
market expansion push of the mature industries towards the periphery.
These explorations further and further away have the backing of all the
learning and experience accumulated in the maturing process so they can usu-
ally be done relatively quickly, in comparison with the original diffusion. So,
this too is only a temporary stretching of business possibilities rather than a
permanent solution. Nevertheless, this outspreading of infrastructures and
mature processes has been one of the forces diffusing capitalism throughout
the world and widening its potential markets, at the same time as it is one of
the mechanisms fueling the catching-up efforts of lagging countries. Addi-
tionally, successful redeployment also creates the conditions for financial capital
to invest in other activities in the destination territories, by reducing the risks
and increasing the knowledge about possible distant investment. So, both pro-
ductive and financial capital tend to arrive in peripheral countries at the time
when the diffusing revolution is in the last phase of its life cycle, moving the
dynamics of the system outwards from its ‘home bases’.
In the 1860s, in the maturity phase of the second surge, abundant and idle
British capital poured into the USA as loans for the reconstruction after the
98.
Crouzet (1964).

84
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
civil war and especially for railways. During the decade before the First World
War, towards the end of the third great surge, the core countries, by then in-
cluding the USA and Germany next to Britain, staged a huge wave of world-
wide investment, direct and indirect.
A sort of pulsating movement inward and outward between core and pe-
ripheral countries seems to characterize the availability of investment capital
in the periphery. It is during Maturity and Frenzy, as will be seen later, that idle
capital goes out searching for opportunities. In the other two phases it has
plenty of profitable opportunities at home in the core countries: in Irruption
with the burgeoning technological revolution; in Synergy staging the full de-
ployment of the paradigm.
Table 8.1 represents the pulsating movements for the case of Britain be-
tween the second and the third surges. During the synergy and irruption phases,
investment concentrates ‘at home’. More than 70 per cent of capital formation
during the Victorian Synergy in the 1850s and the belle époque at the turn of
the century was done within the United Kingdom. The same happens in the
irruption phase of the 1870s with investment in the industries of the techno-
logical revolution. By contrast, Maturity and Frenzy are times of capital mi-
gration. In the case of the UK, capital formation abroad reaches between 40
and nearly 53 per cent in those periods. Again, the character of these outflows
is different. In Maturity it is tied to production, the search for markets and the
outstretching of the mature paradigm; during Frenzy it is much more specula-
tive and more strictly ‘financial’.
Table 8.1
Fluctuations in UK foreign investment (at current prices)
as percentage of total net capital formation, 1855–1914
Years
%
Phase and surge*
1855–1864
29.1
(Since 1851) Synergy second great surge
1865–1874
40.1
Maturity second great surge
1875–1884
28.9
Irruption third great surge
1885–1894
51.2
Frenzy third great surge
1895–1904
20.7
Synergy third great surge
1905–1914
52.9
(After 1907) Maturity third great surge**
Notes:
*   Periods roughly classified by phases in the corresponding surges.
** In the USA,  this is also the beginning of the irruption phase of the fourth surge,
which makes it a powerful magnet for idle British financial capital.
Source:
Data constructed by Landes (1969) p. 331, from Imlah and Deane (the emphases and
the classification of phases are the author’s).

85
Maturity: Planting the Seeds of Turbulence
The figures for the London Stock Exchange show similar trends. The pro-
portion of foreign securities quoted in the City went from 32.8 per cent in
1840 at the end of Frenzy, down to 8 per cent in 1853 and up again to 37 per
cent by 1873, at the end of the maturity phase of the second great surge. In the
equivalent periods for the third great surge, the proportions were 54 per cent
for 1893, 49 per cent for 1903 and 53 per cent for 1913.99
These overflows of investment to the peripheries can give the last push to
catching-up processes in countries that are ready for it. In the cases of forging
forward, self-propelled processes are more likely to be the rule. Such seems to
have been the case of the British with the ‘Industrial Revolution’, of Germany
in the third surge towards the end of the nineteenth century and of Japan in the
1960s and 1970s with the fifth paradigm. The case of the United States is more
mixed. British capital was certainly crucial in helping the USA to catch up in
the 1830s as well as in the 1860s and 1870s. Yet the impulse was doubtlessly
self-fueled from the 1880s, when the real leap ahead took place. Nevertheless,
if not from financial help, most cases of truly significant advances do benefit
from knowledge and technology flows, which in one way or another come
from the leading countries at the time.100
C.
Idle Money Leads to Bad Loans
Idle money does not stop growing in the maturity phase.101 There is an inertial
wealth-accumulating potential at the end of the technological revolution. It is
made up of the monopoly power of the big established firms and the ease with
which the last technologies and products can enter the market and expand. Yet
these last investment opportunities are not enough to absorb available finan-
cial capital, mainly because their life cycles are intense and swift. Those last
‘young’ industries quickly catch up with the old ones, encountering together
what Grübler has called the ‘Kondratiev barrier’102 of maturity and saturation.
99.
Michie (1987) Ch. 2, pp. 36–7 and 52. The figures represent declared paid-up capital but
not real value. Many of the foreign securities included in the 1840 figures had already
defaulted in the 1920s and 1930s and were of little value by then (ibid.). This could also be
the case for the 1893 figures.
100.
The classic argument in favor of such flows was put forward by List (1841) when the
German states were trying to imitate the British industrial success.
101.
Baran and Sweezy (1966) Ch. 3, identified what they called ‘the tendency of surplus to
rise,’ which they interpreted at the time as an immanent law of the new monopoly capital-
ism. Yet, this phenomenon of masses of money looking for opportunities was already
there much earlier in capitalism. It is estimated that in the 1830s and 1840s Lancashire, the
land of the then mature cotton industry being modernized by the steam engine, provided a
dominant share of the funds invested in the main early railways throughout Britain. See
Dyos and Aldcroft (1969) p. 201.
102.
Grübler (1990) p. 280.

86
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
So, as the maturity phase wears on, worthy borrowers with good projects
dwindle and financial capital becomes less and less demanding when it comes
to lending. Loans are granted to weaker and weaker creditors, perhaps with
higher and higher risk premiums. In particular, lending to governments be-
comes popular among investors through various financial instruments. It is
these periods of Maturity that witness the creation of great volumes of sover-
eign debt as well as agricultural, national government, consumer and other
credit in inordinate proportions. It is in this phase that the future debt crises
with their inevitable defaults are nurtured.
The funds that Britain lent to individual states of the USA in the 1820s to
1830s for building canals and turnpikes defaulted in the crash of 1837; those
lent in the late 1860s and early 1870s, to the same or other states, for building
railways defaulted in the crash of 1873.103
The debt crisis of the 1980s, which at the turn of the century was still weigh-
ing heavily upon the Third World, began growing with the development loans
received since the 1960s and intensified with the petrodollar plethora of the
late 1970s. Of course, the hunger for funds experienced in the poorer periph-
ery makes it relatively easy for idle capital to find willing borrowers. Still,
financiers can be pushy and government officials more than obliging (all the
more so if there are juicy commissions involved). According to Kindleberger,
several years before the rise in oil prices, ‘multinational banks swollen with
dollars … tumbled over one another to uncover new foreign borrowers and
practically forced money on the less developed countries’.104
The case of the Latin American countries is a striking illustration of the
recurring cycle of loan fever at the end of a paradigm in the maturity phase,
and of default during the process of paradigm shift in the installation period.
Figure 8.1 organizes the data presented by Carlos Marichal105 in his history of
debt in the subcontinent, locating it in the framework being presented here.
As the figure indicates, the loans came regularly to Latin America in the
maturity phase of each surge. Every 50 to 60 years, from the independence
period through the 1960s and 1970s, plentiful credit poured into the periphery,
as soon as opportunities in the core countries began to wane. The defaults
came in the installation period, some sooner and some later depending on the
unique circumstances. The most rapid were the defaults on the independence
loans, which occurred almost immediately and led to a moratorium that in
many cases lasted more than two or even three decades. The longest delay
took place between the two world wars. The loan fever began around 1904 and
continued to come to many countries after the First World War, during the
103.
Galbraith (1990) pp. 61–6.
104.
Kindleberger (1978) p. 19.
105.
Marichal (1988).

87
Maturity: Planting the Seeds of Turbulence
Note:
* Observe phase overlaps between successive surges.
Figure 8.1
The recurrence of loan fever and default: the Latin American case
Source:
Based on data from Marichal (1988).
Technological
revolution
INSTALLATION
PERIOD
DEPLOYMENT
PERIOD
1904-14
Investment
LOANS
1960-70s*
Development
LOANS
Turning 
Point
20??
?
Institutional
recomposition
(in the core countries)
Crash
Argentina
Mexico
1925-28
Development
LOANS
DEBT MORATORIUM
(Default since 1926-28)
1971
1908
1875
1829
1771
big-bang
Age of Information
and Telecommunications
USA (spreading
to Europe and Asia)
Age of Oil, Automobiles
and Mass Production
USA (spreading to Europe)
Age of Steel, Electricity 
and Engineering
USA and Germany
overtaking Britain
Age of Steam
and Railways
Britain (spreading
to continent and USA)
The Industrial
Revolution
Britain
Core Country
GREAT
SURGE
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
Idle money for loans
in maturity phase
Debt difficulties
and defaults
1874-80 
DEFAULTS
1880-90 Río de la Plata
LOANS for railways/ports 
1890 
Argentina
1980s
DEBT
CRISIS
1860-73
Refinancing old debts,
LOANS for military 
and public works
1820-25
Independence
LOANS
1926-28
DEFAULT
Depression
DEBT
CRISIS
WWII
87

88
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
euphoria of the frenzy phase in the 1920s only to go through a serious debt
crisis during the great depression of the 1930s.
The case of the Rio de la Plata stocks and loans splurge, associated with the
catching up of many countries in the southern hemisphere during the third
great surge, was different. In that occasion, as with that of the Four Asian
Tigers in the 1990s, the collapse came later, not as defaults, but as a financial
crash.
D.
Other Questionable Practices
During the maturity phase, especially towards the end, as handlers of financial
capital learn new ways to scramble for profits whenever and wherever they
can get them, not only do they lower their standards when lending, they also
indulge in unorthodox practices. In the 1960s there were damaging leads and
lags in international payments as well as playing with currency exchange varia-
tions. In fact, there were several national currency ‘collapses’ influenced by
such action (for example, Canada 1962, Italy 1963, Britain 1964, France 1968,
USA 1973 and so on).106 Tax avoidance by various means also plays a signifi-
cant role. In the 1960s and 1970s there was a flurry of ‘tax havens’ set up
abroad, which 30 years later were still hurting national budgets.
E.
Discovering the New Technologies
Yet there is one very important phenomenon which, together with the impulse
given to the catching-up processes, is the positive result of the dispersion of
financial capital in search of profitable opportunities in this twilight of the
established paradigm. This phase harbors the embryonic development of the
next technological revolution. Financial capital becomes ready to take risks in
it, precisely because the previous trajectories had approached exhaustion.
As discussed before, the process is most likely to begin as stretching solu-
tions to the limits of the paradigm inside the main industrial firms looking for
new ways of increasing productivity in maturing products or processes. The
forces helping this exploratory process are crucial for the emergence of the
next technological revolution and for the articulation of a new paradigm. This
is especially so given that the overadaptation of the environment to the estab-
lished paradigm has been systematically excluding, underestimating or
marginalizing the innovations that fall outside the established trajectories.
106.
Kindleberger (1978) p. 210.

89
Maturity: Planting the Seeds of Turbulence
When the signs of exhaustion appear in the space opened by the reigning
paradigm as the ‘normally’ profitable innovation possibilities, financial capi-
tal becomes more and more willing and ready to take risks exploring the emerg-
ing new attractions. It thus lifts one of the limits for radical innovations out-
side the well-trodden paths and opens opportunities in the truly new technolo-
gies, some of which are likely to come together into the next technological
revolution.
After the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 there was wide availability of
investment money for the rapid development of the steamship, of international
telegraph lines and everything that contributed to swifter world trade. After
Ford’s first assembly line, there were funds available for further applications
of mass-production methods in and out of the automobile industry as well as
for the expansion of oil refining, roads and urban development and so on.
From the mid-1960s, it became easier to find funding for developing electron-
ics and computers.
So, this last phase in the life cycle of each paradigm is when the forces
gather both for the impending pain of decline of the long-established indus-
tries, with all its social hardship, and for the emergence of another great surge
of development.

90
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
A.
Coexistence of Two Paradigms; Coexistence of Two
Behaviors
The beginning of each great surge has been identified here with the irruption
of a technological revolution and, for practical purposes, the birth has been
dated at a single symbolic event which represents the big-bang of that poten-
tial universe of opportunities. But obviously such discontinuities can only be
really identified with hindsight. The initial events occur in restricted spaces.
As seen by most contemporaries, even if they often make front-page news,
their multiple implications are visible mainly to an entrepreneurial minority.
Elsewhere there is continuity, with perhaps an inkling of threat. So, in the
present scheme the final phase of the life cycle of a paradigm is being treated
separately from the initial phase of the next. This is only an analytical device.
It cannot be overemphasized that, in real life, everything that was described
for the maturity phase continues in the background, sometimes even in an
exacerbated manner, for practically the whole duration of the phase that will
be discussed now.107 This is why, in the irruption phase, aggregate measures
can be particularly deceptive. Trends in many economic variables, such as
growth, productivity, employment, investment and profits are internally
divergent.
This long period of coexistence of two paradigms is a bifurcation in the
production structure, dividing the dynamic new from the obsolescent old. It is
also a period of bifurcation in that the core countries begin experiencing real
trouble, both economically and socially, while perhaps some of the catching-
up countries are reaching their maximum splendor. The technological revolu-
tion in the core countries – for all its glitter – commands a very small minority
share of the economy, which in its bulk is creaking from maturity and begin-
ning to face unemployment and uncontrollable price behavior. In the new-
comer countries, there is still ample space for using the mature paradigm and
9. Irruption: The Love Affair of Financial
Capital with the Technological Revolution
107.
As mentioned before, for the case of 1908–18, the two phases actually coincide.
90

91
Irruption: The Love Affair with the Technological Revolution
there is no burden of old investment stopping those that are forging ahead
from entering the new.108
Financial capital is still intensely engaged in the outspreading process of
the old, but the appearance of the new territory is very quickly realized. There
is suddenly a completely new situation in certain pockets of the economic
landscape. Huge successes, incredible rates of growth and even more incred-
ible profit margins become potent magnets for the still looming quantities of
idle capital. What ensues can best be described as an infatuation, as a passion-
ate love affair of financial capital with the technological revolution. Idle money
rapidly engages in the enthusiastic backing of the new industries and their
entrepreneurs; the financial and banking worlds jump to the quick adoption of
modernizing innovations for their own operations.
B.
New ‘Risk Capital’ Instruments
By definition a technological revolution implies risk. Products are new, pro-
cesses are being tested, markets are unknown, consumers are unaccustomed,
and supplies are not guaranteed. Although radical breakthroughs often require
relatively small amounts of capital, especially compared with the huge amounts
required by most technologies reaching maturity and economies of scale, there
are nonetheless many new entrepreneurs and many successive and parallel
innovations all vying for success and looking for money. There is also the
added risk of winners against losers, a risk that by the time a paradigm ma-
tures, about 40 or 50 years later, becomes infinitely lower due to the power
which by then is accumulated in the hands of producers and the experience
accumulated among the users.
So, the most salient characteristic of these times of revolutionary break-
throughs and multiple trial and error applications is also an innovative attitude
in the creation of risk capital instruments on the part of financial capital.
It is well known that many of the initiating innovations of the
microelectronics revolution were made in garages with personal funds and with
the help of family and friends. The same happened in the Industrial Revolution
in England. The first of the pioneers often have to break the new ground on
their own. However, the expansion, the continuing momentum and the long
series of radical innovations that follow do usually require and receive
substantial support from the financial system (in whatever form it takes at the time).
The role of outside finance is often determined by the nature of the specific
innovations involved. Discussing the conditions for the Industrial Revolution
108.
Soete (1985).

92
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
in Britain, Landes109 has pointed out that the mechanization of the cotton
industry did not require huge outlays of fixed capital. For this reason it was
possible for family finance and previous accumulation in foreign trade (the
famous ‘nabobs’) to fund the process. By contrast, the development of railways
in the installation period of the second surge did need great quantities of
investment from the beginning that were rarely available to a single firm. At
that time the development of joint-stock companies concentrated capital, spread
the risks and made the diffusion of that important innovation possible.
Nevertheless, the stock market and the other elements of the financial system
were still underdeveloped, so it was individual promoters who usually did the
underwriting.110
It was during the third surge that investment banking and institutionalized
financial capital became a powerful and indispensable part of the industrial
system. Yet, the process took some time to develop. Carnegie’s new Bessemer
steel plant, the big-bang of that surge, was still funded by fellow capitalists as
independent investors.111 Three years later, in 1878, Edison was already get-
ting financial backing for his early projects from young Morgan’s bank. But
what would become the driving power of the financial system in relation to
industry was originally built upon railway stocks, government and foreign
bonds, the agricultural processing business and the spread of trade, infrastruc-
tures and the exploitation of natural resources in the empire.112 Only when
industry became heavy (with electricity, chemistry and the like) and as capital
hungry as infrastructure did financial capital really organize to fund it. By the
end of the nineteenth century, in Germany and the USA, it was even taking
control of it. As Harold Faulkner put it,
The shift of power from the industrial to the finance capitalist came when the ex-
pansion of industry reached a size beyond the resources of individual entrepre-
neurs or banks, and when the movement for consolidation reached a stage where
the services of a central investment house became necessary to handle the finance
involved’.113
More recently, in the microelectronics, computers and software explosion,
once the opportunities were made visible since the 1970s, the emergence of a
plentiful supply of risk and venture capital in small quantities, for the intro-
109.
Landes (1969) pp. 64–6 and 74–5.
110.
Dyos and Aldcroft (1969) pp. 202–3.
111.
In fact, the crash of 1873 hits it and the company doesn’t go bankrupt because Carnegie
had amassed so much personal wealth in steel and railways that he was able to buy out the
partners and wait for better times, while many of his competitors disappeared. Carnegie
(1920) pp. 189–92.
112.
Sobel (1965) p. 127 and Kindleberger (1984) p. 205.
113.
Faulkner (1951) p. 37.

93
Irruption: The Love Affair with the Technological Revolution
duction of successive series of products and services, became a well-known
feature of the period.
What this availability does is to allow the emergence of new entrepreneurs,
a few of whom might later become the giants of their industry. It also opens a
window of opportunity for catching-up countries and regions. As mentioned
before, the outspreading of capital to distant places from the maturity phase
incorporates them into the range of action of financial capital and makes vari-
ous ventures possible, including those related to the new industries and prod-
ucts.
Yet not only private capital is conducive to the development of the revolu-
tionary industries in the early days. The recent examples of state involvement
in Japan in the 1960s and 1970s are fresh in everyone’s memory,114 and look-
ing further back one finds that government provided capital for industrial catch-
ing up in Belgium in the 1840s and in Germany from the 1870s to the 1890s115
while in the United States as much as 40 per cent of the funding for the rail-
ways was put up by the state governments.116 In fact the catching-up periods of
most European countries and the USA had strong backing from the state in
various areas, particularly in acquisition of technology (modern machinery for
reverse engineering), immigration of skilled personnel and technical educa-
tion and training,117 but also in decidedly protectionist policies.118
In studying latecomer catch-up, Gerschenkron119 put financial innovations
and their promotion by the state at the center of his theory and Jang-Sup Shin,120
Ha-Joon Chang,121 Peter Evans122 and others provided further evidence from
various countries, especially from the recent example of Korea.
C.
Facilitating Production, Trade and Purchase of New Goods
Technological revolutions involve vast changes in the established patterns of
production, transport, trade and consumption. Often the existing practices in
each of those areas can be clumsy or inadequate for the flow of the new goods
114.
Johnson (1982).
115.
See Landes (1969) p. 157 and Trebilcock (1981) pp. 55–61.
116.
Sobel (1965), p. 87.
117.
Landes (1969), Chs. 3 and 4.
118.
See Dore’s (2000) analysis in his book Stock Market Capitalism: Welfare Capitalism.
Japan and Germany versus the Anglo-Saxons.
119.
Gerschenkron (1962).
120.
Shin (1992).
121.
Chang (1994 and 2002).
122.
Evans (1995) proposes the notion of the ‘developmental State’, based on the experiences
of Brazil, India and Korea.

94
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
or services. The rhythm of growth of the cotton industry and trade in the early
days of the Industrial Revolution was aided by the provision of 90-day revolv-
ing and open credit.123 In the beginning of the third surge, the swiftness of
ocean travel with faster steamships and the Suez Canal made it possible for
small entrepreneurs to trade in small quantities of goods for which much smaller,
shorter-term, credit instruments were made available,124 as happened some time
later in that same surge when the German producers of small electric motors
needed adequate – medium-sized, medium-term – export funding.
For consumers also, appropriate credit instruments are often needed. After
the First World War, when the fourth technological revolution was diffusing
with increasing force, hire-purchase credit systems were developed so that
masses of home durable equipment, such as refrigerators, vacuum cleaners
and automobiles could be paid for from monthly salaries. With the informa-
tion revolution, since the early 1970s there has been an explosion of interna-
tional plastic money, which is gradually becoming even more ‘virtual’ through
Internet trade. This will be discussed further in Chapter 13.
So the development and diffusion of each technological revolution tends to
stimulate innovations in finance and then to benefit from the impulse they
provide.
D.
Funding the Rejuvenation of Old Core Branches
Some of the ‘idle’ money is in the hands of production capital in the – still
powerful but declining – core branches of the previous revolution. The firms
involved are by this time much fewer, after having gone through mergers and
acquisitions, often acting as oligopolies. Their markets are still large but satu-
rated and their production processes have generally hit a ceiling in terms of
improvements and ‘rationalization’. This puts them in the position of wounded
giants looking for a cure to their ills, ready to experiment even with ‘witch-
craft’, if necessary, and with the financial strength to pay for it.
The fact that each revolution provides generic technologies and new orga-
nizational principles capable of rejuvenating most of the existing industries
fits the bill well. Even if in some cases those technologies and principles are in
their primitive early versions, only partially tested and often very doubtful and
costly, the old core firms are willing to take the risk and give them a chance in
the hope of recovering the old dynamism. So, a growing part of the funds that
123.
Landes (1969) p. 75. Later, ‘by the 1820’s and 1830’s … when the problem of disposing
of the products of British factories had become more difficult that that of financing tech-
nological change, bank credit was a pillar of the industrial edifice’ (ibid.).
124.
Wells (1889:1893) p. 32.

95
Irruption: The Love Affair with the Technological Revolution
might have been used for geographic redeployment or other forms of escape
from declining sales and profit rates, are reinvested in the modernization of
the home firms.
In the 1870s and 1880s, in the irruption phase of the third surge, business
was slow for traditional industries and prices were falling. Steel proved
technically superior to iron and it was cheaper. So transport companies moved
to modernize. The railways swiftly shifted to steel and the merchant fleet was
revitalized with ever more powerful innovations in steel ships and marine
engines.125
The more recent case of the automobile industry is also noteworthy. As
early as the late 1950s the US auto industry felt the productivity pinch and
began touting ‘automation’ as the saving innovation. But by 1971 it was still
facing serious problems in terms of cost pressure worsened by market satura-
tion. This was compounded with growing environmental concerns and, after
1974, with the oil price rise. The answer to all of these was a combination of
the Japanese production organization (just-in-time, total quality, redesign, struc-
tured networks of suppliers and so on), the incorporation of microelectronics,
both in the cars themselves and in computer-controlled equipment for design
and manufacture and, finally, globalization, supported by the early digital tele-
communications.126 These profound, difficult and costly transformations brought
the industry away from the threat of commoditization of its product and to a
complete revitalization in just over a decade.
One could also mention the case of the oil, energy and petrochemical indus-
tries, very hard hit by the oil price hike and environmental pressures. The in-
troduction of digital control systems for optimizing production processes, sav-
ing energy and avoiding toxic emissions and waste was their initial answer.127
In the case of chemicals, moving away from mass-produced commodities to
computer-aided development of specialty chemicals was the following strategy.
All these rejuvenating investment projects could be funded either from their
own accumulated profits without further profitable uses (one form of idle capi-
tal) or with the help of willing outside finance.
Thus the old core firms, because they need it and are able to afford it, be-
come important test beds for many of the innovations of the technological
revolution, in particular, those that are generic and can help modernize the rest
of existing activities. They then unwittingly become agents in the construc-
tion, diffusion and installation of the new techno-economic paradigm.
125.
Wells (1889:1893) p. 30.
126.
Altshuler et al. (1984).
127.
Walker (1986).

96
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
E.
Adoption of New Technologies by the Financial World
But the most demanding test bed of the technological revolution is the finan-
cial world itself, always ready to increase the speed of transactions and to
expand their range. By becoming one of the most willing and daring clients for
its products and services, financial capital propels each technological revolu-
tion in an indirect but extremely important way.
Among the technological, infrastructural and organizational innovations of
each paradigm, there are those that accelerate the transport and transmission
of goods and information. These can usually serve in turn as a source of inno-
vation in money, banking and the financial sector itself. Perhaps because of
the close links and early contact of financial agents with the new entrepre-
neurs, there is very rapid take-up of any form of communication that will fa-
cilitate the flow and /or increase the fluidity, speed or security of money, bank-
ing, credit, finance and so on.
Whether it was gold ingots or information that they had to relay, banks were
among the early clients of the penny post, the railways and the telegraph on
the national level in the early days of the second surge, as well as of interna-
tional railways, telegraph and steamships, together with telephone, typewriter
and calculator from the beginning of the third revolution. International stock
markets were quickly set up as soon as they were made possible at that time.128
The pace of adoption of information and telecommunications technologies by
the banking and financial systems was equally breathtaking since the mid-
1970s.129 In each case, there has also been very rapid application of the ad-
vances in printing technologies and all security-enhancing innovations.
This early adoption accelerates the formation of larger and larger networks
of banks and financial nets. Branch banks developed into national networks in
England as soon as the railway and telegraph lines made it possible; the same
occurred later worldwide when long-distance telegraph permitted British
national bank networks to connect with international branches. Since the 1970s
and 1980s, instant global money and finance movements as well as universal
credit cards began giving shape to world-scale financial service super-markets
and other globalized networks.130 These organizational models appear earlier
and prefigure what will gradually become the scale and the structure of the
largest production and commercial enterprises under each new paradigm.
128.
Michie (1987).
129.
Strange (1998) pp. 23–9 reviews the range of such innovations since the 1970s. See also
Barras (1986 and 1990).
130.
German economist Karl Bücher had already commented towards the end of the nineteenth
century that the financial system is the first of all activities to break through new geo-
graphical barriers and that the inevitable global economy would be led by the financial
sector. Discussed in Reinert (2000).

97
Irruption: The Love Affair with the Technological Revolution
F.
Expecting All Investment to be as Profitable
Towards the end of this phase, the intense love affair with the technological
revolution leads the financial system astray. Experiencing the amazing growth
and profit rates of the new industries and infrastructures, financial capital for-
gets its previous difficulties with idle money, becomes inebriated with these
higher levels of profit and expects to get them from all investments.
It is true that the new industries and infrastructures continue to gather mo-
mentum in this period and are growing and diffusing at an amazing pace. But,
the technological revolution, with all it mobilizes around it, is still a small –
though rapidly growing – fraction of the existing economy. It obviously can-
not absorb all the available investment money that more and more looks to it
as its most secure source of good profits. Indeed, the more the new products
develop and gain market acceptance, the less risky they appear and the more
favorable all conditions become for the complete transformation of the rel-
evant production and consumption patterns.
In the meantime, the exhaustion of the potential of the previous revolution
is becoming clear. The swift take-up of the last products and the rapid diffu-
sion of the old paradigm to the last corners of the productive structure and of
the territory is, by now, making traditional activities less and less profitable
and – ironically – increasingly risky for creditors. Moreover, the diffusion of
the new paradigm in its technical and organizational dimensions to further and
further branches is raising the expected levels of productivity in one activity
after the other. It is also making much of the established equipment obsolete
and often valueless.
This is a time of intensifying clash between the two paradigms. A time when
whole industries can be wiped out. Figure 4.1 showed the rapid replacement of
iron by steel. In the installation period of that same surge, chemical substitutes
put many producers of natural materials out of business.
Previous to 1872, nearly all the calicoes of the world were dyed or printed with a
coloring principle extracted from the root known as madder; the cultivation and
preparation of which involved the use of thousands of acres of land in Holland,
Belgium, eastern France, Italy, and the Levant, and the employment of many hun-
dreds of men, women, and children, and of large amounts of capital … Today [1889],
two or three chemical establishments in Germany and England, employing but few
men and a comparatively small capital, manufacture from coal-tar, at a greatly re-
duced price, the same coloring principle; and the former great business of growing
and preparing madder – with land, labor, and capital involved – is gradually be-
coming extinct …131
131.
Wells (1889) pp. 54–5.

98
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
By the end of Irruption, the technological revolution is hugely successful,
but there is not enough of it; the old industries that are not disappearing show
disappointing profits and modernization can be a difficult and often protracted
process with relatively high risks. The clearly favorable externalities and insti-
tutions that will propel the diffusion of the new paradigm are not yet there.
So, once again, the amount of money available to financial capital has grown
larger than the set it recognizes as good opportunities. Since it has come to
consider normal the huge gains from the successful new industries, it expects
to get them from each and every investment and will not be satisfied with less.
So rather than go back to funding unsophisticated production, it develops so-
phisticated instruments to make money out of money. The decoupling of fi-
nancial capital from production capital has begun. The ‘love affair’ with the
technological revolution makes the bulk of the real economy look boring and
leads to divorce.
Halfway into the installation period, the tensions from this decoupling can
lead to a crisis that may take the form of a stock market crash (see Figure 7.2
above), as in England in 1836 or France in 1882 or in the USA and most ad-
vanced world markets in 1920 and again in 1987.132 Such an event can be
understood as the first violent manifestation of the divergences between the
growth of paper wealth and real wealth and the tensions between financial and
production capital, which characterize this period. As such, it can serve to
mark the passage from the early to the late phase of the installation period, that
is, from Irruption to Frenzy.
But, with or without an intervening crisis, Frenzy arrives as the triumph of
financial capital, which from then on will call the tune in the economy. It will
obviously continue to back the strong growth of the new industries but it will
now set its own conditions, impose its own criteria to production capital, new
and old, and act as an autonomous force through its own strictly financial
logic. The seeds of chaos will now be sown in the wind; the whirlwinds will
come sooner or later.
132.
For an in-depth analysis of 1987 as an event in a continuing process of asset inflation, see
Toporowski (1993).

99
Frenzy: Self-Sufficient Financial Capital Governing the Casino
A.
Decoupling and Widening Social Gaps
Frenzy is the tumultuous period when financial capital takes off on its own. It
is at the same time – and partly for the same reason – a time of extremely
unbalanced prosperity and of polarization on all fronts. The bifurcation be-
tween the new and the old which begins with the irruption of the technological
revolution now becomes more and more of a chasm dividing the successful
firms, industries and countries from the lagging ones; the mismatch between
the changing economy and the inertial social practices and institutions be-
comes increasingly tense. The decoupling of financial capital from production
capital aggravates both phenomena. New and old producing firms must, from
then on, bend their decisions to provide the high short-term gains required by
the stock market. The general behavior of the economy is increasingly geared
to favoring the multiplication of financial capital, which moves further and
further away from its role as supporter of real wealth creation. Its outstanding
successes become ironic harbingers of the chaos to come.
As may be recalled, this is also the time when two contradictory phenom-
ena are taking place. On the one hand, there is the full flowering of the techno-
logical revolution itself, the installation of its infrastructure together with the
clear establishment of the new paradigm as the set of technologies and organi-
zational principles for modernizing all other activities. So there are parts of the
economy in an increasing number of countries that are experiencing rapid
growth and displaying their enormous potential for transformation and wealth
creation, through applying the new paradigm, still with the support of finan-
cial capital. Though confronting regulatory and institutional obstacles and voids,
the new industries and their largest firms, wherever they may be located, are
already replacing the previous engines of growth (see Figure 4.4). This is the
10. Frenzy: Self-Sufficient Financial Capital
Governing the Casino
133
133.
The term ‘Casino Capitalism’ was the title given by Susan Strange (1986), following Keynes,
to her book about financial behavior in the 1970s and 1980s, which in the present model
would be the irruption phase. When the frenzy phase arrived, things got so much worse
that she then used the title ‘Mad Money’ (Strange 1998). A more neutral term ‘eras of
finance’ was proposed by Toporowski (2000).
99

100
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
prosperous side of the fence, the reason for singing the ‘new economy’ as the
arrival of uninterrupted growth. All those benefitting from this flourishing of
opportunities believe the world is going through a marvelous time.
On the other hand, the industries, countries, regions and firms that have not
taken – or cannot take – the modernization path, are clearly deteriorating and
entering a vicious spiral of low growth and lack of funds. That is the other side
of the fence, where the grass is no longer growing and where the majority live.
For them, these are terrible times; the world is falling apart and does not make
any sense any more.
Frenzy is thus a time when the rich get richer and the poor get poorer. Fi-
nancial capital enters this polarized stage as an accelerator of the centrifugal
forces.
Ironically, the unappeased hunger for funds of the poor happens in the midst
of excess capital, because idle money looking for profitable uses also grows in
the frenzy phase, though for different reasons than in Maturity. The very suc-
cess of the successful generates enormous wealth and concentrates it in a small
proportion of the economic agents, who in turn want to multiply their wealth
at the same vertiginous rate at which they made it. So, at these times of Frenzy,
there is even more idle capital around and probably more pressure to make it
profitable, because it is in the hands of the nouveaux riches in contrast with the
maturity phase, when the excess money pursuing opportunities is in the cof-
fers of the – by then – long-time powerful.
B.
Speculating with Old Wealth: Asset Inflation
Financial capital, after having introduced many innovations in support and
application of the technological revolution, has learned to create new instru-
ments and to overcome the old mental blocks.134 So, when the imagination of
financiers, the young and the veterans, is put to the task of making money
from money, a whole range of purely financial, speculative instruments are
invented – or reinvented – and applied to make more wealth out of existing
wealth. Most means are legal, though not always legitimate; some are even
illegal.
One area of new activity is still indirectly tied to production. It relates to
taking control over operating firms, sometimes with very little capital and usu-
ally by building ‘inverted pyramids’ where a small base captures several lay-
ers of holdings. The leveraged buy-outs of the late 1980s and 1990s and some
134.
For a review of the main financial innovations of the 1980s and 1990s and their conse-
quences, see Strange (1998) pp. 29–41.

101
Frenzy: Self-Sufficient Financial Capital Governing the Casino
forms of mutual and hedge funds are the reinvention of age-old practices that
resurface each time in periods such as this.135
According to Newsweek, the Long-Term Capital Fund, an exclusive hedge
fund in the USA reserved only for the largest investors, which had to be res-
cued in 1998, ‘started the year with about $4.7 billion of investors’ capital, and
it borrowed as much as $120 billion … That’s a mighty thin cushion if things
go bad – which they did’.136
Derivatives, ‘junk bonds’ and other instruments serve as rakes to bring in
capital for a wider than usual range of investment in productive assets and to
make ‘everybody into an investor’, which is part of how the financial agents
and the larger players increase their margins.
The other route for imagination is diverting finance from wealth creation
and simply finding whatever objects of speculation are at hand. Investment in
real estate, gold and other precious metals (varying in different historical peri-
ods), futures markets, art, ‘pyramids’ of loans, hedge funds and many other
instruments of financial manipulation can serve the purposes of using the money
that cannot find profitable use in productive activities.
Real estate is one of the preferred targets for speculation. In Tokyo, in the
1980s, real estate climbed to such absurd heights that the grounds of the Impe-
rial Palace had the same nominal value as all the land in the state of California
(or in all of Canada).137 In the Chicago of the late 1880s it was clear that prices
had reached equally impossible levels, however the Chicago Tribune of the
time explained the phenomenon saying that ‘people bought property at prices
they knew perfectly well were fictitious …  [being sure] that some still greater
fool could be depended on to take the property off their hands and leave them
with a profit’.138
As the various assets go up in price, confidence grows that they will con-
tinue to do so. Gradually the notion of ‘fundamentals’, so dear to the finan-
ciers at other times, is set aside and price/earnings ratios augment out of all
proportions. Ironically, this creates a favorable climate to bring back all sorts
of firms to the stock market. New and old, revolutionary and mature, local and
distant, solid and shaky, real and even imaginary firms and activities can now
come to the gambling house, without fulfilling strict profitability criteria, as
long as they can play the capital gains game. Naturally, the required practices
had to become more sophisticated in the 1990s, compared to the outright fraudu-
lent practices possible in the uninformed and unregulated world of the 1840s,
1880s or even 1920s. But the ‘growth’ of the market and the increase in vol-
135.
Galbraith (1990) Ch. 2.
136.
Sloan (1998).
137.
Chancellor (1999) p. 302.
138.
Reported in Kindleberger (1978:1996) p. 102.

102
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
ume of transactions and in number of actors involved attract even more money
and more actors into the game.
Thus, with growing amounts of money available, the increases in nominal
value are self-reinforcing, and the result is generalized ‘asset inflation’. 139
C.
Crises in the Weaker Nodes of the World Economy
The increasing stagnation in the lagging sectors and in what has now become
the traditional economy, tied to the waning paradigm, increases the risk of
default of those fragile debtors, especially the weaker countries that received
the idle money in the previous Maturity and Irruption. (The reader may recall
the Latin American case presented in Figure 8.1.)
As the instability increases so does the probability of bankruptcies and cri-
ses in the weaker banks or financial institutions. The problems can already
appear in the late irruption phase. The 1980s provided examples of this in the
Third World debt crisis and in the US Savings and Loan collapse.
As regards debtors in peripheral countries, many of the loans taken one or
two decades earlier were meant for redeployment of the established paradigm.
In other words, they propelled the last thin splash of the previous surge. Those
were investments in mature technologies serving stagnant markets or in old
infrastructures, probably still needed, but no longer very profitable. The eco-
nomic benefits from these activities are insufficient to amortize debt and their
levels of efficiency soon become inadequate to operate in markets increas-
ingly governed by the superior productivity of the new technological revolution.
Several American states defaulted during the frenzy phases of the second
and third surges in the nineteenth century. In the first case, in the 1830s they
had built canals and turnpikes when Britain was already about to enter the first
railway boom; in the second case, in the 1860s they built the railways with the
old iron technologies when Bessemer steel ones were about to replace them.
Gabriel Palma has amply documented the rise and fall of the Chilean mechani-
cal engineering industries in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. The
great advances related to manufacturing iron-based railways almost literally
vanished, in spite of government efforts to protect them from imports.140 In the
1930s depression, there were massive defaults of several countries on bonds
and loans for building railways and ports or for mining and agricultural ex-
139.
Toporowski (2000) provides a thorough analysis of the asset inflation phenomenon. For
the present period, he suggests that the replenishment of the process by pension funds
might make this phenomenon a more enduring feature of the system.
140.
Palma (1978).

103
Frenzy: Self-Sufficient Financial Capital Governing the Casino
ports, when already the industries manufacturing mass-consumption products
had become the new dynamic sectors.141 As regards the present fifth surge, the
debt crisis – which exploded in the 1980s and is far from overcome in the new
century – is the tail end of the loans taken to set up mature mass-production
industries or, worse still, to massively finance imports for luxury consumption
without investing.142 As a result, the economies of most debtor countries are
stretched to their limits in a situation that makes the debts structurally unpay-
able in most cases.
As this reality hits home, debt–equity swaps, ‘Brady’ Bonds, privatizations
and other ‘takeover’ innovations are reinvented each time.143 That is how the
US-owned United Fruit Co. was ‘born’ in Central America.144 In the current
surge, control over Latin American firms – both public and private – experi-
enced a massive changeover. This apparent solution, by leading to increasing
foreign control over the already battered wealth-generating capability of these
economies, weakens them even further in their debt-paying capacity.
D.
Windows of Opportunity for Catching Up
But not all peripheral investment remains as a failed development process. In
periods of paradigm shift there is a window of opportunity for real catching up
as well as for forging ahead,145 Belgium, France and the USA caught up in the
installation period of the second surge; Germany and the USA forged ahead in
that of the third. Most of Europe, Japan and the Soviet Union, caught up in the
fourth (though the latter fell dramatically behind with the fifth). The forging
forward of Japan in the fifth, overtaking several more advanced countries, was
clear until the collapse of its early casino bubble plunged it into a recession
that lasted through the 1990s. Whether it will set up an appropriate socio-
institutional framework to stay in the front ranks in the next decades is still to
be seen.
There is, however, a particular type of catching up where the behavior of
financial capital, from the maturity phase through the installation period, plays
a particularly important part. There are areas of the world that happen to be in
a position, for national, international, historical and geographic reasons, to
make a catching-up leap with the new paradigm. Examples of this are Argen-
141.
See Marichal (1988) for the Latin American countries  and Latham (1981) for an overview
of the developing world.
142.
This is the point made by Palma and Marcel (1989) when analyzing the sources of the
Latin American debt crises.
143.
Galbraith (1990:1993) pp. 19–21.
144.
Marichal (1988).
145.
Perez and Soete (1988).

104
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
tina with the third great surge in the last quarter of the nineteenth century and
the Asian Tigers a hundred years later, in the installation period of the fifth.
In the case of the Asian Tigers, paradigm constriction plus the geopolitical
forces of the Cold War came together from the 1960s to facilitate a wave of
foreign investment in the area, which happened to have the mass-production
electronics industry as one of the most active. Both factors also opened the US
markets to manufactured exports from those countries.146 The success of Japan
in forging ahead and in riding a high wave in the 1980s, when the Western
economies were riddled with stagflation, created a sort of oasis for the neigh-
boring countries to attempt catching up from behind. Financial capital, Japa-
nese and Western, was more than willing to contribute to their emergence. And
after the first successful period, when the glut of idle money, coming also from
the Asian boom itself, began to pile up wanting high profits, foreign finance
became available in that area for any purpose, from production, construction
and exports to real estate and jewels. Whatever the immediate reasons for the
bursting of the bubble in 1997, this overprovision of funds backed more by the
booming atmosphere than by the credit-worthiness of the specific borrower
had to come to a head.147
Something similar happened to Argentina before the Baring crisis in 1890.
Steam-powered and refrigerated shipping technology made it possible for her
to become a supplier of meat and wheat for Britain and the northern hemi-
sphere. The investment boom that brought the English and the Germans to
build railways and ports and to develop the huge expanses of ‘pampas’ created
a situation very comparable to the recent Asian boom. The international stock
market was awash with stocks and bonds to profit from the South American
success story. The City of London even thought Argentina would be the next
USA.148 After the crash, it took the Argentinians nearly a decade to half get
back on their feet, though the British Central Bank had bailed the Baring Broth-
ers out right away.149
Though it is more complex, an argument could be made to interpret the case
of the USA in the 1820s and 1830s as a phenomenon of the same kind. As in
the other two cases, the United States, then a peripheral country, also had a
booming economy with internal dynamics and intense foreign investment com-
ing from Britain during the installation period of the second great surge. The
crash of 1837 ‘engulfed the entire nation in a depression which would con-
146.
South Korea took more advantage of the market opening than of foreign investment. Its
state-led industrial policy favored Korean firms and excluded foreign investment from the
dynamic sectors and from finance. See Chang (1996), Wade (1990) and Amsden (1990).
147.
For in-depth analyses of the 1998 Asian collapse, see Wade (1998), McKinnon and Pill
(1997) and Chang et al. (2001).
148.
Sobel (1965) p. 132.
149.
Kindleberger (1978) pp. 138–40, Marichal (1988) Ch. 6.

105
Frenzy: Self-Sufficient Financial Capital Governing the Casino
tinue for seven years,’ while the British investors withdrew both credit and
capital.150
In any case, Argentina in the 1890s was not alone in collapsing. It was
accompanied, earlier or later, by Australia, South Africa, California, the West
Indies, Egypt and the Ottoman Empire. Asia in the 1990s shared the stage with
Mexico, the Russian meltdown, the Brazilian tremors and the Argentinian cri-
sis at the turn of the century.
Latecomer economies are naturally more fragile than the already developed
economies and thus probably more vulnerable to a sudden retrieval of funds.
They can also be severely affected by the shrinking of markets. The polariza-
tion of the world economy also creates a widening gap between the rates of
growth of luxury goods and staple goods markets. So, producers in the non-
luxury segments, even in the new industries, can see their demand grow too
slowly or be reduced. Thus, the weaker members of the successful few can be
badly crushed when they get hit.151
E.
Over-Funding the Revolutionary Industries: Manias and
Frantic Competition
The collapse of some of those adventures abroad sends financial capital back
home scathed and ready to make another attempt at making high profits from
the local hyperactive revolutionary industries and infrastructures. In the fren-
zied and confusing atmosphere of the casino economy, the core industries of
the revolution are still the safest and most exciting game. They exercise a
violent, magnetic attraction on financiers and on anyone who has any money
to spare. There is enormous excitement and a feeling of prosperity at the top
that captures the emotions and the confidence of the leaders and gradually of
the general public.
The whole of the installation period could in a sense be understood as an
exploratory time, when the engineers, the entrepreneurs, the consumers and
the financiers test the various directions of development of the technological
revolution, both in production and in the market. It is a huge trial and error
process eventually to affect the whole of society. This is one of the sources of
the general turbulence in the economies of this period. Markets experience
irregular chaotic growth and intense investment can lead to overcapacity
problems.
150.
Sobel (1965) pp. 47–50.
151.
Ernst (2001) has argued, for instance, that the 1997 crisis in the Asian Tigers had struc-
tural roots in the focusing on mass-production commodities and in the overcapacity in
production facilities for standard chips.

106
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
In particular, towards the end of Frenzy, the financiers (and the investors
who trust their money to them) seem to be convinced they have discovered the
most profitable vein. They then indulge in the intense repetition of the same
successful recipe, be it canals from any river to any river, as in the first revolu-
tion, or more and more dot.coms and telecommunications, as in the current
fifth. This leads to an increase in momentum until the process turns into de-
lirium, into irrational exuberance. It is to those years of late-Frenzy that the
expression mania or bubble is properly applied in the present model.152
The canal mania leading to the panic of 1798, the railway mania panic of
1847 and the real estate153 and stock market mania before the crash of 1929
were all such types of phenomena. ‘Internet mania’ was a name often given to
the madness of the 1990s.
In relation to the canal mania of the 1790s, Mathias points out the general
disorder and lack of coordination that prevailed in investment decisions. Canals
were built ‘with different widths and depths and much inefficient routing’,
while, with the railways, 50 years later, ‘this was to be duplicated on an even
larger scale, including the liability of over-investment when capital was cheap
and the expectations of potential shareholders uncritically optimistic’.154
As Ransom comments, ‘railway promotion [in the 1840s] was originally a
matter for routes where the need was evident and the engineering practicable’,
then it spread to ‘routes where demand was doubtful and the engineering full
of problems’. Finally, ‘with the public clamoring for railway shares, compa-
nies were being formed so that promoters might in due course unload their
shares at a premium’.155
Dan Roberts in The Financial Times described telecommunications invest-
ment in the late 1990s as a ‘trillion dollar scrap-heap’. According to his data, in
2001 it was estimated that only 1 to 2 per cent of the fiber optic cable buried
under Europe and the United States had so far been turned on (or ‘lit’). Court-
appointed receivers of bankrupted telecommunications companies were re-
covering an average of less than 10 per cent of the original cost of building the
networks when they tried to sell the assets. 156 The cemetery of ‘dot.coms’ after
the NASDAQ collapse is another witness to the madness of late-Frenzy.
152.
Neither the Tulip mania of the 1630s nor the South Sea Bubble of 1720 qualifies in this
particular sense. In fact there are many collective psychology phenomena associated with
speculative behavior, but not related to the assimilation of technological revolutions in a
capitalist context. There are also many other financial crises in capitalism, following par-
ticular episodes of speculation, which have more immediate explanatory factors.
153.
The advent of the automobile liberated the value of real estate from the constraints of
urban centers and railway tracks. Any piece of territory could be connected by roads and
made highly valuable.
154.
Mathias (1969/1983) p. 105, quoted in Freeman and Louçã (2001) pp. 193–4.
155.
Ransom (1990) p. 86, quoted in Freeman and Louçã (2001) p. 197.
156.
Roberts (2001) p. 12.

107
Frenzy: Self-Sufficient Financial Capital Governing the Casino
Since the profits to be had are amazing, everybody – including widows and
orphans – eventually becomes aware of the incredible possibilities. They gradu-
ally dare to enter what used to be alien territory, trying to get a piece of the
action. What Bruce Nussbaum says in Business Week about the late 1990s
could just as well have applied to the late 1920s:
Confidence was exceptionally high, and Americans were comfortable taking more
chances in the stock market. Academics told them that the risk premium for stocks
long term was no higher than bonds. So investors accepted sky-high p-e’s [price–
earnings ratios], puffed-up bottom lines, and some strange business plans – be-
cause who really knew what was possible? It was a time of opportunity, a time to
place bets. And they paid off …157
That is the stuff ‘manias’ are made of. In the United States, as 1929 was
approaching, ordinary people were so eager to invest in industry that it was
they who were taking out the loans in order to buy the shares, while firms
switched massively from taking loans from banks to issuing securities.158 The
result is the overcrowding of the bandwagon.
Such manias tend to attract not only local funds but also funds from abroad.
In the 1790s, much wealth from France took refuge in Britain from the French
Revolution and ended up as investment in the English canals.159 The present
surge has witnessed the siphoning out of the majority of the available capital
of the rich in the poorer nations into the whirlpool of the stock market in the
core countries. The process was enormously facilitated by digital telecommu-
nications. Obviously this has increased the net outflow of funds from these
countries – already heavy with debt payments – and has worsened economic
decline and global income polarization.
This intense concentration of capital, local and international, furthering the
infrastructure of the new economy can be seen as another of the dynamic roles
played by financial capital in furthering technological advance. It is unwit-
tingly an effective way to attract enough funds to make the significant invest-
ment necessary to install the basic infrastructure and put it in operation. It is
wasteful and likely to overshoot; it can be painful for many, but it does the job
of creating the fundamental externalities and facilitating intense social learn-
ing for the full unfolding of the revolution later on.
157.
Nussbaum (2001) p. 35.
158.
Hoover Report (1929) p. xii. The Report appeared a couple of months before the October
collapse hailing this particular phenomenon as a feature of the dynamic new economy.
159.
Kindleberger (1984) p. 60.

108
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
F.
Mergers and the Creation of Oligopolies
Whether a single-purpose mania develops or not, other types of problem are
likely to follow from excess investment flowing into the core industries. If
there is a time and a place in the evolution of capitalism when ‘free competi-
tion’ actually develops, it is during the installation period. Many, truly many,
enter the fray; only a few are destined to become the giants of each of the new
industries. But, as late-Frenzy is reached, not only overinvestment but also
other perverse mechanisms begin to operate.
The velocity of technical change, typical of the early phases of technologi-
cal revolutions ends up creating the problem of premature obsolescence. Since
the mid-1990s, for instance, the speed of increase in computer power, in new
generations of software or cellular phones and in dot.com companies on the
Internet, hardly allowed users the time for learning or for amortizing invest-
ment. But no producer could afford to stay behind in the innovation race.
Wells in 1889 described a very similar situation in relation to steamships
since the mid-1870s:
The numerous and expansive steamer constructions of 1870–73, being unable to
compete with the constructions of the next two years, were nearly all displaced in
1875–76, and sold for half, or less than half, of their original cost. And within
another decade these same improved steamers of 1875–76 have, in turn, been dis-
carded and sold at small prices, as unfit for the service of lines having an estab-
lished trade, and replaced with vessels fitted with triple-expansion engines and
saving nearly fifty per cent in the consumption of fuel. And now ‘quadruple-expan-
sion’ engines are beginning to be introduced and their tendency to supplant the
‘triple expansion’ is unmistakable.160
With accelerated technical change, price competition can be excessive. Given
that each paradigm provides the potential for a quantum jump in productivity
through successive innovative improvements, lower and lower prices become
a possibility and are typically brandished as weapons in the competition for
market power. Yet, as Schumpeter would hold, perhaps as a provocation to
more orthodox economists, too much price competition ends up thwarting in-
novation and hurting profits.161
So, movements towards oligopoly or cartel-type agreements are likely to
take place as some of the firms involved become strong enough. This was the
case in the USA in the 1880s and early 1890s, when falling prices were mak-
ing competition deadly. The resulting wave of cartel-type collusion led to the
Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, which turned the wave into a full merger move-
160.
Wells (1889:1893) p. 30.
161.
Schumpeter (1942) Ch. 8.

109
Frenzy: Self-Sufficient Financial Capital Governing the Casino
ment.162 Financial power can also be wielded to take over the competition, as
happened from the end of the nineteenth century and has again been happen-
ing since the late 1990s, with aggressive takeovers and ‘mega-mergers’ mark-
ing the trend towards global oligopolistic alliances.
These acquisitions or fusions are greatly facilitated by the enormous amounts
of money pursuing investment opportunities that are siphoned into the system
towards late-Frenzy. In an article in Fortune magazine, Geoffrey Colvin gath-
ered evidence of overpaying for some of the mergers and acquisitions and
suggested that this was probably due to having excess money.163
This aggregation process is another one of the changes brought about by
each technological revolution and its enabling infrastructure. As a consequence,
the typical size of the largest firms in each paradigm can be greater than that in
the previous one and the ‘shape’ is also likely to be different. In the third surge,
vertical integration from raw materials to final client in a core product became
the ‘ideal’ form of the most powerful firms of the period. In the fourth surge,
horizontal integration was more typical, so that final product manufacturers
widened their range of similar products, rather than integrate backwards into
raw materials. In the present fifth surge, transcontinental networks
encompassing the whole range of segments both horizontally and vertically –
or ‘diagonally’ as Auliana Poon164 suggested – in several related markets for
goods and/or services are emerging as the strongest organizations. So these
absorption or merger trends can simply be one of the means through which the
optimum size and typical structure are reached each time. This would put further
emphasis on the crucial role of available finance to feed the process.
G.
Ethical Softening and Opacity
Frenzy is the true ‘gilded age’, the golden shine on the base metal heart. Love
of money flourishes more than at any other phase and the ways of acquiring it
in limitless quantities recognize no boundaries. Individual interest is glorified;
social interest scorned. Being rich is being ‘good’; anything else is failure.
The ethics of success at any price are the only valid norms. That is the attitude
driving the ample diffusion of the doubtfully legitimate financial practices
developing in the gambling context of the frenzy phase. That permissive at-
mosphere generates an opacity that is highly convenient for corruption and for
the flourishing of outright illegal activities.165
162.
For a discussion of the merger question in this period, see Chandler (1977) Ch. 10.
163.
Colvin (1999).
164.
Poon (1992).
165.
Strange (1998) Ch. 7 ‘Finance and crime’.

110
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
In Britain, in the installation period of the second surge, government offi-
cials took commissions for helping get railway ‘rights.’ The Japan of the 1980s
was riddled with tax evasion and corruption, unfortunately facilitated by a
general relaxing of state regulation and supervision of financial practices.166
The vast money-laundering networks for the trafficking in drugs in the 1990s
are similar to those of ‘bootleggers’ in the USA in the 1920s or those of weap-
ons dealers and of corruption money in various similar periods. All this ends
up generating the easy movement of masses of ‘shady’ money across the fi-
nancial system and adding to the glut of idle funds.
Mafia type and other corrupt activities probably exist at all times and in
many places. Yet, when the established institutional system is breaking down
and losing legitimacy, while the power of financial capital is at its highest to
escape the control of weakened governments, there is a climate of ethical soft-
ening. So social resistance to these activities is less organized and the ob-
stacles to constrain them are less effective. The dangers of such an unregulated
system were powerfully revealed when discovering the ease with which ter-
rorists used financial channels to protect their movements of funds.
The other sort of illegal activity that tends to flourish at these frenzied times
involves the participants in the financial world itself. The sight of easy wealth
quickly made with someone else’s money is too strong a temptation for both
big and small financial agents. This is then a time for swindlers. The infamous
Charles Ponzi, whose name has become the label for pyramid-type swindles,167
was able to mount his real estate fraud in Florida in the euphoric atmosphere
of the mid-1920s. The 1980s and 1990s have also produced a large crop of
such crimes.168 It is the conditions that make it more likely, because so much
temptation brings forth the ‘talent’. As Gibbons put it in the nineteenth cen-
tury: ‘there is perhaps no record of a bank fraud extant of which the perpetra-
tor was not honest yesterday’.169
But even among the legal activities there are some practices that certainly
fall in the area of illegitimacy. For example, from the 1970s onward and with
greater intensity in the 1990s, many financial ‘innovations’ can be classified
as taking advantage of legal loopholes to evade regulation, such as seeking to
hold funds that are not classified as deposits to reduce the reserve ratios or the
many new ways of earning commissions for performing financial intermedia-
tion ‘off-the-record’.170
166.
See Chancellor (1999) Ch. 9 and Reading (1992:1993) Ch. 7.
167.
Minsky (1982) uses the term as a category for any sort of highly risky credit, including
those which became so because of external conditions.
168.
A sample of notorious frauds 1980–95 is given in Kindleberger (1978:1996 revised edn)
pp. 78–9.
169.
Gibbons (1959) quoted by Kindleberger (1978) p. 80.
170.
Strange (1998)

111
Frenzy: Self-Sufficient Financial Capital Governing the Casino
If the revelations after the gigantic Enron bankruptcy in 2001 are proven
true, it could turn into the emblematic case of opacity and connivance in the
frenzy phase of the fifth surge.171
As George Soros says, when arguing for government regulation: ‘Financial
markets are not immoral, they are amoral’.172
H.
Increasing Tensions between the Money and Real
Economies
So the frenzy phase is one of increasing tension between the inflated money
economy gone wild and the restructuring real economy. For those pursuing the
accumulation of wealth, the higher profits possible in the financial sphere dis-
courage direct engagement in productive activities, except those related to the
newest and most dynamic technologies, and attract even more money towards
finance. This increases the disparity between the mass of money vying for
high returns in the financial system and the actual aggregate rhythm of wealth
creation in the production and trade of goods and services. The resulting infla-
tion of asset prices generates unwarranted capital gains completely divorced
from the profits and dividends of the real economy represented in them.
Figure 10.1 shows how stock market values broke further and further away
from the growth of the economy towards the end of the installation period of
the current great surge. The figure plots the Dow Jones index and the gross
domestic product of the United States, current and constant, all indexed to a
comparable base. Constant GDP represents the real growth of the economy;
the gap between current and constant represents the general level of inflation.
Since the Dow Jones is quoted at current prices, the widening gap between the
Dow and nominal GDP can thus be seen as a rough proxy for differential infla-
tion between the stock market and the economy. It could also be understood as
a measure of the increasing relative attraction of financial investment as op-
posed to direct investment in production.
To have an idea of the size of the paper wealth mountain that can grow in
the frenzy phase, one can look at the amount invested in derivatives, which
can be seen as a form of risk insurance covering speculators against misjudg-
ments regarding movements of interest or exchange rates or any other invest-
ment on future obligations or receipts. As early as 1995, the volume of the
‘derivative economy’ was estimated by Palma, using IMF data, to have al-
171.
The Financial Times (2002) pp. 18–19, published a collection of articles proposing major
reforms in accountancy and other related practices in order to regain investor confidence.
The title of the whole report was ‘After Enron’.
172.
Soros (2000) p. 157.

112
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
ready reached a notional value of US$64 trillion. This is almost equivalent to
the combined value of all bonds, equity and bank assets in the G17 (G7 plus all
the smaller European countries), which in the same year was around US$68
trillion.173
The tension between financial and production capital can thus become very
high. Structural coherence needs to be re-established by some means and these
can often be violent and painful. It could occur through a truly great crash, as
in 1929, or through what seemed to be a series of partial collapses letting off
steam, as at the end of the nineteenth century. The full history of the readjust-
ment of relative paper and real values at the beginning of the twenty-first cen-
tury will only be appropriately judged with hindsight.
The stress also comes, among other things, from the much greater produc-
tivity of the industries and activities associated with the technological revolu-
tion in relation to traditional ones. This difference produces such rapid and
constant changes in their relative values that, as discussed in Chapter 6, there
is a coexistence of ‘two moneys’, one for the new economy and another for the
old, rather than the assumed single and universal measure of ‘standard units’
of value. If you could in the 1960s buy five cars for the price of one computer
and in the 1990s twenty computers for the price of one car, it is difficult to
gauge the relative worth of goods. This general uncertainty makes the infla-
Source:
Data from US Department of Commerce, recalculated and organized in phases by the
author.
173.
Palma (2000).
1999
1995
1991
1987
1983
1979
1975
1971
10,000
9,000
8,000
7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
Irruption phase
Frenzy phase
Dow Jones
Industrials
Index
US GDP
current $ Index
(1971 = 500)
US GDP
constant $ Index
(1971 = 500)
big-bang
Figure 10.1 The diverging growth of the New York Stock Market and US GDP,
1971–99

113
Frenzy: Self-Sufficient Financial Capital Governing the Casino
tion in stock values all the more credible. The stock market price of Yahoo,
which is a virtual company with hardly any physical assets, was greater at the
end of the 1990s than that of the whole of Eastman Kodak. Time will tell how
much of that difference reflected real value.
Furthermore, since the irruption phase in the 1970s and 1980s several coun-
tries experienced periods of hyperinflation, while the volatility in exchange
rates required stringent controls, even in relatively homogeneous environments
such as the European Union.
Meanwhile, the fortunate participants in the gilded groups, regions and coun-
tries, experiencing the booming atmosphere, become ever more convinced of
the appearance of a ‘new economy’ promising unending bliss. From the other
side of the fence, this buoyant arrogance looks like scorn.
Such growing differences among products, industries, sectors, groups, re-
gions and nations are the very nature of paradigm shifts. They generate disor-
der, confusion, perverse inflationary or deflationary trends, which contribute
to the general tensions and instabilities characteristic of these periods of struc-
tural transition. Re-establishing coherence in relative prices is another require-
ment for the recovery.
But the basic condition for ushering in a period of synergy, convergence
and prosperity, at least in the developed countries and in those that have en-
tered the paradigm and are in a catching-up process, is adaptive regulation,
especially regarding the behavior of financial capital.174 This was clear to George
Soros, a well-known major actor in the financial scene of the present surge. To
him, it is impossible for national institutions, however effective they might be
at their level, to properly regulate a global economy. 175
174.
This is the core point of Susan Strange’s Mad Money (1998).
175.
The need for global regulation is advocated by Soros in his book The Crisis of Global
Capitalism (1998) where he presents ‘market fundamentalism’ as a threat to capitalism,
the possible source of a serious crash and a danger to the ‘open society’. In his later book
he emphasizes this need even further by incorporating it as a subtitle: Reforming Global
Capitalism (Soros 2000).

114
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
The recessions that follow Frenzy – and the crashes that usually usher them in
– are both the consequence of an untenable set-up. By the time the collapse
occurs, the conditions are there for the deployment period to begin, but the
system has been operating under fundamental structural tensions that, once
the breakdown finally occurs, can only be overcome through institutional
recomposition.
When the installation period ends, about mid-way into the unfolding of
each technological revolution, its paradigm has triumphed and is ripe for wide-
spread diffusion. By then, the main dynamic products have been identified
and the dominant designs determined, their industries are structured and well
connected with one another, the infrastructure is basically in place and the
consumption patterns are pretty much defined. The ‘common sense’ of the
paradigm has diffused enough – and proven its power sufficiently – to be basi-
cally installed in people’s minds as the new best practice. The potential for
production and productivity growth is considerable. What is needed for its
realization is a new space for the unhindered expansion of markets, favoring
economies of scale and fostering a wave of new investment.
All is poised for the dynamic expansion of the real economy and for the
propagation of the paradigm across all industries, weaving a coherent produc-
tion network. This build-up task would be better performed under the control
of production capital, given that its interests and decision-making criteria are
more appropriate for the job. In addition, profit expectations – gone wild and
unrealistic during Frenzy – have to be brought back in line with a longer-
term view.
This essentially means that adequate regulation of financial capital has to
be established and an institutional framework favoring the real economy over
the paper economy needs to be put in place. Yet financial capital will resist
with force. It has been at the helm for many years of successful growth. Its
criteria have been ‘proven’ effective. It appears that personal talent and genius
for wealth creation – plus the lack of restrictive rules – were the source of the
achievements. Therefore, financial capital is only likely to accept regulation
after much of the rapidly made gains have evaporated in the collapse and when
the recession has shown the practical impossibility of reviving the casino. There
11. The Turning Point: Rethinking,
Regulation and Changeover
114

115
The Turning Point: Rethinking, Regulation and Changeover
is also growing pressure against financiers from the victims of the many ille-
gal or semi-fraudulent practices that are usually revealed after the fall and the
bankruptcies.
As with many processes in capitalism, it is by taking a successful behavior
to its extreme that it turns into failure. And it is because of this failure that the
appropriate behaviors, practices and norms will be devised, accepted and
adopted. As usual, also, there is no mechanical guarantee that the crash will
happen in any particular way. Nor can predictions be made about the length or
depth of the recession, or about the type of solution applied. All that depends
on a multitude of political and other factors that are specific in each case.
A.
The Fundamental Causes of the After-Frenzy Recession
The crash of 1929 was of much greater absolute magnitude than the canal or
the railway panic of previous centuries, but they were all of a similar structural
nature. Each case is unique due to a very wide range of factors, from the politi-
cal and cultural to the purely accidental. Yet, whether they are called ‘mania’
or ‘new economy’, the bubbles at the end of Frenzy share one fundamental
characteristic: they are structurally unsustainable. Though they seem to in-
volve the whole economy of the core country or countries in unstoppable pros-
perity, they are simply a big delusion, a self-reinforced fantasy.
There are three structural tensions that make it impossible to keep the frenzy
process going for an indefinite time. There are tensions between real and pa-
per wealth, between the profile of existing demand and that of potential supply
in the core products of the revolution, and between the socially excluded and
those reaping the benefits of the bubble.
The first structural problem is that the speed at which capital gains are be-
ing ‘created’ by the collective faith of the paper investors can simply not be
matched by the speed at which the economy can produce real wealth, in spite
of the continued dynamism of the revolutionary industries. Among many oth-
ers, there was an article in Fortune Investor, in February 1999, titled ‘Stocks
May Be Surging Toward an Earnings Chasm’, which states that ‘barring a
miracle, there’s no way corporate earnings can increase fast enough to keep
giving investors the huge returns they’ve gotten used to’.176 Two years later an
article in Le Monde announced that, thanks to the crisis, firms had been finally
freed from the impossible dogma of 15 per cent return on equity.177 Similar
pressure on producers had been put in previous frenzies, because the con–
176.
Tully (1999).
177.
Le Monde (2001).

116
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
ditions for attracting investors are set by the capital gains capacity of the high
fliers in the mania.
The other two structural tensions stem from the same basic cause: the whole
frenzy phenomenon is, at bottom, a huge process of income redistribution in
favor of those directly or indirectly involved in the casino, which funds the
massive process of creative destruction in the economy. That regressive distri-
bution generates a double vicious cycle: one is economic, expressed in the
market; the other is social, expressed in political terms. Both get worse as the
bubble increases.
The economic vicious cycle sets in as the reversal of the virtuous cycle that
created the casino prosperity. The concentration of income in the prosperous
fringe of the population works wonderfully for providing a high investment
rate, accompanied by a high dynamic demand for the early products of the
revolution and many others that complement the new lifestyle. But this very
success brings many of those tested products to the point where continued
profitability requires even greater economies of scale and even faster expan-
sion of markets. Mergers are only a band-aid solution. The growing imbalance
appearing between the profile of potential profitable production and the exist-
ing profile of demand gets worse and worse.
Debates about the macroeconomic balance between supply and demand are
generally restricted to the question of relative volumes. Rarely is there refer-
ence to the qualitative balance between the profile of what is produced and the
profile of demand in terms of income distribution. Business people, by con-
trast, understand this very clearly. If you want to sell basic foods, your poten-
tial market grows with the number of low-income families; if you sell luxury
cars, or even palm-top computers, you look to the upper end of the spectrum.
So the rhythm of potential growth is modulated by the qualitative dynamics of
effective demand. Therefore, even if the quantity of money out there equals
the value of production, if it is not in the right hands, it will not guarantee that
markets will clear.
Naturally, firms will always try to adapt the direction of innovation and
their product mix to the profile of demand, but the consumption capacity of
any group has limits, which will impose restrictions in scale of production that
translate into obstacles to productivity growth. Thus concentration of income
can lead to premature market saturation.
In the case of the present turning point of the fifth surge, if innovations
were made to profitably bring down the price of basic computers by half, mar-
ket volume might not even double. Most people who cannot buy a computer at
$1000, cannot buy one at $500 either. However, if a wave of investment were
to take a good number of developing countries out of crisis, world trade and
markets would grow so fast that prices would naturally go down (through econo-
mies of scale) and present sales numbers would look dwarfed.

117
The Turning Point: Rethinking, Regulation and Changeover
Historically, there have been many types of solutions to the premature satu-
ration problem, from export markets, through government spending for wars
or other purposes, to income distribution within the country or across the world.
The effectiveness and durability of each solution depends on many factors,
among them on the specific nature of the constrained production potential. In
the first surge, after the British had absorbed as much in cotton garments as
their market allowed, the whole world was flooded with them and even the
slaves in the American plantations wore them.178 In the third surge, which was
based on a heavy engineering revolution, the markets expanded worldwide,
for big capital equipment and infrastructures. In the fourth surge, Hitler ex-
panded markets for mass production through a war economy, while the West-
ern democracies did it later through a mixture of income redistribution and
government spending.
Nevertheless, the choice is not without a price, given the other vicious cycle
resulting from regressive income distribution. This other process of worsen-
ing tensions is a social and political one, generated by the impoverishing im-
pact on the excluded. As the gap between the rich and the poor widens beyond
a critical point, anger and violence erupt and make it more and more difficult
for the rich to maintain the game and for politicians to retain power, if they
ignore the social demands.
The blindness of the elites is rooted in biased visibility. Frenzy does bring
prosperity to quite a few, not just to those engaged in the financial sphere. The
roaring twenties and the brilliant nineties were felt by many as the best period
they had ever known or imagined possible. In this atmosphere, the privileged
cannot see or prefer not to see the other side of the fence. Yet their ostentation
of wealth is usually highly visible to the poor, the excluded and the dispos-
sessed. So, Frenzy is a period that can be described in very different terms,
depending on the point of view of the observer. It is ‘the best of times’ for
many; it is ‘the worst of times’ for many more.
In the earlier surges, these opposing situations and differing views occurred
in the national space; in the current surge they are also – and especially –
occurring in the global space.
The ratio of the average GNP per capita (1987 prices) of the richest countries with
a fifth of the world’s population, to the GNP per capita of the poorest countries with
a fifth of the world’s population, grew from 30 to 1 in 1960 to 60 to 1 in 1990, and
74 to 1 at present [1999]. The OECD projects that the gap will grow even larger …
More than 80 developing and transition countries have per capita incomes lower
than ten or more years ago.  Twenty have per capita incomes lower than in 1960.179
178.
In 1805 Britain was still consuming twice as much as she was exporting. By 1814, the
domestic market took only 43 per cent of a greatly expanded output. Hobsbawm (1962) p. 53.
179.
Jolly (1999) p. 5.

118
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Writing just after the Asian crisis of 1997 and the Russian ‘meltdown’,
George Soros warned that ‘there comes a point when distress at the periphery
cannot be good for the center’. He further added that ‘the pain at the periphery
has become so intense that individual countries have begun to opt out of the
global system, or simply fall by the wayside’.180
When the economic structural tensions that make the bubble unsustainable
come to a head, the outcome is written on the wall: some form of breakdown
followed by a serious recession. What cannot be predicted is the specific man-
ner in which society will overcome these tensions.
B.
The Collapse of the Bubble
The implosion of the NASDAQ bubble in April 2000 was a deathblow to
Internet mania, but its consequences were bound to stretch much further. It’s
like taking the plug out of the tub: the water cannot be brought back in. Al-
though it was several months before the rest of the US stock market began to
slowly slide down, recession was clearly threatening the US economy by Janu-
ary 2001. This weakening of the core economy soon spread out worsening the
10-year long Japanese stagnation, that had followed the bursting of the early
bubble in that country, and weakening the recovery of many of the export-led
economies in Asia. The impact in Europe was delayed, but then accelerated by
the consequences of the terrorist acts of September 11th, 2001.
For entrepreneurs, venture capitalists and investors riding the eternally ris-
ing wave of capital gains in NASDAQ, the shock was severe. No explanation
could be satisfying. A year later a venture capitalist in Silicon Valley said to
The Financial Times that 2001 had been like a ‘nuclear winter’.181 Yet, just
looking at the behavior of the index, as shown in Figure 11.1, should have
been enough to warn of impending disaster.
Chris Freeman was one of many economists arguing the inevitable out-
come in his paper on ‘A Hard Landing for the “New Economy”’, 182 though he
was one of the very few connecting the likely collapse with technical and
institutional change issues. The Economist, as it did in the 1840s,183 ran several
articles from the late 1990s predicting the inevitable fall;184 Alan Greenspan,
Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, popularized the expression ‘irratio-
180.
Soros (1998) p. xiv.
181.
Abraham and Daniels (2001).
182.
Freeman (2001a).
183.
The Economist,  25 October 1845, cited by Chancellor (1999) p. 136.
184.
The Economist (1998). See for example, ‘Will Internet shares join tulip bulbs and the
South Sea Company on the list of great financial bubbles?’.

119
The Turning Point: Rethinking, Regulation and Changeover
nal exuberance,’ of which Professor Shiller claims authorship.185 Neverthe-
less, as happened in early 1929 with Paul M. Warburg, the banker, who warned
about the ‘orgy of unrestrained speculation’ and Roger Babson, the statisti-
cian, who foresaw ‘a terrific’ crash, with a fall of 60 to 80 points in the Dow
(20 to 30 per cent at the time), all warnings went unheeded and were forcefully
rejected.186 Then and now the feast continued unabated. It is precisely because
participants refuse to recognize the delusion that bubbles can be inflated.
The investment firms – or the independent promoters, in the earlier surges,
like George Hudson in the second187  – take the center stage and all the tempo-
rary glory. Their growth, towards the end of the bubble, seems to outpace even
the stars of the boom. From 1927 to 1929, the stocks offered by investment
trusts, trading, and other financial firms themselves, went from less than 2 per
cent of the new capital issues in the New York Stock Exchange in 1926 to over
37 per cent in 1929.188 In the USA in 1999, venture capital (VC) firms alone
were able to attract between $36.5 and $48.3 billion (depending on the defini-
tion),189 which was between 4 and 5 dollars per $1000 of total US GDP.
Source:
U.S. Department of Commerce. Phase indications by the author.
Figure 11.1 The rise and fall of the NASDAQ bubble, 1971–2001
185.
Shiller (2000).
186.
Quoted by Galbraith (1990:1993) pp. 6–7.
187.
Bailey (1995).
188.
Schumpeter (1939) p. 878.
189.
Mowrey (2000). This article appeared in what was considered the number one journal in
NASDAQ INDEX
Mar 1971
Mar 1972
Mar 1973
Mar 1974
Mar 1975
Mar 1976
Mar 1977
Mar 1978
Mar 1979
Mar 1980
Mar 1981
Mar 1982
Mar 1983
Mar 1984
Mar 1985
Mar 1986
Mar 1987
Mar 1988
Mar 1989
Mar 1990
Mar 1991
Mar 1992
Mar 1993
Mar 1994
Mar 1995
Mar 1996
Mar 1997
Mar 1998
Mar 1999
Mar 2000
Mar 2001
5,000
4,500
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
3,500
2,500
1,500
500
Irruption phase
Frenzy phase
big-bang
Turning
point

120
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
By 2001 many of those VC firms with previously fantastic profits were
filing for bankruptcy protection. In October 2001 some of the major financial
firms were going through ‘rationalization’ processes. The executive president
of Merrill Lynch declared to the Wall Street Journal that it clearly seemed that
their firm, and the industry in general, were significantly oversized. So they
were planning cuts and even closures in their offices all over the world, to
bring the firm down to a size that made sense in relation to the profit-making
opportunities existing in the market.190
C.
The Party’s Over: Crashes as the Door to Regulation
Until the collapse of the bubble, the agents of financial capital live through a
period when they follow a strictly financial logic, setting their own lax rules
and being highly successful with them. So, the ‘yuppies’ of each casino economy
in the frenzy phase are impervious to calls for regulation. As Galbraith re-
marked, they all wish to think that it is not the facilitating circumstances of the
period that are making it possible for them to become rich but ‘their own supe-
rior insight and intuition’.191
Falling down from such high pedestals may bring them back to reason.
When tensions from decoupling and polarization explode in collapses or pan-
ics or crashes they are more likely to accept new rules and regulations and
some of them may no longer be there to oppose them.
Edwin F. Gay, writing in early 1929 in the Introductory chapter to the so-
called ‘Hoover Report’, subtly broke ranks from the exuberant optimism of
the book and reviewed the ‘four previous periods of efflorescence in the USA’,
noticing that they all ended in major panics and crashes, which in their wake
‘gave impulse to banking and monetary reforms’.192
Crashes serve as catharsis and as calls to orderly behavior, but not if there is
an automatic parachute for irresponsible investors. Without some significant
bankruptcies and failures (not bailed out!) it is highly improbable that finan-
cial capital will ever accept and abide by the necessary regulation.
This raises the question of when and for how long should ‘lenders of last
resort’ intervene. Should they ever let the rope break? The game is not an easy
the Internet world in the USA. Born in 1998, at the height of Frenzy, it reached more than
300 pages, setting a record of 7,558 advertising pages in 2000. In August 2001 it had
closed as a paper journal; a month later it was sold in a bankruptcy auction for half a
million dollars plus assumed subscription liabilities (Web issues of The Industry Standard,
August 26 and September 24).
190.
Wall Street Journal Americas (2001) Spanish edition.
191.
Galbraith (1990:1993) p. 5.
192.
Gay (1929).

121
The Turning Point: Rethinking, Regulation and Changeover
one, of course, and the stakes can be huge. In 1998, Newsweek’s Wall Street
editor, Allan Sloan, scandalized about the orchestration by the Federal Re-
serve Board of the $3.65 billion bail-out of Long-Term Capital, the biggest
hedge fund in the USA, reports that:
Alan Greenspan argued … that the Fed didn’t dare let Long-Term Capital go out of
business because its failure could have triggered worldwide havoc. Markets are
already nervous about the seemingly endless series of financial collapses … [though,
Sloan adds] the IMF has thrown billions into the pot, with little success so far …193
So, once the destabilizing forces have got loose, the risks of not rescuing
are huge. Could the risks of rescuing be equally high or even higher the more
time goes by?
Historical experience seems to show that big crashes teach big lessons,
though both Galbraith and Kindleberger observe that such lessons are short-
lived. Nevertheless, many of the new rules born out of such panics do remain
both in the law and as ‘common sense’. After 1929, the general consensus on
the need to avoid the many excesses visible after the fall, made it possible to
establish a Keynesian framework, which lasted and was fairly effective until
the early 1970s. And yet, at the time, it took more than a decade and a devas-
tating world war for that framework to be accepted and its regulation applied.
Thus, the crashes at the end of the installation period can create the condi-
tions for the state to regulate, turning the tables in favor of production capital
and leading to a period of more harmonious growth. When they do have this
effect, the recession is certainly a high price to pay, but it is typical of the
contradictory nature of capitalism.
D.
The Model and the Historical Record
Has the installation period always led to Frenzy? Has it always ended with a
crash? The case of the third surge shows how specific historical conditions can
significantly deviate from the basic model, but still be explained by the rela-
tionship between technological opportunities and the behavior of production
and financial capital.
What happens, for instance, if installation is not intense? What happens if,
as in the case of Britain in the third surge, the established industrial structure
does not modernize enough and if the love affair of financial capital with the
new technologies is only mild? British financial capital, after having learned
in the maturity phase of the second surge how extraordinarily profitable for-
193.
Sloan (1998).

122
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
eign investment could be, did not concentrate on intensely developing the tech-
nological revolution at home. Or rather, it concentrated on those specific ele-
ments of the revolution that were connected with the previous surge, such as
railways, steam engines and telegraph, and served to multiply their power in
the empire. Modern steel production was put at the service of worldwide rail-
ways and telegraph and especially powerful steamships with vastly improved
engines. Copper and gold mines, agriculture and meat production were devel-
oped in all continents, enriching the shipping, trading and insurance businesses
and keeping financial capital busy and profitable. Frenzies and bubbles took
place abroad and that is where the crashes happened. The biggest of them all,
in Argentina in 1890, almost brought down the whole system.
Baring, the pre-eminent British financial firm responsible for the bulk of
the loans in the Argentinian bubble, was fully bailed out by the Bank of England
with the help of other European countries. This action was judged by Ellis T.
Powell, a contemporary enthusiast of the growing coordinating role of the
financial market, as ‘the salvation of England from another crisis which, if it
had been suffered to develop, would have left its mark on financial history for
the next fifty years’.194
Faced with setbacks abroad, British financial capital recoiled for a while,
staging what was called the ‘home boom’ that by no means can be defined as a
typical frenzy phase. Nevertheless, the international casino economy in
Lombard Street did come to a halt. For five years after the Baring episode ‘the
Stock Exchange lay fallow, with business and credit worn to a shadow’.195
While British finance was making its grand tour of the globe, the shares of
British industries, including crucial ones such as chemistry and electricity,
were still traded in the local banks.196 In the meantime Germany and the USA
were developing giant concerns with the decided support of the most powerful
financial firms. These countries had been forging ahead ever since their unifi-
cation, the USA after the Civil War and Germany after the Franco-Prussian
War. The first benefitted from idle British capital, during the maturity phase of
the second surge; the second from the enormous indemnity from France. Both
experienced an early boom, with a frenzy character, and an early crash in 1873.
Both went through a serious and prolonged recession and then resumed growth
in earnest. As suggested before, the processes of forging ahead do not neces-
sarily follow the regular sequence. The state played an important role to help
the drive to industrial power in very different ways, but in both cases it in-
cluded tariff protection.
There were big financial panics in the USA in 1884 and 1893, but they were
not typical after-frenzy crashes. If anything, the 1884 crash was closer to the
194.
Powell (1915:1966) p. 522.
195.
Landell (1912) quoted in Powell (1915:1966) p. 529.
196.
Kindleberger (1984:1985) p. 205.

123
The Turning Point: Rethinking, Regulation and Changeover
model. In fact, in the pre-1893 years, though the economy was growing quite
fast, the stock market was traversing a period of low volume and not very
intense activity.197 The true madness in the US stock market happened during
Synergy, between the ‘rich man’s panic’ of 1903 and the crash of 1907. So the
strong drive to forge ahead led to a sort of frenzied synergy.
Financial capital in the USA, at the end of the nineteenth century, rather
than hand control over to production capital took full possession of it and
exercised direct management of the merged production giants. Judging by
Sobel’s account, J.P. Morgan, the great financier, had almost as much power
over the national economy as the President of the United States. By 1900, ‘the
Morgan-directed banking fraternity was dedicated to maintaining order and
liquidity, carrying out functions which in other countries were assigned for
central banks’.198
It is not within the scope of this book to analyze in depth any historical
case. The brief overview of the specific developments occurring in the three
core countries of the third surge was meant more as an example of the care
required in the use of the model, both to formulate questions and to propose
explanations.
There is no mechanical sequence to be found, without looking at the actual
behavior of financial and production capital and to the specific manner and
rhythm in which the technological revolution is being installed and where. In
the end, all the techno-economic phenomena will be very much conditioned
by the institutional and political context of the specific moment in the coun-
tries involved. And this is particularly important in cases of falling behind and
forging ahead. What is significant, in terms of the value of the model, is that
there are causal chains and identifying features that can help the analysis and
the interpretation not only of the regularities but also of some of the deviations
from the basic pattern.
E.
Politics and the Question of Handing over Power to
Production Capital
The period of deployment, or the second half of each surge, will consist mainly
of the expansion of the paradigm across the production structure, of the intense
use of the infrastructure and the growth of production to attain economies
of scale, all within the innovation trajectories of the technological revolution
being deployed. Hence, it will be a time of constant investment in production
capacity and constant widening of employment and markets. That is why
197.
Sobel (1965) p. 129.
198.
Sobel (1965) p. 159.

124
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
real ‘golden ages’, in the sense of shared prosperity, are more likely to happen
when production capital, rather than financial capital, is at the helm.
It is production capital that is mainly interested in further pursuing each
technological trajectory, in order to profit fully from the investment already
made, from the learning and experience acquired, from the externalities avail-
able, including the education of consumers and suppliers, and from the inno-
vative paths well mastered. Since market saturation is one of the main limits
encountered in deploying the growth potential of a technological revolution,
ensuring consistent extension of markets is the way to facilitate the pursuit of
those goals. Consequently, it is progressive distribution and worldwide ad-
vances in development that can best guarantee a continued expansion of demand.
Finance capital, by contrast, is mobile and does not accumulate equipment
or technological experience, so it is less capable of guiding economic decisions
at these times. Given the choice, it would prefer a short-lived capital gains
investment, like some of the dot.coms of the 1990s bubble, rather than setting
up more long-term, dividend-producing, capacity. In the early times of the
technological revolution, finance follows the judgment of the new
entrepreneurs. By the time Frenzy arrives, the entrepreneurs are being led by
the criteria of the financiers. These might not know much about the technology
but they certainly know a lot about which ventures will make money faster. In
the 1930s, Keynes expressed concern about the increasing control of the
ownership of capital investment ‘by persons who do not manage and have no
special knowledge of the circumstances, either actual or prospective, of the
business in question’.199 In the late 1990s, Peter Drucker sharply voiced a similar
idea in an interview with Fortune: ‘Securities analysts believe that companies
make money. Companies make shoes!’.200
It is not easy to hand over control. During the frenzy phase financial capital
becomes much more powerful and production capital learns to live by its rules
and to submit to its criteria. Turning the tables requires not only a serious
weakening of financial capital through the collapse of the paper wealth moun-
tain it had constructed, but also the intervention of political forces.
By the end of the installation period, polarization has usually reached mor-
ally unacceptable extremes and has probably stirred the anger of the excluded.
These are the sorts of forces that can put pressure on the political world to-
wards the necessary structural adjustments, favoring the real economy of pro-
duction and restraining some of the more damaging financial practices. The
outcome of such power struggles is, of course, unpredictable.
199.
Keynes (1936) p. 153 of the 1961 edition.
200.
Schlender (1998) p. 170.

125
The Turning Point: Rethinking, Regulation and Changeover
F.
The Long Depression of the 1930s in the United States
Most of the big crashes after the big manias led to depressions of around two
years or less. This is congruent with the hypotheses being presented here. Each
of those big bubbles in the frenzy phase is riding on an enormous potential for
real growth and widespread prosperity. Once the distortion is eliminated, a
healthy economy should be able to emerge. So a question that needs to be
answered is why the Great Depression in the USA, after 1929, lasted so long.
As suggested above, crashes at the end of Frenzy serve as the clang of awak-
ening to the need for recoupling the various broken links: between paper val-
ues and real values, between the new modernized economy and the old one
and, especially, between the regulatory and institutional framework and the
new dynamics of the economic world. Only the first is achieved by the crash,
the other two are conscious – or intuitive – social processes, facilitated by the
lessons of the crash and the recession.
Regarding recovery in the 1930s, one cannot look at the USA only. In Ger-
many, with Hitler’s rise to power, the institutional framework was reoriented
to facilitate the development of mass production (and later of mass destruction
and genocide). The war economy that began after 1933 in Germany could be
seen as a synergy phase of a sort. Fortunately, the Nazis failed to conquer
Europe and lost the war; otherwise, National Socialist Germany might have
been the center of a longer-lasting fascist world. At that same time, the Soviet
economy too was developing very fast with another mode of growth that was
also capable of intensively deploying mass production. This wide range of
options for the deployment of that particular paradigm – including the Keynesian
democracies that will have the USA as their core – is an indication of how
much is at stake and how much is decided about the future of each country and
of the world at the turning point of each surge.
Growth also resumed in the mid-1930s in England, France and other coun-
tries in Europe. But these countries had not gone through a Frenzy as intense
as that of the United States, hence they did not have such a monumental col-
lapse to come out from; but, neither did they benefit from the advantages of
the frenzy phase: that is, they did not have a fully installed industrial base for
deploying mass production, nor had they developed a vast road network ac-
companied by electric utilities, nor had the paradigm diffused as deeply as in
the USA for the establishment of a mass-consumption mode of growth. So,
neither alone nor together could those countries pull the world onto a synergy
period and their recoveries were fragile.201
201.
An additional point to make is that the nature of the particular paradigm can favor certain
comparative advantages. For the deployment of the ‘homogenizing’ consumption patterns
of mass production, large size and population were an advantage. The USA and the Soviet
Union had them (and so would have been the case of a Nazi empire in Europe).

126
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
In the meantime, Roosevelt’s New Deal, which tried to apply many of the
right recipes for successful synergy, was being systematically opposed for fear
of Socialism. Resistance came, not only from the financial world, which was
going to be regulated, but also from production capital, which had the most to
gain from it. In the ideological confrontations that characterized the world of
the 1930s, state intervention in the economy could not yet be fully accepted in
the USA. In 1933 the ‘conservatives predicted that FTC [Federal Trade Com-
mission] supervision was only the first step in the eventual communist take-
over of the United States’.202 It took the experience of collaboration in the
military–industrial complex, during the Second World War, to understand that
capitalists could coexist in a mutually beneficial relationship with a strong
state that assumed an active coordinating and balancing role in the economy.
In a sense, it could be said that the direct US participation in the war was
already the beginning of Deployment. Manufacturing equipment for the in-
creasingly motorized war, fully utilized and expanded the potential of the in-
stalled mass-production paradigm, which had been built up during Frenzy –
and, much more gradually, in the difficult 1930s. Further still, in terms of the
socio-institutional framework, the many elements that were experimented with
then, in terms of the role of the state and of international cooperation, could
somehow be considered a ‘dress rehearsal’ for shaping the post-war Synergy,
including the acceptance of US world leadership.
Thus, at the crossroads of the turning point in the surge, the outcome is very
much determined by politics, ideologies and relative power. Therefore the length
of the recession or depression does not depend on economic factors only, not
even on economic policies and measures narrowly understood. Nor is the
decoupling that leads to the crash a purely economic phenomenon.
It is because a proper regulatory framework is not in place that financial
capital can create havoc. It is because financial capital does not let regulation
hinder it that the adequate framework is neither designed nor established ear-
lier. And after recession sets in, whichever political groups have or seize the
opportunity to represent the collective interests of society will have the power
to deeply shape the future.
202.
Sobel (1965) p. 299.

127
Synergy: Supporting the Expansion of the Paradigm
Whatever time it takes to set up the framework to overcome the recession, the
beginning of Deployment is usually characterized by synergistic growth, ex-
tension of markets and increasing employment.
The atmosphere is likely to be quite different from that which prevailed
during the casino economy, because real growth in production becomes the
basic source of wealth. The confident optimism of company expansion re-
places the arrogant self-complacency of cunning speculation. It is perhaps the
only period when aggregate statistics are consistent for safe extrapolation and
the ceteris paribus assumptions of much economic theory become plausible.
Growth is generally seen as firmly rooted in real production and the relative
values of money across the various sectors of the economy stabilize and seem
understandable to most people. In that context, rules are accepted as ultimately
beneficial for all.
Regarding the relationship between financial and production capital, it has
often been mentioned above that the synergy phases in two major historical
cases, the third and fourth surges, were quite different in the United States. In
both there was a return to the primacy of the real economy, in the sense that
the direct control of production, infrastructure and services became the main
driver of the accumulation of wealth, rather than the indirect hands-off owner-
ship of securities, rent-producing assets or financial instruments. But, in the
‘Progressive Era’ the financiers or their direct agents sat on the boards of rail-
ways and industries and took the main decisions. In the Post War Golden Age,
they could be in the board as stakeholders with some influence, but profes-
sional managers, representing – even embodying – production capital, applied
their growth criteria to the development of the corporations. As Chandler would
define them, the situation in the synergy phase of the third surge could be
termed ‘financial capitalism’ and, in that of the fourth, ‘managerial capital-
ism’. 203 Both counted on technical and professional persons to perform mana-
gerial functions, but the criteria they followed were different.
12. Synergy: Supporting the Expansion
of the Paradigm across the Productive
Structure
203.
Chandler (1977) pp. 9–10.
127

128
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Yet synergy is essentially about recoupling for expansion. As in any mar-
riage, the question of which of the partners is in control is resolved depending
on the relative power of each. It will also depend on the specific circumstances,
the nature of the triumphant paradigm and the unique political scene of the
time. The markets of the third surge, for instance, were driven by heavy engi-
neering while those of the fourth included centrally the mass production of
consumer goods. In the third surge capitalism reigned supreme, in the fourth,
there was competition with Soviet Socialism, turned during Synergy into a
permanent Cold War.
For those and other reasons, even more than the Victorian Synergy of the
second surge in Britain, the post-Second World War synergy phase in the USA
has been the clearest historical case of production capital being in control.
This was so much so that, for a while, the stock market was hardly present as
a dynamic force. In Sobel’s words: ‘Wall Street completely failed to reflect the
nation’s economic exuberance [in 1947]; stock prices did not rise with the
rapidly increasing profits of listed corporations’.204 This situation continued to
basically hold throughout the synergy phase. In 1962, a government report on
the nature of private capital investment, stated that:
Capital requirements were financed chiefly from internal sources during the post-
war period … [when only] … one fourth of total requirements [was financed] by
borrowing from banks and other institution lenders and by selling securities in the
capital markets…  As compared with the 1920s, corporate financing in recent years
featured a higher reliance on internally generated funds, a modest rise in the impor-
tance of long-term borrowing, and a sharp reduction in stock flotations.205
That behavior not only differs from the frenzy phase of the 1920s but also
from the previous synergy phase in the USA, when that country was still in the
process of forging ahead.
A.
An Adequate Framework for Fruitful Recoupling
Perhaps because it comes after the collapse of an unregulated world, Synergy
is a time of orderly and ordered behavior. If regulation of the economic world
was put in place during the turning point recession, it is generally accepted; if
it was not, it is consistently sought by social and political forces.
Though they are more likely to originate in governments or world institu-
tions, some of the new rules in the area of finance are self-imposed, precisely
to avoid the need for government supervision. They usually involve a new
204.
Sobel (1965) p. 321.
205.
Joint Economic Committee, US 87th Congress, 1st Session (1962) pp. 32, 40–41.

129
Synergy: Supporting the Expansion of the Paradigm
framework for banking and monetary practices. Next to them rules of the game
are established to condition business, labor relations and so on, as well as
regulatory innovations on the international level. But each set of regulations is
unique because it needs to match the specific characteristics of the paradigm it
is accommodating.
The suspension of convertibility of the pound, which seemed merely a war
expedient, in practice favored – and protected! – the full propagation of the
first technological revolution which was unfolding mainly, if not only, in Brit-
ain. From the second surge onwards, growing legislation to facilitate joint-
stock banks and companies with limited liability helped, in one country after
another and at different rhythms, the conversion of early family capitalism to
modern corporate capitalism.
Accountancy and disclosure legislation is usually enacted to avoid the spe-
cific abuses revealed during the previous Frenzy.  After the crash of 1929, in
order to overcome some of the more harmful practices then revealed, strict
disclosure rules were established for the safety of investors, together with the
separation of savings from investment banks. For the safe deployment of the
present fifth surge, after the Enron revelations, there were calls for regulation
to separate consultancy from auditing and for new accounting rules that would
make it difficult for off-balance sheet operations to be used to deceive inves-
tors.206 But even the normal accountancy procedures unveil their loopholes in
times of Frenzy. David Wessel in the Wall Street Journal remarked that ‘what
makes the Enron scandal so serious … [is that] it highlights that the bookkeep-
ing that is “generally accepted” these days is too often meaningless, if not
false’.207
Not all regulation is written down, but good practices guaranteeing stable
growth are generally supported. In Britain, the Bank Act of 1844 clearly sepa-
rated money issue from credit, which was crucial, but did not enable the role
of lender of last resort. After the railway panic of 1847, suspension of the Act
was seen as necessary, and continued to be the ‘accepted practice’ in emer-
gencies.208
Some rules help strengthen firms; others reinforce market growth and so-
cial cohesion. The admission of private joint-stock banks to the London Clear-
ing House fostered the development of networks of branch banks to take ad-
vantage of the railway. In 1842 and 1844, laws were enacted improving condi-
tions of work in mines and factories. In 1846 came the crucial decision finally
to repeal the Corn Laws, and fully establish free trade. All this had happened
206.
The Financial Times (2002a).
207.
Wessel (2002).
208.
Kindleberger (1978:1996) p. 149.

130
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
in the last years of the installation period and opened the way for the Victorian
Synergy to follow.209
At that time in Britain, however, wealth was still mainly in the hands of
aristocrats and merchants. The stock market was in its infancy and financial
capital was only beginning to acquire functional autonomy. Thus it could be
said that the triumph of production capital over finance capital in the second
great surge took the form of a triumph of industrial capital over the wealthy
landowning and commercial classes.210
The flourishing of the belle époque Synergy, in the 1890s and 1900s, was
marked by the development of worldwide financial and commercial networks.
This was made possible by international telegraph and rapid transport. It had
been made easier since the 1880s by the universal Gold Standard, with Lon-
don and the British Central Bank serving as centers of the system. Interna-
tional recognition of patents was formally established after the 1883 Paris Con-
vention for the Protection of Industrial Property, universal standards and norms
were agreed and institutionalized to facilitate worldwide compatibility of parts
and products and so on.
In that same phase, another set of institutional innovations addressed the
issue of governance on the national level. The large-scale social security ex-
periment conducted by Bismarck in Germany, when forging ahead since 1883,
was followed in the belle époque Synergy by similar laws being adopted by
one European nation after another. According to Geoffrey Bruun, ‘this wave
of labor legislation, so rapid and universal in the Western world, made the
1890s a significant period in social history. Obviously, the spirit of the times
was changing. Hours of work, salaries, health, social security, protection, the
risk of invalidity and old age pensions stopped being a personal issue’ and
became more and more a responsibility taken up by the state.211
For the full development of the Age of the Automobile, a wide range of
institutions was set up. Many of them were to put order in international finance,
investment and trade: The International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank,
the Bank of International Settlements (BIS), the Marshall Plan and supervisory
agencies, the reserve role assigned to the US dollar in the Bretton Woods
accords, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and others. Many
more were to establish an orderly framework at the national level: Keynesian
policies, separate regulatory bodies for banks, securities, insurance, savings
(to avoid the mixed financial services that allowed risking people’s savings in
209.
On the crucial importance of this for the deployment of the paradigm, see Lloyd-Jones and
Lewis (1998).
210.
The irony is that these gradually turned to financial investment and, by 1900, it is claimed
that most of industry was in the hands of the old aristocracy. Lieven (1993), pp. 119–22.
211.
Bruun (1959:1990) p. 169 (note: the 1990 edition consulted is a Spanish translation).

131
Synergy: Supporting the Expansion of the Paradigm
the casino of the 1920s) and so on,212 plus protective agencies such as the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) in the United States, to restore public confidence and
oversee bank and stock exchange behavior, plus the Banking Act of 1935 ‘to
make the Federal Reserve System an instrument of national economic
management’.213
Social innovations were equally plentiful. They went from such fundamen-
tal aspects as the welfare system, including income safety nets, health and
education, to accessory elements such as the provision of reliable national
statistics to help business planning in a mass-production world.
Many, but certainly not all, of the necessary institutional changes are made
during the period of installation or during the ‘time of reckoning’, just before
the prosperity of the deployment period begins. All along, there continue to be
strong feedback loops that signal further required improvements, which are
implemented after synergistic growth is underway. Schumpeter, always pre-
ferring the market and the economy to have the upper hand, remarked that
institutional innovation of this sort was usually the codification of already
accepted practice,214 which is probably partly true.
B.
Enabling Institutional Innovations
To help bring about this new prosperity, however, innovations geared to smooth
operation in the context of the new paradigm will also be necessary in money,
banking and financial practices. As with all innovations, the date of introduc-
tion is less significant than the time of intense diffusion. Already the whole
installation period of each great surge brings forth multiple innovations in the
field of finance. Some are temporary or doubtfully legitimate and are destined
to disappear or become very marginal (for the time being). Others, especially
those connected with accommodating the investment, production, trade and
consumption processes of the new technologies will probably generalize and
expand. The propagation of the paradigm to further and further branches of
the economy in the deployment period is likely to require those very instru-
ments, together with others tailored to the emerging business practices. These
might include innovations in types of money, banking services and forms of
credit or finance, which create the facilitating conditions for the full adoption
212.
Susan Strange, when reviewing the regulatory systems of this period, notes that although
the American, French, Japanese, British and German systems exhibit significant differ-
ences, they all share what she calls the ‘Chinese walls’ separation between the various
types of banking and financial services. Strange (1998) Ch. 8.
213.
Strange (1998) p. 143.
214.
Schumpeter (1939) Vol. 1, p. 307.

132
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
of the new paradigm across the whole range of the economy in each country
and in the world. They would be closely coupled with those measures of pub-
lic policy (national and international) that establish the rules of the game and
the institutional framework for banking and finance. Once Bretton Woods makes
the US dollar into ‘gold equivalent’ at the end of the Second World War, for
instance, international finance adapts and generates the corresponding practices.
The required innovations also involve the internal working of the financial
system, the types of instruments and conditions that facilitate the specific types
of credit required for the incorporation of the new paradigm.
Synergy of the first surge saw the multiplication of country banks to help
industrialists make local payments, to move money between the country and
London, especially that of traders, and to facilitate collection of government
revenue.215
To usher in the Victorian boom, checks became means of payment; joint
stock which had been developed for large projects became more common;
vendor shares, debentures, preference shares and other instruments made the
incipient capital markets flexible and adaptable. In France the Credit Mobilier
experiment was established for industrial loans.
The belle époque prosperity was supported by generalized limited liability,
legislation facilitating the formation of giant corporations, self-regulation of
stock markets and so on. While Britain specialized in arrangements for financ-
ing great engineering projects all over the world, as well as perfecting their
expertise in short-term credit and insurance to finance international trade, in
Germany, medium-size, medium-term loans were developed to finance pur-
chasers and exporters of the new small electric capital goods.
The post-Second World War golden age was facilitated as much by the
Bretton Woods agreements as by the development of ample personal banking
services, widespread consumer and home buying credit (both made less risky
by unemployment insurance); urban development financial schemes, special-
ized banking and other arrangements for the smooth functioning of the fast
growing real estate and insurance sectors; government loans; and so on.
It is clear that the burgeoning knowledge economy will require a very wide
range of new instruments and even the overturning of some ‘eternal truths’
about the tangible nature of assets.
215.
 Kindleberger (1984) p. 79.

133
Synergy: Supporting the Expansion of the Paradigm
C.
A Shared and Embedded Paradigm: Flourishing Synergy
and Convergent Expansion
What makes the Synergy prosperity an era of good feeling is its tendency to
encompass greater and greater parts of the economy and larger and larger parts
of society in the benefits of growth.216 After a period of acute polarization on
several fronts, when prosperity was extremely lopsided, the system searches
for coherence through the widespread application of the now established para-
digm, as the logic of both production and consumption. Depending on the type
of institutional framework established, it could be a time when the capitalist
promise of achieving the common good through individual pursuit appears
credible. The Victorian prosperity and the belle époque in some countries in
Europe, incorporated wide sections of the middle classes; the post-Second World
War period incorporated the working classes.
Technology and production are the instruments of such promise; they are
the engines that pull the economy and successive social strata forward. Cities
are embellished, infrastructure is brought to every corner of the country and
made available to an increasing number of people, together with education,
which in this phase is often reformed and widened, both in duration and in
coverage of the population. The ‘modern’ style of living established by the
rich during Installation spreads or trickles down further and further in a sim-
plified and less expensive version, thanks to economies of scale. And all this is
done in collaboration with financial capital, which flourishes in its role as
intermediary in a style which is certainly less exuberant and adventurous than
in the casino economy, but highly profitable in a more stable way.
Together with the expansion of the infrastructure comes a flurry of what
could be called ‘induced branches,’ which are investment opportunities created
by the particular features of the paradigm in question. They include construction,
transport and trade accompanying the particular nature of the expansion, as
well as other activities that complete the new production and consumption
spectrum. In the fourth surge, these included the flourishing of a service
economy; in the case of the current surge, they will probably involve many
activities related to intermediation in the information world and to production
in the knowledge economy.
So the range of sectors that support growth and need financing in this phase
encompasses:
●
the core industries of the paradigm, which are still growing, advancing
and expanding;
216.
Tylecote (1985 and 1992) was the first to discuss the importance of income distribution as
a determining element of the possibility of a ‘long-wave’ prosperity.

134
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
●
the infrastructure, increasing its coverage and services;
●
the whole of the old economy being modernized and rejuvenated; and
●
a group of new branches of industry and services that are supplementary
to the others and complete the fabric of the economy within the logic of
that paradigm.
It is certainly enough to keep most of financial capital busy at home (and to
make it withdraw from the now less attractive periphery), though this is likely
to be different in the present fifth surge, which has involved globalization from
the beginning.
Growth during Synergy, in the first phase of the full deployment period,
takes place in the midst of increasing externalities. One of the effects of the
bubble economy is to have invested enough in infrastructure to last for quite a
while and to provide a basic coverage to enable massive use at decreasing
costs. During the whole of the installation period, the diffusion of the techno-
logical revolution was wide and deep enough to have allowed the paradigm to
become fully visible. Consequently, when Deployment arrives, growth takes
place provided with a set of widely shared principles for most effective and
profitable practice as well as an implicit understanding of the various techno-
logical trajectories to exploit.
As discussed in Part I, the paradigm gradually becomes territorially and
socially embedded in terms of the availability of the physical and technical
infrastructure, the technically trained personnel, distribution and supplier net-
works, consumer habits, norms and regulations and cultural adaptation. This
context leads to a situation of high agreement between financial capital and
most production capital about what is a worthwhile and promising investment.
These conditions lead in turn to mutually beneficial collaboration and to in-
creasing and stable interrelations between banks or financial firms and their
production clients.
D.
The Changing Role of Technology
By the end of Frenzy, the potential of the technological revolution has been
understood, the technological paradigms (in the restricted Dosi sense) in terms
of innovation trajectories, have been clearly defined, the competition between
options regarding the main products and processes has led to what Brian Arthur
has termed the ‘locking-in’217 of the winning dominant designs. By that time
too, the main industries of the revolution are reaching their basic structures in
terms of leadership, forms of competition, relative size of firm and production
217.
Arthur (1988).

135
Synergy: Supporting the Expansion of the Paradigm
facilities and other defining features. This means that if the installation period
can be seen as a gigantic experimental stage for testing the various avenues of
the new paradigm and establishing the basic constellation, the deployment
period could be described as the build-out of that constellation and the exten-
sion of the chosen avenues.
Consequently, technological innovation could be said to move from an in-
tense period of exploration, led by financial capital and its goals, to a period of
consolidation and expansion of markets, following the criteria of production
capital. What this means will depend on the specific socio-institutional frame-
work established and on the type of product.
One of the avenues for innovation is facilitating widespread adoption by
making the products truly user friendly and mutually supported. It is what
Brian Arthur has called ‘arrangements-for-use’:
What’s needed for the revolution to fully blossom are the thousand and one small
details – sub-technologies, arrangements, architectures – to fall into place that adapt
us to the new technologies and them to us. This takes time. And more than anything
it defines the buildout period not as a period that merely exploits the earlier innova-
tions, but as one that creates the arrangements that bring the new technologies into
full use.218
An avenue somewhat related to that one is to pursue wider and larger mar-
kets. The concentration of income in the frenzy phase is likely to also have
concentrated innovation on the luxury end of the market spectrum. Conditions
for improvement of income distribution in the deployment period could guide
innovations toward cost reductions in the more basic versions to expand mar-
kets as fast as incomes allow. In this case, innovations are ‘creamed’ at the
upper end of the market and become ‘cash cows’ at the lower end.
Process innovations become a focus of attention as soon as achieving mar-
ket volume becomes one of the main determinants of profits.219 Speed, reli-
ability, quality and cost reductions receive special attention and can lead to
major advances along the paradigm trajectories. In the case of the fifth surge,
increasing attention to the environment, which can be considered part of the
socio-institutional framework with or without enforceable regulation, is likely
to signal directions for both product and process innovations.
There are two areas, though, where cost reduction innovations are crucial
for the growth of the whole economy: the core inputs and the infrastructure. If
these are cheaper and better, more and more producers will use them to mod-
ernize their products and processes and to increase their own markets. A virtu-
ous cycle ensues, as this growth in demand will in turn facilitate further gains
in productivity in the inputs and the infrastructure themselves.
218.
Arthur (2002).
219.
Abernathy and Utterback (1975).

136
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
In the third surge ever-cheaper steel and ever-cheaper rail and sea transport
accelerated the development of transcontinental markets from the 1890s. In
the fourth, the cheapening of oil-based fuels, electricity and road transport
gave positive support to the very high growth rates of national mass markets.
It is likely that in the fifth, this growth-enhancing role will be played by the
ever-lower cost and ever-wider use of microelectronics and telecommunications.
The specific manner in which innovation is financed during this period can
also change. In the fourth surge the R&D laboratory became a feature of most
large corporations and state-funded laboratories, either independent or in uni-
versities, became common. One of the features of the current surge is the im-
portance of innovations as creators of value and the ease with which changes
can be introduced in production, due to flexible equipment and organizations.
This will certainly define much more dynamic arrangements for promoting
and financing technical change.
E.
The Passage to Maturity: Tensions and Dispersion Again
As the maturity of the paradigm is approached, gradually the spectrum of op-
portunities for new investment becomes narrower, the product life cycles of
later products – even of later technology systems – become shorter, invest-
ment in increasing productivity is less and less effective, new profit opportu-
nities are harder to come by and so on.
This loss of momentum could manifest itself in a sort of mid-life crisis as,
for example, the crash of 1857 in Britain and the 1960 recession in the United
States.
Maturity brings merger time again, but not to escape price competition, as
during Frenzy, but to amass market share in search of economies of scale to
boost falling profits, due to stalling productivity and market saturation. The
many other profit-enhancing practices of financial capital in this phase were
amply discussed in Chapter 8.
Thus arrives Maturity, the late phase of the deployment period, with its
superficial brilliance and its political turmoil. The workers organize and de-
mand, sometimes very actively, the benefits that had been promised and not
delivered.220 The young, the artists and the discontented also denounce and
romantically rebel. Meanwhile, as the period wears on, investment opportuni-
ties will dwindle while idle capital grows and grows. Soon, for both produc-
tion and financial capital, it will be emigration time again – often together – in
search of new outlets abroad, or outside the established paradigm, in unusual
220.
For a discussion of these periods of labor unrest and their relation to long-wave patterns,
see Freeman and Louçã (2001) pp. 355–63.

137
Synergy: Supporting the Expansion of the Paradigm
innovations. Thus the great surge spreads out into the periphery fueled by the
willingness of financial capital while, at the core, the next technological revo-
lution is about to irrupt and challenge the established production structure.
Nevertheless the successes of the early phase of the deployment period have
strengthened the confidence of the defenders of the establishment. For them,
by the maturity phase, complacency has arrived, progress seems guaranteed
and the great virtues of the system can be proclaimed with certainty.
In spite of the recurring ups and downs in the economic and social perfor-
mance of capitalism, there seems to be an underlying faith in the eventual
arrival of a period without cycles and without social problems as a result of the
operation of the system. This mixture of ideas and convictions with yearnings
and desires resurfaces with great strength during two particular phases of the
surge: Frenzy and Synergy. In the first, it is the growth of the financial bubble
and the incredible profits achieved that create the delusion of a new economy,
which is all the more credible the more money arrives at the believer’s bank.
In the second, it is the steady growth and the gradual diffusion of well-being
for a relatively long period that create the illusion of an ever-improving soci-
ety. The first mirage will be broken by the bursting of the bubble; the second
by the growing social discontent followed by the economic decline of the es-
tablished production structure.
Another surge is about to emerge; another turbulent period of installation,
with increasing control of financial capital, will spread the next paradigm,
until it reaches a critical mass at the next turning point.

138
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
So far it has been proposed that the irruption of technological revolutions every
40 to 60 years unleashes a process of transformation that affects every aspect
of society. For approximately the first half of the surge, financial capital drives
the diffusion process, forcefully pushing the revolution forward. During the
second half, it is usually production capital that conducts the growth process
propagating the paradigm across the economy. Throughout the successive
phases of diffusion, deep and widespread transformations must occur, which
demand adequate innovations not only in the production sphere – in products,
processes and modes of organization – but also in finance and institutions.
These innovations condition the extent to which a technological revolution
will deliver its potential and the distribution of its economic and social benefits.
In turn, it is the characteristics of the specific revolution that will determine
the nature of the problems to solve by the innovations in both those spheres
and, through the principles of the paradigm, the manner in which to solve
them.
A.
Financial Innovations from Phase to Phase
The process of switching from a production-led economy in the deployment
period to a finance-led economy in the installation period (and vice versa),
profoundly affects the direction and intensity of innovation in the financial
sphere itself. In fact, as has been discussed throughout Part II, in each of the
phases the behavior of finance capital is strongly influenced by the changing
quantity and quality of opportunities for augmenting paper wealth. Sometimes
the paper values represent real wealth; at others they may be just a perverse
form of redistribution. Generally there is a changing mix of both. The same
variety will appear in relation to the nature of innovations.
Table 13.1 proposes a typology of financial innovations, classifying them
according to their main purposes and ranking them from the most useful for
the ‘real’ economy to the least useful. The top ones provide the life-blood for
entrepreneurship and production; the lowest ones take blood out of the economy
through manipulating paper wealth.
13. The Changing Nature of Financial and
Institutional Innovations
138

139
The Changing Nature of Financial and Institutional Innovations
Table 13.1
A tentative typology of financial innovations
Type and purpose of financial innovations
A Instruments
to provide
capital for
new products
or services
B Instruments
to help
growth or
expansion
C Moderniza-
tion of the
financial
services
themselves
D Profit-taking
and spreading
investment
and risk
E Instruments
to refinance
obligations or
mobilize
assets
F
Questionable
innovations
For radical innovations (bank loans, venture capital and others)
To enable large investments and/or spread risks (joint stocks, bank
syndicates and so on)
To accommodate the financial requirements of new infrastructures
(for both construction and operation)
To facilitate investment or trade in novel goods or services
For incremental innovations or production expansion (like bonds)
To facilitate government funding in different circumstances (war,
colonial conquest, infrastructural investment, welfare spending)
For moving (or creating) production capacity abroad
Incorporation of new technologies (communications, transport, se-
curity, printing and so on)
Development of better forms of organization and service to clients
(from telegraph transfers, through personal checking accounts and
high street banking to automatic tellers and E-banking)
Introduction of new financial instruments or methods (from checks
to virtual money, local, national and international services and vari-
ous types of loans and mortgages)
Instruments to attract small investors (various forms of mutual funds,
certificates of deposit, bonds, IPOs, ‘junk bonds’)
New instruments to encourage and facilitate big risk taking (de-
rivatives, hedge funds and similar)
To reschedule debts or restructure existing obligations (re-engineer-
ing, Brady Bonds, swaps and others)
To buy active production assets (acquisitions, incorporations, merg-
ers, takeovers, junk bonds)
To acquire and mobilize ‘rent’-type assets (real estate, valuables,
futures and similar)
Discovering and taking advantage of legal loopholes (fiscal havens,
off-the-record deals and so on)
Discovering and taking advantage of incomplete information: ‘mak-
ing money from money’ (foreign exchange arbitrage, leads and lags
and similar)
Making money without money (from pyramid schemes to insider
trading and outright swindles)

140
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Type A and B innovations are those related to the basic role of finance as an
intermediary in relation to production investment, either to initiate activities
(A), or for growth, expansion and extension (B). Type C innovations improve
the performance of the financial world itself – from banks to investment firms
– as a service production activity. Type D innovations, could be seen as a form
of marketing for financial services: they make it easier – and apparently less
risky – for possible clients, large and small, to engage in investment activities.
They also facilitate the profit taking of the original creditors, in cases of ven-
ture capital, or of the successive investors in bull markets capturing capital
gains. Type E innovations refer to the role of financial services as vehicles for
mobilizing existing assets or obligations from hand to hand, that is, as chan-
nels for change of ownership. Finally, type F innovations are the various ma-
nipulative practices – mainly legal, though often illegitimate – in which finan-
cial agents can participate, most of which tend to be socially undesirable but
not easily curtailed.
In the USA, in the early 1910s, it became common for banks to set up in-
vestment affiliates to be able to buy stock forbidden to them by law, given its
high risk for depositors’ money. ‘Although not illegal in the strict sense of the
word, this practice circumvented the spirit of the law, and was called by one
writer “a masterpiece of legal humor”’.221
Although innovations of all types can occur in all phases, the frequency of
each type can change significantly. Each phase has characteristics that will
bring forth certain types of financial innovation as shown in Table 13.2.
The irruption phase, just after the big-bang, presents the maximum inten-
sity and variety of innovations. In the first place, it will provide a crop of type
A innovations, involving venture capital in whatever form is adequate for the
particular revolution, as well as forms of funding trade in the new products. At
the same time, new ways of financing development in the periphery (type B)
are likely to accompany the last period of diffusion of the old industries and
some incursions into the new. That is also a time when type C innovations will
abound. The financial world is keen to incorporate technological advances in
communications, security, printing and so on as well as organizational changes
that will allow higher productivity and wider coverage for their services.
In the 1860s and 1870s, the ‘ticker tape’ (1867) and the telephone (1878)
were capable of providing a quantum jump in speed of information and deci-
sion making. Wall Street took them up immediately, but the London Exchange
delayed their introduction by around five years (in 1872 and 1882 respec-
tively). R.C. Michie explains that whereas the New York Stock Exchange was
owned by its members and they were all interested in fast access to informa-
tion from wherever they were, the owners of the London Exchange were a
221.
Reported by Sobel (1965) p. 183.

141
The Changing Nature of Financial and Institutional Innovations
small group of a much larger membership. For them, facilitating access to
outsiders reduced the value of the institution and the income they derived from
it.222 So, as with every other aspect being discussed, the institutional setting
will influence both the speed and the manner in which innovations are adopted.
Yet, the irruption phase is also a time when the revolution is still only a
minor part of the economy, while the bulk of the industries of the old paradigm
are mature and offer few good investment opportunities, so idle money piles
up and fosters innovations of types D, E and F. So Irruption witnesses the
maximum variety and intensity in financial innovation.
Table 13.2
The shifting behavior of financial capital from phase to phase of
each surge
Phase
Prevalent types
Prevalent characteristics of finance
of innovation
during the phase
A
B
C
D
E
F
Irruption
❐❐❐❐❐❐
Maximum intensity of real financial innovation
Frenzy
❐❐❐
Escape control, attract funds, speculate, inflate
assets
Synergy
❐❐❐
Adaptive innovations to accompany growth
Maturity
❐
❐❐
Accompany outspreading, escape control and
manipulate
In fact, the whole of the installation period is one of intense experimenta-
tion and innovation not only in technology but also in financial practices. The
intense connection with the technological revolution from the very early phase
builds up a reservoir of appropriate financial innovations capable of dealing
with the various peculiar aspects of each paradigm for the whole duration of
the surge. Ironically, the many distortions that intensify in the frenzy phase
will serve to indicate the type of regulation necessary to avoid them. And this
applies not only to the various institutions and instruments of the financial
world, but also to the accountancy practices and disclosure rules of the pro-
duction companies in which the investment is made.
It should be noted that Table 13.2 refers to the prevalent direction of inno-
vation, that is, to the phase in which certain types of financial instruments or
practices tend to be profusely ‘invented’, introduced and imitated. The appli-
cation of those practices can last a long time and can often define the normal
way of operation in later periods. The most appropriate of the practices devel-
oped during the early phases of the revolution will often generalize in the
222.
 Michie (1987) pp. 250–51.

142
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
deployment period, when the new paradigm becomes the ‘common sense’ for
investment and operation across all the sectors of the economy.
When Frenzy arrives, type A practices will still be very strongly helping to
spread the new technologies. However, the limit to the absorptive capacity of
the still incipient technologies and ways of production generates a profitabil-
ity gap. The resulting urge to mimic the high profitability levels of the new
industries attracts increasing numbers of hopeful investors (and of doubtfully
profitable companies) into what becomes the casino economy, moving the
pendulum towards type D, E and F innovations. As the bubble builds up, there
is a search for new (or renewed) ways of making money out of moving assets
from hand to hand or out of manipulating money, generating asset inflation
and increasing the real or apparent wealth of the participating investors, with-
out augmenting the wealth of society.
The most notable shift in innovative behavior in finance occurs after the
burst of the bubble, between Frenzy and the ‘golden age’ of early Deployment.
In the synergy phase, type A, B and C innovations will tend to prevail, in the
form of adaptive innovations to accompany the full deployment of the para-
digm. These innovations support a ‘back to basics’ trend, towards safe price/
earnings ratios and towards making money by participating in the real profits
made by the productive activities that are being financed.
By Maturity, in contrast, decreasing opportunities are being chased by more
and more idle money coming from the ‘cash cows’ of the well-established
industries. Thus creativity in finance moves toward type E innovations for
concentration of ownership and power, as well as toward new foreign invest-
ment practices of type B. These can be relatively sound investments or very
unsound ways of stuffing the peripheries with loans, like geese, and building
unpayable sovereign debts, likely to default in the next installation period.
When in 1837, Mississippi, Louisiana, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Indiana and
Michigan repudiated their debts, ‘anger was expressed that foreign banks and
investors should now, in hard times, ask for payment of debts so foolishly
granted and incurred.’223
Other innovations in this phase imaginatively search doubtful means of prop-
ping up profits. These are likely to be of the F type, trying, for instance, to
increase opacity to stockholders or to fiscal authorities. In the 1960s in the
USA, the importance of profit squeezing through accountancy practices and
legal loopholes became so large that there were frequent complaints about the
supremacy of financial managers over those of production and marketing. In
the years before the First World War, in the USA, ‘Wall Street was under con-
stant scrutiny from one government agency or another’ and so were banks and
insurance firms. The uncovering of the so-called ‘Money Trust’ by the Glass
223.
Galbraith (1990:1993) p. 62.

143
The Changing Nature of Financial and Institutional Innovations
group made the need for regulation clear. Among the consequences was the
Glass–Owen Act, creating a timid forerunner of the Federal Reserve System,
as another attempt to create a sort of central bank in the United States.224
Many of those manipulative practices will overflow into the irruption phase,
after the next big-bang, as parts of the rationalization and the survival tactics
of the existing production structure that continues battling for profits and mar-
kets behind the astounding economic success of the technological revolution.
B.
Financial Innovations from Paradigm to Paradigm
As financial innovations change in nature and purpose, following the life cycle
of each revolution, they are deeply molded by the nature of the specific techno-
economic paradigm being deployed. This involves not just the adaptation of
financial instruments and services to the specific changes in the production
sphere, but also the application of the paradigm as a generic technology and as
new organizational and operational principles in the financial firms themselves.
The local banks of the first industrial revolution could handle savings and
loans and even some international trade operations, but would not have been
able to engineer the gathering of the huge sums involved in the building of the
railways of the second – much less of the third – surge. These required a new
manner of attracting and handling finance, which was found through joint-
stock companies and limited liability. The enormous financial empires of the
belle époque could easily manage the financing of major engineering works
all over the world and support great industrial concerns, with thousands of
workers and major transactions, such as US Steel and General Electric in the
USA or Siemens and AEG in Germany. Those financial giants probably would
have found it difficult to even envisage the task of providing the myriad of
small consumer credit arrangements necessary for furthering the markets of
the fourth surge.
In fact, one of the major transformations in the economy brought by the
mass-production revolution was the conversion of daily living into an activity
supported by the equivalent of ‘home capital goods’. People’s salaries became
more than the source of subsistence, in terms of food, health and shelter. They
became the form of purchasing, by installments, a whole range of durable
goods, from the automobile, the refrigerator and the washing machine to home
entertainment equipment such as radio, records, TV and tape plus, obviously,
the house to put them in. The expression ‘capital goods’ is used here not only
to refer to their extended terms of payment and the financial processes needed
224.
Sobel (1965) pp. 200–201. But even that ended up under the control of financial capital:
‘Not until the New Deal would the system gain real independence from Wall Street’. (Ibid.)

144
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
to support them, but also to the prolonged productive use of the services pro-
vided. Nevertheless, none of the production activities that took place in the
home went to the market. Something analogous can be said about the other
major product of the mass-production revolution: weapons and military equip-
ment. Financing government investment, for equipping the sophisticated weap-
onry of the Cold War, as well as the many public services (utilities, transport,
education, health or others, depending on the country), can be said to have
become a new activity, given its significantly greater volume, compared with
the previous surges and its much more varied and complex quality. So, the
fourth surge led to a new economy that had government as a fundamental
economic actor, while it opened to consumers forms of financing previously
reserved for ‘capital goods’. This facilitated massive demand and, through it,
fueled the industries that served as the engines of growth.
In the late 1920s in the USA, Edwin A. Seligman, a professor at Columbia
University, was already signaling the deep transformations that would follow
from the diffusion of these accessible forms of credit. In the preface to his
book The Economics of Instalment [sic] Selling: A Study in Consumers’ Credit,
with Special References to the Automobile, he states:
I am convinced that an entirely new chapter is here opening up both in theory and
business life. After more than a century devoted to the elaboration and the tech-
nique of banking and commercial credit, designed to fit the industrial revolution,
we now stand at the brink of another revolution in economic science and economic
life, scarcely inferior to its predecessors.225
The current revolution presents what might be an even greater challenge for
the financial world. To begin with, knowledge, experience and information
have become capital goods. This time, it is not the way of purchasing that
defines them as such, but the fact that – although intangible – they can create
new value, which can also be intangible. A growing portion of the economy, in
terms of investment and trade, will be related to intangibles and will require
appropriate instruments as well as conceptual creativity. How can knowledge
capital be measured? Can it serve as collateral? What is the value of a product
that is infinitely reproducible at almost zero cost? All those questions need to
be solved in practice for the system to flow. In addition, on the lower extreme
of the spectrum, the fast-growing number of cottage industries, be they artisan
or high-tech, is posing further challenges to the banking system. These in-
volve not only adequate financial instruments for investment and operation of
micro firms, but also the need for new schemes for equalizing the irregular
incomes that may be typical of an increasing proportion of self-employed per-
225.
Seligman (1927) p. v.

145
The Changing Nature of Financial and Institutional Innovations
sons in the population. At the upper extreme, globalized operations in produc-
tion, trade and finance are all profoundly shaped by the potential of the infor-
mation and telecommunications revolution as well as by its flexible networks
paradigm. Globalization already involves an unprecedented scale of transac-
tions in terms of volume and frequency, but especially a quantum jump in
complexity. Suffice it to mention the difficulty implied in dealing with mul-
tiple moneys and changing exchange rates, both for daily operations and for
calculating asset values. The power of data processing and the virtual and in-
stantaneous nature of transactions have been rapidly transforming financial
instruments and ways of functioning, while security problems have grown to
serious proportions. There is surely much more to come.
C.
Institutional Innovations: From Old to New Economy
Appropriate financial innovations need to be supported and regulated by ad-
equate institutional innovations attuned to the same paradigm. Without their
corresponding legal frameworks, neither local banks nor joint-stock compa-
nies would have been safe and reliable for participation to occur. Without wel-
fare and unemployment insurance schemes, masses of consumer durable goods
would have had to be returned due to consumer default with each economic
downturn. Without recognized labor unions, salaries would not have been
enough to serve as solvent demand much beyond food and basics. Without a
massive tax system, government demand would not have been forthcoming.
Without a legal compartmentalization of the various financial roles, from sav-
ings and loans to investment, the functioning of the economy of the fourth
surge could have been unstable. Information technology has probably made
such compartments impractical, but other forms of regulation can probably
make financial ‘super-markets’ safe for users. It now seems improbable for the
world economy to reach a path of stable growth without a protective network
of global, national and local regulation. An adequate set of institutions is needed
to complement, shape and guide the transformations that take place in the eco-
nomic sphere. Yet, it cannot be a blissful return to what worked in the previous
paradigm; it must be the complex design of what will work with the new one.
Globalization is not just a much more active international economy; it is a
fundamentally different set-up.
Each technological revolution does then indeed lead to a ‘new economy’.
However, it is not, as was widely believed at the end of the 1990s (as at the end
of the 1920s), one without cycles and with eternal bull markets in the stock
exchange. What is indeed true is that technology is behind the transforma-
tions. But this is not, as often held, an unprecedented phenomenon. Equivalent
leaps in productivity and similar new product explosions have occurred with
each surge. That is what makes development a pulsating process.

146
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
The new economy that emerges with each technological revolution consists
of radical changes in the patterns of investment, production, trade and con-
sumption. These new patterns and the distinct categories of goods and services
involved lead to new market behaviors and require appropriate forms of deal-
ing with them. The different nature of the new products and technologies does
change certain aspects of the functioning of the economy for that particular
surge, but it does not overcome its capitalist nature or its basically cyclical
character.
In the current information revolution, several authors have developed inter-
pretations of the new economy based on the strong contrast between tangible
and intangible goods, between ‘atoms and bits’.226 Some claim that this new
economy is different enough to require a new economics227 for its study and
management. This may very well be so and is wholly within the logic of the
present model. For the previous paradigm, John Maynard Keynes developed a
new economics, providing both a different understanding and a whole new set
of policy tools. Although the debate still rages,228 these policies, where ap-
plied, pretty much achieved their purpose of tempering the business cycle and
supporting smooth growth, full employment and consistent investment, for
the duration of the deployment period of the fourth great surge.
That set of policies and that vision of economics lost effectiveness when
the economy of the mass-production revolution, for which it was designed,
became exhausted at the end of the 1960s. Once productivity stopped growing
and investment opportunities dwindled, the whole basis of the model broke
down and stagflation, that unusual combination of inflation with unemploy-
ment, rendered its main policy tools impotent. This made it easier for finance
capital to make a systematic assault on state intervention and regulation and
for the monetarists to move to pre-eminence in the economics profession.229
Soon, the successful flourishing of the microelectronics revolution and the
wave of real competition that characterizes the early installation period, facili-
tated the unearthing of the laissez-faire philosophies and the neo-classical theo-
ries in economics, championed by the Thatchers and the Reagans. The process
of creative destruction taking place in the economy was accompanied by the
demolition of the old edifice of state intervention and regulation, which had
stopped being effective in that specific form. In the frenzy phase, the reign of
market fundamentalism was supreme, to the benefit of the new technological
entrepreneurs and especially of the violently growing financial capital, but to
226.
See, for example, Negroponte (1995).
227.
See, for example, Soete (2000).
228.
While Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz (1963:1971) held it never could work, there
are Keynesians, such as Dow (1998), who hold that the policies were never properly applied.
229.
See Hodgson (2001) and Chang’s (1997) discussion on ‘The Economics and Politics of
Regulation’.

147
The Changing Nature of Financial and Institutional Innovations
the detriment of those left out at the other extreme of the polarized global
economy, particularly the bulk of the developing world.
The recession that follows the collapse of the bubble once again creates
conditions for the emergence of a new economics and of new policies. As
discussed above in relation to financial innovations, these policy tools will
have to closely conform to the characteristics of the current technological revo-
lution and its paradigm. The nature of the new economics and of the tools it
provides for government action – and for designing its scope – will have enor-
mous bearing on the direction given to the potential of this technological revo-
lution.


chapter title
149
The Recurring Sequence,
Its Causes and Implications
PART III


151
The Sequence and its Driving Forces
The narrative in the preceding chapters went far into proposing a historical
structure based on recurrence. It was approached from a systemic interdisci-
plinary point of view including technology and institutions, which can be
roughly ranged within evolutionary economics. The type of model constructed
is grounded on the idea that it is possible to find dynamic regularities and
recurrent sequences of change in the workings of the capitalist system. This in
itself already raises very fundamental issues, related to worldviews, that can-
not be approached without revising some of the basic premises. It is not the
intention of this book to enter such discussions. An in-depth treatment of those
questions can be found in Freeman and Louçã’s As Time Goes By.230
The object of this concluding part is to summarize the model and to invite a
debate about its implications. This chapter brings together the model in its
main elements and discusses the driving forces involved. Chapter 15 explores
some of the questions raised by this interpretation and looks into its conse-
quences for theory and policy.
A.
A Summary of the Sequence and its Elements
According to the model presented here, when a technological revolution irrupts
in the scene, it does not just add some dynamic new industries to the previous
production structure. Through the configuration of a techno-economic
paradigm, it provides the means for modernizing all the existing industries
and activities. The process of diffusion of both the revolution and its paradigm
across the economy constitutes a great surge of development.
Each surge has two distinct periods. The first two or three decades are the
period of installation, during which the critical mass of the industries and
infrastructures of the revolution are put in place against the resistance of the
established paradigm and driven increasingly by the criteria and the turbulent
dynamics of financial capital. At about mid-surge there is a turning point when
the tensions that had built up are surmounted, creating the conditions for the
period of deployment. During this period, which also lasts two or three decades,
14.
The Sequence and its Driving Forces
230.
Freeman and Louçã (2001) Part One.
151

152
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
the transformation potential of the revolution spreads across the economy,
yielding its full development benefits. Growth in this period is driven mainly
by the longer-term criteria of production capital, with an institutional framework
that tends to pursue a better balance between private and collective interests.
Each period in turn goes through two different phases, defining the chang-
ing character of the assimilation process, so that the recurring sequence is
made up of four phases lasting around a decade each: Irruption, Frenzy – turn-
ing point – Synergy and Maturity.
Given the modernizing power of the revolution and its techno-economic
paradigm, each surge ends up raising the whole productive structure to a higher
plateau of average productivity, while weaving a different fabric of interrela-
tions among the branches of the economy. This evolution by long leaps would
be the manner in which progress takes place in capitalism.
Figure 14.1 Development by surges: the elements of the model
and their recurring changes
Elements of the model
Previous Surge (A)
SURGES:
Diffusion of successive technological
revolutions and paradigms
(A), (B), … (N)
Phase 
PERIOD
TECHNOLOGICAL REVOLUTION (TR)
TECHNO-ECONOMIC PARADIGM (TEP)
FINANCIAL CAPITAL (FK)
PRODUCTION CAPITAL (PK)
SOCIO-INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK (SIF)
GROWTH
Maturity
DEPLOYMENT PERIOD A
Full bloom and maturity of 
revolution A
Gestation of revolution B
Full reign and deployment 
of paradigm A
Financial and
production 
capital
recoupled
Production 
rules
Idle finance 
looking
for opportunities
Mature 
production
looking for 
markets
Socio-Institutional framework
adapted to and shaping
paradigm A
Converging growth of most
industries* using 
paradigm A
Synergy
Note:
* Refers to all production activities, including services, infrastructure and so on.

153
The Sequence and its Driving Forces
However, such massive economic transformations involve complex pro-
cesses of social assimilation. They encompass radical changes in the patterns
of production, organization, management, communication, transportation and
consumption, leading ultimately to a different ‘way of life’. Thus each surge
requires massive amounts of effort, investment and learning, both individually
and socially. That is probably why the whole process takes around half a cen-
tury to unfold, involving more than one generation.
The socio-institutional framework adapts to each paradigm and, in turn,
shapes the preferred direction in which the technological potential will be
deployed and how its fruits will be distributed. But, this deep adaptation
eventually becomes an obstacle for the introduction and diffusion of the next
technological revolution. A society that had established countless routines and
Surge B
Next Surge C
Irruption
Frenzy
INSTALLATION PERIOD B vs.. A
DEPLOYMENT PERIOD B
INSTALLATION PERIOD C vs.B
Irruption
Maturity
Synergy
Frenzy
Decline and outstretching of
revolution A
Deployment of revolution B
Full bloom and maturity of 
revolution B
Gestation of revolution C
Decline and outstretching of
revolution B
Deployment of revolution C
Shift from A to B
Configuration and installation
of Paradigm B
Full reign and deployment 
of paradigm B
Shift from B to C
Configuration and installation
of Paradigm C
Love affair with
Technological
Revolution B 
Finance rules
decoupled
from production
Decoupling of production structure 
Modern B vs. Old A
Mismatch of old framework A
with next paradigm B
Diverging explosive growth
of B industries
vs. declining A industries
Financial and
production 
capital
recoupled
Production 
rules
Idle finance 
looking
for opportunities
Socio-Institutional framework
adapted to and shaping
paradigm B
Converging growth of most
industries* using 
paradigm B
Love affair with
Technological
Revolution C
Finance rules
decoupled
from production
Decoupling of production structure 
Modern C vs. Old B
Mismatch of old framework B
with next paradigm C
Diverging explosive growth
of C industries
vs. declining B industries
Mature 
production
looking for 
markets
Big-bang C
Big-bang B
Turning point

154
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
habits, norms and regulations, to fit the conditions of the previous revolution,
does not find it easy to assimilate the new one. So, a process of institutional
creative destruction will take place, with the simultaneous dismantling of the
old framework and the gradual installation of the new. Nevertheless, some of
the most significant institutional changes are only induced, after about half a
surge, by the mounting social and economic pressures.
In the economy, the interrelations between financial and production capital
determine the rhythm and the direction of growth. Production capital ensures
the full deployment and the widest spread of each technological revolution.
Financial capital enables the succession of surges. When production capital at
the end of a surge becomes conservative, due to having so much investment
and experience tied to it, financial capital will break loose and end up either
helping the initial big-bang of the next revolution or following it up by back-
ing the new entrepreneurs in spreading it. When financial capital, during the
period of installation of the new paradigm, takes the economy on a frenzied
ride up a paper-wealth bubble, the new and modernized production capital
will be ready to take over and lead a more orderly growth process, in the ‘golden
age’ that sees the full deployment of that revolution.
This changeover is aided by the institutions of governance and constitutes
the turning point of the surge. It usually occurs after the bursting of the bubble
and in the midst of the recession that follows. Changes in the rules of the game
are necessary to curb the damaging short-term practices of financial capital,
and induce it to cater to the more long-term interests of production capital.
Some form of response is also required to the intense social pressures that
come from the polarized income distribution characteristic of the frenzy phase.
This response will modify the dynamics of the market profile, in terms of
possible spending patterns, and will eventually influence the direction and
rhythm in which potential supply will develop from the synergy phase onwards.
Figure 14.1 presents a condensed version of all the elements of the model,
locating a particular surge (B) between the end of the previous one (A) and the
beginning of the next (C). In it, the repeated pattern of emergence, replace-
ment and deployment of technological revolutions and techno-economic para-
digms can be identified, as well as the regularities in the changing behavior of
financial and production capital and of the socio-institutional framework, along
the four phases.
As has been the case throughout the previous narrative, the figure concen-
trates on the dynamics of the core societies and does not cover the whole life
cycle of each surge. To do this, it would have to include both the gestation
period, before the big-bang, and the redeployment period, after the next big-
bang, when the mature industries of that surge outstretch and struggle for prof-
itable survival by ‘rationalization’, by reaching for markets in the periphery
and/or by spreading production to locations with comparative advantages. There
is only an allusion to this by the graphic prolongation of the curves of each surge.

155
The Sequence and its Driving Forces
Thus the figure does not properly deal with the surge as it spreads across the
world, as was briefly discussed in Chapter 5. From that wider perspective, the
long surges span a whole century, with each successive one covering a larger
portion of the globe. A similar table constructed from the point of view of the
peripheral countries would be very different indeed, with a significant dis-
placement of the phases. Further still, the table for the closer peripheries would
also differ from that of the further ones (understanding ‘distance’ as economic
and not merely geographic).
B.
The Forces Behind the Sequence
The summary above suggests that there are three features in the functioning of
the capitalist system driving development by surges and determining the re-
current sequence that characterizes them:
●
technical change occurs by clusters of innovations forming successive
and distinct technological revolutions that modernize the whole produc-
tive structure;
●
financial and production capital are interrelated but functionally sepa-
rate agents, each pursuing profits with different criteria and behaviors;
and
●
the socio-institutional framework has much greater inertia and resistance
to change than the techno-economic sphere, which is spurred by com-
petitive pressures.
Each of these features refers to how change takes place in one of the spheres
that co-evolve in the process of development: technology, the economy and
social institutions. It is the manner in which these changing spheres interact
and influence each other that generates the sequence (see Figure 14.2)
Technology is the fuel of the capitalist engine. That technical change should
evolve by revolutions has only little to do with scientific and technological
reasons. It is the mode of absorption and assimilation of innovations in the
economic and social spheres that requires technical change to occur in coher-
ent and interrelated constellations. Once a technological revolution irrupts and
begins to propagate, its techno-economic paradigm emerges and guides the
trajectories of further technical change. Thus, the bulk of technological devel-
opment will be internally compatible and easy to introduce, thanks to interre-
lations and increasing externalities. Yet there will always be plenty of devel-
opments outside those trajectories, due to the relative autonomy of science
and technology. That is why, when the potential of one revolution is spent,
there is a pool of radical innovations capable of coming together to form the

156
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
next. Hence, a certain degree of scientific and academic freedom is an essen-
tial component of the dynamics of the system.
The economic sphere is the scene of the growth process, where production
and financial capital interact. More than merely interdependent, these two func-
tional forms of the profit motive are indispensable to each other: real produc-
tion supports paper wealth; borrowed money supports innovation and real in-
vestment. But it is not a simple, tranquil relationship, but rather a very turbu-
lent one. The tensions and distensions of financial and production capital, their
couplings and recouplings, will determine the rhythm and the direction of eco-
nomic growth in each phase. And, at the two hinges of the surge, from Instal-
lation to Deployment and vice versa, when power struggles between them come
to a head, the two other spheres will intervene. Technology will provide the
big-bang leading to the next installation period, to be steered by financial capi-
tal. At the turning point, when the system stalls in recession, the state and other
institutional, social and economic actors will establish the regulations and other
changes in the framework, to help launch the deployment period based on the
solid expansion of production capital.
The institutional sphere is the seat of politics, ideology and of the general
mental maps of society in each period. It is also the network of norms, laws,
regulations, supervisory entities and the whole structure responsible for social
governance. Being the embodiment of society, it includes in a certain sense the
other two spheres. The people involved in the changes that occur in technol-
Figure14.2
The dynamics of the system: three spheres of change in
constant reciprocal action
Techno-economic
paradigms
Technological
revolutions
TECHNOLOGICAL
CHANGE
Socio-institutional
frameworks
Socio-political
ideas and behavior
INSTITUTIONAL
CHANGE
Financial
capital
Production
capital
ECONOMIC
CHANGE

157
The Sequence and its Driving Forces
ogy and the economy spread the common sense of each new techno-economic
paradigm to their other spaces of activity. It is like the propagation of a virus,
from person to person, weakening the old mental maps and introducing the
new. Thus, during each surge, there is increasing coherence and isomorphism
between the structure and way of functioning of firms, and that of all sorts of
organizations, from schools to hospitals, to political parties and government
departments. This is the source of both the inertia at the end of a surge and the
capacity to design appropriate new institutions and regulations at the turning
point. The inertia in Maturity is rooted in the two or three decades of success
of the deployment period that have strengthened the logic of the prevailing
paradigm in minds and institutions. The capacity to change is stimulated by
the opposite feelings. During the installation period, a sense of impotence and
frustration accumulates and a growing incongruence is experienced between
the new and the old paradigm. So, though institutional change is subject to
greater inertia than economic change, it responds to social and political pres-
sures and has the internal resources to move in the appropriate direction.
The three spheres interact in such a way that each time there is inertia in
one, the processes of change brimming in another eventually exercise enough
pressure to unleash the necessary modifications in the first. Yet inertia is not
always negative. As suggested before, it can and does play a salutary role by
erecting barriers to inopportune change, allowing the full spread of the ben-
efits of each of the revolutions. So, as in most processes of advance, develop-
ment in the capitalist system occurs through combining the forces of conser-
vation with the forces of transformation.
C.
The Difficult Balance Between Private and Social Interest
The model proposed takes into account the fundamental structure of the capi-
talist system, which is in constant tension, managing the balance between pri-
vate and social interests. The profit motive acts as the basic engine of private
interest, moving both finance and production capital. The social interests, in-
carnate in government and the various organizations of civil society, are con-
stantly trying to shape the conditions of growth and the distribution of its toils
and of its fruits.
The actual social benefits, in each particular phase, will depend on the ex-
tent to which there is a positive or negative sum game between individual and
collective interests and on whether the social and political forces leaning to
one or the other side are capable of recognizing these – rationally or intuitively
– and act effectively to attain their aims.
As Keynes remarked in the 1920s:

158
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
The world is not so governed from above that private and social interest always
coincide. It is not so managed from below that in practice they coincide. It is not a
correct deduction from the Principles of economics that enlightened self-interest
generally is enlightened; more often individuals seeking separately to promote their
ends are too ignorant or too weak to attain even these.231
These differences in – real and perceived – individual and social interests
are particularly acute at the end of the installation period. The collapse of the
bubble and the ensuing recession – even depression – can be very painful for
both the rich and the poor; the former can see a good part of their wealth
evaporate, the latter are likely to sink even deeper in their misery. Yet, this
brutal way in which the system forces the recoupling is merely the direct con-
sequence of the extreme internal tensions created by the bubble itself. That is
why, at such times, the role of the state and of the various social forces be-
comes indispensable for shaping the direction in which society will move for
the following two or three decades.
Yet, when maturity sets in and the next revolution is ready to emerge, it
seems that only the uncontrollable drive of financial capital has the conditions
to push the icebreaker across the frozen seas, intensifying the process of eco-
nomic and institutional creative destruction.
It could be that it is in the nature of capitalism to advance by going to ex-
tremes in pendular movements: from the installation periods, characterized by
the unhindered unleashing of private profit seeking, to the deployment peri-
ods, when those forces are moderated and ordered for more widespread social
benefits.
The historian Edwin F. Gay, founding Dean of the Harvard Business School,
is reported to have arrived at such a vision of capitalism, through studying the
history of the United States. According to Cruikshank, the historian of the
Business School:
[E.F. Gay] developed a dynamic vision of economic history [as] a record of swings
of the pendulum between periods when social controls dominated and periods domi-
nated by the actions of aggressive individuals. The former periods were static, char-
acterized by security and stability. The latter periods ushered in by the introduction
of new tools, weapons or other forces, were controlled by the powerful individuals
who introduced these forces. These dynamic periods ... were crucial to economic
development … The role of the economic historian, as Gay perceived it, was to
study and comprehend these cycles and to suggest ways of restraining their ex-
cesses.232
231.
Keynes (1926) (original emphases).
232.
Cruikshank (1987).

159
The Implications for Theory and Policy
A.
The Power and the Dangers of an Interpretation Based on
Recurrence
When reading the accounts of the 1870s and 1880s written by those who lived
through them,233 one is inevitably struck by the similarities between the evolu-
tion of compound engines and ships and that of chips and computers, between
the process of generation of a world economy through transcontinental trans-
port and telegraph and the present process of globalization through telecom-
munications and the Internet. By making the relevant distinctions between
that context and this one, the power of those technologies and of these, the
worldviews of that time and our own, we can learn to distinguish the common
and the unique in all such processes. The same happens when reading the
glowing accounts of economic success in the 1920s234 and the similar writings
about the ‘new economy’ in the 1990s. If one is willing to accept recurrence as
a frame of reference and the uniqueness of each period as the object of study,
then the power of this sort of interpretation comes forth very strongly.
In the author’s own experience, not being a historian or a finance econo-
mist, the historical record became a laboratory for testing the hypotheses of
the model.235 In essence, the job was one of conducting genuine experiments
in regularity. After identifying a phenomenon that could be part of the recur-
rent sequence, it was possible to ‘test’ for its appearance again and again in
each similar historical phase, following the preliminary model. In this manner,
by successive approximations, the various elements of the process could be
either dismissed or modified or tentatively confirmed. In some instances, there
were strong differences, such as the absence of a crash in Britain in the 1890s
or the prominence of finance in the ‘Progressive Era’ in the United States or
the extraordinary length of the 1930s depression in that same country. Those
cases forced the author to delve further and, in the end, served to reshape and
enrich the hypotheses. A model built on the basis of four and a half cases
requires bold stylization and open-minded testing. Naturally, the job is far from
15. The Implications for Theory and Policy
233.
See, for example, Wells (1889:1893).
234.
See the Introductory Summary of the so-called Hoover Report. Hoover (1929) pp. i–xxi.
235.
That is the point made by Gustav Schmoller, the main exponent of the German Historical
School in Economics, about the use of history. Schmoller (1893) pp. 261–269.
159

160
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
complete and further research is likely to help modify and strengthen these
tentative results. For the moment it is for the reader to judge the usefulness of
the general framework.
Obviously, any dogmatic or rigid application of the model will defeat its
purpose. Its main value is serving as a tool to help organize the richness of real
life but not to hammer facts into tight boxes.
With the particular proposal being made here, there is great danger of want-
ing to find exact dates for the end or beginning of a phase or period, when in
fact most of the processes involved are overlapping and do not allow such
precision. The dating used in this book is basically a working approximation
to help transmit the ideas. The peril is further compounded when analyzing
different countries because of the uneven spread of each revolution and the
sequential displacement of phases as propagation advances from one country
to another.
There is also the risk of exceeding the limits of determinism beyond what
could be considered reasonable in a real historical setting. Though technology
takes pride of place in the explanation, it is as much determined by social and
institutional factors and by the economy and finance as it, in turn, influences
them. As Chris Freeman has shown, the relative autonomy of science, technol-
ogy, politics, economics and culture has to be taken into account in any at-
tempt at explaining the processes of development as they actually occur.236 In
particular, even though wars and civil wars are certainly related to the pro-
cesses that have been discussed, they have their own dynamics. The Napole-
onic Wars and both the First and Second World Wars obviously dominated
some phases of economic development and accounted for many of their spe-
cific features. The same may unhappily be true of the present conflicts, which
Mary Kaldor has called new wars.237 So, even though the explanatory hypoth-
eses presented here involve unavoidable simplification, the full complexity of
the feedback loops has to be kept constantly in mind when using the model for
analyzing specific historical cases.
An additional difficulty is the interdisciplinary nature of the model. Look-
ing at it from the standpoint of any one of the many disciplines, into which the
social sciences have come to divide social reality, will diminish the value of
the framework and move away from its intention.
Finally there is the question of the level of abstraction. The proposed model
refers to long-term dynamics and cannot explain individual events. Obviously
to analyze particular financial crises one is better advised to use Minsky’s or
Kindleberger’s models.238 What this framework can be used for is to enrich the
236.
Freeman (1995) pp. 11–19 and Freeman and Louçã (2001) pp. 123–35.
237.
Kaldor (1999).
238.
Minsky (1975 and 1982), Kindleberger (1978).

161
The Implications for Theory and Policy
understanding by providing the wider context within which a particular panic
occurs. The same can be said about individual radical innovations or the intro-
duction of any single regulatory institution. This is a bird’s-eye view where the
bulk of phenomena are roughly ordered in terms of the general gist of the times.
The justification for an exercise that claims to give order to the historical
record at the expense of its infinite complexity and richness is its heuristic
value. Having a structure with which to ask questions and against which to
assess regularity and to fully value uniqueness is all that one can expect. It can
be no more than a very blunt and fuzzy instrument and its power depends on
an intelligent and flexible use.
B.
Changing Times; Changing Views
If what is proposed here reasonably approaches the way the system works,
then one could expect to find traces of these changes in the history of eco-
nomic thought. To begin with, it can throw light on the recurring and varying
interest in certain economic topics. Kindleberger’s later editions of Manias,
Panics and Crashes open with the following paragraph:
There is hardly a more conventional subject in economic literature than financial
crises. If few books on the subject appeared during the several decades after World
War II, following the spate of the 1930s, it was because the industry of producing
them is anticyclical in character, and recessions from 1945 to 1973 were few, far
between and exceptionally mild. More recently, with the worldwide recession of
1974–75 and the nervous financial tension of the 1980s, the industry has picked up.
When it first appeared in 1978, this work thus reflected a revived interest in an old
theme, a theme that became increasingly salient in the decades that followed.239
The model may also serve to explain the changing intensity of certain de-
bates and the ebb and flow of certain views. For instance, if the relationship
between financial and production capital really goes through some stages of
clear collaboration and others of tense decoupling, the heated debates about
the link between the real and the money economy would be temporarily ‘won’
by one side or the other. Such changes of view were observed by Pigou when
he remarked how money was alternately viewed as a mere wrapper of produc-
tion or as a powerful ‘evil genius,’ following the changes from Deployment to
ruthless Installation and to Deployment again, around the two great wars of
the twentieth century.240
239.
Kindleberger (1978:1996) p. 1.
240.
Pigou (1949) pp.18–19. Quoted in Part I, Ch. 1, p. 6 of this book.

162
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Though Greenspan’s early warnings against ‘irrational exuberance’ were
correct, his later claim about the arrival of a ‘new economy’, understood as
non-cyclical growth, came just as the euphoria was about to give way to the
NASDAQ collapse. This echoed the assertions of Irving Fisher, the brilliant
economist, who had the misfortune of declaring in mid-1929 that ‘stock prices
had reached what looked like a permanently high plateau’.241
The Methodenstreit between the historical school and the neo-classicals,
which in practice expelled the state, Society and the historical context from
economic theory, occurred in the period of installation of the third surge, which
in the periodization proposed here is parallel to the installation period of the
fifth, when the monetarists defeated the Keynesians.242
With a longer time frame, in Heilbroner’s classic about the ‘worldly
philosophers’,243 where he locates each of the great economic thinkers in the
context of his times, we get a glimpse at the possible experiential source of
some of their interpretations. If David Ricardo had not been a successful
stockbroker living in the midst of the maturing first surge, he might not have
realized the threat to industrial profits coming from the protective Corn Laws
and the rising cost of land, so he might not have come up with a theory of
rents. If Veblen had not lived through the ‘savage world’ of the 1880s and
1890s he might not have developed his views about the negative role of financial
capital in contrast with that of the engineers. If Keynes had not experienced
both the turbulence of the 1920s and the ‘sick world’ of the 1930s he might not
have searched for an explanation for depression and a recipe for getting out of it.
Capitalism, as an object of study, evolves through successive and distinct
surges of growth, which in turn evolve through different phases, some chaotic,
others more synergistic, none everlasting. So asking when and where a theory
was developed, and especially when and where it gained acceptance, may turn
out to be a very relevant question.244 Furthermore, the expectation of a change
in the tide – from one ‘orthodoxy’ to another – can be firmly rooted in an
understanding of the nature of capitalist society and its functioning.
If the specific nature of ‘what is going on’ has some influence upon the way
economists and others interpret the world, this may underpin the transient for-
tunes of different theories at different times. The extremely long period of
installation since the 1970s, characterized by increasingly globalized free com-
petition, nurtured the idea that markets were all that counted and that the state
was incompetent and its influence undesirable in the economic sphere. After
the collapse of the NASDAQ bubble, and the onset of uncertainty and reces-
241.
Cited by Galbraith (1990) p. 80.
242.
See Hodgson’s (2001) How Economics Forgot History.
243.
Heilbroner (1953).
244.
As reported by Toporowski (2000), this point was made in methodological terms by Chick
(1992) and by Kregel (1995).

163
The Implications for Theory and Policy
sion, this view began to change. Already the unbearable situation in a great
number of ‘economies in transition’ and developing countries – or rather
‘undeveloping’ countries245 – was leading to a questioning of this temporary
dogma. As time moves on and free competition is replaced by global oligopo-
lies, as has occurred in past surges and has been happening in many sectors,
more widespread doubts are likely to arise. Gradually, with or without a truly
deep depression, it is quite probable that institutions and regulation will again
be deemed necessary. Perhaps then those economists and other social scien-
tists that propound the importance of combining state and market may once
more find a good place under the sun.
C.
Changing Times, Changing Policies
The ultimate test of usefulness of a model such as the one presented here is in
relation to policy making, be it in business, in social organizations or in gov-
ernment.
Although no strong claims are made with regards to its predictive ability,
the model does suggest that the near future is often not an extrapolation of the
near past and that, through a reasonable approximation to the stage of the se-
quence we are in, the direction of the next change can be roughly gleaned. So,
this framework may give some guidance and criteria for action in times of
significant change. It is at those times that help is needed in asking the proper
questions both of the present and of the longer-term past in order to construct
a better future. As Eric Hobsbawm has remarked, it is the power to recognize
the turning points that will help economists, politicians and businessmen to
prepare for the next war, not for the last.246
This is no small task. If we look back into recent history we can have a
measure of the amount of audacity required to visualize the future, even a
decade or two ahead. How easy do we think it may have been for people in the
depression of the 1930s to conceive the possibility of effective policies for full
employment and for the control of business cycles? How many would have
believed in the early 1940s, when empire building was still on the agenda, that
most developing countries would soon gain independence? Or, in the mid-
1920s, how realistic would proposals have seemed for strict regulation of fi-
nancial capital and for the official recognition of labor unions? How many in
the 1960s could have envisaged the collapse of Bretton Woods, stagflation,
deregulation and the decline of the welfare state? Yet, with hindsight it is pos-
245.
For a particularly tragic example of this process see the case of Mongolia in Reinert (2001).
246.
Hobsbawm (1997) p. 162.

164
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
sible to locate all those events in an understandable sequence in relation to the
two great surges involved.
Therefore, the main practical implication of the proposed model is to take
advantage of what the past can teach us in order to see policy as responding to
a moving target. At each turn, the range for creativity in terms of viable re-
sponses would be shaped by the nature of each successive technological revo-
lution and its paradigm, as well as by the character of each phase of its unfold-
ing. Whether the actual responses are timely or delayed, adequate or inad-
equate, will depend on a multitude of cultural, political, economic and other
factors, including the specific conditions of the national and world economy
and the previous decisions of the more influential actors.
The design of appropriate policies at each turn requires identifying the di-
rection of change by understanding the paradigm and identifying the phase of
the surge. Neither task is simple and both the willingness to understand and
the goals pursued when responding are politically conditioned.
At the same time, political ideas in terms of their policy translations are not
immune to paradigm changes. In political terms, the periods of installation are
times of cleavage inside political and ideological groupings. Whatever spe-
cific forms they had taken in the previous surge, whatever their location in the
rough distinction between the individualistic and the socially responsible po-
sitions, an internal divide begins to cross each group (see Figure 15.1).
Figure 15.1 Paradigm shift and political cleavage
Source:
Perez (1998).
Looking forward
Looking backward
BELIEF IN
SOCIAL SOLIDARITY
INDIVIDUALISTIC
STANCE

165
The Implications for Theory and Policy
The new line is drawn between those who look back with nostalgia, trying
to hold on to past practices, and those who embrace the new paradigm and
propose new institutions to fit the new conditions. This blurs the previous con-
nection between certain values or goals and the specific means of attaining
them. Though the goals may remain unchanged, the adequate and viable means
to pursue them change with each paradigm shift. This can lead to temporary
confusions, internal confrontations, divisions, revamping of traditional par-
ties, new movements and other forms of realignment, which are likely to rede-
fine the political spectrum for the following few decades.
So, the complexities involved in policy making during these periods of
change can lead to emotional and political havoc in what had been apparently
stable territories and well-defined ideological frontiers.
Yet if this model is a reasonable approximation to the way the system works
then it is wise to try to engage in the design of regulations and institutions so
they will be ready and in the arena of debate when the moment comes for them
to be accepted. This is particularly relevant in the frenzy phase when the
economy appears dominated by the interests of the financial world, which also
has the power to impose them, until the resulting economic tensions and po-
litical pressures make them untenable or a major crash wipes out the source of
confidence. This idea is behind Triffin’s position, who when proposing changes
to the international monetary system, said: ‘My alternatives may not be fea-
sible now but perhaps one day, after the necessary catastrophe, they may be
rediscovered and made use of.’247 Soros also, when proposing the creation of
an international credit insurance corporation for guaranteeing loans to devel-
oping countries, remarked that it could be an acceptable idea only when credi-
tors and debtors alike were seriously scared.248
Proposals can only be effective, however, when bearing in mind that insti-
tutional change is much slower and culturally more complex than technologi-
cal or economic change. Overcoming the inertia of vested interests, long-held
prejudices and dogmas, cultural views, practical routines and ingrained habits,
especially when they had previously been successful, requires impressive events
and powerful political pressures. In addition, during the installation period,
attention tends to concentrate on the ‘destruction’ half of the process of insti-
tutional creative destruction. The inefficacy of the old institutions to handle
the emerging technological revolution and the drive of financial capital for
free-wheeling action come together to dismantle the restraining regulatory
framework. The confrontation between the defenders of the old regime and
the aggressive new deregulators – strong from riding on the high waves of the
247.
Reported by Strange (1998) p. 20.
248.
Reported by Strange (1998) pp.  189–90.

166
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
technological revolution in the midst of a sea of economic troubles – leaves
little space for the proposal and acceptance of the required new and modern
rules. Indeed, it is difficult to even design the appropriate framework before
the paradigm is fully configured. The potential to be fostered begins to be
recognized only after considerable diffusion. Similarly, the problems to be
overcome can only be identified after having experienced them.
It is then possible to envisage the present model as an early-warning tool,
providing criteria to guide policy making. Yet, effectiveness would demand a
very profound and subtle understanding of the nature of the system and its
driving forces. Could the bubble and its consequences be avoided? Could some
institutional agent – or the capitalists themselves – identify the onset of matu-
rity and facilitate the next revolution and its flourishing? Could the decline of
the old industries be forestalled by conscious modernization? Could the shift
of power at the turning point be engineered without the recession and the so-
cial tensions involved? Would all that imply modifying the nature of capital-
ism? Or, could it be – as Karl Polanyi’s notion of the Great Transformation,249
or Beveridge’s version of the Welfare State250 – a set of reforms for the con-
struction of another stage of more humane capitalism? The answers to those
questions do not merely require research but a very deep understanding of the
many human and social complexities involved.
In a more modest way, the model can simply serve as a frame of reference
for social actors within the system as it now operates. Under those circum-
stances, those who grasp the sense of the times, correctly interpret the poten-
tial and the direction of change and deeply understand the characteristics of
the relevant paradigm, are more likely to be able to pursue their goals with
viable and realistic proposals.
249.
Polanyi (1944).
250.
See Beveridge (1944:1967).

167
The Implications for Theory and Policy
167
Epilogue: The World at the Turning Point
In June 2002, as this book is going to press, the world is at the turning point.
The decisions being taken at this crossroads will determine how long, how
deep and how widespread the current recession will be and whether what lies
ahead is a depression, a gilded age or a true golden age.
According to the interpretation presented in this book, the installation pe-
riod of the current fifth great surge ended with the draining of the NASDAQ
bubble, in March 2000. The recession that then began to threaten the US
economy, developed through the first months of 2001 and intensified after the
destruction of the World Trade Center, set the stage for a profound institu-
tional restructuring.
It is not yet clear whether the stock markets have seen the worst of their
troubles or whether the reconnection between paper and real values still
awaits a big jolt or two. But the structural problems causing the recession
are already there to be solved, and the Information Revolution is awaiting the
appropriate conditions to display the second half of its growth and its wealth-
generating potential.
If the world economy is to move towards a phase of synergistic growth, a
new regulatory framework is needed, along with the global organizations ca-
pable of making it effective. This is a time for institutional imagination. Finan-
cial regulation is only a small part – though perhaps the most crucial – in the
wide range of transformations required. Given the nature of the current para-
digm, such changes are needed at several levels of differentiated action: local,
regional, national, supranational and, especially, global.
In the equivalent period of the fourth surge, at the beginning of the reces-
sion following the crash of 1929, Keynes warned about the need for under-
standing the nature of the problem in order to be able to confront it. In his
essay ‘The Grand Slump of 1930’, he defined the situation thus:
The world has been slow to realise that we are living this year in the shadow of one
of the greater economic catastrophes of modern history... At this moment the slump
is probably a little overdone for psychological reasons.  A modest upward reaction,
therefore, may be due at any time. But there cannot be a real recovery, in my
judgment, until the idea of lenders and the idea of productive borrowers are brought
together again [added emphasis]... Seldom in modern history has the gap between
the two been so wide and so difficult to bridge. Unless we bend our wills and our
intelligences, energised by a conviction that this diagnosis is right, to find a solution

168
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
along these lines, then, if the diagnosis is right, the slump may pass over into a
depression, accompanied by a sagging price level, which might last for years, with
untold damage to the material wealth and to the social stability of every country
alike.251 (original emphasis)
That is precisely the dilemma facing world leaders today: misjudge the
situation and treat it as one more passing recession or rise up to the task of
confronting a serious structural problem, starting by understanding its nature.
History, however, tends to play tricks on the beholder by providing events
that divert attention from the underlying forces at play. It has been as easy for
many to blame the recession on the terrorist attack of September 2001 as it
was, in the mid-1970s, to blame stagflation on the OPEC oil price hike. Though
both events certainly intensified the phenomena, they didn’t cause the
recessions, which in both cases had clearly begun earlier and were of a structural
nature. Explanations based on exogenous shocks (often, in fact, partly symptoms
of the same deeper causes) lead to an impotent insistence on applying old
economic recipes to new structural problems. Such recipes can only lead to
fragile and short-lived successes, vulnerable to relatively minor events.
Financial capital has already done its job of leading the intensive spread of
the new paradigm and the installation and testing of the new infrastructure.
Sufficient portions of the business community and of consumers have
assimilated the new common sense to be able to continue the transformation
process. Now is the turn of production capital to take the leadership, expanding
production and widening demand, with financial capital in a supporting role.252
However, this change in the rules of the game may not be easy, because the
financial collapse has not been spectacular enough to wipe out excess self-
confidence.
Nonetheless, it is through institutional recomposition that the synergy phase
can be ushered in. Going from drained bubble to golden age requires overcoming
the three structural tensions that have built up and caused the recession.253 All
three demand well directed institutional action.
The tension between the growth of paper values and real wealth creating
capacity, which was partly relieved by the collapse, can only be overcome by
strict and decisively enforced regulation to restrain the practices of the casino
economy. The cluster of revelations about the accountancy scandals in Enron,
WorldCom and other major corporations should not be seen as a sudden and
unexpected epidemic of dishonesty striking the business community. Rather,
they are the consequence of the extreme pressure for unrealistic profit levels
 251. Keynes (1930:1931:1972) pp. 126 and 133.
 252. See pp. 123–4 above.
 253. See pp. 115–8 above.

chapter title
169
Postscript
that the world of finance put upon the world of production during the Frenzy
bubble. A dip in profits, which is a normal occurrence in the life of any company,
meant a catastrophic collapse in value. Hence, during Frenzy, crime paid well.254
Only such measures as will bring profit expectations down to realistic levels
will allow production firms to conduct their business with strategic goals in
mind. At this turning point, short-term financial criteria, apart from the risk of
stimulating dishonesty, can no longer serve to guide investment and technology
decisions directed to the steady expansion of production and markets. As at
equivalent moments in the past, regulation is one of the main instruments to
achieve that switch.
The second tension – between the potential for production expansion, on the
one side, and the profile and rhythm of existing demand on the other – requires
policies to willfully activate the markets of the new engines of growth. The
premature market saturation in microelectronic chips, computers, software,
telecommunications and Internet-based services affects the whole economy.
Those are the dynamic sectors that have the potential to induce multiple new
business activities around them, as well as to pull all the other industries and
the whole world economy forward. Therefore, the choice of which industries
are stimulated by government demand will make a huge difference, as will
policies 
that 
affect 
the 
shape 
of 
income 
distribution.
Yet, in the globalized world of the present paradigm, demand is also global.
The best promise of massive market expansion would seem to be in the
incorporation of more and more countries to global growth, investment,
production and consumption.  Growth in the larger countries of the developing
world, together with China, Russia and the ex-socialist group of Eastern Europe,
could serve as a first tier to pull the others forward. It is quite obvious that
these potentially huge markets are a very long way from saturation.
Nevertheless, the remaining potential in the markets of the advanced world
should not be underestimated. The feeling of intense technological change of
the 1990s Frenzy can lead, when followed by recession, to misguided pessimism
regarding the future expansion of the Information Revolution and the
Knowledge Society. A comparison with the Age of Mass-production can be
instructive. At the end of the equivalent frenzy phase, in 1929, there were 23
million registered automobiles in the USA at a time when the adult population
was 72 million. That market coverage of 32%, which appeared unsurpassable
then, approached real saturation at over 70% by the end of the golden age,
around 1970.255 Similar figures apply to the markets for home electrical
appliances and to the construction, coverage and use of the infrastructures of
 254. See pp. 75-6, 109–11 and 142 above.
 255. US Department of Commerce (1975), pp. 10 and 716.

170
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
that paradigm: the all-ecompassing networks of roads and electricity. The
markets that were attained from the 1940s256 through the 1960s, including the
flourishing of synthetic materials and of innumerable induced activities in
commerce and services, around suburban living and electricity, made the market
levels of the 1920s Frenzy look relatively small. The parallels with computers
and the Internet can readily be made.257
Regarding the third tension – the political and social pressures generated
by the chasm between the countries that have been getting richer and those
trapped in debt and economic crisis – effective action to ease it would be the
most decisive contribution to overcoming the market saturation problem in an
increasingly globalized economy. Not reversing global polarization, in itself,
poses serious threats to the safety and stability of the prosperous countries.
These include massive migrations, various forms of violence and the outbreak
of serious economic crises, such as that of Argentina, which could affect others
in their wake.
Hence, the tasks are complex and wide-ranging: designing an adequate and
enforceable regulatory framework; devising ways of effective intervention to
reshape the demand profile to extend the Information Revolution; and decisively
acting on both sides of the world divide to stimulate a truly global economy,
expanding wealth generation across the planet.
No idea is too bold as long as it applies the ‘common sense’ principles of
the new techno-economic paradigm. As at other turning points, imagination
has to look forward, not back, and there are no ready-made recipes. Each
technological revolution is different, each paradigm is unique, each set of
solutions needs to be coherent with the problems to overcome and with the
logic of the techno-economic paradigm, its opportunities and its best practice.
Each specific mode of growth, constructed for deploying the second half of
each revolution, involves a set of ideological values that shapes the manner in
which those opportunities are deployed and which of them will be favored.258
The present generations are living through a period requiring intense social
and institutional creativity. There is a growing sense of urgency that leads to
many proposals coming forth, of greater or lesser scope, with greater or lesser
ambition, going from alternative economic theories to practical measures and
256.
See the discussion about institutional inertia prolonging the depression in the 1930s in
the USA, pp. 125–6 above.
257.
And the similarity extends to the pessimistic forecasts. Landes (1969), p. 484, reports that
the economic adviser to the Federation of British Industries predicted in 1944 that the
economy would peak out because the latest cluster of innovations, associated with elec-
tricity and motor transport, was exhausted.
258.
Fascism in the 1930s made choices within the potential of mass production that were
different from those made by Keynesian democracies after the war.

chapter title
171
policies.259 There is also ample scope for redirecting business imagination and
technological innovation towards the deeper transformation of world society,
through developing truly knowledge intensive ways of producing and living.
What lies ahead are many social conflicts and confrontations, negotiations,
agreements and compromises leading to fundamental decisions on policies
and institutions, at all levels and in many areas. The range of the possible is
very wide and history has shown that violence, messianic leaders, economic
theories and many other social, political and ideological factors can influence
the choice. The forces that will engage in those battles are gathering now.
Those present on the arena, with viable proposals, will take part in the shaping
of the social and economic history of the next two or three decades. A golden
age of worldwide expansion is possible. Making it happen will require thinking
big, deciding wisely and acting boldly.
Caracas, June 30, 2002
 259. Examples of collective efforts at building alternative economic theories are The Other
Canon (www.othercanon.org), The Post-Autistic Economic Network (www.paecon.ne) and
the PEKEA (Political and Ethical Knowledge on Economic Activities) Research Programme
(pekea.free.fr). Among the proposals signaling the direction of change, see Chris Freeman’s
(2001b) brief and powerful essay ‘If I ruled the world,’ Richard Jolly’s (2002) measures to
confront inequality, the Sagasti and Bezanson report on Global Public Goods, Radosevic
(1999) and Ostry (1992) on harmonizing global regulation of foreign investment and the
reports of the UNU-WIDER Research Programme (http://www.wider.unu) to help over-
come world poverty. Ambitious proposals to reform the global financial and trade institu-
tions are George Soros (2002) and Stiglitz (1992:1997 and 2002).


173
Bibliography
Abraham, Paul and Daniels, Caroline (2001), ‘A Desert Wind Blows Over
Sand Hill Road’, Financial Times, IT Review, October 3, p. 1.
Abramovitz, Moses (1986), ‘Catching Up, Forging Ahead and Falling Behind’,
Journal of Economic History, Vol. 46, pp. 385–406.
Aglietta, Michel (1976:1979),  A Theory of Capitalist Regulation, London:
New Left Books.
Altshuler, Alan, Anderson, Martin, Jones, Daniel, Roos, Daniel and Womack,
James (1984), The Future of the Automobile, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Amsden, Alice (1990), Asia’s Next Giant, New York: Oxford University Press.
Arthur, W. Brian (1988), ‘Competing Technologies: An Overview’, in Dosi et
al. (eds), pp. 590–607.
Arthur, W. Brian (2002), ‘Is Technology Over? If History Is a Guide, It Is
Not’, Business 2.0, March, pp. 65–72.
Ayres, Robert U. (1989), Technological Transformation and Long Waves,
Laxenburg, Austria: IIASA.
Bailey, Brian (1995), George Hudson: The Rise and Fall of the Railway King,
Gloucestershire: Stroud.
Baran, Paul A. and Sweezy, Paul M. (1966:1968), Monopoly Capital: An Es-
say on the American Economic and Social Order, New York and London:
Modern Reader Paperbacks.
Barras, Richard (1986), ‘Towards a Theory of Innovation in Services’, Re-
search Policy, Vol. 15, pp. 161–73.
Barras, Richard. (1990), ‘Interactive Innovation in Financial and Business Ser-
vices: The Vanguard of the Service Revolution’, Research Policy, Vol. 19,
No. 3, pp. 215–39.
Bell, Daniel (1973:1976), The Coming of Post-Industrial Society,
Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Peregrine/Penguin.
Berghahn, Volker R. (1994), Imperial Germany, 1871–1914. Economy, Soci-
ety, Culture and Politics, Providence, RI and Oxford: Berghahn Books.
Beveridge, Sir William (1944:1967), Full Employment in a Free Society, Lon-
don: George Allen & Unwin (Second impression).
Blair, John M. (1972), Economic Concentration: Structure, Behavior and
Policy, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Boyer, Robert (1988), ‘Technical Change and the Theory of Régulation’, in
Dosi et al., pp. 67–94.
Bibliography
173

174
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Bruun, Geoffrey (1959:1990), Nineteenth Century European Civilization 1815–
1914, London: Oxford University Press. Spanish edition, La Europa del
Siglo XIX 1815–1914, México: Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Cain, Peter J. and Hopkins, Antony G. (1993), British Imperialism: Innova-
tion and Expansion 1688–1914, London and New York: Longman.
Carnegie, Andrew (1920), Autobiography of Andrew Carnegie, Boston and
New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Castells, Manuel, vol. 1 (1996), vol. 2 (1997), vol. 3 (1998), The Information
Age, Economy, Society and Culture, three volumes, Oxford: Blackwell.
Chancellor, Edward (1999), Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial
Speculation, New York: Farrar-Straus-Giroux.
Chandler, Alfred D. (1977), The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in
American Business, Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press.
Chandler, Alfred D. (1990), Scale and Scope, the Dynamics of Industrial Capi-
talism, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chang, Ha-Joong (1994:1996), The Political Economy of Industrial Policy,
Basingstoke and London: Macmillan Press.
Chang, Ha-Joong (1997), ‘The Economics and Politics of Regulation’, Cam-
bridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 21, No. 6, pp. 703–28.
Chang, Ha-Joon (2002), Pulling Up the Ladder? Policies and Institutions for
Development in Historical Perspective, London: Anthem.
Chang, Ha Joon, Palma, Gabriel and Whitaker, D.H. (eds) (2001), Financial
Liberalization and the Asian Crisis, New York: Palgrave.
Chick, Virginia (1992), ‘The Evolution of the Banking System and the Theory of
Saving, Investment and Interest’, in Arestis, P. and Dow, S.C. (eds), On Money,
Method and Keynes, Selected Essays, London: Macmillan, pp. 193–205.
Colvin, Geoffrey (1999), ‘El Año de las Megafusiones’, Fortune Americas,
January 18, pp. 6–9.
Coriat, Benjamin (1978), L’Atelier et le Chronomètre, Paris: C. Bourgois.
Crouzet, François (1964), Wars, Blockade and Economic Change in Europe
1792–1815, Journal of Economic History, Vol. 24, pp. 567–88.
Cruikshank, Jeffrey L. (1987), A Delicate Experiment: The Harvard Business
School 1908–1945, Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review Press.
Diebold, John (1952), Automation: The Advent of the Automatic Factory, New
York: Van Nostrand.
Dore, Ronald (2000), Stock Market Capitalism: Welfare Capitalism. Japan
and Germany Versus the Anglo-Saxons, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dosi, Giovanni (1982), ‘Technical Paradigms and Technological Trajectories:
A Suggested Interpretation of the Determinants of Technical Change’, Re-
search Policy, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 147–62.
Dosi, Giovanni, Freeman, Christopher, Nelson, Richard, Silverberg, Gerald,
and Soete, Luc (eds) (1988), Technical Change and Economic Theory, Lon-
don and New York:  Pinter and Columbia University Press.

175
Bibliography
Dow, J. Christopher R. (1998), The Major Recessions, 1920–1995, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Drechsler, Wolfgang (2000), ‘Money as Myth and Reality’, in Backhaus, Jürgen
G. and Stadermann, Hans-Joachim (eds), Georg Simmel’s Philosophy of
Money: A Centenary Appraisal, Marburg: Metropolis, pp. 33–45.
Dyos, H. James and Aldcroft, Derek H. (1969), British Transport, An Eco-
nomic Survey from the Seventeenth Century to the Twentieth,
Harmondsworth, Middlesex, Baltimore, Maryland, Ringwood, Victoria and
Markham, Ontario: Penguin Books.
Engels, Friedrich (1845:1920), The Condition of the Working-Class in En-
gland in 1844, London: Allen.
Ernst, Dieter (2001), ‘Responses to the Crisis: Constraints to a Rapid Trade
Adjustment in East Asia’s Electronics Industry’, in Chang, Ha-Joon et al.
(eds), The Asian Crisis, London: Macmillan.
Evans, Peter (1995), Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transforma-
tion, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Faulkner, Harold U (1951), The Decline of Laissez Faire, 1897–1917, New
York: Rinehart.
Financial Times (2002a), ‘Enron and the Role of the Banks’, January 17, Edi-
torial.
Financial Times (2002b), ‘After Enron’, February 19, pp. 18–19.
Freeman, Christopher (1974), The Economics of Industrial Innovation,
Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books.
Freeman, Christopher (1995), History, Co-evolution and Economic Growth,
Laxenburg: IIASA Working Paper.
Freeman, Christopher (ed.) (1996), The Long Wave in the World Economy, Inter-
national Library of Critical Writings in Economics, Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Freeman, Christopher (2001a), ‘A Hard Landing For the “New Economy”?
Information Technology and the United States National System of Innova-
tion’, Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, No. 12, pp. 115–39.
Freeman, Christopher (2001b), ‘Viewpoint: If I Ruled the World’, Science and
Public Policy, Vol. 28, No. 6, December, pp. 477–9.
Freeman, Christopher, Clark, John and Soete, Luc (1982), Unemployment and
Technical Innovation. A Study of Long Waves and Economic Development,
London: Frances Pinter.
Freeman, Christopher and Louçã, Francisco (2001), As Time Goes By: From
the Industrial Revolution to the Information Revolution, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Freeman, Christopher and Perez, Carlota (1988), ‘Structural Crises of Adjust-
ment: Business Cycles and Investment Behavior’, in Dosi et al. (eds), pp.
38–66.
Freeman, Christopher and Soete, Luc (1997), The Economics of Industrial
Innovation, 3rd edition, London: Pinter.

176
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Friedman, Milton and Schwartz, Anna (1963:1971), A Monetary History of
the United States, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Galbraith, John Kenneth (1990:1993), A Short History of Financial Euphoria,
New York: Whittle–Penguin.
Gay, Edwin F. (1929), ‘Introduction’, in Hoover, pp. 1–12.
Gerschenkron, Alexander (1962), ‘The Approach to European Industrializa-
tion: A Postscript’, in Economic Backwardness in a Historical Perspective,
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, pp. 353–66.
Gomulka, Stanislaw (1990), The Theory of Technical Change and Economic
Growth, London: Routledge.
Grübler, Arnulf (1990), The Rise and Fall of Infrastructures, Dynamics of Evo-
lution and Technological Change in Transport, Heidelberg and New York:
Physica-Verlag.
Heilbroner, Robert L. (1953), The Worldly Philosophers: The Great Economic
Thinkers, New York: Simon & Schuster.
Hilferding, Rudolf (1910:1981), Das Finanzkapital, Vienna:
Volksbuchhandlung Ignaz Brand &Co. (English translation) Bottomore, T.
and Kegan, Paul (eds), Finance Capital, London: Routledge.
Hirsch, Seev (1965), ‘The United States Electronic Industry in International
Trade’, National Institute Economic Review, No. 34, pp. 92–107.
Hirsch, Seev (1967), Location of Industry and International Competitiveness,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hobsbawm, Eric J. (1962), The Age of Revolution, New York, Ontario and
London: Mentor.
Hobsbawm, Eric J. (1975:1996), The Age of Capital 1848–1875, New York:
Vintage.
Hobsbawm, Eric J. (1997:1998), On History, London: Abacus.
Hodgson, Geoffrey M. (2001), How Economics Forgot History: The Problem
of Historical Specificity in Social Science, London: Routledge.
Hoover, Herbert, Chairman (1929), Recent Economic Changes in the United
States, Report of the Committee on Recent Economic Changes of the
President’s Conference on Unemployment, New York, London: McGraw-
Hill.
Jevons, William Stanley (1866), The Coal Question: An Inquiry Concerning
the Progress of the Nation, and the Probable Exhaustion of Our Coal Mines,
2nd edition, revised, London: Macmillan.
Johnson, Chalmers (1982), MITI and the Japanese Miracle: The Growth of
Industrial Policy 1925–1975, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Joint Economic Committee, US 87th Congress, 1st Session (1962), Variability
of Private Investment in Plant and Equipment, Washington, DC, pp. 32,
40–41.
Jolly, Richard (1999), ‘Global Inequality’, Wider Angle, UNU, No. 2, Decem-
ber, pp. 5–6.

177
Bibliography
Jolly, Richard (2002), ‘Global Inequality: How Tom Paine Would Rage’,
presentation at the Headstrong Society, Lewes, May 10.
Kaldor, Mary (1999), New and Old Wars: Organized Violence in a Global
Era, London: Polity.
Keynes, John Maynard (1926:1931), ‘The End of Laissez Faire’, in Essays in
Persuasion, in Keynes (1972), Vol. IX, pp. 272–94.
Keynes, John Maynard (1930:1931), ‘The Grand Slump of 1930’, in Essays in
Persuasion, in Keynes (1972), Vol. IX, pp. 126–49.
Keynes, John Maynard (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest,
and Money, New York, Chicago, Burlingame: Harcourt, Brace & World,
Inc.
Keynes, John Maynard (1972), Collected Writings of J.M. Keynes, for the Royal
Economic Society, London: Macmillan and Cambridge University Press.
Kindleberger, Charles P. (1978:1996), Manias, Panics and Crashes, A History
of Financial Crises, New York, Chichester, Brisbane, Toronto, Singapore:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Kindleberger, Charles P. (1984:1985), A Financial History of Western Europe,
London, Boston, Sydney: George Allen & Unwin.
Kindleberger, Charles and Laffargue, Jean-Pierre (eds) (1982), Financial Cri-
ses. Theory, History and Policy, London, New York, New Rochelle,
Melbourne, Sydney: Cambridge University Press.
Kleinknecht, Alfred, Mandel, Ernest and Wallerstein, Immanuel (eds) (1992),
New Findings in Long Wave Research, New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Kondratiev, Nikolai (1925:1979), ‘The Long Waves in Economic Life’, Re-
view of Economic Statistics, Vol. 17 (1935), pp. 105–15 (original Russian
version 1925 published in German in 1926). Reproduced in Review, Vol. 2,
No. 4, Spring 1979, pp. 519–62.
Kregel, Jan (1995), ‘Neoclassical Price Theory, Institutions and the Evolution
of Securities Market Organization’, Economic Journal, Vol. 105, No. 429,
March, pp. 459–70.
Kuhn, Thomas (1962:1970), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (2nd edi-
tion, enlarged), Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kuznets, Simon (1940), ‘Schumpeter’s Business Cycles’, American Economic
Review, Vol. 30, pp. 257–71.
Kuznets, Simon (1953), Economic Change, New York: W.W. Norton.
Kuznets, Simon (1971:1973), ‘Modern Economic Growth: Findings and Re-
flections’, in Population, Capital and Growth, Selected Essays, New York:
W.W. Norton.
Landes, David S. (1969), The Unbound Prometheus, Technological Change
and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present,
London: Cambridge University Press.
Latham, A. John H. (1981), The Depression and the Developing World 1914–
1939, London: Croom-Helm; Totowa, NJ: Barnes & Noble.

178
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Laybourn, Keith (1991), British Trade Unionism c.1770–1990, Stroud,
Gloucestershire and Wolfeboro Falls, NH: Alan Sutton.
Le Monde (2001), ‘Grâce à la Crise, les Entreprises se Libèrent du Dogme des
15 per cent de Rentabilité’, December 20, Paris.
Lieven, Dominic (1993), The Aristocracy in Europe, 1815–1914, New York:
Columbia University Press.
List, Frederick (1841), The National System of Political Economy, English
edition 1904, London: Longman.
Lloyd-Jones, Roger and Lewis, M.J. (1998), British Industrial Capitalism since
the Industrial Revolution, London: University College London Press.
Louçã, Francisco and Reijnders, J. (eds) (1999), The Foundations of Long
Wave Theory, International Library of Critical Writings in Economics,
Cheltenham, UK, Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar.
Mackay, James (1997), Sounds out of Silence: A Life of Alexander Graham
Bell, Edinburgh: Mainstream Publishing Co.
Mandel, Ernest (1975), Late Capitalism, London: New Left Books.
Mandel, Michael J. (1997), ‘The New Business Cycle’, Business Week, Latin
American edition, March 31, pp. 38–54.
Marichal, Carlos (1988), Historia de la Deuda Externa de América Latina,
Buenos Aires: Alianza Editorial.
Marx, Karl and Engels, Friedrich (1847), The Communist Manifesto.
McKinnon, Ronald and Pill, Huw (1997), ‘Credible Economic Liberalizations
and Over Borrowing’, American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 2, May.
Meadows, Donella H., Meadows, Dennis and Randers, Jorgen (1972), The
Limits to Growth, New York: Universe Books.
Mensch, Gerhard (1979), Stalemate in Technology, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Michie, Ranald C. (1987), The London and New York Stock Exchanges 1850–
1914, London: Allen & Unwin.
Minsky, Hyman (1975), John Maynard Keynes, New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press.
Minsky, Hyman (1982), ‘The Financial-Instability Hypothesis: Capitalist Pro-
cesses and the Behavior of the Economy’, in Kindleberger and Laffargue
(eds), pp. 13–39.
Minsky, Hyman (1986), Stabilizing an Unstable Economy, New Haven and
London: Yale University Press.
Mowrey, Mark A. (2000), ‘Web Companies Find 1999 Venture Capital Wind-
fall’, The Industry Standard, February 7.
Negroponte, Nicholas (1995), Being Digital, New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Nelson, Richard and Winter, Sidney G. (1977), ‘In Search of a Useful Theory
of Innovation’, Research Policy, Vol. 6, No.1, pp. 36–76.
Nussbaum, Bruce (2001), ‘A Shock to the Equity Culture’, Business Week,
October 8, pp. 34–5.
Ominami, Carlos (ed.) (1986), La Tercera Revolución Industrial, Impactos

179
Bibliography
Internacionales del Actual Viraje Tecnológico, Buenos Aires: Grupo Editor
Latinoamericano.
Ostry, Sylvia (1992), ‘The Domestic Domain: the New International Policy
Arena’, Transnational Corporations, Vol. 1, No. 1, February, pp. 7–26.
Palma, Gabriel (1978), ‘Growth and Structure of Chilean Manufacturing In-
dustry from 1830 to 1935: Origins and Development of a Process of
Industrialisation in an Export Economy’, D. Phil. thesis, Oxford Univer-
sity. Forthcoming, Oxford University Press.
Palma, Gabriel (2001), ‘Three Routes to Financial Crises: The Need for Capi-
tal Controls’, CEPA Working Paper 2000–17, November 2000,
www.newschool.edu/cepa/papers, forthcoming (2002) in Eatwell, J. and
Taylor, L. (eds), International Capital Markets and the Future of Economic
Policy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Palma, Gabriel and Marcel, Mario (1989), ‘Kaldor on the Discreet Charm of
the Chilean Bourgeoisie’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, April, pp. 245–
72.
Perez, Carlota (1983), ‘Structural Change and the Assimilation of New Tech-
nologies in the Economic and Social Systems’, Futures, Vol. 15, No. 5, pp.
357–75.
Perez, Carlota (1985), ‘Microelectronics, Long Waves and World Structural
Change: New Perspectives for Developing Countries’, World Development,
Vol. 13, No. 3, pp. 441–63.
Perez, Carlota (1986), ‘Las Nuevas Tecnologías: Una Visión De Conjunto’, in
Ominami (ed.), pp. 44–89 (also in Estudios Internacionales, Vol. 19, No.
76, October–December, Santiago de Chile, pp. 420–59).
Perez, Carlota (1998), ‘Desafíos Sociales y Políticos del Cambio de Paradigma
Tecnológico’, in Venezuela Desafíos y Propuestas, Caracas: Universidad
Católica Andrés Bello, pp. 63–109.
Perez, Carlota (2001), ‘Cambio Tecnológico y Oportunidades de Desarrollo
como Blanco Móvil’, Revista de la CEPAL, No. 75, December (English
version ‘Technical Change and Opportunities for Development as a mov-
ing Target’ in ECLAC Review, No. 75, forthcoming).
Perez, Carlota and Soete, Luc (1988), ‘Catching Up in Technology: Entry Bar-
riers and Windows of Opportunity’, in Dosi et al. (eds), pp. 458–79.
Pigou, Arthur Cecil (1949), The Veil of Money, London: Macmillan.
Polanyi, Karl (1944), The Great Transformation, New York: Rinehart.
Poon, Auliana (1992), Tourism, Technology and Competitive Strategies,
Wallingford: C.A.B. International.
Powell, Ellis T. (1915:1966), The Evolution of the Money Market 1385–1915:
An Historical and Analytical Study of the Rise and Development of Finance
as a Centralised, Co-ordinated Force, London: Frank Cass and Co. Ltd.
Radosevic, Slavo (1999), International Technology Transfer and ‘Catch Up’
in Economic Development, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

180
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Reading, Brian (1992:1993), Japan: The Coming Collapse, London: Orion
Books.
Reinert, Erik S. (2000), ‘Karl Bücher and the Geographical Dimensions of
Techno-Economic Change’, in Backhaus, Jürgen (ed.), Karl Bücher: Theory–
History–Anthropology–Non-Market Economies, Marburg: Metropolis
Verlag.
Reinert, Erik S. (2001), ‘The Deindustrialization of Mongolia’, in Reinert (ed.),
Evolutionary Economics and Income Equality, Cheltenham, UK and
Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar.
Reinert, Erik S. and Daastøl, Arno (1997), ‘Exploring the Genesis of Eco-
nomic Innovations: The Religious Gestalt-Switch and the Duty to Invent as
Preconditions for Economic Growth’, European Journal of Law and Eco-
nomics, Vol. 4, No. 2/3, June, pp. 233–83.
Roberts, Dan (2001), ‘Glorious Hopes on a Trillion Dollar Scrap Heap’, Fi-
nancial Times, September 6, p. 12.
Rosenberg, Nathan and Frischtak, Claudio (1984), ‘Technological Innovation
and Long Waves’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 8, pp. 7–24.
Sagasti, Francisco and Bezanson, Keith (2001), Financing and Providing Glo-
bal Public Goods: Expectations and Prospects, Stockholm: Ministry for
Foreign Affairs (Fritzes Kundservice, S-106 47)
Shin, Jang-Sup (1992), ‘Catching-up and Technological Progress in Late
Industrialising Countries’, PhD Thesis, Cambridge, England.
Schlender, Brent (1998), ‘Peter Drucker Takes the Long View: An Interview’,
Fortune, September 28, pp. 162–71.
Schmoller, Gustav (1893:1898), ‘Die Volkswirtschaft, die Volkswirtschaftslehre
und ihre Methode’, in Schmoller,  Über einige Grundfragen der Socialpolitik
und der Volkswirtschaftslehre, Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, pp. 213–314.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. (1939:1982), Business Cycles, 2 vols, Philadelphia:
Porcupine Press.
Schumpeter, Joseph, A. (1942:1975), Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy,
New York, Hagerstown, San Francisco, London: Harper & Row.
Seligman, Edwin (1927), The Economics of Instalment [sic] Selling: A study
of Consumers’ Credit with Special References to the Automobile, New York:
Harper.
Shaikh, Anwar (1992), ‘The Falling Rate of Profit as the Cause of Long Waves:
Theory and Empirical Evidence’, in Kleinknecht et al. (eds), pp. 174–95.
Shiller, Robert (2000), Irrational Exuberance, Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Sloan, Allan (1998), ‘The Big Hedge-Fund Bailout Helps Some Fat Cats, but
Makes Our Case for Free Global Markets Look Awfully Thin’, Newsweek,
October 12.
Sobel, Robert (1965), The Big Board: A History of the New York Stock Market,
New York: Free Press, London: Collier/Macmillan.

181
Bibliography
Soete, Luc (1985), ‘International Diffusion of Technology, Industrial Devel-
opment and Technological Leapfrogging’, World Development, Vol. 13, No.
3, March, pp. 409–22.
Soete, Luc (2000), ‘Towards the Digital Economy: Scenarios for Business,’
Telematics and Informatics, No. 17, pp. 199–212.
Sombart, Werner (1913), Krieg und Kapitalismus, München & Leipzig:
Duncker & Humblot.
Soros, George (1998), The Crisis of Global Capitalism: Open Society Endan-
gered, London: Little, Brown & Company.
Soros, George (2000), Open Society: Reforming Global Capitalism, New York:
Public Affairs.
Stankiewicz, Rikard (2000), ‘The Concept of Design Space’, in Ziman (ed.),
pp. 234–48.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1992:1997), An Agenda for Development for the Twenty-
First Century, Keynote Address, Annual Bank Conference on Development
Economics, 30 April–1 May 1992, Washington DC: World Bank.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2002), Globalization and its discontents, New York: W.W.
     Norton.
Strange, Susan (1986), Casino Capitalism, Oxford: Blackwell.
Strange, Susan (1998), Mad Money, Manchester: Manchester University Press.
The Economist (1998), ‘Will Internet Shares Join Tulip Bulbs and the South
Sea Company on the List of Great Financial Bubbles?’, December 19.
Toffler, Alvin (1980), The Third Wave, New York: Random House.
Toporowski, Jan (1993), The Economics of Financial Markets and the 1987
Crash, Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Toporowski, Jan (2000), The End of Finance: Capital Market Inflation, Fi-
nancial Derivatives and Pension Fund Capitalism, London: Routledge.
Trebilcock, Clive (1981), The Industrialisation of the Continental Powers,
1780–1914, London: Longman
Tully, Shawn (1999), ‘Stocks May Be Surging Toward an Earnings Chasm’,
Fortune Investor, Vol. 139, No. 2, February 1.
Twain, Mark and Warner, Charles Dudley (1873), The Gilded Age: A Tale of
Today, Hartford, CT: The American Publishing Co.
Tylecote, Andrew (1985), ‘Inequality in the Long Wave: Trend and Cycle in
Core and Periphery’, European Association of Development Institutes Bul-
letin, No. 1, pp. 1–23.
Tylecote, Andrew (1992), The Long Wave in the World Economy: The Current
Crisis in Historical Perspective, London and New York: Routledge.
US Departament of Commerce (1975), Historical Statistics of the United States,
Colonial Times to 1970, Washington, DC: Bureau of the Census.
Utterback, James M. and Abernathy, William J. (1975), ‘A Dynamic Model of
Process and Product Innovation’, Omega, Vol. 3, No. 6, pp. 639–56.

182
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Van Duijn, Jacob J. (1983), The Long Wave in Economic Life, London, Bos-
ton, Sydney: George Allen & Unwin.
Veblen, Thorstein (1899), The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study
of Institutions (Versión castellana Herrero, Vicente, traductor, Teoría de la
Clase Ociosa, Fondo de Cultura Económica, México, 1944).
Veblen, Thorstein (1904:1975), The Theory of Business Enterprise, New York:
Augustus Kelley.
Vernon, Raymond (1966), ‘International Investment and International Trade
in the Product Cycle’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, No. 80, pp. 190–
207.
Von Tunzelmann, G. Nick (1997), ‘Innovation and Industrialization: A Long-
term Comparison’, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, No. 56,
pp. 1–23.
Wade, Robert (1998), ‘The Asian Debt-and-Development Crisis of 1997–?:
Causes and Consequences’, World Development, Vol. 26, No. 8, pp. 1535–
53.
Wade, Robert (2001), ‘From “Miracle” to “Cronyism”’, in Chang et al. (eds)
(2001), pp. 63–81.
Wade, Robert (1990), Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role
of Government in East Asian Industrialization, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Walker, William (1986), ‘Information Technology and Energy Supply’, En-
ergy Policy, Vol. 14, No. 6, December.
Wall Street Journal Americas (2001), Spanish edition in El Nacional, Caracas,
October 17, p. F–4.
Wells, David A. (1889:1893), Recent Economic Changes, and Their Effect on
the Production and Distribution of Wealth and the Well-Being of Society,
New York: D. Appleton & Company.
Wells, Louis T. Jr. (ed.) (1972), The Product Life Cycle and International Trade,
Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.
Wessel, David (2002), ‘When Standards Are Unacceptable’, The Wall Street
Journal, February 7.
Wiebe, Robert (1967), The Search for Order, 1877–1920, New York: Hill and
Wang.
Wolf, Julius (1912), Die Volkswirtschaft der Gegenwart und Zukunft (A.
Deichertsche Verlags-buchandlung).
Womack, James P., Jones, Daniel T. and Roos, Daniel (1990), The Machine
that Changed the World, New York: Rawson Associates.
Ziman, John (ed.) (2000), Technological Innovation as an Evolutionary Pro-
cess, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

183
Index
Index
Abramovitz, Moses, 59
Accountancy standards. See Regulatory
frameworks
Africa, 65, 105
Argentina, 66, 104, 105, 122, 169
Arkwright, Richard, 11, 37
Arthur, W. Brian
locking-in of dominant design, 134
arrangements for use, 135
Asia, 11, 14, 18, 66, 104, 105, 118
Asset inflation phenomenon, 4, 43, 51,
77, 98, 102, 142
Bailing out, 104, 120–21, 122
Baran, Paul, 85
Belgium, 97, 103
Best-practice. See Techno-economic
paradigms
Beveridge, Sir William, 166
Bifurcation. See Decoupling-recoupling
Big-bang events
see also Irruption phase;
Technological revolutions
definition/description, 11
dates, 3, 11–12, 57
conditions, 56
financial capital
attracted by, 38–9
helping, 47, 154, 168
gestation of revolution before, 63, 65
identification with hindsight, 90
initiating technological revolutions,
3–4, 11–12
irruption phase following, 49
model, role in 12
opportunity explosion, 90
paradigm configuration after, 29
turbulence following, 26, 41, 43
Bismarck, Otto von, 130
Brazil, 66, 93
Bretton Woods, 12, 52, 163
Britain, 49, 59, 85
banks, 94, 96
core country, 11, 14, 18, 47, 57, 78, 87
corruption, 110
crises, 88, 98
financial capital
third surge, 122, 132
industry funding, 58, 94, 122, 130
first surge, 65, 91–2, 107, 117, 129
foreign investment, 83–5, 104
gold standard, 58
irruption phase, 49
oligopolies, 82
third surge with Maturity features, 58
trade unions, 45–6
triple core in third surge, 10, 12, 63–4
Victorian Synergy, 53, 128
Bubbles
see also Crises; Frenzy phase
asset inflation, 4, 43, 51, 98, 102
delusion, 43, 137
Frenzy characteristic, 36, 52, 115
Internet, xvii, 7, 79, 106, 120
Japanese early, 103, 118
manias, 28, 51, 106–7, 118
NASDAQ, 118–19, 162
new infrastructural investment, 41,
106–7, 134
paper versus real values, 76, 112
real estate manias, 101, 106
recurring sequence, 5
regulation rejected, 51–2, 120
structural tensions, 115, 118, 158
technology as object of speculation,
79
warnings unheeded, 118–19
Business Week, 40, 107
Capital gains
bubbles, 75, 101, 115, 118
disparity paper-real values, 76, 111
financial capital, 71, 124, 140
pressure on production capital, 115–6

184
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Capitalism
bad face, 4, 50
basic regularities, 5–6, 115, 151
best face, 5, 54, 133
changing nature, 7, 23, 62, 121, 129,
157, 158, 162, 166
cyclical, 146, 162
diffusion across world, 20, 59, 63,
65, 83, 154–5
expanding by surges, 20, 59, 145
faith in, 137
features causing sequence, 155–7
‘free competition’, 108
Gay, Edwin F., 158
Keynes, John Maynard, 157–8
modes of growth, 24–5
pendular swings of, 52, 158
private and social interest, 52, 157–8
progress, 152, 20
recurring sequence, 3–4, 151–4, 162
role of financial and production
capital, 72, 158
Schumpeter, Joseph, 22–3
successful behavior taken to
extremes, 115
technology as fuel, 155
three spheres of change, 155
unfulfilled promises, 55
Carnegie, Andrew, 4, 11, 32, 92
Casino capitalism, 99
Casino economy, 3, 75–6, 103, 105, 116,
120, 122, 142
Castells, Manuel, 19, 25
Catching up, 21, 31, 90–91, 103
Asian Tigers, 104
European countries, 103
Germany, 85
governmental funding, 93
idle money helping, 85, 103–5
internal, between industries, 44
Soviet Union, 103
USA, 93, 103
windows of opportunity, 21, 66, 103–5
Centrifugal trends. See Decoupling-
recoupling; Social polarization
Clusters
of new entrepreneurs, 27, 34
regional irruption, 10
technological revolutions, 6, 8, 155
Common sense
externality, 27, 42
principles, generalized, 4, 17, 19, 26,
42, 44, 114, 168
techno-economic paradigms as, 7,
15, 16, 26,
Competition
dominant design, 134
fierce ‘free’, 5, 51, 105
globalized, 38, 162–3
leading to oligopolies, 5, 51, 76
mergers and oligopolies, 55, 82,
108–9, 136
new versus old industries, 40, 61
price lowering excessive, 108
truly free, 108, 146, 162–3
Consumer credit, 42, 94, 143–4, 145
Core countries
see also Peripheral countries
Britain falling behind, 121–3
Britain, 11, 14, 18, 47, 57, 78, 87
Maturity, 31, 90
paradigm first deployed in, 10
triple core in third surge, 10, 12, 63–4
USA, 11, 14, 18, 57, 78, 87, 127–8
Core industries
capital hungry in third surge, 92
engines of growth, 44–5
expanding in Synergy, 133
mergers and oligopolies, 55, 82,
108–9, 136
rejuvenated, 94–5
technological revolution, 13–14
test beds for next revolution, 95
Corn laws, 52, 55, 162
Corruption, 51, 109, 110, 142–3, 168
Crashes. See Bubbles; Crises
Creative destruction, 22
financial capital, 43, 75, 116, 158
discontinuous leaps, 59
institutional, 146, 154, 165
Schumpeter, Joseph A., 22–3, 37
Social impact, 41
Sombart, Werner, 22
Crises
see also Bubbles; Frenzy phase
Argentina, 1890, crisis, 104, 122
Asia 1997, 104, 105
catching up countries, 88
catharsis, 119
causes of recession after, 115–16
currency, 88
dates of major, 78

185
Index
Frenzy ending with, 52, 76
frequency changing with phases, 79
frenzy phase, 105
forging ahead untypical, 122
installation period, 43, 167
Kindleberger model, 79
lessons learned, 121
manner unpredictable, 115
mid-period, 79, 98, 136
mismatch, cause of crash, xviii
model and real history, 121, 159
model, inclusion in, 77, 106
paper values readjusted, 112, 115
recession following, 3, 114–18
recoupling need for, 125
recurrence of major, 77, 79
recurring interest in, 161
regulation, pressure and acceptance
after, 5, 120–21, 125, 129
technology related, xviii, 118, 165
turning point after collapse, 47
simultaneity of major, 63
USA, 88, 104–5
Cycles,
economic, 23, 146
life of technological revolutions, 29–
32, 63
loan fever and default, 86
short in mature paradigms, 54, 81, 85
overlap, 9, 154–5
Schumpeter, 23
vicious/virtuous, 42, 116, 117, 135
Chandler, Alfred, 16, 17, 44, 45, 109,
127
Chang, Ha Joon, 93, 104
Debt crisis 7, 77
frenzy phase, 102, 105
1930s, 88
Latin American, recurrent, 86–8
Marichal Carlos, 86–7, 103
sovereign debt in Maturity, 86
Third World 1980s, 86, 102
unpayable debts, 103
USA, 1837 and 1873, 86, 103, 142
Decoupling-recoupling
see also Social polarization
deployment period, 74
economy and institutions, xviii, 41, 99
financial and production capital, 50,
54, 75, 76, 99
frenzy phase, 75
high technology and traditional
economy, 40
paper and real value, 50, 76
recessions forcing recoupling, 158
synergy phase, 128
technological revolution assimilation
process, 26
within the economy, 39–41, 61, 99
Defaults. See Debt crises
Deflation. See Money and value
Deployment period
see also Synergy phase; Maturity
phase
definition/description, 36, 135, 151–2
adequate financial innovations, 128–
32, 142–5
dates, 78
engines of growth, new, 44–5
era of ‘good feeling’, 26
institutional framework enabling, 17,
128–32
lagged across world, 10
mode of growth appropriate, 26
paradigm triumphant 44
production capital leading, 53–4,
154
recoupling
economy and institutions, 43–4
financial and production capital,
76
within the economy, 44, 61
reforms continuing, 53
single money economy, 62
social shaping of paradigm, 22, 42–
3, 53, 77, 153–4
structural tensions overcome, 47
two phases, 47–8, 74
Depressions. See Recessions and
depressions
Developing countries. See Peripheral
countries
Development
by surges, 20, 59
pulsating process, 145
uneven propagation, 60–67
Diffusion of paradigms. See Propagation
of techno-economic paradigms
Disaccumulation, 20

186
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Dosi, Giovanni
paradigm as Kuhnian analogy, 8
paradigm in restricted sense, 134
Economic development
uneven, 6, 20, 59, 60–7
Economic theories
phases of surges influencing, 161–3
shaped by economic changes, 146–7
state, role of, 162–3, 166
Edison, Thomas Alva, 29, 32, 92
Employment
full in synergy phase, 54
irruption phase unemployment, 49, 90
labor unrest in maturity phase, 45, 55
rising in deployment period, 44
stagflation, 146
Engels, Friedrich, 4, 25, 50
Evolutionary economics, 151
Exclusion-inclusion mechanism
causing revolutions, 16, 28, 32, 88–9
conservatism of, 34–5
Rosenberg and Frischtak condition,
32
war expenditure excepted, 28–9
Externalities
see also Infrastructures
consumer credit in fourth surge, 94
cost reduction helping growth, 135–6
economic, social and legal, 41–2
exclusion-inclusion mechanism, 16,
28, 88–9
increasing in synergy phase, 134
installed during Frenzy, 53, 114
over adaptation, 88
unavailable during irruption phase, 98
Financial and production capital
see also Financial capital; Production
capital
changing relationship with phases,
73–7, 152–3
decision criteria distinguished, 71–3,
124, 155
different functions and behaviors,
71–3, 121, 124, 154
financial and managerial capitalism,
127
functional separation, xvii, 6, 33, 155
profit motive as basic engine, 157
shifts of power
between propagation periods, 75,
114, 121, 123–4, 138, 151–2, 154,
156, 168
influence on economic theories,
161–3
Financial capital
see also Production capital; Financial
and production capital
bail outs, 104, 121, 122
behavior
basic, 72–3
shifting over phases, 74, 141,
152–3
Britain and France, similar foreign
investment bias, 58
creative destruction, role in, 75
criteria, 71–3, 124
definition, 71
financial crises, recurrent, 77–9
frenzy phase behavior, 99–113
decoupling, 75
economy controlled, 50, 75, 98,
124
excess self-confidence, 51, 168
illegitimate-illegal practices, 101,
106, 109–11, 142
money whirlpool, 107
over-funding the revolutionary
industries, 51, 105–7
profit delusion, 76, 115, 119, 137
Hilferding’s notion, 72
industry, not funded, 92, 122
innovative behavior changing
over phases, 138–43
with paradigms, 143–5
typology, 139
institutionalization, 92, 130
investment shifting to new, 21, 107
irruption phase behavior, 90–8
maturity phase behavior, 81–9
bad loans, 85–8
export during, 83
future debt build-up, 86, 142
idle money in, 49, 77
peripheral sector investment, 49,
55, 77, 83–4
questionable practices, 88
risk in new technologies, 33, 88
mobility, 72, 124
new paradigm, establishing, 47, 168
new technologies
new requirements met, 92, 93–4

187
Index
pioneer in adopting, 96
risk capital innovations, 91
venture capital, 3, 92, 118, 140
periphery, loans to, 87, 142
production capital
decoupling-recoupling, 75, 81,
98, 102, 111, 114, 127–31
different from, 72–3, 124, 155
shifts of power, 75, 114, 121,
123–4, 138, 151–2, 154, 156,
 168
profit expectations
excess, 3, 43, 51, 75, 77, 97–8,
106, 116
normal in synergy, 114, 113, 142
pressure on production capital,
75–6, 99, 115–6, 168–9
speculative innovations, 100, 139, 140
surges, enabling succession of, xviii,
154
synergy phase behavior, 76, 127–36
intermediary role, 76, 142
investment opportunities, 133–4
technological advance, role in, 73,
75, 107
technological revolutions, enabling,
xvii, 33–5, 73, 88–9
turning point behavior
regulation, attitude towards, 114–
15, 120–21
crashes and pressure for
regulation, 120
reluctant changeover to
production capital, 123–4, 168–9
windows of opportunity, 93
Financial crises. See Crises
Financial innovation
character changing with phases, 75,
138–43
irruption phase, risk, 73
paradigms shaping, 143–5
Financial Times, 106, 111, 118, 129
Ford, Henry, 3, 11, 32
Fordism, 17
Foreign investment
catching-up, role in, 104
changing with phases, 84–5
Forging ahead
during Irruption, 90–1
Japan, 58, 66, 103, 104
protectionism, 51
self-propelled, 85
sequence, not followed, 58, 59, 122–3
windows of opportunity, 21, 103, 104
USA and Germany, 12, 58, 63, 122
France, 58, 88, 97, 98, 103, 107, 122, 132
Freeman, Christopher
dating of technological revolutions,
10
disaggregate versus aggregate trends,
61
dynamic regularities, premises for,
151
institutional recomposition, 169
labor unrest recurring, 55, 136
long waves, 60, 63
relative autonomy of social spheres,
160
technological revolution, life cycle,
63
technology and financial collapses,
118
Frenzy phase
See also Bubbles; Crises; Installation
period.
definition/description, 47–8, 50–2,
74–6, 99–113, 152–3
asset inflation, 4, 43, 51, 77, 98, 102,
104
catching up opportunities, 103
competition fierce, 51, 76, 108–9
casino economy, 75, 116, 120, 142
corruption, 109–11, 141, 168
crashes at end of, 114
dates, 58, 78
decoupling from production, 75
diffusion acceleration, 36, 75
financial capital in control, 4, 50, 75,
98, 124
financial innovations, 100–01, 141–2
gilded age, 109
idle capital, 84, 100
infrastructure installed, 4, 51, 53,
125
Japan, early bubble in, 58
mergers and oligopolies towards end
of, 108–9
model and historical record, 58, 77–
8, 121–3
money whirlpool, 4, 75, 101–2, 107
new common sense established, 4
‘new economy’, xvii, 75, 100, 113,

188
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
115, 137, 159, 162
over-investment, 51, 106–7
paper and real economy tensions, 76,
111–13, 168–9
paradigm established, 47, 168
policy, influence on, 146–7, 165
profit delusion, 76, 115, 119, 137
propagation of technological
revolution, 43, 75, 105–7
prosperity biased, 99, 117, 135
redistribution of income, regressive,
116, 138
regulation
needed after, 129, 141, 142–3
rejected, 120
social tensions, 52, 100, 117, 154,
170
stagnation in old economy, 100, 102
structural causes of recession
following, 115–16
structural tensions built up during,
43, 115–18, 168–70
technological experimentation, 51,
75, 134
tension between financial and
production capital, 111
Galbraith, John Kenneth
debt repudiation by US states in
1830s, 142
British lending to US states in 1800s,
86
financiers, excess self-confidence,
51, 120
learning from crashes, 121
reinvention of financial instruments,
100–01, 103
Gay, Edwin F., 120, 158
Germany
catching-up, 85, 93
corruption, 110
financial capital, 92, 132
foreign investment, 83, 104
forging ahead, 11–12, 58, 103, 122
Hitler, 41
institutional innovation, 130
miracle, 66
protectionism, 51, 85
triple core in third surge, 10, 63–4
Synergy in 1930s, 125
Gestation of technological revolution,
10, 63, 65, 79, 81–9, 88–9
Gilded age. See Golden age
Globalized economy
current surge feature, 66–7, 134
financial innovations adapted to,
145
global oligopolies, 163
outflow of funds from periphery,
107
rich-poor divide global, 5, 117–18
Golden age
see also Synergy phase
description, 5, 53
gilded age, 51, 53, 76, 109
good feeling, 5, 26, 44, 53, 133
growth rates in, 26
production capital at the helm, 124,
154
social choice, 43, 53, 76, 167, 171
synergy phase as, 53
two or three decades after big-bang,
24
Maturity troubles, 46, 54, 55
Government action
see also State, role of
catching up support, 93
changing with phases, 163
changing with paradigms, 145–7,
163–6
Chile in second surge, 102
economic theories, 162–3, 166
protectionism, 51, 93, 130
Great surges of development
see also Propagation of techno-
economic paradigms
definition /description, 7, 20
dates parallel periods, 57
driving forces, 151–8
financial and production capital
changing roles, 71–7
financial capital, 74
global reach increasing with each, 155
long waves, 23
mid-life crises, 136
model based on, 23
overlaps and gaps, 56
periods and phases, 36–7, 47–59,
151–2
policy influenced by phases, 146–7
productivity rising with each, 8, 20,
152

189
Index
six phase model, 63, 65, 154–5
Greenspan, Alan, 118–9, 162
Grübler, Arnulf, 85, 86
Heilbroner, Robert L., 162
Hilferding, Rudolf, 72
Hitler, Adolf, 41, 117, 125
Hobsbawm, Eric, 46, 58, 65, 117, 163
Hoover Report, 107, 120, 159
Idle money
decreasing investment opportunities,
49, 77, 81–2, 85–8
different from Maturity, 83–4, 100
innovation helped by, 75, 88–9
leading to debt crises, 85–8
real estate bubbles, 101
speculation, 100
venture and risk capital, 33
Income polarization See Social
polarization
Induced branches, 133, 169–70
Industrial Revolution, 11, 14, 18, 37, 91-
2
Industry See Core industries; New and
old industries
Inflation and deflation. See money and
value
Information revolution, xvii, 11, 14, 18,
24, 144–5, 146, 167, 169
Infrastructures
see also Externalities
cost reduction virtuous cycle, 135–6
frenzy phase 53, 114
installation of, 53, 114
over-funding, 105–7
new for each technological
revolution, 13–15
Innovations
acceleration perverse in frenzy
phase, 108
clusters, 155
diminishing returns, 75
epochal, 9
equipment and whole industries
made obsolescent, 97–8
exclusion-inclusion by paradigm, 28
exhaustion of established paradigm
as stimulus for radical, 34
financial, 100, 138–45
financing, changing with surges, 136
institutional for new economy, 145–7
natural trajectories, 29
outsiders, crucial role in radical, 33
possible, profitable and socially
acceptable, 33
potentially revolutionary in minor
uses, 32
radical pioneers on their own, 91–2
radical, 29, 32
regulatory, 128–30
relative autonomy of science and
technology, 155
Schumpeter and cycles, 23
synergy phase, 134–6
technological, for financial services,
96, 100, 139
technology as fuel of capitalist
engine, 155
three spheres of change in socio-
economic system, 156
Installation period
see also; Frenzy phase; Irruption
phase;
definition/description, 36–7, 47–8,
135, 151
catching up, 66, 103–5
coexistence of two moneys, 61
coexistence of two paradigms, 43
dates, 56–8, 78
decoupling/recoupling
institutions and economy, xviii,
41–3, 99
new and old paradigm, 12, 43
paper and real economy, 111–13,
115
within economy, 39–41, 61
default recurring, 86–7, 102–03
Deployment, different from, 44
financial and production capital, 74
inflation/deflation, 61–2
institutional changes during, 131
labor unrest, 55, 70
laissez faire, 146
mid-point crisis, 98
‘modernity’ established, 133
paradigm ready for diffusion, 114,
134
political cleavage, 164–5
social exploration of paradigm, 105,
135, 141
structural tensions growing, 52, 157–8

190
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
triple core in third surge, 63–4
US Gilded Age, 51
USA and Germany, forging ahead, 58
Institutional adjustment See Institutional
recomposition
Institutional change
adapted to paradigm changes, 145–7
inertia, positive function, 157
three spheres in reciprocal action, 156
Institutional recomposition
see also Socio-institutional
frameworks
continuing in deployment period, 53
financial and production capital, 124,
154
lessons of historical parallels, 163–4,
169–70
premature market saturation,
overcoming, 117, 169–70
resistance to reform as cause of
crisis, 25, 125–6
turning point as crossroads for, 43,
52, 167
wide range of the possible, 7, 17, 24,
42, 53
Institutions. See Socio-Institutional
Frameworks
Intel, 3, 11
Internet,
mania bubble, 7, 28, 51, 79, 106,
118, 120
infrastructure fifth surge, 14
technology system, 15
new paradigm, 15, 42, 94, 159
over-investment, 108
Investment. See Financial Capital;
Production Capital; Stock
Markets
Irrational exuberance, 3, 106, 118, 162
Irruption phase
see also Big-Bang events;
Installation period
definition/ description, 47, 48, 49–
50, 73–5, 90–98, 153
aggregate measures deceptive, 90
coexistence of two paradigms, 90
crises less likely, 79
dates, 11, 56–7, 78
decoupling between new and old, 39,
49–50, 90
development in periphery, 90–91, 140
divergence in politics, 50
financial capital, 90–98
financial innovations, intense, 91–3,
140–41
investment in technological
revolution, 84, 91–3
new technology for finance, 96, 140
overlaps of successive revolutions,
89, 90
opportunity explosion, 90, 92
productivity expectations rising, 97
profit expectations, 97–8
redeployment of old industries to
periphery, 154–5
rejuvenation of mature technologies,
66
risk and venture capital, 91–3, 140
unemployment, 49
Italy, 66, 97
Japan
early Frenzy in fifth surge, 58, 101
forging ahead, 104, 103
organizational innovation, 66, 39, 95
recession, 118
Jevons, William Stanley, 54
Keynes, John Maynard
countercyclical policies, 25
historical context, influence of, 162
investment, concern over control of,
124
Keynesian policies, 121, 130, 146
private and social interest, 157–8
slump, dangers of, 167
Kindleberger, Charles P.
country banks in first Synergy, 132
developing countries, lending to, 86,
88
financial crises, dates, 78
financial crises, model, 79
historical context, influence of, 161
illegal financial activities, 101, 107,
110
learning from crashes, 121
Kondratiev barrier, 85
Kondratiev, Nikolai, 23, 60, 62, 63
Korea, 66, 93, 104
Kuhn, Thomas, 17, 28, 31
Kuhnian notion of paradigm, 8, 9
Kuznets, Simon, 9–10, 27, 30

191
Index
Labor unrest
see also Social unrest; Social
polarization
Installation and Maturity compared,
55
in maturity phase, 45–6
strike waves, 55, 136
Latin America, 86–8, 102, 103
List, Friedrich, 85
Long waves
see also Great surges of development
growth statistics, 23
different approaches, 60
Freeman and Louçã, 60
decrease in profit rates hypothesis, 81
research program shortcomings, 60
world synchronicity expected, 62–3
Louçã, Francisco
dynamic regularities, premises for,
151
labor unrest recurring, 55, 136
long waves, 60, 63
Manias, 106–7
See also Bubbles; Crises; Frenzy
phase
Markets
see also Stock markets
coherence in relative prices needed,
113
consumption expanding in synergy
phase, 54
exports as outlets, 22
interest in widening, 5, 114, 123–4
premature saturation, 52, 116, 169
saturation, 54, 55, 75, 94
structural imbalance, 43, 116,
Mass-production revolution, 7, 11, 14,
15, 17, 18, 42, 143–4, 145, 169–70
Mature industries
fixed investment as weight, 31
migration to peripheries, 49, 55, 77,
154
price behavior, 62, 90
rationalization, 94, 154
stretching technologies, 31, 39, 88
stagnation, 49
Mature technologies
behavior of firms, 31, 81–3
Grüblers’s Kondratiev barrier, 85
last life cycles short, 54, 81, 85
limits to growth, 54–5
migration to periphery, 64–6, 83
revitalized by new paradigm, 31, 95
Maturity phase
see also Deployment period;
definition/description, 30, 47, 48,
54–6, 74, 77, 81–9, 136–7
crises likely, 79
dates, 78, 56–7
debt build-up, 86
delusion of eternal progress, 137
financial capital, 81–9
financial innovations, 142–3
four phases of propagation, 151
golden age twilight, 54
growth and markets in periphery, 45,
55, 64, 65,77, 83–5
idle money, 77, 81–2, 85–8
institutional inertia, 157
limits to growth, 77
loans to weaker creditors, 86
market control maneuvers, 82
market saturation, 44, 55, 81
oligopolies, 62, 82–3, 136
opportunities narrowing, 136
overlaps of successive revolutions,
89, 90
paradigm exhaustion, 44
political rebellion versus
complacency, 55, 137
social unrest, 45–6, 55
wars during, 28–9, 82–3
Mensch, Gerhard, 32, 33
Mergers. See Competition
Metaparadigm
techno-economic paradigm as, 8
Migrations
capital
idle money, 49
speculative in Frenzy, 84
tied to production in Maturity, 49,
55, 77, 84
frenzy phase, 5, 50, 84
people, 5, 50, 170
maturity phase, 49, 55, 77
skilled personnel, 93
Minsky, Hyman, xv, xviii, 79, 110, 160
Mismatch. See Decoupling-recoupling
Model of development by surges
see also Capitalism; Great surges of
development; Financial and

192
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Production capital
summary, 151–7
abstraction level, 160–61
causal mechanisms, xvii, 6, 49, 59,
155–7
determinism, 53, 160
early warning tool, 166
forging ahead modifies, 58–9
fuzzy due to diffusion lags, 67, 160
general framework and individual
events, 160–61
heuristic device, 49, 161
hindsight, 90
interdisciplinary nature of, 160
long wave models, difference with,
60
model and real world, 56
narrative and historical illustrations,
49
nature, xv, xix
policy guidance, 163–6
politics changing, 164–5
power and dangers of recurrence
interpretation, 159–61
predictive ability, 163
private and social interest, 157–8
progress not linear and cumulative, 20
recurrence and uniqueness, xvii, 6,
56–9, 121–3, 127–32, 159
recurring sequence, 5–6, 56–9, 152–4
sequence not mechanical, 123
six phase model, 65, 154–5
strong stylization, 59
structural imbalances, 43
technology and finance, xviii
three spheres interacting, 155–7
turning point as conceptual device, 52
use, 6–7, 49, 160, 166
Modernization, 98
across the economy, 6, 8, 15, 36, 44,
134, 151, 152, 155
habit breaking, 4
generic technologies, 39
new technology for finance, 91, 139–
40
peripheral countries, 65, 66
political, 50, 165–6
rejuvenation of industries, 85, 94–5,
99
replacement and upgrading, 4
restructuring helped by
 externalities, 51, 135
superiority forcing, 49
Modes of growth
see also; Institutional recomposition;
Turning point
description/definition, 25
Marxian mode of production, 25
variety in same paradigm, 7, 17, 24,
42, 125
technological revolution, second half
shaped by, 53, 125–6, 167
turning point, 53, 167
Money and value
asset inflation, 51, 102
constant-value measurements
difficult, 61–2
economic theory, changing views, 6,
18–19, 161–2
hyperinflation, 113
inflation-deflation, 39, 61–2, 113
long-term statistics doubtful, 62
mad money, 99
notions of value lost, 75, 112–13
perverse price behavior, 50
productivities and relative values, 112
single money in Deployment, 62, 127
stagflation 1980s, 75, 146
two moneys, 61, 112
Morgan, J.P., 92, 123
NAFTA, 66
NASDAQ, 106, 119–20
Natural trajectories of innovation, 29
Nelson, Richard
evolutionary economics, 151
natural trajectory, 29
New and old economies
see also New economy
institutional innovations, 145–7
latecomer economies, 105
stagnating sectors during Frenzy, 102
two productivity levels, two-moneys,
112
New and old industries
see also Core industries; Mature
industries
chasm during frenzy phase, 99
installation of paradigms,
competition during, 40
mergers and oligopolies during
frenzy phase, 108–9

193
Index
old industries and infrastructures
redefined, 13
New economics, 146–7
New economy
illusion of, xvii, 7, 100, 113, 115,
137, 159, 162, 145
real change, 4, 43, 75, 112, 144, 145–6
Nietzsche, Friedrich, xv, 22
Oil crisis, xv, 12, 95, 168
Old economies. See New and old
economies
Old industries. See New and old
industries
Oligopolies. See Competition
Opportunity explosion, 90, 92
Organizational change, 9, 16–19
see also Techno-economic
paradigms
activities non-economic, 17–19
financial sector prefiguring, 96
Japanese developments in fifth
surge, 95
networks versus pyramids, 17–19
technological revolutions, involving,
8–9, 15
paradigms, organizational, 17
Over adaptation
conservative force, 30–31, 42
established paradigm, 60–61, 88
Over-investment 51, 106–07
Palma, Gabriel, 102, 103, 112
Panics. See Bubbles; Crises
Paper and real economy, xviii, 43, 76,
77, 114, 125, 138
Paradigm shifts, 12, 15, 36
see also Techno-economic
paradigms
in industry, 37–8
political cleavage, 164–5
social creative destruction, 42–3
tensions and instability, 113
windows of opportunity, 21, 103–5
Paradigms. See Techno-economic
paradigms
Peripheral countries
see also Core countries;
catching up in installation period,
66–7, 103–05
debt crises, 102
default recurring, 86–8
demand growth potential, 116, 169
growth ‘miracles’ in irruption phase,
90
idle capital going to, 84
loan fever at Maturity, 86–8
mature technologies, 66, 83, 102–03
outflow of funds from, 107
paradigm diffusion delayed, 62–6,
154–5
Soros, credit insurance for, 165
‘undeveloping’, 163
USA in 1820-1830s, 104–05
windows of opportunity, 66, 93, 103
Pigou, Arthur, C., 6, 161
Polarization See Social polarization
Politics
cleavage in political groups, 164–5
ideological bewilderment, 50
individualism in frenzy phase, 51
influence factor at Turning point,
115, 123–4, 126
legitimacy and governance
questioned, 41
maturity phase, 137
mutual influence with technology, 19
rebels versus complacency in, 55
social expectations frustrated, 5, 55,
136–7
turning point intervention, 124
Premature market saturation, 52, 116, 169
Production capital
see also Financial capital; Financial
and production capital
definition, 71–2
behavior, basic, 72, 152–3
concentration in maturity phase, 82,
94
controlling the economy in
deployment period, 123–4
criteria for expansion, 114, 127, 135,
152
deployment, role in, 154
financial capital
decoupling-recoupling, 75, 81,
98, 102, 111, 114, 127–31
different from, 72–3, 124, 155
shifts of power, 75, 114, 121,
123–4, 138, 151–2, 154, 156, 168
Idle money profits, 77, 94
incumbent conservative, 73

194
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
knowledge, activity specific, 72, 73
long terms interests, 154
migrating when mature, 77
new and old, 75, 97–8, 99–100
paper values and real economy, 43,
111–12, 114, 125, 138
power seeking behavior in Maturity,
82
pressure from stock markets, 75–6,
99, 115–16, 168–9
risk taking for rejuvenation, 94
self-financing, 128
stagflation during propagation of
next paradigm, 75
synergy phase, 76, 127–37
Productivity explosions, xvii, 51
Productivity
average higher with each surge, 8,
20, 152
constriction of growth, 30, 44–5, 55,
81, 136
deployment period, normal growth,
44
differing levels, 39
expectations, 97
growing across the economy, 54
resistance to change overcome by
higher, 38
Propagation of techno-economic
paradigms
see also Great surges of
development
description, 36–46
acceleration in frenzy phase, 108
‘common sense’
guiding diffusion, 29
pioneers developing, 16
common sense spreading, 16, 157
consumer learning, 41
convergence and divergence, 64–5
cultural change, 156–7
decoupling and recoupling periods,
41–6
deployment periods, 44
externalities and diffusion loops, 41–
2
exclusion-inclusion mechanism, 16,
28, 42, 88–9
financial sector leading geographic
expansion, 96
four phases of propagation, 47–59
proportion small during Irruption,
97–8
great surges, diffusion by, 20
innovation during synergy phases,
134–6
institutional framework enabling, 17,
42, 131–2
isomorphism, 16
lagged across world, 10, 62–7, 160
last products and industries, 81
periods of installation and
deployment, 36, 41–6
paradigms as guide for economic
agents, 9
phases in life cycle, 29–30
polarization, social and economic,
37–41
productivity, higher levels, 44, 51
recessions as turning points, 36, 43
sectoral and geographic, 61–2
two paradigms during installation, 43
superior technology, inevitable
triumph, 38
Rationalization. See Mature industries
Recessions and depressions
see also Turning point
bubble burst followed by, 76
causes, structural, 115–16, 168–70
decrease in profit rates hypothesis, 81
financial capital’s time of reckoning,
76
Great Depression 1930s, persistence
of, 125
institutional change, pressure for, 25
institutions, role in, 156
recoupling forced by, 158
resistance to change prolonging,
125–6
structural causes of, 115-16
Recoupling. See Decoupling-recoupling
Recurrence
frame of reference to distinguish
uniqueness, 159
testing for, 159
unique factors hiding, 6
Regulatory frameworks
acceptance-resistance, 51, 76, 114,
120, 121, 129
accountancy and disclosure, 129
crashes and pressure for, 120

195
Index
deregulatory pressures, 146
facilitating propagation of
paradigms, 42
global regulation, call for, 113
information revolution,
requirements, 24
synergy phase, 128–32
turning point, 114–26
Reinert, Erik, 22, 96, 163
Risk and venture capital, 3, 92, 119–20,
139–40
diffusion reducing risk perception, 97
irruption phase, 91–3
new entrepreneurs backed, 33, 92,
139–40
Roosevelt, F.D., 41, 126
Schmoller, Gustav, 159
Schumpeter, Joseph
aggregate variables, 61
bandwagon effects, 34
capitalism, 72
clustering, 27, 30
creative destruction, 22, 37
cycles, 23
entrepreneurs and financiers xviii,
33, 71
government action and market
mechanisms, 25
institutional innovation, 131
market equilibrium, 23
price competition, excess of, 108
Schumpeterians, xviii
September 11th, 118, 168
Sobel, Robert, 54
illegitimate practice, 140
international investment, 104, 105
power of financiers, 53, 58, 92, 123,
126, 143
State funding, 93
USA prosperity, 54
Wall Street subdued in 1947 boom,
128
Social polarization, 4–5, 37–41
see also Decoupling-recoupling
between countries in Installation
period, 63–4
global in fifth surge, 107
opposing visions during Frenzy
prosperity, 99–100, 113
political tension, 41, 117, 170
pressure to reverse, 41, 124
rich and poor, 41, 43, 50, 100, 117
technological revolutions leading to,
39
Social shaping of technological
revolutions, 22, 42, 53, 77, 153–4
Social unrest
see also Labor unrest; Social
polarization
political forms varied, 41
recurring problems of governance, 26
Socio institutional frameworks
see also Institutional recomposition;
Regulatory frameworks;
creative destruction, institutional, 154
inertia, 6, 26, 153–4, 155, 157, 165
innovations adequate to new
economy, 145–7
isomorphism economy-institutions,
157
mismatch with economy, xviii, 26,
43, 99
paradigm changes in political ideas,
164
rhythm of change, 26, 165–6
surges of development, 152
wide range possible for each
revolution, 7, 17, 42, 53
Soete, Luc
catching up, 21, 31, 90–91, 103
new Economics, 146
Soros, George, 111, 113, 118, 165, 171
Soviet system
adequate for mass-production
paradigm, 7, 17, 42
catching up, 103
Cold War, 128
rejuvenation mechanism lacking, 35,
66
Spheres of change, 155–7
Stagflation. See Money and value
State, role of, 121, 157–8
see also Government action;
Institutional recomposition;
Regulatory frameworks; Socio-
institutional frameworks
accepted, 126
backing catching-up processes, 93,
104
collective interest, 52, 130, 157–8
facilitating technological revolution,

196
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
7, 130
markets, 25, 39, 146, 163
theories changing with phases, 146–
7, 162–3
turning point intervention, 25, 125,
156, 158
Welfare State, 166
Stock markets
see also Financial capital; Bubbles;
Crises
after crises, 122
asset inflation, 100, 101–2
corruption in frenzy phase, 109
‘derivative economy’, 111–12
Dow Jones and US GDP, 112
fundamentals set aside, 101, 107
global regulation, call for, 113
illegal-illegitimate practices, 109–11
innovations, 138–43
investment firms in frenzy phase,
119–20
paper values divorced from real
economy, 43, 111–12
pressure on production capital, 75–6,
99, 115–16, 168–9
pyramids and leverage, 100–01
revival in irruption phase, 50
risk capital instruments, 91–2, 139–40
synergy phase, 127
New York versus London, 58, 140–41
Strange, Susan
casino capitalism, 99, 165
corruption and illegality, 109, 110
innovation in finance, 96, 100
regulation and finance, 113
Structural adjustment. See Institutional
recomposition
Structural causes of mid-surge
recession, 52, 115–18, 168–70
Surge. See Great surges of development
Sweezy Paul, 85
Synergy phase
see also Deployment period; Golden
age
definition/description, 47, 48, 53–4,
74, 76, 127–37
benefits of growth widespread, 133
capitalism best face, 5, 53, 133
coherent trends within economy, 62,
127
cost reduction virtuous cycle, 135–6
crises likelihood of, 79
dates, 78
economies of scale, 53
employment, full, 54
externalities, 134
financial capital backs production
capital, 76, 128–31
golden age, 5, 43, 46, 53, 76, 154
growth during, 134
income redistribution, 54
induced activities, 133–4, 169–170
innovations
financial, 128–32, 142–3
institutional, 131–3
technological 134–6
investment concentrated in core, 64
new paradigm generalized, 54
production a time for, 5, 53, 133–6
regulation accepted, 128–31
social choice, 43, 53, 76, 167, 171
technology, role for, 133–6
third surge in USA, 123, 127
Taiwan, 66
Techno-economic paradigms
see also Propagation of techno-
economic paradigms
definition/description, 7, 8–9, 15–16,
125, 151–3
articulation in irruption phase, 50
closure, 35
coexistence of two, 43, 56, 90
common sense new, 7, 15, 16, 26
deep adoption, 32
different principles for, 18
economic theories influenced by,
146–7
exclusion-inclusion mechanism, 26
financial innovations shaped, 143–5
generalized in synergy phase, 54
generic technologies, 16
guide for
economic agents, 9, 17, 27–8, 134
viable policy, 7
habit breaking, 7
life trajectory, 29–30
limits of, as guidelines to search new
technologies, 31
limits showing at maturity, 54
locking-in of dominant designs, 134
maturity, 136

197
Index
modernization, 152
organizational principles, 15, 17, 19
outsiders as radical innovators, 32
overadaptation
as conservative force, 30–31, 42
revolutions as result, 61, 31–2
socio-economic environment, 88
politics and ideologies, influence on,
164, 165
process innovations, 135
propelling and inhibiting functions,
19, 42, 153–4
social cost of change, 26
social shaping of, 42, 77
surges of development, 152
Techno-economic split, 48–9
Technological revolutions
see also Great surges of
development; Techno-economic
paradigms
definition/description, 8, 9–15, 151–3
articulation, 33–4
attractor for diffusion, 11
bifurcation of production structure, 90
big-bang and financial manias, 3
clusters of entrepreneurship, 31
coexistence with previous one, 56, 90
core industries and infrastructure,
13–15, 63
dates, 56–7
diffusion, xix, 7, 8, 19, 77
double nature, 8–9, 15, 151
emergence conditions plus random
factors, 56
ending dates not significant, 12
financial capital
love affair, 73, 91–3
role in emergence, 33–5, 88–9
five historical occurrences, 9–15, 57
institutional and economic
facilitators, 41–2, 128–32
institutional framework enabling, 17
life cycle, 29–30, 36, 63, 152–3
limits to potential, 30
maturity phase setting stage for, 55–6
mismatch with institutions, xviii, 26,
43, 99
new economy, xvii, 4, 112, 145–6,
opportunity explosion, 90, 92
phases of propagation, 48, 74
politics, 19
propagation by surges, 20, 23, 151
recurring financial crises, 78
regulation adapted to, 23–5, 145–7,
170
social assimilation, prolonged, xvii,
22–7, 152–3
social shaping of, 22, 42–3, 53, 77,
153–4
technical change continuous and
discontinuous, 27, 73
technology systems, successive, 15
turning point at mid-potential, 114,
123, 167, 169–70
typical structure and size of firm
changing, 109
The Economist, 118
Third world. See Peripheral countries
Toporowski, Jan
asset inflation, 98, 51, 102
eras of finance, 99
Turning point
See also Institutional
recomposition; Recessions-
depressions
definition/description, 36, 47, 52–3,
76, 114–26, 151, 154
dates, 57
depression of 1930s, 125–6
individual and social interests, 52
institutional recomposition, 43, 48
lessons of historical parallels, 163–4,
169–70
paradigm ready for deployment, 114
political factors, 26, 126, 163–6,
170–71
politics involved, 126
premature market saturation, 116–17,
169–70
production capital, power to, 123–4,
154
recession after bubble collapse, 47,
114
recognition of, 163
regulation acceptance, 5, 52–3, 120–
21
social unrest, 52, 117, 124
structural tensions to overcome, 47,
52, 115–18, 168–70
time of indetermination, 53
wide range of the possible, 24, 53
Tylecote, Andrew, 10, 133

198
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital
Unemployment. See Employment
USA
catching-up, 85, 103, 104
core country, 11, 14, 18, 47, 57, 78,
87, 127–8
corruption, 110, 140
crises, 88, 98, 120, 122, 123
debt defaults in 19th Century, 102
decoupling economy, 40
depression 1930s, prolonged, 125–6
Dow Jones compared to GDP, 112
financial capital, 92, 142, 143
foreign investment, 83–5
forging ahead, 11–12, 58, 85, 103, 122
fourth surge, production migrating to
peripheries, 64
frenzy phase, 101
Gilded Age, 51
high tech versus traditional economy,
40
irruption phase, 49
New Deal, 41, 126
oligopolies, 82
post-war golden age, 53, 128
Progressive Era, 53, 159
protectionism, 51
regulation, 130–31, 132, 143
state supported catching-up, 93
triple core in third surge, 10, 63–4
Value. See Money and value
Veblen, Thorstein, 4, 50, 71, 162
Wars
cold war and technology, 28–9
excluded from analytical model, 83,
160
forging ahead after, 58, 122
maturity phase, 82
Second World War
dress rehearsal for post-war role
of state in economy accepted,
121, 126
Synergy, 126
technology and war expenditures,
82–3
Wells, David A., 38, 61, 94, 95, 97, 108,
159
Wells, Louis T., Jr., 64
Windows of opportunity, 66, 93, 103
Winter Sydney
evolutionary economics, 151
natural trajectory, 29

