Citation: Yago Malo, J.; Lepori, L.;
Gentini, L.; Chiofalo, M.L. Atomic
Quantum Technologies for Quantum
Matter and Fundamental Physics
Applications. Technologies 2024, 12, 64.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
technologies12050064
Academic Editor: Bharat S. Rawal
Received: 6 January 2024
Revised: 18 March 2024
Accepted: 26 April 2024
Published: 7 May 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
technologies
Review
Atomic Quantum Technologies for Quantum Matter and
Fundamental Physics Applications
Jorge Yago Malo 1,2,*
, Luca Lepori 3,4,†
, Laura Gentini 1,†
and Maria Luisa (Marilù) Chiofalo 1,2,*
1
Department of Physics, University of Pisa, Largo Bruno Pontecorvo 3, 56126 Pisa, Italy;
laura.gentini@df.unipi.it
2
INFN, Pisa Section, Largo Bruno Pontecorvo 3, 56126 Pisa, Italy
3
Department of Mathematical, Physical, and Computer Science, University of Parma, Parco Area delle Scienze
53/A, 43124 Parma, Italy; luca.lepori@unipr.it
4
INFN, Gruppo Collegato di Parma, Parco Area delle Scienze 7/A, 43124 Parma, Italy
*
Correspondence: jorge.yago@unipi.it (J.Y.M.); marilu.chiofalo@unipi.it (M.L.C.)
†
These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract: Physics is living an era of unprecedented cross-fertilization among the different areas of
science. In this perspective review, we discuss the manifold impact that state-of-the-art cold and
ultracold-atomic platforms can have in fundamental and applied science through the development
of platforms for quantum simulation, computation, metrology and sensing. We illustrate how the
engineering of table-top experiments with atom technologies is engendering applications to under-
stand problems in condensed matter and fundamental physics, cosmology and astrophysics, unveil
foundational aspects of quantum mechanics, and advance quantum chemistry and the emerging field
of quantum biology. In this journey, we take the perspective of two main approaches, i.e., creating
quantum analogues and building quantum simulators, highlighting that independently of the ulti-
mate goal of a universal quantum computer to be met, the remarkable transformative effects of these
achievements remain unchanged. We wish to convey three main messages. First, this atom-based
quantum technology enterprise is signing a new era in the way quantum technologies are used for
fundamental science, even beyond the advancement of knowledge, which is characterised by truly
cross-disciplinary research, extended interplay between theoretical and experimental thinking, and
intersectoral approach. Second, quantum many-body physics is unavoidably taking center stage
in frontier’s science. Third, quantum science and technology progress will have capillary impact on
society, meaning this effect is not confined to isolated or highly specialized areas of knowledge, but
is expected to reach and have a pervasive influence on a broad range of society aspects: while this
happens, the adoption of a responsible research and innovation approach to quantum technologies
is mandatory, to accompany citizens in building awareness and future scaffolding. Following on
all the above reflections, this perspective review is thus aimed at scientists active or interested in
interdisciplinary research, providing the reader with an overview of the current status of these wide
fields of research where cold and ultracold-atomic platforms play a vital role in their description
and simulation.
Keywords: atom-based quantum technologies; condensed matter and fundamental physics; open
quantum systems; quantum biology; responsible research and innovation
1. Introduction
The controllable manipulation and characterization of quantum matter have a wide range
of potential applications. Over the years, the horizon of these applications has been moved far
beyond that originally motivating the development of quantum simulators, like for example
the simulation of yet non-well understood condensed-matter phenomena that were hard to
investigate in their native media. Since then, applications have bloomed in many directions,
including the creation of quantum simulators for fundamental physics and cosmology [1],
Technologies 2024, 12, 64. https://doi.org/10.3390/technologies12050064
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/technologies

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
2 of 124
the design of devices for precision measurements in quantum sensing and communications [2],
or the development of high-fidelity qubits for quantum computers [3]. In particular, quantum
computers constitute the application that could have the farthest-reaching impacts: despite
them being still in their early development, they could enable the design of molecules for
medicine, biology, and agronomy, as well as the creation of energetically efficient materials,
and simulation of complex systems for applications in finance or artificial intelligence [3]. If the
first quantum revolution has led to the development of powerful miniaturized devices and
influenced culture, art, and philosophy in the 20th century, the second revolution could deeply
transform economy, labor market, and day-to-day use of devices with novel capabilities.
Quantum many-body physics is a crucial area of study that underpins quantum
technologies (QT) in an interdisciplinary, transversal, and global manner, given that its
underlying theory represents the scaffolding for a number of technological platforms and
experiments. Quantum many-body physics draws from atomic physics to model and
compute microscopic interactions, while it relies on the unifying and foundational concepts
of broken symmetry and conservation laws [4] to understand the emergence of different
quantum states of matter. In fact, while system symmetries can be possibly reduced by
tuning a number of knobs, different (quantum) states of matter set in and - irrespective of
details - the well-known conservation laws are preserved with the many-particles traits
ensured by thermodynamic and statistical mechanics. It is therefore not surprising that the
corresponding concepts and methods of many-particle physics are shared with, and often
essential to, high-energy physics problems like the quark-gluons matter in the Quantum
Chromo-Dynamics (QCD) phase diagram, nuclear physics quests like the equation of
state of neutron stars [5], and even biological problems [6–8]. In fact, quantum simulation
technologies, in both their theoretical and experimental joined development, open a wide
research space where universe-related problems can be investigated to some extent in the
four squared meters size of the optical table in a QT laboratory.
So, what is a quantum simulator and how quantum technologies are making this
concept accessible? Quantum simulators, as proposed by Richard Feynman [9], involve
the mapping of a quantum system that is to be understood by means of an experiment or
simulation performed with another highly controllable quantum system. In order to achieve
this task, two approaches can generally be addressed: creating quantum analogues and
building quantum simulators. The former involves the design of an analogy between two
(quantum) systems, to explore common features and learn through associative creativity.
The latter involves the encoding of specific microscopic system Hamiltonians in a quantum
platform that is highly controllable, in what can be seen as a specific type of quantum
computation. The boundary between the two methods is often blurred, since paradigmatic
model Hamiltonians, as the Ising or the Hubbard model just to mention two of them, can
be used to either create an analog simulation or to code microscopic quantum problems.
Different platforms for quantum technologies are being developed in parallel, involving
scientific research institutions and companies [10–12], as for example IonQ [13] and Alpine
Quantum Computing [14] for trapped ions plaforms; Quera [15], Planqc [16] and Pasqal [17]
for neutral atoms ones; or Atom Computing for nuclear spin qubit realization [18]; while
instead some companies like Zapata Computing [19] focus on cross-platform applications
like Generative AI. In fact, this field of research represents one of the most intersectoral
worldwide technological efforts.
The state-of-the-art science that can be addressed with cold and ultracold-atom based
technology platforms, is the focus of the present review.
Atom-based quantum technologies have proven to be useful in simulating quantum-
matter systems that would otherwise be inaccessible or difficult to control, working as a
rich test-bed for creating quantum analogies, quantum simulators but also as quantum
sensors and computers, albeit with varying levels of efficacy [20]. Numerous paradig-
matic implementations of condensed-matter physics problems include the crossover from
a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS)-type [21] superconductivity/superfluidity to a Bose-
Einstein condensation (BEC) of composite bosons, relevant for high-temperature supercon-

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
3 of 124
ductivity [22–24], the transition from superfluidity to Mott insulator states [25,26], systems
frustrated by different incommensurabilities [27,28], quantum simulators for fermionic
systems [29–31], topological phases [32], or the entirely new concept of many-body local-
ization [33,34]. These latter implementations involve the breaking of the ergodic thermal
hypothesis with the exploration of quantum phase transitions in open, driven-dissipative,
out-of-equilibrium quantum systems, in turn connecting with the idea of dissipation en-
gineering [35,36]. These non-exhaustive list of condensed-matter physics applications
highlights the power of QTs, that can be transferred to diverse applied fields, as discussed
in this review.
Indeed, atom-based quantum technologies also hold great promise for addressing
problems in fundamental physics. Here, our understanding relies on four fundamental
theories, Quantum mechanics and the Standard Model of particle physics, General relativity
and the Standard model of cosmology. Despite the successes of these theories in the
corresponding domains, a unified description has yet to be found that can encompass all
phenomena across the more than 40 orders of magnitude from the atomic to the astrophysics
and cosmology length scales. Fundamental questions remain, including the behavior
of General relativity at the atomic level and the possible existence of additional forces,
the nature of Dark matter and, at the quantum scale, the measurement problem and the
quantum to classical crossover. The reconciliation of Quantum Mechanics with General
Relativity stands as an unresolved problem, which may require modifications to one or
both theories.
For instance, as we discuss in this review, the BCS-BEC crossover is relevant to the
low-temperature region of the QCD phase diagram from color-superconductivity to quark
confinement in the baryon formation [5], as well as the equation of state for quark matter
and for neutrons in neutron stars, where adimensional values for the scattering length and
effective range of the interactions are similar to those in certain atomic gases [5]. Addition-
ally, gravity is being explored as an effective theory in superfluids [37,38], including the
observation of Hawking radiation and temperature in acoustic black holes [39,40], and high-
lighting the geometric nature of these concepts [41]. These are some relevant examples of
the role that quantum simulation can play in the understanding of these theories. However,
the applicability of QT does not end there.
In recent years in fact, quantum metrology has emerged as a new paradigm [2] for
testing general relativity and for accurately measuring fundamental constants [42–47]. This
field has seen a variety of applications, including tests of the equivalence principle using
atomic interferometry [48], measuring gravity at micrometer distances with an atomic
pendulum [49], and detecting gravitational waves at intermediate frequencies [50], that are
not accessible to LIGO-VIRGO. The use of non-classical states of matter, such as squeezed
or many-body entangled states, has also been proposed as a way to reduce quantum
uncertainty in interferometers [2]. Atomic clocks have also seen significant progress in
recent years, with best-performing clocks failing only half a second in the age of the
universe [51]. With the ability to keep cold molecules coherent over hundreds of microns,
researchers are beginning to envision table-top experiments that could explore the fabric of
spacetime [51]. Quantum metrology has also found applications in testing the foundations
of quantum mechanics at the border with general relativity [52], and in exploring the
hypothesis of ultra-light scalar-bosons for dark matter [50,53].
While quantum technologies were born within atomic-molecular-optics physics and
condensed matter, they have now progressively become a modern research domain relevant
for disciplines from computer science to engineering and life sciences, and have as well
attracted worldwide efforts aimed at qualified outreach tools and responsible research
and innovation concerns. These active fields of research are linked in the present review.
In particular, quantum technologies form the foundation for quantum computers, which
have become a reality with the development of Noisy Intermediate scale Quantum (NISQ)
devices [3]. The applications of these technologies are vast and ever-growing, ranging from
quantum-communication protocols, or the design of drugs, fertilizers, and environment-

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
4 of 124
friendly materials, to model complex phenomena in fields like artificial intelligence, finance,
and logistics [3]. The research in this field involves many leading groups in scientific
institutions and numerous companies, making it one of the most intersectoral and inter-
disciplinary endeavour to date in science and technology. While many challenges are still
ahead in terms of size, circuit depth or qubit robustness against decoherence, the emergence
of such problems has also fostered the collaboration across fields and led to the exploration
of new paradigms, such as topological protection, and even seeking inspiration from nature
to preserve quantum coherence [6,8]. Additionally, existing platforms are being used to sim-
ulate the real-time dynamics of lattice-gauge theories relevant to fundamental interactions
in higher dimensions, which might otherwise be rather limited, and at times impossible„
with conventional quantum simulation methods [54–56]. A pioneering proof-of-concept
coding of the Schwinger Hamiltonian into an ion system has been successful, allowing
researchers to observe particle-antiparticle pairs popping out of a vacuum from a vacuum
and measure their entanglement [57]. This approach represents an example of a new theory-
experiment relationship, where Theory can design experimental implementations from the
available resources, also in combination with classical and/or digital optimizations. Then,
experiments perform the physical simulations that provide theoretical insight.
In addition, quantum technologies are potentially relevant in the investigation of macro-
scopic quantum-coherence emergence in biological systems, known as quantum biology [7,58].
While photosynthesis is a paradigmatic example in which macroscopic quantum effects
have been demonstrated, they may not necessarily be critical to the function [8,59]. How-
ever, other cases, such as how our sense of smell or birds’ mapping abilities work, are
currently under experimental and theoretical investigation [6], notwithstanding the micro-
scopic effects in the brain [60].
Lastly, we notice that quantum mechanics is the microscopic theory accounting for all
kinds of phenomena, from the cosmology of the universe down to the quarks as elementary
constituents of matter, but the microscopic world cannot be seen. While this fact can be
met as a conceptual limitation, it also presents a unique opportunity when we consider
current quantum technologies and simulators in particular. Quantum many-body physics
addresses phenomena on a size scale and complexity level – ever-growing with current
technologies– that stand close to this classical emergence boundary, from the simplest mate-
rial compounds to the simplest biological molecules. In fact, quantum technologies are now
capable of producing systems with progressively increasing size that show macroscopic
quantum coherence. In this scenario, quantum many-body physics and its contemporary
evolution in terms of quantum complex systems can indicate to us where to place the
classical-to-quantum crossover, i.e., the border between size scales where we must use
quantum mechanics instead of classical physics. Thus, the same models built up to describe
the experimental data, which are essential to educate knowledge and intuition, could
work as bridges between exciting microscopic theories and our (narrow) macroscopic view.
This statement has significant cultural, epistemic, and educational dimensions. These
considerations can impact the educational aspects, and combined with the progress in
creating suitable digital and interactive tools, can make the storytelling and education of
quantum many-body physics accessible, indeed a powerful potential in physics education.
This is especially relevant in that the current scientific blossoming in quantum technolo-
gies presents a new challenge for society, while indeed citizens are already immersed in
the second quantum revolution but lack the tools and educational contexts to develop an
awareness of how quantum technologies will transform their lives [61]. From a Responsible-
Research and Innovation (RRI) perspective [62], an additional tool-set is therefore needed,
which in turn requires an approach based on Physics-Education-Research (PER) as well as
Physics-Outreach-Research (POR) [61]. This challenge concerns also classical physics, but it
acquires a special significance in the quantum domain, due to even more limited literacies
that would be needed to grasp an understanding of just the essential concepts.
Following on all the above reflections, this perspective review is thus aimed at scien-
tists active or interested in interdisciplinary research, providing the reader with an overview

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
5 of 124
of the current status of these wide fields of research, while focusing on cold and ultracold-
atomic platforms. As highlighted in the guidelines and competence framework from major
public funding agencies [63,64], interdisciplinary approach is a must in modern science,
and this review is motivated from placing this concept in a practical context. Following
the Quantum Flagship [65] classification, QT are the foundations for four pillars: quantum
simulations, quantum computing, quantum metrology and sensing, and quantum commu-
nications. With a focus on hardware concepts, frameworks and devices, this review mainly
connects to the first three pillars, where examples from cold and ultracold-atom platforms
are numerous and specific. Contemporarily, the fields of quantum communications [66]
and quantum internet [67] are rapidly expanding, in fact already pursuing the integration
of quantum and classical communication systems to create shared infrastructures and ways
to enable hybrid devices. The impact of theoretical design and experimental demonstra-
tions in this field is potentially enormous in sectors such as healthcare, space exploration,
banking, underwater communication, industry, and transportation. Closer to this review,
quantum networks and information processing have an indisputable influence on the
realistic design of toolsets for efficient and effective architectures involving large numbers
of qubits. Importantly, given the steady and rapid evolution of the field, the overall picture
distinctions and boundaries between the pillars’ topics can move over time. While we refer
the interested reader to [66,68,69] for comprehensive reviews about quantum communica-
tions, in the rest of this review we will only mention selected quantum communications
developments that can extend, in the near term, the applicability of specific hardware.
While the content of this review aims to be accessible from different disciplinary
expertises. To this purpose, a multilevel approach is adopted: each subject is presented in a
pedagogically-oriented manner and accounting for the main experimental demonstrations.
With such a broad setting and whenever possible, reference will be made to existing reviews
that are specific to—and therefore can be used to zoom in—more limited parts. Besides an
interdisciplinary perspective on the subject, with this review we wish indeed to provide
readers with a resource made of links and connections among most diverse pieces of the
puzzle, deepening those that cannot be found in existing literature and giving a compact
summary of the rest.
The review is organized as follows. In Section 2 we provide the quantum-technology
toolbox useful to discuss the physics applications of interest for the rest of the journey. We
first dig into the concept of quantum simulators in Section 2.1, briefly accounting for the
main QT platforms and then focusing on those based on quantum gases. The advent of
quantum technologies has boosted the development of methodological theoretical and
simulational frameworks essential to describe and predict the behaviour of QT; thus, in
Section 2.2 we describe in detail the tools of open quantum systems to model driven-
dissipative quantum phenomena, including also the discussion of tensor networks as
approximate methods especially relevant to model current experiments and linked to
topics connecting to following sections. Then, in Section 2.3 we review the main ideas
concerning quantum computing, where we encompass fault-tolerant and NISQ devices,
and the relevant question of quantum optimization and control that is transversal to
quantum simulation as well. As a final theoretical and experimental tool we introduce,
in Section 2.4 quantum metrology and sensing, describing the well-known tools of atomic
clocks and atom interferometry, and discussing the more recent relevant paradigms of
squeezing, many-body entanglement, and their quantification.
With the platforms described and the theoretical toolbox at hand, the newly accessible
physics is discussed. Section 3 reviews the toolbox uses to explore selected evergreen
paradigms of condensed-matter physics (Section 3.1), including the well-known but yet
surprising BCS-BEC crossover and different forms of commensurate-incommensurate
phenomena, as well as freshly sprouting frameworks (Section 3.2) such as dissipation engi-
neering, many-body localization or dynamical quantum phase transitions. Section 4 is then
dedicated to toolbox implementations in the field of fundamental interactions, focusing
on the possibility of investigating via analogue systems the quark-gluon phase diagram of

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
6 of 124
quantum chromodynamics (QCD), and via quantum simulators lattice-gauge field Hamil-
tonians. From the quark size to the universe, Section 5 discusses selected different routes,
along which open problems in cosmology and astrophysics are envisioned to be explored by
means of quantum technologies. One, in Section 5.1, is via the use of atomic clocks and atom
interferometry for general relativity test, like the measurement of the gravitational constant
G, the variation of fundamental constants or equivalence principle tests, or for detection of
gravitational waves or the quest for ultra-light dark matter. One second, in Section 5.2, is
about analogue simulations of gravity and black-holes physics with superfluid systems.
Still concerning fundamental physics, Section 6 sketches currently circulating ideas to test
foundational concepts of quantum mechanics which are still not understood, e.g., how the
collapse of the wavefunction work, with implications on the measurement problem and
the classical-to-quantum crossover. We follow on the applications by picking one outside
traditional perimeter of quantum physics, that is discussed in Section 7: here, we briefly
account for the many routes in which quantum science and technology crosses chemistry
and biology, including the quest for the persistence of macroscopic quantum-coherence
effects in biological systems such as plants and the brain, and the prospects of quantum
computing - already in the NISQ era - to address the engineering of molecules, bearing
e.g., pharmaceutical and ecological interest. The journey is then completed in Section 8,
by opening a window into the Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI) aspects involved
in quantum science and technology education and outreach. Remaining considerations are
elaborated in Section 9, before proceeding to the concluding remarks in Section 10.
With the wide-open landscape of subjects listed so far, it is comprehensible that this
review places the fastly growing field of atomic technologies in the perspective of the
variety of its applications, with a special attention to the most unconventional among them.
The in-depth narrative of the individual topics is necessarily limited, especially whenever
more recent and specific reviews are available from literature, which we thereby refer to.
Along these lines, the choice of topics illustrated in the Section 2 among a vast range of
possibilities, has been operated by reverse-engineering the theoretical and experimental
concepts and tools touched upon when dealing with the chosen applications.
2. Theoretical and Experimental Concepts and Tools
In this section, we provide a compact overview of tools that are functional to our
journey on atomic quantum technologies and their applications to quantum simulators,
quantum computing, and quantum metrology and sensing. We begin in Section 2.1,
by briefly summarizing the main existing experimental platforms based on atomic and
molecular (AMO) devices in order to highlight the wide range of hardware-development
and possibilities to non-expert readers. We will briefly discuss some of those based on
solid-state technologies that are relevant to specific parts of this review. We provide a
compact account of the essential physical traits characterizing the use of cold and ultracold-
atomic platforms as quantum simulators, their potential, current challenges or limitations,
and scalability. We then overview in Section 2.2 the theoretical paradigms currently at
the forefront of the description of QT, providing a link between quantum simulators,
quantum computing, and quantum metrology and sensing. In fact, quantum simulations
can on the one side be applied to investigate on classical computers or QT platforms the
behavior of quantum matter for condensed matter, fundamental physics, and quantum
metrology applications, and on the other side they can benefit from the existing classical
and quantum protocols in quantum computing for accessible applications in the present
NISQ era. Finally, this section will be completed with an overview of concepts and tools for
quantum computing in Section 2.3, and in Section 2.4 for quantum metrology and sensing.
2.1. Quantum Simulators Platforms
Quantum simulators are controllable and tunable quantum systems used to simulate
the behavior of other complex quantum systems that are observed in nature [9]. In more
recent years, there has been significant progress in the development of quantum simulators,

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
7 of 124
with the emergence of new technologies and experimental techniques, hand in hand with
theoretical advancements.
2.1.1. Platforms Overview
Before describing in detail AMO platforms for quantum simulation, for the sake of
completeness we briefly recall in this section those quantum technology platforms based on
solid-state devices, that are currently the subject of extensive research at different levels of
technological readiness and constituting NISQ-friendly hardware realizations of simulation,
computing or sensing protocols.
The most commonly used solid-state platforms are based on superconducting cir-
cuits [70,71]. These superconducting qubits hinge on the use of Josephson junctions work-
ing as non-linear, non-dissipative inductors. The latter, looped with a capacitor, provide
anharmonic oscillator circuits with an uneven energy-level structure that can be externally
controlled, therefore allowing for unambiguous addressing and manipulation of the quan-
tum states forming the qubit. The most common type of superconducting qubit is the
transmon qubit, originally proposed in [71], where two (or more) superconducting islands
are joined with one (or more) Josephson junction(s). In so doing, the ratio of the oscillator-
to-kinetic energy can be tuned to increasing values, providing exponential protection from
low-frequency noise while preserving useful anharmonicity. Quantum information can
be stored in the number of superconducting pairs (charge qubit), in the direction of their
current (flux qubit), or in the phase of the oscillatory states (phase qubit). Superconducting
qubits are highly tunable and can be manipulated with microwave pulses, making them
ideal for use in quantum circuits. Superconducting qubits are currently most developed for
quantum computers architectures. They have been used to realize a wide range of quantum
computing operations, and they are a promising platform for building quantum computers
in the future [72].
Regarding the currently known disadvantages of the use superconducting qubits for
building quantum computers, we highlight the reduced connectivity compared to atomic
realizations. Low connectivity may limit the depth of circuits that can be implemented
on the device, also related to the typical coherence times at present in superconducting
quantum device prototypes [73]. It is also important to consider that solid-state devices,
and not just superconducting qubits, are prone to certain disparity between individual
qubits, as these are fabricated, specially when compared to atoms or ions which are identical
by nature.
In solid-state devices, qubits can also be realized using spins. Different platforms can
be employed based on the material that constitutes the crystal lattice in which spins are
trapped. Spin qubits in diamond [74] are a type of qubit that rely on the spin of electrons
trapped in nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers within the diamond crystal lattice. These NV
centers are defects in the diamond structure that result from the replacement of two carbon
atoms with a nitrogen atom and a vacant lattice site. The spin of the electron trapped in the
NV center can be manipulated with electromagnetic fields, and the resulting spin states
can be used as qubits. One advantage of spin qubits in diamond is that they can operate at
room temperature, unlike other types of qubits [75]. Additionally, diamond is a hard and
inert material, which makes it a promising platform for developing robust and scalable
quantum devices. Spin qubits in diamond have been used to implement error correction
algorithms [76], and so they are a valuable candidate for the development of fault-tolerant
quantum technologies.
Spin qubits in silicon are another type of qubit that rely on the spin of electrons
in silicon structures and, given that silicon is a widely used material in the semiconduc-
tor industry, it offers a potential pathway for integrating quantum devices with existing
electronic technology [75,77], which could enable the development of scalable and com-
mercially viable quantum devices [77]. Spin qubits in silicon are typically formed by
introducing a phosphorus atom into a silicon crystal lattice and then using the spin of the
electron associated with the phosphorus atom as a qubit. Like diamond spin qubits, silicon

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
8 of 124
spin qubits can operate at room temperature and have shown long coherence times [78].
Despite some challenges in achieving high-fidelity quantum operations, they remain as a
potential avenue for the development of practical quantum technologies [75].
It is also worth mentioning polariton qubits, that are based on the quantum optics
phenomenon of polariton condensation also denoted as quantum fluid of light [79]. Quantum
fluids of light occur when photons and matter interact strongly, creating the polariton as
a hybrid particle. Polaritons can then form a Bose-Einstein condensate: in fact, photons
and matter become indistinguishable, forming a fluid-like substance that behaves like a
superfluid. This unique behaviour has potential applications in quantum information
processing, as well as in the study of fundamental physics [80]. Additionally, their study
can foster the understanding of light-matter interactions and of the behaviour of quantum
systems in extreme conditions [80]. Polariton condensates have also shown potential as
qubits in quantum computing, envisioned to be based e.g., on superposition states with
different orbital momenta [81]. The coherent and stable nature of these fluids makes them
attractive candidates for storing and manipulating quantum information. Polariton qubits
may have several advantages over other qubit types, given that they can be operate at room
temperature and are compatible with traditional semiconductor fabrication techniques.
Additionally, the strong light-matter interactions that give rise to polariton condensates
offer the possibility of achieving high-fidelity quantum operations [82]. While there are
still challenges to be addressed, such as the short coherence times, some of the properties
discussed make them interesting qubit platforms [83].
Quantum well and quantum dot lasers have emerged as important applications of
quantum technology in the field of photonics [84]. Quantum well lasers use ultra-thin layers
of semiconductor material to confine the motion of electrons in one dimension, creating a
quantized energy-level structure that can be used to produce light [85]. In quantum dots,
electrons are confined in all three dimensions within nanometers sizes [86], with a degree
of control of relevant system properties like their lifetime, and the precise engineering
of their light-emitting properties at specific wavelengths to make excellent single-photon
sources with applications in quantum communications [87], sensing [88] and quantum
computing, in particular based on electron spins [89]. In particular, quantum dot systems
possess the advantage that the electron coupling with external reservoirs can be precisely
tuned electrically and that interparticle and spin interactions, along with their interplay,
are strong enough to be observed [90]. Additionally, electron states in quantum dots are
amenable to be effectively described by Hubbard Hamiltonians in specific regimes, more
easily accessible in this hardware than in other atomic-based platforms, where thermal
energy is much smaller than tunneling energy, and the latter much smaller than onsite
repulsion energy [90]. Existing challenges in these platforms include the need for improved
control over their size, shape, and composition to optimize their emission properties or the
susceptibility of quantum dots to environmental perturbations [91], which can limit their
coherence and quantum properties.
Another interesting platform for quantum physics applications is provided by the
macromolecules known as molecular nanomagnets (MNMs) [92–94]. These molecules
typically host large manageable low-energy spectra, where the corresponding eigenstates
and eigenvectors can be suitably engineered. These levels can be used for storing and
processing quantum information. In particular, MNMs have been used as qudits, enlarging
the available logic space for computation, compared to qubits, building blocks of the more
diffused solid-state or atom-based architectures. Moreover, qudits on MNMs recently
proved to allow quantum error correction and fault-tolerant computation, even in the
space of a single molecule. MNMs also allow a high degree of control to synthesize
supramolecular structures (also transferable on solid-state devices), where notably the
qudits, even if possibly interacting, can maintain separately their properties and coherence.
For all these reasons, the role of MNMs for quantum information, simulation and sensing
is gathering increasing relevance. Beyond these targets, several other applications have

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
9 of 124
been envisaged, as for electronics (single-molecule transistors or superconducting devices)
or spintronics (say via the novel chiral-induced spin selectivity).
Hardware Developments towards Quantum Communication
Before proceeding to describe in more detail the main cold and ultracold-atom based
platforms, we close this introduction by highlighting that despite the widespread successful
near-term applications of NISQ devices based both in solid-state or in atom technologies,
impactful applications still require large number of qubits that those available in the current
hardware. In this direction, important research is devoted to explore different routes for
reliable and long-distance connections within NISQ devices, a large research field falling
under the umbrella of quantum networks and quantum information processing, and more
generally quantum communication [66,95] typically enabled by optical means [96]. A key
challenge in implementing quantum networks is to distribute entangled flying qubits,
i.e., quantum channels typically realized with photons, into nodes that are spatially sepa-
rated. This operation is performed by means of suited quantum transducers that can write
the entanglement properties into stationary physical qubits, in fact functioning as quantum
memories, also using teleportation protocols as a concept introduced in this field with the
seminal work of Bennett et al. [97]. Global and significant efforts are being dedicated over
the last decades to advance the theoretical design and experimental realization of these
crucial tools, with explorations that touch upon all the main quantum platforms, no matter
whether atoms, ions, or solid-state based. A complete discussion of this field falls beyond
the scope of this review, that focuses more strongly on quantum simulation hardware and
corresponding applications, rather than on quantum information and algorithmic tools.
While for comprehensive reviews, we refer the reader to [66,95,96], in relevant sections
below we mention selected quantum communications developments that can extend, in the
near term, the applicability of specific hardware.
Ultracold Atoms
After having summarised predominant solid-state technologies, we can shift our
attention to AMO platforms, the focus of this review. The development of ultra-cold
atomic technologies has exploded since the very first realizations of the Bose-Einstein
condensation of ultracold Bose gases in 1995 in the group of Carl Wieman and Eric Cornell
at JILA [98] and of Wolfgang Ketterle at MIT [99], and of superfluidity in Fermi gases
in 2003 in the groups of Debbie Jin at JILA [22] and of Wolfgang Ketterle at MIT [100].
While referring to seminal reviews for details [101–103], we here recall that in those early
days, cooling of dilute atom gases down to nano-Kelvin temperatures in the quantum
degenerate regime while remaining in the dilute gas regime, was only possible by means of
combined techniques of laser cooling and magnetic trapping [104] followed by evaporative
cooling, notwithstanding the required knowledge of low-energy scattering properties of
atomic species to ensure efficient thermalisation via elastic collisions. Though in dilute
conditions, the emergence of interaction effects has been since the very beginning a clear
distinction from the original prediction of Bose and Einstein [105]. In fact, the steady and
rapid progress in quantum-gases platforms capabilities results also from the emergence
of a new scientific community where atomic and molecular physics, quantum optics,
condensed matter, and quantum information scientists merged into, fostering cooperation,
contamination, and cross-disciplinarity as values for the way of conducting research.
After almost three decades, the toolbox at hand for accurate control and manipu-
lation of these systems under extreme quantum conditions has enormously flourished
with tools to engineer system properties for quantum states realisations. Among these:
the trapping geometries allowing for reduced dimensions (D) down to effectively 2D, 1D,
and 0D systems also with the aid of optical lattices (see Section 2.1.3), and the introduction
of uniform, boxed, potentials [106] allowing for textbook examples of superfluid behav-
ior [107], as well as refined detection techniques like the quantum gas microscope [108];
the strength and range of the interactions, with the tuning of the short-range van der Waals

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
10 of 124
interactions via the low-energy scattering length (see Sections 2.1.2), the use of ultracold
ions with Coulomb-like potentials (Section 2.1.4), Rydberg atoms with ∼1/r6 (Section 2.1.5)
and dipolar atoms with ∼1/r3 interactions (Section 2.1.6), and cavity-photon mediated
tunable interactions depending on the number of coupled cavity modes (Section 2.1.7);
the addition of disorder (see Section 3.2.1), or the coupling to environmental noise and
dissipation mechanisms (see Section 2.2.1) and the possibility of investigating dynamical
phase transitions (see Section 3.2.4). With reference to Figure 1, the main platforms and
tools are briefly highlighted in the rest of this section, to provide a flavour of the capabilities
at hand, before diving into the theoretical tools in Sections 2.2–2.4, and finally into the
applications.
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the different atom−technology platforms considered in the
Section 2.1. (a) Atoms with tunable interactions. Top: physical meaning of the scattering length a
illustrated through the simplest case of an attractive square−well potential. a < 0 (left): the wave
function has no zeros in the physical r > 0 plane. a < 0 (right): a bound state appears. Bottom left:
Fano−Feshbach magnetic resonance mechanism. A static magnetic field tunes the energy difference
between the threshold of the open channel and the bound state in the closed channel. Bottom right:
resulting scattering length vs. magnetic field. (b) Optical lattices. From top to bottom: 1D, 2D, and 3D
optical lattices leading to 2D, 1D, and 0D−like confinement, respectively. Center and bottom images
are from [109]. (c) Trapped ions. Linear Paul trap. Ions are trapped using static electric control fields
combined with time-dependent radio−frequency oscillating electric fields to stabilize the confinement.
In tight radial confinement, laser−cooled ions form a linear string (inset image for eight ions) with a
spacing determined by the trade−off between external confining fields and ion−ion Coulomb repulsion.
Image from [2]. (d) Rydberg atoms. Left: Rydbergs are atoms excited to very high energy states. Right:
Rydberg blockade: the shift due to their strong mutual interaction displaces a doubly excited state out of
resonance. Center: therefore, it is unlikely to have two Rydbergs closer than the corresponding blockade
radius rb. (e) Dipolar atoms. Atoms can be represented as dipoles, the interaction being thus necessarily
anisotropic: in this 1D configuration, e.g., a rotation of the angle θ between the dipole direction and the
direction of atoms line up, can turn the interaction from maximally repulsive (head to head) to maximally
attractive (head−to−tail). (f) Atoms in optical cavities: the free−space cooperativity ηfs related to the

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
11 of 124
atom-photon strength g2
0 is amplified into η = 4Fηf s/π by the number of round trips of the photon
in the cavity, and measured by the free-spectral range F, a geometric quantity. The system is open
and out-of-equilibrium, due to unavoidable photon leakage and atomic spontaneous emission at
rates κ and γ, respectively. In fact, it can be shown that η = 4g2
0/(κγ), so g2
0 can be tuned by
geometrical means. (g) Summary of energy scale for the interaction strengths from dilute (also with
Fano-Feshbach resonances), to dipolar, to hetero-nuclear, to Rydberg atoms.
2.1.2. Atoms with Tunable Short-Range Interaction Strength
Atomic gases platforms are nowadays equipped with the powerful tool of the Fano-
Feshbach resonance mechanism, allowing to manipulate the short-range part of the inter-
atomic interactions via the tuning of the low-energy scattering length via changing an
external magnetic field.
Before diving into the mechanism illustration, we recall the relevant fundamentals.
The low-energy limit of the s-wave scattering amplitude is fs(k) ≃[a−1 + ik]−1 in terms of
the scattering length a for ka ≪1. The scattering length a has an important physical mean-
ing, as depicted in Figure 1a. It represents the degree by which the long-range (free particle-
like) behaviour of the wave function is affected by the interactions. The corresponding in-
teratomic potential can be accurately described by a pseudopotential V(⃗r) = 4π¯h2a/mδ(⃗r),
with m the atom mass and δ(⃗r) the Dirac-δ function. The sign of a provides useful infor-
mation on the effects of the interaction. When a is positive, the two-particle wavefunction
possesses a zero before approaching its asymptotic form: thus, the short-range part of
the wavefunction behaves as a bound state, while the long-range part as a free particle.
Thus, during the scattering process the particles are bound for a finite amount time before
decaying back into two free ones. When a is negative, the wavefunction does not vanish at
any distance from the origin, and no resonant intermediate states appear. When turning to
the many-atoms system, positive a values can allow for the formation of metastable pairs
of atoms with wavefunction localized in real space, while negative a values determine an
attractive interaction V(r).
Further terms in the expansion of the energy scattering can be considered when
energy dependence of thee scattering properties cannot be neglected. To lowest order,
fs(k) ≃[a−1 −r0k2/2 + ik]−1. This introduces a new relevant parameter, the so-called
effective range r0. When positive, r0 is a measure of the effective range of the interatomic
potential. When negative instead, r0 is unrelated to the interaction-potential range, it rather
expresses the possibility of the two atoms colliding at low enough energy to remain for a
finite time in a bound state and then decay back into two free particles: this is the process
of resonant-scattering.
Reverting back to the tuning mechanism for the scattering length, the original sem-
inal derivation of the theory has been independently worked out by Fano [110] and
Feshbach [111]. In a nutshell, the Fano-Feshbach mechanism is a straightforward phe-
nomenon occurring when a discrete bound state (also called closed channel) and a free-
scattering state of two atoms (also called open channel) become resonant, thereby affecting
the scattering amplitude. The resonance condition can be achieved by exploiting the differ-
ent magnetic moments and responses to an external magnetic field of the scattering state
in the open channel and the bound state in the closed channel. Typically, magnetic means
are employed, using alkali atoms or rare-earth elements. In experimental atomic systems
with s-wave ground states and zero electronic angular momentum, the collision properties
are determined by the electronic Born-Oppenheimer potentials between two s-state atoms.
These potentials depend on the total electronic spin, denoted as S = S1 + S2, with alkali
atoms having quantum numbers of 0 and 1. The resulting spin-singlet state VS becomes the
closed channel, while the spin triplet state VT becomes the open channel. By introducing
a static magnetic field B, the energy difference between the two continuum levels can
be adjusted due to the different magnetic moments of the two channels. This tuning of

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
12 of 124
the magnetic field allows for control over the energy difference between the continuum
threshold of the open channel and the bound-state energy of the closed channel [112]:
a(B) = abg(1 −
∆
B −B0
),
where ∆is the width of the Fano-Feshbach resonance, occuring at magnetic field B0,
and abg is the scattering length well away from resonance, in fact named background
scattering length.
The scattering length can also be cast in the form a = abg −mg2/(4π¯h2ν) [113] with m
the atom mass, in terms of the strength g at wavevector k = 0 of the coupling between the
open and the closed channels, the detuning ν from resonance. When the effective range r0
plays a role, it can be cast in the form r0 = −8π¯h4/ (mg2) [113]: this makes apparent that
weaker couplings determine larger effective ranges and longer lifetimes of the resonant
state. When considering the two-body problem, Fano-Feshbach resonances are classified
as narrow or broad depending on whether |abg/r0| ≪1 or ≫1, respectively. When
considering the many-body atoms system, however, the relevant length scale becomes the
inverse Fermi momentum k−1
F . Thus, while the width of the magnetic resonances is a fixed
trait of the two-particle interaction potential, in the many-body system this can be tuned -
at least slightly - changing the atomic density.
Besides than with magnetic fields, the Fano-Feshbach resonance mechanism can be
also implemented by optical means [114]. In contrast with the magnetic ones, optical Fano-
Feshbach resonances allow for a more versatile external control of the resonance width,
besides its location. The idea is that a photon with (typically optical) frequency ν excites
the two atoms system into a roto-vibrational level. Modeling for simplicity the atom as a
two-level system, with |g⟩and |e⟩separated by energy hνc, the resonance position can thus
be changed after tuning the laser frequency electromagnetic spectrum. These resonances
are called optical Fano-Feshbach resonances. While more versatile, optical Fano-Feshbach
resonances suffer from the fact that the excited roto-vibrational state is inevitably subjected
to irreversible decay even at zero collision energy with a characteristic time ¯h/γ, with γ the
spontaneous emission rate. Therefore, the scattering length is complex, with an imaginary
part describing collisional loss. In addition, both the resonance width and shift depend
on the laser intensity I. Notwithstanding these difficulties, the use of optical resonances
has also been developed in optical cavities, that are amenable to accurate control and
engineering of atom-photon interactions [115].
2.1.3. Atoms in Optical Lattices
Optical lattices have emerged as a powerful tool in the field of AMO quantum tech-
nologies due to their ability to trap and manipulate individual particles with high pre-
cision [116,117] and low temperatures in periodic potentials, while not suffering from
non-accurately controllable complications of solid-state technologies, that can typically
arise from phonon-like interactions and fabrication defects. These potentials are created
by the interference patterns of laser beams, which can confine particles in stable positions,
thus amenable to load atoms in specific spatial patterns. In turn, this can be realised
in the presence of disorder [118], variable geometries and different dimensions, either
spatial (3D to 0D) or even synthetic [119,120]. It is thus not surprising how atoms in
optical lattices allow for the study of a wide range of phenomena [109] (see Figure 1b).
Breakthrough examples of physics accessible with optical lattices include the seminal
observation of superfluid (SF)-to-Mott insulator phase transition [25], emergence of dis-
sipation from superfluid behavior [121], dissipation-induced coherence [122], Josephson
physics [123–126]. An important property of these systems is that the related dynamical
scales correspond to frequencies ∼Hz-kHz allowing for the experimental observation
of the dynamics of the system in real time; compatible with typical lifetimes (≳1 s) of
the prepared atomic states. Optical potentials have been used to trap and cool not only
neutral atoms but also molecules [127,128]. They constitute essential building blocks for

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
13 of 124
various quantum technologies [125] including quantum computers [129], sensors [130],
and simulators [117,131,132]. Moreover, technological development allowed for single-site
controllability, probing and imaging with the appearance of quantum gas microscopes,
both in bosonic and fermionic systems [108,133].
In fact, another important versatility of optical lattices is that technological advance-
ment has allowed to trap and cool both bosonic and fermionic species [29,134–136], as well
as spin mixtures or Bose-Fermi mixtures, which have emerged as a promising platform
to create controllable species-dependent potentials and tunable interactions for atoms or
molecules [137], with applications to, e.g., the study of topological phases and exotic su-
perfluidity [138,139]. Optical lattices present several advantages in comparison with other
QTs. In particular, the system sizes that are achievable, the discrete nature of the system,
the flexible geometry and the single-site resolution make them a perfect platform for sim-
ulation and Hamiltonian-based protocols. However, they are less-adapted to gate-based
approaches, as for e.g., trapped ions. This is partially due to the ratio between their coher-
ence time, limited mostly by background radiation pressure, and gate time—as the system
frequencies are f ∼Hz-kHz small compared to trapped ions with f ∼MHz—as well as
their lower experimental repetition rate compared to other platforms. We note that despite
these challenges, progress is steadily being achieved. If used for quantum computing,
atoms in optical lattices offer the advantage of providing qubits made of individual neutral
atoms and consequently identical by construction. However, lack a modular construction
of the hardware, like it is possible for solid-state technologies, makes the scaling more
challenging despite the steady progress. We refer to ref. [140] for a complete discussion
on the commonly utilized theoretical methods for analyzing the cooperative responses of
atomic arrays, and a deep-dive into recent advancements and potential future uses of planar
arrays as adaptable quantum interfaces connecting light and matter. Moreover, we refer
to [141] for a theoretical and experimental review of optical dipole traps for neutral atoms.
2.1.4. Trapped Ions
While optical lattices represent an ideal platform for simulation and sensing, and the
progress towards quantum computing (QC) is still ongoing (with notable progress thanks
to Rydberg-atom technologies, see Section 2.1.5 below), trapped ions were originally better
technologically suited for gate-based quantum technologies [142,143] and they are still
nowadays one of the leading cold-atomic platform for digital approaches due to continuous
development [144,145]. This is due to their ability to prepare high-fidelity and long-
lived qubits [146–149] with short gate times (with characteristic frequencies f ∼MHz)
and high repetition rates, while remaining a suitable hardware for Hamiltonian-based
approaches. The development of linear Paul traps, using a combination of radio-frequency
and static electric fields (see Figure 1c), allowed for the confinement of ions and consistent
manipulation of the quantum states of the ionic chains with high precision and increasing
number of elements, overpassing 100 qubits. Once the ions are trapped, by using laser
pulses or microwave fields it is possible to perform single-qubit operations, entangling
gates, and other quantum operations with high fidelity [150–152]. In fact, even N-body
interaction terms have been recently encoded [153].
One of the significant advantages of trapped ions over other quantum technologies is
their long coherence times [144] due to their low coupling to the environment. Trapped
ions have coherence times on the order of seconds, or event minutes [154], significantly
longer than other qubit technologies.
As for optical lattices, scalability represents one of the challenges, as these platforms
lack the modular nature of solid-state QC, leading to certain operations becoming slower
as the system is scaled up or dissipative effects becoming more relevant. Substantial efforts
have been made towards scalable approaches [155] and progress is continuously made
towards larger ion traps while maintaining high coherence times and fidelity. Constant
assessment on the technological challenges for the construction and operation of a trapped
ion system requirements has also been regularly made [144,145]. All these combined efforts

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
14 of 124
have allowed for QC applications where trapped ion qubits have been shown to perform
some of the seminal QC protocols, such as Shor’s algorithm for factoring large numbers,
and Grover’s algorithm for searching unsorted databases, with high fidelity [156].
Importantly, an essential aspect of trapped ions is the fact that they are also suitable
for Hamiltonian-based or analog physics, as one can program the coupling to the trapped
modes, engineer the interaction between the ions, and thus access a wide variety of long-
range coupling configurations [157,158]. This analog-digital duality has made trapped ions
one of the most flexible platform also in quantum simulation [159–161], e.g., of quantum
chemistry problems [162] or also in sensing [163]. This flexible nature and applications
together with novel techniques for the probing of the quantum state [164] in efficient and
scalable ways, have made ion traps one of the leading quantum technologies.
2.1.5. Rydberg Atoms
Another cold-atomic platform that has experienced substantial development in recent
times is based on the use of Rydberg atoms and their unique properties [165]. The Rydberg
atoms platform consists of ensembles of individual highly excited atoms (see Figure 1c),
i.e., characterized by large principal quantum numbers n [166,167], confined in optical
lattices or arrays of optical tweezers [168] using the gradient force of a focused laser beam to
trap, transport and manipulate single particles, which are separated by a few micrometers.
In fact, the Rydbergs benefit from the same level of control through optical addressing
techniques that we discussed in Sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.3, enabling great controllability over
the individual atoms within the system.
By driving the atoms to highly excited Rydberg states, interactions scaling as ∝1/r6 –
beyond the µm scale—can be achieved. When in the Rydberg state with quantum number
n, the atoms possess two crucial properties. Firstly, their lifetime scales as n3, significantly
longer than the lifetimes associated with low-lying transitions (typically in the range of
100µs for n ∼50). Secondly, they exhibit substantial dipole moments between states n
and n −1 with opposite parity, scaling as n2. Consequently, these properties give rise
to significant interaction strengths V corresponding to frequencies V = /h ≥1MHz for
n ∼50, at distances approximately 5 µm [169]. The presence of interactions modifies the
excitation dynamics with a mechanism that is known as Rydberg blockade, observed for
the first time in 2009 [170] (see Figure 1c): in essence, only one of any two atoms that
are spatially close by can be excited, due to the shift introduced by their strong mutual
interaction, which displaces the doubly excited state out of resonance [169].
These properties make Rydberg atoms ideal for quantum computing [171], simula-
tion [172], and sensing [173] applications. Rydberg technology allows, as was the case of
trapped ions, for gated-based protocols [174] or analog-based approaches [169]. Addition-
ally, their long lifetimes allow for long gate sequences and simulation protocols [165,175].
Another advantage inherent to the use of Rydberg systems is their strong dipole mo-
ments, which facilitate long-range interactions between them, increasing their flexibility
and applicability in creating multi-body gates [176].
Unlike trapped ions, Rydberg-based systems are easier to scale up, as is the case of
optical lattices. On the other hand, challenges remain that are associated with the increasing
size, such as the need to isolate the Rydberg atoms from external perturbations originated
by collisions with other atoms or photons: in fact, these dissipative effects can cause deco-
herence, which can reduce the timescale for which we can perform operations with high
fidelity. In more recent years, the development of optical tweezers has rendered Rydberg
atom technologies even more flexible [177,178], as it allows precise arbitrary positioning of
the Rydberg atoms, enabling the creation of specific quantum states, simulating particu-
larly relevant physical geometries, and exploiting the long-range nature of interactions to
create specific gates and protocols [179]. In very recent years, Rydberg atoms were used
to successfully implement high-fidelity two qubit operation in parallel [180], in scalable,
highly connected 2D systems [181]. For an exhaustive description of Rydberg atoms we
refer to the more recent review [169].

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
15 of 124
2.1.6. Atoms with Dipolar Interactions
Similarly to Rydberg atoms, another relevant platform characterized by such long-
range interactions is dipolar gases. As for Rydbergs, these dipolar gases can be confined
as well in optical lattices, traps and cavities, benefiting from the technological control
achieved in those platforms. Since they have been envisioned [182], dipolar gases have been
associated to a number of intriguing quantum states, such as Wigner crystals [183,184], fer-
rofluids [185], systems with roton-maxon excitations [186], checkerboard supersolids [187],
Haldane insulators [188], the emergence of quantum scars [189], and Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-
Ovchinnikov phases [190]. These states emerge due to the interplay between quantum
fluctuations and frustration effects due to interactions.
In the absence of dipoles, atoms in the ground state interact through short-range
van der Waals interactions, which decay as 1/r6 and are typically isotropic due to the
spherically symmetric electronic cloud of most atoms in the ground state [191], contrasting
the long-range dipolar interaction. Different platforms are available to investigate the
effects of dipole-dipole interactions (DDIs) in ultracold gas contexts. For instance, electric
dipole moments can be induced using heteronuclear molecules [128,192–194] or Rydberg
atoms [56,195,196] in an electric field, or by employing light-induced dipoles [197]. More-
over, elementary particles can possess permanent magnetic dipoles even in the absence
of an external field. Consequently, the impact of magnetic DDIs on quantum gases can be
studied under full rotational symmetry, even at extremely small magnetic fields.
In dipolar gases experiments, various species of atoms have been used depending
on the specific research goals and experimental setups. Some commonly studied species
include Dysprosium (Dy), Erbium (Er), Chromium (Cr) and Dysprosium-Erbium mixture
(Dy-Er) [191].
Generally the DDI interaction scaling as 1/r3 [191] is also anisotropic and can be either
attractive or repulsive depending on the relative orientation of the dipoles. Specifically,
its elastic component varies as 1 −3 cos (2θ), where θ represents the angle between the
relative position of the particles and their polarization direction. In one-dimensional (1D)
geometries, unique characteristics come into play [198,199]. An illustrative example is the
exactly solvable Lieb-Liniger gas [200], where the many-body excitation spectrum becomes
identical to that of a free Fermi gas in the limit of infinite contact interaction strength
g1D →∞, referred to as the Tonks-Girardeau gas [201]. In fact, tuning of the quantum
liquid density causes a crossover from a strongly interacting Tonks regime to a quasi-crystal,
while the low-energy system remains characterized by Luttinger liquid behavior [202–205].
Theoretical descriptions based on the local density approximation [198], time-dependent
Hartree method [206], and diffusion Quantum Monte Carlo simulations [207,208] have been
developed to capture the behaviour of the system across weakly and strongly interacting
regimes. More recently, independent tuning of the van-der-Waals contact potential and of
the dipolar interaction strength by means of dipoles rotation, have made accessible richer
regimes, investigated both experimentally [189] and theoretically [209].
Notably, the development of stable degenerate quantum gases composed of atoms
with strong dipolar forces as the primary interactions [210] has revealed the coexistence
of crystalline order and superfluidity, known as supersolidity [211], that have recently
realized experimentally [189,210,212–215]. Other studies [216] revealed the possibility of
self-bound droplets and droplet assemblies.
For a more complete description of dipolar gases, we recommend the theoretical
review [217] for a theoretical review, and the more recent experimental [191].
2.1.7. Atoms in Optical Cavities
Optical-cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED) explores the interaction between light
and matter in confined electromagnetic modes, with the purpose of achieving strong
coupling between quantum emitters and the electromagnetic field and enabling the study
of light-matter interactions at the quantum level. Matter in QED cavities is an out-of-
equilibrium, driven-dissipative system, whose description requires open quantum system

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
16 of 124
methods (see Section 2.2.1). As such, it can serve as an ideal platform for interdisciplinary
research on noise and dissipation engineering. For a comprehensive understanding of
atom processes in optical resonators we refer to the pedagogical work in [218], while an
extensive review [137,219] outlines the capabilities of optical cavities.
As sketched in Figure 1f, the concept is that the free-space cooperativity ηfs, i.e., the
probability for the an atom to scatter a photon in the solid angle, is amplified into η = 4Fηfs/π
by the number of round trips of the photon in the cavity, as measured by the free-spectral range
F. The latter is a geometry-related quantity involving the cavity fabrication characteristics.
The single-atom cooperativity η thus accounts for enhanced atom-photon interaction strength
with respect to g2
0, that is achievable by geometric means. Photon leakage at rate κ and atomic
spontaneous emission at rate γ, besides possible external pumping make the system open,
driven-dissipative. In fact, it can be shown that η = 4g2
0/(κγ), so that the η design can result
in tuning the strength of the coupling g2
0 with respect to dissipations κγ [218].
In the strong-coupling regime, coherent evolution dominates despite dissipative pro-
cesses, leading to collective Rabi oscillations [220] of the trapped atoms. Integrating cold
atoms into optical cavities allows for the investigation of mechanical effects resulting from
atomic motion interacting with the cavity field. Friction exerted by the emitted radiation
acts as an effective cooling mechanism [221], achieving sub-recoil cooling limits [222].
This technique is more efficient in atomic ensembles, where the coupling strength scales
with the square root of the particle number. Meanwhile, photon leakage not only dissi-
pates energy but also carries information about atomic dynamics, enabling applications
in feedback control and non-destructive measurements of atomic states or quantum spin
squeezing [223]. Cavity photons can simultaneously serve as external optical lattices and
probes, as demonstrated in previous works [224,225].
Atomic ensembles in high-finesse optical resonators exhibit intriguing phenomena,
such as long-range atom-atom interactions mediated by photon exchange [226]. These
interactions collectively modify the field inside the cavity, affecting each atom in a position-
dependent manner. Thus, the coupling between light and atoms strongly depends on their
positions, emphasizing the role of interference effects.
Thermal atoms driven by a transverse classical pump and interacting with a vacuum
cavity mode create an interesting phenomenon known as superradiance [227], in which
self-organization is observed with a macroscopically populated cavity mode. The self-
organization of thermal atoms was first experimentally demonstrated in [228], with self-
organization revealed symmetry-breaking of translational symmetry. Self-organization of a
BEC in a cavity was also observed [229].
Theoretical works have predicted a phase transition achievable by coupling a trans-
versely laser-driven Bose-Einstein Condensate (BEC) to a single-mode cavity, with non-
trivial ordering arising due to photon-mediated interactions [230], and cavity-mediated
fermionic superfluidity in reduced dimensions is envisioned [231].
Besides the possibility of tuning the atom-photon interaction strength, the develop-
ment of multimode cavities has led to tunable range of the interactions. Unlike single-mode
cavities indeed, multi-mode cavities support transverse electromagnetic modes resonating
at the same frequency: the interactions mediated by these modes possess finite-range inter-
actions in the transverse direction [232]. The adaptation of the field to particle distribution
in highly degenerate multimode cavities allows to explore novel conceptual systems and
the study of crystalline and liquid-crystalline ordering [35,233]. The comprehensive phase
diagram of this complex system was investigated [234], along with additional insights
provided in [235,236]. Multimode cavities also establish connections to neural network
and spin models, enabling investigations into dislocations, crystal boundaries, and phonon
spectra. Initial investigations into this relationship were presented by [237,238], while
extensions involving fermionic atoms [239,240] and local couplings using multimode cavity
QED have been explored [35,241].
Cavities can be categorized into standing-wave and travelling-wave (ring) cavities.
Standing-wave cavities consist of two mirrors that create a stationary pattern through light

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
17 of 124
reflection, forming a standing wave. Ring cavities, on the other hand, confine light in a
circular path through total internal reflection. Unlike standing-wave cavities, ring cavities
do not create a standing wave by bouncing light back on itself. However, by introducing
two counter-propagating beams into the cavity, a ring cavity can support a standing wave.
This introduces an additional degree of freedom where the resulting standing wave mode
can freely rotate by adjusting the phase of one of the input modes. In this configuration,
momentum exchange occurs between the field modes, enabling atoms to exert a back action
on the optical field. This back action is sensed by all trapped atoms in the cavity, leading to
coupled motions and the emergence of rich cooperative behaviour such as Recoil Induced
Resonances (RIR) [242]. Experimental investigations of cold atoms in ring cavities have
observed superradiant behaviour [243,244], characterized by Superradiant Rayleigh Scat-
tering (SRyS) [245] and Collective Atomic Recoil Lasing (CARL) [242]. Recent experiments
have further explored the properties of the supersolid phase within ring cavities [246,247].
Many applications of trapped atoms in cavities, such as quantum simulation or quan-
tum computing, exploit space-programmable interactions. In particular the connectivity
network, or graph, is usually dictated by geometry. Tunable non-local interactions are
crucial for some applications like the simulating information scrambling in black holes and
mappings of hard optimization problems onto frustrated classical magnets [248]. Some
results [115,248] show the experimental realization of programmable non-local interac-
tions in an array of atomic ensembles within an optical cavity, offering also a test case for
experimentally observing the emergent geometry of a quantum many-body system.
For similar reasons, also the potential importance of quantum electrodynamics in
waveguides for quantum information applications has been widely recognized, see e.g., [249].
In essence, quantum emitters such as atoms or molecules, can interact even strongly with
radiation propagating along a waveguide. In this way, high-entangled states from strong
coupling or collective phenomena, as superradiance, arising from correlations between
photons and bound states of them, can be observed, similarly to the case of cavity QED.
In the same context, striking experiments have been performed quite recently with cold
atoms, semiconductor quantum dots, quantum solid-state defects and superconducting
qubits. For instance, in recently developed cold atomic systems coupled to nanoscopic pho-
tonic waveguides [250–252], these nanoscale devices can mediate long-range atom-atom
interaction in a similar way to standard optical cavities leading to potential applications
not only in quantum simulation [253], but also in quantum communications [254–256].
We close this platforms’ overview by remarking that current atom technologies al-
low for a remarkable tunability of strength and range of the interactions (see Figure 1g),
from short van-der Waals equipped with Fano-Feshbach resonances to Rydberg-like ∼1/r6,
dipolar ∼1/r3, Coulomb ∼1/r, and multimode QED-cavity mediated mechanisms intrin-
sically tunable from infinitely long to short range with increasing the number of coupled
cavity modes.
2.1.8. Miniaturization and Atom Chips Technology
One of the problems that cold atom technologies have experienced over the years is
the limitations of miniaturization, currently requiring moderate setup sizes and optical
tables. This poses certain challenges, particularly relevant in the field of quantum sensing
where the ability to produce portable, small and robust experimental setups can be crucial.
Instruments employing atomic ensembles at room temperature have achieved success-
ful miniaturization through the utilization of micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS)
alkali vapor cells [257]. Cold-atom generation has been demonstrated by employing a single
laser beam reflected from different cell geometry structures [258,259], while research in this
direction is still going on, with the goal of investigating alternative cell geometries to reduce
overall size [260]. That being said, it is important to note that, while there are promising op-
portunities for compact instrumentation [261], via micro-fabrication techniques involving
optical elements [262–264] or via the development of grating chips [265,266] for on-chip
magnetic confinement of laser-cooled atoms, systems typically require traps that need

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
18 of 124
liter-range volume loading from vacuum apparatuses. The miniaturization of ultra-high
vacuum (UHV) vacuum packages [267] remains limited and many cases constrained by
conventional bulk machining methods used for chamber materials, compromising partially
the scalability potential provided by micro-fabrication techniques so far.
The substantial progress made in this miniaturization effort is described in depth in
the reviews [266,268,269].
2.2. Theoretical and Simulational Paradigms for Atomic Systems
2.2.1. Driven-Dissipative Quantum Systems
As we discussed in detail in Section 2.1, current developments of quantum technologies
have allowed for a high-degree of control over the experimental platforms. In particular, we
are currently in a unique position in which we can derive simple microscopic models based
on well-understood approximations to describe closed quantum systems, and even more
interestingly characterise accurately the dominant couplings of quantum technological
platforms to their environment. This change of paradigm has enriched our description of
the devices and enabled us to access new physical regimes that could not be explored in
the context of closed quantum systems. In this section, we discuss how the use of open
quantum systems, starting from their theoretical characterisation, plays an essential role in
current—and future—quantum technologies.
Open Systems: Reservoir Engineering
Traditionally in QT, one of the main approaches consisted in the cooling of the system
to its ground state [104,270] in a consistent manner. In this way, the problem revolved
around modifying the coupling terms and coherent drives in our physical system, in order
to map the problem of interest into the experimental device at hand that was then subse-
quently cooled. In the field of quantum simulation, this approach was typically denoted as
Hamiltonian engineering. This technique was widely applied in state preparation for con-
sistent particle loading in experimental devices [271] or entangled state preparation [272],
with numerous examples to this day, typically to study condensed-matter analogs in so-
called crystals of light with cold atoms [117,132]. An obvious limitation to this protocol is
that the number of problems that can be mapped is directly dependent on the classes of
Hamiltonians that the device can represent faithfully. However, in this section we will
describe how from the very early development it was understood that this idea could be
extended to general dissipative couplings, with particular success in the fields of quantum
simulation and quantum metrology.
The fact that these systems are also coupled to their environment represents certain
challenges to our ability to describe them as the bath typically consisting of a large number
of degrees of freedom; but also, provides novel ways of controlling and probing these
systems, enlarging the class of problems we can map into the QT platforms and the phases
of matter we can access. More concretely to represent OQSs, we are required to understand
the set of necessary approximations that render a numerically effective and controllable
description of both system and environment. Once this description is provided, typically in
the form of stochastic or master equations as described in the following sections, exploiting
dissipative coupling offers a new toolbox for the engineering of quantum many-body states,
which is often described as reservoir engineering [273]. The idea of exploiting both coherent
and dissipative coupling was originally imported from the field of Quantum Optics into
cold atomic platforms were it quickly became the standard. Some of the most relevant exam-
ples of this technology transfer, now widely applied, include optical pumping [274,275] and
laser cooling [104]. In addition, current temperatures achieved in cold atomic experiments,
e.g., fermionic quantum gas microscopes [276–278]—systems particularly challenging to
cool in the presence of vanishing scattering lengths, would not have been possible without
the use of dissipative engineering in the form of sympathetic cooling [279], where an atomic
species—typically harder to cool to physically relevant temperatures—is immersed into
another atomic species that can be cooled to lower temperatures, e.g., a bosonic species

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
19 of 124
in a BEC state [280]. Some other relevant techniques for dissipative cooling and state
preparation in AMO platforms include combining this with dark-state driving [281,282]
or more complex cooling schemes, achieving temperatures even within the lowest Bloch
band [283]. For a wide set of early examples, see the dedicated review [273].
Up to this point, the applications that we have considered used the environment as a
cooling reservoir where energy could be transferred from the system in a controlled manner.
However, dissipative coupling can also be used for a wide range of applications including
the creation of entangled states [284,285] or topologically protected states [286] which
could be used for quantum enhanced metrology as discussed in Section 2.4 or quantum
computing, see Section 2.3.
Furthermore, beyond these consistent cooling and state-preparation protocols pre-
sented here, the inclusion of dissipative dynamics can also give raise to fundamentally
new phenomena. In particular, dissipation can alter the behaviour of known phases of
matter drastically or it can be used to infer or probe some inherent properties of the system
as particle statistics [287]. It can even generate new phases, with some early examples
in [284,288,289]. The emergence of these new phases of matter has lead to the study
of non-equilibrium critical behaviour and new universality classes in driven-dissipative
scenarios [290,291].
An interesting case that has drawn substantial attention recently is the case of measurement-
induced phase transitions [292–294], a subclass of dynamical phase transitions that appear
due to the interplay between projective measurements and coherent evolution leading to
drastically different entanglement properties in the different phases of monitored systems,
with the difference been encoded only in non-linear quantities of the system’s state, making
its probing rather elusive [295]. This particular example is an illustrative instance of a
fundamental aspect of the OQSs framework, as they allow to also consider their relation
with foundational quantum concepts, such as information scrambling [296], the role of
measurement [297] or the emergence of classical behaviour [298,299].
Notably, the necessity to characterize these non-equilibrium dissipative phases also
stimulated developments of existing theoretical techniques and approaches developed
for equilibrium, as those based on Green functions. This formalism is particularly useful
in the description of transport problems in correlated media beyond 1D and amenable
for long-range interacting systems, thus constituting a useful framework in the physical
description of, e.g., biological matter. As we do not cover in detail these methods in our
review, we refer the reader to the existing recent literature on the topic [300].
Describing Dissipation in Quantum Systems: Gorini-Kossakowski-Sudarshan- Lindblad
Master Equation
As we have just described, despite experimental efforts that guarantee the always-
improving isolation conditions of quantum systems, an open quantum system approach is
necessary to guarantee both a more complete description at relevant bath-system timescales
and also as a controllable novel form of interaction with quantum systems, accessing new
physical regimes.
As a result, we require a formalism to describe the dynamics of systems weakly
coupled to their environment, as shown in Figure 2,—while we later on discuss ways
in which this condition can be relaxed. Here, we discuss the main approximations that
allow us to write an evolution equation for an open system with Hamiltonian ˆHtot =
ˆHsys + ˆHenv + ˆHint based on a set of energy and timescale hierarchies that we detail:
•
Born Approximation: this approximation assumes that system and environment are
weakly coupled, implying that the dynamics induced by this coupling Hint are small
compared to the system or environment ones given by Hsys, Henv.
•
Markov Approximation: Firstly, it implies the S-E coupling to be frequency-independent
over short timescales, that we can define with a rate Γ. Secondly, it requires that the
information transmitted from the system into the environment, decays exponentially
fast in a way that this information cannot return to the system S itself. This, together

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
20 of 124
with the Born approximation, implies that the environment can be considered static
throughout the evolution.
This approximation is valid in a wide range of scenarios; formalising the condition
that the bath correlations ⟨b†(t)b(0)⟩→0 decay in timescales τenv. These τenv, on the
other hand, are given by the inverse of the spectral width of the bath [301]. E.g., if we
assume a bath in thermal equilibrium, the decay of correlations will be much faster
than the rate of change of the system t ∼Γ−1 ≫τenv [302,303].
ci
S
E
Figure 2. Diagram of an open quantum system. The physical system of interest (S) is immersed in a
typically larger environment (E) also denoted as the bath. The S −E environment coupling can be
described by a discrete set of dissipative channels ci under the suitable approximations.
These approximations, together with the rotating-wave or secular approximation [36,302]
neglecting the fast rotating terms of ˆHint to guarantee that the resulting density matrix after
the evolution is physical (trace-preserving and positive semidefinite), allow us to derive
the desired description. It is relevant to mention that in the context of quantum optics and
AMO systems all of these approximations can be summarised as simply the presence of a
dominant frequency in the total system that we can relate to the characteristic energy of
the physical system ωsys, which is much larger than typical coupling strengths with the
radiation fields Ω0 or the related detunings ∆.
Moreover, we have specified that typically τenv ≲ω−1
sys [36,301,302]. Thus, we can
justify all these approximations by writing:
Γ, Ω0, ∆≪ωsys .
(1)
The standard equation that fulfills the required approximations for the evolution of an
OQS, is denoted the Gorini-Kossakowski-Sudarshan-Lindblad master equation describing
the evolution of the reduced system density operator ρ:
˙ρ = Lρ = −i
 ˆHsys, ρ
 + ∑
i
Γ
2

2ˆciρˆc†
i −
n
ˆc†
i ˆci, ρ
o
,
(2)
with the jump operators ˆci characterising the i-th dissipation channel between system
and environment. A crucial point is that these operators appear after tracing out the
environment degrees of freedom and, as a result, the description of the OQS is done in
terms only of the system-only Hilbert space reducing dramatically the theoretical and
numerical description.
While the type of channels is extremely large and system-dependent—from e.g., back-
ground gas collisions or inelastic light-scattering for a cold-atomic system, to parasitic
fields or dissipative coupling to defects in solid state systems - the effects that those channel

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
21 of 124
produce on the system can be related to two important physical phenomena: dissipation
and decoherence. The first one, dissipation, describes the loss of energy or particles from
the system into the environment. Decoherence instead is characterised by the transfer of
information from the system into the environment due to its indirect probing of the system.
At the level of the physical system, this produces the dynamical destruction of coherence
between the states competing with the superposition arising from coherent dynamics. Both
dissipation and decoherence are fundamental concepts in the description of OQS and
their implications.
Finally, while the master equation allows for a system-only description of the OQS,
the exponential nature of the Hilbert Space size produces relevant limitations to the sizes
we can compute numerically as the density matrix ρ has dimension dim(H) × dim(H).
One possible avenue to overcome this limitation consist of the use of stochastic unraveling
techniques that allow us to describe these systems as an average of random trajectories.
These techniques are the topic of the next section as, apart from their numerical utility,
they are deeply connected with specific experimental setups and ways in which we can
interact and probe quantum systems linking to quantum measurement theory and quantum
information [304].
Stochastic Unraveling Description of Open Quantum System
In this section, we detail some of the existing theoretical and numerical methods
that allow for the efficient description of open quantum systems within the Markovian
approximation, based on some form of stochastic averaging.
The first modelisation of the bath in this direction comes from the field of quantum
optics where a quantum stochastic calculus formulation allowed to describe the effect of
the environment as a set of noise terms leading to the evolution of the system governed by
Quantum Langevin-type equations or master equations [305–307].
Importantly, these equations where then quickly formulated in term of stochastic
Schröedinger equations [308] meaning that the effect of the noise in the evolution equation
could be described in terms of probabilistic random individual trajectories that can be
efficiently sampled numerically. Moreover, each of the individual trajectories would
correspond to the measurement record of a single run of the corresponding experiment.
Thus, these techniques do not only are interesting to provide a sample of the statistically
averaged reduced density operator of the system but also are intimately connected to the
information that the measurement apparatus or bath would extract from a given quantum
system. While this idea is inherently in the realm of quantum optics, the considerations
are in fact rather general and this approach has been approach widely in cold atomic and
solid-state systems. Examples can be found in these reviews [36,309,310].
This powerful formalism remains rather mathematical, nevertheless, substantial work
was performed in the early years of the development of the theory to connect it to the
physical properties of the bath and the specific experimental scenarios. In particular,
we would like to highlight two relevant scenarios that have develop to constitute their
own standalone frameworks for OQS: photodetections characterised via quantum jumps,
Figure 3a, and homodyne detection described via quantum state diffusion, Figure 3b.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
22 of 124
S
(a)
(b)
t
γ
S
⌦
γ
I1
I2
t
Figure 3. Diagrams for the stochastic unraveling of an open system: (a) A physical system S emits
photons into the environment with a characteristic rate γ; when these are recorded via our photode-
tector, we gain the information that the system has undergone a quantum jump; (b) The output
photons of our system S is instead coupled to a strong oscillatory signal Ωthrough a homodyne
detection scheme of intensities I1, I2 at the output of a beam splitter. The system is then weakly and
continuously monitored leading to a noisy diffusive behavior instead of projective collapse.
Quantum jumps: Monte Carlo wave-function method
This approach was independently introduced in different contexts of quantum optics
from laser theory to the description of radiating atoms [311–314], with all revolving around
the process of photodetection. The idea is rather simple: when a photon is detected on
the system’s apparatus this implies a sudden change on the state of the system, or jump,
e.g., a two-level atom decays from the excited state emitting a photon into the background
field, see Figure 3a. Consequently, it is possible to associate the state of the system in
a single realisation with the stochastic measurement of the detector. This was observed
experimentally already in the early years of the theory by monitoring the change of an
ancilla in optical systems [315–317], and later on also in solid-state ones [318,319]. More
recently, the degree of experimental control has allowed not only to observe such quantum
jump but also reverse it as it is occurring [320].
This technique unravels the master equation evolution into a set of individual trajecto-
ries where the system undergoes time evolution and experiences a set of jumps at random
times and locations that are sampled according to well-defined probability rules. The evolu-
tion of the master equation is then recover from a set of pure state evolutions—numerically
requiring dim(H) instead of dim(H) × dim(H) at the cost of the sampling over trajectories.
Despite its origin in quantum optics, this technique can be applied to any Markovian open
system, in particular, it is widely uses in cold atomic systems. For a detailed review on the
method and extensive example applications, see [36,309]. The essential point is that this
formalism, and the ones presented below, can be extended to situations in which there is no
measurement apparatus but rather the measurement is performed by certain environmental
degrees of freedom that remain not monitored, not requiring then experimental probing of
the system.
Quantum state diffusion
The second physical scenario that we consider is the one of continuously and weakly
probing the system by means of homodyne detection, i.e., by coupling the output from
the physical system to a strong oscillator field [304,306,321], see Figure 3b. In this case,
the photons incoming from the system are not directly measured and, as a result, the system

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
23 of 124
will only be weakly perturbed and undergo a diffusive evolution that can be model in
terms of a noise term. These diffusion equations, see e.g. [322,323], both in terms of density
operators and pure states, allowed for a similar treatment to classical control theory of these
systems leading into not only a framework where it is possible to describe the measurement
process but also quantum control and feedback [310,324,325]. This diffusive evolution
behaviour has also been observed experimentally [326,327], and its effect on the system
as characterised theoretically [328,329] has been modelled and mitigated in a variety of
scenarios (see here the first experimental example [330]), or completely reverted [331].
The quantum state diffusion allows then to describe a system under weak continuous
monitoring whose master equation—to be seen as the statistical average of all possible
measurement outcomes at all possible times – is reduced to a set of noisy random reali-
sations; an approach that is complementary to the quantum jumps, where the advantage
to use either of them depends typically on the characteristics of the model being studied.
In addition, there is another relevant specific subclass of bath description in the weak
measurement limit, that we discuss in the following section.
Collisional models
The unraveling techniques presented above are not the only possible ways in which
the exponentially large number of degrees of freedom of the environment can be treated
or discretized. In the following, we consider a specific non-perturbative method that has
gained interest in recent years, partially due to its applicability in discrete physical systems
such as gate-based QC [332,333] or even more generally in applications outside physics as
described in Section 7. This is the case of quantum collisional models (CMs) [334,335].
Quantum collisional models were first introduced by [336], and provide a bath descrip-
tion that is both discrete in time and space. More specifically, in this framework the system
is coupled to a small subset of bath degrees of freedom at a time, turning the complex
bath-system coupling Hamiltonian into a reduced quasi-pairwise discretization of their
interaction that allows for a more efficient description of the coupling. It is immediate to
understand how this approach could be beneficial in certain scenarios describing spatially
structured systems, e.g., lattices, linear traps or quantum circuits where the system itself
possess a certain space structure. While the approximation of considering that the system
interacts with a reduced portion of the bath at a time instead of all the normal modes at
once, seems rather drastic, applications have been found in a wide range of systems. While
referring to the relevant reviews [334,335] for a detailed list of applications, significant
examples are e.g., in quantum thermalisation [333,337], quantum transport [338,339] or in
state preparation [340] among others.
The last relevant aspect of CMs that we would like to discuss in this review is that
the time discrete nature of the interaction allows for a natural framework to incorporate
structured baths beyond the Markovian approximation and also beyond the weak-coupling
regime. In this sense, CMs constituted an ideal framework for a non-perturbative modelisa-
tion of non-Markovian systems, see [341,342].
In the following, we will discuss some general aspects of the existing approaches to
describe with OQS beyond the standard Markovian limit.
Beyond the Born-Markov Approximation
As it is not the main topic of this work, in the following we will highlight a set of
relevant scenarios for the platforms and frameworks that we include in the review, while
for detailed studies we refer to [343–346].
While both the Born and the Markov approximations are applicable in a wide range of
systems—particularly in the context of cold atomic systems, due to the typical timescale
separation as we have discussed—there are certain scenarios in which these are no longer
reasonable assumptions [347].
For example, it is easy to imagine scenarios in which the system is no longer weakly
coupled to the environment, e.g., if we introduce the system into a cavity it will strongly
couple to the radiation field. Even if this constitutes a challenge for the description, the cavity

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
24 of 124
modes can mediate long-range interactions with complex space dependence [35,115,348]
that we can use for programmable quantum simulation and computing, such as modelling
information scrambling, that is a fundamental problem in e.g., cosmology and quantum
information [349,350]. We hope this motivates the reader to understand how as the degree
of control develops, it is important to consider descriptions beyond the standard framework
to model new possible applications.
In addition to the relaxation of the weak-coupling condition, there are other relevant
scenarios where we cannot assume that the Markov approximation is preserved, as the
bath does not remain unchanged by the coupling to the system. This can be either because
their size is comparable or because its correlations do not decay fast in comparison with
the system timescales. This is a common problem in solid-state systems, but also present
in cold atoms under certain conditions, e.g., by considering coupling to untrapped states
from the optical trap [351,352] or by the presence of a spin or fermionic bath [353].
Furthermore, in our derivation of the GSKL master equation, we required a third
approximation namely the rotating-wave or secular approximation [302] that guaranteed
that our dynamical map was preserving the physical properties of our state as time evolves.
This can also be avoided by deriving the Bloch-Redfield master equation [354], a pertur-
bative master equation that can represent non-trivial bath spectra and that can be solved
numerically for moderate system sizes.
In general, there has been substantial work in solving the general problem of OQSs in the
absence of these approximations: through perturbative master equation approaches [355,356],
through the use of stochastic methods such as quantum jumps [357] or quantum state
diffusion approaches [358], through collisional models [334,342], or through a hierarchy of
pure states approaches [359]. We refer again to the relevant reviews for a detailed list.
Before we move on, there are two relevant aspects of non-Markovian systems that
should be considered. The first is that biological systems, object of Section 7, are often
subject to non-Markovian dynamics [360] as it has been reported in experiments on chemical
compounds involved in photosynthesis, where reltively long-coherence times and bath
relaxation rates comparable to the system dynamical timescales have been observed [361].
Thus, it is important to consider a general, non-necessarily Markovian description for
biological systems as OQSs. For a detailed discussion see [345]. Finally, there is a relevant
aspect on non-Markovianity related to fundamental questions on quantum information.
There has been extensive work in defining measures of non-Markovianity in terms of some
quantification of the information exchange between system and environment, e.g., via
Quantum Fisher information flow [362] or distinguishability measures [363].
All in all, in this Section 2.2.1 we have discussed a set of theoretical tools that allow
for the description of driven-dissipative quantum systems in a feasible manner, discussing
scenarios in which the different approximations suffice, and also means to extend them.
However, in any of these frameworks we often require the manipulation of large matrices
due to the exponential growth of the Hilbert space with the system size. As a result, many of
these techniques cannot be applied directly to more than 10–20 sites/particles. Motivated by
this limitation, in the following section we discuss one of the leading approximate methods
to tackle the simulation of large quantum systems, that is tensor networks, with special
focus on their 1D version, denoted as matrix product states.
2.2.2. Quantum System Description via Tensor Networks
As we have just discussed, the major bottleneck in the theoretical and numerical
description of current quantum technology platforms is the quickly increasing dimension
of the Hilbert space. This requires finding ways in which we can manipulate and perform
operations with large objects, but this method quickly becomes unfeasible due to the
exponential growth. As an example, let us consider a set of N 2-level atoms (two hyperfine
states of a neutral atomic species), here the configuration space is given by 2N. If we
consider the computational storage of the quantum state associated to our system this
task becomes quickly impossible. In particular, with N = 4 we are only required to store

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
25 of 124
24 = 16 complex coefficients to define our quantum state. However, as we increase the size,
e.g., N = 300 atoms, then our space would be have a dimension of 2300 and the associated
Hamiltonian matrix would have a size of approximately 1082 B if using double precision,
a number larger than current estimates of the number of barions in the observable universe
(∼1080). This example should quickly make the reader aware of how exact methods,
even exploiting specific properties of the system such as certain conserved quantities or
constraints, quickly become untreatable in current—and near-future—technologies.
Consequently, we are required to consider approximate methods to describe quantum
technology platforms. In this section, we briefly introduce the framework of tensor net-
works an approximate method that has been been developed in the last 30 years for the
computation of both equilibrium and dynamical properties of quantum systems. The origin
of tensor networks is connected to the development of the density matrix renormalization
group (DMRG) [364,365] that was designed for the iterative computation of equilibrium
properties in one-dimensional quantum systems. A few years later, it was shown that the
ground states of the systems addressed by DMRG could be efficiently represented [366,367]
by means of matrix product states (MPS), which are the essential components of tensor
networks in 1D. The ability to map the DMRG problems into the language of MPS enabled
the rapid development of the field with techniques that could describe also time-dependent
processes (t-DMRG) [368–370].
The basic principle behind matrix product states is the fact that, as observed in nature,
low-dimensional and low-energy quantum systems present a moderate amount of entan-
glement. This is well-characterised in literature by the existence of bounds and so-called
area laws [371] limiting the bipartite entanglement in physical systems to the size of the
boundary between subsystems in contrast to the entanglement growing with the system’s
volume [372] as it would for a random state in the Hilbert space. Thus, MPS constitute a
low-entanglement ansatz representation of the states in our quantum system providing an
efficient truncation of the Hilbert space to the relevant physical region, providing accurate
representations in one-dimensional gapped systems. It is important to mention that this
description was also extended to the representation of operators via so-called matrix prod-
uct operators (MPOs) [373–375], allowing to deal with non-local and long-range systems.
Furthermore, extensions to larger dimensions have already been developed [376] while
optimizations in these cases are rather system-dependent, and moderate success has been
found in modelling quantum many-body systems in 2D and 3D.
In this section we will highlight some of the relevant tools developed in the field
of MPS that are applicable to the topics discussed in this review, focusing on the one-
dimensional case but also highlighting the link with OQS techniques, particularly with the
stochastic unraveling methods discussed in Section 2.2.1, and potential links to machine
learning and QC. For a detailed description of the formalism we direct the reader to some
of the excellent extensive reviews in literature [377–379].
Matrix Product States (MPS) and Operators (MPO)
The simplest approach to understand how to represent a quantum state via MPS is
by considering two decompositions. The first one, related to quantum information, is the
Schmidt decomposition [380] that represents a pure state in terms of two orthonormal bases
of two partitions A and B {|i⟩A}, {|j⟩B}:
|ϕ⟩= ∑
i,j
λab|i⟩A|j⟩B .
(3)
The second one is the singular value decomposition (SVD), that allows to express any
generic matrix M with dim(M) = d1 × d2 in a product of matrices of the following form:
M = USV†,
(4)

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
26 of 124
with U composed of orthonormal columns satisfying U†U = I and dim(U) = d1 ×
min(d1, d2); S a diagonal matrix of dim(S) = min(d1, d2) × min(d1, d2) formed by the
singular values λ1 < λ2 < ... < λr, and we denote as Schmidt rank r the number of
non-zero entries of S and, V† composed of orthonormal rows as VV† = I and dim(V) =
min(d1, d2) × d2.
Ee then consider a generic quantum state representing a discrete system of M quantum
systems with individual local basis |σi⟩of dimension d, written as:
|ϕ⟩=
∑
σ1,...,σM
cσ1,...,σM|σ1, ..., σM⟩,
(5)
where we require a set of dM complex values cσ1,...,σM to represent our state. By iteratively
performing SVD to the local Hilbert spaces, as described schematically in Figure 4, we can
transform the M-indexed coefficients into a product of local matrices of the form:
|ϕ⟩=
∑
σ1,...,σM
r1
∑
l1
r2
∑
l2
...
rM
∑
lM
Mσ1
l1 Mσ2
l1,l2...MσM−1
lM−2,lM−1 MσM
lM−1,lM .
(6)
. . .
. . .
. . .
U
cσ1,...,σM
M[1]
l1
l1
l1
σ1
σ1
cl1,σ2,...,σM
. . .
M[1]
l1
σ1
M[2]
M[3]
M[M]
l2
σ2
σ3
σM
lM−1
l3
σ1
σ2
σ3
σM
. . .
U
(l1σ2)
l2
l2
M[1]
l1
σ1
M[2]
l2
σ2
. . .
cl2,σ3,...,σM
...
S
V †
S
σ2
σ3
σM
V †
σ3
σM
σ4
σ2
σ3
σM
σ3
σM
σ4
Figure 4. Construction of an MPS representation of a generic state: A quantum state representing a
M-unit system, e.g., M particles or lattice sites, requires a set of complex coefficients given by the
product of the local dimensions σi, with dim(σi) = d, generating a M-legged tensor of dimension dM.
By performing iterative local SVDs for each dimension σi we can write the state as a set of product
of local matrices M[i] for each combination of {σ1, ..., σM}. These matrices can be compressed in a
controlled way, according to their bipartite entanglement with the rest of the system. Figure taken
from [381].
Crucially, this transformation can be done without loosing any information if we keep
the maximum matrix dimensions. However, the key aspect of MPS compression is that
every time we perform SVD, the Schmidt rank associated to the matrix is given by the
amount of entanglement between the two bipartitions connected by the corresponding
link. In many relevant physical cases this Schmidt rank is rather small, trivially being
r = 1 for the case of a product state, allowing for the reduction of the matrix dimension.
In fact, the best approximation to each local matrix with a maximum dimension Dmax is
that associated to the largest Dmax singular values and singular vectors.
Thus, we can obtain the matrix product form and compress the state in a controlled
way, as in every iteration we can monitor the amount of error in the representation as the
sum of the singular values not being stored ϵi ≡∑ri
li=Dmax+1(λi)2 . Moreover, we can relate
this compression with the idea of MPS as a low-entanglement ansatz if we consider the
definition of Von Neumann entropy [380], for a given bipartition with singular values {λi}:
SvN = −
ri
∑
li
(λi)2 ln(λi)2 →max(SvN) ≤ln(Dmax) .
(7)

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
27 of 124
As we mentioned before, this matrix product structure can be generalised for operators
in the form of MPOs [373,374], where the local tensors now will have an additional index
σ′
i . These formalisms allow for the straightforward product of states and operators and the
computation of overlaps and expectation values, see e.g., [377].
Algorithms with MPSs and MPOs: Equilibrium, Dynamics and Open Systems
The first applications of MPS methods, where related as we mentioned to the calcu-
lation of equilibrium properties. Particularly for the calculation of ground states, these
revolve around the idea of adapting DMRG protocols [364,365] to MPS language through
local updates of tensor network to iteratively minimize the energy variationally. The devel-
opment of MPOs allowed to also successfully apply to long-range interacting systems [375].
Moreover, further advances have rendered the method well-suited for the calculation of not
only ground states [377] and low-excited states but even thermal states [373] in dissipative
settings. In addition, MPS methods can also be used to understand certain spectral proper-
ties and the structure of excitations in the lower part of the energy spectrum [382,383]. Other
protocols have developed frameworks to compute highly-excited states [384] in conditions
of low entanglement or have also extended the formalism to continuous systems [385].
This wide range of applicability in equilibrium phenomena together with the ability to
approximate large systems made MPS a suitable approach to study a wide range of one
dimensional critical phenomena where the failure of the low-entanglement ansatz could
characterise criticality [386,387].
In parallel to this development, MPS has also been widely used in the study of
dynamics. Originally, based on local tensor updates similar to Suzuki-Trotter decompo-
sitions, this is the case of time evolution block decimation (TEBD) [368–370]. Later on,
variational tangent-space methods where also successfully employed in computing time
evolution in the MPS/MPO language through the time-dependent variational principle
(TDVP) [388,389].
Quite crucially, as any protocol based on MPS when a tensor update is performed,
either for DMRG or for time evolution, the error in the re-compression into MPS form can
be monitored and keep to a suitable value. This error is typically the limiting factor in the
maximum system sizes and simulation times that can be achieved.
Natural extensions to the study of open quantum systems where also developed in the
context of tensor networks. Particularly, early examples of the use of MPOs where dedicated
to the representation of density operators [373]. In general, most protocols that we have
discussed so far are readily applicable to vectorized density matrices, where the local Hilbert
space of each individual tensor is doubled and adapted via a Choi’s isomorphism [390].
Importantly, all the stochastic methods described in Section 2.2.1, are also compatible
with time evolution algorithms through MPS since they are typically based on the use
of pure state evolution. In the context of Markovian open systems, extensions to the
DMRG protocol for the computation of steady states were developed [390]. More recently,
extensions to the study of dynamics in non-Markovian systems were developed [391,392].
For further details we refer to this topical review [393].
Beyond One-Dimension
While the applications of matrix product states are quite general and new examples
are constantly developed, it is important to consider that MPS constitutes a subclass of
the bigger tensor network family. This is particularly relevant when we consider the
applications of tensor networks in contexts beyond quantum simulation and its links with
QC, as we discuss in the following section.
The first generalisation of MPS to two-dimensional systems is the case of projected
entangled pair states (PEPS) [376]. In parallel to these, tree-tensor networks (TTN) and, par-
ticularly, multiscale entanglement renormalization ansatz or MERAs was developed [394],
these methods were also suitable for the study of multidimensional systems. These more
general structures of tensor networks are an active area of research with new protocols

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
28 of 124
being currently developed, e.g., for thermal states in 2D [395]. One of the most relevant
differences with the case of MPS is that the optimization of the computational routines are
often heavily system-dependent and, as a result, algorithms need to be tailored to the prob-
lem at hand. Despite this, there are some general strategies for the efficient development of
tensor networks, with new algorithms being developed [396,397]. We refer to this recent
review for further details [398].
Tensor Networks Beyond the Simulation of Quantum Matter
One of the first field of applications of tensor networks (TN) outside the description
of quantum many-body systems was the simulation of lattice gauge theories. This link
was originally established for quantum simulators [54,399] more generally, but was quickly
rephrased into TN language [400–402]. Since then, TN have been widely applied in a large
amount of fields: from the description of holographic theories in cosmology [403] to their
links with conformal field theories in critical systems [404,405], to the study of dynamically
constraint models [406] or to the understanding of quantum thermalisation [407].
In this section, we would like to focus our attention on a set of applications of TN that
are specially pertinent for this review and will be the focus on Section 2.3. That is their
utility in the development of current QC algorithms, partially due to their synergy with
machine learning approaches.
Perhaps the simplest way to understand the role of TN in QC is the idea that TN offer
a natural framework for information compression, in the same way that they provided
a compressed state description through a controllable ansatz. Then, one could apply TN
to the efficient simulation of QC circuits [408]. This has allowing to devise protocols for
efficient tomography [409], for error mitigation [410] or for data classification [411]. Fur-
thermore, the TN framework can also accelerate existing variational quantum computing
approaches [412] and provide compact descriptions of random circuit networks [413].
In parallel to these developments, the use of TN in QC has been enhanced by its
connection with the field of machine learning. While initially machine learning approaches
were applied to the study of quantum matter as an alternative approach, solving the many-
body problem [414,415] or helping in the characterization of phases of matter [416]. It was
quickly understood that the underlying similar mathematical framework between both
disciplines would be able to create a synergistic development of both fields.
Since then, the TN formalism has been applied to the network structures native to
ML, formally understanding their equivalence [417], allowing for the compression and
simplification of ML algorithms by exploiting the TN structure [418], characterising their
expressivity [419] or being able to adapt tensor network algorithms such as DMRG to
their language [420]; also intertwining with Bayesian based-protocols [421] or generative
modeling [422]. In the same way, ML approaches can be used to accelerate operations in
TN [423].
All in all, the use of TN has enabled to access larger systems, model experimental
setups where exact methods were no longer feasible and access new physical regimes in the
context of quantum simulation, from the benchmarking of the devices [424], to mapping
interesting problems, e.g., in quantum chemistry [425] or in non-linear systems [426].
These long-standing benefits of the use of TN in quantum simulation, have only recently
transferred to the QC framework [3,427,428] and its likely that many of the potential use
cases and optimizations are yet to be revealed.
In this section, we have summarised some of the most relevant aspects for the descrip-
tion of open quantum systems in numerically treatable approaches. We have also discussed
in detail one of the leading techniques for the simulation of quantum many-body and
quantum computing given by tensor networks. Finally, we have connected these to more
general ideas of complex network theory and linked it with biological and more generally
applied physics systems. However, it is important to highlight that other widely used
methods for the simulation of quantum systems exist but will not be covered in this review.
In particular, we highlight the following methods that were applied to certain studies in

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
29 of 124
the following sections and direct the reader to the extended reviews included: quantum
Monte Carlo approaches [429], Keldysh formalism [430], transfer matrix methods [431],
applied in quantum optics not to be confused with the formulation of path integrals in TN
language [432], and truncated Wigner approach [433,434].
2.3. Quantum Computing
Existing quantum technologies bear a long-term promise in the implementation in
quantum computers, with all their potential applications. Chemistry [435], pharmaceuti-
cal [436], finance [437], and machine learning [438] are some of the many example fields.
From a purely theoretical point of view, quantum computing algorithms that have been
already demonstrated to solve certain types of problems faster than their existing classical
counterparts [439]. In the last 40 years, many quantum algorithms [440] that confirm this
advantage have been designed.
These theoretical proposals gave impetus to an intense experimental activity aimed
at realising a quantum computer. As we showed in the previous section, there is a broad
range of completely different quantum technologies that can be employed as quantum
computing elements like qubits, or quantum gates. Despite different hardware realizations,
all experimental proposals for a quantum computer must satisfy the so-called five Di
Vincenzo criteria [441]: a set of essential conditions that serve as a benchmark for assessing
the feasibility and practicality of quantum computing systems. The criteria encompass five
fundamental requirements:
•
Architecture scalability . The qubit is a well-defined physical system that can be isolated
from the external environment. Moreover, increasing the number of qubits does not
modify the device’s functioning principles.
•
Initialization ability. It is possible to initialise qubits in a custom desired state.
•
Coherence. Qubits have long coherence times.
•
Universality. It is possible to perform quantum gate operations that form a universal
set of gates. In this way, every quantum operation can be realized as a composition of
gates from the universal set.
•
Addressability. The device is capable of addressing and selecting the qubit that is
intended to be measured, isolating it from the remaining ones and performing the
measurement without information leaking or cross-talks.
A device that satisfies all five Di Vincenzo criteria is a quantum computer that is
capable of running quantum algorithms of any sort, without any limitation in the instance
size, of the computation time. On the contrary the current stage in the technological
development of quantum computers is often referred to in literature as NISQ-era (Noisy
Intermediate Scale Quantum Era) [442], a name that is explanatory of the characteristics of
the available technology today and what we predict in the near future. In fact, such devices
are affected by several types of noise and errors, that come from imperfect experimental
realizations or limited sampling.
Before providing an overview of theoretical strategies to deal with noise and errors,
we want to comment briefly on the first criteria since it often plays a pivotal role in many
quantum computing applications, like chemistry, pharmaceutical, and finance [435,436,438],
while we refer to review work [66,67,443] for a complete dive in quantum computing,
quantum communication and quantum internet.
Architecture scalability, the ability to scale up the number of qubits and interconnect
different quantum platforms, often necessitates the interconnection of many Quantum
Processor Units (QPUs), that may also differ in terms of experimental realization [444].
While the QPUs communication open up the possibility of constructing a quantum
network, and so realizing the so-called Quantum Internet [445], it is also a significant chal-
lenge, requiring among other resources the realisation of a quantum memory. A quantum
memory is used for storing and processing qubits for photon transmission with high fidelity,
enabling synchronization within quantum computers, extending the range of quantum
communication via repeaters, and distributing entanglement between distant nodes [445].

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
30 of 124
Various implementations, including cold neutral atoms and doped crystals, support storage
and retrieval functionalities, enabling efficient entanglement transfer. However, achiev-
ing high fidelity transfer remains a significant challenge for network scalability despite
advancements in polarization qubits [445].
Although we refer to the recent review work [443] for a deep dive in quantum comput-
ing topics, in Section 2.1 we summarised the different experimental platforms, indicating
relevant differences, and main advantages and challenges. Though not at all specific to
atom technologies, for completeness in this section we shift the focus onto the theoretical
progress that has been made in quantum computing regardless of the specific hardware
realisation, to deal with errors and noise. In the course of the years, this has come about
with two different strategies: error-correction codes and a hybrid quantum-optimization
approach. Finally, we introduce in Section 2.3.3 the concept of quantum control, which is
essential in both strategies above.
2.3.1. Fault-Tolerant, Error-Corrected Quantum Computation
The practical realization of a quantum computer is subject to the presence of imperfec-
tions, errors and noise. Thus, it is natural to develop protocols that reduce or completely
mitigate their impact. This has led to the development of error-correcting codes. An initial
strategy that deals with the presence of noise is encoding quantum information redundantly
using additional redundant qubits, as discovered in [446]. In the extra-qubits strategy-based
algorithms, the quantum information is spread over multiple physical qubits to generate a
logical qubit [446]. Most transformative algorithms, such as [439], require error-corrected
qubits. As a result, many protocols, including stabilizer and topological codes, have been
developed to protect logical qubits [447]. Nevertheless, the process itself of detecting and
correcting errors is also prone to noise, which means that error correction alone cannot
guarantee the long-term storage or processing of quantum information and alternative
approaches are required.
Fault-tolerant quantum computing is a theoretical framework for building quantum
computers that can continue to operate correctly even in the presence of errors caused by
noisy quantum hardware or imperfect control operations. The idea is to design quantum
algorithms and hardware in such a way that errors can be detected and corrected on the
fly, without disrupting the computation. The Quantum Fault-Tolerant threshold theorem
allows for the execution of large quantum computations by suppressing the quantum error
rate below a certain threshold. Proof of this result can be found in [448–450]. The challenge
of lowering noise levels remains significant, but some progress has been made in both
algorithmic and hardware development. Hardware improvement on both improvements in
the quality of the qubit properties and also in providing hardware components and architec-
tures that are less prone to errors. Results regarding hardware improvements of solid-state
platforms such as electron spin qubits in silicon [451], and spin qubits in diamond [452] have
been presented; as well as optical platforms’ ones [453]. In the quantum error correction
algorithmic literature, some authors [454,455] connect different quantum error correction
algorithms and protocols with the achievement fault-tolerance computation.
Moreover, there exist additional strategies towards fault-tolerant quantum computing.
Here we introduce two of them. The first one is making use of topological qubits to
overcome the current capability of traditional qubits to resist noise and errors [456], while
the second one is based on using quantum annealing [457], which utilizes a different type
of hardware and algorithms than gate-based quantum computing. This approach connects
with the quantum-simulation related ideas discussed in 2.2.1.
Although fault-tolerance operations are starting to become achievable only in very re-
cent years [458], we are now entering the transition phase towards a fault-tolerant quantum
computing era, following on the initial steps have been implemented for different hardware
platforms, including solid state devices, such as electron spin qubits in silicon [451], spin
qubits in diamond [452] and optical devices [453]. Moreover, as described in Section 2.1.1,
when commenting on nanomagnet technologies, fault-tolerant schemes for fault-tolerant

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
31 of 124
quantum information have been also proposed exploiting qudits, as those synthesizable on
magnetic nanomagnets [92–94].
2.3.2. Quantum Optimization
While fault-tolerant architectures are one of the main routes to design QC hardware
that can cope with imperfect implementations, there are other approaches to reduce the
noise impact, like the creation of on-purpose designed quantum algorithms.
One of the most common ways to achieve this goal is to turn the design into a quantum
optimization algorithm. In fact, optimization problems are ubiquitous in both classical and
quantum frameworks, including machine learning [438], chemistry [435,436], finance [437],
and more. All these different scenarios rely on the same basic optimization structure:
finding the best from a set of potential solutions, subject to a set of constraints. Optimisation
aims to find a solution that maximizes or minimizes a particular criterion, such as profit,
cost, or energy consumption. Thus, the essential task is focused in mapping the problem
into the optimal cost functions given the system’s constraints, transforming the problem
into finding the extreme of a given cost function.
In the quantum context, the optimization problem is encoded in the quantum com-
puter itself [459]. The most prominent example is the Variational Quantum Eigensolver
(VQE) [460], which we describe in more detail in the section below. Even if we present the
basic scheme of VQE as a textbook model of variational hybrid optimization algorithms,
many results [461,462] show how to improve VQE and hybrid variational algorithms
performances for specific applications sourcing from more advanced techniques. In the
VQE problem, similar to Hamiltonian engineering as in Section 2.2.1, the objective is to
find the lowest energy state of a given quantum system. This can be used to find the
ground state properties of a given quantum model, and also to map a relevant, other-
wise hard to solve, problem into the quantum one. VQE is part of the family of hybrid
quantum-classical variational optimization algorithms [463]: the hybrid core idea is to
use a quantum computer only to tackle specific tasks of an algorithm, leaving other tasks
to a classical computer. In this way, the quantum computer would be used to exploit a
(possible) quantum advantage while a classical computer can manage tasks like storing
data, arithmetic, and in general, any processing operation that is simpler to implement in
classical hardware, for which typically classical efficient algorithms exists. Section 2.3.2 is
dedicated to quantum variational algorithms, while referring to [464] for a complete review
on this topic.
For the sake of completeness, we want to mention that it is also possible to tackle
the optimization process only using a quantum device, in what is known as a quantum
annealer [465], a specific type of analogue quantum computer. In fact, the computational
model of quantum annealers is completely different from other QC algorithms presented
in this review. Thus, while referring to more recent reviews such as e.g., [466], for a
complete theoretical and experimental perspective, we here only recall quantum annealers
are devices that implement the adiabatic driving from a well-known ground state of an
initial Hamiltonian H0 to the unknown ground state of the problem Hamiltonian Hp. In so
doing, the solution of the given optimization problem is encoded, based on the adiabatic
theorem of quantum mechanics.
Quantum Variational Algorithms
Quantum variational algorithms, originally proposed in [460,463] are a family of
hybrid quantum-classical algorithms that use classical optimization techniques to find the
ground state of a given Hamiltonian. In the NISQ era, quantum variational algorithms
are especially important because they can be implemented on the available quantum
hardware [464], which is currently limited in terms of the number of qubits, the circuit
depths (i.e. the longest path in a quantum circuit, in terms of the number of executed
gates), the presence of noise or the imperfections in gates that can be implemented. Thus,
shifting the focus to a resource-based approach where the optimization can be performed

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
32 of 124
considering the hardware-constraints on top of those of physical origin. This way the
quantum circuit can be parametrized in terms of the set of available quantum operations.
Every circuit then can be described in terms of a set of variational parameters, describing
the gates applied, their position and times or their angles when applicable.
As we introduced in the previous Section 2.3.2, a prominent example of quantum
variational algorithms in the NISQ era is the Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE), which
was first proposed by [460]. The VQE algorithm consists of three main components: a
parametric quantum circuit that prepares a trial wavefunction, a measurement of the energy
of the trial wavefunction, and a classical optimization loop that updates the parameters
of the trial wavefunction to minimize the energy. The typical hybrid algorithm scheme is
represented in Figure 5. The quantum computer executes the parametric state preparation
that is then measured, while a classical feedback loop extracts the outcome from the
quantum measurements, manipulates and stores the information, performs statistical
processing, computes the relevant quantities and feeds back the quantum computer with a
new set of variational parameters, found using the classical optimization subroutine.
⟨H⟩
. . .
. . .
...
...
. . .
ψ(0)
0
E
e−iθ1X1
e−iθ2X2
e−iθP XP
Update θ
ψ(1)
0
E
ψ(N)
0
E
Variational parameters
θ = (θ1, θ2...θP )
Figure 5. Basic scheme of variational hybrid quantum algorithms. A N-qubit quantum register is
initialized in the variational state
ψ(0)
0 , ψ(1)
0 , ...ψ(N)
0
E
at the step i = 0. The state evolves under the
application of several parametric quantum gates (purple boxes) until a quantum measurement is
performed (red boxes). The mean value of the relevant observables, e.g., the Hamiltonian of the
quantum system, is then computed using a classical processor (yellow boxes) that feeds back to
the quantum processor a set of new variational parameters, and the entire procedure restarts. New
parameters should be predicted using a classical iterative minimization sub-routine so that when
convergence is reached at i = I, the solution to the original problem is found.
Figure 5 can also be viewed as an outline of the basic scheme for a computational opti-
mization algorithm, in fact, other quantum variational algorithms that fit this scheme and
are commonly used nowadays. The latter include the Quantum Approximate Optimization
Algorithm (QAOA) [467], which is used for combinatorial optimization problems, and the
Quantum K-Means Algorithm (QK-means) [468], used for clustering. These quantum vari-
ational algorithms, including the VQE, are well-suited for the NISQ era for several reasons,
including their ability to cope with noise and other imperfections in current quantum
hardware due to their parametric nature [469–471].
As we notice above, Parametric Quantum Circuits (PQCs) are typically [440] describe
the state of the circuit in terms of a collection of parameters {ϑ} used to prepare the trial

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
33 of 124
wavefunctions. If we consider starting from an initial reference state |ψ0⟩, while the solution
to the problem is encoded in the target state
|ψ(θ∗)⟩= U(θ∗)|ψ0⟩,
(8)
characterised with the optimal parameters θ∗. Even at this general level, we can firstly see
that the expressibility of the PQC ansatz, encoded within U(ϑ), is important to guarantee
that the target state is actually reachable using a particular variational ansatz, meaning it
exists a set of parameters ϑ for which |ψ(ϑ)⟩= |ψ∗⟩. On the other hand, also trainability is
important, where this term quantifies how easy it is to actually find optimal parameters
ϑ and, in so doing, identifying the target state, via information extraction from the final
quantum state.
In most cases there is a trade-off between expressibility and trainability of a quantum
circuit [472] due to both experimental and theoretical limitations. Experimentally, we have
already discussed the presence of noise and errors in quantum circuits, while theoretically
there is a large open challenge in hybrid variational computing, the appearance Barren
plateaus. Barren plateaus are large regions in the parameter landscape, in which the cost
function has vanishing gradients, which prevents efficient optimization. It was recently
shown [473] that the expectation value of the gradient of the cost function corresponding to
randomly initialized parametric quantum circuits vanishes exponentially with the number
of qubits. In [474], a solution based on the connection between barren plateaus and the
locality of the cost function is proposed. In particular, it has been proven that if the cost
function is local, in the sense that the associated quantum observable contains only 1-qubit
operators, the effect of Barren plateaus is not so severe. In such cases, the Barren plateau
exists, but the variance of the cost function only decays polynomially with the number of
qubits, if the quantum circuit length scales at most as log(N), with N number of qubits.
Other strategies are proposed to avoid Barren plateaus, such as classical shadows [475],
classical optimization strategies [476,477], or measuring low-depth analytic gradients [478].
2.3.3. Quantum Control
Quantum control theory development stems from the implicit goal of controlling
quantum phenomena [479]. Controlling, manipulating, and steering quantum systems
towards desired states and objectives is both the ultimate need of all quantum technologies
and the final goal of quantum control as a theory; so the rapid evolution of the first led
to a similar improvement in the second over the last three decades [480]. A classical
control theory exists as a field of engineering and applied mathematics. Quantum control,
instead, differentiates due to the unique characteristics of microscopic quantum systems,
such as entanglement and coherence, or quantum measurement, which have no classical
counterpart. Such effects require establishing a new theoretical foundation and systematic
methods for manipulating and controlling quantum systems , in what was denoted as
quantum control theory.
This field has already achieved significant successes in physical chemistry [481], atomic
and molecular physics [482], , quantum optics [324], and fundamental aspects of quantum
mechanics [483]. Recent advancements highlight the essential role of quantum control
theory for the future application of quantum technologies [484].
The problem of defining controllability for quantum systems has been studied exten-
sively. Various notions of controllability, have been proposed [485]. Moreover, control-
lability criteria have been defined for finite-dimensional closed quantum systems while,
regarding infinite-dimensional quantum systems or open quantum systems, only limited
results have been obtained [485] as we briefly discuss later.
The open-loop strategies for quantum control are ones in which the control actions
are predetermined and executed without real-time feedback or adjustment based on the
system’s current state or measurement outcomes. When developing a one-loop strategy,
one can employ either a coherent or incoherent quantum control strategy. Coherent control
strategy involves manipulating the states of a quantum system by applying semiclassical

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
34 of 124
potentials while preserving quantum coherence, with many successful applications in
physical chemistry, spin systems, and also permit to enhance multidimensional nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments’ sensitivity in the presence of relaxation [486].
Incoherent control instead allows for the destruction of coherence during the control pro-
cess and has been introduced to enhance quantum control capabilities for uncontrollable
quantum systems [487]. Despite these achievements, one-loop strategies are not suitable
for quantum systems affected by noise resulting from coupling with uncontrollable envi-
ronments. Closed-loop learning control and quantum feedback control are the two main
different strategies that have been proposed to overcome this obstacle: the first achieved
great success by iteratively operating with new samples to control quantum phenomena in
chemical reactions [481]; while the latter has improved system performance in various tasks,
including controlling squeezed states and entangled states, state reduction, and quantum
error correction [488].
Finally, we want to highlight that the measurement process (typically the weakly
continuous one), can be part of control protocols: we dedicate Section 3.2.3 to this particular
framework, often denoted as quantum measurement and feedback control [304].
For an exhaustive review of the topic of quantum control theory and for a complete
description of its application the authors recommend previous topical reviews, e.g., [486].
2.4. Quantum Metrology and Sensing
We now turn to the last major theoretical and experimental toolbox useful to the
purposes of this review: quantum metrology and sensing. Quantum metrology and
sensing commonly denotes the use of a controllable quantum state to measure or detect
properties of another system, classical or quantum. For instance, to use the sensibility
of a quantum state to an external field to measure the field itself, with high accuracy. In
the last two decades, quantum metrology and sensing have increasingly turned towards
strongly correlated systems as a promising paradigm, for which we refer to the more recent
review [2]. Within this framework, we focus here on quantum gases, since they offer a
powerful platform for developing quantum measurement protocols and devices, both
benefiting from technological developments in the variety of QTs described in Section 2.1,
and also connecting to the engineering of quantum states of matter via the advancements
in atomic clocks [489] and atom interferometry [490–495].
In this section, we first remind the reader briefly of the principles of operation of
atomic clocks and atom interferometers [494] as transversal tools in atom-based quantum
technologies. Then, with this toolbox in mind, we review fundamental theoretical aspects
related to quantum metrology and sensing that will be essential to some of the applications
described in Section 5.
2.4.1. Atomic Clocks and Atom Interferometry
Atomic Clocks
Precise clocks operate based on the same fundamental concept of resonance, thus
involving systems that possess a natural oscillation frequency and an external driving that
can be tuned across this resonance. In fact, frequency standards have been historically
based on observations of cyclic motion of celestial bodies, the design of macroscopic me-
chanical resonators like pendulums or miniaturised electronic resonators, all significantly
limited by the dependence of the operational parameters and stability from external agents.
The development of atomic clocks, leading to an outstanding progress in more recent times,
represents a remarkable breakthrough to overcome these limitations.
While referring to [489] for a very comprehensive review, we here summarize the
main concepts and facts. To start with, these novel frequency standards provide the current
base unit of time, that is derived from the electronic ground-state hyperfine transition fre-
quency in caesium, while accurate optical frequency standards are becoming a secondary
standard. High-performance atomic clocks have crucial impacts and potential implications,
besides providing the standard definition of time and frequency. In fact, they provide the

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
35 of 124
worldwide coordination of atomic time; they are a critical component of global navigation
satellite systems; they help in deep space navigation and communication networks and are
part of inertial sensor technology like absolute gravimeters, gyroscopes, and gravity aided
navigation; they have important applications in geodesy, i.e., in the form of a chronometric
leveling method to connect height systems between countries, based on a frequency com-
parison between two remote optical clocks via optical fibers, microwave or optical satellite
links [489].
Atoms are extraordinary natural oscillators. Identical atoms of the same species have
the same natural oscillation frequencies given by the modes of the electron wave functions,
and can therefore serve as ideal frequency standards. Thus, the concept underlying the
use of atomic transitions as a frequency reference is to produce an oscillatory signal in
resonance with the atoms’ (or molecules’) natural oscillations, and then accurately counting
the oscillation cycles to measure the time intervals. In particular, the atom is prepared in
one (of two) of its quantum states, associated with one of its natural oscillations. Then,
a local oscillator is used to generate radiation around the natural oscillation frequency,
and a mechanism is designed to detect the change of the atom’s state and in particular
the resonance condition reveling synchronicity between the local and the atoms’ natural
oscillations. This synchronization ensures the accuracy and stability of the clock [489].
While the atomic hydrogen maser is one important and still widely used standard
realization since its introduction in the 1960s, more common methods to achieve synchro-
nization are based on atoms’ absorption and use lasers. The degree of synchronization
is limited by noise inherent to the measurement protocol and by dissipative couplings to
the environment, especially of electromagnetic origin. Frequency standards are in fact
characterized by statistical and systematical errors. The former arise from measurement
fluctuations and are characterized in terms of fractional frequency errors: they are estimated
basically by performing averages over different probing time duration of the fractional
frequency deviation between the local oscillator frequency—assumed to be perfect—and
the clock atoms’ frequency as related to the reference oscillator frequency [489]. One com-
monly used indicator is the Allan variance [496], quantifying how the precision on the
measured frequency improves with longer averaging times. Systematic errors are more
challenging to estimate, since their origin may be unknown or not completely understood.
On the other hand, they are crucial for stability, since its statistical improvement with
increasing averaging time is strongly affected by systematics. One effective way of dealing
with systematic errors is to compare the performance of different versions of the same
clock [489]. Designing a good clock requires three essential conditions related to the concept
of resonance: stability, high-frequency operation, and narrow-line resonances.
Stabilization of the local-oscillator frequency to an atomic transition is accomplished
by extracting a sensitive discriminator signal dS/d f, with S the signal obtained from
the atomic sample and f the frequency shift of the applied radiation, and using it to
provide a feedback mechanism. This requires maximizing the value of the atomic-transition
frequency f0 and of the rate of change dS/d f of S vs. f, while minimizing the fluctuations
δS. The governing parameters involved are the signal-to-noise ratio, the quality factor Q,
and the measurement duration Tm ∝1/∆f. Atoms are prepared in one of the clock states
and the clock transition resonance is excited near the frequency that maximizes the value
of (dS/d f )/δS.
The desired high frequencies and narrow linewidths of the clock transitions have
for many years been guaranteed by exploiting microwave—in particular hyperfine—
transitions. While even higher frequencies might in principles be exploited as those
involved in Mössbauer spectroscopy, Mössbauer clocks suffer from a number of limitations:
significant systematics, primarily associated with pressure effects in the host material,
dispersive line shapes, technical limitations to observe coherences and realize sufficient
collimation of the local oscillator. The optical region of the spectrum comprises suitable
narrow-linewidth transitions available in many atoms. However, only recently improved
techniques have been made available for locking lasers to stable reference cavities, thereby

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
36 of 124
meeting two requirements for optical atomic clocks: narrow spectra lasers and a conve-
nient method to count cycles of the stabilized laser local oscillators. This has enabled the
development of optical atomic clocks with high stability and precision.
In optical atomic clocks, systematic shifts can be classified as those due to environ-
mental perturbations and observational shifts [489]. Environmental shifts are caused by
external factors such as present electric and magnetic fields, while observational shifts are
related to instrumental and observational effects specific to the clock’s experimental setup.
Of course, also relativistic effects determine fundamental and universal observational shifts,
which are precisely the subject of current investigations, see Section 5.
Atom Interferometry
The fundamental concept of particle-wave duality suggests that matter can exhibit
interference phenomena similar to light. This has been experimentally demonstrated for
various systems, including electrons and neutrons [497] and, more recently, even large
organic molecules [498]. On the other hand, atoms offer precise and accurate controllability
due to their internal structure and the possibility of manipulating their quantum states
with light. In contrast with e.g., electrons, atoms also lack electric charge, minimizing
unwanted external electromagnetic interactions. For this reason, atomic interferometry has
been strongly developed, in conjunction with precision measurements [494].
As conceptualised in Figure 6, atom interferometers are basically similar to optical
Mach-Zehnder interferometers, in that they use light-pulse atom-optical elements instead
of mirrors and beam-splitters. By timing the laser pulses appropriately, one can manipulate
the populations and create superpositions of states, similar to the behavior of light in an
optical interferometer. The principle of operation of mirrors and beam-splitters is that laser
light is made to interact with atoms resonantly to specific atomic transitions, thus coherently
driving the populations of the ground and excited states into Rabi oscillations. Thus, a π/2
pulse, i.e., corresponding to a quarter oscillation period, acts as a 50:50 beam-splitter by
creating an equal probability of ground and excited states. Similarly, a π pulse acts as a
mirror [495].
Therefore, these laser pulses can in principle create superpositions of internal as well
as momentum states, given that atoms absorbing the photons get a finite momentum
kick and makes them travel along different paths simultaneously. During these paths,
a different phase can be accumulated due to the distinct interactions with the given external
fields, gravity being one such example. This phase difference can then be detected after
recombination of the atomic beams. In the simplest configuration, this operation can
be accomplished by a sequence π/2 −π −π/2 of three light pulses applied, effectively
corresponding to the matter-wave equivalent of a Mach-Zehnder (light) interferometer.
Since the first laboratory demonstration of atom interferometers [499], a number
of variants have been developed with diverse applications, which can be reviewed in
e.g., [494]. Selected applications are discussed in Section 5.1.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
37 of 124
(a)
(b)
Figure 6. Conceptual operation scheme of an atom interferometer. (a) Concept for the case of
beam splitters and mirrors. The probability of detecting an excited two-level atom fluctuates as
the interaction time is manipulated by laser pulses. If the energy of the laser photons matches the
energy difference between a ground and an excited state, the population undergoes Rabi oscillations
characterised by a frequency Ω. A pulse of duration
π
2Ωcreates a balanced 50:50 superposition
state, whereas a pulse of duration π
Ωresults into a population inversion. (b) Concept for an atom-
interferometry Mach-Zender protocol. A sequence of three laser pulses is applied to a cluster of atoms
in their ground state. First, the initial pulse splits the atomic beam by generating an equally-weighted
superposition state as described in (a), inducing both momentum transfer and spatial separation.
After a duration of time T, a π pulse mirrors the atomic beam by inverting the populations of the
ground and excited states as in (a), subsequently making their trajectories converge. Finally, one
more π
2 beam-splitting pulse mixes the populations, leading to interference patterns in the output
port populations. The interferometric phase, which is influenced by the external fields such as the
gravitational one ⃗g, can be assessed by quantifying the number of atoms in each port. The sensitivity
of the system relies on the size of the enclosed space-time area encompassed by the atom trajectories.
2.4.2. Entanglement as a Resource for Quantum Metrology and Sensing
Atom interferometry poses several challenges due to various sources of uncertainty,
which can be classified as either device-related or statistically driven [500]. Experimental
techniques have made considerable progress in reducing the former, reaching a level
comparable to or even lower than statistical errors [43,49,499–502]. To achieve even greater
precision, research efforts are now focusing on addressing the issue of statistical uncertainty,
especially in the context of quantum phase estimation [503,504]. The conceptual map in
Figure 7, adapted from [2], provides a glimpse of the current status of metrological gain
sensitivity in atomic platforms, including ions, Bose-Einstein condensates, and cold thermal
(i.e., not condensed) atoms.
One potential solution to mitigate statistical uncertainty lies in leveraging entanglement,
specifically through the use of quantum squeezing, to start with [223,505,506]. Quantum
squeezing allows for the reduction of uncertainty in a specific observable below the fun-
damental Heisenberg limit, at the cost of increased uncertainty in a conjugate observable,
as introduced already for light [507]. Experimental setups involving atomic spin squeezing
have been successfully proposed and implemented using either collision-driven interactions
or light-mediated interactions in optical cavities [137,223,508–512]. While most of the early re-
search has been focused on squeezing schemes for internal states of the atoms, more recently
proposals for momentum-states squeezing have been pushed forward [513–515], the latter
inspiring the more recent realization [514], and preluding to further progress with the
proposal of more advantageous simultaneous squeezing in internal and external degrees of
freedom [516].

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
38 of 124
Figure 7. Conceptual map of the achieved gain ∆θSQL = 1/
√
N in phase sensitivity over the standard
quantum limit, vs. the total number of atoms N or, when fluctuations are present, its average. Figure
adapted from [2], to provide an idea of the current technological landscape. The logarithmic scale
[left, in dB, 10 log10(∆θSQL/∆θ)2] and the linear scale [right, (∆θSQL/∆θ)2] are employed to display
the gain. As a reference, the solid thick line represents the Heisenberg limit with ∆θHL = 1/N.
Different colors refer to different experimental platforms as follows. Black: trapped ions. Red:
Bose-Einstein condensates. Blue: cold thermal ensembles. Different symbols refer to different ways
of estimating sensitivity, as follows. Stars: gains directly measured in phase sensitivity, acquired
through full phase estimation experiments. Circles: expected gains based on the characterization
of the quantum state, as computed e.g., from ∆θ = ξR/
√
N using the spin-squeezing parameter
ξR, or as ∆θ = 1/pFQ using the quantum Fisher information FQ. Filled (open) circles: results
obtained without (with) the subtraction of technical and/or imaging noise. We refer to [2] for the
correspondence of each symbol to a different experiment.
The presence of entanglement provides an advantage for sensing, as it can enhance
considerably the sensitivity of the considered protocol for estimation [2,173,491,503,517,518].
More in detail, sensitivity denotes here the variance (uncertainty due to classical and
quantum errors) ∆Q in the estimation of the desired quantity Q, calculated on a varying
(up to infinite) number of repeated measures on a chosen interrogation time. This amounts
to the minimum detectable value for Q and for unitary interrogation time. Beyond on the
specific details of the sensing protocol and on the decoherence timescales [173], sensitivity
depends critically on the spatial multi-partite entanglement between the different subsets
of the sensor.
Multi-partite entanglement (ME) is generally defined as follows. For a d-dimensional
discrete system with N components (e.g., sites), c-partite entanglement, with 1 ≤c ≤N,
implies that a partition {|ψi⟩} exists, where the maximum number of components in a
single |ψi⟩is c. The tensor-product state |ψ⟩= ∏⊗i |ψi⟩is then said to be c-producible, or to
have entanglement depth c. In addition, a system is said to host c-partite entanglement if it
is c-producible but not (c + 1)-producible. Instead, the number h, with N
c ≤h ≤N −c + 1,
of disentangled subsets is the degree of separability [517–519]. The usual separability
observed for product states corresponds to h = N and c = 1. Note that the subsystems are
not necessarily physically adjacent sites or parts of the system, e.g., in a lattice, but can be
distant in general. When c = N, |ψ⟩is said to host genuine ME. Note also that c can even
diverge with N, c ∼Nl, 0 ≤l ≤1.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
39 of 124
For mixed states, c-producibility in h subsets holds if ρ can be decomposed (generally
not uniquely) as
ρ = ∑
˜λ
p˜λ
˜λ

˜λ
 ,
(9)
where p˜λ > 0 without any lack of generality, and
˜λ

are c-separable states in h subsets,
not necessarily with the same space-partition. If c = N, then Equation (9) is still valid,
trivially with a single partition and in every decomposition. In general, the c-producible
decomposition
˜λ

is not orthogonal, thus ρ is not diagonal. Moreover, the producibility of
˜λ

is generally lost in other decompositions.
Multi-partite entanglement can be lower-bounded by a quantity, called quantum Fisher
information (QFI), FQ [2], expressed for pure states as sums of two-point connected correla-
tions of local operators. The same quantity is also effective for mixed states, although the
precise expression is in general more involved, given that it does not imply standard one-
and two-point correlations only, unless specific symmetries are present [520]. More in
detail, if c-entanglement, but not (c + 1)-entanglement, is present, then the inequality
FQ[N] ≤4 k c N ,
(10)
holds [504]. This implies that its violation signals at least (c + 1)-partite entanglement. The
ultimate limit FQ[N] = 4 k N2, when the state |ψ⟩hosts genuine multi-partite entanglement
(c = N), is called the Heisenberg limit. Other notable limits can be formulated, also
involving the separability h, and extending therefore that in (10). Overall, the QFI reveals a
class of entangled states, obeying a necessary condition for super-shot-noise sensitivity of a
quantum sensor.
More in detail, the QFI bounds the sensitivity of a quantum sensor via the so-called
Cramer-Rao bound:
∆Q ≥
c
pFQ
,
(11)
where c is a classical statistical factor, depending on the experimental details: the maximum
reachable sensitivity scales as the inverse of the square root of the QFI.
The quantification of entanglement has sparked a recent debate in both the quan-
tum information and many-body communities, driven by experimental observations in
quantum gases, see e.g., [521–527]. Textbook examples of quantum devices effective for
sensing are trapped ions and Rydberg atoms devices, atomic clocks, ensemble sensors,
spin sensors, magnetometers [528] (as SQUID-based technologies), single electron transis-
tors, optomechanical devices, or even elementary particles, as muons and neutrons [173].
Concerning the QFI, a weaker counterpart, the so-called classical Fisher information, has
been measured in [529]. Alternatively, multi-partite entanglement has been estimated on
multi-qubit devices, without the use of local operators as for the QFI, and using instead a
long-range Ising Hamiltonian [530].
Focusing on the theoretical level, various sensing archetype schemes have been elabo-
rated, mostly employing maximally-entangled states. Moreover, they are often based on
interferometric schemes, as Rabi, Ramsey, or Mach-Zender like protocols. Indeed, exploit-
ing quantum states, various estimation problems of different physical quantities can be
mapped on the suitable phase estimations. Other fundamental applications concerns the
study of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox, and more in general for the verification of
quantum mechanics against alternative theories, see e.g., [531–534].
Due to that central importance of maximally-entangled states, a large part of the efforts
in the research on quantum metrology and sensing is devoted to the efficient synthesis of
these states, as via bosonic Josephson junctions (mostly in their ground-states), suitable
atomic collisions or atom-light interactions, mostly in cavities [2], and their characterization
in terms of the quantum Fisher information content. In particular, Bose-Einstein dynamics
experimentally proved particularly suitable for actual entanglement generation [535,536].

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
40 of 124
Generating useful entanglement has also widely exploited quantum statistics [537]
and long-range interactions [223,538–540]. On the other hand, the impact of many-body
finite-range interactions has also been considered [239], as they can as well induce the
build-up of long-range correlations.
Relevant examples of highly-entangled states are realizable with sufficiently high
fidelity, in ultra-cold atom or trapped-ion experiments. Some of them are GHZ states,
NOON states and squeezed states. GHZ states are natural generalizations of cat states
with N ≥2 spins: (|↑. . . ↑⟩± |↓. . . ↓⟩)/
√
2. NOON states are instead superpositions of
multi-well states with a unique populated well. The simplest example for them is obtained
in a double quantum well with N bosons, as combinations of two classical states where
only a well is macroscopically populated: (|N, 0⟩± |0, N⟩)/
√
2. GHZ and NOON states are
useful for textbook protocols for quantum sensing, as Ramsey or Rabi schemes. However,
these states are typically very fragile against decoherence, due to magnetic frustrations and
particle losses, respectively. Also for this reason, a large attention has been devoted to the
creation of more stable highly entangled states, for instance the so-called squeezed states.
In general, squeezed states are characterized by the fact that the sum of the variances for
conjugate variables is fixed to ¯h/2 [2,173,504]. The coherent states are a particular squeezed
states, where the mentioned variances are equal, to ¯h/4.
GHZ and squeezed states have been created and manipulated in trapped-ions setups:
one example for GHZ states is reported in Figure 8, adapted from [2]. There, the long-
range Coulomb force is an ideal ingredient to prepare ions in highly-entangled states.
We also mention that similar magnetic properties are exploited in molecular quantum
nanomagnets—nanosized molecules with a certain number of ions interacting with each
other via a strong Heisenberg (anti-)ferromagnetic coupling—, still to produce and manip-
ulate entangled states for quantum simulation, information, communication and sensing,
see e.g., [92–94] and references therein.
Figure 8. Showcase of phase sensitivity for ion Schrödinger cat states. Figure adapted from [2].
(a) Typical parity oscillations achieved using cat states, characterized by a distinctive period of 2π/N
(here illustrated for N = 8). (b) Overview of experimental realisations. The Fisher information
F obtained from experimentally extracted visibilities V, is presented as a function of the num-
ber of qubits N, specifically expressed as F = V2N2. Upper thick line: Heisenberg limit (HL)
F = N2.
Lower thick line: standard quantum limit (SQL) F = N.
Thin lines: bounds for
valuable k−particle entanglement, employed to perimetrise the shaded region corresponding to
(k + 1)−particle entanglement. Notice that the darker red region indicates useful genuine N−particle
entanglement, while the lighter red region signifies useful (N −1)−particle entanglement, and so
forth. Inset: zoomed−in view for the specific case with N = 2 ions.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
41 of 124
Various remarkable examples of sensing have been performed, using atoms and
ultracold atoms. A major example being atomic clocks, as described in Section 2.4.1.
There, the textbook approach exploits the extreme precision of resonant frequencies of
long-living isolated atoms (the caesium atoms being the most-used ones). In the last years,
enhancements of atomic clocks have been proposed, exploiting quantum properties [541],
as well as optical magnometers and magnometers with Bose-Einstein condensates [504].
Concerning more fundamental physics-oriented purposes, precise tests of gravity
(equivalence principle or gravitational constant) have been performed using interferometric
schemes on ultracold atoms setups, as discussed in Section 5.1.
3. Condensed Matter and Many-Body Physics
The engineering of quantum states of matter for simulating condensed-matter systems,
or other applications, usually implies the concept of quantum phase transition. Quantum
many-particle systems can undergo phase transitions even at zero temperature, usually
driven by the competition between kinetic and interaction energies, or else between two
length scales, across a critical point [542]. Therefore, their behaviours is influenced by a
variety of parameters such as the dimensionality of the system, the strength and range of
the interactions, or the amount of disorder. Remarkable results in ultra-cold atoms have
given access, under accurately controlled conditions, also to paradigms falling outside
this concept.
The enormous development of experimental techniques has led to the possibility of
quantum simulate textbook condensed-matter physics problems. For example, the achieved
possibility of combining interactions with strong synthetic magnetic fields has allowed to
place a Landau gauge Bose-Einstein condensate in and near the lowest Landau level and
perform in such an experiment quantum simulations of known and new effects related to
quantum Hall physics, including e.g., spontaneous crystallization driven by condensation
of magneto-rotons [543], as well as the realization of fractional quantum Hall states [544].
Experimental quantum simulators of hydrodynamic flow are currently developed
with strongly correlated fermionic or bosonic atoms, that can be exploited to inform theories
of fermion transport relevant to electron, neutrons, and quark systems. For example, uni-
versal behavior stemming from scale invariance has been probed in a strongly-interacting
fermionic Lithium fluid under hydrodynamic and very low temperature conditions, finding
that the sound diffusivity behaves similarly to what observed in liquid Helium 4, i.e., a
strongly-interacting boson fluid, instead [545]. The high accuracy and control achieved
in these experiments is quite remarkable, more recently including also new techniques
allowing for spatial fluctuation thermometry of these quantum fluids [546]. Also thanks to
the development of boxed confining potentials made with sheets of laser light, accurately
enough homogeneous geometries are realized, that reproduce textbook studies of first and
second sound in compressible Bose fluids [107], More recent advances in ultracold K-atom
impurities embedded in a Fermi sea of Li atoms has led to the first controlled quantum
simulation of the physics of Fermi polarons, as predicted by Landau theory of Fermi liquids,
in an experiment with ultracold-atoms mixtures [547].
In this section, we make the specific choice of focusing on selected examples, classified
among well established, evergreen, paradigms in Section 3.1 and among freshly sprouting
ones in Section 3.2. In the former case, we step into the BCS-BEC crossover, as an example
of phase transition characterised by the continuous evolution of a single order parameter
across asymptotic behaviors, and commensurate-incommensurate quantum phase tran-
sitions, due the competition between two types of potential energies, that favor different
system configurations. In the latter case, we focus on quantum phase transitions based on
completely different concepts, like the breaking of the thermalisation hypothesis or the case
of dynamical quantum phase transitions.
The choice for these particular examples is based on their physics relevance and to
their transversal applicability outside condensed-matter physics.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
42 of 124
3.1. Condensed Matter and Many-Body Physics: Evergreen Paradigms
3.1.1. BEC-BCS Crossover
Here we address one relevant example of phase transition in which the characterising
order parameter continuously evolves across limiting behaviors under the tuning of an
internal parameter. In particular, this is the case of the crossover from a Bardeen-Cooper-
Schrieffer (BCS) [21] type of weak-coupling superfluidity or superconductivity, to a Bose-
Einstein condensation (BEC) of tightly bound, point-like, composite bosons made of two
fermions, which is one of the most captivating and useful paradigms born in condensed
matter physics as a tool to understand the puzzling behavior of high-Tc superconductors,
to be then applicable beyond material’s science in the physics of fundamental interactions,
nuclear matter, and cosmology [1,548]. However, it is with the advent of ultracold atomic
(Fermi) gases [22,100,549,550], that the BCS-BEC crossover has been explored in length and
depth under highly controlled conditions and as a joined effort of experimentalists and
theorists. There are a number of useful reviews focused on the subject [102,114,548,551–554],
so that in this section we summarize the main ideas while providing a different perspective.
In essence, the main concept in this problem is that while the attraction strength be-
tween fermionic particles is progressively increased, all the fundamental system quantities
smoothly interpolate between the two BCS and BEC limiting regimes. The ground-state
firmly maintains the same kind of spontaneous symmetry-breaking, while one same order
parameter evolves from the BCS-related gap function to the BEC condensate fraction. Thus,
for example, at T = 0 the chemical potential evolves from the Fermi energy to half the bind-
ing energy of the composite boson, the critical temperature from the exponentially-reduced
BCS expression for the fermions system to that of a non-interacting BEC of (half as many)
composite bosons. A similar crossover physics may occur in the non-broken symmetry
phases, while varying the interaction strength. Figure 9 illustrates the schematic phase
diagram encompassing the BEC-BCS crossover and the various phases investigated so far.
Figure 9. BEC-BCS crossover. Schematic phase diagram within the parameter space defined by
temperature T (in units of the Fermi temperature TF = EF/kB, where EF represents the Fermi energy)
and inverse scattering length 1/(kFa) in units of k−1
F . The green lower line separates the superfluid
phase with broken symmetry from the normal phases (i.e., non−superfluid phases). The critical
temperature Tc exhibits an increasing trend with the inverse scattering length, starting from the BCS
limit and approaching the BEC value TBEC ≃0.218TF of a gas composed of non−interacting bosons.
Notably, Tc passes through an optimal value around the resonance point (kFa)−1 = 0. The predicted
value of TBEC can only be obtained by considering pairing fluctuations, as first emphasized by
Nozières and Schmitt−Rink [555]. Otherwise, without accounting for these fluctuations, Tc would
indefinitely increase with the strength of pairing. The red dashed line represents the dissociation
temperature T∗at which composite bosons, formed by two fermions, are disrupted by thermal
fluctuations. This temperature can be viewed as indicative of the opening of a pseudogap in the
single−particle spectral function. On the BCS side of the phase diagram, the critical and dissociation
temperatures coincide, while in the BEC limit, they differ.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
43 of 124
The inception of the BCS-BEC crossover can be traced back to the formulation of
the BCS theory itself, in fact during a time when alternative theories were emerging
aimed to explain superconductivity in metals as a BEC point-like bosons, namely bound
states of two electrons [556]. In their influential paper, Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer
sought to highlight the distinctions between their theory of strongly overlapping Cooper
pairs and the BEC of point-like bosons. The theoretical groundwork for the BEC-BCS
crossover theory was then laid by Eagles [557], focusing on its potential applications to
excitons in semiconductors. Then, Leggett [558] and Nozières and Schmitt-Rink [555]
advanced the idea by developing the formal theory at zero and at the critical temperature
for superconductivity, respectively. Noticing that an increase of interaction strength in
mean-field approximation for the fermionic system, would have led to unphysical divergent
critical temperatures in the BEC regime, Nozières and Schmitt-Rink (NSR) recovered the
correct BEC limit after including gaussian pairing fluctuations in a form of Random-Phase
approximation. The work of NSR has then turned out to be especially relevant in light
of the discovery of high-temperature superconductors (HTSC), when the universal log-
log Uemura plot for the critical vs. the Fermi temperature of a number of conventional
and HTSC superconductors [559]. Uemura et al. noticed how the HTSC were gathering
along a universal line lying somewhere in between the two opposite regimes of BCS-like
superconductivity and BEC of point-like bosons, the universality being later on explained
by Pistolesi and Strinati when using a description in terms of the correlation length [560].
Since then, extensive research has been conducted in this domain, exploring the entire phase
diagram, including the normal non-superfluid phase, and proposing the existence of novel
regimes such as the pseudogap phase characterized by the presence of non-condensed
composite bosons. In addition, it has emerged as a valuable concept in the study of the
QCD phase diagram and the equation of state in neutron stars [5,561,562].
The interest in the BCS-BEC crossover has extraordinarily grown following the real-
ization of Bose-Einstein Condensation [98,99] and BCS superfluidity [22,100] in ultracold
quantum gases. The possibility of tuning the pairing strength between fermionic atoms
allowed by the Fano-Feshbach (FF) resonance mechanism [563] described in Section 2.1.2,
has led to the proposed resonance superfluidity [549,550,564,565] as the route to realise
high-Tc superfluidity in Fermi gases. Resonance superfluidity was then experimentally
realized first at JILA in the group of Debbie Jin [566,567], followed by the Ketterle group at
MIT [568], opening the door to the investigation of the BCS-BEC crossover under controlled
conditions. In fact, as highlighted in Figure 10 from [549], it was immediately apparent
how a universal behavior of superfluidity comprises the most diverse bosonic systems, like
liquid 4He and the BECs of alkali atoms, and fermionic systems like 3He, the conventional
superconductors, the HTSC, and the Fermi gases equipped with Fano-Feshbach resonances.
Since the first realization, a number of textbook experimental investigations have been
performed, like studies about the evolution of vortex lattices [569] or the second sound [570]
in the crossover. More recently, even more flexible platforms are being setup, that involve
fermionic molecules with dipolar interactions. A two-dimensional Fermi gas of spin-
polarized potassium-rubidium polar molecules is created with tunable dipolar interactions
that are also elastic for efficient evaporative cooling to reach quantum degeneracy [128].
Understanding losses in reactive molecular gases such as KRb [571,572] is critical for
harnessing their anisotropic long-range interactions for quantum technology applications.
Experimental control on spin exchange dynamics has been achieved [573,574], paving the
way to the investigation of many-body phases and nonequilibrium dynamics in long-range
interacting systems with reduced dimensionality. Non-local fermion pairing has been
directly observed in an attractive gas made of fermionic K atoms, that in fact implements a
Fermi-Hubbard model, and has allowed to investigate the BCS-BEC crossover including
the formation of a pseudogap [575]. The Fermi-Hubbard model has been implemented also
in a system of fermionic Lithium atoms in 2D optical lattices, and exploited to quantum
simulate frustration- and doping-induced magnetism [576].

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
44 of 124
Figure 10. Universal behavior of superfluid systems. Log-log plot of the transition temperature Tc as a
function of the normalized gap energy 2∆relative to the effective Fermi temperature T∗
F. The different
regions correspond to BCS systems (a), the crossover regime (b), strongly bound composite bosons
exhibiting BEC-like behavior (c). In (a,b), 2∆signifies the the energy required to break apart a fermion
pair and T∗
F the effective Fermi temperature built from the system density. In (c), 2∆represents the
minimum energy necessary to separate the composite boson into two fermions, that is the ionization
energy leading to a charged atomic core and an electron, and T∗
F is the corresponding ionic Fermi
temperature. Image from [549].
In fact, the emergence of Fermi gases [22,568,577,578] has transformed the crossover
physics from a phenomenological approach to a framework that can be explored through
microscopic theories.
The conceptual map in Figure 11, adapted from [579], summarizes the theories de-
veloped so far in the domain of cold gases, in the relevant parameter space defined by
−(kFa)−1 and (kFr0)−1, the former driving the crossover between BEC (−(kFa)−1 < 0) and
BCS (−(kFa)−1 > 0) limits and the latter distinguishing the resonance width from narrow
((kFr0)−1 ≪1) to broad ((kFr0)−1 ≫1) [113], as introduced in Section 2.1.2. The so-called
one-channel models are constructed based on the BCS Hamiltonian, utilizing the single
parameter U = 4π¯h2a/m in terms of the tunable scattering length a, which facilitates
the description of broad resonances. Broad resonances have been extensively explored
through self-consistent theories that incorporate pairing fluctuations [580–584] and zero
and finite temperature Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulations [585–588]. However,
recent advancements in quantum gas experiments [215,589,590] have made intermediate
resonances accessible, necessitating further theoretical examination. Intermediate width-
to-narrow resonances are as well relevant for the equation of state of matter in neutron
stars [5,561] that is characterized by kF|r0| ≃1. Nevertheless, the theoretical treatment
of narrow resonances faces several unresolved questions, primarily due to the need of
introducing the finite width as a second parameter [113,114,591]. While QMC results are
available [592] for a one-channel model that emulates the finite width using well-barrier
potentials [593], these results are limited to the regime where (kF|r0|)−1 ≫1.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
45 of 124
Figure 11. Conceptual map of BEC−BCS crossover theories within the parameter space defined by
−(kFa)−1, which govern the transition between the BEC and BCS limits, and by (kFr0)−1, charac-
terizing the width of the resonance from narrow to broad, respectively. On the left side are general
model−frameworks, including one or two−channel models. On the right side, the corresponding
theoretical or Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods employed to investigate the crossover are
illustrated, covering the narrow (indicated by a red stripe), intermediate (represented by orange),
and broad (depicted by green) regions. The boson-fermion local-field theory (BFLF) serves as a bridge
for intermediate−to−large values of (kFr0)−1, encompassing fluctuations through a comprehensive
local−field theory of the boson−fermion Hamiltonian. For an account of the different theories and
corresponding references, see the main text. The conceptual map is adapted from [579].
In contrast, two-channel, boson-fermion (BF) models explicitly incorporate the reso-
nant (boson) state composed of two fermions, representing the underlying FF mechanism:
in fact, BF Hamiltonian models represent the many-body formulation of the original two-
body FF mechanism, the resonant boson composed of two fermions being the bosonic
mediator of the pairing attraction among the fermions themselves. Initially introduced in
the context of high-temperature superconductivity [594,595], the BF model has been pro-
posed for ultracold atoms within a mean-field formulation [549,550,564], and subsequently
developed using Random-Phase-approximation (RPA) methods [564,596–598], as well as
various forms of self-consistent RPA [599,600]. To account for a wide range of FF reso-
nance widths, the inclusion of particle-hole fluctuations has been accomplished using the
powerful Functional Renormalization Group (FRG) approach, albeit in a parameterized
manner [601–603] (see Figure 11).
The intermediate regime that bridges the gap between narrow and broad FF res-
onances has been more recently addressed the boson-fermion local-local field (BFLF)
theory [579], providing a unifying framework to treat fermionic atoms interacting via
narrow to intermediate-width Fano-Feshbach resonances, with inclusion of exchange and
correlation effects beyond mean field. The BFLF theory builds on the so-called local-field
factor theories developed in the 70s [604,605] to study the density and spin response in
low-density metals, when the long-range Coulomb interactions are not negligible and lead
to significant correlation effects, and providing a description quantitatively competitive
with best quantum Montecarlo simulations [606]. In essence, the local-field factor concept
enters the system’s response function, where it incorporates the exchange and correlation
effects beyond mean-field in a self-consistent manner, in fact corresponding to the intro-
duction of irreducible vertex corrections [606]. Indeed, it is intimately connected to the
pair-correlation function embodying the exchange and correlation hole and therefore to
the structure factor that, in turn, is related to the response function via the fluctuation-
dissipation theorem. This leads to a set of self-consistent equations to be numerically solved
iteratively, to determine all the system’s properties. In the BFLF, the method is built on top
of the boson-fermion Hamiltonian, especially suited to describe narrow-to-intermediate

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
46 of 124
FF resonances, and in a generalized manner to include density, spin, and superfluid pair-
ing fluctuations in amplitude and phase, i.e., characterizing the Higgs and the Goldstone
modes, respectively. The BFLF theory embodies the relevant symmetries and exact results
such as the Hugenoltz and Pines theorem establishing the conditions for the gapless nature
of the excitations, and recovers the known limits of BEC and BCS behaviors, extending
to the whole crossover and to narrow-to-intermediate width FF resonances the predicted
Gor’kov and Melik-Barkhudarov Tc suppression due to the interactions.
The availability of a unifying theory of the BCS-BEC crossover in the whole phase
diagram in Figure 11, may allow to investigate beyond mean-field whether universal
behavior along the crossover holds under more general conditions, provided that the
correlation length is used as a driving parameter [560]. The correlation length is in fact the
microscopic measure of the size of a Cooper pair, as calculated from the variance of the pair
correlation function, and crosses over from very large to very small values from the BCS to
the BEC regimes.
Indications along these lines have been provided for different microscopic systems
within different mean-field theories. In [607], the case of fermions interacting via a shape-
resonance, in the form of a well-barrier potential, has been investigated within one-channel
Hamiltonian in mean field, capable of describing broad-to-intermediate range resonances.
As displayed in Figure 12a,b, when plotted vs. the correlation length, the superfluid chemi-
cal potential and the condensate fraction of a number of different microscopic realisations
of the same Hamiltonian after tuning the potential parameters, collapse in only one uni-
versal curve. Similar behavior occurs for the case studied in [608] of fermions interacting
via a separable potential characterized by a strength and a range like that introduced by
NSR [555], in the additional presence of a spin-orbit coupling, and treated within the con-
serving GG0 approximation [599]. As displayed in Figures 13a,b, universal behavior holds
for the chemical potential at Tc and the critical temperature, provided that the spin-orbit
coupling is weak enough to keep the system below a topological phase transition. These
results extend the findings from Pistolesi and Strinati [560] to different contexts.
(a)
(b)
Figure 12. Universal behavior of fermionic superfluids in the BCS-BEC crossover. Fermions interact-
ing via a shape-resonance in the form of a well-barrier potential, within one-channel Hamiltonian
treated in mean field. (a) Chemical potential µ at temperature T = 0 vs. correlation length kFξ in
units of the Fermi wavevector k−1
F . µ is normalized to the Fermi energy EF when µ > 0 (BCS side)
and to half the binding energy Eb/2 of the composite bosons when µ < 0 (BEC side). The model
parameters are the scattering length a, effective range R∗in k−1
F
units, and the diluteness parameter
nr3
0 in terms of the density n and the width of the well r0. Each symbol refers to a different realisation
of the set of model parameters, as in the legend. (b) Same as in (a), but for the condensate fraction
2N0/N at T = 0 in units of the number N of fermions. Notice how both quantities show universal
behavior, irrespective of the microscopic details. From [607].

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
47 of 124
(a)
(b)
Figure 13. Universal behavior of fermionic superfluids in the BCS-BEC crossover. Fermions interact-
ing via a model separable potential characterized by a strength g and a range k−1
0
like that introduced
by NSR [555], in the additional presence of a spin-orbit coupling with strength λ, and treated within
the conserving GG0 approximation [599]. (a) Effective chemical potential ˜µ at Tc vs. the pair correla-
tion length kFξ. ˜µ is normalized as in Figure 12a. Each symbol refers to a different realisation of the
set of model parameters g, k0, and λ, as in the legend. In the inset, a specific region is examined,
highlighting the difference between ˜µ and its non-interacting value ˜µNI as a function of λ. For larger
λ values, pair correlation lengths kFξ > 2π no longer correspond to a weakly interacting BCS regime,
regardless of the interaction range (represented by k0 = 4). (b) Log-plot of the critical temperature
Tc multiplied by the effective mass mb of the non-condensed resonant pairs, vs. kFξ. Different
values of λ are represented by symbols in the legend. Squares correspond to k0 = 0.5, triangles to
k0 = 4. The coupling g ranges from 1.25 to 30. In both (a,b), the vertical dashed lines at kFξ = 1/π
and kFξ = 2π indicate the thresholds for the deep BEC and BCS regimes, respectively. Notice
how both quantities show universal behavior, irrespective of the microscopic details, provided
that λ < λB be below the threshold for the transition to a topological state and the nature of the
fluid changes. From [608] (Permission to use this content granted by Creative Commons Licence
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
3.1.2. Commensurate—Incommensurate Transitions
Let us now address a second paradigmatic problem that can be accessed with atomic
technologies under controlled conditions, and lying outside the conventional case of the
competition between kinetic and potential energies. Here, we consider quantum phase
transitions due the existence of two types of potential energies for the system, that can lead
to different configurations. This is the case when the phase transition is e.g., driven by the
competition between two different length scales, yielding diverse complex phenomena.
A non exhaustive list of this type of transitions, appearing in remarkably diverse either
classical or quantum systems, include charge density waves [609], nano-contacts between
solids [610], dislocations in crystals [611], adsorbed monolayers [612] in the form of no-
ble gases on graphite substrates [4], bio-molecular transport [613], emergence of chaotic
structures in metal-insulator transitions in Peierls systems [614] and spin glasses [615],
Josephson junctions [616], quantum pinning in strongly-interacting bosonic fluids [617]
and Meissner-to-vortex transition in bosonic ladders [27,618].
The behavior of the system is highly dependent on whether the two lengths, d and a,
are commensurate (C) with a rational ratio or incommensurate (IC) with an irrational ratio.
The way in which the system accommodates the incommensuration gives rise to various
interesting phenomena. For example, one can have situations where incommensurations
float within the commensurate phase [619] or else appear as interstitial phases separating
the commensurate ones [4]. Generally enough, a C-IC transition can be characterized by
the pinning of the system to an otherwise floating and translationally invariant phase.
The translational invariance of the incommensurate phase manifests as a superlubricity and
corresponds to the presence of gapless excitations, called phasons. Instead, an energy gap
opens up in the excitation spectrum when in the commensurate phase, with the breaking
of translational invariance. This gap amounts to the energy needed for a classical particle

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
48 of 124
to surmount the energy barrier. Finally, defects can significantly contribute to the complex
behavior and rich dynamics of the system in the pinned regime, their nature being in the
form of walls, dislocations, or vortices [615].
In the following, we first discuss the model that has been extensively used to describe
these physical phenomena, focusing on its realization as an Aubry-like transition [620] with
atomic technologies, and the possibility of identifying emerging quantum effects. Then,
we discuss one peculiar example falling in the C-IC universality class, the Meissner to
vortex transition.
Aubry-like Transitions
The paradigmatic model used to explain the physics of competing length scales
consists of a one-dimensional (1D) chain of particles connected by harmonic springs. While
at equilibrium, the particles are initially positioned at a distance d from each other, when
subjected to a periodic substrate lattice with a period a a rich physical phenomena takes
place. This model, originally proposed by Frenkel and Kontorova and by Frank and Van
der Merwe model (FKVdM) [621,622], indeed captures the essence of the competition
between two key potentials.
In the FKVdM model, the competition in fact arises between the elastic potential,
which favors a periodic structure with a characteristic period of d, and the lattice potential,
which seeks to confine the particle positions to integer multiples of a. Consequently, when
the lattice potential V is weak, the particles positions are largely unaffected by the ratio
w ≡d/a, tending to float on the lattice. This corresponds to the incommensurate (IC)
phase. On the other hand, above a critical threshold for the strength of the lattice potential,
the particles tend to localize near its minima. This is the commensurate phase. In essence,
they form a structured arrangement where the average spacing between particles is a
rational multiple of a, where the lattice potential dominates over the elastic potential,
causing the particles to align with the lattice in a commensurate manner.
To delve into the transition in more detail, we can introduce the concept of average
spacing d between atoms in the chain and the so-called winding number ˜w = d/a. These
quantities help providing further insight into the system behavior. At a lattice potential
depth of V = 0, the winding number ˜w is equal to the ratio w, and the particles float
without significant localization. However, as the lattice potential becomes non-zero, it
tends to localize the particles. For non-rational values of w, the system accommodates this
by allowing an increase in energy while maintaining the winding number ˜w = w. This
energy increase persists until it reaches a critical point where there is enough energy to
form a discommensuration.
The C-IC transition, as predicted by Aubry [620], occurs as a second-order transition
where the winding number ˜w abruptly jumps to the next rational number. A critical
lattice strength Vc exists, below which there are intervals of non-rational values of w
where ˜w remains irrational, that form a Cantor set with non-integral fractal dimension [4].
As the lattice strength exceeds the threshold V > Vc, the size of these intervals reduces to
zero measure.
It is worth noting that the critical lattice depth Vc depends on the specific irrational
value of the length ratio d/a, and it attains its largest value at the golden ratio (
√
5 −1)/2.
Remarkably, this transition persists even when the number of particles in the chain is
finite [623].
The quantum version of the FKVdM model has been as well subject of extensive
investigation, as reported in the study by Borgonovi [624]. Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC)
studies, extending to systems with up to 144 particles, have provided insights into the
impact of quantum effects on the Aubry transition [625]. Indicators analogous to those used
in the classical transition, such as the hull function, particle position variance, and density-
density correlation function, have been defined to identify the transition, along with an
effective Planck constant measuring the degree of quantum behavior, and essentially
dictated by the elastic energy and the lattice spacing [625,626].

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
49 of 124
Density-Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG) and Path-Integral Molecular Dynam-
ics methods have been employed to investigate correlations in the C phase and the IC phase,
respectively [627–629]. The excitation dynamics across the transition have been discussed,
revealing a transformation from a pinned instanton glass to a sliding phonon gas [626].
The influence of long-range interactions has been explored in a study by Pokrovsky [630].
In a nonlocal FKVdM model considering long-range power-law interactions, the formation
of kinks (topological solitons) and kink-antikink pairs has been characterized, with consid-
erations for finite-size effects [631].
The relevance of the FKVdM model extends beyond simulations. It has been noted
that the model relates to the structural zigzag instabilities of ion strings in optical res-
onators [632], as highlighted in studies by Cormick, Gangloff, and Fogarty [633–635].
Theoretical approaches also exist, including the description of the C-IC transition using an
Ising model, as demonstrated in the influential work by P. Bak and R. Bruinsma [636].
Bylinskii et al. [28] have observed an Aubry-like transition in a small chain of trapped
ultracold Yb+ ions, investigating the dependence on temperature [637] and commensurabil-
ity [638]. In the confined system, the competition between the period of the applied optical
potential and the average interparticle spacing is seen to drive a transition between pinned
and sliding arrangements. By employing precise atom-by-atom control and observation
techniques, the transition has been explored from superlubricity to stick-slip behavior as a
function of the optical potential height and the commensurability of the length scales. This
experimental setup, depicted in Figure 14, provides a versatile and controllable platform
to explore the fundamental aspects of friction at the nanoscale over a wide temperature
range [639–641]. A similar ion-trap experiment has been conducted in 2D [642], providing
insights on nanofriction and transport processes with atomic resolution, and enabling the
observation of a soft vibrational mode during the transition.
Figure 14. Aubry-like transition in ion platforms. Concept of the experiment in [28]. Laser-cooled
trapped ions with charge +|e| are arranged at an average distance d, determined by the interplay
between Coulomb repulsion and external (harmonic) confinement. Superimposed is a periodic
optical lattice with period a and potential height V. The lengths a and d are chosen to have an
irrational, incommensurate, ratio. In the commensurate phase, whenever V > Vc exceeds a critical
value Vc, ions pin into the bottom of the lattice wells forming commensurate segments separated
by incommensurate regions. With increasing the level of incommensuration, pinning occurs at
progressively larger Vc values. Quantum effects arise from tunneling between lattice sites. When this
happens, the quantum probability density |ψ(x)|2 (here depicted for the central particle) becomes
bimodal, and can be detected. Image inspired from [643] .
The 1D experiment with ions is especially interesting because the power law α = 1 of
the Coulomb interaction equals the dimensionality d = 1, and it is well known that under
such conditions the interactions are long-range in nature. One should therefore ask whether
the detailed knowledge developed on the FKVdM model, the Aubry transition, and the
quantum effects remain unaltered and, in particular, whether the quantum effects might be
observable or washed out. An answer in the case of a finite-size system comes from a Path-
Integral Monte Carlo (PIMC) simulation study [643] that replicates the finite temperature
and other conditions of the experiment [28]. Here, the signatures of quantum effects have

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
50 of 124
been identified from the analysis of the Binder cumulant B, an additional indicator not
previously considered. B indeed, continuously evolves from zero for monomodal to 2/3
for bimodal distributions, in this case signaling the existence of a superposition state in
adjacent lattice sites. resulting phase diagram is depicted in Figure 15 from [643]. A feasible
experimental strategy has been envisioned to detect the emergence of these quantum effects,
which in the simulation have demonstrated to remain robust in the presence of thermal
fluctuations at temperatures already achieved in experiments, and distinguishable even in
the relatively small systems that are currently available [643].
Figure 15. Commensurate-incommensurate physics. Phase diagram of the Aubry transition for the
experimental realisation in Figure 14. The variance of the central-particle density probability is used as
an indicator for the transition in the space of the governing parameters, that are the incommensuration
degree ∆and the normalised height K of the lattice potential. Red region: localized phase. Blue region:
delocalized phase. Yellow region: intermediate phase. Figure inspired from [643] (Permission to use
this content granted by Creative Commons Licence https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Notwithstanding this wide range of existing studies, a number of crucial questions
regarding the quantum Aubry transition remain open, among which is the relation between
the C-IC transition and the paradigm of many-body localization (see Section 3.2.1), the degree
of universality across different dimensions and length scales, also depending on the range of
the interactions among the particles, or the implications of the presence of disorder.
Meissner to Vortex Transition
It is known that superconductors subjected to an external magnetic field H < Hc1 ex-
hibit the Meissner-Ochsenfeld effect, where surface currents effectively shield the magnetic
field within the bulk, resulting in perfect diamagnetism [644]. In type-I superconductors,
the normal state is restored when H > Hc1. However, in type-II superconductors, a vortex
phase is formed for Hc1 < H < Hc2, where the magnetic field partially penetrates the
system in the form of flux lines surrounded by screening currents. The transition from a
Meissner to a vortex state is an example that falls in the commensurate-incommensurate
universality class [645,646]. Indeed, in the commensurate Meissner state, the flux lines
are homogeneously distributed throughout the material due to the expulsion of magnetic
fields via the Meissner effect. However, as external magnetic fields increase beyond a
critical threshold, the material undergoes a phase transition characterized by the formation
of vortex lattice structures. These vortices arise due to the penetration of magnetic flux
lines, leading to the breakdown of commensurability between the vortex lattice and the
underlying crystal lattice. The incommensurate vortex state exhibits a spatially modulated
arrangement of vortices, resulting in a complex magnetic field distribution, accompanied
by diverse physical phenomena, such as vortex pinning, flux creep, and Josephson cou-
pling. In material science, a number of factors can affect the detailed manner with which

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
51 of 124
the transition occurs, such as temperature, magnetic field strength, material composition,
and crystal symmetry, and their study can be relevant to unveil the interplay between
superconductivity, lattice structure, and magnetic field dynamics.
A striking demonstration of the Meissner to vortex transition has been realized in
quasi-one dimensional noninteracting bosonic ladders of ultracold atoms [27], subjected to
external synthetic gauge fields as predicted to occur theoretically [647,648] and experimen-
tally engineered [649]. The type of experimental concept is also depicted in Section 3.2.2 and
the corresponding figure In this ladder arrangement, atoms sit in two different (pseudospin)
states, with the possibility of tunneling in one-dimensional optical lattices, and are coupled
by light fields across the ladder rungs. The use of synthetic dimensions can overcome
the Mermin-Wagner-Hohenberg theorem, otherwise prohibiting the U(1) spontaneous
symmetry breaking needed for the superfluid state to appear [650,651].
In particular, an analogous Meissner phase is predicted to exist in the ground state for
low flux of the synthetic gauge field, while a Tomonaga-Luttinger liquid (TLL) of vortices
is expected for higher flux [652–654]. Density-Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG)
studies combined with bosonization methods have been conducted with increasing flux
at different fillings, finding that in the presence of on-site hard-core repulsion among the
bosons determines a persistence of the Meissner phase over the vortex state at any flux
above a minimum interchain hopping [655]. When the applied flux is ρπ or close to it,
with ρ the filling per rung, a second incommensuration is found in the vortex state [618]
(see Figure 16).
Figure 16. Commensurate-incommensurate physics in the Meissner−to−vortex transition. DMRG
prediction of the phase diagram for experiments of the type of Atala et al. [27] on a two−leg ladder
(see also Figure 18c), but in the case of hard−core spinless bosons case, i.e., infinitely repulsive on-site
bosons. Left panel: phase diagram in the space of the governing parameters, that are the flux λ of
the synthetic gauge field per plaquette, and the coupling Ω/t between across the rungs in units of
the tunneling t along the legs. Black solid line: phase boundary between the Meissner and vortex
phases. Compared to the non−interacting case (red dashed line), the hard-core nature of the bosons
favors the persistence of the Meissner phase above the threshold Ω> Ωc for all fluxes λ, except at
λ = π. Shaded area: a second incommensuration appears. In the green region (region II), additional
peaks at k = π emerge in the Fourier transform of the rung current correlations, which dominate in
the blue region (region III). The double line (green vs dark red) at λ = π represents the transition
to a localized phase. Right panel: Intensity plots of the momentum distribution n(k) versus λ and
k. (a) Ω/t = 1.75 in the Meissner phase, characterised by one single maximum at k = 0 for all λ.
At λ = π, n(k) = 1, corresponding to the formation of a fully localized state (dark-red solid line).
(b,c) for Ω/t = 1 and 0.25, respectively, showing the transition from the Meissner phase to the vortex
phase, characterised by two maxima of n(k) symmetrically located around k = 0. Figure from [655].
Additional predicted orderings include chiral superfluid order at half a flux quantum
per plaquette [652,656,657] and a chiral Mott insulating phase [658–662], which exhibits
both chiral currents and a spin-density-wave phase. Diagonal interchain hopping in ladder

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
52 of 124
structures has also been studied using Density Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG)
methods [663–668].
3.2. Condensed Matter: Sprouting Paradigms
3.2.1. Eigenstate Thermalisation Hypothesis and Anderson/Many-Body Localisation
In this section, we focus on the emergence of thermal behaviour in isolated quantum
many-body systems and scenarios where this behaviour is violated, as it is the case of localised
states. As it is well-known, an isolated quantum system undergoes unitary, hence reversible,
evolution and should retain information of its initial configuration but instead the quantum
system is observed to thermalise. Quantum thermalisation is often described in literature in
terms of quantum chaos and ergodicity (Two elusively different concepts as an ergodic system
can present non-divergent dependence to its initial conditions.) [669–672]. For our brief
description, we focus on the concept of ergodicity: an ergodic quantum many-body system is
that explore all configurations permitted by its conservation laws, as a consequence it is also
one whose local d.o.f. entangle with each other leading to the decoherence of local quantum
correlations and to macroscopic observables becoming stationary after a slow classical hydro-
dynamical evolution [673]. These observables become thermal and can then be described in
terms of statistical mechanics and loose any dependence on the initial condition. Importantly,
this process should occur for any state of the system, even those forming its eigenbasis which
are stationary. Thus, this process should already occur at the level of individual eigenstates,
this is denoted as the Eigenstate Thermalisation Hypothesis (ETH) [672].
While AMO platforms have allowed for the understanding of many aspect of quantum
thermalisation given their ability to measure local and global observables and hold conditions
of quasi-isolation for long system timescales allowing to observe thermalisation in controlled
quantum system, in cold atoms [674] and more recently in trapped ions [675], we would like
to focus in the class of systems that fail to exhibit this behaviour due to localization.
Localization was first predicted by Anderson as a consequence of quantum interference
at the level of single non-interacting particles in the presence of random potentials or
tunneling rates [676] already for infinitesimal disorder rates. It took close to 40 years for
this to be observed experimentally [677], since then in a large variety of systems [678,679],
including cold atom platforms [680–682]. The localization mechanism was also extended
and observed in the case of interacting particles, a phenomenon known as many-body
localization (MBL) [683–685]. In contrast to the Anderson localization case, with interacting
particles all eigenstates exhibit localization for high disorder values [686], while for smaller
disorders rates current theoretical and numerical evidence predicts the localization of a
finite subset of the eigenstates in one-dimensional systems [687]. Thus, in the interacting
MBL systems the violation of ETH and non-ergodic behaviour occurs at a finite disorder
rate with the system thermalising below the critical value. This was predicted [688] and
experimentally observed in random and quasi-periodic models [689] initially in 1D [33,690],
and later on in quasi-2D [691] and 2D [692]. In these experiments, it is actually the degree
of ergodicity that is tested in order to detect an MBL phase by measuring the degree of
survival at long times of an initial space-imbalanced configuration, see Figure 17. Since then,
MBL has been studied in a large range of non-disordered scenarios, such as dynamically
constraint systems [693–695]. Moreover, the long-time scales required to reach the steady
configuration [696] together with the technological advances making longer experimental
running times possible, makes it necessary to consider scenarios where the system is
coupled to its environment [697] where the signatures of the transition or the long-time
steady states are modified by the rate of dephasing [698–700] and particle losses [701],
leading in certain regimes to the breaking of the localised phases. From the theoretical
perspective, MBL has been characterize in terms of the entanglement growth rate [683,684],
by the appearance of local conserved quantities [702] or by the information spreading of
system subregions [703].

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
53 of 124
Figure 17. Schematic experimental detection protocol of Many-Body Localization (MBL). (A) The
system is initially prepared in a charge-density state with half-filling, where a particle/doublon
is present in every second lattice site. Over time, particles can tunnel with rate J to neighbouring
sites and doublons experience a local energy offset U due to particle interactions and local random
disorder of order Delta. (B) A phenomenological phase diagram illustrates the MBL transition,
reflecting the ergodicity properties of the system. In the localization phase (yellow region), the initial
configuration persists for long periods of time, in contrast to the ergodic delocalized phase (white
region), where the particles evenly distribute across the lattice. The stripped region represents the
variation in the transition point based on the initial number of doublons, highlighting the interplay
between disorder ∆and interaction U, which are factors included in the Hamiltonian contributions
schematically depicted in (C). Figure from [33].
While MBL has been discussed in literature for a relatively long period, this paradigm
offers an ideal platform for the testing and understanding of thermalisation in quantum
systems, leaving a number of open questions. In particular, challenges remain on the
understanding of the mechanism beyond 1D [704] and particularly in parameter regions
near the phase transition [705], where thermal rare regions appear and can lead to eventual
thermalisation [706–709]. Only very recent experiments tackle the characterization of
the critical behaviour [710] or have been able to measure the entanglement content in a
vicinity of them [526]. Other relevant directions include its combinations with topological
phases [711,712], its relationship with glass transitions [693–695] and with periodically-
driven systems and time crystals [713].
Notably, in the recent years, the community’s attention has focused on the understand-
ing and generation of another example of non-ergodic behaviour, that are the so-called
quantum many-body scars. These are examples of weak-breaking of ergodicity, where
abnormally long relaxation times linked to non-thermal high energy eigenstates—and thus
non-thermal behaviour—can be detected for certain initial conditions. These states, first
observed in Rydberg-atoms simulators [56], do not only challenge the general applicability
of ETH and our understanding of thermalization and chaos in quantum systems, but have
also been predicted to be relevant in describing the emergence of glassy dynamics, certain
lattice gauge theories or fast scrambling [714]. Moreover, their naturally long coherence
times can be seen as a useful resource in QT for state preparation, with some proposals
already been posed towards their applicability in quantum sensing [715]. While a deeper
understanding of the systematic preparation of many-body scars, their theoretical clas-
sification or the discovery of a wider range of systems that exhibit them is still under
development we expect useful applications in the coming years. For details on the current
state of these phenomena we refer to the recent topical reviews [714,716].
3.2.2. Periodically-Driven Systems: Floquet Engineering
When describing some of the potential uses of cold atomic platforms in Section 2.1.3
we already highlighted the possibility of engineering the system into the generation of
synthetic dimensions as a versatile tool for quantum simulation, e.g., in designing synthetic
bosonic ladders [649] for the studies in Section 3.1.2, or for applications to fundamental
interactions, see Section 4.2. In this section, we describe Floquet engineering, an already
well-established field, which uses periodic coherent driving to modify the behaviour of a
quantum system. We include a description of the basic concept of the protocol in the case of

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
54 of 124
a BEC in Figure 18, including condensation at finite momenta and the induction of complex
tunneling phases.
Figure 18. Floquet engineering: summary of the main protocols. (a) The behavior of atoms in a shaken
optical lattice can be described by an effective tunneling constant Jeff, which can take negative values
within certain parameter ranges. When Jeff < 0, condensation occurs at new minima (shown in red)
in the distribution instead of the previous minima centered at zero quasi-momentum (shown in blue).
The effective tunneling is experimentally estimated in a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) by measuring
the suppression of diffusion. (b) If the driving force is asymmetric in time, this lattice distortion
leads to a change in the energy bands, which amounts to the introduction of Peierls phases [717]
to the effective tunneling elements. By controlling the amplitude of the drive, the positions of the
minima in the quasi-momentum distribution can be adjusted, allowing the creation of condensates
with finite momenta, as observed in experimental observations. (c) By combining field gradients with
the imprinting of Peierls phases, it becomes possible to engineer intriguing plaquette models with
controlled effective flux. Figure from [718].
Periodically driving a cold atomic platform allows for the generation of synthetic
gauge fields that appear in the form of additional—generally complex—phases in an
effective Hamiltonian picture, mimicking the effects of the desired static magnetic field in a
controllable way [719,720]. The continuous driving of the system generates non-equilibrium
steady states for simulation [718,721], complementing other approaches of material and
solid-state design. We include in Figure 18 a summary of the main protocols accessible
through Floquet engineering, that constitute a well-established tool in current quantum
technologies. These mechanisms have allowed to access unexplored parameter regimes and
configurations. Among other early examples, a partial list includes: the creation of effective
spin-orbit coupling for the study of paradigmatic condensed matter magnetism phenomena
such as the Quantum Hall effect [722], the study of frustrated magnetic systems [723],
the creation of space-dependent tunneling [724], the study of phenomena in ladder systems
such as Vortex superfluidity [725] or the preparation of topological insulators in driven
superconductors [726,727]. Another advantage of using Floquet theory is the fact that,
despite it applies to the description of systems out of equilibrium, its theoretical formulation
remains numerically treatable, see e.g., [721].
Finally, there is a subset of problems in driven systems that has attracted particular
attention in recent years. That is the case for instance of accelerated counter-adiabatic
protocols for quantum control and information ([728] and references therein), and of

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
55 of 124
boundary-driven systems [729]. While the drive has been introduced in a variety of frame-
works, both dissipatively [730,731] and coherently-periodic [732], these model systems
constitute an important test-bed for the understanding of transport phenomena not only
in quantum matter and technologies [733] but also in biology [734,735], as we discuss in
Section 7. Moreover, these tools have been applied in the simulation of a set of models in-
cluded in this review. In particular in IC-C transitions in condensed matter, see Section 3.1.2
and in the simulation of fundamental interactions, see Section 4.2.
3.2.3. Measurement, Control and Feedback in Open Quantum Systems
In Section 2.2.1, we discussed how the measurement of a quantum system can be
treated theoretically, both when the measurement is due to some apparatus or instead via
some non-monitored degrees of freedom of the environment. The measurement process
can lead to dephasing and decoherence, heating [36], freezing of the system’s dynamics
due to the quantum Zeno effect [736], and even induce a phase transition as we present
here and in Section 3.2.4.
Here, we highlight how the measurement process, typically in a weakly continuous
manner as described in Section 2.2.1, can also be combined with control methods (see
Section 2.3.3) so that the measurement outcome is classically processed and fed back
to perform a conditional action onto the physical system steering it into a desired state
(see also Figure 19). This framework is often referred to as quantum measurement and
feedback control [304]. This is similar to what occurs in error correction (Section 2.3.1),
where the classical outcome of the ancillary qubit is processed in order to act on the rest
of the system to mitigate some operational errors. The quantum feedback protocol has
been successfully implemented to: improve cooling schemes in both trapped ions [737]
and neutral atoms [738] by coherently, and not dissipatively, coupling the system to a
radiation mode; generate strongly correlated states [739]; induce phase transitions [740];
generate novel non-equilibrium steady states [741]; prepare self-organised phases [742]
or, recently, cool BECs in 2D preventing the effects of measurement back-action [743].
In addition, optimal control theory has also been applied in quantum devices in the
presence of dissipation [744].
Figure 19. Diagram of a quantum measurement and feedback protocol. The AMO platform, in this
case atoms in an optical cavity, is weakly probed via some homodyne-like measurement. The outcome
is classically processed by a computer that modifies the feedback controller accordingly in order to
steer the state to the desired phase.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
56 of 124
While these protocols are rather system-dependent, we believe that current techno-
logical developments will make their use more frequent as a framework for quantum
simulation [745,746], particularly for AMO systems in optical cavities (Section 2.1.7). These
mechanisms for the preparation of programmable out-of-equilibrium systems can be com-
bined with the existing coherent and dissipative approaches, some of which are described in
Sections 2.2.1 and 3.2.2, composing an evergrowing toolbox for the canvas of fundamental
and applied use cases of quantum technologies that we discuss in subsequent sections.
3.2.4. Out-of-Equilibrium Systems, Dynamical Phase Transitions and Dissipation
Before discussing the applications of quantum simulators in a different fields, we would
like to bring the attention to a final set of tools that have proven useful in the recent years
when discussing driven-dissipative quantum systems. In Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2, we have
discussed instances of non-thermalising quantum systems due to disorder or driving. This
is also true in more general scenarios like in integrable models or after performing specific
quantum quenches, where long-lasting quasi-stationary states can be observed [747]. In this
context, the first examples of dynamical phase transitions in driven quantum systems have
been found [748].
Dynamical phase transitions are well understood and characterised in classical sys-
tems [749] where the universal behaviour arises—both in time and space—after a quench
were parameters cross an equilibrium phase transition point. Similarly, we find instances
of phase transitions of dissipative nature related to the gap closing of the evolution super-
operator in open system [750,751] with the associated change in the steady state properties.
Consequently, efforts for the characterisation of these different phenomena in quantum
systems have seen a considerable rise in recent years in order to extend existing approaches
(as those based on Green functions [300]) and create a generalised description of dissipative
non-thermal systems with their related phase transitions. While the lack of an equilib-
rium statistical description could seem a problem, it also allows to engineer states and
phenomena that are not possible in such scenarios. Moreover, there has been progress in
their formalisation particularly in terms of Keldysh approaches [290,430] and some of the
transitions have already experimentally observed, with the first examples here [752,753].
For a detailed description, we refer to the following excellent topical reviews [430,748].
One class of dynamical phase transitions that has attracted a large interest is that of
measurement-induced phase transitions (MIPT). These have been observed both in gate-
based [292] and in continuous [754] systems. MIPT arise from the competition between
the creation of entanglement by the coherent system dynamics and its destruction due
to the projective nature of measurements. This interplay can lead to drastically different
properties in the individual realisations of the dynamics, while their average density
operator at long times is a trivial infinite-temperature state due to the heating induced by
the measures, regardless of their rate. The signatures of these transition, which are only
present in non-linear quantities of the state, are then elusive to experimental probing – as
that would typically require to measure a system twice. Since then, several proposals have
appeared using ancillary degrees of freedom, establishing links with purification phase
transitions [755,756]. Importantly, links with quantum error correction and information
scrambling have been established [757,758], leading to links with relevant questions in
cosmology that can be proved via quantum simulation [115].
4. Fundamental Physics
Section 3 has highlighted several relevant new paradigms, or old paradigms with
new implications, related to many-body quantum matter physics, that can be explored by
means of cold and ultracold atomic quantum platforms in perspective of their current and
potential technological applications. However, many-body quantum matter technologies
can be applied in other sectors of physics. We dedicate this section to applications in
fundamental physics.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
57 of 124
In this field, our understanding relies on four fundamental theories, Quantum Field
Theory (QFT) and the Standard Model of particle physics (SMPP) on the one side, and Gen-
eral Relativity (GR) and the Standard Model of cosmology (SMC) on the other. While each
of them has resisted to a wide range of testing over decades up to more than a century,
a unified description has yet to be found. A number of questions seek a definite answer.
Examples are the unification of GR with other SMPP interactions, the account for Dark
energy (DE) and Dark matter (DM) in the SMPP, and the discrepancy of the vacuum energy
density expected from the SMPP, ∼40–120 orders of magnitude larger than observed DE.
The observation of the Higgs boson at the LHC confirmed the final piece predicted
by the standard model of particle physics. While it has been tested in detail over the
years, the Standard Model of particle physics cannot explain certain universe observations.
Therefore, new particles, fields, and forces must be introduced in order to have a more
comprehensive understanding of the behavior of elementary particles and forces from
shortly after the Big Bang through to the creation of atoms, molecules, stars, and galaxies.
Experimental particle physics has focused on the discovery of these new particles and
forces beyond those in the SMPP for decades, through very-high-energy particle colliders,
and direct evidence searches for dark matter. To date, no new particles have been found.
However, with advances in atomic, molecular, and optical physics techniques and quantum-
limited measurement devices, it is now possible to explore these questions with table-top
experiments based on a completely different concept, that is the sensitive measurement of
extremely small energy shifts in quantum-mechanical resonances, caused by the existence
of such new SMPP fields. It is worth noting that these novel types of experiments allow
to push the frontiers of fundamental physics as a complementary approach, but also in
certain occasions to outperform traditional methods [47].
In this section, we thus overview the main problems in fundamental physics that have
been or potentially can be addressed by means of cold and ultracold-atomic platforms, that
are linked to tests of the Standard Model of particle physics. We then refer to Sections 5
and 6 for the discussion of foundational problems in General Relativity and Quantum
Mechanics, respectively.
We notice that dark matter and dark energy are preeminent examples of unknown
systems in physics, which do not fit the SMPP for particle physics, and which have deep
connections with cosmology. As a result, we choose to discuss them in Section 5. Here,
we first necessarily focus on a third unanswered question, that is how the atoms making
the visible universe managed to survive the Big Bang, which is connected to the matter-
antimatter asymmetry. We then dive into the possibilities offered by atomic quantum
technologies to make quantum simulators for lattice-gauge field theories and implement
analogue models to investigate nuclear and quark matter.
4.1. Electric Dipole Moment
The generation of a matter-antimatter asymmetry in the universe requires forces that
violate the combination of charge conjugation (C) and parity transformation (P) symmetries,
i.e., CP symmetry. At the same time, CP violation is always accompanied by a violation
of time-reversal (T) symmetry, while the combined symmetry CPT is preserved, as for
every theory with Poincaré invariance, as it is the case for the SMPP. The CP violation also
results in the fact that ordinary particles having a magnetic dipole moment, also develop
an electric dipole moment (EDM). This is the case of the neutron, whose possible (but not
observed so far) EDM would signal CP violation in the strong (baryonic) sector of the SM.
Contrary to the strong sector, the CP symmetry is violated in weak (leptonic) sectors
of the SMPP, however the associated effects cannot suffice to account for the observed
matter-antimatter asymmetry. Beyond the SMPP, if new particles and forces are present,
these can induce CP violation, leading for instance to larger EDMs compared to those
predicted by the SMPP [759].
Experimental efforts have focused on detecting EDMs. The experiment concept is to
orient the spin of an electron or a nucleus in a given direction, by means of polarized laser

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
58 of 124
light resonant with a transition between atomic or molecular energy levels. If the particle
were to possess an EDM, application of an electric field perpendicular to the spin would
result into a torque, which in turn would be detected in the form of a spin precession about
the direction of the field [47].
These experiments enhance their sensitivity by maximizing the strength of the electric
field, the time of the spin-field interaction, and the number of particles observed.
In the ACME experiment in Harvard [46], electrons bound inside an ultracold, slow,
and intense beam of polar molecules, experience an intense effective electric field of
≈1011 V/cm for about 1 ms. In the JILA experiment [45], molecular ions have been
trapped by a rotating electric field, so that despite the lower number of detected molecules,
the observation time for each of them could reach nearly 1 s. A third type of experiment
uses 199Hg nuclei bound in Hg atoms: these are exposed to fields of 104 V/cm and confined
in small transparent cells, the nuclear spins remaining polarized for more than 100 s [760].
Though no finite EDM has been detected so far by any of these experiments, these three
experiments are characterized by remarkable sensitivities, in fact |de| < 9.3 · 10−29 e· cm,
|de| < 1.3 · 10−28e· cm with 90% confidence and |de| < 7.4 · 10−30e· cm with 95% confidence,
respectively. A more recent experiment at JILA improves on the previous best upper bound
by a factor of about 2.4, providing constraints on new physics above electron volts, beyond the
direct reach of the current particle colliders [761].
4.2. Fundamental Equations and Symmetries
Ultracold atoms and trapped ions reveal to be ideal platforms for the simulation of
analogous phenomena of relativistic quantum mechanics and quantum field theory.
In the framework of relativistic quantum mechanics, the first notable experimental
example has been the realization of the honeycomb lattice [32], known to host at half filling
low-energy excitations effectively described as (3+1)D-Weyl (that is massless) fermions,
moving in a (2+1)-dimensional space [762–764]. A similar spectrum has been proved
on a square lattice pierced by a magnetic π-flux, Φ = π = B · S per plaquette, S being
the plaquette area vector [765]. Indeed, a continuous map exists between the two lattice
schemes, see e.g., [766].
Later on, Dirac mass terms have been conceived for Weyl fermions [767] also via the
Wilson mechanism (a method to give mass to lattice fermions avoiding ambiguities from
different lattice momenta [768]) [769] In the latter approach, a direct effective realization
of axion electrodynamics (possibly from a Peccei-Quinn scheme, a proposed method for
the solution of the CP problem in the strong sector, exactly based on a similar (pseudo)-
scalar boson [770]) is obtained [769,771]. Following similar ideas, proposals have been
conceived for the Majorana equation [772] (designed for trapped ions platforms) and for
Majorana fermions, that means massive fermions with Majorana mass terms [773]. Finally,
still concerning relativistic quantum mechanics, we report the theoretical proposal for
Nambu-Jona-Lasinio models [774,775]) in [767], and low-dimensional fermionic models,
as the Thirring and Gross-Neveu models [776]. All these examples are pure fermionic
interacting models, originally proposed as toy models for QCD and related phenomena,
as chiral symmetry breaking.
These notable achievements become even more interesting by the possibility, theoreti-
cal and partly experimental, of synthesizing static gauge potentials and dynamical (gauge)
fields, both Abelian and non-Abelian.
More in detail, Abelian gauge potentials, i.e., gauge configurations fixed from outside
without their own dynamics, have been realized experimentally on two-dimensional
systems, both in the continuous space and for lattice systems. Indeed, Abelian electric
potentials are realized relatively easily via space-dependent energy offsets. Concerning
the achievement of Abelian magnetic potentials, the more successful approach exploits
optical transitions between atomic hyperfine levels to accumulate a suitable Berry phase
along close spatial loops [117,777]. A similar approach can be designed for non-Abelian
potentials, accumulating the product of matrix unitary operators, instead of phases, acting

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
59 of 124
on multiplets representing the chosen non-Abelian group symmetry. In the Abelian case,
magnetic potentials with moderate intensity—typically strong enough to probe the Landau
levels regime and related phases, as in probing the integer/fractional quantum Hall phase—
can be obtained via lattice rotations, also in the presence of parabolic trapping [777–779].
More involved, even theoretically, and experimentally challenging, is the synthesis of
dynamical gauge fields with proper dynamics. Various schemes have been proposed so
far. The scheme by [780,781], that first triggered the recent efforts in ultracold atoms, is a
direct approximation of lattice gauge theory [768], valid both for Abelian and non-Abelian
theories, and uses the so-called quantum-link models [782–785]. The latter are based on
the use of link operators organized in discrete sets, allowing to approximate the unitary
gauge transformations on the links of a lattice formulation. For a SU(2) theory, the same
operators can be chosen as angular momentum representations. Quantum link models
have been proven to be realizable via gauge invariant quantum link models, both Abelian
and non-Abelian, and can be exactly described in terms of tensor networks [784,786–788].
This fundamental ingredient, yielding a direct link with Section 2.2.2, allowed the direct
simulation on classical computers.
Other proposals for the simulation of gauge fields, equally recent, involve specific
dynamics of Bose-Einstein condensates [789,790], long-range correlated honeycomb lat-
tices [791] exploiting the fact that gauge dynamics characterizes the low-energy behaviour
of systems hosting topological order [792], Floquet dynamics [727] as described in 3.2.2,
or internal degrees of freedom of single atoms [793]. Besides these analog quantum sim-
ulators proposals, digital proposals also appeared, mimicking the gauge-dynamics time
evolution via stroboscopic approaches [172,794].
The mentioned lattices setups with effective gauge fields have been used to describe
and partly simulate numerically a number of remarkable physical phenomena, ranging
from color confinement and baryons formation, to confining string breaking and vacuum
polarization, i.e., production of lepton-antilepton pairs in the presence of ultra-intense
electromagnetic fields (see e.g., [784] and references therein).
Next to gauge symmetries, flavour symmetries play a relevant role in fundamental
physics [795]. While the experimental realization of color dynamics, as described above, is
still lacking on cold and ultracold-atomic setups, fermionic mixtures with effective flavour
dynamics are realized using earth-alkaline or lanthanide atoms [117,777,796,797]. This is
because these atoms are characterized by interactions that do not depend on the hyperfine
levels of the multiplet they belong to. Identifying these levels with flavour degrees of
freedom, an effective flavour-invariant interaction can be modelled and, being also the
atomic mass not dependent on the same levels, effective U(N) or SU(N) invariance flavour
groups are realized. The particular features of earth-alkaline or lanthanide atoms also
allowed to simulate synthetic compact dimensions, using the levels of these atoms as
effective sites of an hyperlattice along the synthetic dimension [798]. In addition, synthetic
gauge fields involving synthetic dimensions have also been realized [799]. Notably, similar
techniques also offered an alternative route towards experimental realizations of topological
phases, as quantum Hall phases [800].
The issue of symmetries simulation involves unavoidably their spontaneous break-
ing [801,802]. When concerning global symmetries, this phenomenon is ubiquitous in the
context of ultracold atoms physics.
The first notable example is the presence of Goldstone bosons in superfluids, due
to the spontaneous breaking of the global U(1)-symmetry related to the conservation of
the number of bosons. Goldstone bosons mostly appear in condensates as propagating
density excitations, i.e., sounds, see e.g. [802]. A similar phenomenology can be observed
in superconductive phases of ultracold fermions [117,777], possible also in the presence of
gauge potentials. It is important to note that gauge potentials do not allow Higgs dynamics,
but only Goldstone dynamics, due to the lack of dynamics for them. In turn, this results
in the lack of dynamics for photons, that are not present in the theory as propagating
excitations [801].

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
60 of 124
As we discuss below, the problem is substantially harder for the Higgs mechanism.
Higgs effective excitations have been realized first in fermionic setups, at the transition
between superfluid and Mott phases [26,803–805]. In perspective, in ultracold setups of
fermions with colour degrees of freedom and corresponding gauge dynamics, as of the
types described above, a Higgs realization can be expected from a di-fermion condensate (a
non-vanishing vacuum expectation value for a proper fermionic bilinear operator ψα ψβ, α
and β labeling generic internal degrees of freedom). This condensate would give rise to the
so-called dynamical symmetry breaking [774,775]. In particle physics, this condensate has
been proposed as an alternative to the scalar Higgs boson of the Standard Model, possibly
useful for open problems left by the Standard Model itself, as the hierarchy problem [806].
In short, this problem concerns the huge differences between the coupling constants of the
four fundamental forces of Nature, and often referred as between weak force and gravity.
The simultaneous presence of independent symmetry groups, as involving flavour and
gauge degrees of freedom, enriches further the relevance of spontaneous symmetry break-
ing. Indeed, even if at Lagrangian or Hamiltonian levels these systems display Gc × Gf
group invariance (with Gc and Gf the colour and flavour symmetry groups, respectively),
a certain condensate (as of a fermion bilinear) can induce a pattern of spontaneous symme-
try breaking to a subgroup Gc f ∈Gc × Gf , composed by simultaneous transformations of
Gc and Gf . This is the invariance group of the condensate, such that colour and flavour
degrees of freedom are not any longer independent of each other. The phenomenon is
called colour-flavour locking [5,807–810], and plays an important role in the physics of
deconfined quarks, as we will comment in the Section 4.3. Locking of two flavour (global,
in general) groups is also possible while locking of gauge groups is forbidden by the
Elitzur’s theorem [801,802].
Still in the wide framework of symmetry phenomenology, up to condensed matter
physics, a special role is played by anomalous symmetries, aka anomalies. An anomalous
symmetry is exact at the level of classical Hamiltonian or (more often) Lagrangian for-
mulation, and instead explicitly broken by quantum corrections, even at the perturbative
level [801,811]. In principle, every symmetry can be anomalous, but only global ones are
accepted in consistent theories. Among them, the most important ones are axial anomalies,
involving chiral (massless, in even space-time dimensions) fermions coupled to gauge
fields, even external (static). In particle physics, axial anomalies have very important
physical consequences, the first known one being the decay of the pion π0 in a pair of
photons [812] or a finite mass for the η particle. Realizations of axial anomalies have also
been developed in condensed matter, as argued long ago by Nielsen and Ninomyia [813],
on the basis of theoretical arguments only. More recently [814], these realizations have
been described in Weyl semimetals, which means three-dimensional systems hosting zero-
dimensional Fermi surfaces, consisting of pairs of isolated points, topologically protected.
Dispersion is linear around these points, eventually allowing a direct link with chiral
fermions. Various condensed matter realizations have been discovered later on, as well
as various generalizations [815,816], as with more involved dispersions. At the same time,
various ultracold atoms realizations of those have been proposed, see [817] and references
therein. Along these lines, above introduced honeycomb lattices have been recognized as
a suitable framework for the quantum simulation of axial anomalies [818]. This progress,
together with developments in the synthesis of gauge potentials and fields, pave the way
for the simulation of axial anomalies in ultracold atoms setups. In this respect, we stress
that the appearance of axial anomalies does not require coupling with gauge fields, gauge
potentials being sufficient. This fact holds both for axial anomalies in particle physics and
in condensed matter/ultracold atoms devices. Moreover, axial anomalies turn out to be
realizable in not topologically protected semimetals, as Dirac semimetals [818]. The first
notable example is the honeycomb lattice (as for the graphene), already simulated by
ultracold atoms in [32].
Analogous models for group locking of global and gauge symmetries can also be
obtained in ultracold atom setups. Indeed, fermionic mixtures with effective flavour

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
61 of 124
dynamics are realized using certain earth-alkaline or lanthanide atoms [117,777,796,797].
There, suitable di-fermion condensates result in group-flavour lockings [797]. Further
possibilities are in perspective in ultracold setups of fermion with colour degrees of freedom
and corresponding gauge dynamics, as of the types described in the next Section 4.3.
Still concerning analogies and analogous models in ultracold atom setups with interest
in fundamental physics, it is important to mention Bose-Einstein condensates, possibly
multi-species, around unitarity. Indeed, these systems display interesting analogies with
meson condensates in ultracompact stars, in a deconfined regime characterized by suf-
ficiently high barionic and/or isospin chemical potential [548,819]. Similarly, fermionic
quantum gases at unitarity, i.e., in the middle of the BEC-BCS crossover, are known to
lose their characterization in terms of any intrinsic length-scale, then effectively displaying
scale-invariance. This property is approximately shared by quark-gluon plasma [820]
or by certain non-Abelian gauge theories with a large number of colours [821] and/or
flavours [822].
So far, we mainly discussed ultracold atoms in their ground state. However, also
the Rydberg atoms platforms discussed in Section 2.1.5, are gaining a steadily increasing
attention [172]. Among other notable achievements, they allowed recent progresses on
the quantum simulation of gauge theories [823,824]. These results stand in a more general
program for quantum simulations, that already started to be experimentally developed.
More in detail, simulations with devices composed by up to 256 (Rydberg) atoms have
been realized so far [56,57,177].
Beyond ultracold atoms, a separate approach makes use of trapped ions, a platform al-
ready mentioned concerning the simulation of the Majorana equation [772]. As discussed in
Section 2.1.4, due to the long-range interaction that can be encoded in such devices, ions, or-
ganized in suitable arrays, proved to be effective as quantum simulators for various relevant
quantum systems and models [825–827]. A first notable application is given by long-range
systems, as long-range generalizations of the standard quantum Ising chain [828,829] or
of the quantum Heisenberg chain [157]. Other relevant proposals exploiting ultracold
atoms and trapped ions concern long-range topological superconductors [830], see [831].
Beyond their intrinsic importance as strong and long-range correlated systems and as
potential quantum simulators [832], tunable interactions allow for variable spreading of
correlations on the system, effectively without a finite maximum speed. This makes these
platforms ideal toy models as interacting systems with (even strong) violation of Lorentz
invariance. Connected with this aspect, recently peculiar phenomena of dynamical mass
generation, due to long-range couplings, have been shown. This is the case for instance
of some Goldstone excitations from the spontaneous symmetry breaking of continuous
symmetries, see e.g., [833–835].
Finally, we highlight that the quantum Ising chain with vacancies, often referred to as the
tricritical Ising model, is known to host a global N = 1-supersymmetry [836,837] at criticality,
hunted since long-ago in particle accelerators. This symmetry can be spontaneously broken
by continuously lowering the vacancy density, ending up in the critical quantum Ising model.
As customary in supersymmetric theories, this breakdown is paralleled by the appearance of
Goldstino excitations, the fermionic counterparts of bosonic Goldstone excitations for global
ordinary symmetries. Actually, the Majorana fermion, describing the low-energy behaviour
of the critical quantum Ising model, can be shown to be nothing but a Goldstino mode from
the pattern described above [836,837]. Other notable proposals for emergent supersymmetry
in ultracold atoms setups involve Bose-Fermi mixtures [838], also spin-orbit coupled [839],
and atom-molecule mixing [840]. In the same references, the spontaneous breaking of
supersymmetry, even thermal [840], has been also inferred.
A separate treatment will be devoted to the analogous description of QCD in some of
the deconfined regimes, a topic treated in the following section, Section 4.3.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
62 of 124
4.3. Ultracompact Stars and Quark Matter
Ultracold atoms proved to work as an ideal platform also for quantum simulation of
selected nuclear physics phenomena, relevant as well for ultra-compact objects like neu-
trons stars [5,841]. As customary, this approach exploits simplified toy models, including
solely essential properties of much more involved dynamics. Most prominent examples in-
volve the multispecies Bose-Einstein condensates (BEC), BEC-BCS crossover [552,566]—as
described in Section 3.1.1—and superfluid fermionic mixtures [796,797,842], as well as the
proposal for gauge fields included in Section 4.2.
In order to contextualize the role of such a modeling, let us focus at the beginning
on the description of the core of certain ultracompact stars. In this region of the star, it
is expected that sufficiently high densities can be reached so to induce deconfinement of
quarks. In this condition, various deconfined regimes, typical of the QCD phase diagram,
are expected to arise. The expected interior of a neutron star is depicted in Figure 20, while
a qualitative drawing of the QCD phase diagram is reported in Figure 21 [819].
Figure 20. Cross-section of a neutron star. The neutron superfluid in the crust and the proton
superfluid in the core are expected to be paired in 1S0 states, and the neutron superfluid in the core in
3P2 states. The electrons are instead expected to be in a normal state. A quark superfluid in the core
is also expected to be BCS paired in 1S0 states. Figure re-drawn from [843].
Figure 21. Qualitative QCD phase diagram for varying temperature T, baryonic chemical potential
µ, and isospin chemical potential µI (see text). Reported are the order parameters identifying
the different phases. They are expressed as vacuum expectation values of bilinears of the field
Ψ = (ψu, ψd), where ψu and ψd are fields for the up and down quarks, C denotes the charge-
conjugation unitary matrix acting on each of them, σ2 is the second Pauli matrix acting on the color (u,
d) indexes, and γ5 denotes the fifth Dirac matrix. The bar over the field operators indicates the usual
Lorentz inverse conjugation. For a detailed description of the order parameters, see [807,809,810,819].
In Figure 21, the yellow zone denotes the regime where quarks are confined in the
nucleons, while the main other deconfined reported regimes are denoted by typical order
parameters [819]. We stress that even if the yellow region appears as well-defined, a decon-
fined crossover is nowadays expected, at least in temperature. Moreover, the existence of a

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
63 of 124
single critical temperature for deconfinement and for chiral symmetry is still debated, see
e.g., [844].
A widely studied [5,807–810] regime concerns the region of the QCD phase diagram at
large-enough baryonic chemical potential µB. There, due to an attractive channel between
quarks (possible to be obtained even at a fully perturbative level, and well described by
effective Nambu-Jona-Lasinio models [774,775]), the formation of coloured counterparts
of the Cooper pairs can be favoured, also depending on the relative chemical potentials
of the different flavours. These pairs are described by the anomalous difermion conden-
sate ⟨ψa,α(r)ψb,β(r′)⟩, {a, b} denoting color and {α, β} the flavour indexes. Provided that
formation of these pairs occurs coherently, it can give rise to colored superfluid states
of quarks, possibly belonging to different flavour multiplets. In this way, color-flavour
locking, see Section 4.2, is generally obtained. Moreover, due to imbalances between the
number densities of the pairing species (colour and flavour), pairs with nonzero total
momentum can be stabilized, resulting in spatial modulations and crystalline patterns
of the pairings [809,810,819,845,846]. Peculiar astrophysics signatures of colour-flavour
locked phases have been described in the emission spectrum of the stars hosting these
phases [807,809,810,819], deserving present and future investigation. Also for this purpose,
ultracold atoms can still be useful, as suggested by the discussions in the same references.
Still concerning the QCD phase diagram in Figure 21 and its effective simulation, it is
also interesting to focus on the opposite, deconfined, regime where the isospin chemical
potential µI is sufficiently large (we remind that µI is the difference between the chemical
potentials of different quarks in the same flavour multiplet). There, also based on Monte-
Carlo simulations (see e.g., [847–851]) it has been inferred [852] the formation of a BEC of
scalar (spinless) particle called mesons, primarily involving the pion doublet π±, at least
at not too large baryonic chemical potential µB. Probably, due to the mesons interactions,
a nonvanishing superfluid fraction parallels the BEC. The further role of the strange
quarks and consequently of the k-mesons (kaon) is also considered, at larger strange-
quarks chemical potential. Focusing on the pions dynamics, a BEC regime arises when
the isospin chemical potential approaches the pion mass, mπ± ≈139.57 MeV. Increasing
further the same potential, up to ≈1.7 mπ±, theoretical and numerical studies indicate
the continuous evolution of the BEC into a BCS state, à priori not linked to the colour-
flavour phases described above. We stress that this crossover does not involve a colour
deconfinement transition, indeed deconfinement is a common feature of all the regimes
discussed here. More at a phenomenological level, the described phenomenology suggests
the existence of meson stars [852], an issue still under investigation. Finally, for even larger
µI, the BCS regime can display again spatial modulations and crystalline patterns of the
pairings [809,810,819,845,846] (equivalently, with nonzero momentum), linking with the
large µB-regime, still reported in Figure 21.
This physics can in principle been investigated with ultracold atoms. The simulation
of the physics of di-fermion condensates and colour-flavour locking has been already dis-
cussed in Section 4.2. Concerning instead the BEC-BCS crossover, a similar phenomenology
can be obtained in current experiments, even in the presence of additional degrees of
freedom, as mimicking color or other elementary quantum numbers. Indeed, the same
phenomenology is mainly driven by the difference in the chemical potentials between the
fermions forming the BEC molecules, which constitute central controllable parameters in
ultracold atoms setups [117,777]. This is the case also for the related regime of superconduc-
tivity with non-zero momentum. Detailed studies, also at finite temperature, of unbalanced
ultracold fermions, indicating similar pairings, are included in the review [853,854] and
references therein.
5. Cosmology and Astrophysics
Section 4 has highlighted the main problems that have been or potentially can be
addressed by means of cold and ultracold-atomic platforms, to test the Standard Model
of particle physics. In this section, we proceed with our journey along selected aspects of

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
64 of 124
the four fundamental theories, Quantum Field Theory and the Standard Model of particle
physics on the one side, and General Relativity and the Standard Model for cosmology
on the other, and discuss how atomic quantum technologies can be exploited to address
foundational problems in General Relativity.
In particular, General Relativity (GR), our so far best theory of gravity, lies on the
following principles: relativity principle, stating that no preferred inertial frames and that
all (accelerated or not) frames can be equally considered; general covariance, stating that
field equations must be in covariant form; causality, stating that each spacetime point has
past, present, and future; equivalence principle, essentially stating that locally, inertial and
gravitational effect are indistinguishable.
In turn, the equivalence principle encompasses a number of different aspects. One
is related to the universality of free fall, often referred to as weak equivalence principle
(WEP), stating that inertial and gravitational mass are equivalent. Thus, (a) locally, one
cannot distinguish inertial and gravitational effects using the straightforward observation
of free-fall of physical objects, and (b) objects with different internal composition are subject
to the same acceleration when moving in a gravitational field. The generalized Einstein
equivalence principle (EEP) embodies (i) WEP through the fact that special relativity is
locally valid; it additionally encompasses (ii) local Lorentz invariance (LLI), stating that the
outcome of any “local non-gravitational” test is independent of the frame velocity of the
measuring apparatus, and (iii) local position invariance (LPI), that adds independence of
the position and time where the test is performed. In this perspective, gravity is indeed a
curvature of spacetime with the trait of a universal property, and the EEP is indeed crucial
for all metric theories of gravity.
Despite its many successes, a number of issues arise with GR, both at infrared—
cosmological—scales and at the ultraviolet scales of quantum field theory. In the former
case, the Standard Model of particle physics and the standard model of cosmology appear
to be inadequate at extreme energy curvatures regimes. In the latter, the problem is that GR
is hardly made to work as a fundamental theory of gravity with a quantum spacetime. Thus,
solving such controversies requires to either act on the sources of Einstein field equations
and introduce exotic forms of matter (Dark Matter, DM) and energy (Dark Energy, DE),
or on the geometric view. Acting on the geometric view implies, e.g., building on effective
theories with GR recovered to some limit, or extended theories of gravity with additional
higher-order curvature invariants and (non)minimally coupled scalar fields, possibly (not
necessarily) due to field quantization of spacetime [52,855,856].
Interestingly enough, EEP breaking is invoked in a number of scenarios. For example,
several dark matter and dark energy models break EP due to the introduction of new fields
that are expected to non-universally couple to Standard Model particles, and the same
occurs with other unification theories. Also, attempts to develop a quantum theory of
gravitation lead to a breaking of Lorentz symmetry. In addition, EEP breaking can explain
the values of some arbitrary Standard Model constants. On other hand, WEP and LLI
can be violated in extended SMPP theories, e.g., due to coupling to generalized charges,
the strong EP encompassing also gravitational energy, can be violated in extended GR
theories, e.g., in presence of a scalar field non-minimally coupled to geometry. Finally, EEP
can be violated at finite temperature T since a fraction of particle mass might arise via
finite-T radiative corrections spoiling Lorentz-invariance of vacuum [856,857].
Consistent efforts have been performed to address all these intriguing questions by
employing highly-sensitive quantum sensors based on cold atoms, proposed to make
unprecedented advancements at the interface of general relativity, gravity, atomic physics,
and quantum mechanics [48,494,858–862], and fostering the reach of technology readiness
also for practical applications in Earth observation, geodesy, time-keeping, and navigation.
One essential ingredient in this quest necessarily are precise and accurate frequency
standards and clocks [489], with steadily improving stability [863,864] up to record precisions
of 5 × 10−19 s, i.e., failing approximately one second in the age of this universe [865,866].
The demonstration that precision is not necessarily limited by the local-oscillator stability,

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
65 of 124
with the reach of a 8.9 × 10−20 precision after 3.3 h of averaging [860,867], suggests that
we may expect even further steady improvements. This exceptional advancements are
enabling table-top experiments relevant for fundamental physics beyond the Standard
Model, as demonstrated in achieving the capability of resolving gravitational redshift
across mm distances in table-top experiments [51], and the applications in the search for
dark matter [868–871].
One second ingredient is atom interferometry [494,499,500,872] that, along with atomic
clocks, is having a tremendous development as an accurately controllable tool characterised by
even long coherence times [873]. Atom interferometry is exploited for experimental gravitation,
including precision measurements of gravitational acceleration [874–876], also via schemes
using Bloch oscillations in optical lattices [224,873,877–879], curvature gradients [880,881],
geodesy [882], gyroscopes based on the Sagnac effect [883,884], testing the Newtonian 1/r2
law [885], general relativity tests [264] and investigation of quantum gravity models [886],
geophysics [887], and measurements of the gravitational constant G [42,43].
In the following, we step on some of these more recent developments especially
relevant for the spirit of the present review.
5.1. Gravity and General Relativity Tests
5.1.1. Measurement of Big G
While the Newtonian gravitational constant G has no definitive relationship to other
fundamental constants and its value is not predicted theoretically, improving the precision
with which G is known is of paramount theoretical importance in gravitation, cosmology,
particle physics and astrophysics, and for geophysical models [43]. About 300 are the
experiments aimed at determining the value of G, however resulting into discrepancies too
large to lead to sufficiently precise conclusions. In the experiment performed at LENS with
the use of ultracold atoms and quantum interferometry, in the presence of macroscopic
tungsten masses [43], G has been determined to be G = 6.67191(99) · 10−11 m3Kg−1s−2,
with a relative uncertainty of 150 parts per million, allowing to identify systematic errors
from previous experiments, and improving confidence in the value of G. The gravity
gradiometer consisted of two vertically separated atom interferometers operated in differ-
ential mode with any spurious acceleration induced by vibrations or seismic noise rejected.
The double-differential configuration has been designed to cancel out common-mode
spurious signals and maximize the signal. The (two sets of) well-characterized tungsten
masses were placed in two different positions to modulate the relevant gravitational signal,
and designing for additional cancellation of common-mode spurious effects [43]. The atom
interferometer was realized using light pulses to stimulate 87Rb atoms at the two-photon
Raman transition between the hyperfine levels F = 1 and F = 2 of the ground state.
This experiment has improved by one order of magnitude the measurement previously
performed at Stanford [42].
5.1.2. Variation of Fundamental Constants
One use of atomic clocks is in disentangling the fundamental problem of possible
variations of fundamental constants in nature, such as the fine-structure constant α and
the electron-proton mass ratio µ. These are typically assumed to be fixed, but some
forces-unification theories predict their variation in space and time. Atomic and molecular
transitions, which determine the clock frequencies, depend on them. Atomic clocks can
therefore constrain these fundamental constant variation over the period during which
they are locally operated, typically years, thus complementing astronomical measurements
spanning instead larger fractions of the universe’s time history [489].
Optical clocks, which have higher precision than traditional cesium (Cs) microwave
clocks, are particularly useful in studying the variation of the fine-structure constant, given
that they are instead insensitive to the electron-proton mass ratio µ. Then, variations
in α and µ can be investigated by comparing the frequency of different atomic species.
Additionally, frequency measurements can be analyzed to search for couplings between α,

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
66 of 124
µ, and gravitational potentials due to the elliptical Earth orbit that introduces an annually
varying solar gravitational term. Currently, constraints of δα/α = −2.0(2.0)10−17/yr and
δµ/µ = −0.5(1.6)10−1/yr are extracted from these studies [489].
Similar goals can be pursued by means of atom interferometry [495], in fact after
setting up two closed interferometers by extending the laser-pulse sequence. The phase
shift experienced by the two closed interferometers is directly related to the recoil energy
acquired during the π/2 beamsplitter pulses. Precise measurement of this phase difference,
with the accurate determination of the laser wavelength, gives access to the ratio h/m
of the Planck’s constant to the mass of the involved atomic species. Combining this
measurement with the extremely accurate determinations of the Rydberg constant, yields
the most accurate results for the fine-structure constant to date, α = 1/137.035999046(27)
with relative uncertainty ≃2 · 10−10. These results surpass the precision achieved through
measurements of the electron’s anomalous magnetic moment. In fact, a comparison of the
two results can serve as a high-precision test of quantum electrodynamics.
5.1.3. Equivalence Principle Tests
As highlighted in the introduction to this section, a number of reasons has shifted
some of the efforts performed to design accurate tests of the equivalence principle. Three
motivations are especially relevant. First, several theories developed to unify gravity with
the other fundamental forces suggest that yet undetected fifth forces would violate the
Universality of Free Fall (UFF) and the Equivalence Principle (EEP) [857]. Then, quantum
interactions of dark matter with Standard Matter particles could show signatures leading
to violations of UFF and EEP [888–891]. Finally, though still controversial, contradictions
are proposed to exist between general relativity and quantum mechanics, as e.g., with
possible gravitational-induced collapses of the wavefunction and the understanding of
the measurement problem in quantum mechanics [892–895]. Needless to say, EEP remains
a crucial point for any self-consistent theory of gravity and can discriminate between
competing theories. Moreover, EEP might hold at a classical level and be violated at
quantum level. In fact, given that EEP is not based on any fundamental symmetry and can
be seen more as an heuristic hypothesis, instead of asking whether EEP is violated, one
might ask its validity extent and why a violation has not been observed yet [52].
The concepts underlying the design of EEP tests are the encoding of (i) local Lorentz
invariance, so that clock rates are independent of the clocks velocities, (ii) local-position
invariance, i.e., the universality of red-shift, and (iii) the universality of free fall, so that
all free-falling point particles follow the same trajectories independently of their internal
structure and composition. To this end, atom interferometers based on multi-photon Raman
(involving internal states of the atoms) or Bragg (for external, momentum states) transitions
and Bloch oscillations have been developed. In particular, (i) and (ii) can be tested by means
of atomic clocks, and (iii) by atom interferometers using momentum states. For example,
absolute redshift measurements can be performed in which a terrestrial clock is compared
to a clock in a spacecraft, and null redshift measurements -i.e. tests of the universality of
the redshift–in which two different types of clocks on board of the same spacecraft are
compared, with any GR deviation would manifest in a modulation of the frequency ratio
between the clocks. The UFF can be for example tested by atomic Mach-Zender like Bragg
interferometers like those illustrated in Section 2.4.1.
As to the cases (i)–(ii), optical clocks in space have indeed the potential to greatly
improve tests of fundamental physics such as Einstein’s theory of relativity, time and
frequency transfer, and the accurate determination and monitoring of the geoid. Mis-
sion scenarios like SAGAS [896] and EGE [897] propose to use an optical clock in space
that could surpass terrestrial tests by several orders of magnitude in terms of redshift
measurements, Local Lorentz Invariance (LLI) tests, and parametrized post-Newtonian
gravity measurements. Additionally, optical clocks in space can act as stable time and
frequency servers for time/frequency transfer between continents, and relativistic geodesy
applications. For example, ACES is a mission designed to test Einstein’s General Relativity

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
67 of 124
from the International Space Station, using a laser-cooled Cesium atom clock and an active
H-maser. It will measure the gravitational redshift, search for time variations of funda-
mental constants, and perform Standard Model Extension tests. In currently undergoing
qualification tests, ACES states a fractional frequency stability of 10−16 and accuracy of 1–2
×10−16 after 10 days of integration [898,899].
Turning to the case (iii), we begin by noticing that historically tests of the UFF have
been conducted since the 16th century by Galileo after measuring the time of “free falling”
balls of different compositions under gravity with a 10−3 precision, this being ingeniously
reached with thousands of about 1 second oscillation periods of a pendulum, having no
more than his heartbeats as a timekeeper. Ground tests of EP with macroscopic torsion
balances have been performed reaching η = (0.3 ± 1.8) × 10−13 [900] for the Eötvös param-
eter η ≡2(aA −aB)/(aA + aB) built from the accelerations aA,B of the two macroscopic test
bodies, and other proposals have been pushed forward [901,902] until the state-of-the-art
space experiment MICROSCOPE [903–905].
Ultracold-atom interferometry has been developed for UFF and EEP tests since the
1990s [499,874], reaching now η = (1.6 ± 1.8(stat) ± 3.4(syst)) × 10−12 [906]. In white
papers submitted to the ESA Voyage-2050 call [50,907], the growing AEDGE (Atomic Exper-
iments for Dark Matter and Gravity Exploration in Space) community and the STEQUEST
(Space Time Explorer and QUantum Equivalence principle Space Test) team [52,907] have
structured proposals to test the Universality of Free Fall (UFF) and the Einstein Equivalence
Principle (EEP) using (ultracold) atom interferometry, beyond the best existing results
achieved by MICROSCOPE (see Table 1). In general, these atom-interferometry propos-
als are also constructed to be multipurpose under different usages and/or data analysis,
allowing also for Lorentz invariance tests, gravitational waves detection and (ultra-light
type) dark-matter quests (see next sections).
Table 1. State-of-the-art in UFF/EEP tests. Numbers in brackets are results expected in the future.
Table reproduced from [52] (Permission to use this content granted by Creative Commons Licence
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) and adapted from [53].
Class
Elements
η
Year
Comments
Be–Ti
2 × 10−13
2008
Torsion balance
Classical
Pt–Ti
1 × 10−14
2017
MICROSCOPE first results
Pt–Ti
3 × 10−15
2022
MICROSCOPE full data
Hybrid
133Cs–CC
7 × 10−9
2001
Atom Interferometry
87Rb–CC
7 × 10−9
2010
and macroscopic corner cube (CC)
39K– 87Rb
3 × 10−7
2020
different elements
87Sr– 88Sr
2 × 10−7
2014
same element, fermion vs. boson
Quantum
85Rb– 87Rb
3 × 10−8
2015
same element, different isotopes
85Rb– 87Rb
3.8 × 10−12
2020
10 m drop tower
41K– 87Rb
(10−17)
2037
STE-QUEST
Antimatter
¯H–H
(10−2)
2023+
under construction at CERN
The STEQUEST proposal for example [52], aims at η ≈10−17 after 18 months of
operation, by using a double atom interferometer on a satellite with 87Rb and 41K test
masses in a quantum-state superposition (see Table 1). Interestingly, this proposals build on
the technological advancements achieved in MICROSCOPE and LISA-Pathfinder missions,
besides the Technical Readiness Level of the payloads reached by ground-based and
microgravity experiments, that include drop-tower [908,909], zero-gravity flights [910],
sounding rockets [911], and the International Space Station [912], special efforts devoted to
controlling the main systematic effects [913].
At the same time, the AEDGE community is building up a roadmap for terrestrial
very-long-baseline Atom (VLB) Interferometry (AI) based on underground or tower infras-
tructures [914]. Five proposals are being pushed forward: the 150 m deep array of three

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
68 of 124
Rb Bragg AI MIGA-ELGAR in France [915,916], the 240 m deep array of Rb and Sr Ra-
man/Bragg AI ZAIGA (Zhaoshan long-baseline Atom Interferometer Gravitation Antenna)
in China [917], the 10 m tall tower with Rb and Yb VLBAI in Germany [918], the clock AI
10-m tall tower AION in UK [919], and the 100 m deep clock/Bragg AI MAGIS at Fermilab
in USA [920]. These large facilities are at various stages of planning and realization, while
others possibilities are flourishing such as those in the underground laboratories SURF
(USA), CallionLab (Finland), and an underground VLB-AI at CERN.
5.1.4. Detection of Gravitational Waves
The first direct evidence for gravitational waves (GWs) was provided by LIGO (Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory)/Virgo observations of black hole and neu-
tron star mergers [921]. LIGO and Virgo are interferometers essentially composed by 4 km
and 3 km long perpendicular arms, respectively. In the basic operating concept, a passing
gravitational wave stretches one arm while shrinking the other, so that the light bouncing
between the arms mirrors takes different amounts of time to travel, and interference fringes
manifest and can be detected. Extraordinary sensitivities have been reached, corresponding
to arm-length changes of the order of 10−19 m: the longer the arms, the bigger being
the arm-length change (see Figure 22). The GW frequency range which LISA/Virgo are
sensitive to is 10–103 Hz in the high portion of the spectrum, corresponding to objects
with relatively small masses up to several tens of solar masses. This discovery has opened
the door to new explorations in fundamental physics, astrophysics and cosmology and,
on the methodology side, fostered the era of so-called multimessenger astronomy. Other
GW experiments are currently being prepared or proposed, such as KAGRA (Kamioka
Gravitational Wave Detector) in Japan, INDIGO (Indian Initiative in Gravitational-wave
Observations) in India, and the Einstein Telescope (ET) in Europe, which will focus on the
same frequency range of detectable gravitational waves as LIGO/Virgo while aiming at
higher sensitivities.
Figure 22. Gravitational Waves detection with atom technologies. Comparative analysis of strain
measurements proposed by AEDGE with those proposed or realised by light-interferometry exper-
iments as in the legend. Sensitivities to black hole (BH) mergers at different redshifts z and with
varying total masses are showcased. Lines: predicted strain signals for binary BH mergers, with equal
mass (solid lines) and significantly different masses (dashed lines), specifically 3000 M⊙and 30 M⊙.
Shown is also the estimated level of gravitational gradient noise (GGN), that could potentially arise
in a terrestrial detector of kilometer scale: this emphasizes the need for effective mitigation strategies.
Notice that potential synergistic collaborations are possible between AEDGE and other detectors
investigating different stages and histories of BH mergers. Image from [50] (Permission to use this
content is granted by Creative Commons Licence https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
On the other hand, supermassive black holes with masses larger than ∼106 solar
masses are known to exist, being relevant to cosmological structure formation. For this
reason, designing lower-frequency interferometers is crucial. This concept is a big focus in
the forthcoming LISA (Laser Interferometer Space Antenna), the ESA/NASA mission led

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
69 of 124
by ESA, and building on the results of the LISA pathfinder mission. LISA will be a space
interferometer using three satellites arranged at the vertices of an equilateral triangle with
about 5 million km side [922] and orbiting the Sun behind the Earth, the long interferometric
arms opening to a (best) sensitivity in the low-frequency range (10−4–1 Hz), and thus
corresponding to GW caused by heavier objects or with wider orbits (see Figure 22).
The AEDGE proposal using atom interferometry [50,53], is aimed at sensitivities in a
frequency range suited to observe mergers of intermediate-mass black holes with masses
between 102 and 105 solar masses, thus intermediate between the LIGO/Virgo-like and
the forthcoming LISA capabilities, possibly allowing also for complementary observations
(see Figure 22). For example, it could detect mergers of ∼104 solar-mass black holes with
signal-to-noise (SNR) higher than ≈1000 out to 10 years redshift, and mergers of ∼103
solar-mass black holes with SNR higher than ≈100 out to 100 years redshift. In so doing,
the AEDGE proposal can pursue the goal of providing evidence of how some of the most
massive stellar black holes eventually grow into super-massive black holes, to observe
the inspiral stages of lower-mass black holes, and investigate whether a gap exists in the
spectrum of black holes masses around 200 solar masses [50,53].
We highlight that some of the same EEP-test aimed at very-long-baseline terrestrial
experiments are under design, listed in the previous section, are also aimed at GW detection
in such intermediate frequency range. These are, e.g., MIGA, ZAIGA, and MAGIS.
Finally, experiments like AEDGE and LISA can be helpful also to link GW detection
to cosmological sources, whereby e.g., the Standard Model of particle physics predicts
first-order phase transitions in the early Universe, including cosmic strings [50,53].
5.1.5. Quest for Ultra-Light Dark Matter
Dark matter (DM) and dark energy (DE) are preeminent examples of unknowns
remaining to be unveiled at the verge between the standard model of particle physics
and of cosmology. It is estimated that DM comprises around 84% of the matter density
in the Universe. However, nothing about the nature of the corresponding particles is
known: neither its mass, nor energy, spin, parity, lifetime, not even the type of interaction
(if any) with normal—e.g., SMPP-matter, to start with. DE is theorized to be related to
the cosmological constant Λ of general relativity, a yet unknown form of energy, in fact
the dominant form of energy in the universe: while the vacuum energy of quantum fields
can potentially account for dark energy, a correct prediction of its value requires a viable
theory of quantum gravity [889]. Searches for DM in a wide range of energies between
zeV and TeV/PeV have been performed [923]. One of the most popular high-energy
candidates, the weakly interacting massive particles (WIMP), have however not been
directly detected at the CERN Large Hadron Collider. Therefore, alternative dark matter
candidates have more recently gained interested in research, within the so-called ultralight
dark matter (ULDM) scenario, e.g., DM in the sub-eV mass range. Different hypothesis
include QCD axions and axion-like-particles (ALPs), dark vector bosons, and light scalar
particles [924–926].
Atom interferometers can be sensitive to these low-energy particles, i.e., in the zeV-
keV range (see Figure 23). The concept underlying the detection of scalar ULDM by atom
interferometry exploits a temporal variation of atomic transition frequencies, due to scalar
DM-induced oscillations in time of fundamental constants like the electron mass and the
electromagnetic fine-structure constant, at frequencies set by the mass of the scalar DM
and amplitudes driven by the DM mass and local density [870]. The sensitivity increases
with increasing the interrogation times, the number of atoms in the beam, the amount of
momentum transfer, and the fringes contrast, and with decreasing the sampling time [50,53].
Massive vector ULDM fields would be detected also because of a composition-dependent
Yukawa-type modification of the two-body interaction, leading to a differential acceleration
of different isotopes in dual-species atomic interferometers [52].

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
70 of 124
-24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10
-8
-6
-4
-2
-7
-5
-3
-1
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
log10 mφ [eV/c2]
log10 d
m
^
(1)-dg
(1)
log10 fφ [Hz]
Lab - atomic experiments
Eöt-Wash
MICROSCOPE Ti/Pt
STE-QUEST
95% C.L. excluded area
Figure 23. Quest for Dark Matter with atom technologies. Comparison between current experiment
sensitivity to a linear coupling of scalar ULDM to quarks (shaded region) and the sensitivity proposed
by STE−QUEST mission (dashed line). Experiments include atomic clocks [927], the MICROSCOPE
experiment obtained from [904] and torsion balances [928], as in the legend. Image from [52] (Permission
to use this content granted by Creative Commons Licence https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.
0/).
The AEDGE roadmap aims at probing extensive new regions of parameter space in the
largely unexplored mass range of ∼10−2 eV to ∼10−16 eV, for DM with linear and quadratic
couplings to electrons and photons [50,53]. Using atomic isotopes with different nuclear
spins, detection of axion-like DM lighter than 10−14 eV [929] could become accessible, while
running two coupled interferometers would become sensitive to dark vector bosons below
10−15 eV coupled to the difference between baryon and lepton number [930].
Limits to possible oscillations of a linear combination of constants like the hyperfine-
structure constant, the α quark mass, and the QCD mass scale, have also been set after
performing approximately 6 years of highly accurate hyperfine frequency comparison of
atomic 87Rb and 133Cs clocks [927], making more stringent a previous Dy-spectroscopy
based experiment assuming only α variations [869].
While the present open debate continues on whether one day it will be possible to
detect gravitational waves or dark matter by atom interferometry, this field of research
is rapidly growing and extending, always involving a cross-disciplinary community of
condensed-matter and AMO physicists, astrophysicists, and high-energy physicists [50,931].
The topic has entered The 2021 ECFA detector research and development roadmap (DRDR)
(see e.g., [932]) and two fully dedicated work packages (WP1 and WP2) are being conceived
as input for the ongoing Quantum Detector initiative started at CERN. A dedicated location
at CERN has been more recently announced to host a ground atom interferometer at the
more recent Terrestrial Very-Long-Baseline Atom Interferometry Workshop (13–14 March
2023 at CERN) [933].
We finalise this section by highlighting one aspect of the ULDM scalar boson hy-
pothesis, that represent one more example of integration between ultracold-atoms physics
and cosmology. In fact, it is known that the conventional cold-particle interpretation of
dark matter (so-called cold dark matter) misses basic properties of the density profiles for
common dwarf galaxies. While this outcome is fostering increasing interest, remarkably
complex simulations of cold, wavelike dark matter composed of Bose–Einstein condensates
are being performed. Indeed, it is found that when Bose-Einstein condensed into what
is named fuzzy dark matter, dwarf galaxies profiles are reproduced, with the observed
uniform central masses and shallow density [934]. These simulations are computationally
extremely challenging because of the very different length scales involved, which require
large and adaptive simulation meshes. Ideally, one might also want to embed the simu-
lation of the small-scale galaxy-size BEC DM into the large-scale structure dark matter
simulations [935], leading to even more demanding computations. In the spirit of this
review, one may still envision implementing at least the fuzzy-DM simulation in real BEC
experiments, using BEC platforms as a quantum simulator.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
71 of 124
5.1.6. A Special Perspective
We conclude this section by highlighting that these forefront enterprises are signing
a new era in the way quantum technologies are used for fundamental science. Some
of the illustrated proposals ride along the—so-far unexplored—path of integrating mi-
croscopic quantum sensors in large-scale facilities. Thus, practicing a cross-disciplinary
approach to one common search, sourcing from high-energy physics, condensed matter
and atomic-molecular-optical physics, astrophysics, general relativity and cosmology. All
of them operate within tightly-joined theoretical and experimental efforts, implementing
techniques and technologies across different scientific communities, and fostering the ad-
vancement of technology readiness to stimulate dedicated companies and ignite sustainable
economical development.
5.2. Quantum Simulators for Gravity and Cosmology Problems
We have discussed how atomic clocks and atom interferometry can be exploited for
fundamental tests and to detect gravitational waves and dark matter. On the other hand,
in the spirit of this review we highlight that atom-based quantum technologies can also
be designed to work as quantum simulators for specific phenomena. In this section, we
discuss one such example interesting to gravity and general relativity, that is analogue
gravity. This is attracting increasing interest on both the theoretical and experimental side
and proposes to encode gravity-related phenomena in ultracold-atom experiments.
5.2.1. What Is Meant by Analogue Gravity
Analogue gravity is a paradigm built on the concept that a physical phenomenon
can be described using an emergent or analogue metric [936], thus enabling to simulate
the dynamics of objects living on a spacetime and described by classical or quantum field
theory in curved spacetime. While depending on the specific matter model, this emergent
metric can act as an effective background quantity governing field fluctuations. Along these
lines, analogue models essentially work as effective-field theories, with their dynamics
being determined by matter equations, aiming to replicate aspects of general relativity and
field theory in a curved background.
In essence, the analogy works as follows: the fields propagating through other gravita-
tional fields correspond to the perturbations propagating in continuous systems, that are
the limiting form of a microscopic underlying structure, thus emerging from a more funda-
mental theory. In this view, general relativity would be the analogue to hydrodynamics,
whereby gravity is simulated by the model kinematics and the dynamics through the sys-
tem’s microphysics: the metric experienced by the quantum excitations would emerge from
the fluid-dynamics equations with parameters determined by a thermodynamic equation
of state. Of course, the possibility of describing emergent phenomena within an analogue
gravity approach, by no means implies that general relativity must emerge from a more
fundamental theory of quantum gravity. This notwithstanding, the analogy can be quite
useful to construct different cosmological metrics, as it has been the case for example of the
Friedmann-Lemaitre-Robertson-Walker [937].
Playing with analogue gravity offers three main advantages. First, it encourages
creative thinking by associating concepts from seemingly distinct systems, potentially lead-
ing to new understanding and ideas that, in this case, might lead to completely different
perspectives on gravity as a quantum or as an emergent phenomenon. Second, the knowl-
edge of the matter model—in our case an ultra-cold atomic fluid, can be exploited to gain
insight on classical general relativity and viceversa, or yet on curved-space quantum field
theory. Third, selected concepts from gravitational theory can be encoded into real table-top
experiments, allowing for practical investigations, albeit with limitations [37,38]. In this
respect, two caveats are relevant in this discussion. Firstly, the matter stress-energy tensor
does not obey the Einstein equations, so that no correspondence directly exists with the
analogue metric. Second, at the scales where the system’s microscopic properties become
relevant, the equations describing particles and waves in the gravitational field can deviate

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
72 of 124
from those of gravitation: for example, local Lorentz invariance can break, whereas at larger
length scales it is intrinsically encoded along with local-position invariance. Nonetheless,
these analogies serve as a source of inspiration, opening up new perspectives and generat-
ing novel ideas. Turning to the specific models, a number of classical and quantum systems
have been explored in the last couple of decades, including water and classical fluids with
on-purpose designed background velocities [938–941], electrodynamical systems [942–945],
liquid Helium [38], and quantum gases.
One common tool is the formation of horizons. In a moving fluid, this is realised
by arranging the fluid to move with a speed below and above the speed of sound in
different regions: in the subsonic portion, the fluid drags the sound waves along, while in
the supersonic region sound waves cannot go back upstream, so that the limiting border
between the supersonic and the subsonic regions plays the role of an event horizon. In fact,
analogs of horizons with the corresponding Hawking radiation, and rotating black holes
have been simulated in classical fluids. However, in classical systems the field analogues
must be simulated, while in quantum systems they spontaneously pop up. For this reason,
quantum models result to be especially appealing and useful. Among them, those of
interest for the present review, which are physically realized by Bose-Einstein condensates
(BEC) of ultracold atoms [37,946,947].
Here, the acoustic metric is fully determined by the BEC wavefunction and the ana-
logue particles are the Bogoliubov quasi-particles spontaneously appearing in the conden-
sate as a quantum perturbation of the condensate wavefunction. The BEC healing length,
governed by the system density and the interatomic interaction strength, plays the role
of the Planck scale and sets a natural cutoff preventing the ultraviolet divergences and
solving the transplanckian problem [948–950]. In fact, the connections between gravity and
quantum hydrodynamics via thermodynamics [951] and collective quantum fields [952,953]
is sometimes speculatively used to develop a theory of quantum gravity. The cosmological
particle creation can be simulated after dynamical tuning of the atomic interactions through
time variations of the low-energy scattering length operated by means of the Fano-Feshbach
resonance mechanism [954,955], see Section 2.1.1.
As a field of research, analogue gravity started flourishing after the pioneering work of
Unruh [956], building up an analogue model based on fluid flow to investigate aspects of
Hawking radiation in real black holes, years later developed in another seminal paper by
Jacobson [948]. In playing the analogy, the lesson was learnt that Hawking radiation should be
thought of as a fundamental phenomenon of curved spacetime, occurring whenever a horizon
is equipped with an effective geometry, thus not necessarily specific of general relativity.
While we refer to the detailed review by Barcelò et al. [37] for an extensive account of
this subject, we discuss below the main ideas and selected recent results implying the use of
quantum fluids of atoms, and highlight the possible perspectives. In particular, we overview
three significant outcomes of the joint experimental and theoretical research performed
in analogue acoustic (or dumb) holes realized in these analogue systems: the creation
of acoustic horizons with the non-trivial observation and understanding of (analogue)
Hawking radiation [957–961], the perspective of investigating the information-paradox
problem, and of testing the Kovtun, Son and Starinets (KSS) conjecture about the existence
of a universal bound for the shear viscosity-to-entropy density ratio η/s ≥1/(4π) at the
black-hole horizon [962]. Other ongoing theoretical and numerical studies are aimed at
mimicking rotating black holes, the occurrence of superradiance, and the Penrose effect.
5.2.2. Analogue Horizons and Hawking Radiation
In the acoustic (AH) analogue of black holes (BHs), also named dumb holes, long-
wavelength sound waves cannot propagate upstream against the supersonic fluid flow
across the acoustic horizon, that works as a trapping surface. Hawking radiation and
temperature TH can be defined in analogy to photons spontaneously emitted at the BH
horizon [37,956,963–968]. As first derived by Unruh [956], TH results to be determined

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
73 of 124
by the gradient of the velocity field for a transonic flow in a background with spatially
uniform sound speed:
TH = 1
2π
∂|cs −v|
∂n

|H,
(12)
with v and cs the space-dependent fluid velocity and sound speed profiles, respectively,
the normal derivative being evaluated at the event horizon [37]. Following the theoretical
suggestion in [959] of identifying the signatures of Hawking radiation in the density-
density correlation function between analogue Hawking particles (see Figure 24a), analogue
Hawking radiation has been observed in the laboratory [39] with quasi-one-dimensional
BEC (see Figure 24b). Here, an imprinted density profile created a space-dependent speed of
sound and thus an analogue horizon. In a more recent theoretical work [41], the expression
(12) for TH has been derived within a covariant kinetic approach, with steps that lead
to learn two special lessons. First, the analogy between hydrodynamic flow and gravity
results in a covariant expression for the distribution function of phonons [969,970], that
highlights the geometric nature of TH. Second, the derivation is performed by equating
the entropy and energy losses of the acoustic horizon and the entropy and energy gains
of the spontaneously emitted phonons, that highlights the connection between Hawking
radiation and the horizon area [971] known from real black holes. In particular, this result
supports the conjecture that the entropy of acoustic horizons is proportional to their horizon
area, consistently with what is expected from considerations about the information loss
problem [972] and the entanglement of quantum fluctuations on opposite sides of the
horizon [973] (see below).
(c)
Figure 24. Analogue gravity simulation with atom technologies of Hawking radiation in acoustic
holes. (a) predicted density−density correlation function (nξ1) × [G(2)(x, x′) −1] between Hawk-
ing particles and their partners, rescaled to the diluteness parameter nξ1, with n the density and
ξ1 =
q
¯h2/(mµ1) the healing length in terms of the atom mass m and the chemical potential µ1.
The temperature is kBT0/µ1 = 0.1. (b) the same quantity as in (a), in the absence of a black−hole
horizon, where the flow remains sub-sonic everywhere. Image from [959] (Permission to use this
content granted by Creative Commons Licence https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
(c) Experimental observation of the predicted two−body correlation function in (a) panel, performed
in [39]. The origin represents the location of the horizon, and the dark bands emerging from the
horizon indicate correlations. Image from [39].
5.2.3. Information-Loss Paradox
While radiating, the black hole evaporates until it becomes a thermal bath. This,
however, would be in contrast with a unitary evolution of the quantum state from the
initial to the final state. In that case, it is easily understood that different initial states
may lead to the same thermal state and information would be lost. This paradox is a
major open problem in (analogue) gravity, connected to the link between geometry and
quantum matter, whereas a semiclassical theory of gravity essentially separates them: thus,
information transfer among the two is not possible [974]. Restoring such an information
transfer among matter and geometry is the solution, that is what quantum theory of gravity
should be capable of. Atom technologies can be an effective platform where to investigate
this concept of information transfer between matter and geometry.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
74 of 124
More recent studies [974] have suggested that during evaporation the information
might remain encoded in the entanglement between condensed and excited particles,
which would then preserve unitarity. This can be viewed by studying the corresponding
many-point correlation functions in a beyond-Bogoliubov approach that accounts also
for the quantum behaviour of the condensate correlations between quantum degrees of
freedom of matter and geometry build-up during evaporation.
5.2.4. Viscosity to Entropy Density Ratio
We finally turn to one of the most striking predictions of the universal behaviour of
black holes, that is the Kovtun, Son and Starinets (KSS) lower bound conjectured to exist
for the ratio between the shear viscosity and the entropy density ratio η/s ≥1/(4π) at the
BH horizon [962]. This is quite a robust result. Indeed, though KSS originally derived the
bound within the AdS/CFT correspondence, completely independent derivations have
been performed instead in Rindler causal horizon in flat spacetime [975,976]. In addition,
since the speed of light does not appear in the bound, the KSS conjecture seems to be
valid for all real fluids, relativistic and not, and amenable to be extended to classical
fluids. Given such a degree of universality, one may ask whether are there necessary
conditions that the fluid should fulfill, that have a quantum mechanical nature [552].
This question presents a pathway to investigating the interplay of general relativity and
quantum mechanics at the black hole horizon. Experimental studies of the KSS ratio
in BECs have been performed [977], that however show discrepancies with microscopic
theoretical predictions based on the theory of strongly interacting Fermi gases [552]. In fact,
KSS had already highlighted that one microscopic condition for the bound validity is that
the fluid be strongly interacting without well-defined quasi-particles [552]. Interestingly,
this condition can be met in relativistic heavy-ion collisions close to the deconfinement
transition temperature [978], in pure gauge numerical simulations [979], in O(N) [980] and
hadronic [981] models. In both the microscopic [552] and quantum hydrodynamic [976,982]
treatments of the KSS bound, the bound calculation has been based on the determination of
the Kubo transport coefficients formulas, involving finite temperature Green’s functions of
conserved currents. An entirely different, simpler and particularly transparent derivation
has been proposed [983], where the KSS bound is derived within a kinetic theory approach,
where interaction-driven and geometric effects can be easily disentangled, the latter being
enhanced, and is open to further developments also based on the quantum hydrodynamic
microscopic formulation for superfluids, that is based on the time-dependent density
functional theory [984–986].
6. Foundations of Quantum Mechanics
In Sections 4 and 5 we have explored the extent to which atomic quantum technologies
can be exploited to explore unsolved questions about the connections between Quantum
Field Theory (QFT) and the Standard Model of particle physics (SMPP) on the one side,
and General Relativity (GR) and the Standard Model of cosmology (SMC) on the other. We
have highlighted that while these theories have resisted to all sort of testing over decades
up to more than a century, a unified description has yet to be found. In particular, Quantum
mechanics is our best fundamental theory to describe the microscopic building blocks of
Nature, and it has not been disproved so far by any of the increasingly sophisticated and
precise experiments that have been conceived in more the 100 years, scaling up in size
from the behavior of subatomic particles, chemical reactions, the functioning of electronic
devices, up to matter-wave interferometry with tests masses of nearly 105 atomic mass units
(amu) [987,988]. In fact, the possibility that macroscopic quantum-mechanical behavior
be relevant in the realm of biological systems is attracting considerable interest as well,
and will be the subject of the next Section 7.
However, even before questioning its connections with the other theories, a number
of fundamental questions remain to be unveiled. One especially intriguing mystery is the
concept of time, unavoidable and crucial question in the search of how to reconcile QM and

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
75 of 124
general relativity [989]. In this domain, a seminal paradigm shift has been initiated by Page
and Wootters [990], considering time as a quantum degree of freedom with a corresponding
Hilbert space, the time flow being then provided by the entanglement between the time
degree of freedom and the system itself, the global state remaining time-independent.
For an observer internal to the system, the clocking would reduce to a normal time evolution
resulting from projecting the global quantum state on the given time t, thus a conditioned
state. However, the mechanism fails to provide the correct quantum propagators and
correct quantum statistics of the measurements performed at different times, an issue that
has been subsequently fixed by formalizing measurements according to the von-Neumann
prescription [991]. The presence of gravitational interactions among the clocks and the
definition of consistent quantum reference frames has been also addressed [992,993] and a
well-defined classical limit recovered through Generalized Coherent States [994]. Needless
to say, the remarkable progress being achieved with atomic quantum technologies and
specifically with quantum clocks [51] potentially leads to explorations and experimental
testings of these new paradigms.
In the following, we focus on a second fundamental and foundational problem, that
is the classical-to-quantum crossover. This question revolves around the observability
of quantum phenomena in macroscopic objects and how quantum theory retrieves the
predictions of classical physics in the limit of large quantum number, a topic that is also
intimately connected with the measurement problem in quantum mechanics and that has
generated considerable debate [987,995–997]. While decoherence can explain the emer-
gence of classical behavior [998] and quantum physics does not pose any fundamental
limitation to the system sizes at which quantum behaviors—like the observability of super-
position states—can be observed, many proposals have been pushed forward to explain
how classical behavior emerges from quantum physics at macroscopic scales, and current
quantum technologies can provide accurate test-beds for these theories. Among them
is the Bohmian interpretation [999,1000], decoherence histories [1001], the many-world
interpretation [1002], and collapse models [893,894,1003–1005]. Alternatively, one could
consider that quantum mechanics emerges as the effective framework of a more fundamen-
tal theory [1006].
In the last two decades, systems of increasing size have been realized, whose behav-
ior requires quantum mechanics to be understood. These include picogram mechanical
oscillators [1007,1008], optomechanical systems [1009], superconducting quantum inter-
ference devices [1010], Bose–Einstein condensates [1011,1012], matter-wave interferome-
ters [872,1013], and massive molecules [988,1014].
In particular, quantum superposition has been demonstrated in the experiment per-
formed in the Arndt group using a Long-Baseline Universal Matter-Wave Interferometer
comprising a three-grating Talbot–Lau interferometer with a 2 m baseline [988], where
quantum interference of single molecules beyond 25kDa has been observed, corresponding
to the record macroscopicity parameter [1015] µ ≡log1 0[(m/me)2(τ/1s)/ ln(η)] = 14.1.
Here, the mass m = 26.777 Da is scaled with the electron mass me, the coherence time is
τ = 7.5 ms, the fidelity η = (0.93 ± 0.06), and a de Broglie wavelength of about 53 fm.
Since 1980, an approximately linear scaling-up of the macroscopicity parameter has been
achieved in quantum experiments, from µ ≃6 to the present ≃14.
In general, these tests are classifiable under two main strategies, depending on whether
interferometric methods are used or not [895]. Interferometric experiments rely on quantum
superposition and are therefore more fragile with respect to decoherence issues, though they
provide access to a wider landscape of fundamental physics tests. Non-interferometric
experiments can be more stringent for collapse models on the ground. In this scenario,
atom technologies can indeed provide an effective platform to explore the boundaries of the
quantum superposition principle when applied to larger-scale systems, in fact testing the
wavefunction collapse models. The idea behind the collapse models is that collapse terms
enter the otherwise conventional Schröedinger dynamics, that induce the localization of the
wavefunction within a preferred basis [1005,1006]. In fact, collapse models are invoked also

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
76 of 124
in the context of cosmology to explain the formation of cosmic structures and mechanisms
for the cosmological constant [895].
Two such models are currently attracting much interest to design ultracold atoms
experiments: the phenomenological Continuous Spontaneous Localization (CSL) and the
Diosi-Penrose (DP) model. The CSL [1016,1017] considers that a fundamentally quantum
system be subjected to weak and continuous measurement-like dynamics, in the form of
white-noise terms.
A conceptual map of the CSL model is displayed in Figure 25, again from the STE-
QUEST proposal [52], in terms of the two relevant free parameters: the collapse rate λ
related to the collapse strength and the correlation length of the collapse noise rc, defining
the spatial resolution of the collapse. The parameter values denoted as GRW (Ghirardi,
Rimini, and Weber) correspond to λ = 10−16s−1 and rC = 10−7 m, and were theoretically
proposed [1018] to ensure the effective collapse of macroscopic systems. The values of
λ = 4 × 10−8±2s−1 and rC = 10−7 m were instead proposed by Adler [1019] to enable
the collapse to occur at the mesoscopic scale instead. While the latter have already been
experimentally excluded, GRW has not yet been ruled out.
Figure 25. Testing the foundations of quantum mechanics with atom technologies. Test of the
phenomenological Continuous Spontaneous Localization (CSL) model for the collapse of the wave-
function, in the governing parameters space: the collapse rate λ and the correlation length rc of
the collapse noise (see text). Diversely colored areas indicate the excluded regions based on results
from different experiments: ground-based interferometric experiments (pink) [988,1020,1021], non-
interferometric experiments (blue) [1022–1026], cold-atoms on the ground (orange) [1027], and non-
interferometric experiments in space (green) [1022,1028]. Red line: the STE-QUEST prediction. Grey
area: theoretically excluded region assuming a collapse at the macroscopic scale, which is a funda-
mental requirement of the model [1021]. Black dot: prediction of the Ghirardi-Rimini-Weber (GRW)
model [1018]. Black interval: Adler model [1019]. Image from [52] (Permission to use this content
granted by Creative Commons Licence https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Alternatively, the model independently conceived by Diosi and Penrose (DP) [893,894,
1003,1004], postulates that quantum superposition states collapse due to gravitationally-
induced decoherence. In Penrose’s argument in fact, this mechanism would at once
unveil the quantum-to-classical crossover transition and re-connect the principle of general
covariance of general relativity with the superposition principle of quantum mechanics.
According to the argument, spontaneous collapse into localized states occurs, which would
be enhanced as the system’s mass increases. Diosi in turn has formalized the concept
by analyzing a master equation where Newtonian gravity enters the non-unitary system-
environment coupling. Formalization of the idea requires to avoid the divergences of
the Newtonian potential at small distances with consequent diverging collapse rate for a
point-like particle regardless of its mass, implying an unphysical instantaneous collapse.
Thus, the Diosi-Penrose model needs to be formalized with including an extended mass
distribution characterized by a minimum length R0, in fact the sole free model parameter.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
77 of 124
Experiments have been performed to test the lower bounds on R0 [1029,1030], the most
stringent having been performed by X-ray measurements, exploiting the fact that the
collapse mechanism makes charged particles emit radiation [1026]. This notwithstanding,
more recent proposals are being pushed forward [1031] also envisioning to exploit current
atomic technologies.
In the STE-QUEST concept, CSL would be tested by measuring the variance in posi-
tion of a non-interacting Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) in free fall, moving to space an
experiment implemented on the ground [1027], predicting the red-line result in Figure 25.
When related to the CSL parameters, this variance can be expressed as σ2
t = σ2
QM,t +
(¯h2/6m2
0r2
c)λt3. The idea is that the presence of collapse models enhances the variance of
the BEC compared to the prediction of quantum mechanics, whereas σ2
QM,t ∝t2. The scaling
induced by collapse models is thus distinguished to be proportional to the cube of the
free evolution time. Needless to say, operating the experiment in space offers the usual
significant advantage of longer free-fall evolution times [895,923,1032,1033]. By measuring
the BEC expansion over times of the order of 50 s of free-fall and with an accuracy of a
position variance in the order of micrometers (both accessible in the STEQUEST space-
design), the expected sensitivities to the CSL parameters are approximately four orders
of magnitude stronger than those in ground-based experiments (see Figure 25). Similarly,
the bounds on the DP model can be improved by more than an order of magnitude.
7. Quantum Simulators for Biology and Chemistry
In this review, we have already introduced in Section 2.3 the applicability of certain QT
tools and algorithms to problems of relevance in chemistry and biology. In particular, when
discussing quantum control protocols in Section 2.3.3 or more generally in quantum varia-
tional algorithms in Section 2.3.2, since the description of microscopic complex structures
like those of relevant biological molecules is one of the heralded applications of large-scale
QC, e.g., in drug-design [436]. Thus, a considerable effort has been put forward in recent
years towards possible applications already in the NISQ era, see e.g., [435,436,1034], com-
bining gate-based approaches, Hamiltonian simulation and hybrid protocols [425,1035],
even with some initial experimental implementations [162]. Moreover, the developed of
NISQ protocols has shifted the approach with the combination of classical and quantum
algorithms or classical processing of the quantum results; moving towards an approach
where only the suitable hard problem is solved via the quantum co-processor while the rest
is solved classically.
This route towards the description of applied physical phenomena has indeed been
pursued in depth by a large community and it is steadily advancing, in parallel to quantum
technological (not exclusively atom-based) and algorithmic development. For an account
of this vast subject we refer the reader to the relevant reviews, see [3,427,436], and here we
do not pursue it further. Instead, here we would like to take the opportunity to highlight a
complementary approach, that is the quantum-like paradigm.
7.1. Quantum-like Paradigm and the Brain
The quantum-like paradigm relies on a simple idea: using quantum mechanics for
the mathematical description of non-linear, complex phenomena that do not require to be
inherently quantum [1036,1037]. This approach uses the mathematical toolbox of quan-
tum systems exploiting: (i) the linearity of quantum information processing, mapping
the problem’s complexity into the intricate build-up of correlations through superposi-
tion and entanglement that appears due to the coherent evolution; and (ii) the innate
non-linearity of the measurement process. Mapping a problem into a quantum one can
take advantage of the large set of tools that we have discussed in this review allowing in
certain scenarios to simplify the description in a controllable way, particularly via the ap-
proaches in Sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2, and making it possible to save computational resources
by the use of these well-understood approximations. In particular, those tools of non-
Markovian open quantum systems [334,345] or those in periodically and boundary-driven

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
78 of 124
systems [729,732] that allow for the description of transport processes [733] particularly
in biological matter [734,735]. In addition, certain properties of the quantum counterpart
can be exploited to prevent computational bottlenecks as, e.g., in quantum annealing
where quantum dynamics have been shown to be more robust in avoiding self-trapping in
metastable states [1038]. Thus, finding the right mapping allows to exploit the quantum
theoretical and numerical toolbox, utilizes any inherent advantages of the quantum system,
and complements existing classical methods in a synergistic manner. Finally, while quan-
tum simulators technologies progress, we can envision that this mapping can be performed
not simply theoretically but directly on the relevant QT platforms surpassing the limits of
what can be classically simulated.
In literature there exist numerous examples of these coarse-grained quantum mod-
els to applied physics. Here, we consider the quantum-like paradigm as applied to the
description of certain brain functions. Existing examples include models to describe
long-lived quantum-chaotic patterns generation [1039], information processing and con-
sciousness measures as in the the quantum versions of the Integrated Information Theory
(IIT) [1040,1041], dissipative quantum models of the brain [1042], information processing
in more general biosystems [1043], quantum-inspired techniques in psychology defining
the field of quantum cognition [1044], and comparing the brain to a quantum Bayesian
inference machine [1045,1046].
In order to provide a flavour of how the quantum-like paradigm may work, in the
following we illustrate it through one specific example related to the description of a visual,
perceptual function of the human brain, that is the perception of number or numerosity. Most
existing approaches to this problem rely on the use of artificial and deep convoluted clas-
sical neural networks [1047,1048] to reproduce the observed phenomenology [1049–1051].
In particular, the hallmark of perception is given by Weber’s law, an observation that the
error in number perception of a set of visual, auditory or tactile cues is linear with the
number of stimuli for a wide range of numbers up to several hundreds [1049]. While the
classical neural network approaches manage to reproduce the phenomenology, the ability
to perceive numerosity is only related to a small subset of the network nodes and not as a
global property. In addition, the neural mechanisms underlying the relationship between
the error rate and the number of perceived items across such a broad range of conditions
remain unknown. Finally, this partial description of the problem requires rather compli-
cated architectures for the underlying artificial neural network which could be considered
as more complex that the network they try to describe.
Here instead, we introduce a paradigmatic example of the quantum-like paradigm,
that reveals to be capable of accounting for this phenomenology in a relatively simpler man-
ner. In a truly interdisciplinary research reported in [1052], an open quantum spin model—a
dissipative XXZ model—maps the information processing of a network of neurons, mod-
eled as 1/2-spin particles with varying connectivity (Figure 26a). Excitations, produced via
spin flips (Figure 26e), can be transferred through exchange coupling (Figure 26b); they are
subject to an energy offset when multiple excitations are in close proximity (Figure 26c),
and they can decay to a resting state due to interactions with the environment, including
losses and dephasing effects (Figure 26d). It was observed that certain time-dependent
observables (Figure 26f–h) in the all-to-all connected network carried in their spectrum
information about the number of previous excitations. A robust feature that remains con-
sistent regardless of the location, time or amplitude of the stimuli and in a wide parameter
range. By employing an ideal-observer decoding procedure [1052], the uncertainty σ(N)
associated with number estimation can be retrieved, which remarkably follows Weber’s
law, i.e., σ(N)/N ∼const (Figure 26i). All in all, this model shows that applying the
quantum statistical toolbox can reproduce complex phenomenology with a minimal model
that can be efficiently simulated. We remark that the use of the quantum toolbox does
not necessarily imply the claim of quantum effects in perception, having instead only a
descriptive power.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
79 of 124
0
5
10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(i)
3
Z29/YPyodHbS1TxbDFpJCqG1CNgsfYMtwI7CYKaRQI7ASTm7nfeUSluYwfzDRBP6KjmIecUWNHzftBueJW3YXIKng5VCBXY1D+7A8lSyOMDRNU657nJsbPqDKcCZyV+qnGhLIJHWHPYkwj1H62WHRGzkKpiBkjWbx/ZzMaT2NApuJqBnrZW8+/M/rpSa89jMeJ6nBmNmI9cJUECPJvC8ZcoXMiKkFyhS3WxI2poyY69SsvW95bKr0L6oepfVWrNWqd/lhyjCZzCOXhwBXW4hQa0gAHCM7zBuzN0npwX5/UnWnDyP8fwR87HN5ueinM=</latexit>J
s
7u3v5B+fCopeNUMWqyWMSqE6ImwSNqGm4EdRJFKENB7XByM/fbj6Q0j6MHM0okDiK+JAzNHbU6Y1QSuzfrniVb2F3FXwc6hArka/NkbxCyVFBkmUOu7yUmyFAZzgTNSr1U4JsgiPqWoxQkg6yxb4z92wYK9eMyV28f2czlFpPZWgzEs1YL3vz4X9eNzXD6yDjUZIaipiNWG+YCtfE7ry2O+CKmBFTC8gUt1u6bIwKmbHKdn6/nLZVWhdVP3Lau2+Vqnf5Ycowgmcwjn4cAV1uIUGNIGBgGd4g3dn4jw5L87rT7Tg5H+O4Y+cj2/u2o2W</latexit>γi
(b)
(a)
∆0
(c)
(d)
R4lvIKcODAxaJC4lQliNexgvHItGH1KSV425aq3YS2Q6iCvkZOCHgxmfwA/wNbskBWuY0uzMr7UyQcKa043xZC4tLyurpbXy+sbm1ra9s9tUcSopNGjMY9kOiALOImhopjm0EwlEB
xaweh6orfuQSoWR3d6nIAvyCBiIaNEm1XP3oduxjw9BE16mZt7ig0E6T7kPbviVJ0p8DxC1JBeo9+9PrxzQVEGnKiVId10m0nxGpGeWQl71UQULoiAygY2hEBCg/mwbI8VEYS2yewN
P5tzcjQqmxCIxHED1Us9pk+Z/WSXV46WcsSlINETUWo4UpxzrGkx5wn0mgmo8NIVQy8yWmQyIJ1atsonvzoadJ82TqntePbs9rdSuiJK6AdomPkogtUQzeojhqIohw9ozf0bj1aT9
aL9fpjXbCKmz30B9bHNzZGlJE=</latexit>
ei✓1σx
(e)
7M6stDN+zJnSjvNlLSwuLa+sFtaK6xubW9v2zm5DRYmkUKcRj2TLJwo4C6GumebQiUQ4XNo+qOrid68A6lYFN7qcQwdQYhCxgl2qx69j50U+YFktDUi1mWVjJPsYEg3fusZ5ecsjMFniduTkoR61nf3r9iCYCQk05UartOrHupERqRjlkRS9REBM6IgNoGxoSAaqTjNk+CiIJNZDwNP5tzclQqmx8I1HED1Us9pk+Z/WTnRw0UlZGCcaQmosRgsSjnWEJ1XgPpNANR8bQqhk
5ktMh8RUoU1hRPfnQ07TxqVsntWPr05KVUv8yIK6AdomPkonNURdeohuqIokf0jN7Qu/VgPVkv1uPdcHKb/bQH1gf38EulgQ=</latexit>
ei ⇡
2 σx
0
10
20
30
2
4
6
)
)
0
10
20
30
2
4
6
)
0
5
10
20
25
30
2
4
6
)
0
5
10
20
25
30
2
4
6
-1
0
1
)
(f)
0
10
20
30
2
4
6
8
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
0.05
0.1
0
10
20
30
2
4
6
8
-4
-2
0
2
4
0
0.05
0.1
(g)
(h)
Figure 26. Quantum-like paradigm and the brain. Quantum spin model for visual neurosciences:
a network of neurons or groups of neurons is mapped into an open quantum chain of spins with
given connectivity. (a) Different connectivities: nearest-neighbour (left) and all−to−all (right);
(b) Excitations propagate via exchange J; (c) nearby excitations experience an energy offset ∆0; and
(d) can be subject to different dissipative channels at rate γi; (e) Excitations of variable amplitude are
injected via spin flip operations. (f) Magnetisation profile of one single excitation in nearest−neighbor
(n.n., top) and all−to−all (a.a., bottom) connectivity. (g) Magnetisation propagations in the a.a. case
for N = 2 (top) and N = 3 (bottom) excitations, the regular interference generates clear patterns
with additional frequencies as more spin flips are introduced. This can be understood in the power
spectrum of the time signals (h). (i) Weber’s law for numerosity is recovered using an ideal−observer
decoding procedure independently of whether the excitation is injected with random amplitude (RR)
or random amplitudes constrained to constant total energy (CE). Adapted from [1052] (Permission to
use this content granted by Creative Commons Licence https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.
0/).
Besides being relevant to the specific visual neuroscience problem, this example
connects to the emerging field of research aimed at exploring the effects of long-range inter-
actions in open quantum systems dynamics. Indeed, the dynamical coordination necessary
to create this number-dependent spectral signal can be understood as a manifestation of the
concept of cooperative shielding [1053]. This phenomenon observed in long-range models
describes how certain initial states, locked in Hamiltonian subspaces, can be protected from
evolution for long time periods [1054–1056] or even dissipation [1057], with applications to
describe efficient biological phenomena [1058,1059].
We close this section by evidencing in perspective other approaches to the description
of biological and neuronal systems through the quantum-like paradigm, that make use of
concepts typical of non-linear dynamics and quantum chaos. Examples include: chaotic be-
haviour for the amplification of emergent quantum macroscopic effects [1039], dissipative
driving for the enhancement of chaotic behaviour [1060] or models for long-lasting coher-
ence in warm noisy media due to near-criticality from quantum chaos to order, discussed
e.g., in FMO complexes [1061] or in descriptions of nuclear physics via random Hamiltoni-
ans [1062]. Additionally, models for the brain as a resonating biosystem in a dissipative
environment [1063], connect with ideas of time crystals [1064] and synchronisation [1065],
as those discussed in Section 3.2.2, providing avenues for the description of the brain in
terms of out-of-equilibrium systems [1066].
All in all, the quantum-like paradigm is providing means to use the quantum me-
chanical statistics toolbox to describe complex dynamics that are not-necessarily quantum,
and to establish educated models for non-equilibrium dissipative driven phenomena that
could explain the emergence of quantum effects in warm macroscopic biological media.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
80 of 124
These models can be benchmarked in experiments with atom-based quantum technologies
and, on the way back, might be exploited to make a bio-imspired quantum technology.
7.2. Transport and Quantum Effects in Biology
Another important problem in biology is the study of transport in noisy media, rele-
vant in processes such as photosynthesis. Here, it is also possible to derive quantum models
to describe the potential role of quantum effects in such tasks. After the experimental obser-
vations of relatively long-coherence times even at room temperature in biological complexes
involved in photosynthesis [1067], it is important to understand whether these quantum
effects, even if already observed, play a role in the transport efficiency and whether nature
has evolve to use them for its advantage.
The understanding of photosynthesis is progressing in hand with advances in theory
and experiments in quantum biology [7,8,1068] that build, among other tools, on the use of
femtosecond two-dimensional spectroscopy methods [8,59,1069,1070] to investigate energy
transport in light-harvesting complexes. The crucial question is how can these coherent
effects survive, given that the system’s typical frequencies provide an estimate for the
quantum-to-classical crossover temperature of approximately 0.1 µK, which is far from
room temperature. Some studies suggest that optimized evolutionary conditions would
steer away from fully coherent or incoherent processes, exploiting also the available dissi-
pative couplings [59]. A known example in biology is Fröhlich condensation [1071,1072],
where externally driven polar molecules condense into a narrow low-frequency state
and exhibit coherent collective motion [1073]. And, following on the tools mentioned
in Section 2.2.1, particularly those oriented towards the description of non-Markovian
systems constitute a suitable platform to describe these transport problems—given that
biological baths are known to have non-trivial spectral densities [734,735].
In addition, when considering transport problems in large systems these tools can be
combined with ideas of quantum complex networks [1074] to create a flexible framework
for both the understanding of the optimized microscopic transport phenomena and the
emergence of certain properties at larger scales. Complex network theory is a powerful
classical tool that was developed after the fundamental understanding that despite their
different scale or origin, many networks in nature or society share some general proper-
ties [1075–1077]. The study and characterisation of a set of network classes allowed for
the universal description of a large set of problems. Once the right network properties are
identified for a given problem, basing on a series of quantifiers such as network topology,
clustering or disparity, it is possible to predict the network behaviour, its dynamics or its
response to perturbations based on this theory. One of the ubiquitous network classes is
so-called “small-world” appearing in systems as varied as the brain or the internet [1075].
Then, it is natural to consider if this emergent universality and its related tools can be
applied to networks of quantum elements both in theory [1078] and experiment [1079].
Moreover, the quantum information description of such systems can then be combined and
applied to general network theory creating a generalised theory inspired both by quantum
and classical tools [1080]. In the same way, network tools can be used to describe quantum
phenomena [1081] or to improve certain QC protocols [1082]. For further details on the
topic the authors refer to the topical review [1074] and the references therein.
While these networks are used to describe a large category of problems, we highlight
the discussion on the pertinent topic of transport in such systems. A large amount of
research has been conducted in recent years in order to compare the information and
energy transport properties of a given network, in their classical and quantum version,
in what is often denoted as quantum walks [1083], also in their stochastic account [1084].
This is opening the avenue to connect to dissipative scenarios [1085,1086], with potential
applications in biological systems.
All in all, in this section we have shown how the mapping of applied physical phenom-
ena into quantum Hamiltonians or algorithms can benefit from the large theoretical and
experimental toolbox to describe quantum matter and from emergent quantum technolo-

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
81 of 124
gies. This change of description framework can offer deeper understanding of the system
and foster combinations of protocols (classical and quantum or even hybrid), that may help
developing quantum-inspired classical methods and further synergistic applications.
8. Responsible Research and Innovation, Research-Based Education and Outreach in
Quantum Technologies
The scientific blossoming in quantum technologies that we have described so far
presents new challenges for society, even in the narrower perspective of atom technologies.
In this section, we briefly present our scientific perspective on the subject, that stems from
more recent intense research.
Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI) is a concept that emphasizes the need
for scientific research to be conducted in a way that is socially responsible, inclusive,
and sustainable [1087]. The European Commission defines RRI as “an approach that
anticipates and assesses potential implications and societal expectations with regard to
research and innovation, and the aim of fostering the design of inclusive and sustainable
research and innovation” [1088]. In fact, RRI emerges as a response to concerns about the
potential negative impacts of scientific research. To do so, RRI encompasses six dimensions,
i.e., open science, public engagement, gender equality actions, science education and
outreach and ethics [1089]. The principles of RRI are increasingly being adopted by research
funding agencies and institutions around the world. For example, the European Union has
made RRI a key component of its research and innovation strategy and has established a
framework for promoting RRI across all stages of the research process [1090]. In the United
States, the National Science Foundation has adopted a similar approach, emphasizing the
importance of RRI in its funding priorities [1091].
When dealing with rapidly developing areas like quantum science and technologies,
which have the potential to significantly impact society in the next decade, public aware-
ness, education and outreach activities play an important role in the development of the
society itself [1092,1093]. In fact, quantum technologies are expected to have a profound im-
pact on our daily lives, and produce a shift to entirely novel economies and job markets [62].
As we have discussed from the perspective of atom technologies, examples include the en-
vironmentally safe and sustainable development of batteries exhibiting increased efficiency,
the development of materials to absorb and convert carbon dioxide in efficient manner,
the development of fertilizers with increased efficiency and reduced environmental impact,
sustainable food production, engineering of precision medicine, quantum communications
and criptography, and the mitigation or solution of complex-network problems in the
domain of logistics, finance, artificial intelligence, and even the brain. With such a list, hard
sciences, as well as philosophical, economical, juridical, social, and policy-making sciences
are expected to be affected by these developments, and potentially interested by the emerg-
ing quantum industry. In addition, enormous amounts of financial resources are being
invested by public bodies and companies. It is then apparent how all the six Responsible
Research and Innovation (RRI) dimensions should be adopted as glasses through which
the research in quantum technologies should be viewed.
Effective public communication is crucial in achieving this goal and is already recog-
nized as an important aspect of research and study programs: scientists worldwide are
beginning to acknowledge their responsibility in this regard [1094]. However, educating
the general public in quantum science presents a formidable challenge. Though similar
to any other arisen in response to other technological advancements throughout history,
this challenge for quantum technologies pose the additional problem of severe limitations
in the experimental, creative, and mathematical literacies that are the pillars of scientific
thinking [61].
Indeed, even basic forms of understanding of quantum science and technology con-
cepts, require forms of experimental and mathematical literacy that are not readily available
in everyday life, with quantum-physics experiments conducted in specialized labs and
involving math that is out of reach for most people. Furthermore, quantum physics deals

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
82 of 124
with intangible objects and phenomena, which challenge our creativity and imagination
to levels which are not usually well-developed [1095]. Despite the importance of quan-
tum technologies, quantum-matter physics is also usually excluded from school curricula,
or only present at a descriptive level. In an outreach context, quantum physics is often
presented via analogies or historical perspectives, which provide only factoids instead of
explanations or understanding through a scientific-thinking process, leading to potential
misunderstandings. Thus, even more than with classical physics [1096,1097], education and
outreach in quantum science and technologies would risk to become a bare transmission of
historical facts and scientific factoids often using misleading analogies [1098,1099], with no
fundamental understanding nor education to scientific thinking. Without grounding in ex-
periments and a certain level of formal structure, educators run the risk of offering transient
narratives that are often misleading, relying on familiar analogies as a substitute. Therefore,
the development of a research-based approach to outreach is required, that has been intro-
duced in [61] and given the name of Physics Outreach Research (POR). Though paralleling
the well established field of Physics Education Research (PER), and the development of
PER and POR for quantum physics can be beneficial to each other, profound differences are
in order [1100]. For example, the outreach context is different from classroom by definition:
the public may not be uniform in age and background, the assessment of new learning
tools and techniques usually cannot be obtained through tests and exams, outreach events
are usually a short-period activity, and more importantly, the participation to an outreach
activity is voluntary. This poses additional questions when the design of learning paths
and especially the assessment of their efficiency and effectiveness are addressed.
One significant step has been pushed forward by the QTEdu-CSA (Quantum Tech-
nology Education—Coordination and Support Action) under the European Quantum
Flagships initiative [1101]. This has been established to foster a robust competence ecosys-
tem for the quantum-technologies workforce and to amplify outreach and education in
the realm of quantum science. By bridging the gap between academic and industrial
quantum communities, QTEdu reinforces its dual objective. Over a period of one and a
half years spanning from 2021 to 2022, QTEdu has successfully executed 11 pilot projects in
25 European countries, diligently addressing educational needs and enlightening society
about the remarkable potential of quantum technologies [1101]. These QTEdu pilot projects
have addressed diverse segments of the public, including citizens of all ages, policymakers,
teachers, students, media personnel, and industry workforce. Design of didactic mate-
rial has been tailored for high schools and universities, the latter finally leading to the
EU-funded Digitally Enhanced Quantum Technology Master (DIGIQ) [1102]. Specifically
interesting in the context of RRI in quantum techonologies is the pilot QUTE4E on outreach
and education [1103], that has produced the research-based approach Culturo-Scientific
Storytelling (CSS) [61], evolving the proposal pushed forward in [1104].
As depicted in Figure 27a, CSS essentially considers that a discipline has a nucleus
of concepts with their relationships, a body of knowledge about how these concepts are
applied into practice, and a periphery. The latter is the space where the most exciting things
happen from both the scientists and the citizens viewpoints. For scientists, the periphery
is the space where the boundaries of knowledge are pushed to reach new understanding.
For citizens, the periphery is the space where their beliefs are developed. Therefore,
the periphery is a highly transformative space. In this perspective, the CSS narrative follows
a unique approach that explores the intersection of discipline and culture, thereby naturally
suited to RRI. For quantum science and technologies, story-telling of the nucleus and of
the body is performed through the process of scientific thinking depicted in Figure 27b.
The elements entering the CSS approach mirror those characterising the five minds for
future introduced by Howard Gardner, including the disciplined, synthetic, creative, ethic
and respectful minds [1105].

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
83 of 124
(a)
(b)
Figure 27. Culturo-scientific storytelling (CSS) approach to Physics Outreach Research. (a) CSS
consists in an experiential journey that mirrors the encounters of scientists and citizens, with each
subject being approached through the process of scientific thinking, as depicted in (b). The journey
begins by acquainting oneself with peripheral knowledge (arrow 1) and gradually delves deeper
into the consolidation of fundamental concepts at the core (arrow 2). Practical applications are then
explored and comprehended in the main body (arrow 3), followed by a return to the periphery
to emphasize the ever-evolving and unfinished nature of the discipline-culture (arrow 4). Image
inspired from [61].
In fact, sustaining creative, formal, and experimental literacies for quantum science
and technology storytelling is not an easy task. The proposed way out to overcome this
challenge is envisioned in the design of resources and tools that can work to compensate
the corresponding language limitations. Within the QUTE4E pilot, a survey of available
and desirable resources has been performed [1106], that are in terms of quantum games
and interactive tools, and conceptual and experimental virtual labs, working as effective
mediators between the mathematical or experimental technical tasks—demanded to a
computer—and their management by users. In particular, quantum games have been
proven to work as effective tools to support high-school students in grasping elementary
concepts of quantum mechanics [1107], and are being developed as outreach resources to
leverage on the awareness to cultural heritage [1108].
The idea of language compensation is the core in the development of the QPlayLearn
platform [1095] to educate K12 and general public to quantum physics and technologies,
and inspired by the theory of multiple intelligences proposed by Howard Gardner in the
1980s. In a nutshell, a dictionary of quantum physics and technologies concepts is proposed,
the storytelling of each item being offered through the use of different languages, suited
to our diverse intelligences. The sections play, discover, learn, apply use the language of
games, experiments and animations in the form of quantum pills, mathematics, and quan-
tum information and logic, respectively. In addition, an integrated art and science approach
is offered, like the one developed with the Quantum Jungle, an interactive and immersive
art installation created by the artist Robin Baumgarten, supported by a team of quantum
physicists from Helsinki and Pisa Universities for the conceptualisation and the coding
side. As shown in Figure 28, the Quantum Jungle is capable of visualising the behaviour of
a single quantum particle from a given initial state, providing a scientifically effective and
artistically fascinating tool to grasp the essential quantum concepts of quantum state, super-
position, tunneling, and measurement. The analysis of didactic experiments is under way,
wih promising results involving students from the kindergarten to the high school, as well
as general public during the six months of exhibition in Pisa in the Palazzo Blu museums.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
84 of 124
Figure 28. Interactive tools for CSS. Screenshots from the art and science 6 sqm installation Quantum
Jungle by Robin Baumgarten, visualizing the time evolution of one quantum particle. After touching
the springs, the quantum particle is created in a superposition state (top left). The probability from
computer simulations of the Schrödinger equation evolves according to a quantum walk (top right,
bottom left), and is visualized via switching on of LEDs with proportional intensity. Later spring
touch is interpreted as a measurement action, visualizing the collapse (bottom right).
9. Discussion
In this perspective review we have illustrated the state-of-the-art quantum technology
platforms based on ultracold atoms and molecules that are currently leading in terms of
their control in system size, coherence time, level of noise, and in terms of number of
applications. In particular, we have focused on those based on neutral atoms in optical
lattices, optical cavities or optical traps, trapped ions in linear traps, Rydberg atoms,
and dipolar gases. For completeness, we also very briefly discussed solid-state platforms,
including the most relevant superconducting qubits on which current quantum computers
technology is often based. We have discussed how the diverse atom-technologies provide a
flexible framework of experimental platforms. While these still exhibit certain limitations
in terms of operation time or noise effects and are generally better suited for specific
tasks, the degree of control and the variety of applications is remarkable, especially if one
considers the development of AMO as a whole. Moreover, the consistent improvement
over an extended period of time that spans several decades, heralds on the technological
and theoretical sides the continuation of a healthy pure and applied research landscape.
The development of these platforms then requires an adequate level of advancement
in their theoretical characterization. In this review, we have discussed the theory of open
quantum systems providing the tools for the description of coherent and dissipative cou-
plings in many-body physics platforms. We have also shown how this set of dissipative
tools can access novel phenomena in quantum matter and be used as a resource, in fact
beyond being considered as a technical limitation in what is denoted as reservoir engineer-
ing. Moreover, we have summarized the main approximations for a resource-affordable
description and discussed selected approximate methods based on stochastic unravelling,
to ensure that these problems remain treatable classically at least for moderate system sizes.
In this direction, we have provided the reader with a summary of tensor network methods
that can complement the tools provided by open quantum systems theory, to tackle current
relevant system sizes. There, we have discussed their success in one dimension and their
moderate progress in higher dimensions, while also connecting with their applicability in
quantum simulation in other fields: from their links with the simulation of lattice gauge
theories to their synergies with neural network approaches.
Once the description of the platforms and the theoretical description of quantum
simulation was laid down, we have presented that the applications of AMO platforms reach
far beyond their use as quantum simulators. In particular, we have discussed the potential
use of some platforms as NISQ computers and discussed their potential utility in view of

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
85 of 124
resource-conscious, optimization and variational approaches, where in certain scenarios
these atomic platforms can complement and outperform existing solid-state approaches.
Then, we discussed their applicability as high-sensitivity sensors, which is essential for
their applications e.g., for fundamental physics tests and for cosmology problems. There,
we described strategies for the production and characterization of highly entangled states
as a new paradigmatic resource for high-sensitivity performance and the general measure-
ment strategies to exploit these advantages. Using quantum entanglement for quantum
metrology and sensing still requires various directions of development. An important
limitation is the consistent preparation of highly entangled states, characterized by a higher
number of degrees of freedom and/or by a longer coherence time. The second challenge
is the realization of more efficient protocols, for single-state and collective manipulation,
useful for applications on a growing number of physical systems. However, as we discuss
in the text, we believe that variational and optimization approaches derived from classical
systems, together with dissipative driving methods, could provide useful solutions to some
of these technical limitations.
Once that the tools and platforms were described in detail, we focused on the wide
range of applications of atom technologies, starting from those originally motivating their
development: condensed-matter physics. Given the wide variety of interesting possibilities,
we adopted as selection criterion their potential applications in engineering quantum
states of matter or their potential coding in atom technologies to simulate phenomena
otherwise hard to control in their original context. We have addressed the description
of superconductivity/superfluidity, the effect of incommensurations or disorder leading
to non-thermal states, the role of driving and of dissipation in state preparation or the
characterisation of topological phases of matter. Importantly, we highlight the relevance
of these frameworks—typically based on well-understood microscopic rules—to describe
complex problems in other fields and establish connections with cosmology, information
theory or physics foundations.
In this direction, we have delved into the application of atom technologies to address
open questions in fundamental physics, cosmology or even physics foundations. We have
discussed the use of ultra-sensitive atomic clock technologies and quantum metrology to
test the equivalence principle or the microscopic effects of general relativity in molecule
ensembles; the possibility of coding into atom technologies Hamiltonians relevant for
the description of quark-gluon matter in neutron stars, and the use of analog-gravity
models for the simulation of cosmological problems via cold-atomic ensembles in table-top
experiments. While some limitations still exists, in terms of e.g., systematic generation
of gauge fields in dimensions larger than 1 spatial plus 1 temporal, or in the required
system sizes, one can expect that these applications will progressively be better at hand
with technology improvements, and that new ones will come to life.
The final applications that we have covered in this review are related to their appli-
cations in biology and chemistry. We started from their microscopic descriptions as an
emergent field where the role of quantum phenomena is still being discussed. Then, we
introduced recent coarse-grained approaches connected with quantum complex networks
for the benchmarking of transport phenomenology in noisy and warm media. This cross-
fertilization can work in both ways: learning from biological systems efficient ways to
harness quantum advantage in quantum technologies and quantum computers, and exploit
the latter to understand biological processes. The latter two discussed applications convey
the message that the degree of control and sensitivity reached in atom-based quantum
technologies, is pushing the limits of fields well beyond condensed matter and atomic-
molecular physics.
In this direction, as the transformative effect of quantum technologies impacts society,
the need for the scientific community to reflect on their role in educating the general public
and in understanding the implications of their research and the value this could bring to
the world. Consequently, it is important that quantum technology development comes in
hand with a Responsible-Research and Innovation perspective, providing both scientists

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
86 of 124
and stakeholders with the tools to assess the importance of these innovative advances in
quantum matter.
10. Conclusions
Physics is living an era of unprecedented cross-fertilization among the different areas
of science. In this perspective review, we have discussed the manifold impact that state-of-
the-art cold and ultracold-atomic platforms can have in fundamental and applied science
through the development of platforms for quantum simulation, computation, metrology
and sensing. Engineering of table-top experiments with atom technologies is engendering
applications aimed at understanding problems in condensed matter and fundamental
physics, cosmology and astrophysics, to unveil foundational aspects of quantum mechanics,
and advance quantum chemistry and the emerging field of quantum biology.
This has become possible via two main approaches: creating quantum analogues
and building quantum simulators. The former fosters learning from analogies between
two quantum systems via associative creativity, the latter implies the encoding of specific
microscopic system Hamiltonians in a highly controllable quantum platform, in fact a
specific type of quantum computation. At the boundary between the two approaches are
paradigmatic model Hamiltonians, that can serve to create analogue simulations or code
microscopic quantum problems. Needless to say, quantum computing would represent a
universal answer to all these questions, though not necessarily to be adopted alone.
The first message from this review is that indeed this forefront enterprise is marking a
new era in the way quantum technologies are used for fundamental science even beyond
the advancement in content knowledge: this is characterised by truly cross-disciplinary
research, extended interplay between theoretical and experimental thinking, and inter-
sectoral approach. Cross-disciplinary approach to common research is manifest in the
connections that we have illustrated existing among condensed matter, atomic-molecular-
optical (AMO) physics and quantum information, foundations of quantum mechanics,
high-energy physics, astrophysics, general relativity and cosmology, with new branches
sprouting across quantum chemistry and quantum biology, and neuroscience. In fact,
the steady and rapid progress in quantum-gases platforms capabilities has since the very
beginning resulted into the emergence of a new scientific community from the originating
disciplines, fostering cooperation, contamination, and cross-disciplinary thinking as values
for the way of practising research. The seeding and care in building up such a community
has been one of the roots for its success with fast and extended growth, a lesson that
should be valued. On the other hand, the development of atom technologies has led to
a different cooperation between theory and experiment, going beyond the conventional
pillars of scientific thinking, where phenomena understanding is formalized into a theory
and/or theoretical predictions are tested in experiments. In the new environment, theory is
also part of the experiment, in that serves to efficiently map the problems in a quantum
simulator, and the experiment works as an alternative or complementary simulation for the
theory. Pushing the boundaries even further, systematic intersectoral connections are being
developed between quantum science and technology developed in academic contexts,
and their implementations in everyday life operated by small to large companies, the small
ones not rarely stemming from academic experiences. Based on science history, such an out-
come could in fact be expected when considering the impact of condensed matter physics
and material science in the human-kind progress. What is instead less obvious, is how
this is happening also for fundamental science. This is apparent for example going back to
more recent enterprises encountered in this journey, like the AEDGE community [50,53]
and the efforts to advance gravity exploration in terrestrial very-long-baseline or else in
space experiments. In these advanced cross-disciplinary searches, the – so-far unexplored –
path is being pursued of using microscopic quantum sensors in large-scale facilities. Be-
sides requiring tightly-joined theoretical and experimental efforts and the implementation
of techniques and technologies across different scientific communities, this route is also

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
87 of 124
fostering the advancement of technology readiness to stimulate dedicated companies and
ignite sustainable economical development.
One second message emerging from this review is that quantum many-body physics
is taking center stage in frontier’s science. In fact, it addresses phenomena on a size
scale and complexity level that stand closer to the emergent boundary between classical
physics and quantum mechanics, as the microscopic theory accounting for more than 40
orders of magnitude in length scales from the cosmology of the universe down to the
quarks as elementary constituents of matter. While the classical-to-quantum crossover
is moved by the advancement of quantum technologies, quantum many-body physics
and its contemporary evolution in terms of quantum complex systems can provide useful
reading glasses to understand whether and where this border should be placed. In fact,
quantum technologies are playing a vital role in the investigation of the emergence of
macroscopic quantum-coherence in biological systems, leading to the establishment of
the new field of quantum biology. While the effective function of macroscopic quantum
coherence in optimizing or even solving biological functions is at the center of live debates,
this field of research is seeding remarkable knowledge advancements: first, to develop
refined experimental and theoretical methods suited to address this question, and, second,
to explore whether one can learn from Nature hints useful for the design of quantum
technologies, and viceversa. In parallel, quantum technologies are reinforcing the use of the
quantum-like paradigm to address complex systems, in fact exploiting the mathematical
machinery of quantum many-body physics to describe aspects of their behavior.
While applications appear hand in hand with a better degree of platform control and
new experimental and theoretical protocols are developed, so will the opportunities to
address either new problems or old ones with new perspectives, pushing the boundaries
of what these simulators are able to achieve. The development of quantum technologies
naturally aims at a large-scale fault-tolerant universal quantum computer in the future:
in any event, in this review we have shown how the high degree of current technological
development of the different platforms, the combination of classical and quantum methods,
the use of a resource-based approach, the application of mappings and of cross-disciplinary
toolboxes, have already provided us with a large amount of new knowledge and appli-
cations. Thus, should this ultimate goal of a universal quantum computer not be fully
met eventually, that would not change the already transformative effects that quantum
technologies have had in the last decades and will have in a next future.
One last and equally important message we wish to convey follows on the potential
impacts that the tremendous progress of quantum science and technology will have on
society in the next decade. Examples include the environmentally safe and sustainable
development of batteries and materials, fertilizers for food-supply chains, the engineering
of precision medicine, quantum communications and criptography, and the mitigation or
solution of complex-network problems important for logistics, finance, artificial intelligence.
With such a list, hard and human sciences, including philosophical, economical, juridical,
social, and policy-making sciences, sought to get entangled in new forms of scientific
humanism. Along these lines, quantum technologies are expected to produce a shift
to entirely novel economies and job markets, what is already occurring also with huge
amounts of financial investments operated by both public and private bodies. While this
happens, as history shows that occurs in correspondence of any technology revolution,
the adoption of a responsible research and innovation approach to quantum technologies
is mandatory, across all its six dimensions of open science, public engagement, gender
equality actions, science education and outreach and ethics. The development of public
awareness through education and outreach is a necessary step in this process. Considering
that quantum science and technologies pose additional challenges in overcoming the more
limited creativity, formal, and experimental literacies that are pillars of scientific thinking,
renovated efforts and resources need to be invested to develop research-based educational
and outreach tools. This would turn a potential limitation, such as the difficulty of educating

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
88 of 124
to the counterintuitive concepts of quantum science, into the fantastic opportunity of
providing citizens with culturo-scientific storytelling tools for future scaffolding.
All in all, atom-based quantum technologies represent one of the most relevant play-
grounds in the future of transversal experimental, and even theoretical, physics. Moreover,
the tools developed for their control and description do not only advance our understand-
ing of quantum matter but open the door to applications of these models and protocols
to other systems. While there are limitations in what we can achieve today, there is still a
fruitful path ahead of us already in the NISQ era.
Author Contributions: M.L.C.: writeup, conceptualization, coordination. J.Y.M.: writeup and
contribution to conceptualization. L.L. and L.G.: writeup. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: J.Y.M. and M.L.C. were supported by the European Social Fund REACT EU through
the Italian national program PON 2014-2020, DM MUR 1062/2021. L.L. acknowledges financial
support by a project funded under the National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP), Mission 4
Component 2 Investment 1.3—Call for tender No. 341 of 15/03/2022 of Italian Ministry of University
and Research funded by the European Union NextGenerationEU, award number PE0000023, Con-
cession Decree No. 1564 of 11/10/2022 adopted by the Italian Ministry of University and Research,
CUP D93C22000940001, Project title National Quantum Science and Technology Institute (NQSTI),
spoke 2. This manuscript reflects only the authors’ views and opinions, neither the European Union
nor the European Commission can be considered responsible for them. M.L.C. acknowledges sup-
port from the National Centre on HPC, Big Data and Quantum Computing—SPOKE 10 (Quantum
Computing) and received funding from the European Union Next-GenerationEU—National Re-
covery and Resilience Plan (NRRP)—MISSION 4 COMPONENT 2, INVESTMENT N. 1.4—CUP
N. I53C22000690001. This research has received funding from the European Union’s Digital Europe
Programme DIGIQ under grant agreement no. 101084035. M.L.C. also acknowledges support from
the project PRA_2022_2023_98 “IMAGINATION”, from the MIT-UNIPI program, and in part by
grants NSF PHY-1748958 and PHY-2309135 to the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics (KITP).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The datasets analysed during the current study are available from the
quoted references.
Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful to Fausto Borgonovi, Stefano Carretta, Luca Celardo,
Alessandro Chiesa, Elena Garlatti, Stefano Liberati, Massimo Mannarelli, Marco Nardecchia, G.
Nerina, Filippo Simoni, and Augusto Smerzi for many enlightening discussions. M.L.C. is grateful to
Simon Goorney, the AEDGE community, the STEQUEST core Team, and all the co-Authors of works
that have seeded this review. M.L.C. and L.G. would like to thank the support of the Regione Toscana
through the WQubit funds and the University of Pisa through the BIHO funding.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or
in the decision to publish the results.
References
1.
Adams, A.; Carr, L.D.; Schäfer, T.; Steinberg, P.; Thomas, J.E. Strongly correlated quantum fluids: ultracold quantum gases,
quantum chromodynamic plasmas and holographic duality. New J. Phys. 2012, 14, 115009. https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/
14/11/115009.
2.
Pezzè, L.; Smerzi, A.; Oberthaler, M.K.; Schmied, R.; Treutlein, P. Quantum metrology with nonclassical states of atomic
ensembles. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2018, 90, 035005.
3.
Bauer, B.; Bravyi, S.; Motta, M.; Chan, G.K.L. Quantum Algorithms for Quantum Chemistry and Quantum Materials Science.
Chem. Rev. 2020, 120, 12685–12717. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00829.
4.
Chaikin, P.M.; Lubensky, T.C. Principles of Condensed Matter Physics; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1995.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511813467.
5.
Baym, G. BCS from Nuclei and Neutron Stars to Quark Matter and Cold Atoms. Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 2010, 24, 3968–3982.
6.
Ball, P. Beyond the bond. Nature 2011, 469, 26–28. https://doi.org/10.1038/469026a.
7.
Al-Khalili, J.; McFadden J. Life on the Edge: The Coming of Age of Quantum Biology; Bantam Press: London, UK, 2014.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
89 of 124
8.
Cao, J.; Cogdell, R.J.; Coker, D.F.; Duan, H.G.; Hauer, J.; Kleinekathöfer, U.; Jansen, T.L.C.; Manˇcal, T.; Miller, R.J.D.; Ogilvie, J.P.;
et al. Quantum biology revisited. Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, eaaz4888.
9.
Feynman, R.P. Simulating physics with computers. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 1982, 21, 467–488. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02650179.
10.
Barzanjeh, S.; Xuereb, A.; Gröblacher, S.; Paternostro, M.; Regal, C.A.; Weig, E.M. Optomechanics for quantum technologies.
Nat. Phys. 2022, 18, 15–24.
11.
Atatüre, M.; Englund, D.; Vamivakas, N.; Lee, S.Y.; Wrachtrup, J. Material platforms for spin-based photonic quantum
technologies. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2018, 3, 38–51.
12.
Pelucchi, E.; Fagas, G.; Aharonovich, I.; Englund, D.; Figueroa, E.; Gong, Q.; Hannes, H.; Liu, J.; Lu, C.Y.; Matsuda, N.; et al. The
potential and global outlook of integrated photonics for quantum technologies. Nat. Rev. Phys. 2022, 4, 194–208.
13.
Debnath, S.; Linke, N.M.; Figgatt, C.; Landsman, K.A.; Wright, K.; Monroe, C. Demonstration of a small programmable quantum
computer with atomic qubits. Nature 2016, 536, 63–66. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature18648.
14.
Postler, L.; Heuβen, S.; Pogorelov, I.; Rispler, M.; Feldker, T.; Meth, M.; Marciniak, C.D.; Stricker, R.; Ringbauer, M.; Blatt, R.; et al.
Demonstration of fault-tolerant universal quantum gate operations. Nature 2022, 605, 675–680. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586
-022-04721-1.
15.
Wurtz, J.; Bylinskii, A.; Braverman, B.; Amato-Grill, J.; Cantu, S.H.; Huber, F.; Lukin, A.; Liu, F.; Weinberg, P.; Long, J.; et al.
Aquila: QuEra’s 256-qubit neutral-atom quantum computer. arXiv 2023. arXiv:2306.11727.
16.
DLR Institute of Quantum Technologies. DLR QCI Awards Contract Worth 29 Million Euros for the Development of a Quantum
Computer Based on Neutral Atoms. Available online: https://qci.dlr.de/en/dlr-qci-awards-contract-worth-29-million-euros-
for-the-development-of-a-quantum-computer-based-on-neutral-atoms/ (accessed on ).
17.
Pasqal. Towards Regenerative Quantum Computing with Proven Positive Sustainability Impact; Pasqal: Massy, France, 2023.
18.
Atom Computing. High Scalable Quantum Computing with Atomic Arrays; Atom Computing: Berkeley, CA, USA, 2023.
19.
Zapata Computing. The Near Term Promise of Quantum Generative AI; Zapata Computing: Boston, MA, USA, 2023.
20.
Bloch, I.; Dalibard, J.; Nascimbène, S. Quantum simulations with ultracold quantum gases. Nat. Phys. 2012, 8, 267.
21.
Bardeen, J.; Cooper, L.N.; Schrieffer, J.R. Theory of Superconductivity. Phys. Rev. 1957, 108, 1175–1204. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRev.108.1175.
22.
Greiner, M.; Regal, C.; Jin, D.S. Emergence of a Molecular Bose-Einstein Condensate from a Fermi Gas. Nature 2003, 426, 537–540.
23.
Zwierlein, M.W.; Stan, C.A.; Schunck, C.H.; Raupach, S.M.F.; Gupta, S.; Hadzibabic, Z.; Ketterle, W. Observation of Bose-Einstein
Condensation of Molecules. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 91, 250401. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.250401.
24.
Chiu, C.S.; Ji, G.; Mazurenko, A.; Greif, D.; Greiner, M. Quantum State Engineering of a Hubbard System with Ultracold
Fermions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 120, 243201. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.243201.
25.
Greiner, M.; Mandel, O.; Esslinger, T.; Hänsch, T.W.; Bloch, I. Quantum phase transition from a superfluid to a Mott insulator in
a gas of ultracold atoms. Nature 2002, 415, 39–44.
26.
Endres, M.; Fukuhara, T.; Pekker, D.; Cheneau, M.; Schauss, P.; Gross, C.; Demler, E.; Kuhr, S.; Bloch, I. The ‘Higgs’ amplitude
mode at the two-dimensional superfluid-Mott insulator transition. Nature 2012, 487, 454.
27.
Atala, M.; Aidelsburger, M.; Lohse, M.; Barreiro, J.T.; Paredes, B.; Bloch, I. Observation of chiral currents with ultracold atoms in
bosonic ladders. Nat. Phys. 2014, 10, 588–593. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys2998.
28.
Bylinskii, A.; Gangloff, D.; Counts, I.; Vuleti´c, V. Observation of Aubry-type transition in finite atom chains via friction. Nat.
Mater. 2016, 15, 717–721. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat4601.
29.
Köhl, M.; Moritz, H.; Stöferle, T.; Günter, K.; Esslinger, T. Fermionic Atoms in a Three Dimensional Optical Lattice: Observing
Fermi Surfaces, Dynamics, and Interactions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 94, 080403. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.080403.
30.
Esslinger, T. Fermi-Hubbard Physics with Atoms in an Optical Lattice. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 2010, 1, 129–152.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-070909-104059.
31.
Tarruell, L.; Sanchez-Palencia, L. Quantum simulation of the Hubbard model with ultracold fermions in optical lattices. Comptes
Rendus Phys. 2018, 19, 365–393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crhy.2018.10.013.
32.
Tarruell, L.; Greif, D.; Uehlinger, T.; Jotzu, G.; Esslinger, T. Creating, moving and merging Dirac points with a Fermi gas in a
tunable honeycomb lattice. Nature 2012, 483, 302–305.
33.
Schreiber, M.; Hodgman, S.S.; Bordia, P.; Lüschen, H.P.; Fischer, M.H.; Vosk, R.; Altman, E.; Schneider, U.; Bloch, I. Observation
of many-body localization of interacting fermions in a quasirandom optical lattice. Science 2015, 349, 842–845.
34.
Alet, F.; Laflorencie, N. Many-body localization: An introduction and selected topics. Comptes Rendus Phys. 2018, 19, 498–525.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crhy.2018.03.003.
35.
Vaidya, V.D.; Guo, Y.; Kroeze, R.M.; Ballantine, K.E.; Kollár, A.J.; Keeling, J.; Lev, B.L. Tunable-Range, Photon-Mediated Atomic
Interactions in Multimode Cavity QED. Phys. Rev. X 2018, 8, 011002. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.8.011002.
36.
Daley, A.J. Quantum trajectories and open many-body quantum systems. Adv. Phys. 2014, 63, 77–149. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00018732.2014.933502.
37.
Barceló, C.; Liberati, S.; Visser, M. Analogue Gravity. Living Rev. Relativ. 2005, 8, 12. https://doi.org/10.12942/lrr-2005-12.
38.
Volovik, G. Superfluid analogies of cosmological phenomena. Phys. Rep. 2001, 351, 195.
39.
Steinhauer, J. Observation of quantum Hawking radiation and its entanglement in an analogue black hole. Nat. Phys. 2016,
12, 959–965. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys3863.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
90 of 124
40.
Hu, J.; Feng, L.; Zhang, Z.; Chin, C.
Quantum simulation of Unruh radiation.
Nat. Phys. 2019, 15, 785–789.
https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41567-019-0537-1.
41.
Mannarelli, M.; Grasso, D.; Trabucco, S.; Chiofalo, M.L. Hawking temperature and phonon emission in acoustic holes. Phys. Rev.
D 2021, 103, 076001. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.103.076001.
42.
Fixler, J.B.; Foster, G.; McGuirk, J.; Kasevich, M. Atom interferometer measurement of the Newtonian constant of gravity. Science
2007, 315, 74–77.
43.
Rosi, G.; Sorrentino, F.; Cacciapuoti, L.; Prevedelli, M.; Tino, G.M. Precision measurement of the Newtonian gravitational
constant using cold atoms. Nature 2014, 510, 518–521. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13433.
44.
Tino, G.M. Testing gravity with cold atom interferometry: results and prospects.
Quantum Sci. Technol. 2021, 6, 024014.
https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-9565/abd83e.
45.
Cairncross, W.B.; Gresh, D.N.; Grau, M.; Cossel, K.C.; Roussy, T.S.; Ni, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Ye, J.; Cornell, E.A. Precision measurement of
the electron’s electric dipole moment using trapped molecular ions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 119, 153001.
46.
ACME Collaboration.; Baron, J.; Campbell, W.C.; DeMille, D.; Doyle, J.M.; Gabrielse, G.; Gurevich, Y.V.; Hess, P.W.; Hutzler, N.R.;
Kirilov, E.; et al. Order of magnitude smaller limit on the electric dipole moment of the electron. Science 2013, 343, 269–272.
47.
DeMille, D.; Doyle, J.M.; Sushkov, A.O. Probing the frontiers of particle physics with tabletop-scale experiments. Science 2017,
357, 990–994, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aal3003.
48.
Tino, G.M.; Bassi, A.; Bianco, G.; Bongs, K.; Bouyer, P.; Cacciapuoti, L.; Capozziello, S.; Chen, X.; Chiofalo, M.L.; et al. SAGE: A
proposal for a space atomic gravity explorer. Eur. Phys. J. D 2019, 73, 228. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjd/e2019-100324-6.
49.
Ivanov, V.V.; Alberti, A.; Schioppo, M.; Ferrari, G.; Artoni, M.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Tino, G.M. Coherent delocalization of atomic wave
packets in driven lattice potentials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 043602.
50.
El-Neaj, Y.A.; Alpigiani, C.; Amairi-Pyka, S.; Araújo, H.; Balaž, A.; Bassi, A.; Bathe-Peters, L.; Battelier, B.; Beli´c, A.; Bentine,
E.; et al. AEDGE: Atomic Experiment for Dark Matter and Gravity Exploration in Space. EPJ Quantum Technol. 2020, 7, 6.
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjqt/s40507-020-0080-0.
51.
Bothwell, T.; Kennedy, C.J.; Aeppli, A.; Kedar, D.; Robinson, J.M.; Oelker, E.; Staron, A.; Ye, J. Resolving the gravitational redshift
across a millimetre-scale atomic sample. Nature 2022, 602, 420–424. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04349-7.
52.
Ahlers, H.; Badurina, L.; Bassi, A.; Battelier, B.; Beaufils, Q.; Bongs, K.; Bouyer, P.; Braxmaier, C.; Buchmueller, O.; Carlesso, M.;
et al. STE-QUEST: Space Time Explorer and QUantum Equivalence principle Space Test. arXiv 2022. arXiv:2211.15412.
53.
Alonso, I.; Alpigiani, C.; Altschul, B.; Araújo, H.; Arduini, G.; Arlt, J.; Badurina, L.; Balaž, A.; Bandarupally, S.; et al. Cold atoms
in space: community workshop summary and proposed road-map. EPJ Quantum Technol. 2022, 9, 30. https://doi.org/10.1140/
epjqt/s40507-022-00147-w.
54.
Zohar, E.; Cirac, J.I.; Reznik, B. Cold-Atom Quantum Simulator for SU(2) Yang-Mills Lattice Gauge Theory. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013,
110, 125304. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.125304.
55.
Zohar, E.; Cirac, J.I.; Reznik, B. Quantum simulations of gauge theories with ultracold atoms: Local gauge invariance from
angular-momentum conservation. Phys. Rev. A 2013, 88, 023617. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.88.023617.
56.
Bernien, H.; Schwartz, S.; Keesling, A.; Levine, H.; Omran, A.; Pichler, H.; Choi, S.; Zibrov, A.S.; Endres, M.; Greiner, M.; et al.
Probing many-body dynamics on a 51-atom quantum simulator. Nature 2017, 551, 579.
57.
Martinez, E.A.; Muschik, C.A.; Schindler, P.; Nigg, D.; Erhard, A.; Heyl, M.; Hauke, P.; Dalmonte, M.; Monz, T.; Zoller,
P.; et al.
Real-time dynamics of lattice gauge theories with a few-qubit quantum computer.
Nature 2016, 534, 516–519.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature18318.
58.
Al-Khalili, J. Overview of the quantum biology session at the 19th IUPAB congress and 11th EBSA congress. Biophys. Rev. 2017,
9, 293–294.
59.
Huelga, S.; Plenio, M. Vibrations, quanta and biology. Contemp. Phys. 2013, 54, 181–207.
60.
Adams, B.; Petruccione, F. Quantum effects in the brain: A review. AVS Quantum Sci. 2020, 2, 022901. https://doi.org/10.1116/
1.5135170.
61.
Goorney, S.; Foti, C.; Santi, L.; Sherson, J.; Yago Malo, J.; Chiofalo, M.L. Culturo-Scientific Storytelling. Educ. Sci. 2022, 12, 474.
https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci12070474.
62.
Chiofalo, M.; Michelini, M. Responsible Research and Innovation in Quantum Technologies. Front. Quantum Sci. Technol.
2023. Available online: https://www.frontiersin.org/research-topics/48870/responsible-research-and-innovation-in-quantum-
science-and-technologies/articles (accessed on 1 February 2023)
63.
Müller, R.; Greinert, F. Competence Framework for Quantum Technologies: Methodology and Version History; European Commission:
Brussels, Belgium, 2021. https://doi.org/doi/10.2759/130432.
64.
Raymer, M.G.; Monroe, C. The US National Quantum Initiative. Quantum Sci. Technol. 2019, 4, 020504. https://doi.org/10.1088/
2058-9565/ab0441.
65.
The Quantum Flagship Initiative. Available online: https://qt.eu/ (accessed on 1 February 2023).
66.
Hasan, S.R.; Chowdhury, M.Z.; Saiam, M.; Jang, Y.M. Quantum Communication Systems: Vision, Protocols, Applications, and
Challenges. IEEE Access 2023, 11, 15855–15877. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3244395.
67.
Zhang, P.; Chen, N.; Shen, S.; Yu, S.; Wu, S.; Kumar, N. Future Quantum Communications and Networking: A Review and
Vision. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 2024, 31, 141–148. https://doi.org/10.1109/MWC.012.2200295.
68.
Gisin, N.; Thew, R. Quantum communication. Nat. Photonics 2007, 1, 165–171.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
91 of 124
69.
Orieux, A.; Diamanti, E. Recent advances on integrated quantum communications. J. Opt. 2016, 18, 083002. https://doi.org/10
.1088/2040-8978/18/8/083002.
70.
Devoret, M.H.; Wallraff, A.; Martinis, J.M. Superconducting qubits: A short review. arXiv 2004. arXiv:cond-mat/0411174.
71.
Koch, J.; Yu, T.M.; Gambetta, J.M.; Houck, A.A.; Schuster, D.I.; Majer, J.; Blais, A.; Devoret, M.H.; Girvin, S.M.; Schoelkopf, R.J.
Charge-insensitive qubit design derived from the Cooper pair box. Phys. Rev. A 2007, 76, 042319.
72.
Kjaergaard, M.; Schwartz, M.E.; Braumüller, J.; Krantz, P.; Wang, J.I.J.; Gustavsson, S.; Oliver, W.D. Superconducting qubits:
Current state of play. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 2020, 11, 369–395.
73.
Linke, N.M.; Maslov, D.; Roetteler, M.; Debnath, S.; Figgatt, C.; Landsman, K.A.; Wright, K.; Monroe, C. Experimental comparison
of two quantum computing architectures. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2017, 114, 3305–3310. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.161802
0114.
74.
Dutt, M.G.; Childress, L.; Jiang, L.; Togan, E.; Maze, J.; Jelezko, F.; Zibrov, A.; Hemmer, P.; Lukin, M. Quantum register based on
individual electronic and nuclear spin qubits in diamond. Science 2007, 316, 1312–1316.
75.
Fedyanin, D.Y. Optoelectronics of Color Centers in Diamond and Silicon Carbide: From Single-Photon Luminescence to
Electrically Controlled Spin Qubits. Adv. Quantum Technol. 2021, 4, 2100048.
76.
Nakazato, T.; Reyes, R.; Imaike, N.; Matsuda, K.; Tsurumoto, K.; Sekiguchi, Y.; Kosaka, H. Quantum error correction of spin
quantum memories in diamond under a zero magnetic field. Commun. Phys. 2022, 5, 102. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-022-0
0875-6.
77.
Saraiva, A.; Lim, W.H.; Yang, C.H.; Escott, C.C.; Laucht, A.; Dzurak, A.S. Materials for silicon quantum dots and their impact on
electron spin qubits. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2022, 32, 2105488.
78.
Pla, J.J.; Tan, K.Y.; Dehollain, J.P.; Lim, W.H.; Morton, J.J.; Zwanenburg, F.A.; Jamieson, D.N.; Dzurak, A.S.; Morello, A.
High-fidelity readout and control of a nuclear spin qubit in silicon. Nature 2013, 496, 334–338.
79.
Carusotto, I.; Ciuti, C. Quantum fluids of light. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2013, 85, 299–366. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.85.299.
80.
Gerace, D.; Carusotto, I. Analog Hawking radiation from an acoustic black hole in a flowing polariton superfluid. Phys. Rev. B
2012, 86, 144505.
81.
Kavokin, A.; Liew, T.C.; Schneider, C.; Lagoudakis, P.G.; Klembt, S.; Hoefling, S. Polariton condensates for classical and quantum
computing. Nat. Rev. Phys. 2022, 4, 435–451.
82.
Yang, H.; Kim, N.Y. Microcavity exciton-polariton quantum spin fluids. Adv. Quantum Technol. 2022, 5, 2100137.
83.
Basov, D.N.; Asenjo-Garcia, A.; Schuck, P.J.; Zhu, X.; Rubio, A. Polariton panorama. Nanophotonics 2020, 10, 549–577.
84.
Sammak, A.; Sabbagh, D.; Hendrickx, N.W.; Lodari, M.; Paquelet Wuetz, B.; Tosato, A.; Yeoh, L.; Bollani, M.; Virgilio, M.;
Schubert, M.A.; et al. Shallow and undoped germanium quantum wells: a playground for spin and hybrid quantum technology.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807613.
85.
Liao, P.F.; Kelley, P. Quantum Well Lasers; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2012.
86.
Das, R.; Bandyopadhyay, R.; Pramanik, P. Carbon quantum dots from natural resource: A review. Mater. Today Chem. 2018,
8, 96–109.
87.
Vajner, D.A.; Rickert, L.; Gao, T.; Kaymazlar, K.; Heindel, T. Quantum communication using semiconductor quantum dots. Adv.
Quantum Technol. 2022, 5, 2100116.
88.
Sun, H.; Wu, L.; Wei, W.; Qu, X. Recent advances in graphene quantum dots for sensing. Mater. Today 2013, 16, 433–442.
89.
Burkard, G.; Engel, H.A.; Loss, D. Spintronics and quantum dots for quantum computing and quantum communication.
Fortschritte Phys. Prog. Phys. 2000, 48, 965–986.
90.
Barthelemy, P.; Vandersypen, L.M.K. Quantum Dot Systems: A versatile platform for quantum simulations. Ann. Phys. 2013,
525, 808–826.
91.
García de Arquer, F.P.; Talapin, D.V.; Klimov, V.I.; Arakawa, Y.; Bayer, M.; Sargent, E.H. Semiconductor quantum dots:
Technological progress and future challenges. Science 2021, 373, eaaz8541.
92.
Carretta, S.; Zueco, D.; Chiesa, A.; Gómez-León, A.; Luis, F. A perspective on scaling up quantum computation with molecular
spins. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2021, 118, 240501. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0053378.
93.
Chicco, S.; Allodi, G.; Chiesa, A.; Garlatti, E.; Buch, C.D.; Santini, P.; De Renzi, R.; Piligkos, S.; Carretta, S. Proof-of-Concept
Quantum Simulator Based on Molecular Spin Qudits. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2024, 146, 1053–1061. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c1
2008.
94.
Lockyer, S.J.; Chiesa, A.; Brookfield, A.; Timco, G.A.; Whitehead, G.F.S.; McInnes, E.J.L.; Carretta, S.; Winpenny, R.E.P. Five-
Spin Supramolecule for Simulating Quantum Decoherence of Bell States. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2022, 144, 16086–16092. https:
//doi.org/10.1021/jacs.2c06384.
95.
Wei, S.H.; Jing, B.; Zhang, X.Y.; Liao, J.Y.; Yuan, C.Z.; Fan, B.Y.; Lyu, C.; Zhou, D.L.; Wang, Y.; Deng, G.W.; et al. Towards
Real-World Quantum Networks: A Review. Laser Photonics Rev. 2022, 16, 2100219.
96.
Paraïso, T.K.; Woodward, R.I.; Marangon, D.G.; Lovic, V.; Yuan, Z.; Shields, A.J. Advanced Laser Technology for Quantum
Communications (Tutorial Review). Adv. Quantum Technol. 2021, 4, 2100062.
97.
Bennett, C.H.; Brassard, G.; Crépeau, C.; Jozsa, R.; Peres, A.; Wootters, W.K. Teleporting an unknown quantum state via dual
classical and Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen channels. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 70, 1895–1899. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.70.1
895.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
92 of 124
98.
Anderson, M.H.; Ensher, J.R.; Matthews, M.R.; Wieman, C.E.; Cornell, E.A. Observation of Bose-Einstein Condensation in
a Dilute Atomic Vapor. Science 1995, 269, 198–201, [http://science.sciencemag.org/content/269/5221/198.full.pdf]. https:
//doi.org/10.1126/science.269.5221.198.
99.
Davis, K.B.; Mewes, M.O.; Andrews, M.R.; van Druten, N.J.; Durfee, D.S.; Kurn, D.M.; Ketterle, W. Bose-Einstein Condensation
in a Gas of Sodium Atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1995, 75, 3969–3973. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.75.3969.
100.
Zwierlein, M.W.; Stan, C.A.; Schunck, C.H.; Raupach, S.M.F.; Kerman, A.J.; Ketterle, W. Condensation of Pairs of Fermionic
Atoms near a Feshbach Resonance. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 92, 120403. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.92.120403.
101.
Dalfovo, F.; Giorgini, S.; Pitaevskii, L.P.; Stringari, S. Theory of Bose-Einstein condensation in trapped gases. Rev. Mod. Phys.
1999, 71, 463–512. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.71.463.
102.
Giorgini, S.; Pitaevskii, L.P.; Stringari, S. Theory of ultracold atomic Fermi gases.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 2008, 80, 1215–1274.
https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.80.1215.
103.
Inguscio, M.; Stringari, S.; Weiman, C. (Eds.) Bose Einstein Condensation in Atomic Gases; IOS Press: Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
1999.
104.
Metcalf, H.; Stratenvan, P. Laser Cooling and Trapping; Graduate Texts in Contemporary Physics; Springer: New York, NY, USA,
1999.
105.
Holland, M.J.; Jin, D.S.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Cooper, J. Emergence of Interaction Effects in Bose-Einstein Condensation. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 1997, 78, 3801–3805. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.78.3801.
106.
Gaunt, A.L.; Schmidutz, T.F.; Gotlibovych, I.; Smith, R.P.; Hadzibabic, Z. Bose-Einstein Condensation of Atoms in a Uniform
Potential. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, 200406. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.200406.
107.
Hilker, T.A.; Dogra, L.H.; Eigen, C.; Glidden, J.A.P.; Smith, R.P.; Hadzibabic, Z. First and Second Sound in a Compressible 3D
Bose Fluid. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2022, 128, 223601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.128.223601.
108.
Bakr, W.; Gillen, J.; Peng, A.; Fölling, S.; Greiner, M. A quantum gas microscope for detecting single atoms in a Hubbard-regime
optical lattice. Nature 2009, 462, 74.
109.
Bloch, I.; Dalibard, J.; Zwerger, W. Many-body physics with ultracold gases.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 2008, 80, 885–964.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.80.885.
110.
Fano, U. Effects of Configuration Interaction on Intensities and Phase Shifts. Phys. Rev. 1961, 124, 1866–1878.
111.
Feshbach, H. A unified theory of nuclear reactions. II. Ann. Phys. 1962, 19, 287–313.
112.
Moerdijk, A.J.; Verhaar, B.J.; Axelsson, A. Resonances in Ultracold Collisions of 6Li, 7Li, and 23Na.
Phys. Rev. A 1995,
51, 4852–4861.
113.
Gurarie, V.; Radzihovsky, L. Resonantly Paired Fermionic Superfluids. Ann. Phys. 2007, 322, 2–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
aop.2006.10.009.
114.
Chin, C.; Grimm, R.; Julienne, P.; Tiesinga, E. Feshbach Resonances in Ultracold Gases. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2010, 82, 1225–1286.
https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.82.1225.
115.
Periwal, A.; Cooper, E.S.; Kunkel, P.; Wienand, J.F.; Davis, E.J.; Schleier-Smith, M. Programmable interactions and emergent
geometry in an array of atom clouds. Nature 2021, 600, 630–635. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04156-0.
116.
Bloch, I. Ultracold quantum gases in optical lattices. Nat. Phys. 2005, 1, 23–30.
117.
Lewenstein, M.; Sanpera, A.; Ahufinger, V. Ultracold Atoms in Optical Lattices: Simulating Quantum Many-Body Systems; OUP
Oxford: Oxford, UK, 2012.
118.
Lye, J.E.; Fallani, L.; Modugno, M.; Wiersma, D.S.; Fort, C.; Inguscio, M. Bose-Einstein Condensate in a Random Potential. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2005, 95, 070401. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.070401.
119.
Dalibard, J.; Gerbier, F.; Juzeli¯unas, G.; Öhberg, P. Colloquium: Artificial gauge potentials for neutral atoms. Rev. Mod. Phys.
2011, 83, 1523–1543. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.83.1523.
120.
Goldman, N.; Juzeli¯unas, G.; Öhberg, P.; Spielman, I.B. Light-induced gauge fields for ultracold atoms. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2014,
77, 126401.
121.
Burger, S.; Cataliotti, F.S.; Fort, C.; Minardi, F.; Inguscio, M.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Tosi, M.P. Superfluid and Dissipative Dynamics
of a Bose-Einstein Condensate in a Periodic Optical Potential. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2001, 86, 4447–4450. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.86.4447.
122.
Witthaut, D.; Trimborn, F.; Wimberger, S. Dissipation Induced Coherence of a Two-Mode Bose-Einstein Condensate. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2008, 101, 200402. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.200402.
123.
Cataliotti, F.S.; Burger, S.; Fort, C.; Maddaloni, P.; Minardi, F.; Trombettoni, A.; Smerzi, A.; Inguscio, M. Josephson junction arrays
with Bose-Einstein condensates. Science 2001, 293, 843–846.
124.
Chiofalo, M.L.; Tosi, M.P. Josephson-type oscillations of a driven Bose-Einstein condensate in an optical lattice. Europhys. Lett.
2001, 56, 326. https://doi.org/10.1209/epl/i2001-00523-2.
125.
Micheli, A.; Daley, A.J.; Jaksch, D.; Zoller, P. Single Atom Transistor in a 1D Optical Lattice. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 93, 140408.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.93.140408.
126.
Levy, S.; Lahoud, E.; Shomroni, I.; Steinhauer, J. The A.C. and D.C. Josephson effects in a Bose-Einstein condensate. Nature 2007,
449, 579–583.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
93 of 124
127.
Bloch, I.; Zoller, P. Chapter 5 - Ultracold Atoms and Molecules in Optical Lattices. In Ultracold Bosonic and Fermionic Gases; Levin,
K., Fetter, A.L., Stamper-Kurn, D.M., Eds.; Contemporary Concepts of Condensed Matter Science; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 2012; Volume 5, pp. 121–156.
128.
Valtolina, G.; Matsuda, K.; Tobias, W.G.; Li, J.R.; De Marco, L.; Ye, J. Dipolar evaporation of reactive molecules to below the
Fermi temperature. Nature 2020, 588, 239–243. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2980-7.
129.
Briegel, H.J.; Calarco, T.; Jaksch, D.; Cirac, J.I.; Zoller, P. Quantum computing with neutral atoms. J. Mod. Opt. 2000, 47, 415–451.
130.
Dumke, R.; Lu, Z.; Close, J.; Robins, N.; Weis, A.; Mukherjee, M.; Birkl, G.; Hufnagel, C.; Amico, L.; Boshier, M.G.; et al. Roadmap
on quantum optical systems. J. Opt. 2016, 18, 093001.
131.
Dutta, O.; Gajda, M.; Hauke, P.; Lewenstein, M.; Lühmann, D.S.; Malomed, B.A.; Sowi´nski, T.; Zakrzewski, J. Non-standard
Hubbard models in optical lattices: a review. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2015, 78, 066001.
132.
Schäfer, F.; Fukuhara, T.; Sugawa, S.; Takasu, Y.; Takahashi, Y. Tools for quantum simulation with ultracold atoms in optical
lattices. Nat. Rev. Phys. 2020, 2, 411–425.
133.
Gross, C.; Bakr, W.S. Quantum gas microscopy for single atom and spin detection. Nat. Phys. 2021, 17, 1316–1323.
134.
Hemmerich, A.; Hänsch, T.W. Two-dimesional atomic crystal bound by light.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 70, 410–413.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.70.410.
135.
Grynberg, G.; Lounis, B.; Verkerk, P.; Courtois, J.Y.; Salomon, C. Quantized motion of cold cesium atoms in two- and three-
dimensional optical potentials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 70, 2249–2252. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.70.2249.
136.
Modugno, G.; Ferlaino, F.; Heidemann, R.; Roati, G.; Inguscio, M. Production of a Fermi gas of atoms in an optical lattice. Phys.
Rev. A 2003, 68, 011601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.68.011601.
137.
Ritsch, H.; Domokos, P.; Brennecke, F.; Esslinger, T. Cold atoms in cavity-generated dynamical optical potentials. Rev. Mod. Phys.
2013, 85, 553–601. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.85.553.
138.
Zhu, C.; Chen, L.; Hu, H.; Liu, X.J.; Pu, H. Spin-exchange-induced exotic superfluids in a Bose-Fermi spinor mixture. Phys. Rev.
A 2019, 100, 031602.
139.
Wu, Z.; Bruun, G.M. Topological superfluid in a Fermi-Bose mixture with a high critical temperature. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016,
117, 245302.
140.
Ruostekoski, J. Cooperative quantum-optical planar arrays of atoms. Phys. Rev. A 2023, 108, 030101. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevA.108.030101.
141.
Grimm, R.; Weidemüller, M.; Ovchinnikov, Y.B. Optical Dipole Traps for Neutral Atoms. In Advances in Atomic, Molecular, and
Optical Physics; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2000; Volume 42, pp. 95–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1049-250X(08)6
0186-X.
142.
Cirac, J.I.; Zoller, P. Quantum Computations with Cold Trapped Ions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1995, 74, 4091–4094. https://doi.org/10.1
103/PhysRevLett.74.4091.
143.
Wineland, D.J.; Monroe, C.; Itano, W.M.; Leibfried, D.; King, B.E.; Meekhof, D.M. A Experimental Issues in Coherent Quantum-
State Manipulation of Trapped Atomic Ions. J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. 1998, 103, 259.
144.
Bruzewicz, C.D.; Chiaverini, J.; McConnell, R.; Sage, J.M. Trapped-ion quantum computing: Progress and challenges. Appl.
Phys. Rev. 2019, 6, 021314.
145.
Brown, K.R.; Chiaverini, J.; Sage, J.M.; Häffner, H. Materials challenges for trapped-ion quantum computers. Nat. Rev. Mater.
2021, 6, 892–905.
146.
Benhelm, J.; Kirchmair, G.; Roos, C.F.; Blatt, R. Towards fault-tolerant quantum computing with trapped ions. Nat. Phys. 2008,
4, 463–466.
147.
Myerson, A.; Szwer, D.; Webster, S.; Allcock, D.; Curtis, M.; Imreh, G.; Sherman, J.; Stacey, D.; Steane, A.; Lucas, D. High-fidelity
readout of trapped-ion qubits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 200502.
148.
Häffner, H.; Roos, C.F.; Blatt, R. Quantum computing with trapped ions. Phys. Rep. 2008, 469, 155–203.
149.
Monroe, C.; Kim, J. Scaling the ion trap quantum processor. Science 2013, 339, 1164–1169.
150.
Webb, A.E.; Webster, S.C.; Collingbourne, S.; Bretaud, D.; Lawrence, A.M.; Weidt, S.; Mintert, F.; Hensinger, W.K. Resilient
entangling gates for trapped ions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 121, 180501.
151.
Ospelkaus, C.; Warring, U.; Colombe, Y.; Brown, K.; Amini, J.; Leibfried, D.; Wineland, D.J. Microwave quantum logic gates for
trapped ions. Nature 2011, 476, 181–184.
152.
Jonathan, D.; Plenio, M.; Knight, P. Fast quantum gates for cold trapped ions. Phys. Rev. A 2000, 62, 042307.
153.
Katz, O.; Cetina, M.; Monroe, C. N-Body Interactions between Trapped Ion Qubits via Spin-Dependent Squeezing. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2022, 129, 063603. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.129.063603.
154.
Wang, Y.; Um, M.; Zhang, J.; An, S.; Lyu, M.; Zhang, J.N.; Duan, L.M.; Yum, D.; Kim, K. Single-qubit quantum memory exceeding
ten-minute coherence time. Nat. Photonics 2017, 11, 646–650.
155.
Zhang, C.; Pokorny, F.; Li, W.; Higgins, G.; Pöschl, A.; Lesanovsky, I.; Hennrich, M. Submicrosecond entangling gate between
trapped ions via Rydberg interaction. Nature 2020, 580, 345–349.
156.
Monz, T.; Nigg, D.; Martinez, E.A.; Brandl, M.F.; Schindler, P.; Rines, R.; Wang, S.X.; Chuang, I.L.; Blatt, R. Realization of a
scalable Shor algorithm. Science 2016, 351, 1068–1070.
157.
Graß, T.; Lewenstein, M. Trapped-ion quantum simulation of tunable-range Heisenberg chains. EPJ Quantum Technol. 2014, 1, 8.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
94 of 124
158.
Shimshoni, E.; Morigi, G.; Fishman, S. Quantum Zigzag Transition in Ion Chains.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 106, 010401.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.010401.
159.
Porras, D.; Cirac, J.I.
Effective Quantum Spin Systems with Trapped Ions.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 92, 207901.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.92.207901.
160.
Blatt, R.; Roos, C.F. Quantum simulations with trapped ions. Nat. Phys. 2012, 8, 277–284.
161.
Monroe, C.; Campbell, W.C.; Duan, L.M.; Gong, Z.X.; Gorshkov, A.V.; Hess, P.W.; Islam, R.; Kim, K.; Linke, N.M.; Pagano,
G.; et al.
Programmable quantum simulations of spin systems with trapped ions.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 2021, 93, 025001.
https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.93.025001.
162.
Hempel, C.; Maier, C.; Romero, J.; McClean, J.; Monz, T.; Shen, H.; Jurcevic, P.; Lanyon, B.P.; Love, P.; Babbush, R.; et al. Quantum
Chemistry Calculations on a Trapped-Ion Quantum Simulator. Phys. Rev. X 2018, 8, 031022. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.
8.031022.
163.
Reiter, F.; Sørensen, A.S.; Zoller, P.; Muschik, C. Dissipative quantum error correction and application to quantum sensing with
trapped ions. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 1822.
164.
Elben, A.; Flammia, S.T.; Huang, H.Y.; Kueng, R.; Preskill, J.; Vermersch, B.; Zoller, P. The randomized measurement toolbox.
Nat. Rev. Phys. 2023, 5, 9–24.
165.
Adams, C.S.; Pritchard, J.D.; Shaffer, J.P. Rydberg atom quantum technologies. J. Phys. B At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 2019, 53, 012002.
166.
Gallagher, T.F. Rydberg Atoms; Cambridge Monographs on Atomic, Molecular and Chemical Physics; Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge, UK, 1994. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511524530.
167.
Sibalic, N.; Adams, C.S. Rydberg Physics; IOP Publishing: Bristol, UK, 2018; pp. 2399–2891. https://doi.org/10.1088/978-0-7503
-1635-4.
168.
Ashkin, A.
Acceleration and Trapping of Particles by Radiation Pressure.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1970, 24, 156–159.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.24.156.
169.
Browaeys, A.; Lahaye, T. Many-body physics with individually controlled Rydberg atoms. Nat. Phys. 2020, 16, 132–142.
170.
Urban, E.; Johnson, T.A.; Henage, T.; Isenhower, L.; Yavuz, D.D.; Walker, T.G.; Saffman, M. Observation of Rydberg blockade
between two atoms. Nat. Phys. 2009, 5, 110–114. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys1178.
171.
Ryabtsev, I.I.; Tretyakov, D.B.; Beterov, I.I. Applicability of Rydberg atoms to quantum computers. J. Phys. At. Mol. Opt. Phys.
2005, 38, S421.
172.
Weimer, H.; Müller, M.; Lesanovsky, I.; Zoller, P.; Büchler, H.P. A Rydberg quantum simulator. Nat. Phys. 2010, 6, 382–388.
173.
Degen, C.L.; Reinhard, F.; Cappellaro, P. Quantum sensing. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2017, 89, 035002.
174.
Saffman, M.; Walker, T.G.; Mølmer, K. Quantum information with Rydberg atoms. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2010, 82, 2313–2363.
https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.82.2313.
175.
Hermann-Avigliano, C.; Teixeira, R.C.; Nguyen, T.; Cantat-Moltrecht, T.; Nogues, G.; Dotsenko, I.; Gleyzes, S.; Raimond, J.;
Haroche, S.; Brune, M. Long coherence times for Rydberg qubits on a superconducting atom chip. Phys. Rev. A 2014, 90, 040502.
176.
Saffman, M. Quantum computing with atomic qubits and Rydberg interactions: Progress and challenges. J. Phys. At. Mol. Opt.
Phys. 2016, 49, 202001.
177.
Ebadi, S.; Wang, T.T.; Levine, H.; Keesling, A.; Semeghini, G.; Omran, A.; Bluvstein, D.; Samajdar, R.; Pichler, H.; Ho,
W.W.; et al.
Quantum phases of matter on a 256-atom programmable quantum simulator.
Nature 2021, 595, 227–232.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03582-4.
178.
Barredo, D.; Lienhard, V.; Scholl, P.; de Léséleuc, S.; Boulier, T.; Browaeys, A.; Lahaye, T. Three-dimensional trapping of
individual Rydberg atoms in ponderomotive bottle beam traps. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 124, 023201.
179.
Wilson, J.; Saskin, S.; Meng, Y.; Ma, S.; Dilip, R.; Burgers, A.; Thompson, J. Trapping alkaline earth Rydberg atoms optical
tweezer arrays. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2022, 128, 033201.
180.
Evered, S.J.; Bluvstein, D.; Kalinowski, M.; Ebadi, S.; Manovitz, T.; Zhou, H.; Li, S.H.; Geim, A.A.; Wang, T.T.; Maskara,
N.; et al. High-fidelity parallel entangling gates on a neutral-atom quantum computer. Nature 2023, 622, 268–272. https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06481-y.
181.
Bluvstein, D.; Evered, S.J.; Geim, A.A.; Li, S.H.; Zhou, H.; Manovitz, T.; Ebadi, S.; Cain, M.; Kalinowski, M.; Hangleiter, D.; et al.
Logical quantum processor based on reconfigurable atom arrays. Nature 2024, 626, 58–65. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023
-06927-3.
182.
Santos, L.; Shlyapnikov, G.V.; Zoller, P.; Lewenstein, M. Bose-Einstein Condensation in Trapped Dipolar Gases. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2000, 85, 1791–1794. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.85.1791.
183.
Schulz, H.J. Wigner crystal in one dimension. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 71, 1864–1867. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.71.1864.
184.
Capponi, S.; Poilblanc, D.; Giamarchi, T. Effects of long-range electronic interactions on a one-dimensional electron system.
Phys. Rev. B 2000, 61, 13410–13417.
185.
Richter, R.; Barashenkov, I.V. Two-Dimensional Solitons on the Surface of Magnetic Fluids. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 94, 184503.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.184503.
186.
Ronen, S.; Bortolotti, D.C.E.; Bohn, J.L. Radial and Angular Rotons in Trapped Dipolar Gases. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 98, 030406.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.030406.
187.
Góral, K.; Santos, L.; Lewenstein, M. Quantum Phases of Dipolar Bosons in Optical Lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 88, 170406.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.88.170406.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
95 of 124
188.
Dalla Torre, E.G.; Berg, E.; Altman, E. Hidden Order in 1D Bose Insulators.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97, 260401.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.97.260401.
189.
Kao, W.; Lin, K.Y.; Gopalakrishnan, S.; Lev, B. Topological pumping of a 1D dipolar gas into strongly correlated prethermal
states. Science 2021, 371, 296.
190.
Wei, X.; Gao, C.; Asgari, R.; Wang, P.; Xianlong, G. Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov pairing states of a polarized dipolar Fermi
gas trapped in a one-dimensional optical lattice. Phys. Rev. A 2018, 98, 023631.
191.
Chomaz, L.; Ferrier-Barbut, I.; Ferlaino, F.; Laburthe-Tolra, B.; Lev, B.L.; Pfau, T. Dipolar physics: a review of experiments with
magnetic quantum gases. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2022, 86, 026401. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6633/aca814.
192.
Carr, L.D.; DeMille, D.; Krems, R.V.; Ye, J. Cold and ultracold molecules: science, technology and applications. New J. Phys. 2009,
11, 055049.
193.
Bohn, J.L.; Rey, A.M.; Ye, J. Cold molecules: Progress in quantum engineering of chemistry and quantum matter. Science 2017,
357, 1002–1010.
194.
Moses, S.A.; Covey, J.P.; Miecnikowski, M.T.; Jin, D.S.; Ye, J. New frontiers for quantum gases of polar molecules. Nat. Phys.
2017, 13, 13.
195.
Löw, R.; Weimer, H.; Nipper, J.; Balewski, J.B.; Butscher, B.; Büchler, H.P.; Pfau, T. An experimental and theoretical guide to
strongly interacting Rydberg gases. J. Phys. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 2012, 45, 113001.
196.
Labuhn, H.; Barredo, D.; Ravets, S.; Léséleuc, S.D.; Macrì, T.; Lahaye, T.; Browaeys, A. Tunable two-dimensional arrays of single
Rydberg atoms for realizing quantum Ising models. Nature 2016, 534, 667.
197.
Lahaye, T.; Menotti, C.; Santos, L.; Lewenstein, M.; Pfau, T. The physics of dipolar bosonic quantum gases. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2009,
72, 126401.
198.
Menotti, C.; Stringari, S. Collective oscillations of a one-dimensional trapped Bose-Einstein gas. Phys. Rev. A 2002, 66, 043610.
199.
Petrov, D.; Gangardt, D.; Shlyapnikov, G. Low-dimensional trapped gases. J. Phys. IV 2004, 116, 3.
200.
Lieb, E.H.; Liniger, W. Exact analysis of an interacting Bose gas. I. The general solution and the ground state. Phys. Rev. 1963,
130, 1605.
201.
Girardeau, M. Relationship between Systems of Impenetrable Bosons and Fermions in One Dimension. J. Math. Phys. 1960,
1, 516.
202.
Citro, R.; Orignac, E.; De Palo, S.; Chiofalo, M.L. Evidence of Luttinger-liquid behavior in one-dimensional dipolar quantum
gases. Phys. Rev. A 2007, 75, 051602. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.75.051602.
203.
Citro, R.; Palo, S.D.; Orignac, E.; Pedri, P.; Chiofalo, M.L. Luttinger hydrodynamics of confined one-dimensional Bose gases with
dipolar interactions. New J. Phys. 2008, 10, 045011. https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/10/4/045011.
204.
Orignac, E.; Citro, R.; De Palo, S.; Chiofalo, M.L. Light scattering in inhomogeneous Tomonaga-Luttinger liquids. Phys. Rev. A
2012, 85, 013634. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.85.013634.
205.
De Palo, S.; Orignac, E.; Citro, R.; Chiofalo, M.L. Low-energy excitation spectrum of one-dimensional dipolar quantum gases.
Phys. Rev. B 2008, 77, 212101. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.77.212101.
206.
Schmitz, R.; Krönke, S.; Cao, L.; Schmelcher, P. Quantum breathing dynamics of ultracold bosons in one-dimensional harmonic
traps: Unraveling the pathway from few- to many-body systems. Phys. Rev. A 2013, 88, 043601. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevA.88.043601.
207.
Parisi, L.; Giorgini, S. Quantum Monte Carlo study of the Bose-polaron problem in a one-dimensional gas with contact
interactions. Phys. Rev. A 2017, 95, 023619. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.95.023619.
208.
Gudyma, A.I.; Astrakharchik, G.E.; Zvonarev, M.B. Reentrant behavior of the breathing-mode-oscillation frequency in a
one-dimensional Bose gas. Phys. Rev. A 2015, 92, 021601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.92.021601.
209.
De Palo, S.; Orignac, E.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Citro, R. Polarization angle dependence of the breathing mode in confined one-
dimensional dipolar bosons. Phys. Rev. B 2021, 103, 115109. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.103.115109.
210.
Koch, T.; Lahaye, T.; Metz, J.; Fröhlich, B.; Griesmaier, A.; Pfau, T. Stabilization of a purely dipolar quantum gas against collapse.
Nat. Phys. 2008, 4, 218–222. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys887.
211.
Santos, L.; Shlyapnikov, G.V.; Lewenstein, M. Roton-Maxon Spectrum and Stability of Trapped Dipolar Bose-Einstein Conden-
sates. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 90, 250403. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.90.250403.
212.
Tanzi, L.; Lucioni, E.; Famà, F.; Catani, J.; Fioretti, A.; Gabbanini, C.; Bisset, R.N.; Santos, L.; Modugno, G. Observation of a
Dipolar Quantum Gas with Metastable Supersolid Properties. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 122, 130405. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.122.130405.
213.
Norcia, M.A.; Politi, C.; Klaus, L.; Poli, E.; Sohmen, M.; Mark, M.J.; Bisset, R.N.; Santos, L.; Ferlaino, F. Two-dimensional
supersolidity in a dipolar quantum gas. Nature 2021, 596, 357–361. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03725-7.
214.
Tang, Y.; Kao, W.; Li, K.Y.; Seo, S.; Mallayya, K.; Rigol, M.; Gopalakrishnan, S.; Lev, B.L. Thermalization near Integrability in a
Dipolar Quantum Newton’s Cradle. Phys. Rev. X 2018, 8, 021030. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.8.021030.
215.
Baier, S.; Petter, D.; Becher, J.H.; Patscheider, A.; Natale, G.; Chomaz, L.; Mark, M.J.; Ferlaino, F. Realization of a Strongly
Interacting Fermi Gas of Dipolar Atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 121, 093602. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.093602.
216.
Ferrier-Barbut, I.; Kadau, H.; Schmitt, M.; Wenzel, M.; Pfau, T. Observation of Quantum Droplets in a Strongly Dipolar Bose Gas.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 116, 215301. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.215301.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
96 of 124
217.
Santos, L. Theory of dipolar gases (I). In Many-Body Physics with Ultracold Gases: Lecture Notes of the Les Houches Summer School:
Volume 94, July 2010; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2012; Volume 94, p. 231.
218.
Tanji-Suzuki, H.; Leroux, I.D.; Schleier-Smith, M.H.; Cetina, M.; Grier, A.T.; Simon, J.; Vuleti´c, V. Interaction between Atomic
Ensembles and Optical Resonators. Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 2011, 60, 201–237. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385508-4.0
0004-8.
219.
Mivehvar, F.; Piazza, F.; Donner, T.; Ritsch, H. Cavity QED with quantum gases: new paradigms in many-body physics. Adv.
Phys. 2021, 70, 1–153. https://doi.org/10.1080/00018732.2021.1969727.
220.
Kaluzny, Y.; Goy, P.; Gross, M.; Raimond, J.M.; Haroche, S. Observation of self-induced Rabi oscillations in two-level atoms
excited inside a resonant cavity: The ringing regime of superradiance. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1983, 51, 1175.
221.
Vuletic, V.; Chu, S. Laser Cooling of Atoms, Ions, or Molecules by Coherent Scattering. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2000, 84, 6090.
222.
Wolke, M.; Klinner, J.; Keßler, H.; Hemmerich, A. Cavity cooling below the recoil limit. Science 2012, 337, 3787.
223.
Ma, J.; Wang, X.; Sun, C.P.; Nori, F. Quantum spin squeezing. Phys. Rep. 2011, 509, 89–165.
224.
Peden, B.M.; Meiser, D.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Holland, M.J. Nondestructive cavity QED probe of Bloch oscillations in a gas of ultracold
atoms. Phys. Rev. A 2009, 80, 063614.
225.
Meiser, D.; Ye, J.; Holland, M.J. Spin squeezing in optical lattice clocks via lattice-based QND measurements. New J. Phys. 2008,
10, 045014.
226.
Maschler, C.; Ritsch, H. Cold atom dynamics in a quantum optical lattice potential. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 95, 260401.
227.
Jäger, S.B.; Cooper, J.; Holland, M.J.; Morigi, G. Dynamical phase transitions to optomechanical superradiance. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2019, 123, 053601.
228.
Black, A.T.; Chan, H.W.; Vuletic, V. Observation of Collective Friction Forces due to Spatial Self-Organization of Atoms: From
Rayleigh to Bragg Scattering. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 91, 203001.
229.
Baumann, K.; Guerlin, C.; Brennecke, F.; Esslinger, T. Dicke quantum phase transition with a superfluid gas in an optical cavity.
Nature 2010, 464, 1301–1306.
230.
Nagy, D.; Szirmai, G.; Domokos, P. Self-organization of a Bose-Einstein condensate in an optical cavity. Eur. Phys. J. D At. Mol.
Opt. Plasma Phys. 2007, 48, 127–136.
231.
Colella, E.; Citro, R.; Barsanti, M.; Rossini, D.; Chiofalo, M.L. Quantum phases of spinful Fermi gases in optical cavities. Phys.
Rev. B 2018, 97, 134502. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.97.134502.
232.
Kollár, A.J.; Papageorge, A.T.; Baumann, K.; Armen, M.A.; Lev, B.L. An adjustable-length cavity and Bose–Einstein condensate
apparatus for multimode cavity QED. New J. Phys. 2015, 17, 043012. https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/17/4/043012.
233.
Niedenzu, W.; Schulze, R.; Vukics, A.; Ritsch, H. Microscopic dynamics of ultracold particles in a ring-cavity optical lattice. Phys.
Rev. A 2010, 82, 043605. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.82.043605.
234.
Gopalakrishnan, S.; Lev, B.L.; Goldbart, P.M. Emergent crystallinity and frustration with Bose–Einstein condensates in multimode
cavities. Nat. Phys. 2009, 5, 845–850. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys1403.
235.
Ritsch, H. Crystals of atoms and light. Nat. Phys. 2009, 5, 781–782. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys1435.
236.
Colella, E.; Ostermann, S.; Niedenzu, W.; Mivehvar, F.; Ritsch, H. Antiferromagnetic self-ordering of a Fermi gas in a ring cavity.
New J. Phys. 2019, 21, 043019.
237.
Gopalakrishnan, S.; Lev, B.L.; Goldbart, P.M. Frustration and Glassiness in Spin Models with Cavity-Mediated Interactions.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 107, 277201. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.107.277201.
238.
Strack, P.; Sachdev, S. Dicke Quantum Spin Glass of Atoms and Photons.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 107, 277202.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.107.277202.
239.
Lucchesi, L.; Chiofalo, M.L. Many-Body Entanglement in Short-Range Interacting Fermi Gases for Metrology. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2019, 123, 060406. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.060406.
240.
Müller, M.; Strack, P.; Sachdev, S. Quantum charge glasses of itinerant fermions with cavity-mediated long-range interactions.
Phys. Rev. A 2012, 86, 023604. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.86.023604.
241.
Bentsen, G.S.; Hashizume, T.; Davis, E.J.; Buyskikh, A.S.; Schleier-Smith, M.H.; Daley, A.J.
Tunable geometries from a
sparse quantum spin network.
In Optical, Opto-Atomic, and Entanglement-Enhanced Precision Metrology II; Shahriar, S.M.,
Scheuer, J., Eds.; International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE: Bellingham, WA, USA, 2020; Volume 11296, p. 112963W.
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2552602.
242.
Kruse, D.; Ruder, M.; Benhelm, J.; von Cube, C.; Zimmermann, C.; Courteille, P.; Elsässer, T.; Nagorny, B.; Hemmerich, A. Cold
atoms in a high-Q ring cavity. Phys. Rev. A 2003, 67, 051802.
243.
Nagorny, B.; Elsässer, T.; Richter, H.; Hemmerich, A.; Kruse, D.; Zimmermann, C.; Courteille, P. Optical lattice in a high-finesse
ring resonator. Phys. Rev. A 2003, 67, 031401.
244.
Elsässer, T.; Nagorny, B.; Hemmerich, A. Collective sideband cooling in an optical ring cavity. Phys. Rev. A 2003, 67, 051401.
245.
Slama, S.; Bux, S.; Krenz, G.; Zimmermann, C.; Courteille, P. Superradiant Rayleigh scattering and collective atomic recoil lasing
in a ring cavity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 98, 053603.
246.
Mivehvar, F.; Ostermann, S.; Piazza, F.; Ritsch, H. Driven-Dissipative Supersolid in a Ring Cavity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018,
120, 123601.
247.
Schuster, S.; Wolf, P.; Ostermann, S.; Slama, S.; Zimmermann, C. Supersolid Properties of a Bose-Einstein Condensate in a Ring
Resonator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 124, 143602.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
97 of 124
248.
Bentsen, G.; Hashizume, T.; Buyskikh, A.S.; Davis, E.J.; Daley, A.J.; Gubser, S.S.; Schleier-Smith, M. Treelike Interactions and Fast
Scrambling with Cold Atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 123, 130601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.130601.
249.
Sheremet, A.S.; Petrov, M.I.; Iorsh, I.V.; Poshakinskiy, A.V.; Poddubny, A.N. Waveguide quantum electrodynamics: Collective
radiance and photon-photon correlations. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2023, 95, 015002. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.95.015002.
250.
Goban, A.; Hung, C.L.; Hood, J.D.; Yu, S.P.; Muniz, J.A.; Painter, O.; Kimble, H.J. Superradiance for Atoms Trapped along a
Photonic Crystal Waveguide. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 115, 063601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.115.063601.
251.
Chang, D.E.; Douglas, J.S.; González-Tudela, A.; Hung, C.L.; Kimble, H.J. Colloquium: Quantum matter built from nanoscopic
lattices of atoms and photons. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2018, 90, 031002. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.90.031002.
252.
Da Ros, E.; Cooper, N.; Nute, J.; Hackermueller, L. Cold atoms in micromachined waveguides: A new platform for atom-photon
interactions. Phys. Rev. Res. 2020, 2, 033098. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.033098.
253.
Lodahl, P.; Mahmoodian, S.; Stobbe, S.; Rauschenbeutel, A.; Schneeweiss, P.; Volz, J.; Pichler, H.; Zoller, P. Chiral quantum optics.
Nature 2017, 541, 473–480.
254.
González-Tudela, A.; Hung, C.L.; Chang, D.E.; Cirac, J.I.; Kimble, H.J. Subwavelength vacuum lattices and atom–atom
interactions in two-dimensional photonic crystals. Nat. Photonics 2015, 9, 320–325.
255.
Gouraud, B.; Maxein, D.; Nicolas, A.; Morin, O.; Laurat, J. Demonstration of a Memory for Tightly Guided Light in an Optical
Nanofiber. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 114, 180503. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.180503.
256.
González-Tudela, A.; Cirac, J.I. Quantum Emitters in Two-Dimensional Structured Reservoirs in the Nonperturbative Regime.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 119, 143602. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.119.143602.
257.
Yver-Leduc, F.; Cheinet, P.; Fils, J.; Clairon, A.; Dimarcq, N.; Holleville, D.; Bouyer, P.; Landragin, A. Reaching the quantum noise
limit in a high-sensitivity cold-atom inertial sensor. J. Opt. Quantum Semiclassical Opt. 2003, 5, S136. https://doi.org/10.1088/14
64-4266/5/2/371.
258.
Budker, D.; Romalis, M. Optical magnetometry. Nat. Phys. 2007, 3, 227–234.
259.
Wildermuth, S.; Hofferberth, S.; Lesanovsky, I.; Groth, S.; Krüger, P.; Schmiedmayer, J.; Bar-Joseph, I. Sensing electric and
magnetic fields with Bose-Einstein condensates. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2006, 88, 264103.
260.
Napolitano, M.; Koschorreck, M.; Dubost, B.; Behbood, N.; Sewell, R.J.; Mitchell, M.W. Interaction-based quantum metrology
showing scaling beyond the Heisenberg limit. Nature 2011, 471, 486–489. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09778.
261.
Kozhekin, A.E.; Mølmer, K.; Polzik, E. Quantum memory for light. Phys. Rev. A 2000, 62, 033809. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevA.62.033809.
262.
Duan, L.M.; Lukin, M.D.; Cirac, J.I.; Zoller, P. Long-distance quantum communication with atomic ensembles and linear optics.
Nature 2001, 414, 413–418. https://doi.org/10.1038/35106500.
263.
Bize, S.; Diddams, S.A.; Tanaka, U.; Tanner, C.E.; Oskay, W.H.; Drullinger, R.E.; Parker, T.E.; Heavner, T.P.; Jefferts, S.R.; Hollberg,
L.; et al. Testing the Stability of Fundamental Constants with the 199Hg+ Single-Ion Optical Clock. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003,
90, 150802. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.90.150802.
264.
Dimopoulos, S.; Graham, P.; Hogan, J.; Kasevich, M. Testing general relativity with atom interferometry. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007,
98, 111102.
265.
McGilligan, J.P.; Griffin, P.F.; Elvin, R.; Ingleby, S.J.; Riis, E.; Arnold, A.S. Grating chips for quantum technologies. Sci. Rep. 2017,
7, 384.
266.
Singh, V.; Tiwari, V.; Chaudhary, A.; Shukla, R.; Mukherjee, C.; Mishra, S. Development and characterization of atom chip for
magnetic trapping of atoms. J. Appl. Phys. 2023, 133.
267.
Cooper, N.; Coles, L.; Everton, S.; Maskery, I.; Campion, R.; Madkhaly, S.; Morley, C.; O’Shea, J.; Evans, W.; Saint, R.; et al.
Additively manufactured ultra-high vacuum chamber for portable quantum technologies. Addit. Manuf. 2021, 40, 101898.
268.
Fortágh, J.; Zimmermann, C. Magnetic microtraps for ultracold atoms. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2007, 79, 235.
269.
Rushton, J.; Aldous, M.; Himsworth, M. Contributed review: The feasibility of a fully miniaturized magneto-optical trap for
portable ultracold quantum technology. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 2014, 85, 121501.
270.
Ketterle, W.; Druten, N.V. Evaporative Cooling of Trapped Atoms. In Evaporative Cooling of Trapped Atoms; Bederson, B., Walther,
H., Eds.; Advances in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1996; Volume 37,
pp. 181–236.
271.
Rabl, P.; Daley, A.J.; Fedichev, P.O.; Cirac, J.I.; Zoller, P. Defect-Suppressed Atomic Crystals in an Optical Lattice. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2003, 91, 110403. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.110403.
272.
Kantian, A.; Daley, A.J.; Zoller, P. η Condensate of Fermionic Atom Pairs via Adiabatic State Preparation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010,
104, 240406. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.240406.
273.
Müller, M.; Diehl, S.; Pupillo, G.; Zoller, P. Engineered Open Systems and Quantum Simulations with Atoms and Ions. In
Advances in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics; Berman, P., Arimondo, E., Lin, C., Eds.; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA,
USA, 2012; Volume 61, pp. 1–80.
274.
Brossel, J.; Kastler, A.; Winter, J. Gréation optique d’une inégalité de population entre les sous-niveaux Zeeman de l’état
fondamental des atomes. J. Phys. Radium 1952, 13, 668–668.
275.
Cohen-Tannoudji, C.; Kastler, A. In I Optical Pumping; Wolf, E., Ed.; Progress in Optics; Elsevier; Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
1966; Volume 5, pp. 1–81.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
98 of 124
276.
Haller, E.; Hudson, J.; Kelly, A.; Cotta, D.A.; Peaudecerf, B.; Bruce, G.D.; Kuhr, S. Single-atom imaging of fermions in a
quantum-gas microscope. Nat. Phys. 2015, 11, 738–742.
277.
Cheuk, L.W.; Nichols, M.A.; Okan, M.; Gersdorf, T.; Ramasesh, V.V.; Bakr, W.S.; Lompe, T.; Zwierlein, M.W. Quantum-Gas
Microscope for Fermionic Atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 114, 193001. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.193001.
278.
Parsons, M.F.; Huber, F.; Mazurenko, A.; Chiu, C.S.; Setiawan, W.; Wooley-Brown, K.; Blatt, S.; Greiner, M. Site-Resolved Imaging
of Fermionic 6Li in an Optical Lattice. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 114, 213002. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.213002.
279.
McKay, D.C.; DeMarco, B. Cooling in strongly correlated optical lattices: prospects and challenges. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2011,
74, 054401.
280.
Daley, A.J.; Fedichev, P.O.; Zoller, P. Single-atom cooling by superfluid immersion: A nondestructive method for qubits. Phys.
Rev. A 2004, 69, 022306.
281.
Aspect, A.; Arimondo, E.; Kaiser, R.; Vansteenkiste, N.; Cohen-Tannoudji, C. Laser Cooling below the One-Photon Recoil Energy
by Velocity-Selective Coherent Population Trapping. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1988, 61, 826–829.
282.
Kasevich, M.; Chu, S. Laser cooling below a photon recoil with three-level atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1992, 69, 1741–1744.
283.
Griessner, A.; Daley, A.J.; Clark, S.R.; Jaksch, D.; Zoller, P. Dark-State Cooling of Atoms by Superfluid Immersion. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2006, 97, 220403.
284.
Diehl, S.; Micheli, A.; Kantian, A.; Kraus, B.; Büchler, H.P.; Zoller, P. Quantum states and phases in driven open quantum systems
with cold atoms. Nat. Phys. 2008, 4, 878–883.
285.
Kraus, B.; Büchler, H.P.; Diehl, S.; Kantian, A.; Micheli, A.; Zoller, P. Preparation of entangled states by quantum Markov
processes. Phys. Rev. A 2008, 78, 042307.
286.
Diehl, S.; Rico, E.; Baranov, M.A.; Zoller, P. Topology by dissipation in atomic quantum wires. Nat. Phys. 2011, 7, 971–977.
287.
Yago Malo, J.; van Nieuwenburg, E.P.L.; Fischer, M.H.; Daley, A.J. Particle statistics and lossy dynamics of ultracold atoms in
optical lattices. Phys. Rev. A 2018, 97, 053614. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.97.053614.
288.
Daley, A.J.; Taylor, J.M.; Diehl, S.; Baranov, M.; Zoller, P. Atomic Three-Body Loss as a Dynamical Three-Body Interaction. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2009, 102, 040402.
289.
Kantian, A.; Dalmonte, M.; Diehl, S.; Hofstetter, W.; Zoller, P.; Daley, A.J. Atomic Color Superfluid via Three-Body Loss. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2009, 103, 240401.
290.
Sieberer, L.M.; Huber, S.D.; Altman, E.; Diehl, S. Dynamical Critical Phenomena in Driven-Dissipative Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2013, 110, 195301.
291.
Sieberer, L.M.; Huber, S.D.; Altman, E.; Diehl, S. Nonequilibrium functional renormalization for driven-dissipative Bose-Einstein
condensation. Phys. Rev. B 2014, 89, 134310.
292.
Li, Y.; Chen, X.; Fisher, M.P.A. Quantum Zeno effect and the many-body entanglement transition. Phys. Rev. B 2018, 98, 205136.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.98.205136.
293.
Skinner, B.; Ruhman, J.; Nahum, A. Measurement-Induced Phase Transitions in the Dynamics of Entanglement. Phys. Rev. X
2019, 9, 031009. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.9.031009.
294.
Li, Y.; Chen, X.; Fisher, M.P.A. Measurement-driven entanglement transition in hybrid quantum circuits. Phys. Rev. B 2019,
100, 134306. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.100.134306.
295.
Potter, A.C.; Vasseur, R., Entanglement Dynamics in Hybrid Quantum Circuits.
In Entanglement in Spin Chains; Springer
International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2022; pp. 211–249.
296.
Bhattacharyya, A.; Joshi, L.K.; Sundar, B. Quantum information scrambling: from holography to quantum simulators. Eur. Phys.
J. C 2022, 82, 458.
297.
Nassar, A.B.; Miret-Artés, S. Bohmian Mechanics, Open Quantum Systems and Continuous Measurements; Springer International
Publishing: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-53653-8.
298.
Zurek, W.H. Quantum Darwinism. Nat. Phys. 2009, 5, 181–188.
299.
Brandão, F.G.S.L.; Piani, M.; Horodecki, P. Generic emergence of classical features in quantum Darwinism. Nat. Commun. 2015,
6, 7908.
300.
Hirsbrunner, M.R.; Philip, T.M.; Basa, B.; Kim, Y.; Park, M.J.; Gilbert, M.J. A review of modeling interacting transient phenomena
with non-equilibrium Green functions. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2019, 82, 046001. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6633/aafe5f.
301.
Cohen-Tannoudji, C.; Guéry-Odelin, D. Advances in Atomic Physics: An Overview; World Scientific Publishing: Singapore, 2011.
302.
Breuer, H.P.; Petruccione, F. The Theory of Open Quantum Systems; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2002.
303.
Alicki, R.; Lendi, K. Quantum Dynamical Semigroups and Applications; Lecture Notes in Physics; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2007; Volume 717.
304.
Milburn, G.; Wiseman, H. Quantum Measurement and Control; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2009.
305.
Gardiner, C.W. Quantum Noise; Springer series in synergetics; Springer-Verlag: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1991.
306.
Carmichael, H. An Open Systems Approach to Quantum Optics; Lecture Notes in Physics Monographs; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 1993; Volume 18. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-47620-7.
307.
Gardiner, C.; Zoller, P. Quantum Noise: A Handbook of Markovian and Non-Markovian Quantum Stochastic Methods with Applications
to Quantum Optics; Springer Series in Synergetics; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2004.
308.
Barchielli, A.; Belavkin, V.P. Measurements continuous in time and a posteriori states in quantum mechanics. J. Phys. A Math.
Gen. 1991, 24, 1495. https://doi.org/10.1088/0305-4470/24/7/022.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
99 of 124
309.
Plenio, M.B.; Knight, P.L. The quantum-jump approach to dissipative dynamics in quantum optics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1998,
70, 101–144. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.70.101.
310.
Clerk, A.A.; Devoret, M.H.; Girvin, S.M.; Marquardt, F.; Schoelkopf, R.J. Introduction to quantum noise, measurement, and
amplification. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2010, 82, 1155–1208. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.82.1155.
311.
Dalibard, J.; Castin, Y.; Mølmer, K. Wave-function approach to dissipative processes in quantum optics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1992,
68, 580–583. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.68.580.
312.
Mølmer, K.; Castin, Y.; Dalibard, J. Monte Carlo wave-function method in quantum optics. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 1993, 10, 524–538.
https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAB.10.000524.
313.
Dum, R.; Zoller, P.; Ritsch, H. Monte Carlo simulation of the atomic master equation for spontaneous emission. Phys. Rev. A
1992, 45, 4879–4887. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.45.4879.
314.
Dum, R.; Parkins, A.S.; Zoller, P.; Gardiner, C.W. Monte Carlo simulation of master equations in quantum optics for vacuum,
thermal, and squeezed reservoirs. Phys. Rev. A 1992, 46, 4382–4396. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.46.4382.
315.
Bergquist, J.C.; Hulet, R.G.; Itano, W.M.; Wineland, D.J. Observation of Quantum Jumps in a Single Atom. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1986,
57, 1699–1702. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.57.1699.
316.
Nagourney, W.; Sandberg, J.; Dehmelt, H. Shelved optical electron amplifier: Observation of quantum jumps. Phys. Rev. Lett.
1986, 56, 2797–2799. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.56.2797.
317.
Sauter, T.; Neuhauser, W.; Blatt, R.; Toschek, P.E. Observation of Quantum Jumps.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1986, 57, 1696–1698.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.57.1696.
318.
Yu, Y.; Zhu, S.L.; Sun, G.; Wen, X.; Dong, N.; Chen, J.; Wu, P.; Han, S. Quantum Jumps between Macroscopic Quantum
States of a Superconducting Qubit Coupled to a Microscopic Two-Level System. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 101, 157001. https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.157001.
319.
Vamivakas, A.N.; Lu, C.Y.; Matthiesen, C.; Zhao, Y.; Fält, S.; Badolato, A.; Atatüre, M. Observation of spin-dependent quantum
jumps via quantum dot resonance fluorescence. Nature 2010, 467, 297–300.
320.
Minev, Z.K.; Mundhada, S.O.; Shankar, S.; Reinhold, P.; Gutiérrez-Jáuregui, R.; Schoelkopf, R.J.; Mirrahimi, M.; Carmichael, H.J.;
Devoret, M.H. To catch and reverse a quantum jump mid-flight. Nature 2019, 570, 200–204. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019
-1287-z.
321.
Wiseman, H.M. Quantum Trajectories and Feedback. PhD Thesis, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, 1994.
322.
Belavkin, V.P. Quantum stochastic semigroups and their generators. In Irreversibility and Causality Semigroups and Rigged Hilbert
Spaces; Bohm, A., Doebner, H.D., Kielanowski, P., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1998; pp. 82–109.
323.
Barchielli, A. Direct and heterodyne detection and other applications of quantum stochastic calculus to quantum optics. Quantum
Opt. J. Eur. Opt. Soc. Part B 1990, 2, 423. https://doi.org/10.1088/0954-8998/2/6/002.
324.
Wiseman, H.M.; Milburn, G.J. Quantum theory of optical feedback via homodyne detection. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 70, 548–551.
325.
Wiseman, H.M. Quantum theory of continuous feedback. Phys. Rev. A 1994, 49, 2133–2150. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.
49.2133.
326.
Murch, K.W.; Weber, S.J.; Macklin, C.; Siddiqi, I. Observing single quantum trajectories of a superconducting quantum bit.
Nature 2013, 502, 211–214. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12539.
327.
Hatridge, M.; Shankar, S.; Mirrahimi, M.; Schackert, F.; Geerlings, K.; Brecht, T.; Sliwa, K.M.; Abdo, B.; Frunzio, L.; Girvin,
S.M.; et al.
Quantum Back-Action of an Individual Variable-Strength Measurement.
Science 2013, 339, 178–181.
https:
//doi.org/10.1126/science.1226897.
328.
Wiseman, H. Using feedback to eliminate back-action in quantum measurements. Phys. Rev. A 1995, 51, 2459.
329.
Korotkov, A.N. Simple quantum feedback of a solid-state qubit. Phys. Rev. B 2005, 71, 201305.
330.
Korotkov, A.N.; Jordan, A.N. Undoing a Weak Quantum Measurement of a Solid-State Qubit. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97, 166805.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.97.166805.
331.
de Lange, G.; Ristè, D.; Tiggelman, M.J.; Eichler, C.; Tornberg, L.; Johansson, G.; Wallraff, A.; Schouten, R.N.; DiCarlo, L.
Reversing Quantum Trajectories with Analog Feedback.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 112, 080501.
https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.112.080501.
332.
Brun, T.A. A simple model of quantum trajectories. Am. J. Phys. 2002, 70, 719–737. https://doi.org/10.1119/1.1475328.
333.
Scarani, V.; Ziman, M.; Štelmachoviˇc, P.; Gisin, N.; Bužek, V. Thermalizing Quantum Machines: Dissipation and Entanglement.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 88, 097905. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.88.097905.
334.
Ciccarello, F.; Lorenzo, S.; Giovannetti, V.; Palma, G.M. Quantum collision models: Open system dynamics from repeated
interactions. Phys. Rep. 2022, 954, 1–70.
335.
Campbell, S.; Vacchini, B. Collision models in open system dynamics: A versatile tool for deeper insights? Europhys. Lett. 2021,
133, 60001.
336.
Rau, J. Relaxation Phenomena in Spin and Harmonic Oscillator Systems. Phys. Rev. 1963, 129, 1880–1888. https://doi.org/10.1
103/PhysRev.129.1880.
337.
Facchi, P.; Marzolino, U.; Parisi, G.; Pascazio, S.; Scardicchio, A. Phase Transitions of Bipartite Entanglement. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2008, 101, 050502. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.050502.
338.
Tian, F.; Zou, J.; Li, L.; Li, H.; Shao, B. Effect of Inter-System Coupling on Heat Transport in a Microscopic Collision Model.
Entropy 2021, 23, 471.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
100 of 124
339.
Chisholm, D.A.; García-Pérez, G.; Rossi, M.A.C.; Palma, G.M.; Maniscalco, S. Stochastic collision model approach to transport
phenomena in quantum networks. New J. Phys. 2021, 23, 033031.
340.
Cakmak, B.; Campbell, S.; Vacchini, B.; Müstecaplıo˘glu, O.E.; Paternostro, M. Robust multipartite entanglement generation via a
collision model. Phys. Rev. A 2019, 99, 012319. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.99.012319.
341.
Rybár, T.; Filippov, S.N.; Ziman, M.; Bužek, V. Simulation of indivisible qubit channels in collision models. J. Phys. B At. Mol.
Opt. Phys. 2012, 45, 154006. https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-4075/45/15/154006.
342.
Ciccarello, F.; Palma, G.M.; Giovannetti, V. Collision-model-based approach to non-Markovian quantum dynamics. Phys. Rev. A
2013, 87, 040103. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.87.040103.
343.
Rivas, Á.; Huelga, S.F.; Plenio, M.B. Quantum non-Markovianity: characterization, quantification and detection. Rep. Prog. Phys.
2014, 77, 094001.
344.
Breuer, H.P.; Laine, E.M.; Piilo, J.; Vacchini, B. Colloquium: Non-Markovian dynamics in open quantum systems. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 2016, 88, 021002. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.88.021002.
345.
de Vega, I.; Alonso, D. Dynamics of non-Markovian open quantum systems.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 2017, 89, 015001.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.89.015001.
346.
Li, L.; Hall, M.J.; Wiseman, H.M. Concepts of quantum non-Markovianity: A hierarchy. Phys. Rep. 2018, 759, 1–51.
347.
Breuer, H.P. Foundations and measures of quantum non-Markovianity. J. Phys. B At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 2012, 45, 154001.
348.
Guo, Y.; Kroeze, R.M.; Marsh, B.P.; Gopalakrishnan, S.; Keeling, J.; Lev, B.L. An optical lattice with sound.
Nature 2021,
599, 211–215.
349.
Maldacena, J.; Shenker, S.H.; Stanford, D. A bound on chaos. J. High Energy Phys. 2016, 2016, 106.
350.
Preskill, J. Quantum Shannon Theory. arXiv 2016, arXiv:1604.07450.
351.
Jaksch, D.; Zoller, P. The cold atom Hubbard toolbox. Ann. Phys. 2005, 315, 52–79.
352.
Navarrete-Benlloch, C.; de Vega, I.; Porras, D.; Cirac, J.I. Simulating quantum-optical phenomena with cold atoms in optical
lattices. New J. Phys. 2011, 13, 023024.
353.
Schön, G.; Zaikin, A. Quantum coherent effects, phase transitions, and the dissipative dynamics of ultra small tunnel junctions.
Phys. Rep. 1990, 198, 237–412.
354.
Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Dupont-Roc, G.G. Atom-Photon Interactions: Basic Processes and Applications; Wiley: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 1992.
355.
Whitney, R.S. Staying positive: Going beyond Lindblad with perturbative master equations. J. Phys. A Math. Theor. 2008,
41, 175304.
356.
Li, A.C.Y.; Petruccione, F.; Koch, J. Resummation for Nonequilibrium Perturbation Theory and Application to Open Quantum
Lattices. Phys. Rev. X 2016, 6, 021037. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.6.021037.
357.
Piilo, J.; Härkönen, K.; Maniscalco, S.; Suominen, K.A. Open system dynamics with non-Markovian quantum jumps. Phys. Rev.
A 2009, 79, 062112. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.79.062112.
358.
Diósi, L.; Gisin, N.; Strunz, W.T. Non-Markovian quantum state diffusion.
Phys. Rev. A 1998, 58, 1699–1712.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.58.1699.
359.
Hartmann, R.; Strunz, W.T. Exact Open Quantum System Dynamics Using the Hierarchy of Pure States (HOPS). J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 2017, 13, 5834–5845.
360.
Ishizaki, A.; Fleming, G.R. Unified treatment of quantum coherent and incoherent hopping dynamics in electronic energy
transfer: Reduced hierarchy equation approach. J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 130, 234111.
361.
Engel, G.S.; Calhoun, T.R.; Read, E.L.; Ahn, T.K.; Manˇcal, T.; Cheng, Y.C.; Blankenship, R.E.; Fleming, G.R. Evidence for wavelike
energy transfer through quantum coherence in photosynthetic systems. Nature 2007, 446, 782–786.
362.
Lu, X.M.; Wang, X.; Sun, C.P. Quantum Fisher information flow and non-Markovian processes of open systems. Phys. Rev. A
2010, 82, 042103. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.82.042103.
363.
Breuer, H.P.; Laine, E.M.; Piilo, J. Measure for the Degree of Non-Markovian Behavior of Quantum Processes in Open Systems.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 103, 210401. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.103.210401.
364.
White, S.R. Density matrix formulation for quantum renormalization groups. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1992, 69, 2863–2866.
365.
White, S.R. Density-matrix algorithms for quantum renormalization groups. Phys. Rev. B 1993, 48, 10345–10356.
366.
Östlund, S.; Rommer, S. Thermodynamic Limit of Density Matrix Renormalization. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1995, 75, 3537–3540.
367.
Rommer, S.; Östlund, S. Class of ansatz wave functions for one-dimensional spin systems and their relation to the density matrix
renormalization group. Phys. Rev. B 1997, 55, 2164–2181.
368.
Vidal, G. Efficient Classical Simulation of Slightly Entangled Quantum Computations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 91, 147902.
369.
Daley, A.J.; Kollath, C.; Schollwöck, U.; Vidal, G. Time-dependent density-matrix renormalization-group using adaptive effective
Hilbert spaces. J. Stat. Mech. Theory Exp. 2004, 2004, P04005.
370.
White, S.R.; Feiguin, A.E. Real-Time Evolution Using the Density Matrix Renormalization Group.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004,
93, 076401.
371.
Eisert, J.; Cramer, M.; Plenio, M.B. Colloquium: Area laws for the entanglement entropy. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2010, 82, 277–306.
https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.82.277.
372.
Page, D.N. Average entropy of a subsystem. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 71, 1291–1294. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.71.1291.
373.
Verstraete, F.; García-Ripoll, J.J.; Cirac, J.I. Matrix Product Density Operators: Simulation of Finite-Temperature and Dissipative
Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 93, 207204. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.93.207204.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
101 of 124
374.
Pirvu, B.; Murg, V.; Cirac, J.I.; Verstraete, F. Matrix product operator representations. New J. Phys. 2010, 12, 025012.
375.
Wall, M.L.; Carr, L.D. Out-of-equilibrium dynamics with matrix product states. New J. Phys. 2012, 14, 125015.
376.
Verstraete, F.; Murg, V.; Cirac, J. Matrix product states, projected entangled pair states, and variational renormalization group
methods for quantum spin systems. Adv. Phys. 2008, 57, 143–224.
377.
Schollwöck, U. The density-matrix renormalization group in the age of matrix product states. Ann. Phys. 2011, 326, 96 – 192.
378.
Cirac, J.I.; Pérez-García, D.; Schuch, N.; Verstraete, F. Matrix product states and projected entangled pair states: Concepts,
symmetries, theorems. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2021, 93, 045003. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.93.045003.
379.
Orús, R. Tensor networks for complex quantum systems. Nat. Rev. Phys. 2019, 1, 538–550.
380.
Nielsen, M.A.; Chuang, I.L. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information: 10th Anniversary Edition; Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge, UK, 2010.
381.
Malo, J.Y. Dissipative Engineering of Cold Atoms in Optical Lattices. University of Strathclyde. 2019.
Available online:
http://localhost/files/g732d907d (accessed on 26 August 2021).
382.
Zauner, V.; Draxler, D.; Vanderstraeten, L.; Degroote, M.; Haegeman, J.; Rams, M.M.; Stojevic, V.; Schuch, N.; Verstraete, F.
Transfer matrices and excitations with matrix product states. New J. Phys. 2015, 17, 053002.
383.
Van Damme, M.; Vanhove, R.; Haegeman, J.; Verstraete, F.; Vanderstraeten, L. Efficient matrix product state methods for
extracting spectral information on rings and cylinders. Phys. Rev. B 2021, 104, 115142. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.104.
115142.
384.
Yu, X.; Pekker, D.; Clark, B.K. Finding Matrix Product State Representations of Highly Excited Eigenstates of Many-Body
Localized Hamiltonians. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 118, 017201. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.017201.
385.
Dutta, S.; Buyskikh, A.; Daley, A.J.; Mueller, E.J. Density Matrix Renormalization Group for Continuous Quantum Systems.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2022, 128, 230401. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.128.230401.
386.
Pirvu, B.; Vidal, G.; Verstraete, F.; Tagliacozzo, L. Matrix product states for critical spin chains: Finite-size versus finite-
entanglement scaling. Phys. Rev. B 2012, 86, 075117. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.86.075117.
387.
Milsted, A.; Haegeman, J.; Osborne, T.J. Matrix product states and variational methods applied to critical quantum field theory.
Phys. Rev. D 2013, 88, 085030. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.88.085030.
388.
Haegeman, J.; Cirac, J.I.; Osborne, T.J.; Pižorn, I.; Verschelde, H.; Verstraete, F. Time-Dependent Variational Principle for
Quantum Lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 107, 070601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.107.070601.
389.
Haegeman, J.; Lubich, C.; Oseledets, I.; Vandereycken, B.; Verstraete, F. Unifying time evolution and optimization with matrix
product states. Phys. Rev. B 2016, 94, 165116. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.94.165116.
390.
Cui, J.; Cirac, J.I.; Bañuls, M.C. Variational Matrix Product Operators for the Steady State of Dissipative Quantum Systems. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2015, 114, 220601.
391.
Strathearn, A.; Kirton, P.; Kilda, D.; Keeling, J.; Lovett, B.W. Efficient non-Markovian quantum dynamics using time-evolving
matrix product operators. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 3322.
392.
Flannigan, S.; Damanet, F.; Daley, A.J. Many-Body Quantum State Diffusion for Non-Markovian Dynamics in Strongly Interacting
Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2022, 128, 063601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.128.063601.
393.
Weimer, H.; Kshetrimayum, A.; Orús, R. Simulation methods for open quantum many-body systems. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2021,
93, 015008. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.93.015008.
394.
Vidal, G. Entanglement Renormalization. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 99, 220405. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.99.220405.
395.
Kadow, W.; Pollmann, F.; Knap, M. Isometric tensor network representations of two-dimensional thermal states. Phys. Rev. B
2023, 107, 205106. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.107.205106.
396.
Felser, T.; Notarnicola, S.; Montangero, S. Efficient Tensor Network Ansatz for High-Dimensional Quantum Many-Body
Problems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2021, 126, 170603. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.170603.
397.
Yang, L.P.; Fu, Y.F.; Xie, Z.Y.; Xiang, T. Efficient calculation of three-dimensional tensor networks. Phys. Rev. B 2023, 107, 165127.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.107.165127.
398.
Bañuls, M.C. Tensor Network Algorithms: A Route Map. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 2023, 14, 173–191.
399.
Zohar, E. Quantum simulation of lattice gauge theories in more than one space dimension—Requirements, challenges and
methods. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 2022, 380, 20210069.
400.
Chanda, T.; Zakrzewski, J.; Lewenstein, M.; Tagliacozzo, L. Confinement and Lack of Thermalization after Quenches in the
Bosonic Schwinger Model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 124, 180602. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.180602.
401.
Bañuls, M.C.; Cichy, K. Review on novel methods for lattice gauge theories.
Rep. Prog. Phys. 2020, 83, 024401.
https:
//doi.org/10.1088/1361-6633/ab6311.
402.
Shachar, T.; Zohar, E. Approximating relativistic quantum field theories with continuous tensor networks. Phys. Rev. D 2022,
105, 045016. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.105.045016.
403.
Jahn, A.; Eisert, J. Holographic tensor network models and quantum error correction: a topical review. Quantum Sci. Technol.
2021, 6, 033002.
404.
Gasull, A.; Tilloy, A.; Cirac, J.I.; Sierra, G. Symmetries and field tensor network states.
Phys. Rev. B 2023, 107, 155102.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.107.155102.
405.
Huang, R.Z.; Zhang, L.; Läuchli, A.M.; Haegeman, J.; Verstraete, F.; Vanderstraeten, L. Emergent conformal boundaries from
finite-entanglement scaling in matrix product states. arXiv 2023. arXiv:2306.08163.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
102 of 124
406.
Bañuls, M.C.; Garrahan, J.P. Using Matrix Product States to Study the Dynamical Large Deviations of Kinetically Constrained
Models. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 123, 200601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.200601.
407.
Yang, Y.; Iblisdir, S.; Cirac, J.I.; Bañuls, M.C. Probing Thermalization through Spectral Analysis with Matrix Product Operators.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 124, 100602. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.100602.
408.
Cheng, S.; Cao, C.; Zhang, C.; Liu, Y.; Hou, S.Y.; Xu, P.; Zeng, B. Simulating noisy quantum circuits with matrix product density
operators. Phys. Rev. Res. 2021, 3, 023005. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.3.023005.
409.
Lanyon, B.P.; Maier, C.; Holzäpfel, M.; Baumgratz, T.; Hempel, C.; Jurcevic, P.; Dhand, I.; Buyskikh, A.S.; Daley, A.J.; Cramer, M.;
et al. Efficient tomography of a quantum many-body system. Nat. Phys. 2017, 13, 1158–1162.
410.
Guo, Y.; Yang, S. Quantum Error Mitigation via Matrix Product Operators. PRX Quantum 2022, 3, 040313. https://doi.org/10.1
103/PRXQuantum.3.040313.
411.
Wall, M.L.; Titum, P.; Quiroz, G.; Foss-Feig, M.; Hazzard, K.R.A. Tensor-network discriminator architecture for classification of
quantum data on quantum computers. Phys. Rev. A 2022, 105, 062439. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.105.062439.
412.
Schiffer, B.F.; Tura, J.; Cirac, J.I. Adiabatic Spectroscopy and a Variational Quantum Adiabatic Algorithm. PRX Quantum 2022,
3, 020347. https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.3.020347.
413.
Napp, J.C.; La Placa, R.L.; Dalzell, A.M.; Brandão, F.G.S.L.; Harrow, A.W. Efficient Classical Simulation of Random Shallow 2D
Quantum Circuits. Phys. Rev. X 2022, 12, 021021. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.12.021021.
414.
Carleo, G.; Troyer, M. Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural networks. Science 2017, 355, 602–606.
415.
Melko, R.G.; Carleo, G.; Carrasquilla, J.; Cirac, J.I. Restricted Boltzmann machines in quantum physics. Nat. Phys. 2019,
15, 887–892.
416.
Huang, H.Y.; Kueng, R.; Torlai, G.; Albert, V.V.; Preskill, J. Provably efficient machine learning for quantum many-body problems.
Science 2022, 377, eabk3333.
417.
Chen, J.; Cheng, S.; Xie, H.; Wang, L.; Xiang, T. Equivalence of restricted Boltzmann machines and tensor network states. Phys.
Rev. B 2018, 97, 085104. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.97.085104.
418.
Huggins, W.; Patil, P.; Mitchell, B.; Whaley, K.B.; Stoudenmire, E.M. Towards quantum machine learning with tensor networks.
Quantum Sci. Technol. 2019, 4, 024001.
419.
Sharir, O.; Shashua, A.; Carleo, G. Neural tensor contractions and the expressive power of deep neural quantum states. Phys.
Rev. B 2022, 106, 205136. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.106.205136.
420.
Ganahl, M.; Beall, J.; Hauru, M.; Lewis, A.G.; Wojno, T.; Yoo, J.H.; Zou, Y.; Vidal, G. Density Matrix Renormalization Group with
Tensor Processing Units. PRX Quantum 2023, 4, 010317. https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.4.010317.
421.
Xu, L.; Cheng, L.; Wong, N.; Wu, Y.C. Tensor train factorization under noisy and incomplete data with automatic rank estimation.
Pattern Recognit. 2023, 141, 109650.
422.
Hur, Y.; Hoskins, J.G.; Lindsey, M.; Stoudenmire, E.M.; Khoo, Y. Generative modeling via tensor train sketching. arXiv 2022.
arXiv:2202.11788.
423.
Ghosh, S.K.; Ghosh, D. Machine learning matrix product state ansatz for strongly correlated systems. J. Chem. Phys. 2023,
158, 064108.
424.
Derbyshire, E.; Malo, J.Y.; Daley, A.J.; Kashefi, E.; Wallden, P. Randomized benchmarking in the analogue setting. Quantum Sci.
Technol. 2020, 5, 034001.
425.
Argüello-Luengo, J.; González-Tudela, A.; Shi, T.; Zoller, P.; Cirac, J.I. Analogue quantum chemistry simulation. Nature 2019,
574, 215–218.
426.
Lubasch, M.; Joo, J.; Moinier, P.; Kiffner, M.; Jaksch, D. Variational quantum algorithms for nonlinear problems. Phys. Rev. A
2020, 101, 010301. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.101.010301.
427.
Cao, Y.; Romero, J.; Olson, J.P.; Degroote, M.; Johnson, P.D.; Kieferová, M.; Kivlichan, I.D.; Menke, T.; Peropadre, B.; Sawaya,
N.P.D.; et al. Quantum Chemistry in the Age of Quantum Computing. Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856–10915.
428.
Baiardi, A.; Reiher, M. The density matrix renormalization group in chemistry and molecular physics: Recent developments and
new challenges. J. Chem. Phys. 2020, 152, 040903.
429.
Pollet, L. Recent developments in quantum Monte Carlo simulations with applications for cold gases. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2012,
75, 094501.
430.
Sieberer, L.M.; Buchhold, M.; Diehl, S. Keldysh field theory for driven open quantum systems. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2016, 79, 096001.
431.
Sánchez-Soto, L.L.; Monzón, J.J.; Barriuso, A.G.; Cariñena, J.F. The transfer matrix: A geometrical perspective. Phys. Rep. 2012,
513, 191–227.
432.
Haegeman, J.; Verstraete, F. Diagonalizing Transfer Matrices and Matrix Product Operators: A Medley of Exact and Computa-
tional Methods. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 2017, 8, 355–406.
433.
Sinatra, A.; Lobo, C.; Castin, Y. The truncated Wigner method for Bose-condensed gases: limits of validity and applications. J.
Phys. B At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 2002, 35, 3599. https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-4075/35/17/301.
434.
Polkovnikov, A. Phase space representation of quantum dynamics. Ann. Phys. 2010, 325, 1790–1852.
435.
Motta, M.; Rice, J.E. Emerging quantum computing algorithms for quantum chemistry. WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci. 2022, 12, e1580.
https://doi.org/10.1002/wcms.1580.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
103 of 124
436.
Blunt, N.S.; Camps, J.; Crawford, O.; Izsák, R.; Leontica, S.; Mirani, A.; Moylett, A.E.; Scivier, S.A.; Sünderhauf, C.; Schopf, P.;
et al. Perspective on the Current State-of-the-Art of Quantum Computing for Drug Discovery Applications. J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 2022, 18, 7001–7023. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.2c00574.
437.
Orús, R.; Mugel, S.; Lizaso, E. Quantum computing for finance: Overview and prospects.
Rev. Phys. 2019, 4, 100028.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revip.2019.100028.
438.
Biamonte, J.; Wittek, P.; Pancotti, N.; Rebentrost, P.; Wiebe, N.; Lloyd, S. Quantum machine learning. Nature 2017, 549, 195–202.
439.
Shor, P.W. Polynomial-Time Algorithms for Prime Factorization and Discrete Logarithms on a Quantum Computer. SIAM J.
Comput. 1997, 26, 1484–1509. https://doi.org/10.1137/s0097539795293172.
440.
Bharti, K.; Cervera-Lierta, A.; Kyaw, T.H.; Haug, T.; Alperin-Lea, S.; Anand, A.; Degroote, M.; Heimonen, H.; Kottmann, J.S.;
Menke, T.; et al. Noisy intermediate-scale quantum algorithms. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2022, 94, 015004. https://doi.org/10.1103/
RevModPhys.94.015004.
441.
DiVincenzo, D.P. The Physical Implementation of Quantum Computation. Fortschritte Der Phys. 2000, 48, 771–783. https:
//doi.org/10.1002/1521-3978(200009)48:9/11<771::AID-PROP771>3.0.CO;2-E.
442.
Preskill, J. Quantum Computing in the NISQ era and beyond. Quantum 2018, 2, 79. https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2018-08-06-79.
443.
Gill, S.S.; Kumar, A.; Singh, H.; Singh, M.; Kaur, K.; Usman, M.; Buyya, R. Quantum computing: A taxonomy, systematic review
and future directions. Softw. Pract. Exp. 2022, 52, 66–114.
444.
Escofet, P.; Rached, S.B.; Rodrigo, S.; Almudever, C.G.; Alarcón, E.; Abadal, S. Interconnect Fabrics for Multi-Core Quantum
Processors: A Context Analysis.
In Proceedings of the 16th International Workshop on Network on Chip Architectures,
NoCArc’23, Toronto, ON, Canada, 28 October 2023; pp. 34–39. https://doi.org/10.1145/3610396.3623267.
445.
Singh, A.; Dev, K.; Siljak, H.; Joshi, H.D.; Magarini, M. Quantum Internet—Applications, Functionalities, Enabling Technologies,
Challenges, and Research Directions. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 2021, 23, 2218–2247. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2021
.3109944.
446.
Shor, P.W. Scheme for reducing decoherence in quantum computer memory. Phys. Rev. A 1995, 52, R2493–R2496. https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.52.R2493.
447.
Terhal, B.M. Quantum error correction for quantum memories. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2015, 87, 307–346. https://doi.org/10.1103/
RevModPhys.87.307.
448.
Aharonov, D.; Ben-Or, M. Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computation with Constant Error Rate. SIAM J. Comput. 2008, 38, 1207–1282.
https://doi.org/10.1137/S0097539799359385.
449.
Knill, E.; Laflamme, R.; Zurek, W.H. Resilient Quantum Computation. Science 1998, 279, 342–345. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.279.5349.342.
450.
Kitaev, A. Fault-tolerant quantum computation by anyons. Ann. Phys. 2003, 303, 2–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0003-4916(02
)00018-0.
451.
Noiri, A.; Takeda, K.; Nakajima, T.; Kobayashi, T.; Sammak, A.; Scappucci, G.; Tarucha, S. Fast universal quantum gate above the
fault-tolerance threshold in silicon. Nature 2022, 601, 338–342. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04182-y.
452.
Abobeih, M.H.; Wang, Y.; Randall, J.; Loenen, S.J.H.; Bradley, C.E.; Markham, M.; Twitchen, D.J.; Terhal, B.M.; Taminiau, T.H.
Fault-tolerant operation of a logical qubit in a diamond quantum processor. Nature 2022, 606, 884–889. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-022-04819-6.
453.
Sun, K.; Hao, Z.Y.; Wang, Y.; Li, J.K.; Xu, X.Y.; Xu, J.S.; Han, Y.J.; Li, C.F.; Guo, G.C. Optical demonstration of quantum
fault-tolerant threshold. Light Sci. Appl. 2022, 11, 203. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41377-022-00891-9.
454.
Campagne-Ibarcq, P.; Eickbusch, A.; Touzard, S.; Zalys-Geller, E.; Frattini, N.E.; Sivak, V.V.; Reinhold, P.; Puri, S.; Shankar, S.;
Schoelkopf, R.J.; et al. Quantum error correction of a qubit encoded in grid states of an oscillator. Nature 2020, 584, 368–372.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2603-3.
455.
Noh, K.; Chamberland, C. Fault-tolerant bosonic quantum error correction with the surface—Gottesman-Kitaev-Preskill code.
Phys. Rev. A 2020, 101, 012316. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.101.012316.
456.
Bombin, H.; Andrist, R.S.; Ohzeki, M.; Katzgraber, H.G.; Martin-Delgado, M.A. Strong Resilience of Topological Codes to
Depolarization. Phys. Rev. X 2012, 2, 021004. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.2.021004.
457.
Crosson, E.J.; Lidar, D.A. Prospects for quantum enhancement with diabatic quantum annealing. Nat. Rev. Phys. 2021, 3, 466–489.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-021-00313-6.
458.
Egan, L.; Debroy, D.M.; Noel, C.; Risinger, A.; Zhu, D.; Biswas, D.; Newman, M.; Li, M.; Brown, K.R.; Cetina, M.; et al.
Fault-tolerant control of an error-corrected qubit. Nature 2021, 598, 281–286. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03928-y.
459.
Lockwood, O. An Empirical Review of Optimization Techniques for Quantum Variational Circuits. arXiv 2022. arXiv:2202.01389.
460.
Peruzzo, A.; McClean, J.; Shadbolt, P.; Yung, M.H.; Zhou, X.Q.; Love, P.J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; O’brien, J.L. A variational
eigenvalue solver on a photonic quantum processor. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 4213.
461.
Fitzpatrick, A.; Nykänen, A.; Talarico, N.W.; Lunghi, A.; Maniscalco, S.; García-Pérez, G.; Knecht, S. A self-consistent field
approach for the variational quantum eigensolver: orbital optimization goes adaptive. arXiv 2022. arXiv:2212.11405.
462.
Nykänen, A.; Rossi, M.A.C.; Borrelli, E.M.; Maniscalco, S.; García-Pérez, G. Mitigating the measurement overhead of ADAPT-
VQE with optimised informationally complete generalised measurements. arXiv 2022. arXiv:2212.09719.
463.
McClean, J.R.; Romero, J.; Babbush, R.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. The theory of variational hybrid quantum-classical algorithms. New J.
Phys. 2016, 18, 023023. https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/18/2/023023.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
104 of 124
464.
Cerezo, M.; Arrasmith, A.; Babbush, R.; Benjamin, S.C.; Endo, S.; Fujii, K.; McClean, J.R.; Mitarai, K.; Yuan, X.; Cincio, L.; et al.
Variational quantum algorithms. Nat. Rev. Phys. 2021, 3, 625–644. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-021-00348-9.
465.
Kadowaki, T.; Nishimori, H. Quantum annealing in the transverse Ising model. Phys. Rev. E 1998, 58, 5355.
466.
Yarkoni, S.; Raponi, E.; Bäck, T.; Schmitt, S. Quantum annealing for industry applications: Introduction and review. Rep. Prog.
Phys. 2022, 85, 104001. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6633/ac8c54.
467.
Edward Farhi, J.G. A Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm. arXiv 2014. arXiv:1411.4028.
468.
Khan, S.U.; Awan, A.J.; Vall-Llosera, G. K-means clustering on noisy intermediate scale quantum computers. arXiv 2019.
arXiv:1909.12183.
469.
Ding, C.; Xu, X.Y.; Zhang, S.; Huang, H.L.; Bao, W.S. Evaluating the resilience of variational quantum algorithms to leakage
noise. Phys. Rev. A 2022, 106, 042421.
470.
Fontana, E.; Fitzpatrick, N.; Ramo, D.M.; Duncan, R.; Rungger, I. Evaluating the noise resilience of variational quantum
algorithms. Phys. Rev. A 2021, 104, 022403.
471.
Gentini, L.; Cuccoli, A.; Pirandola, S.; Verrucchi, P.; Banchi, L. Noise-resilient variational hybrid quantum-classical optimization.
Phys. Rev. A 2020, 102, 052414.
472.
Holmes, Z.; Sharma, K.; Cerezo, M.; Coles, P.J. Connecting Ansatz Expressibility to Gradient Magnitudes and Barren Plateaus.
PRX Quantum 2022, 3, 010313. https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.3.010313.
473.
McClean, J.R.; Boixo, S.; Smelyanskiy, V.N.; Babbush, R.; Neven, H. Barren plateaus in quantum neural network training
landscapes. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 4812.
474.
Cerezo, M.; Sone, A.; Volkoff, T.; Cincio, L.; Coles, P.J. Cost function dependent barren plateaus in shallow parametrized
quantum circuits. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 1791.
475.
Sack, S.H.; Medina, R.A.; Michailidis, A.A.; Kueng, R.; Serbyn, M. Avoiding Barren Plateaus Using Classical Shadows. PRX
Quantum 2022, 3, 020365. https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.3.020365.
476.
Lyu, C.; Montenegro, V.; Bayat, A. Accelerated variational algorithms for digital quantum simulation of many-body ground
states. Quantum 2020, 4, 324. https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2020-09-16-324.
477.
Skolik, A.; McClean, J.R.; Mohseni, M.; van der Smagt, P.; Leib, M. Layerwise learning for quantum neural networks. Quantum
Mach. Intell. 2021, 3, 5. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42484-020-00036-4.
478.
Harrow, A.; Napp, J. Low-depth gradient measurements can improve convergence in variational hybrid quantum-classical
algorithms. arXiv 2019. arXiv:1901.05374v1.
479.
Warren, W.S.; Rabitz, H.; Dahleh, M. Coherent control of quantum dynamics: The dream is alive. Science 1993, 259, 1581–1589.
480.
Dong, D.; Petersen, I.R. Quantum control theory and applications: a survey. IET Control. Theory Appl. 2010, 4, 2651–2671.
481.
Rabitz, H.; de Vivie-Riedle, R.; Motzkus, M.; Kompa, K.L. Whither the future of controlling quantum phenomena? Science 2000,
288, 824–828.
482.
Chu, S. Cold atoms and quantum control. Nature 2002, 416, 206–210.
483.
Lloyd, S. Coherent quantum feedback. Phys. Rev. A 2000, 62, 022108.
484.
Ball, H.; Biercuk, M.J.; Carvalho, A.R.; Chen, J.; Hush, M.; De Castro, L.A.; Li, L.; Liebermann, P.J.; Slatyer, H.J.; Edmunds, C.;
et al. Software tools for quantum control: Improving quantum computer performance through noise and error suppression.
Quantum Sci. Technol. 2021, 6, 044011.
485.
Wu, R.; Pechen, A.; Brif, C.; Rabitz, H. Controllability of open quantum systems with Kraus-map dynamics. J. Phys. Math. Theor.
2007, 40, 5681–5693.
486.
Koch, C.P.; Boscain, U.; Calarco, T.; Dirr, G.; Filipp, S.; Glaser, S.J.; Kosloff, R.; Montangero, S.; Schulte-Herbrüggen, T.; Sugny, D.;
et al. Quantum optimal control in quantum technologies. Strategic report on current status, visions and goals for research in
Europe. EPJ Quantum Technol. 2022, 9, 19. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjqt/s40507-022-00138-x.
487.
Dong, D.; Petersen, I.R. Controllability of quantum systems with switching control. Int. J. Control. 2010, 83, 518–525.
488.
Jacobs, K.; Shabani, A. Quantum feedback control: How to use verification theorems and viscosity solutions to find optimal
protocols. Contemp. Phys. 2008, 49, 435–448.
489.
Ludlow, A.D.; Boyd, M.M.; Ye, J.; Peik, E.; Schmidt, P.O.
Optical atomic clocks.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 2015, 87, 637–701.
https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.87.637.
490.
Ye, J.; Kimble, H.J.; Katori, H. Quantum state engineering and precision metrology using state-insensitive light traps. Science
2008, 320, 1734.
491.
Giovannetti, V.; Lloyd, S.; Maccone, L. Advances in quantum metrology. Nat. Photonics 2011, 5, 222.
492.
Mølmer, K.; Sørensen, A. Multiparticle entanglement of hot trapped ions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1999, 82, 1835.
493.
Kasevich, M.A. Coherence with atoms. Science 2002, 298, 1363.
494.
Tino, G.M.; Kasevich, M.A. Atom Interferometry. In Proceedings of the International School of Physics “Enrico Fermi”, Course
CLXXXVIII, Varenna, Italy, 27 June–9 July 1966; Tino, G.M., Kasevich, M.A., Eds.; Società Italiana di Fisica and IOS Press; IOS
Press: Bologna, Italy, 2013.
495.
Bongs, K.; Holynski, M.; Vovrosh, J.; Bouyer, P.; Condon, G.; Rasel, E.; Schubert, C.; Schleich, W.P.; Roura, A.
Taking
atom interferometric quantum sensors from the laboratory to real-world applications.
Nat. Rev. Phys. 2019, 1, 731–739.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-019-0117-4.
496.
Allan, D.W. Statistics of atomic frequency standards. Proc. IEEE 1966, 54, 221–230.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
105 of 124
497.
Silverman, M.P. Neutron Interferometry: Lessons in Experimental Quantum Mechanics, Wave–Particle Duality, and Entangle-
ment. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 2015, 48, 1607–1608. https://doi.org/10.1107/S1600576715014582.
498.
Gerlich, S.; Eibenberger, S.; Tomandl, M.; Nimmrichter, S.; Hornberger, K.; Fagan, P.J.; Tüxen, J.; Mayor, M.; Arndt, M. Quantum
interference of large organic molecules. Nat. Commun. 2011, 2, 263. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms1263.
499.
Kasevich, M.; Chu, S. Atomic interferometry using stimulated Raman transitions.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1991, 67, 181–184.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.67.181.
500.
Cronin, A.D.; Schmiedmayer, J.; Pritchard, D.E. Optics and interferometry with atoms and molecules. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2009,
81, 1051.
501.
Müller, H.; Peters, A.; Chu, S. A precision measurement of the gravitational redshift by the interference of matter waves. Nature
2010, 463, 926.
502.
Graham, P.W.; Hogan, J.M.; Kasevich, M.A.; Rajendran, S. New method for gravitational wave detection with atomic sensors.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, 171102.
503.
Giovannetti, V.; Lloyd, S.; Maccone, L. Quantum metrology. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 96, 010401.
504.
Pezzè, L.; Smerzi, A. Quantum theory of phase estimation. In Atom Interferometry; Tino, G.M., Kasevich, M.A., Eds.; IOS Press;
Bologna, Italy, 2013; p. 691.
505.
Gross, C.; Zibold, T.; Nicklas, E.; Estève, J.; Oberthaler, M.K. Nonlinear atom interferometer surpasses classical precision limit.
Nature 2010, 464, 1165.
506.
Kitagawa, M.; Ueda, M. Squeezed spin states. Phys. Rev. A 1993, 47, 5138.
507.
Walls, D.F. Squeezed states of light. Nature 1983, 306, 141.
508.
Leroux, I.D.; Schleier-Smith, M.H.; Vuleti´c, V. Implementation of Cavity Squeezing of a Collective Atomic Spin. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2010, 104, 073602. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.073602.
509.
Bohnet, J.G.; Cox, K.C.; Norcia, M.A.; Weiner, J.M.; Chen, Z.; Thompson, J.K. Reduced spin measurement back-action for a phase
sensitivity ten times beyond the standard quantum limit. Nat. Photonics 2014, 8, 731.
510.
Norcia, M.A.; Lewis-Swan, R.J.; Cline, J.R.K.; Zhu, B.; Rey, A.M.; Thompson, J.K. Cavity-mediated collective spin-exchange
interactions in a strontium superradiant laser. Science 2018, 361, 259.
511.
Spagnolli, G.; Semeghini, G.; Masi, L.; Ferioli, G.; Trenkwalder, A.; Coop, S.; Landini, M.; Pezzè, L.; Modugno, G.; Inguscio, M.;
et al. Crossing Over from Attractive to Repulsive Interactions in a Tunneling Bosonic Josephson Junction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017,
118, 230403. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.230403.
512.
Baroni, C.; Gori, G.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Trombettoni, A. Effect of Inter-Well Interactions on Non-Linear Beam Splitters for Matter-
Wave Interferometers. Condensed Matter 2020, 5, 31. https://doi.org/10.3390/condmat5020031.
513.
Salvi, L.; Poli, N.; Vuleti´c, V.; Tino, G.M. Squeezing on Momentum States for Atom Interferometry. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018,
120, 033601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.033601.
514.
Luo, C.; Zhang, H.; Koh, V.P.W.; Wilson, J.D.; Chu, A.; Holland, M.J.; Rey, A.M.; Thompson, J.K. Cavity-Mediated Collective
Momentum-Exchange Interactions. arXiv 2023. arXiv:2304.01411.
515.
Shankar, A.; Salvi, L.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Poli, N.; Holland, M.J. Squeezed state metrology with Bragg interferometers operating in a
cavity. Quantum Sci. Technol. 2019, 4, 045010. https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-9565/ab455d.
516.
Wilson, J.D.; Jäger, S.B.; Reilly, J.T.; Shankar, A.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Holland, M.J. Beyond one-axis twisting: Simultaneous
spin-momentum squeezing. Phys. Rev. A 2022, 106, 043711. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.106.043711.
517.
Tóth, G. Multipartite entanglement and high-precision metrology. Phys. Rev. A 2012, 85, 022322. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevA.85.022322.
518.
Hyllus, P.; Laskowski, W.; Krischek, R.; Schwemmer, C.; Wieczorek, W.; Weinfurter, H.; Pezzé, L.; Smerzi, A. Fisher information
and multiparticle entanglement. Phys. Rev. A 2012, 85, 022321.
519.
Ren, Z.; Li, W.; Smerzi, A.; Gessner, M. Metrological Detection of Multipartite Entanglement from Young Diagrams. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2021, 126, 080502. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.080502.
520.
Lepori, L.; Trombettoni, A.; Giuliano, D.; Kombe, J.; Yago Malo, J.; Daley, A.; Smerzi, A.; Chiofalo, M.L. Can multipartite
entanglement be characterized by two-point connected correlation functions? J. Phys. A Math. Theor. 2023, 56, 305302.
521.
Zanardi, P. Quantum entanglement in fermionic lattices. Phys. Rev. A 2002, 65, 042101.
522.
Islam, R.; Ma, R.; Preiss, P.M.; Eric Tai, M.; Lukin, A.; Rispoli, M.; Greiner, M. Measuring entanglement entropy in a quantum
many-body system. Nature 2015, 528, 77–83. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature15750.
523.
Lo Franco, R.; Compagno, G. Quantum entanglement of identical particles by standard information-theoretic notions. Sci. Rep.
2016, 6, 20603.
524.
Hauke, P.; Heyl, M.; Tagliacozzo, L.; Zoller, P. Measuring multipartite entanglement through dynamic susceptibilities. Nat.
Photonics 2016, 12, 778.
525.
Lourenço, A.C.; Debarba, T.; Duzzioni, E.I. Entanglement of indistinguishable particles: A comparative study. Phys. Rev. A 2019,
99, 012341.
526.
Lukin, A.; Rispoli, M.; Schittko, R.; Tai, M.E.; Kaufman, A.M.; Choi, S.; Khemani, V.; Léonard, J.; Greiner, M. Probing
entanglement in a many-body localized system. Science 2019, 364, 256–260. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau0818.
527.
Naldesi, P.; Elben, A.; Minguzzi, A.; Clément, D.; Zoller, P.; Vermersch, B. Fermionic correlation functions from randomized
measurements in programmable atomic quantum devices. arXiv 2022. arXiv:2205.00981.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
106 of 124
528.
Mitchell, M.W.; Palacios Alvarez, S. Colloquium: Quantum limits to the energy resolution of magnetic field sensors. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 2020, 92, 021001. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.92.021001.
529.
Strobel, H.; Muessel, W.; Linnemann, D.; Zibold, T.; Hume, D.B.; Pezzè, L.; Smerzi, A.; Oberthaler, M.K. Fisher information and
entanglement of non-Gaussian spin states. Science 2014, 345, 424–427. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1250147.
530.
Pezzè, L.; Li, Y.; Li, W.; Smerzi, A. Witnessing entanglement without entanglement witness operators. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
2016, 113, 11459–11464. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1603346113.
531.
Aspect, A.; Grangier, P.; Roger, G. Experimental Realization of Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen-Bohm Gedankenexperiment: A New
Violation of Bell’s Inequalities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1982, 49, 91–94. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.49.91.
532.
Aspect, A.; Dalibard, J.; Roger, G. Experimental Test of Bell’s Inequalities Using Time-Varying Analyzers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1982,
49, 1804–1807. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.49.1804.
533.
Greenberger, D.M.; Horne, M.A.; Shimony, A.; Zeilinger, A. Bell’s theorem without inequalities. Am. J. Phys. 1990, 58, 1131–1143.
https://doi.org/10.1119/1.16243.
534.
Weihs, G.; Jennewein, T.; Simon, C.; Weinfurter, H.; Zeilinger, A. Violation of Bell’s Inequality under Strict Einstein Locality
Conditions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1998, 81, 5039–5043. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.81.5039.
535.
Luo, X.Y.; Zou, Y.Q.; Wu, L.N.; Liu, Q.; Han, M.F.; Tey, M.K.; You, L. Deterministic entanglement generation from driving
through quantum phase transitions. Science 2017, 355, 620–623. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aag1106.
536.
Lücke, B.; Scherer, M.; Kruse, J.; Pezzé, L.; Deuretzbacher, F.; Hyllus, P.; Topic, O.; Peise, J.; Ertmer, W.; Arlt, J.; et al. Twin Matter
Waves for Interferometry Beyond the Classical Limit. Science 2011, 334, 773–776. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1208798.
537.
Eckert, K.; Schliemann, J.; Bruß, D.; Lewenstein, M. Quantum correlations in systems of indistinguishable particles. Ann. Phys.
2002, 299, 88.
538.
Gabbrielli, M.; Lepori, L.; Pezzè, L. Multipartite entanglement tomography of a quantum simulator. New J. Phys. 2019, 21, 033039.
539.
Buyskikh, A.S.; Fagotti, M.; Schachenmayer, J.; Essler, F.; Daley, A.J. Entanglement growth and correlation spreading with
variable-range interactions in spin and fermionic tunneling models. Phys. Rev. A 2016, 93, 053620.
540.
Foss-Feig, M.; Gong, Z.X.; Gorshkov, A.; Clark, C. Entanglement and spin-squeezing without infinite-range interactions. arXiv
2016, arXiv:1612.07805.
541.
Szigeti, S.S.; Hosten, O.; Haine, S.A. Improving cold-atom sensors with quantum entanglement: Prospects and challenges. Appl.
Phys. Lett. 2021, 118, 140501. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0050235.
542.
Sachdev, S. Quantum Phase Transitions; Cambridge Press: Cambridge, UK, 2000.
543.
Mukherjee, B.; Shaffer, A.; Patel, P.B.; Yan, Z.; Wilson, C.C.; Crépel, V.; Fletcher, R.J.; Zwierlein, M. Crystallization of bosonic
quantum Hall states in a rotating quantum gas. Nature 2022, 601, 58–62. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04170-2.
544.
Léonard, J.; Kim, S.; Kwan, J.; Segura, P.; Grusdt, F.; Repellin, C.; Goldman, N.; Greiner, M. Realization of a fractional quantum
Hall state with ultracold atoms. Nature 2023, 619, 495–499. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06122-4.
545.
Patel, P.B.; Yan, Z.; Mukherjee, B.; Fletcher, R.J.; Struck, J.; Zwierlein, M.W. Universal sound diffusion in a strongly interacting
Fermi gas. Science 2020, 370, 1222–1226. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaz5756.
546.
Hartke, T.; Oreg, B.; Jia, N.; Zwierlein, M. Doublon-Hole Correlations and Fluctuation Thermometry in a Fermi-Hubbard Gas.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 125, 113601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.113601.
547.
Baroni, C.; Huang, B.; Fritsche, I.; Dobler, E.; Anich, G.; Kirilov, E.; Grimm, R.; Bastarrachea-Magnani, M.A.; Massignan, P.;
Bruun, G.M. Mediated interactions between Fermi polarons and the role of impurity quantum statistics. Nat. Phys. 2023, 20,
68–73. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-023-02248-4.
548.
Strinati, G.C.; Pieri, P.; Röpke, G.; Schuck, P.; Urban, M. The BCS-BEC Crossover: From Ultra-Cold Fermi Gases to Nuclear
Systems. Phys. Rep. 2018, 738, 1–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2018.02.004.
549.
Holland, M.; Kokkelmans, S.J.J.M.F.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Walser, R. Resonance Superfluidity in a Quantum Degenerate Fermi Gas.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2001, 87, 120406. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.87.120406.
550.
Timmermans, E.; Tommasini, P.; Hussein, M.; Kerman, A. Feshbach Resonances in Atomic Bose-Einstein Condensates. Phys.
Rep. 1999, 315, 199–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0370-1573(99)00025-3.
551.
Pitaevskii, L.; Stringari, S. Bose-Einstein Condensation; International Series of Monographs on Physics; Clarendon Press: Oxford,
UK, 2003.
552.
Zwerger, W. The BCS-BEC Crossover and the Unitary Fermi Gas; Lecture Notes in Physics; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany,
2011.
553.
Randeria, M.; Taylor, E. Crossover from Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer to Bose-Einstein Condensation and the Unitary Fermi Gas.
Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 2014, 5, 209–232. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-031113-133829.
554.
Chen, Q.; Stajic, J.; Tan, S.; Levin, K. BCS–BEC crossover: From high temperature superconductors to ultracold superfluids. Phys.
Rep. 2005, 412, 1–88.
555.
Nozieres, P.; Schmitt-Rink, S. Bose condensation in an attractive fermion gas: From weak to strong coupling superconductivity.
J. Low Temp. Phys. 1985, 59, 195–211. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00683774.
556.
Iadonisi, G.; Schrieffer, J.R.; Chiofalo, M.L. (Eds.) Models and Phenomenology for Conventional and High-Temperature Superconductiv-
ity; Proceeding of the International School “Enrico Fermi”, Course CXXXVI; IOS Press: Bologna, Italy, 1998.
557.
Eagles, D.M. Possible Pairing without Superconductivity at Low Carrier Concentrations in Bulk and Thin-Film Superconducting
Semiconductors. Phys. Rev. 1969, 186, 456–463. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.186.456.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
107 of 124
558.
Leggett, A.J. Diatomic Molecules and Cooper Pairs. In Proceedings of the Modern Trends in the Theory of Condensed Matter, Karpacz,
Poland, 19 February–3 March 1979 ; Pkekalski, A., Przystawa, J.A., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1980; pp. 13–27.
559.
Uemura, Y.J.; Le, L.P.; Luke, G.M.; Sternlieb, B.J.; Wu, W.D.; Brewer, J.H.; Riseman, T.M.; Seaman, C.L.; Maple, M.B.; Ishikawa,
M.; et al. Basic Similarities among Cuprate, Bismuthate, Organic, Chevrel-Phase, and Heavy-Fermion Superconductors Shown by
Penetration-Depth Measurements. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1991, 66, 2665–2668. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.66.2665.
560.
Pistolesi, F.; Strinati, G.C. Evolution from BCS superconductivity to Bose condensation: Role of the Parameter kFξ. Phys. Rev. B
1994, 49, 6356–6359. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.49.6356.
561.
Gezerlis, A.; Pethick, C.J.; Schwenk, A. Pairing and superfluidity of nucleaons in neutron stars. arXiv 2014, arXiv:1406.6109.
562.
Schwenk, A.; Pethick, C.J. Resonant Fermi Gases with a Large Effective Range. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 95, 160401. https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.160401.
563.
Regal, C.A.; Jin, D.S. Measurement of Positive and Negative Scattering Lengths in a Fermi Gas of Atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003,
90, 230404. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.90.230404.
564.
Chiofalo, M.L.; Kokkelmans, S.J.J.M.F.; Milstein, J.N.; Holland, M.J. Signatures of Resonance Superfluidity in a Quantum Fermi
Gas. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 88, 090402. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.88.090402.
565.
Kokkelmans, S.J.J.M.F.; Milstein, J.N.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Walser, R.; Holland, M.J. Resonance Superfluidity: Renormalization of
Resonance Scattering Theory. Phys. Rev. A 2002, 65, 053617. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.65.053617.
566.
Regal, C.A.; Ticknor, C.; Bohn, J.L.; Jin, D.S. Creation of ultracold molecules from a Fermi gas of atoms. Nature 2003, 424, 47–50.
567.
Regal, C.A.; Greiner, M.; Jin, D.S. Observation of Resonance Condensation of Fermionic Atom Pairs. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004,
92, 040403. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.92.040403.
568.
Zwierlein, M.W.; Abo-Shaeer, J.R.; Schirotzek, A.; Schunck, C.H.; Ketterle, W. Vortices and superfluidity in a strongly interacting
Fermi gas. Nature 2005, 435, 1047–1051. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03858.
569.
Adhikari, S.K.; Salasnich, L. Vortex lattice in the crossover of a Bose gas from weak coupling to unitarity. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 8825.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-27146-1.
570.
Hoffmann, D.K.; Singh, V.P.; Paintner, T.; Jäger, M.; Limmer, W.; Mathey, L.; Hecker Denschlag, J. Second sound in the
crossover from the Bose-Einstein condensate to the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer superfluid.
Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 7074.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27149-z.
571.
He, M.; Lv, C.; Lin, H.Q.; Zhou, Q. Universal relations for ultracold reactive molecules.
Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, eabd4699.
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abd4699.
572.
Gao, X.Y.; Blume, D.; Yan, Y. Temperature-Dependent Contact of Weakly Interacting Single-Component Fermi Gases and Loss
Rate of Degenerate Polar Molecules. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2023, 131, 043401. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.131.043401.
573.
Tobias, W.G.; Matsuda, K.; Li, J.R.; Miller, C.; Carroll, A.N.; Bilitewski, T.; Rey, A.M.; Ye, J. Reactions between layer-resolved
molecules mediated by dipolar spin exchange. Science 2022, 375, 1299–1303. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abn8525.
574.
Li, J.R.; Matsuda, K.; Miller, C.; Carroll, A.N.; Tobias, W.G.; Higgins, J.S.; Ye, J. Tunable itinerant spin dynamics with polar
molecules. Nature 2023, 614, 70–74.
575.
Hartke, T.; Oreg, B.; Turnbaugh, C.; Jia, N.; Zwierlein, M. Direct observation of nonlocal fermion pairing in an attractive
Fermi-Hubbard gas. Science 2023, 381, 82–86. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.ade4245.
576.
Xu, M.; Kendrick, L.H.; Kale, A.; Gang, Y.; Ji, G.; Scalettar, R.T.; Lebrat, M.; Greiner, M. Frustration- and doping-induced
magnetism in a Fermi–Hubbard simulator. Nature 2023, 620, 971–976. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06280-5.
577.
Bourdel, T.; Khaykovich, L.; Cubizolles, J.; Zhang, J.; Chevy, F.; Teichmann, M.; Tarruell, L.; Kokkelmans, S.J.J.M.; Salomon, C.
Experimental Study of the BEC-BCS Crossover Region in Lithium 6. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 93, 050401.
578.
Jochim, S.; Bartenstein, M.; Altmeyer, A.; Hendl, G.; Riedl, S.; Chin, C.; Denschlag, J.H.; Grimm, R. Bose-Einstein condensation
of molecules. Science 2003, 302, 2101.
579.
Bonetti, P.M.; Chiofalo, M.L. Local-field Theory of the BCS-BEC Crossover. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1908.10648.
580.
Chen, Q.; Kosztin, I.; Jankó, B.; Levin, K. Phase separation and vortex states in rotating trapped Bose-Einstein condensates. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 1998, 81, 4708.
581.
Pieri, P.; Pisani, L.; Strinati, G.C. BCS-BEC Crossover at Finite Temperature in the Broken-Symmetry Phase. Phys. Rev. B 2004,
70, 094508. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.70.094508.
582.
Perali, A.; Pieri, P.; Pisani, L.; Strinati, G.C. Pseudogap, superfluidity, and BCS-BEC crossover in a trapped Fermi gas. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2004, 92, 220404.
583.
Haussmann, R.; Rantner, W.; Cerrito, S.; Zwerger, W. Thermodynamics of the BCS-BEC crossover. Phys. Rev. A 2007, 75, 023610.
584.
Chiofalo, M.L.; Giorgini, S.; Holland, M. Released Momentum Distribution of a Fermi Gas in the BCS-BEC Crossover. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2006, 97, 070404. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.97.070404.
585.
Astrakharchik, G.E.; Boronat, J.; Casulleras, J.; Giorgini, S. Equation of State of a Fermi Gas in the BEC-BCS Crossover: A
Quantum Monte Carlo Study. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 93, 200404. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.93.200404.
586.
Bulgac, A.; Drut, J.E.; Magierski, P. Spin 1/2 Fermions in the Unitary Regime: A Superfluid of a New Type. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006,
96, 090404.
587.
Burovski, E.; Prokofév, N.; Svistunov, B.; Troyer, M. Critical Temperature and Thermodynamics of Attractive Fermions at
Unitarity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 96, 160402.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
108 of 124
588.
Akkineni, V.K.; Ceperley, D.M.; Trivedi, N. Pairing Symmetry in Dilute Fermi Gases with Attractive Interactions. Phys. Rev. B
2007, 76, 165116.
589.
Mazurenko, A.; Chiu, C.S.; Ji, G.; Parsons, M.F.; Kanász-Nagy, M.; Schmidt, R.; Grusdt, F.; Demler, E.; Greif, D.; Greiner, M. A
cold-atom Fermi–Hubbard antiferromagnet. Nature 2017, 545, 462–466. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22362.
590.
Lercher, A.; Takekoshi, T.; Debatin, M.; Schuster, B.; Rameshan, R.; Ferlaino, F.; Grimm, R.; Nägerl, H.C. Production of a dual-
species Bose-Einstein condensate of Rb and Cs atoms. Eur. Phys. J. D 2011, 65, 3–9. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjd/e2011-20015-6.
591.
Diener, R.B.; Ho, T.L. The Condition for Universality at Resonance and Direct Measurement of Pair Wavefunctions Using rf
Spectroscopy. arXi 2004, arXiv:cond-mat/0405174v2.
592.
Forbes, M.M.; Gandolfi, S.; Gezerlis, A. Resonantly Interacting Fermions in a Box.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 106, 235303.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.235303.
593.
De Palo, S.; Chiofalo, M.; Holland, M.; Kokkelmans, S. Resonance effects on the crossover of bosonic to fermionic superfluidity.
Phys. Lett. A 2004, 327, 490–499. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physleta.2004.05.034.
594.
Friedberg, R.; Lee, T.D. Gap Energy and Long-Range Order in the Boson-Fermion Model of Superconductivity. Phys. Rev. B
1989, 40, 6745–6762. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.40.6745.
595.
Ranninger, J.; Robin, J. The Boson-Fermion Model of High-Tc Superconductivity. Doping Dependence. Phys. C Supercond. 1995,
253, 279 – 291. https://doi.org/10.1016/0921-4534(95)00515-3.
596.
Ohashi, Y.; Griffin, A. Superfluidity and Collective Modes in a Uniform Gas of Fermi Atoms with a Feshbach Resonance. Phys.
Rev. A 2003, 67, 063612. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.67.063612.
597.
Ohashi, Y.; Griffin, A. BCS-BEC Crossover in a Gas of Fermi Atoms with a Feshbach Resonance. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 89, 130402.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.89.130402.
598.
Manini, N.; Salasnich, L. Bulk and collective properties of a dilute Fermi gas in the BCS-BEC crossover. Phys. Rev. A 2005,
71, 033625. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.71.033625.
599.
Stajic, J.; Milstein, J.; Chen, Q.; Chiofalo, M.; Holland, M.; Levin, K. Nature of superfluidity in ultracold Fermi gases near
Feshbach resonances. Phys. Rev. A 2004, 69, 063610.
600.
Liu, X.J.; Hu, H. Self-consistent theory of atomic Fermi gases with a Feshbach resonance at the superfluid transition. Phys. Rev.
A 2005, 72, 063613. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.72.063613.
601.
Floerchinger, S.; Scherer, M.; Diehl, S.; Wetterich, C. Particle-hole fluctuations in BCS-BEC crossover.
Phys. Rev. B 2008,
78, 174528.
602.
Diehl, S.; Gies, H.; Pawlowski, J.M.; Wetterich, C. Renormalization flow of Wilsonian effective actions and Translationally
invariant nonperturbative Functionals. Phys. Rev. A 2007, 76, 053627.
603.
Diehl, S.; Gies, H.; Pawlowski, J.M.; Wetterich, C. Universality in Bose-Einstein condensates: Particle correlations beyond
Landau and Bogoliubov. Phys. Rev. A 2007, 76, 021602(R).
604.
Singwi, K.S.; Tosi, M.P.; Land, R.H.; Sjölander, A. Electron Correlations at Metallic Densities. Phys. Rev. 1968, 176, 589–599.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.176.589.
605.
Hasegawa, T.; Shmizu, M. Electron Correlations at Metallic Densities, II. Quantum Mechanical Expression of Dielectric Function
with Wigner Distribution Function. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 1975, 38, 965–973. https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.38.965.
606.
Giuliani, G.; Vignale, G. Quantum Theory of the Electron Liquid; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK , 2005.
607.
Musolino, S.; Chiofalo, M.L. Correlation Length and Universality in the BCS-BEC Crossover for Energy-Dependent Resonance
Superfluidity. Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top. 2017, 226, 2793–2803. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjst/e2017-70016-0.
608.
Giambastiani, D.; Barsanti, M.; Chiofalo, M.L. Interaction-range effects and universality in the BCS-BEC crossover of spin-
orbit–coupled Fermi gases. Europhys. Lett. 2018, 123, 66001. https://doi.org/10.1209/0295-5075/123/66001.
609.
Grüner, G. The dynamics of charge-density waves. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1988, 60, 1129–1181. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.
60.1129.
610.
Mo, Y.; Turner, K.; Szlufarska, I. Friction Laws at the Nanoscale. Nature 2009, 457, 1116–1119. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature0
7748.
611.
Braun, O.M.; Kivshar, Y.S. The Frenkel-Kontorova Model: Concepts, Methods, and Applications; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2004.
612.
Braun, O.; Naumovets, A. Nanotribology: microscopic mechanisms of friction.
Surf. Sci. Rep. 2006, 60, 79–158.
https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.surfrep.2005.10.004.
613.
Bormuth, V.; Varga, V.; Howard, J.; Schäffer. Protein friction limits diffusive and directed movements of kinesin motors on
microtubules. Science 2009, 325, 870–873. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1174923.
614.
Chiang, C.K.; Fincher, C.R.; Park, Y.W.; Heeger, A.J.; Shirakawa, H.; Louis, E.J.; Gau, S.C.; MacDiarmid, A.G. Electrical
Conductivity in Doped Polyacetylene. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1977, 39, 1098–1101. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.39.1098.
615.
Bak, P. Commensurate phases, incommensurate phases and the devil’s staircase.
Rep. Prog. Phys. 1982, 45, 587.
https:
//doi.org/10.1088/0034-4885/45/6/001.
616.
Kürten, K.; Krattenthaler, C. Multistability and Multi 2π-kinks in the Frenkel-Kontorova model: An Application to Arrays of
Josephson Junctions. In Condensed Matter Theories, Part E; World Scientific: Singapore, 2012; pp. 290–300.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
109 of 124
617.
Haller, E.; Hart, R.; Mark, M.J.; Danzl, J.; Reichsöllner, L.; Gustavsson, M.; Dalmonte, M.; Pupillo, G.; Nägerl, H.C. Pinning
quantum phase transition for a Luttinger liquid of strongly interacting bosons. Nature 2010, 466, 597. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature09259.
618.
Orignac, E.; Citro, R.; Dio, M.D.; Palo, S.D.; Chiofalo, M.L. Incommensurate phases of a bosonic two-leg ladder under a flux.
New J. Phys. 2016, 18, 055017. https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/18/5/055017.
619.
Consoli, L.; Knops, H.J.F.; Fasolino, A. Onset of Sliding Friction in Incommensurate Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2000, 85, 302–305.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.85.302.
620.
Aubry, S.
The twist map, the extended Frenkel-Kontorova model and the devil’s staircase.
Phys. D 1983, 7, 240–258.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-2789(83)90129-X.
621.
Frenkel, Y.; Kontorova, T.K. On the theory of plastic deformation and twinning. II. Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 1938, 8, 1340.
622.
Frank, F.C.; Van der Merwe, J.H. One-dimensional dislocations. I. Static theory.
Proc. R. Soc. 1949, 198, 205.
https:
//doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1949.0095.
623.
Sharma, S.R.; Bergersen, B.; Joos, B.
Aubry transition in a finite modulated chain.
Phys. Rev. B 1984, 29, 6335–6340.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.29.6335.
624.
Borgonovi, F.; Guarneri, I.; Shepelyansky, D. Destruction of classical cantori in the quantum Frenkel-Kontorova model. Z.
Phys.B. 1990, 79, 133. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01387834.
625.
Hu, B.; Li, B. Quantum Frenkel-Kontorova model. Phys. A 2000, 288, 81–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4371(00)00416-7.
626.
Zhirov, O.V.; Casati, G.; Shepelyansky, D.L. Quantum phase transition in the Frenkel-Kontorova chain: From pinned instanton
glass to sliding phonon gas. Phys. Rev. E 2003, 67, 056209. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.67.056209.
627.
Ma, Y.; Wang, J.; Xu, X.; Wei, Q.; Kais, S. Quantum Phase Transition in One-Dimensional Commensurate Frenkel–Kontorova
Model. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 2014, 83, 124603. https://doi.org/10.7566/JPSJ.83.124603.
628.
Krajewski, F.R.; Muser, M.H. Quantum dynamics in the highly discrete, commensurate Frenkel-Kontorova model: A path-
integral molecular dynamics study. J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 122, 124711. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1869392.
629.
Hu, B.; Wang, J.X. Density-matrix renormalization group study of the incommensurate quantum Frenkel-Kontorova model.
Phys. Rev. B 2006, 73, 184305. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.73.184305.
630.
Pokrovsky, V.; Virosztek, A. Solitary wave solutions of nonlocal Sine-Gordon equations. J. Phys. C 1983, 16, 4513. https:
//doi.org/10.1063/1.166304.
631.
Braun, O.M.; Kivshar, Y.S.; Zelenskaya, I.I. Kinks in the Frenkel-Kontorova model with long-range interparticle interactions.
Phys. Rev. B 1990, 41, 7118–7138. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.41.7118.
632.
Silvi, P.; De Chiara, G.; Calarco, T.; Morigi, G.; Montangero, S. Full characterization of the quantum linear-zigzag transition in
atomic chains. Ann. Phys. 2013, 525, 827–832. https://doi.org/10.1002/andp.201300090.
633.
Cormick, C.; Morigi, G. Structural Transitions of Ion Strings in Quantum Potentials.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 053003.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.053003.
634.
Gangloff, D.A.; Bylinskii, A.; Vuleti´c, V. Kinks and nanofriction: Structural phases in few-atom chains. Phys. Rev. Research 2020,
2, 013380. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.013380.
635.
Fogarty, T.; Cormick, C.; Landa, H.; Stojanovi´c, V.M.; Demler, E.; Morigi, G. Nanofriction in Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 115, 233602. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.115.233602.
636.
Bak, P.; Bruinsma, R. One-Dimensional Ising Model and the Complete Devil’s Staircase. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1982, 49, 249–251.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.49.249.
637.
Gangloff, D.; Bylinskii, A.; Counts, I.; Jhe, W.; Vuleti´c, V. Velocity tuning of friction with two trapped atoms. Nat. Phys. 2015,
11, 915–919. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys3459.
638.
Bylinskii, A.; Gangloff, D.; Vuleti´c, V. Tuning friction atom-by-atom in an ion-crystal simulator. Science 2015, 348, 1115–1118.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1261422.
639.
Benassi, A.; Vanossi, A.; Tosatti, E. Nanofriction in cold ion traps. Nat. Commun. 2011, 2, 236.
640.
Mandelli, D.; Vanossi, A.; Tosatti, E. Stick-slip nanofriction in trapped cold ion chains. Phys. Rev. B 2013, 87, 195418.
641.
Pruttivarasin, T.; Ramm, M.; Talukdar, I.; Kreuter, A.; Häffner, H. Trapped ions in optical lattices for probing oscillator chain
models. New J. Phys. 2011, 13, 075012.
642.
Kiethe, J.; Nigmatullin, R.; Kalincev, D.; Schmirander, T.; Mehlstäubler, T.E. Probing nanofriction and Aubry-type signatures in a
finite self-organized system. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 15364. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15364.
643.
Bonetti, P.M.; Rucci, A.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Vuleti´c, V. Quantum effects in the Aubry transition. Phys. Rev. Res. 2021, 3, 013031.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.3.013031.
644.
Tinkham, M. Introduction to Superconductivity; McGraw-Hill: New York, NY, USA, 1975.
645.
Japaridze, G.I.; Nersesyan, A.A. One-dimensional electron system with attractive interaction in a magnetic field. J. Low Temp.
Phys. 1979, 37, 95–110. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00114059.
646.
Pokrovsky, V.L.; Talapov, A.L. Ground State, Spectrum, and Phase Diagram of Two-Dimensional Incommensurate Crystals.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1979, 42, 65–67. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.42.65.
647.
Osterloh, K.; Baig, M.; Santos, L.; Zoller, P.; Lewenstein, M. Cold Atoms in Non-Abelian Gauge Potentials: From the Hofstadter
“Moth” to Lattice Gauge Theory. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 95, 010403. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.010403.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
110 of 124
648.
Ruseckas, J.; Juzeli¯unas, G.; Öhberg, P.; Fleischhauer, M. Non-Abelian gauge potentials for ultracold atoms with degenerate dark
states. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 95, 010404.
649.
Lin, Y.J.; Jiménez-García, K.; Spielman, I.B. Spin-orbit-coupled Bose-Einstein condensates. Nature 2011, 471, 83–86. https:
//doi.org/10.1038/nature09887.
650.
Mermin, N.D.; Wagner, H. Absence of Ferromagnetism or Antiferromagnetism in One- or Two-Dimensional Isotropic Heisenberg
Models. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1966, 17, 1133–1136. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.17.1133.
651.
Hohenberg, P.C. Existence of Long-Range Order in One and Two Dimensions.
Phys. Rev. 1967, 158, 383–386.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.158.383.
652.
Kardar, M. Josephson-junction ladders and quantum fluctuations. Phys. Rev. B 1986, 33, 3125–3128. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevB.33.3125.
653.
Orignac, E.; Giamarchi, T. Meissner effect in a bosonic ladder. Phys. Rev. B 2001, 64, 144515. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.
64.144515.
654.
Cha, M.C.; Shin, J.G. Two peaks in the momentum distribution of bosons in a weakly frustrated two-leg optical ladder. Phys.
Rev. 2011, 83, 055602.
655.
Di Dio, M.; De Palo, S.; Orignac, E.; Citro, R.; Chiofalo, M.L. Persisting Meissner state and incommensurate phases of hard-core
boson ladders in a flux. Phys. Rev. B 2015, 92, 060506. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.92.060506.
656.
Granato, E. Phase transitions in Josephson-junction ladders in a magnetic field. Phys. Rev. B 1990, 42, 4797–4799. https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.42.4797.
657.
Nishiyama, Y. Finite-size-scaling analyses of the chiral ordert in the Josephson-junction ladder with half a flux quantum per
plaquette. Eur. Phys. J. -Condens. Matter Complex Syst. 2000, 17, 295–299.
658.
Dhar, A.; Maji, M.; Mishra, T.; Pai, R.V.; Mukerjee, S.; Paramekanti, A. Bose-Hubbard model in a strong effective magnetic field:
Emergence of a chiral Mott insulator ground state. Phys. Rev. A 2012, 85, 041602. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.85.041602.
659.
Dhar, A.; Mishra, T.; Maji, M.; Pai, R.V.; Mukerjee, S.; Paramekanti, A. Chiral Mott insulator with staggered loop currents in the
fully frustrated Bose-Hubbard model. Phys. Rev. B 2013, 87, 174501. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.87.174501.
660.
Petrescu, A.; Le Hur, K.
Bosonic Mott Insulator with Meissner Currents.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 111, 150601.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.111.150601.
661.
Tokuno, A.; Georges, A. Ground states of a Bose–Hubbard ladder in an artificial magnetic field: field-theoretical approach. New
J. Phys. 2014, 16, 073005. https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/16/7/073005.
662.
Petrescu, A.; Le Hur, K. Chiral Mott insulators, Meissner effect, and Laughlin states in quantum ladders. Phys. Rev. B 2015,
91, 054520. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.91.054520.
663.
Zhao, J.; Hu, S.; Chang, J.; Zhang, P.; Wang, X. Ferromagnetism in a two-component Bose-Hubbard model with synthetic
spin-orbit coupling. Phys. Rev. A 2014, 89, 043611.
664.
Zhao, J.; Hu, S.; Chang, J.; Zheng, F.; Zhang, P.; Wang, X. Evolution of magnetic structure driven by synthetic spin-orbit coupling
in a two-component Bose-Hubbard model. Phys. Rev. B 2014, 90, 085117.
665.
Xu, Z.; Cole, W.S.; Zhang, S. Mott-superfluid transition for spin-orbit-coupled bosons in one-dimensional optical lattices. Phys.
Rev. A 2014, 89, 051604.
666.
Peotta, S.; Mazza, L.; Vicari, E.; Polini, M.; Fazio, R.; Rossini, D. The XYZ chain with Dzyaloshinsky–Moriya interactions:
from spin–orbit-coupled lattice bosons to interacting Kitaev chains. J. Stat. Mech. Theory Exp. 2014, 2014, P09005. https:
//doi.org/10.1088/1742-5468/2014/09/P09005.
667.
Piraud, M.; Cai, Z.; McCulloch, I.P.; Schollwöck, U. Quantum magnetism of bosons with synthetic gauge fields in one-dimensional
optical lattices: A density-matrix renormalization-group study. Phys. Rev. A 2014, 89, 063618.
668.
Barbiero, L.; Abad, M.; Recati, A. Magnetic phase transition in coherently coupled Bose gases in optical lattices. Phys. Rev. A
2016, 93, 033645. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.93.033645.
669.
Deutsch, J.M. Quantum statistical mechanics in a closed system. Phys. Rev. A 1991, 43, 2046–2049.
670.
Srednicki, M. Chaos and quantum thermalization. Phys. Rev. E 1994, 50, 888–901.
671.
Rigol, M.; Dunjko, V.; Olshanii, M. Thermalization and its mechanism for generic isolated quantum systems. Nature 2008,
452, 854.
672.
Deutsch, J.M. Eigenstate thermalization hypothesis. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2018, 81, 082001.
673.
Lux, J.; Müller, J.; Mitra, A.; Rosch, A. Hydrodynamic long-time tails after a quantum quench. Phys. Rev. A 2014, 89, 053608.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.89.053608.
674.
Kaufman, A.M.; Tai, M.E.; Lukin, A.; Rispoli, M.; Schittko, R.; Preiss, P.M.; Greiner, M. Quantum thermalization through
entanglement in an isolated many-body system. Science 2016, 353, 794–800.
675.
Kranzl, F.; Lasek, A.; Joshi, M.K.; Kalev, A.; Blatt, R.; Roos, C.F.; Yunger Halpern, N. Experimental Observation of Thermalization
with Noncommuting Charges. PRX Quantum 2023, 4, 020318. https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.4.020318.
676.
Anderson, P.W. Absence of Diffusion in Certain Random Lattices. Phys. Rev. 1958, 109, 1492–1505.
677.
Wiersma, D.S.; Bartolini, P.; Lagendijk, A.; Righini, R. Localization of light in a disordered medium. Nature 1997, 390, 671.
678.
Schwartz, T.; Bartal, G.; Fishman, S.; Segev, M. Transport and Anderson localization in disordered two-dimensional photonic
lattices. Nature 2007, 446, 52.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
111 of 124
679.
Lahini, Y.; Avidan, A.; Pozzi, F.; Sorel, M.; Morandotti, R.; Christodoulides, D.N.; Silberberg, Y. Anderson Localization and
Nonlinearity in One-Dimensional Disordered Photonic Lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 013906.
680.
Billy, J.; Josse, V.; Zuo, Z.; Bernard, A.; Hambrecht, B.; Lugan, P.; Clément, D.; Sanchez-Palencia, L.; Bouyer, P.; Aspect, A. Direct
observation of Anderson localization of matter waves in a controlled disorder. Nature 2008, 453, 891.
681.
Kondov, S.S.; McGehee, W.R.; Zirbel, J.J.; DeMarco, B. Three-Dimensional Anderson Localization of Ultracold Matter. Science
2011, 334, 66–68.
682.
Jendrzejewski, F.; Bernard, A.; Müller, K.; Cheinet, P.; Josse, V.; Piraud, M.; Pezzé, L.; Sanchez-Palencia, L.; Aspect, A.;
Bouyer, P. Three-dimensional localization of ultracold atoms in an optical disordered potential. Nat. Phys. 2012, 8, 398–403.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys2256.
683.
Žnidariˇc, M.; Prosen, T.; Prelovšek, P. Many-body localization in the Heisenberg XXZ magnet in a random field. Phys. Rev. B
2008, 77, 064426.
684.
Bardarson, J.H.; Pollmann, F.; Moore, J.E. Unbounded Growth of Entanglement in Models of Many-Body Localization. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 017202.
685.
Nandkishore, R.; Huse, D.A. Many-Body Localization and Thermalization in Quantum Statistical Mechanics. Annu. Rev.
Condens. Matter Phys. 2015, 6, 15–38.
686.
Basko, D.; Aleiner, I.; Altshuler, B. Metal–insulator transition in a weakly interacting many-electron system with localized
single-particle states. Ann. Phys. 2006, 321, 1126–1205.
687.
Pal, A.; Huse, D.A. Many-body localization phase transition. Phys. Rev. B 2010, 82, 174411.
688.
Iyer, S.; Oganesyan, V.; Refael, G.; Huse, D.A. Many-body localization in a quasiperiodic system. Phys. Rev. B 2013, 87, 134202.
689.
Aubry, S.; André, G. Analyticity breaking and Anderson localization in incommensurate lattices. Ann. Israel Phys. Soc 1980, 3, 18.
690.
Smith, J.; Lee, A.; Richerme, P.; Neyenhuis, B.; Hess, P.W.; Hauke, P.; Heyl, M.; Huse, D.A.; Monroe, C. Many-body localization
in a quantum simulator with programmable random disorder. Nat. Phys. 2016, 12, 907–911.
691.
Bordia, P.; Lüschen, H.P.; Hodgman, S.S.; Schreiber, M.; Bloch, I.; Schneider, U. Coupling Identical one-dimensional Many-Body
Localized Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 116, 140401.
692.
Choi, J.Y.; Hild, S.; Zeiher, J.; Schauß, P.; Rubio-Abadal, A.; Yefsah, T.; Khemani, V.; Huse, D.A.; Bloch, I.; Gross, C. Exploring the
many-body localization transition in two dimensions. Science 2016, 352, 1547–1552.
693.
Van Horssen, M.; Levi, E.; Garrahan, J.P. Dynamics of many-body localization in a translation-invariant quantum glass model.
Phys. Rev. B 2015, 92, 100305. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.92.100305.
694.
Turner, C.J.; Michailidis, A.A.; Abanin, D.A.; Serbyn, M.; Papi´c, Z. Weak ergodicity breaking from quantum many-body scars.
Nat. Phys. 2018, 14, 745–749.
695.
Brenes, M.; Dalmonte, M.; Heyl, M.; Scardicchio, A. Many-Body Localization Dynamics from Gauge Invariance. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2018, 120, 030601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.030601.
696.
Altman, E.; Vosk, R. Universal Dynamics and Renormalization in Many-Body-Localized Systems. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter
Phys. 2015, 6, 383–409.
697.
Lüschen, H.P.; Bordia, P.; Hodgman, S.S.; Schreiber, M.; Sarkar, S.; Daley, A.J.; Fischer, M.H.; Altman, E.; Bloch, I.; Schneider, U.
Signatures of Many-Body Localization in a Controlled Open Quantum System. Phys. Rev. X 2017, 7, 011034.
698.
Medvedyeva, M.V.; Prosen, T.; Žnidariˇc, M. Influence of dephasing on many-body localization. Phys. Rev. B 2016, 93, 094205.
699.
Levi, E.; Heyl, M.; Lesanovsky, I.; Garrahan, J.P. Robustness of Many-Body Localization in the Presence of Dissipation. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2016, 116, 237203.
700.
Fischer, M.H.; Maksymenko, M.; Altman, E. Dynamics of a Many-Body-Localized System Coupled to a Bath. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2016, 116, 160401.
701.
van Nieuwenburg, E.; Malo, J.Y.; Daley, A.; Fischer, M. Dynamics of many-body localization in the presence of particle loss.
Quantum Sci. Technol. 2017, 3, 01LT02. https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-9565/aa9a02.
702.
Serbyn, M.; Papi´c, Z.; Abanin, D.A. Criterion for Many-Body Localization-Delocalization Phase Transition. Phys. Rev. X 2015,
5, 041047.
703.
Bañuls, M.C.; Yao, N.Y.; Choi, S.; Lukin, M.D.; Cirac, J.I. Dynamics of quantum information in many-body localized systems.
Phys. Rev. B 2017, 96, 174201. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.96.174201.
704.
De Roeck, W.; Huveneers, F.M.C. Stability and instability towards delocalization in many-body localization systems. Phys. Rev.
B 2017, 95, 155129.
705.
Pancotti, N.; Knap, M.; Huse, D.A.; Cirac, J.I.; Bañuls, M.C. Almost conserved operators in nearly many-body localized systems.
Phys. Rev. B 2018, 97, 094206. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.97.094206.
706.
Li, X.; Ganeshan, S.; Pixley, J.H.; Das Sarma, S. Many-Body Localization and Quantum Nonergodicity in a Model with a
Single-Particle Mobility Edge. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 115, 186601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.115.186601.
707.
Agarwal, K.; Altman, E.; Demler, E.; Gopalakrishnan, S.; Huse, D.A.; Knap, M. Rare-region effects and dynamics near the
many-body localization transition. Ann. Phys. 2017, 529, 1600326.
708.
Rubio-Abadal, A.; Choi, J.y.; Zeiher, J.; Hollerith, S.; Rui, J.; Bloch, I.; Gross, C. Many-Body Delocalization in the Presence of a
Quantum Bath. Phys. Rev. X 2019, 9, 041014. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.9.041014.
709.
Léonard, J.; Kim, S.; Rispoli, M.; Lukin, A.; Schittko, R.; Kwan, J.; Demler, E.; Sels, D.; Greiner, M. Probing the onset of quantum
avalanches in a many-body localized system. Nat. Phys. 2023, 19, 481–485.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
112 of 124
710.
Rispoli, M.; Lukin, A.; Schittko, R.; Kim, S.; Tai, M.E.; Léonard, J.; Greiner, M. Quantum critical behaviour at the many-body
localization transition. Nature 2019, 573, 385–389.
711.
Huse, D.A.; Nandkishore, R.; Oganesyan, V.; Pal, A.; Sondhi, S.L. Localization-protected quantum order. Phys. Rev. B 2013,
88, 014206. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.88.014206.
712.
Bahri, Y.; Vosk, R.; Altman, E.; Vishwanath, A. Localization and topology protected quantum coherence at the edge of hot matter.
Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 7341.
713.
Guo, L.; Liang, P. Condensed matter physics in time crystals. New J. Phys. 2020, 22, 075003.
714.
Serbyn, M.; Abanin, D.A.; Papi´c, Z. Quantum many-body scars and weak breaking of ergodicity. Nat. Phys. 2021, 17, 675–685.
715.
Bluvstein, D.; Omran, A.; Levine, H.; Keesling, A.; Semeghini, G.; Ebadi, S.; Wang, T.T.; Michailidis, A.A.; Maskara, N.; Ho, W.W.;
et al. Controlling quantum many-body dynamics in driven Rydberg atom arrays. Science 2021, 371, 1355–1359.
716.
Chandran, A.; Iadecola, T.; Khemani, V.; Moessner, R. Quantum Many-Body Scars: A Quasiparticle Perspective. Annu. Rev.
Condens. Matter Phys. 2023, 14, 443–469.
717.
Lewenstein, M.; Sanpera, A.; Ahufinger, V.; Damski, B.; De Sen, A.; Sen, U. Ultracold atomic gases in optical lattices: mimicking
condensed matter physics and beyond. Adv. Phys. 2007, 56, 243–379. https://doi.org/10.1080/00018730701223200.
718.
Weitenberg, C.; Simonet, J. Tailoring quantum gases by Floquet engineering. Nat. Phys. 2021, 17, 1342–1348.
719.
Rahav, S.; Gilary, I.; Fishman, S. Effective Hamiltonians for periodically driven systems.
Phys. Rev. A 2003, 68, 013820.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.68.013820.
720.
Goldman, N.; Dalibard, J. Periodically Driven Quantum Systems: Effective Hamiltonians and Engineered Gauge Fields. Phys.
Rev. X 2014, 4, 031027. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.4.031027.
721.
Aoki, H.; Tsuji, N.; Eckstein, M.; Kollar, M.; Oka, T.; Werner, P. Nonequilibrium dynamical mean-field theory and its applications.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 2014, 86, 779–837. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.86.779.
722.
Sørensen, A.S.; Demler, E.; Lukin, M.D. Fractional Quantum Hall States of Atoms in Optical Lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005,
94, 086803. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.086803.
723.
Eckardt, A.; Hauke, P.; Soltan-Panahi, P.; Becker, C.; Sengstock, K.; Lewenstein, M. Frustrated quantum antiferromagnetism with
ultracold bosons in a triangular lattice. Europhys. Lett. 2010, 89, 10010.
724.
Creffield, C.E.; Sols, F. Directed transport in driven optical lattices by gauge generation.
Phys. Rev. A 2011, 84, 023630.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.84.023630.
725.
Lim, L.K.; Smith, C.M.; Hemmerich, A. Staggered-Vortex Superfluid of Ultracold Bosons in an Optical Lattice. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2008, 100, 130402. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.130402.
726.
Jiang, L.; Kitagawa, T.; Alicea, J.; Akhmerov, A.R.; Pekker, D.; Refael, G.; Cirac, J.I.; Demler, E.; Lukin, M.D.; Zoller, P.
Majorana Fermions in Equilibrium and in Driven Cold-Atom Quantum Wires. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 106, 220402. https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.220402.
727.
Hauke, P.; Tieleman, O.; Celi, A.; Ölschläger, C.; Simonet, J.; Struck, J.; Weinberg, M.; Windpassinger, P.; Sengstock, K.; Lewenstein,
M.; et al. Non-Abelian Gauge Fields and Topological Insulators in Shaken Optical Lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 145301.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.145301.
728.
Yagüe Bosch, L.S.; Ehret, T.; Petiziol, F.; Arimondo, E.; Wimberger, S. Shortcut-to-Adiabatic Controlled-Phase Gate in Rydberg
Atoms. Ann. Phys. 2023, 535, 2300275. https://doi.org/10.1002/andp.202300275.
729.
Landi, G.T.; Poletti, D.; Schaller, G. Nonequilibrium boundary-driven quantum systems: Models, methods, and properties. Rev.
Mod. Phys. 2022, 94, 045006. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.94.045006.
730.
Sato, S.A.; Giovannini, U.D.; Aeschlimann, S.; Gierz, I.; Hübener, H.; Rubio, A. Floquet states in dissipative open quantum
systems. J. Phys. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 2020, 53, 225601.
731.
Mori, T. Floquet States in Open Quantum Systems. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 2023, 14, 35–56.
732.
Berdanier, W.; Kolodrubetz, M.; Vasseur, R.; Moore, J.E. Floquet Dynamics of Boundary-Driven Systems at Criticality. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2017, 118, 260602. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.260602.
733.
Li, N.; Ren, J.; Wang, L.; Zhang, G.; Hänggi, P.; Li, B. Colloquium: Phononics: Manipulating heat flow with electronic analogs
and beyond. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2012, 84, 1045–1066. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.84.1045.
734.
Olaya-Castro, A.; Lee, C.F.; Olsen, F.F.; Johnson, N.F. Efficiency of energy transfer in a light-harvesting system under quantum
coherence. Phys. Rev. B 2008, 78, 085115. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.78.085115.
735.
Plenio, M.B.; Huelga, S.F. Dephasing-assisted transport: quantum networks and biomolecules. New J. Phys. 2008, 10, 113019.
736.
Itano, W.M. Perspectives on the quantum Zeno paradox. arXiv 2006, arXiv:quant-ph/quant-ph/0612187.
737.
Bushev, P.; Rotter, D.; Wilson, A.; Dubin, F.; Becher, C.; Eschner, J.; Blatt, R.; Steixner, V.; Rabl, P.; Zoller, P. Feedback Cooling of a
Single Trapped Ion. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 96, 043003. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.043003.
738.
Maunz, P.; Puppe, T.; Schuster, I.; Syassen, N.; Pinkse, P.W.H.; Rempe, G. Cavity cooling of a single atom. Nature 2004, 428, 50–52.
739.
Mazzucchi, G.; Caballero-Benitez, S.F.; Ivanov, D.A.; Mekhov, I.B. Quantum optical feedback control for creating strong
correlations in many-body systems. Optica 2016, 3, 1213–1219.
740.
Ivanov, D.A.; Ivanova, T.Y.; Caballero-Benitez, S.F.; Mekhov, I.B. Feedback-Induced Quantum Phase Transitions Using Weak
Measurements. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 124, 010603. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.010603.
741.
Young, J.T.; Gorshkov, A.V.; Spielman, I.B. Feedback-stabilized dynamical steady states in the Bose-Hubbard model. Phys. Rev.
Res. 2021, 3, 043075. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.3.043075.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
113 of 124
742.
Ostermann, S.; Piazza, F.; Ritsch, H. Spontaneous Crystallization of Light and Ultracold Atoms. Phys. Rev. X 2016, 6, 021026.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.6.021026.
743.
Yamaguchi, E.P.; Hurst, H.M.; Spielman, I.B. Feedback-cooled Bose-Einstein condensation: Near and far from equilibrium. Phys.
Rev. A 2023, 107, 063306. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.107.063306.
744.
Koch, C.P. Controlling open quantum systems: Tools, achievements, and limitations. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2016, 28, 213001.
745.
Caballero-Benitez, S.F.; Mazzucchi, G.; Mekhov, I.B. Quantum simulators based on the global collective light-matter interaction.
Phys. Rev. A 2016, 93, 063632. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.93.063632.
746.
Zhang, J.; Xi Liu, Y.; Wu, R.B.; Jacobs, K.; Nori, F. Quantum feedback: Theory, experiments, and applications. Phys. Rep. 2017,
679, 1–60.
747.
Polkovnikov, A.; Sengupta, K.; Silva, A.; Vengalattore, M. Colloquium: Nonequilibrium dynamics of closed interacting quantum
systems. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2011, 83, 863–883. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.83.863.
748.
Heyl, M. Dynamical quantum phase transitions: A review. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2018, 81, 054001.
749.
Hohenberg, P.C.; Halperin, B.I. Theory of dynamic critical phenomena. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1977, 49, 435–479. https://doi.org/10.1
103/RevModPhys.49.435.
750.
Albert, V.V.; Jiang, L. Symmetries and conserved quantities in Lindblad master equations. Phys. Rev. A 2014, 89, 022118.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.89.022118.
751.
Minganti, F.; Biella, A.; Bartolo, N.; Ciuti, C. Spectral theory of Liouvillians for dissipative phase transitions. Phys. Rev. A 2018,
98, 042118. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.98.042118.
752.
Jurcevic, P.; Shen, H.; Hauke, P.; Maier, C.; Brydges, T.; Hempel, C.; Lanyon, B.P.; Heyl, M.; Blatt, R.; Roos, C.F. Direct
Observation of Dynamical Quantum Phase Transitions in an Interacting Many-Body System. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 119, 080501.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.119.080501.
753.
Fläschner, N.; Vogel, D.; Tarnowski, M.; Rem, B.S.; Lühmann, D.S.; Heyl, M.; Budich, J.C.; Mathey, L.; Sengstock, K.; Weitenberg,
C. Observation of dynamical vortices after quenches in a system with topology. Nat. Phys. 2018, 14, 265–268.
754.
Alberton, O.; Buchhold, M.; Diehl, S. Entanglement Transition in a Monitored Free-Fermion Chain: From Extended Criticality to
Area Law. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2021, 126, 170602. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.170602.
755.
Gullans, M.J.; Huse, D.A. Scalable Probes of Measurement-Induced Criticality. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 125, 070606. https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.070606.
756.
Gullans, M.J.; Huse, D.A. Dynamical Purification Phase Transition Induced by Quantum Measurements. Phys. Rev. X 2020,
10, 041020. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.10.041020.
757.
Choi, S.; Bao, Y.; Qi, X.L.; Altman, E. Quantum Error Correction in Scrambling Dynamics and Measurement-Induced Phase
Transition. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 125, 030505. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.030505.
758.
Kuriyattil, S.; Hashizume, T.; Bentsen, G.; Daley, A.J. Onset of Scrambling as a Dynamical Transition in Tunable-Range Quantum
Circuits. PRX Quantum 2023, 4, 030325. https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.4.030325.
759.
Dine, M.; Kusenko, A. Origin of the matter-antimatter asymmetry. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2003, 76, 1–30. https://doi.org/10.1103/
RevModPhys.76.1.
760.
Barr, S. A review of CP violation in Atoms. Int. J. Mod. Phys. 1993, 8, 209–236. https://doi.org/10.1142/S0217751X93000096.
761.
Roussy, T.S.; Caldwell, L.; Wright, T.; Cairncross, W.B.; Shagam, Y.; Ng, K.B.; Schlossberger, N.; Park, S.Y.; Wang, A.; Ye, J.; et al.
An improved bound on the electron’s electric dipole moment. Science 2023, 381, 46–50. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adg4084.
762.
Wallace, P.R. The Band Theory of Graphite. Phys. Rev. 1947, 71, 622–634. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.71.622.
763.
Castro Neto, A.H.; Guinea, F.; Peres, N.M.R.; Novoselov, K.S.; Geim, A.K. The electronic properties of graphene. Rev. Mod. Phys.
2009, 81, 109–162. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.81.109.
764.
Katsnelson, M.; Novoselov, K. Graphene: New bridge between condensed matter physics and quantum electrodynamics. Solid
State Commun. 2007, 143, 3–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssc.2007.02.043.
765.
Affleck, I.; Marston, J.B. Large-n limit of the Heisenberg-Hubbard model: Implications for high-Tc superconductors. Phys. Rev.
B 1988, 37, 3774–3777. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.37.3774.
766.
Mazzucchi, G.; Lepori, L.; Trombettoni, A. Semimetal–superfluid quantum phase transitions in 2D and 3D lattices with Dirac
points. J. Phys. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 2013, 46, 134014.
767.
Lepori, L.; Mussardo, G.; Trombettoni, A. (3+1) massive Dirac fermions with ultracold atoms in frustrated cubic optical lattices.
Europhys. Lett. 2010, 92, 50003.
768.
Creutz, M. Quarks, Gluons and Lattices; Cambridge Monographs on Mathemathics; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK,
2023.
769.
Bermudez, A.; Mazza, L.; Rizzi, M.; Goldman, N.; Lewenstein, M.; Martin-Delgado, M.A. Wilson Fermions and Axion
Electrodynamics in Optical Lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 105, 190404. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.190404.
770.
Peccei, R.D.; Quinn, H.R.
CP Conservation in the Presence of Pseudoparticles.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1977, 38, 1440–1443.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.38.1440.
771.
Qi, X.L.; Zhang, S.C. Topological insulators and superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2011, 83, 1057–1110. https://doi.org/10.110
3/RevModPhys.83.1057.
772.
Casanova, J.; Sabín, C.; León, J.; Egusquiza, I.L.; Gerritsma, R.; Roos, C.F.; García-Ripoll, J.J.; Solano, E. Quantum Simulation of
the Majorana Equation and Unphysical Operations. Phys. Rev. X 2011, 1, 021018. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.1.021018.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
114 of 124
773.
Lepori, L.; Celi, A.; Trombettoni, A.; Mannarelli, M. Synthesis of Majorana mass terms in low-energy quantum systems. New J.
Phys. 2018, 20, 063032.
774.
Nambu, Y.; Jona-Lasinio, G. Dynamical Model of Elementary Particles Based on an Analogy with Superconductivity. I. Phys.
Rev. 1961, 122, 345–358. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.122.345.
775.
Nambu, Y.; Jona-Lasinio, G. Dynamical Model of Elementary Particles Based on an Analogy with Superconductivity. II. Phys.
Rev. 1961, 124, 246–254. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.124.246.
776.
Cirac, J.I.; Maraner, P.; Pachos, J.K. Cold Atom Simulation of Interacting Relativistic Quantum Field Theories. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2010, 105, 190403. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.190403.
777.
Inguscio, M.; Fallani, L. Atomic Physics: Precise Measurements and Ultracold Matter; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2013.
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198525844.001.0001.
778.
Schweikhard, V.; Coddington, I.; Engels, P.; Mogendorff, V.P.; Cornell, E.A. Rapidly Rotating Bose-Einstein Condensates in and
near the Lowest Landau Level. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 92, 040404. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.92.040404.
779.
Williams, R.A.; Al-Assam, S.; Foot, C.J. Observation of Vortex Nucleation in a Rotating Two-Dimensional Lattice of Bose-Einstein
Condensates. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 104, 050404. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.050404.
780.
Banerjee, D.; Dalmonte, M.; Müller, M.; Rico, E.; Stebler, P.; Wiese, U.J.; Zoller, P. Atomic Quantum Simulation of Dynamical
Gauge Fields Coupled to Fermionic Matter: From String Breaking to Evolution after a Quench. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 175302.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.175302.
781.
Banerjee, D.; Bögli, M.; Dalmonte, M.; Rico, E.; Stebler, P.; Wiese, U.J.; Zoller, P. Atomic Quantum Simulation of U(N) and SU(N)
Non-Abelian Lattice Gauge Theories. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, 125303. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.125303.
782.
Chandrasekharan, S.; Wiese, U.J. Quantum link models: A discrete approach to gauge theories. Nucl. Phys. B 1997, 492, 455–471.
783.
Brower, R.; Chandrasekharan, S.; Wiese, U.J.
QCD as a quantum link model.
Phys. Rev. D 1999, 60, 094502.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.60.094502.
784.
Bañuls, M.C.; Blatt, R.; Catani, J.; Celi, A.; Cirac, J.I.; Dalmonte, M.; Fallani, L.; Jansen, K.; Lewenstein, M.; Montangero, S.; et al.
Simulating lattice gauge theories within quantum technologies. Eur. Phys. J. D 2020, 74, 165. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjd/e2
020-100571-8.
785.
Aidelsburger, M.; Barbiero, L.; Bermudez, A.; Chanda, T.; Dauphin, A.; González-Cuadra, D.; Grzybowski, P.R.; Hands, S.;
Jendrzejewski, F.; Jünemann, J.; et al. Cold atoms meet lattice gauge theory. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 2022,
380, 20210064. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2021.0064.
786.
Rico, E.; Pichler, T.; Dalmonte, M.; Zoller, P.; Montangero, S. Tensor Networks for Lattice Gauge Theories and Atomic Quantum
Simulation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 112, 201601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.112.201601.
787.
Pichler, T.; Dalmonte, M.; Rico, E.; Zoller, P.; Montangero, S. Real-Time Dynamics in U(1) Lattice Gauge Theories with Tensor
Networks. Phys. Rev. X 2016, 6, 011023. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.6.011023.
788.
Zohar, E.; Cirac, J.I. Combining tensor networks with Monte Carlo methods for lattice gauge theories. Phys. Rev. D 2018,
97, 034510. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.97.034510.
789.
Büchler, H.P.; Hermele, M.; Huber, S.D.; Fisher, M.P.A.; Zoller, P. Atomic Quantum Simulator for Lattice Gauge Theories and
Ring Exchange Models. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 95, 040402. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.040402.
790.
Zohar, E.; Reznik, B. Confinement and Lattice Quantum-Electrodynamic Electric Flux Tubes Simulated with Ultracold Atoms.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 107, 275301. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.107.275301.
791.
Szirmai, G.; Szirmai, E.; Zamora, A.; Lewenstein, M. Gauge fields emerging from time-reversal symmetry breaking for spin-5/2
fermions in a honeycomb lattice. Phys. Rev. A 2011, 84, 011611. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.84.011611.
792.
Wen, X. Quantum Field Theory of Many-body Systems: From the Origin of Sound to an Origin of Light and Electrons; Oxford Graduate
Texts; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2004.
793.
Zohar, E.; Cirac, J.I.; Reznik, B. Simulating Compact Quantum Electrodynamics with Ultracold Atoms: Probing Confinement
and Nonperturbative Effects. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 125302. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.125302.
794.
Tagliacozzo, L.; Celi, A.; Orland, P.; Mitchell, M.W.; Lewenstein, M. Simulation of non-Abelian gauge theories with optical
lattices. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2615.
795.
Georgi, H. Lie Algebras In Particle Physics: From Isospin To Unified Theories; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2018.
796.
Yip, S.K. Theory of a fermionic superfluid with SU(2) × SU(6) symmetry. Phys. Rev. A 2011, 83, 063607. https://doi.org/10.110
3/PhysRevA.83.063607.
797.
Lepori, L.; Trombettoni, A.; Vinci, W. Simulation of two-flavor symmetry-locking phases in ultracold fermionic mixtures.
Europhys. Lett. 2015, 109, 50002.
798.
Boada, O.; Celi, A.; Latorre, J.I.; Lewenstein, M. Quantum Simulation of an Extra Dimension. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108, 133001.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.133001.
799.
Celi, A.; Massignan, P.; Ruseckas, J.; Goldman, N.; Spielman, I.B.; Juzeli¯unas, G.; Lewenstein, M. Synthetic Gauge Fields in
Synthetic Dimensions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 112, 043001. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.112.043001.
800.
Mancini, M.; Pagano, G.; Cappellini, G.; Livi, L.; Rider, M.; Catani, J.; Sias, C.; Zoller, P.; Inguscio, M.; Dalmonte, M.; et al.
Observation of chiral edge states with neutral fermions in synthetic Hall ribbons.
Science 2015, 349, 1510–1513.
https:
//doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa8736.
801.
Weinberg, S. The Quantum Theory of Fields: Volume 2, Modern Applications; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1996.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
115 of 124
802.
Zee, A. Quantum Field Theory in a Nutshell, 2nd ed.; In a Nutshell; Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, USA, 2010.
803.
Huber, S.D.; Altman, E.; Büchler, H.P.; Blatter, G. Dynamical properties of ultracold bosons in an optical lattice. Phys. Rev. B
2007, 75, 085106. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.75.085106.
804.
Pollet, L.; Prokofév, N. Higgs Mode in a Two-Dimensional Superfluid. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 010401. https://doi.org/10.110
3/PhysRevLett.109.010401.
805.
Pekker, D.; Varma, C. Amplitude/Higgs Modes in Condensed Matter Physics. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 2015, 6, 269–297.
806.
Hill, C.T.; Simmons, E.H. Strong Dynamics and Electroweak Symmetry Breaking. Phys. Rep. 2003, 381, 235–402; Erratum in Phys.
Rep. 2004, 390, 553–554. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0370-1573(03)00140-6.
807.
Alford, M.; Rajagopal, K.; Wilczek, F. Color-flavor locking and chiral symmetry breaking in high density QCD. Nucl. Phys. B
1999, 537, 443–458.
808.
Alford, M.G.; Schmitt, A.; Rajagopal, K.; Schäfer, T. Color superconductivity in dense quark matter. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2008,
80, 1455–1515. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.80.1455.
809.
Anglani, R.; Casalbuoni, R.; Ciminale, M.; Ippolito, N.; Gatto, R.; Mannarelli, M.; Ruggieri, M. Crystalline color superconductors.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 2014, 86, 509–561. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.86.509.
810.
Mannarelli, M. The amazing properties of crystalline color superconductors. J. Physics: Conf. Ser. 2014, 527, 012020. https:
//doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/527/1/012020.
811.
Peskin, M.; Schroeder, D. An Introduction To Quantum Field Theory; Frontiers in Physics; Avalon Publishing: New York, NY, USA,
1995.
812.
’t Hooft, G. Symmetry Breaking through Bell-Jackiw Anomalies. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1976, 37, 8–11. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.37.8.
813.
Nielsen, H.; Ninomiya, M. The Adler-Bell-Jackiw anomaly and Weyl fermions in a crystal. Phys. Lett. B 1983, 130, 389–396.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0370-2693(83)91529-0.
814.
Wan, X.; Turner, A.M.; Vishwanath, A.; Savrasov, S.Y. Topological semimetal and Fermi-arc surface states in the electronic
structure of pyrochlore iridates. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 83, 205101. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.83.205101.
815.
Fang, C.; Gilbert, M.J.; Dai, X.; Bernevig, B.A. Multi-Weyl Topological Semimetals Stabilized by Point Group Symmetry. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2012, 108, 266802. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.266802.
816.
Bradlyn, B.; Cano, J.; Wang, Z.; Vergniory, M.G.; Felser, C.; Cava, R.J.; Bernevig, B.A. Beyond Dirac and Weyl fermions:
Unconventional quasiparticles in conventional crystals. Science 2016, 353, aaf5037. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf5037.
817.
Lepori, L.; Burrello, M.; Guadagnini, E. Axial anomaly in multi-Weyl and triple-point semimetals. J. High Energy Phys. 2018,
2018, 110. https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP06(2018)110.
818.
Semenoff, G.W. Condensed-Matter Simulation of a Three-Dimensional Anomaly.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1984, 53, 2449–2452.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.53.2449.
819.
Mannarelli, M. Meson Condensation. Particles 2019, 2, 411–443.
820.
Borsányi, S.; Endr˝odi, G.; Fodor, Z.; Katz, S.D.; Szabó, K.K. Precision SU(3) lattice thermodynamics for a large temperature range.
J. High Energy Phys. 2012, 2012, 56.
821.
Zhitnitsky, A.R. Conformal window in QCD for large numbers of colors and flavors. Nucl. Phys. A 2014, 921, 1–18.
822.
Deuzeman, A.; Lombardo, M.P.; Pallante, E. Evidence for a conformal phase in SU(N) gauge theories. Phys. Rev. D 2010,
82, 074503. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.82.074503.
823.
Surace, F.M.; Mazza, P.P.; Giudici, G.; Lerose, A.; Gambassi, A.; Dalmonte, M. Lattice Gauge Theories and String Dynamics in
Rydberg Atom Quantum Simulators. Phys. Rev. X 2020, 10, 021041. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.10.021041.
824.
Celi, A.; Vermersch, B.; Viyuela, O.; Pichler, H.; Lukin, M.D.; Zoller, P. Emerging Two-Dimensional Gauge Theories in Rydberg
Configurable Arrays. Phys. Rev. X 2020, 10, 021057. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.10.021057.
825.
Dumitrescu, P.T.; Bohnet, J.G.; Gaebler, J.P.; Hankin, A.; Hayes, D.; Kumar, A.; Neyenhuis, B.; Vasseur, R.; Potter, A.C. Dynamical
topological phase realized in a trapped-ion quantum simulator. Nature 2022, 607, 463–467.
826.
Ringbauer, M.; Meth, M.; Postler, L.; Stricker, R.; Blatt, R.; Schindler, P.; Monz, T. A universal qudit quantum processor with
trapped ions. Nat. Phys. 2022, 18, 1053–1057.
827.
Chertkov, E.; Bohnet, J.; Francois, D.; Gaebler, J.; Gresh, D.; Hankin, A.; Lee, K.; Hayes, D.; Neyenhuis, B.; Stutz, R.; et al.
Holographic dynamics simulations with a trapped-ion quantum computer. Nat. Phys. 2022, 18, 1074–1079.
828.
Richerme, P.; Gong, Z.X.; Lee, A.; Senko, C.; Smith, J.; Foss-Feig, M.; Michalakis, S.; Gorshkov, A.V.; Monroe, C. Non-local
propagation of correlations in quantum systems with long-range interactions. Nature 2014, 511, 198–201.
829.
Jurcevic, P.; Lanyon, B.P.; Hauke, P.; Hempel, C.; Zoller, P.; Blatt, R.; Roos, C.F. Quasiparticle engineering and entanglement
propagation in a quantum many-body system. Nature 2014, 511, 202–205.
830.
Vodola, D.; Lepori, L.; Ercolessi, E.; Gorshkov, A.V.; Pupillo, G. Kitaev Chains with Long-Range Pairing. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014,
113, 156402. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.156402.
831.
Lepori, L.; Giuliano, D.; Paganelli, S. Edge insulating topological phases in a two-dimensional superconductor with long-range
pairing. Phys. Rev. B 2018, 97, 041109. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.97.041109.
832.
Lucas, A. Ising formulations of many NP problems. Front. Phys. 2014, 2, 74887. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2014.00005.
833.
Defenu, N.; Donner, T.; Macrì, T.; Pagano, G.; Ruffo, S.; Trombettoni, A. Long-range interacting quantum systems. arXiv 2021,
arXiv:cond-mat.quant-gas/2109.01063.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
116 of 124
834.
Diessel, O.K.; Diehl, S.; Defenu, N.; Rosch, A.; Chiocchetta, A. Generalized Higgs mechanism in long-range interacting quantum
systems. arXiv 2022, arXiv:2208.10487. http://arxiv.org/abs/2208.10487.
835.
Song, M.; Zhao, J.; Zhou, C.; Meng, Z.Y. Dynamical properties of quantum many-body systems with long range interactions.
arXiv 2023, arXiv:2301.00829. http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.00829.
836.
Qiu, Z. Supersymmetry, two-dimensional critical phenomena and the tricritical Ising model. Nucl. Phys. B 1986, 270, 205–234.
837.
Mussardo, G. Statistical Field Theory: An Introduction to Exactly Solved Models in Statistical Physics; Oxford Graduate Texts; Oxford
University Press: Oxford, UK, 2010.
838.
Yu, Y.; Yang, K. Supersymmetry and the Goldstino-Like Mode in Bose-Fermi Mixtures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 090404.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.090404.
839.
Tomka, M.; Pletyukhov, M.; Gritsev, V. Supersymmetry in quantum optics and in spin-orbit coupled systems. Sci. Rep. 2015,
5, 13097.
840.
Yu, Y.; Yang, K. Simulating the Wess-Zumino Supersymmetry Model in Optical Lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 105, 150605.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.150605.
841.
Cooper, L.; Feldman, D. BCS: 50 Years; World Scientific: Singapore, 2011.
842.
Rapp, A.; Zaránd, G.; Honerkamp, C.; Hofstetter, W. Color Superfluidity and “Baryon” Formation in Ultracold Fermions. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2007, 98, 160405. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.160405.
843.
Baym, G. The Microscopic Description of Superfluidity. In Mathematical Methods in Solid State and Superfluid Theory; Clark, R.C.,
Derrick, G.H., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1968; Chapter 3, pp. 121–156.
844.
Guenther, J.N. Overview of the QCD phase diagram. Eur. Phys. J. A 2021, 57, 136. https://doi.org/10.1140/epja/s10050-021-0
0354-6.
845.
Fulde, P.; Ferrell, R.A. Superconductivity in a Strong Spin-Exchange Field.
Phys. Rev. 1964, 135, A550–A563.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.135.A550.
846.
Larkin, A.I.; Ovchinnikov, Y.N. Non-uniform state of superconductors. Zh. Eksperim. Teor. Fiz. 1964, Vol: 47.
847.
Alford, M.; Kapustin, A.; Wilczek, F. Imaginary chemical potential and finite fermion density on the lattice. Phys. Rev. D 1999,
59, 054502. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.59.054502.
848.
Lombardo, M.P. Finite density [might well be easier] at finite temperature. Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl. 2000, 83-84, 375–377.
849.
Nishida, Y. Phase structures of strong coupling lattice QCD with finite baryon and isospin density. Phys. Rev. D 2004, 69, 094501.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.69.094501.
850.
Cea, P.; Cosmai, L.; D’Elia, M.; Papa, A.; Sanfilippo, F. Critical line of two-flavor QCD at finite isospin or baryon densities from
imaginary chemical potentials. Phys. Rev. D 2012, 85, 094512. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.85.094512.
851.
Brandt, B.B.; Cuteri, F.; Endr˝odi, G.; Schmalzbauer, S. Dirac spectrum and the BEC-BCS crossover in QCD at nonzero isospin
asymmetry. arXiv 2019, http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.07451
852.
Carignano, S.; Lepori, L.; Mammarella, A.; Mannarelli, M.; Pagliaroli, G. Scrutinizing the pion condensed phase. Eur. Phys. J.
2017, 53, 35.
853.
Parish, M.M.; Marchetti, F.M.; Lamacraft, A.; Simons, B.D. Finite-temperature phase diagram of a polarized Fermi condensate.
Nat. Phys. 2007, 3, 124–128. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys520.
854.
Ravensbergen, C.; Soave, E.; Corre, V.; Kreyer, M.; Huang, B.; Kirilov, E.; Grimm, R. Resonantly Interacting Fermi-Fermi Mixture
of 161Dy and 40K. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 124, 203402. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.203402.
855.
Hawking, S.; Ellis, G. The Large Scale Structure of Space-Time, 1st ed.; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1973.
856.
Tino, G.; Cacciapuoti, L.; Capozziello, S.; Lambiase, G.; Sorrentino, F. Precision gravity tests and the Einstein Equivalence
Principle. Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 2020, 112, 103772. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ppnp.2020.103772.
857.
Damour, T.; Polyakov, A. The string dilation and a least coupling principle.
Nucl. Phys. B 1994, 423, 532–558.
https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(94)90143-0.
858.
Tino, G.M.; Vetrano, F. Is it possible to detect gravitational waves with atom interferometers? Class. Quantum Gravity 2007,
24, 2167. https://doi.org/10.1088/0264-9381/24/9/001.
859.
Dimopoulos, S.; Graham, P.W.; Hogan, J.M.; Kasevich, M.A.; Rajendran, S. Atomic gravitational wave interferometric sensor.
Phys. Rev. D 2008, 78, 122002. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.78.122002.
860.
Kolkowitz, S.; Pikovski, I.; Langellier, N.; Lukin, M.D.; Walsworth, R.L.; Ye, J. Gravitational wave detection with optical lattice
atomic clocks. Phys. Rev. D 2016, 94, 124043. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.94.124043.
861.
Counts, I.; Hur, J.; Aude, C.; L., D.P.; Jeon, H.; Leung, C.; Berengut, J.C.; Geddes, A.; Kawasaki, A.; Jhe, W.; et al. Evidence for
Nonlinear Isotope Shift in Yb+ Search for New Boson. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 125, 123002. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.
125.123002.
862.
Solaro, C.; Meyer, S.; Fisher, K.; Berengut, J.C.; Fuchs, E.; Drewsen, M. Improved Isotope-Shift-Based Bounds on Bosons
beyond the Standard Model through Measurements of the 2D3/2 −2D5/2 Interval in Ca+. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 125, 123003.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.123003.
863.
Hinkley, N.; Sherman, J.A.; Phillips, N.B.; Schioppo, M.; Lemke, N.D.; Beloy, K.; Pizzocaro, M.; Oates, C.W.; Ludlow, A.D. An
atomic clock with 10−18 instability. Science 2013, 341, 1215–1218.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
117 of 124
864.
Nicholson, T.L.; Martin, M.J.; Williams, J.R.; Bloom, B.J.; Bishof, M.; Swallows, M.D.; Campbell, S.L.; Ye, J. Comparison of Two
Independent Sr Optical Clocks with 1×10−17 Stability at 103 s. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 230801. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.109.230801.
865.
Campbell, S.L.; Hutson, R.B.; Marti, G.E.; Goban, A.; Oppong, N.D.; McNally, R.L.; Sonderhouse, L.; Robinson, J.M.; Zhang, W.;
Bloom, B.J.; et al. A Fermi-degenerate three-dimensional optical lattice clock. Science 2017, 358, 90–94. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.aam5538.
866.
Kim, K.; Aeppli, A.; Bothwell, T.; Ye, J. Evaluation of Lattice Light Shift at Low 10−19 Uncertainty for a Shallow Lattice Sr Optical
Clock. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2023, 130, 113203. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.130.113203.
867.
Zheng, X.; Dolde, J.; Lochab, V.; Merriman, B.N.; Li, H.; Kolkowitz, S. Differential clock comparisons with a multiplexed optical
lattice clock. Nature 2022, 602, 425–430.
868.
Derevianko, A.; Pospelov, M.
Hunting for topological dark matter with atomic clocks.
Nat. Phys. 2014, 10, 933–936.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys3137.
869.
Van Tilburg, K.; Leefer, N.; Bougas, L.; Budker, D. Search for Ultralight Scalar Dark Matter with Atomic Spectroscopy. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2015, 115, 011802. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.115.011802.
870.
Arvanitaki, A.; Huang, J.; Van Tilburg, K. Searching for dilaton dark matter with atomic clocks. Phys. Rev. D 2015, 91, 015015.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.91.015015.
871.
Stadnik, Y.V.; Flambaum, V.V. Enhanced effects of variation of the fundamental constants in laser interferometers and application
to dark-matter detection. Phys. Rev. A 2016, 93, 063630. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.93.063630.
872.
Kovachy, T.; Asenbaum, P.; Overstreet, C.; Donnelly, C.A.; Dickerson, S.M.; Sugarbaker, A.; Hogan, J.M.; Kasevich, M.A.
Quantum superposition at the half-metre scale. Nature 2015, 528, 530–533.
873.
Poli, N.; Wang, F.Y.; Tarallo, M.G.; Alberti, A.; Prevedelli, M.; Tino, G.M. Precision Measurement of Gravity with Cold
Atoms in an Optical Lattice and Comparison with a Classical Gravimeter.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 106, 038501.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.038501.
874.
Peters, A.; Chung, K.Y.; Chu, S. Measurement of gravitational acceleration by dropping atoms. Nature 1999, 400, 849–852.
875.
McGuirk, J.M.; Foster, G.T.; Fixler, J.B.; Snadden, M.J.; Kasevich, M.A. Sensitive absolute-gravity gradiometry using atom
interferometry. Phys. Rev. A 2002, 65, 033608.
876.
D’Amico, G.; Borselli, F.; Cacciapuoti, L.; Prevedelli, M.; Rosi, G.; Sorrentino, F.; Tino, G.M. Bragg interferometer for gravity
gradient measurements. Phys. Rev. A 2016, 93, 063628. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.93.063628.
877.
Tarallo, M.G.; Alberti, A.; Poli, N.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Wang, F.Y.; Tino, G.M. Delocalization-enhanced Bloch oscillations and
driven resonant tunneling in optical lattices for precision force measurements.
Phys. Rev. A 2012, 86, 033615.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.86.033615.
878.
Alberti, A.; Ferrari, G.; Ivanov, V.V.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Tino, G.M. Atomic wave packets in amplitude-modulated vertical optical
lattices. New J. Phys. 2010, 12, 065037. https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/12/6/065037.
879.
McAlpine, K.E.; Gochnauer, D.; Gupta, S. Excited-band Bloch oscillations for precision atom interferometry. Phys. Rev. A 2020,
101, 023614. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.101.023614.
880.
Hu, L.; Wang, E.; Salvi, L.; Tinsley, J.N.; Tino, G.M.; Poli, N. Sr atom interferometry with the optical clock transition as a
gravimeter and a gravity gradiometer. Class. Quantum Gravity 2019, 37, 014001. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6382/ab4d18.
881.
Asenbaum, P.; Overstreet, C.; Kovachy, T.; Brown, D.D.; Hogan, J.M.; Kasevich, M.A. Phase Shift in an Atom Interferometer due to
Spacetime Curvature across its Wave Function. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 118, 183602. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.183602.
882.
Conlon, L.O.; Michel, T.; Guccione, G.; McKenzie, K.; Assad, S.M.; Lam, P.K. Enhancing the precision limits of interferometric
satellite geodesy missions. NPJ Microgravity 2022, 8, 21. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-022-00204-9.
883.
Durfee, D.S.; Shaham, Y.K.; Kasevich, M.A. Gravity gradiometry using a Bose-Einstein condensate. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006,
97, 240801.
884.
Gustavson, T.L.; Landragin, A.; Kasevich, M.A. Rotation sensing with a dual atom-interferometer Sagnac gyroscope. Class.
Quantum Gravity 2000, 17, 2385. https://doi.org/10.1088/0264-9381/17/12/311.
885.
Ferrari, G.; Poli, N.; Sorrentino, F.; Tino, G.M. Long-lived Bloch oscillations with bosonic Sr atoms and application to gravity
measurement at the micrometer scale. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97, 060402.
886.
Amelino-Camelia, G.; Lämmerzahl, C.; Mercati, F.; Tino, G.M. Constraining the energy-momentum dispersion relation with
Planck-scale sensitivity using cold atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 103, 171302.
887.
De Angelis, M.; Bertoldi, A.; Cacciapuoti, L.; Giorgini, A.; Lamporesi, G.; Prevedelli, M.; Saccorotti, G.; Sorrentino, F.; Tino, G.M.
Precision gravimetry with atomic sensors. Meas. Sci. Technol. 2009, 20, 022001.
888.
Damour, T.; Donoghue, J.F. Equivalence principle violations and couplings of a light dilaton. Phys. Rev. D 2010, 82, 084033.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.82.084033.
889.
Bertone, G.; Hooper, D. History of dark matter. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2018, 90, 045002. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.90.045
002.
890.
Hees, A.; Minazzoli, O.; Savalle, E.; Stadnik, Y.V.; Wolf, P. Violation of the equivalence principle from light scalar dark matter.
Phys. Rev. D 2018, 98, 064051. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.98.064051.
891.
Rogers, K.K.; Peiris, H.V. Strong Bound on Canonical Ultralight Axion Dark Matter from the Lyman-Alpha Forest. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2021, 126, 071302. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.071302.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
118 of 124
892.
Ellis, J.; Hagelin, J.S.; Nanopoulos, D.; Srednicki, M. Search for violations of quantum mechanics. Nucl. Phys. B 1984, 241, 381–405.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(84)90053-1.
893.
Diósi, L. Models for universal reduction of macroscopic quantum fluctuations.
Phys. Rev. A 1989, 40, 1165–1174.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.40.1165.
894.
Penrose, R. On Gravity’s Role in Quantum State Reduction. Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 1996, 28, 581–600.
895.
Gasbarri, G.; Belenchia, A.; Carlesso, M.; Donadi, S.; Bassi, A.; Kaltenbaek, R.; Paternostro, M.; Ulbricht, H. Testing the Foundation
of Quantum Physics in Space via Interferometric and Non-Interferometric Experiments with Mesoscopic Nanoparticles. Commun.
Phys. 2021, 4, 155.
896.
Reynaud, S.; Salomon, C.; Wolf, P. Testing General Relativity with Atomic Clocks.
Space Sci. Rev. 2009, 148, 233–247.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-009-9539-0.
897.
Schiller, S.; Tino, G.M.; Gill, P.; Salomon, C.; Sterr, U.; Peik, E.; Nevsky, A.; Görlitz, A.; Svehla, D.; Ferrari, G.; et al. Einstein
Gravity Explorer—A medium-class fundamental physics mission. Exp. Astron. 2009, 23, 573–610.
898.
Lilley, M.; Savalle, E.; Angonin, M.C.; Delva, P.; Guerlin, C.; Le Poncin-Lafitte, C.; Meynadier, F.; Wolf, P. ACES/PHARAO:
high-performance space-to-ground and ground-to-ground clock comparison for fundamental physics. GPS Solut. 2021, 25, 34.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10291-020-01058-y.
899.
Cacciapuoti, L.; Armano, M.; Much, R.; Sy, O.; Helm, A.; Hess, M.P.; Kehrer, J.; Koller, S.; Niedermaier, T.; Esnault, F.X.; et al.
Testing gravity with cold-atom clocks in space. Eur. Phys. J. D 2020, 74, 164. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjd/e2020-10167-7.
900.
Schlamminger, S.; Choi, K.Y.; Wagner, T.A.; Gundlach, J.H.; Adelberger, E.G. Test of the Equivalence Principle Using a Rotating
Torsion Balance. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 041101. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.041101.
901.
Nobili, A.; Bramanti, D.; Comandi, G.; Toncelli, R.; Polacco, E.; Chiofalo, M. “Galileo Galilei-GG”: design, requirements, error
budget and significance of the ground prototype. Phys. Lett. A 2003, 318, 172–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physleta.2003.07.
019.
902.
Blaser, J.; Cornelisse, J.; Cruise, T.; Damour, F.; Hechler, M.; Hechler, Y.; Jafry, B.; Kent, N.; Lockerbie, H.; Pik, A.; et al. STEP:
“Satellite Test of the Equivalence Principle”, Report on the Phase A Study; Technical Report, ESA SCI (96)5; NASA: Washington, DC,
USA , 1996.
903.
Touboul, P.; Métris, G.; Rodrigues, M.; André, Y.; Baghi, Q.; Bergé, J.; Boulanger, D.; Bremer, S.; Carle, P.; Chhun, R.; et al.
MICROSCOPE Mission: First Results of a Space Test of the Equivalence Principle. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 119, 231101.
904.
Touboul, P.; Métris, G.; Rodrigues, M.; André, Y.; Baghi, Q.; Bergé, J.; Boulanger, D.; Bremer, S.; Chhun, R.; Christophe, B.; et al.
Space test of the equivalence principle: first results of the MICROSCOPE mission. Class. Quantum Gravity 2019, 36, 225006.
https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6382/ab4707.
905.
Collaboration, M.; Touboul, P.; et al. MICROSCOPE Mission: Final Results of the Test of the Equivalence Principle. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2022, 129, 121102.
906.
Asenbaum, P.; Overstreet, C.; Kim, M.; Curti, J.; Kasevich, M.A. Atom-Interferometric Test of the Equivalence Principle at the
10−12 Level. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 125, 191101. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.191101.
907.
Battelier, B.; Bergé, J.; Bertoldi, A.; Blanchet, L.; Bongs, K.; Bouyer, P.; Braxmaier, C.; Calonico, D.; Fayet, P.; Gaaloul, N.; et al.
Exploring the foundations of the physical universe with space tests of the equivalence principle. Exp. Astron. 2021, 51, 1695–1736.
908.
Müntinga, H.; Ahlers, H.; Krutzik, M.; Wenzlawski, A.; Arnold, S.; Becker, D.; Bongs, K.; Dittus, H.; Duncker, H.; Gaaloul, N.;
et al. Interferometry with Bose-Einstein condensates in microgravity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, 093602.
909.
Deppner, C.; Herr, W.; Cornelius, M.; Stromberger, P.; Sternke, T.; Grzeschik, C.; Grote, A.; Rudolph, J.; Herrmann, S.; Krutzik,
M.; et al. Collective-mode enhanced matter-wave optics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2021, 127, 100401.
910.
Nyman, R.A.; Varoquaux, G.; Lienhart, F.; Chambon, D.; Boussen, S.; Cl´ement, J.-F.; Muller, T.; Santarelli, G.; Santos, F.P.D.;
Clairon, A.; et al. I.C.E.: a transportable atomic inertial sensor for test in microgravity. Appl. Phys. B 2006, 84, 673–681.
911.
Lachmann, M.D.; Ahlers, H.; Becker, D.; Dinkelaker, A.N.; Grosse, J.; Hellmig, O.; Müntinga, H.; Schkolnik, V.; Seidel, S.T.;
Wendrich, T.; et al. Ultracold atom interferometry in space. Nature Comm. 2021, 12, 1317.
912.
Aveline, D.C.; Williams, J.R.; Elliott, E.R.; Dutenhoffer, C.; Kellogg, J.R.; Kohel, J.M.; Lay, N.E.; Oudrhiri, K.; Shotwell, R.F.; Yu, N.;
et al. Observation of Bose-Einstein condensates in an earth-orbiting research lab. Nature 2020, 582, 193–197.
913.
Loriani, S.; Schubert, C.; Schlippert, D.; Ertmer, W.; Santos, F.P.D.; Rasel, E.M.; Gaaloul, N.; Wolf, P. Resolution of the colocation
problem in satellite quantum tests of the universality of free fall. Phys. Rev. D 2020, 102, 124043.
914.
Bongs, K.; Bouyer, P.; Buchmueller, O.; Canuel, B.; Chiofalo, M.; Ellis, J.; Gaaloul, N.; Hogan, J.; Kovachy, T.; Rasel, E.; et al. In
Proceedings of the Terrestrial Very-Long-Baseline Atom Interferometry Workshop, Geneva, Switzerland, 13–14 March 2023.
915.
Canuel, B.; Bertoldi, A.; Amand, L.; Pozzo di Borgo, E.; Chantrait, T.; Danquigny, C.; Dovale Álvarez, M.; Fang, B.; Freise,
A.; Geiger, J.; et al.
Exploring gravity with the MIGA large scale atom interferometer.
Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 14064.
https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-32165-z.
916.
Canuel, B.; Abend, S.; Amaro-Seoane, P.; Badaracco, F.; Beaufils, Q.; Bertoldi, A.; Bongs, K.; Bouyer, P.; Braxmaier, C.; Chaibi,
W.; et al. ELGAR—A European Laboratory for Gravitation and Atom-interferometric Research. Class. Quantum Gravity 2020,
37, 225017. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6382/aba80e.
917.
Zhan, M.S.; Wang, J.; Ni, W.T.; Gao, D.F.; Wang, G.; He, L.X.; Li, R.B.; Zhou, L.; Chen, X.; Zhong, J.Q.; et al. ZAIGA: Zhaoshan
long-baseline atom interferometer gravitation antenna. Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 2020, 29, 1940005. https://doi.org/10.1142/S02182
71819400054.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
119 of 124
918.
Ufrecht, C.; Di Pumpo, F.; Friedrich, A.; Roura, A.; Schubert, C.; Schlippert, D.; Rasel, E.M.; Schleich, W.P.; Giese, E. Atom-
interferometric test of the universality of gravitational redshift and free fall. Phys. Rev. Res. 2020, 2, 043240. https://doi.org/10.1
103/PhysRevResearch.2.043240.
919.
Badurina, L.; Bentine, E.; Blas, D.; Bongs, K.; Bortoletto, D.; Bowcock, T.; Bridges, K.; Bowden, W.; Buchmueller, O.; Burrage,
C.; et al.
AION: an atom interferometer observatory and network.
J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 2020, 2020, 011.
https:
//doi.org/10.1088/1475-7516/2020/05/011.
920.
Abe, M.; Adamson, P.; Borcean, M.; Bortoletto, D.; Bridges, K.; Carman, S.P.; Chattopadhyay, S.; Coleman, J.; Curfman, N.M.;
DeRose, K.; et al. Matter-wave Atomic Gradiometer Interferometric Sensor (MAGIS-100). Quantum Sci. Technol. 2021, 6, 044003.
https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-9565/abf719.
921.
Abbott, B.P.; Abbott, R.; Abbott, T.D.; Abernathy, M.R.; Acernese, F.; Ackley, K.; Adams, C.; Adams, T.; Addesso, P.; Adhikari,
R.X.; et al. GW150914: The Advanced LIGO Detectors in the Era of First Discoveries. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 116, 131103.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.131103.
922.
Amaro-Seoane, P.; Andrews, J.; Arca Sedda, M.; Askar, A.; Baghi, Q.; Balasov, R.; Bartos, I.; Bavera, S.S.; Bellovary, J.;
Berry, C.P.L.; et al.
Astrophysics with the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna.
Living Rev. Relativ. 2023, 26, 2.
https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s41114-022-00041-y.
923.
Belenchia, A.; Carlesso, M.; Bayraktar, Ö.; Dequal, D.; Derkach, I.; Gasbarri, G.; Herr, W.; Li, Y.L.; Rademacher, M.; Sidhu, J.; et al.
Quantum Physics in Space. Phys. Rep. 2022, 951, 1–70.
924.
Foster, J.W.; Rodd, N.L.; Safdi, B.R. Revealing the dark matter halo with axion direct detection. Phys. Rev. D 2018, 97, 123006.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.97.123006.
925.
Derevianko, A. Detecting dark-matter waves with a network of precision-measurement tools. Phys. Rev. A 2018, 97, 042506.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.97.042506.
926.
Lee, Jae-Weon. Brief History of Ultra-light Scalar Dark Matter Models. EPJ Web Conf. 2018, 168, 06005. https://doi.org/10.1051/
epjconf/201816806005.
927.
Hees, A.; Guéna, J.; Abgrall, M.; Bize, S.; Wolf, P. Searching for an Oscillating Massive Scalar Field as a Dark Matter Candidate
Using Atomic Hyperfine Frequency Comparisons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 117, 061301. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.117.
061301.
928.
Wagner, T.A.; Schlamminger, S.; Gundlach, J.H.; Adelberger, E.G. Torsion-balance tests of the weak equivalence principle. Class.
Quantum Gravity 2012, 29, 184002. https://doi.org/10.1088/0264-9381/29/18/184002.
929.
Graham, P.W.; Kaplan, D.E.; Mardon, J.; Rajendran, S.; Terrano, W.A.; Trahms, L.; Wilkason, T. Spin precession experiments for
light axionic dark matter. Phys. Rev. D 2018, 97, 055006. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.97.055006.
930.
Graham, P.W.; Kaplan, D.E.; Mardon, J.; Rajendran, S.; Terrano, W.A. Dark matter direct detection with accelerometers. Phys.
Rev. D 2016, 93, 075029. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.93.075029.
931.
Bailes, M.; Berger, B.K.; Brady, P.R.; Branchesi, M.; Danzmann, K.; Evans, M.; Holley-Bockelmann, K.; Iyer, B.R.; Kajita, T.;
Katsanevas, S.; et al. Gravitational-wave physics and astronomy in the 2020s and 2030s. Nat. Rev. Phys. 2021, 3, 344–366.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-021-00303-8.
932.
ECFA Detectors R&D Roadmap Process Group. The 2021 ECFA Detector Research and Developement Roadmap; CERN: Geneva,
Switzerland, 2021. https://doi.org/10.17181/CERN.XDPL.W2EX.
933.
Abend, S.; Allard, B.; Alonso, I.; Antoniadis, J.; Araujo, H.; Arduini, G.; Arnold, A.; Aßmann, T.; Augst, N.; Badurina, L.; et al.
Terrestrial Very-Long-Baseline Atom Interferometry: Workshop Summary. arXiv 2023, arXiv:hep-ex/2310.08183.
934.
Schive, H.Y.; Chiueh, T.; Broadhurst, T. Cosmic structure as the quantum interference of a coherent dark wave. Nat. Phys. 2014,
10, 496–499. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys2996.
935.
Angulo, R.E.; Hahn, O. Large-scale dark matter simulations. Living Rev. Comput. Astrophys. 2022, 8, 1. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s41115-021-00013-z.
936.
Faccio, D.; Belgiorno, F.; Cacciatori, S.; Gorini, V.; Liberati, S.; Moschella, U. Lecture Notes in Physics Analogue Gravity Phonomenol-
ogy; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2013. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-00266-8.
937.
Wald, R.M. General Relativity, 1984 ed.; University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, USA, 1984; p. 473.
938.
Schützhold, R.; Unruh, W.G. Gravity wave analogs of black holes. Phys. Rev. D 2002, 66, 044019.
939.
Weinfurtner, S.; Tedford, E.W.; Penrice, M.C.J.; Unruh, W.G.; Lawrence, G.A. Measurement of stimulated Hawking emission in
an analogue system. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 106, 021302.
940.
Euvé, L.P.; Michel, F.; Parentani, R.; Philbin, T.G.; Rousseaux, G. Observation of noise correlated by the Hawking effect in a
water tank. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 117, 121301.
941.
Torres, T.; Patrick, S.; Coutant, A.; Richartz, M.; Tedford, E.W.; Weinfurtner, S. Observation of superradiance in a vortex flow.
Nat. Phys. 2017, 13, 833–836.
942.
Plebanski, J. Electromagnetic Waves in Gravitational Fields. Phys. Rev. 1959, 118, 1396–1408.
943.
de Felice, F. On the gravitational field acting as an optical medium. Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 1971, 2, 347–367.
944.
Schuster, S.; Visser, M. Effective metrics and a fully covariant description of constitutive tensors in electrodynamics. Phys. Rev.
D 2017, 96, 124019.
945.
Schuster, S.; Visser, M. Boyer-Lindquist space-times and beyond: Meta-material analogues. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1802.09807.
946.
Garay, L.J.; Anglin, J.R.; Cirac, J.I.; Zoller, P. Black holes in Bose-Einstein condensates. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2000, 85, 4643–4647.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
120 of 124
947.
Visser, M.; Barceló, C.; Liberati, S. Analog models of and for gravity. Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 2002, 34, 1719–1734.
948.
Jacobson, T. Black hole evaporation and ultrashort distances. Phys. Rev. D 1991, 44, 1731–1739.
949.
Unruh, W.G. Sonic analog of black holes and the effects of high frequencies on black hole evaporation. Phys. Rev. D 1995,
51, 2827–2838.
950.
Finazzi, S.; Parentani, R. On the robustness of acoustic black hole spectra. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2011, 314, 012030.
951.
Jacobson, T. Thermodynamics of space-time: The Einstein equation of state. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1995, 75, 1260–1263.
952.
Liberati, S.; Visser, M.; Weinfurtner, S. Analogue quantum gravity phenomenology from a two-component Bose-Einstein
condensate. Class. Quantum Gravity 2006, 23, 3129.
953.
Howl, R.; Penrose, R.; Fuentes, I. Exploring the unification of quantum theory and general relativity with a Bose-Einstein
condensate. New J. Phys. 2019, 21, 043047.
954.
Jain, P.; Weinfurtner, S.; Visser, M.; Gardiner, C.W. Analog model of a Friedmann-Robertson-Walker universe in Bose-Einstein
condensates: Application of the classical field method. Phys. Rev. A 2007, 76, 033616.
955.
Sindoni, L.; Girelli, F.; Liberati, S. Emergent Gravitational Dynamics in Bose-Einstein Condensates. AIP Conf. Proc. 2009,
1196, 258–265. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3284392.
956.
Unruh, W. Experimental Black Hole Evaporation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1981, 46, 1351.
957.
Balbinot, R.; Fabbri, A.; Fagnocchi, S.; Parentani, R. Non-local density correlations as a signal of Hawking radiation in BEC
acoustic black holes. Phys. Rev. 2008, 78, 024035.
958.
Finazzi, S.; Parentani, R. Black-hole lasers in Bose-Einstein condensates. New J. Phys. 2010, 12, 095015.
959.
Carusotto, I.; Fagnocchi, S.; Recati, A.; Balbinot, R.; Fabbri, A. Numerical observation of Hawking radiation from acoustic black
holes in atomic Bose–Einstein condensates. New J. Phys. 2008, 10, 103001. https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/10/10/103001.
960.
Parola, A.; Tettamanti, M.; Cacciatori, S.L. Analogue Hawking radiation in an exactly solvable model of BEC. EPL Europhys. Lett.
2017, 119, 50002.
961.
Kolobov, V.I.; Golubkov, K.; Muñoz de Nova, J.R.; Steinhauer, J. Spontaneous Hawking Radiation and Beyond: Observing the
Time Evolution of an Analogue Black Hole. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1910.10677.
962.
Kovtun, P.K.; Son, D.T.; Starinets, A.O. Viscosity in strongly interacting quantum field theories from black hole physics. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2005, 94, 111601.
963.
Brout, R.; Massar, S.; Parentani, R.; Spindel, P. A primer for black hole quantum physics. Phys. Rep. 1995, 260, 329.
964.
Corley, S. Computing the spectrum of black hole radiation in the presence of high-frequency dispersion: An analytical approach.
Phys. Rev. D 1998, 57, 6280.
965.
Saida, H.; Sakagami, M.A. Black hole radiation with high-frequency dispersion. Phys. Rev. D 2000, 61, 084023.
966.
Himemoto, Y.; Tanaka, T. Generalization of the model of Hawking radiation with modified high-frequency dispersion relation.
Phys. Rev. D 2000, 61, 064004.
967.
Unruh, W.G.; Schutzhold, R. On the universality of the Hawking effect. Phys. Rev. D 2005, 71, 024028.
968.
Balbinot, R.; Fabbri, A.; Fagnocchi, S.; Parentani, R. Hawking radiation from acoustic black holes, short distance and back-reaction
effects. Riv. Del Nuovo C. 2005, 28, 1.
969.
Lindquist, R.W. Relativistic transport theory. Ann. Phys. 1966, 37, 487.
970.
Stewart, J. Lecture Notes in Physics; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1969; Volume 10.
971.
Bardeen, J.M.; Carter, B.; Hawking, S.W. The four laws of black hole mechanics. Commun. Math. Phys. 1973, 31, 161.
972.
Bekenstein, J.D. Black holes and entropy. Phys. Rev. D 1973, 7, 2333.
973.
Jacobson, T. Black Hole Entropy and Induced Gravity. arXiv 1994, arXiv:gr-qc/9404039.
974.
Liberati, S.; Tricella, G.; Trombettoni, A. The Information Loss Problem: An Analogue Gravity Perspective. Entropy 2019, 21, 940.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e21100940.
975.
Chirco, G.; Liberati, S. Non-equilibrium thermodynamics of spacetime: The role of gravitational dissipation. Phys. Rev. D 2010,
81, 024016.
976.
Chirco, G.; Eling, C.; Liberati, S. The universal viscosity to entropy density ratio from entanglement.
Phys. Rev. D 2010,
82, 024010.
977.
Penrose, R. Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1965, 14, 57–59.
978.
Shuryak, E. Strongly coupled quark-gluon plasma in heavy ion collisions.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 2017, 89, 035001.
https:
//doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.89.035001.
979.
Meyer, H.B. Calculation of the Bulk Viscosity in SU(3) Gluodynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 162001. https://doi.org/10.110
3/PhysRevLett.100.162001.
980.
Romatschke, P. Shear Viscosity at Infinite Coupling: A Field Theory Calculation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2021, 127, 111603.
981.
Rais, J.; Gallmeister, K.; Greiner, C. Shear viscosity to entropy density ratio of Hagedorn states. Phys. Rev. D 2020, 102, 036009.
982.
Enss, T.; Haussmann, R.; Zwerger, W. Viscosity and scale invariance in the unitary Fermi gas. Ann. Phys. 2011, 326, 770–796.
983.
Chiofalo, M.L.; Grasso, D.; Mannarelli, M.; Trabucco, S.
Dissipative processes at the acoustic horizon.
arXiv 2022,
arXiv:2202.13790.
984.
Chiofalo, M.L.; Tosi, M.P. Time-dependent density-functional theory for superfluids. Europhys. Lett. 2001, 53, 162. https:
//doi.org/10.1209/epl/i2001-00131-8.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
121 of 124
985.
Chiofalo, M.; Minguzzi, A.; Tosi, M. Time-dependent linear response of an inhomogeneous Bose superfluid: microscopic theory
and connection to current-density functional theory. Phys. Condens. Matter 1998, 254, 188–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-
4526(98)00472-4.
986.
Iadonisi, G.; Cantele, G.; Chiofalo, M.L.
Introduction to Solid State Physics and Crystalline Nanostructures; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2014.
987.
Arndt, M.; Hornberger, K. Testing the Limits of Quantum Mechanical Superpositions. Nat. Phys. 2014, 10, 271–277.
988.
Fein, Y.Y.; Geyer, P.; Zwick, P.; Kiałka, F.; Pedalino, S.; Mayor, M.; Gerlich, S.; Arndt, M. Quantum Superposition of Molecules
beyond 25 kDa. Nat. Phys. 2019, 15, 1242–1245.
989.
Isham, C.J. Canonical Quantum Gravity and the Problem of Time. In Integrable Systems, Quantum Groups, and Quantum Field
Theories; Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1993; pp. 157–287.
990.
Page, D.N.; Wootters, W.K. Evolution without evolution: Dynamics described by stationary observables. Phys. Rev. D 1983,
27, 2885–2892.
991.
Giovannetti, V.; Lloyd, S.; Maccone, L. Quantum time. Phys. Rev. D 2015, 92, 045033.
992.
Castro-Ruiz, E.; Giacomini, F.; Belenchia, A.; Brukner, ˇC. Quantum clocks and the temporal localisability of events in the
presence of gravitating quantum systems. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 2672.
993.
Castro-Ruiz, E.; Giacomini, F.; Brukner, ˇC. Entanglement of quantum clocks through gravity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2017,
114, E2303–E2309.
994.
Foti, C.; Coppo, A.; Barni, G.; Cuccoli, A.; Verrucchi, P. Time and classical equations of motion from quantum entanglement via
the Page and Wootters mechanism with generalized coherent states. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 1–12.
995.
Adler, S. Quantum Theory as an Emergent Phenomenon; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2004.
996.
Leggett, A.J. The Quantum Measurement Problem. Science 2005, 307, 871–872.
997.
Weinberg, S. The Trouble with Quantum Mechanics; The New York Review of Books: New York, NY, USA, 2017.
998.
Schlosshauer, M. Quantum decoherence. Phys. Rep. 2019, 831, 1–57.
999.
Bohm, D. A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of “hidden” variables. i. Phys. Rev. 1952, 85, 166.
1000. Walleczek, J.; Grössing, G.; Pylkkänen, P. Emergent Quantum Mechanics: David Bohm Centennial Perspectives; MDPI: Basel,
Switzerland, 2019.
1001. Griffiths, R.B. Consistent histories and the interpretation of quantum mechanics. J. Stat. Phys. 1984, 36, 219–272.
1002. Everett III, H. “Relative state” formulation of quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1957, 29, 454.
1003. Diosi, L. A Universal Master Equation for the Gravitational Violation of Quantum Mechanics. Phys. Lett. A 1987, 120, 377–381.
1004. Penrose, R. On the Gravitization of Quantum Mechanics 1: Quantum State Reduction. Found. Phys. 2014, 44, 557–575.
1005. Bassi, A.; Lochan, K.; Satin, S.; Singh, T.P.; Ulbricht, H. Models of Wave-Function Collapse, Underlying Theories, and
Experimental Tests. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2013, 85, 471–527.
1006. Adler, S.L.; Bassi, A. Is Quantum Theory Exact? Science 2009, 325, 275–276.
1007. Riedinger, R.; Wallucks, A.; Marinkovi´c, I.; Löffler, W.; Aspelmeyer, M.; Hammerer, K. Remote quantum entanglement between
two micromechanical oscillators. Nature 2018, 556, 473.
1008. Ockeloen-Korppi, C.F.; Damskägg, E.; Pirkkalainen, J.M.; Clerk, A.A.; Massel, F.; Sillanpää, M.A. Stabilized entanglement of
massive mechanical oscillators. Nature 2018, 556, 478.
1009. Marinkovi´c, I.; Wallucks, A.; Milburn, G.J.; Aspelmeyer, M.; Hammerer, K. Optomechanical Bell test. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018,
121, 220404.
1010. Friedman, J.R.; Patel, V.; Chen, W.; Tolpygo, S.K.; Lukens, J.E. Quantum superposition of distinct macroscopic states. Nature
2000, 406, 43–46.
1011. Andrews, M.R.; Townsend, C.G.; Miesner, H.J.; Durfee, D.S.; Kurn, D.M.; Ketterle, W. Observation of interference between two
Bose condensates. Science 1997, 275, 637–641.
1012. Berrada, T.; van Frank, S.; Bücker, R.; Schumm, T.; Schmiedmayer, J. Integrated Mach–Zehnder interferometer for Bose–Einstein
condensates. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2077.
1013. Xu, M.; Jäger, S.B.; Schütz, S.; Cooper, J.; Morigi, G.; Holland, M. Supercooling of Atoms in an Optical Resonator. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2016, 116, 153002.
1014. Brand, C.; Kiałka, F.; Troyer, M.; Mayor, M. Bragg diffraction of large organic molecules. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 125, 033604.
1015. Nimmrichter, S.; Hornberger, K. Macroscopicity of mechanical quantum superposition states. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, 160403.
1016. Pearle, P. Combining Stochastic Dynamical State-Vector Reduction with Spontaneous Localization.
Phys. Rev. A 1989,
39, 2277–2289.
1017. Ghirardi, G.C.; Pearle, P.; Rimini, A. Markov Processes in Hilbert Space and Continuous Spontaneous Localization of Systems of
Identical Particles. Phys. Rev. A 1990, 42, 78.
1018. Ghirardi, G.C.; Rimini, A.; Weber, T. A Unified Dynamics for Micro and MACRO Systems. Phys. Rev. D 1986, 34, 470.
1019. Adler, S.L. Lower and Upper Bounds on CSL Parameters from Latent Image Formation and IGM Heating. J. Phys. A 2007,
40, 2935.
1020. Belli, S.; Bonsignori, R.; D’Auria, G.; Fant, L.; Martini, M.; Peirone, S.; Donadi, S.; Bassi, A. Entangling Macroscopic Diamonds at
Room Temperature: Bounds on the Continuous-Spontaneous-Localization Parameters. Phys. Rev. A 2016, 94, 012108.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
122 of 124
1021. Toroš, M.; Gasbarri, G.; Bassi, A. Colored and Dissipative Continuous Spontaneous Localization Model and Bounds from
Matter-Wave Interferometry. Phys. Lett. A 2017, 381, 3921–3927.
1022. Carlesso, M.; Bassi, A.; Falferi, P.; Vinante, A. Experimental Bounds on Collapse Models from Gravitational Wave Detectors.
Phys. Rev. D 2016, 94, 124036.
1023. Vinante, A.; Mezzena, R.; Falferi, P.; Carlesso, M.; Bassi, A. Improved Noninterferometric Test of Collapse Models Using
Ultracold Cantilevers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 119, 110401.
1024. Adler, S.L.; Bassi, A.; Carlesso, M.; Vinante, A. Testing Continuous Spontaneous Localization with Fermi Liquids. Phys. Rev. D
2019, 99, 103001.
1025. Vinante, A.; Carlesso, M.; Bassi, A.; Chiasera, A.; Varas, S.; Falferi, P.; Margesin, B.; Mezzena, R.; Ulbricht, H. Narrowing the
Parameter Space of Collapse Models with Ultracold Layered Force Sensors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 125, 100404.
1026. Donadi, S.; Piscicchia, K.; Grande, R.D.; Curceanu, C.; Laubenstein, M.; Bassi, A. Novel CSL Bounds from the Noise-Induced
Radiation Emission from Atoms. Eur. Phys. J. C 2021, 81, 1–10.
1027. Bilardello, M.; Donadi, S.; Vinante, A.; Bassi, A. Bounds on Collapse Models from Cold-Atom Experiments. Phys. A 2016,
462, 764–782.
1028. Helou, B.; Slagmolen, B.J.J.; McClelland, D.E.; Chen, Y. LISA Pathfinder Appreciably Constrains Collapse Models. Phys. Rev. D
2017, 95, 084054.
1029. Carlesso, M.; Donadi, S.; Ferialdi, L.; Paternostro, M.; Ulbricht, H.; Bassi, A. Present Status and Future Challenges of Non-
Interferometric Tests of Collapse Models. Nat. Phys. 2022, 18, 243–250.
1030. Vinante, A.; Ulbricht, H. Gravity-Related Collapse of the Wave Function and Spontaneous Heating: Revisiting the Experimental
Bounds. AVS Quantum Sci. 2021, 3, 045602.
1031. Howl, R.; Milburn, G.J. Penrose–Fuentes gravitationally-induced wave-function collapse. New J. Phys. 2019, 21, 043047.
1032. Belenchia, A.; et al. Test Quantum Mechanics in Space—Invest US $1 Billion. Nature 2021, 596, 32–34.
1033. Kaltenbaek, R.; et al. Macroscopic Quantum Resonators (MAQRO): 2015 Update. EPJ Quantum Technol. 2016, 3, 1–47.
1034. O’Brien, T.E.; Streif, M.; Rubin, N.C.; Santagati, R.; Su, Y.; Huggins, W.J.; Goings, J.J.; Moll, N.; Kyoseva, E.; Degroote, M.;
et al.
Efficient quantum computation of molecular forces and other energy gradients.
Phys. Rev. Res. 2022, 4, 043210.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.043210.
1035. Malone, F.D.; Parrish, R.M.; Welden, A.R.; Fox, T.; Degroote, M.; Kyoseva, E.; Moll, N.; Santagati, R.; Streif, M. Towards the
simulation of large scale protein–ligand interactions on -era quantum computers. Chem. Sci. 2022, 13, 3094–3108.
1036. Khrennikov, A.
Ubiquitous Quantum Structure: From Psychology to Finances; Springer: Berlin, Switzerland, 2010.
https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-05101-2.
1037. Khrennikov, A. Order stability via Fröhlich condensation in bio, eco, and social systems: The quantum-like approach. Biosystems
2022, 212, 104593.
1038. Jedlicka, P. Revisiting the Quantum Brain Hypothesis: Toward Quantum (Neuro)biology? Front. Mol. Neurosci. 2017, 10, 366.
1039. Satinover, J. The Quantum Brain: The Search for Freedom and the Next Generation of Man; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA,
2001.
1040. Tononi, G.; Koch, C. Consciousness: Here, there and everywhere? Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Biol. Sci. 2015, 370, 20140167.
1041. Barbosa, L.S.; Marshall, W.; Albantakis, L.; Tononi, G. Mechanism Integrated Information. Entropy 2021, 23, 362.
1042. Sabbadini, S.A.; Vitiello, G. Entanglement and Phase-Mediated Correlations in Quantum Field Theory. Application to Brain-Mind
States. Appl. Sci. 2019, 9.
1043. Basieva, I.; Khrennikov, A.; Ozawa, M. Quantum-like modeling in biology with open quantum systems and instruments.
Biosystems 2021, 201, 104328.
1044. Li, J.A.; Dong, D.; Wei, Z.; Liu, Y.; Pan, Y.; Nori, F.; Zhang, X. Quantum reinforcement learning during human decision-making.
Nat. Hum. Behav. 2020, 4, 294–307.
1045. Knill, D.C.; Pouget, A. The Bayesian brain: the role of uncertainty in neural coding and computation. Trends Neurosci. 2004,
27, 712–719.
1046. Friston, K. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2010, 11, 127–138.
1047. Nasr, K.; Viswanathan, P.; Nieder, A. Number detectors spontaneously emerge in a deep neural network designed for visual
object recognition. Sci. Adv. 2019, 5, eaav7903.
1048. Kim, G.; Jang, J.; Baek, S.; Song, M.; Paik, S. Visual number sense in untrained deep neural networks. Sci. Adv. 2021, 7, 6127.
1049. Dehaene, S. The neural basis of the Weber—Fechner law: A logarithmic mental number line. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2003, 7, 145.
1050. Gallistel, C.R.; Gelman, R. Non-verbal numerical cognition: from reals to integers. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2000, 4, 59–65.
1051. Burr, D.; Ross, J. A visual sense of number. Current Biol. 2008, 18, 425.
1052. Yago Malo, J.; Cicchini, G.M.; Morrone, M.C.; Chiofalo, M.L. Quantum spin models for numerosity perception. PLoS ONE 2023,
18, 1–16.
1053. Santos, L.F.; Borgonovi, F.; Celardo, G.L. Cooperative Shielding in Many-Body Systems with Long-Range Interaction. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2016, 116, 250402. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.250402.
1054. Nandkishore, R.M.; Sondhi, S.L. Many-Body Localization with Long-Range Interactions.
Phys. Rev. X 2017, 7, 041021.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.7.041021.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
123 of 124
1055. Liu, F.; Lundgren, R.; Titum, P.; Pagano, G.; Zhang, J.; Monroe, C.; Gorshkov, A.V. Confined Quasiparticle Dynamics in Long-
Range Interacting Quantum Spin Chains. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 122, 150601. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.150601.
1056. Thomson, S.J.; Schiró, M. Quasi-many-body localization of interacting fermions with long-range couplings. Phys. Rev. Res. 2020,
2, 043368. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.043368.
1057. Bhakuni, D.S.; Santos, L.F.; Lev, Y.B. Suppression of heating by long-range interactions in periodically driven spin chains. Phys.
Rev. B 2021, 104, L140301. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.104.L140301.
1058. Celardo, G.L.; Giusteri, G.G.; Borgonovi, F. Cooperative robustness to static disorder: Superradiance and localization in a
nanoscale ring to model light-harvesting systems found in nature. Phys. Rev. B 2014, 90, 075113. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevB.90.075113.
1059. Celardo, G.L.; Poli, P.; Lussardi, L.; Borgonovi, F. Cooperative robustness to dephasing: Single-exciton superradiance in a
nanoscale ring to model natural light-harvesting systems. Phys. Rev. B 2014, 90, 085142. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.90
.085142.
1060. Cornelius, J.; Xu, Z.; Saxena, A.; Chenu, A.; del Campo, A. Spectral Filtering Induced by Non-Hermitian Evolution with Balanced
Gain and Loss: Enhancing Quantum Chaos. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2022, 128, 190402. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.128.190402.
1061. Vattay, G.; Kauffman, S.; Niiranen, S. Quantum Biology on the Edge of Quantum Chaos. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e89017.
1062. Altland, A.; Sonner, J. Late time physics of holographic quantum chaos. SciPost Phys. 2021, 11, 034. https://doi.org/10.21468
/SciPostPhys.11.2.034.
1063. Saxena, K.; Singh, P.; Sahoo, P.; Sahu, S.; Ghosh, S.; Ray, K.; Fujita, D.; Bandyopadhyay, A. Fractal, Scale Free Electromagnetic
Resonance of a Single Brain Extracted Microtubule Nanowire, a Single Tubulin Protein and a Single Neuron. Fractal Fract. 2020,
4, 11.
1064. Wilczek, F. Quantum Time Crystals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 160401. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.160401.
1065. Witthaut, D.; Wimberger, S.; Burioni, R.; Timme, M. Classical synchronization indicates persistent entanglement in isolated
quantum systems. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 14829. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14829.
1066. Singh, P.; Saxena, K.; Singhania, A.; Sahoo, P.; Ghosh, S.; Chhajed, R.; Ray, K.; Fujita, D.; Bandyopadhyay, A. A Self-Operating
Time Crystal Model of the Human Brain: Can We Replace Entire Brain Hardware with a 3D Fractal Architecture of Clocks
Alone? Information 2020, 11, 238.
1067. Panitchayangkoon, G.; Hayes, D.; Fransted, K.A.; Caram, J.R.; Harel, E.; Wen, J.; Blankenship, R.E.; Engel, G.S. Long-lived
quantum coherence in photosynthetic complexes at physiological temperature. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 12766–12770.
1068. Ball, P. Physics of life: The dawn of quantum biology. Nature 2011, 474, 272–274.
1069. Fleming, G.R.; Scholes, G.D.; Cheng, Y.C. Quantum effects in biology. Procedia Chem. 2011, 3, 38–57.
1070. Collini, E.; Wong, C.Y.; Wilk, K.E.; Curmi, P.M.G.; Brumer, P.; Scholes, G.D. Coherently wired light-harvesting in photosynthetic
marine algae at ambient temperature. Nature 2010, 463, 644–647.
1071. Fröhlich, H. Bose condensation of strongly excited longitudinal electric modes. Phys. Lett. A 1968, 26, 402–403.
1072. Vasconcellos, Á.R.; Vannucchi, F.S.; Mascarenhas, S.; Luzzi, R. Fröhlich Condensate: Emergence of Synergetic Dissipative
Structures in Information Processing Biological and Condensed Matter Systems. Information 2012, 3, 601–620.
1073. Zhang, Z.; Agarwal, G.S.; Scully, M.O. Quantum Fluctuations in the Fröhlich Condensate of Molecular Vibrations Driven Far
From Equilibrium. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 122, 158101. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.158101.
1074. Biamonte, J.; Faccin, M.; De Domenico, M. Complex networks from classical to quantum. Commun. Phys. 2019, 2, 53.
1075. Watts, D.J.; Strogatz, S.H. Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’networks. Nature 1998, 393, 440–442.
1076. Barabási, A.L.; Albert, R. Emergence of Scaling in Random Networks. Science 1999, 286, 509–512.
1077. Boccaletti, S.; Latora, V.; Moreno, Y.; Chavez, M.; Hwang, D.U. Complex networks: Structure and dynamics. Phys. Rep. 2006,
424, 175–308.
1078. Cirac, J.I.; Zoller, P.; Kimble, H.J.; Mabuchi, H. Quantum State Transfer and Entanglement Distribution among Distant Nodes in
a Quantum Network. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1997, 78, 3221–3224. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.78.3221.
1079. Ritter, S.; Nölleke, C.; Hahn, C.; Reiserer, A.; Neuzner, A.; Uphoff, M.; Mücke, M.; Figueroa, E.; Bochmann, J.; Rempe, G. An
elementary quantum network of single atoms in optical cavities. Nature 2012, 484, 195–200.
1080. De Domenico, M.; Biamonte, J. Spectral Entropies as Information-Theoretic Tools for Complex Network Comparison. Phys. Rev.
X 2016, 6, 041062. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.6.041062.
1081. Valdez, M.A.; Jaschke, D.; Vargas, D.L.; Carr, L.D. Quantifying Complexity in Quantum Phase Transitions via Mutual Information
Complex Networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 119, 225301. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.119.225301.
1082. García-Pérez, G.; Rossi, M.A.C.; Sokolov, B.; Borrelli, E.M.; Maniscalco, S. Pairwise tomography networks for many-body
quantum systems. Phys. Rev. Res. 2020, 2, 023393. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.023393.
1083. Kadian, K.; Garhwal, S.; Kumar, A. Quantum walk and its application domains: A systematic review. Comput. Sci. Rev. 2021,
41, 100419.
1084. Whitfield, J.D.; Rodríguez-Rosario, C.A.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Quantum stochastic walks: A generalization of classical random
walks and quantum walks. Phys. Rev. A 2010, 81, 022323.
1085. Rossi, M.A.C.; Benedetti, C.; Borrelli, M.; Maniscalco, S.; Paris, M.G.A. Continuous-time quantum walks on spatially correlated
noisy lattices. Phys. Rev. A 2017, 96, 040301. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.96.040301.

Technologies 2024, 12, 64
124 of 124
1086. Kurt, A.; Rossi, M.A.C.; Piilo, J. Quantum transport efficiency in noisy random-removal and small-world networks. J. Phys. A
Math. Theor. 2023, 56, 145301.
1087. Burget, M.; Bardone, E.; Pedaste, M. Definitions and conceptual dimensions of responsible research and innovation: A literature
review. Sci. Eng. Ethics 2017, 23, 1–19.
1088. About RRI. Available online: https://www.rri-leaders.eu/about-rri/ (accessed on 30 June 2023).
1089. Shelley-Egan, C.; Gjefsen, M.D.; Nydal, R. Consolidating RRI and Open Science: understanding the potential for transformative
change. Life Sci. Soc. Policy 2020, 16, 7.
1090. Groves, C. Review of RRI Tools Project. J. Responsible Innov. 2017, 4, 371–374. Available online: https://rri-tools.eu/ (accessed
on 1 March 2023).
1091. Kuzma, J.; Cummings, C.L. Cultural beliefs and stakeholder affiliation influence attitudes towards responsible research and
innovation among United States stakeholders involved in biotechnology and gene editing. Front. Political Sci. 2021, 3, 677003.
1092. Mackay, S.M.; Tan, E.W.; Warren, D.S. Developing a new generation of scientist communicators through effective public outreach.
Commun. Chem. 2020, 3, 76. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42004-020-0315-0.
1093. Science outreach in the post-truth age. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017, 12, 929–929. https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2017.217.
1094. McCartney, M.; Childers, C.; Baiduc, R.R.; Barnicle, K. Annotated Primary Literature: A Professional Development Opportunity
in Science Communication for Graduate Students and Postdocs. J. Microbiol. Biol. Educ. 2018, 19, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1128/
jmbe.v19i1.1439.
1095. Foti, C.; Anttila, D.; Maniscalco, S.; Chiofalo, M.L. Quantum Physics Literacy Aimed at K12 and the General Public. Universe
2021, 7, 86. https://doi.org/10.3390/universe7040086.
1096. Schwab, J. The Teaching of Science as Enquiry; Simon and Schuster: New York, NY, USA, 1962.
1097. Bloomfield, L.A. How Things Work: The Physics of Everyday Life, 6th ed.; Wiley: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2015.
1098. Bondani, M.; Chiofalo, M.L.; Ercolessi, E.; Macchiavello, C.; Malgieri, M.; Michelini, M.; Mishina, O.; Onorato, P.; Pallotta, F.;
Satanassi, S.; et al. Introducing Quantum Technologies at Secondary School Level: Challenges and Potential Impact of an Online
Extracurricular Course. Physics 2022, 4, 1150–1167. https://doi.org/10.3390/physics4040075.
1099. Montagnani, S.; Stefanel, A.; Chiofalo, M.L.M.; Santi, L.; Michelini, M. An experiential program on the foundations of quantum
mechanics for final-year high-school students. Phys. Educ. 2023, 58, 035003. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6552/acb5da.
1100. Chiofalo, M.L.; Michelini, M. An Interview with Marisa Michelini: IUPAP-ICPE Medal, Professor of Physics-Education Research
at Udine University, GIREP President. Eurasia J. Math. Sci. Technol. Educ. 2023, 19, em2243. https://doi.org/10.29333/ejmste/13
031.
1101. Quantum Technology Education (QTEdu), Action of Quantum Flagship Initiative. Available online https://qtedu.eu/ (accessed
on 1 March 2023).
1102. DigiQ: Digitally Enhanced European Quantum Technology Master. 2022. Available online : https://www.digiq.eu/ (accessed
on 1 February 2023).
1103. Quantum Technology Education for Everyone, QTEdu Pilot Project. Available online: https://qtedu.eu/project/quantum-
technologies-education-everyone (accessed on 1 March 2023).
1104. Tseitlin, M.; Galili, I. Physics Teaching in the Search for Its Self. Sci. Educ. 2005, 14, 235–261. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11191-0
04-7943-0.
1105. Chiofalo, M.L.; Giudici, C.; Gardner, H. An Interview with Howard Gardner: John H. and Elisabeth A. Hobbs Research Professor
of Cognition and Education at the Harvard Graduate School of Education. Eurasia J. Math. Sci. Technol. Educ. 2022, 18, em2112.
https://doi.org/10.29333/ejmste/12035.
1106. Seskir, Z.C.; Migdał, P.; Weidner, C.; Anupam, A.; Case, N.; Davis, N.; Decaroli, C.; ˙Ilke Ercan.; Foti, C.; Gora, P.; et al.
Quantum games and interactive tools for quantum technologies outreach and education.
Opt. Eng. 2022, 61, 081809.
https://doi.org/10.1117/1.OE.61.8.081809.
1107. Chiofalo, M.L.; Foti, C.; Michelini, M.; Santi, L.; Stefanel, A. Games for Teaching/Learning Quantum Mechanics: A Pilot Study
with High-School Students. Educ. Sci. 2022, 12, 446. https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci12070446.
1108. Gentini, L.; Yago Malo, J.; Chiofalo, M. The Quantum Bit Woman: Promoting the Cultural Heritage with Quantum Games.
In Cultural Physics Awareness and Education: The Challenge of Digitalization 2023; Springer Book Series Challenges in Physics
Education; Bonivento, W., Michelini, M., Streit-Bianchi, M., Tuveri, M., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2023.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

