
ISBN 0-393-03838-6 
USA $29.95 
CAN. $39.99 
The Symbolic Species 
This revolutionary book offers fresh answers to long­
standing questions of human origins and consciousness. 
Drawing on his breakthrough research in comparative 
neuroscience, Terrence Deacon shows that: 
• The evolution of language did not involve a language 
organ or instinct, and did not result simply from a larg­
er, more complex brain. 
• Language reflected a new mode of thinking: symbolic 
thinking. 
• 
Symbolic thinking triggered a 
co-evolutionary 
exchange between languages and brains over two mil­
lion years of hominid evolution-"Many of the physical 
traits that distinguish human bodies and brains were 
· ultimately caused by ideas shared down the genera­
tions." 
• The grammars of the world's languages are remarkably 
similar and, despite their complexity, are easily learned 
by young children, not because of innate grammatical 
knowledge but because languages have themselves 
evolved structural adaptations to human cognitive con­
straints, particularly those of immature brains. 
• The first symbolic communication evolved as the only 
means our hominid ancestors had to overcome the evo­
lutionary difficulties of combining long-term sexual 
exclusivity, mostly in pair bonds, with cooperative group 
foraging, which became a critical factor with the utiliza­
tion of animal foods. 
• The reorganization of the brain for language brought 
with it many indirect and serendipitous consequences, 
including 
unprecedented 
vocal 
control, 
unusual 
"innate" calls like laughter and sobbing, a susceptibility 
to such mental disorders as schizophrenia and autism, 
and a compulsion to assign symbolic import to almost 
every aspect of the physical world. 
• An understanding of symbolic communication allows 
us to reinterpret such aspects of consciousness as ratio­
nal intention, meaning, belief, and self-consciousness as 
emergent properties of the virtual world created by sym­
bols. It also points the way to building machines that 
don't just manipulate symbols, but understand them. 
• Symbolic abilities created a species that for the first 
time in the history of life had access to others' thoughts 
and emotions-and thus confronted an ethical dimen­
sion to social behavior. 
(t:a11tiuued 011/)(lrA'}lap) 

The 
Symbolic 
Species 


THE CO-EVOLUTION OF 
LANGUAGE AND THE BRAIN 
Terrence W. Deacon 
W. W. NORTON & COMPANY ƛ NEW YORK 
LONDON 

Copyright © 1997 by Terrence W. Deacon 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 
For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book, write to 
Permissions, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 50 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110. 
The text of this book is composed in New Caledonia with the display set in Trade Gothic 
Condensed Bold. Compostion and manufacturing by the Haddon Craftsmen, Inc. 
BOOK DESIGN BY BTD I ROBIN BENTZ. 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATAL OGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
Deacon, Terrence William. 
The symbolic species: the co-evolution of language and the brain I 
by Terrence W. Deacon. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-393-03838-6 
l. Neurolinguistics. 2. Brain-Evolution. I. Title. 
QP399.D43 1997 
153.6-DC20 96-31115 
CIP 
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. 
500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110 
http://ww.wwnorton.com 
W. W. Norton & Company Ltd. 
10 Coptic Street, London WClA lPU 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
0 

In memory of Harriet Deacon, my grandmother and first mentor, 
who taught me to recognize the miraculous in everyday things. 

Very special thanks are due to my family, Cris, Anneka, and John, who sup­
ported me even as I stole precious time away from them to complete this 
work, and to my parents, whose encouragement I could always count on. 
Thanks are also due to many who have directly inspired, assisted, and en­
dured this project. These include: Joseph Marcus, who read, edited, and 
commented extensively on earlier drafts and who has consistently held me 
to the high standards he expects from a mentor; my own mentors, who have 
knowingly or unknowingly contributed their insights and valuable criti­
cisms, but who are far too numerous to list; my former student Alan 
Sokoloff, whose Ph.D. research on oral tract innervation underlies my 
thoughts on vocal evolution; David Rudner, Sandra Kleinman, Alan Aronie, 
and many other friends whose feedback has helped clear away some of the 
fog; my colleagues in the lab, who understood and picked up more of the 
load as my attentions were diverted from the lab bench; Robyn Swierk and 
Julie Criniere, who helped enter the endless corrections, and copyeditor 
Ann Adelman; Hoover the seal, who opened my ears to the mystery of 
speech; and my editor, Hilary Hinzmann, who was patient through my long 
spells of writer's block and overcommitment, an,d who helped nurse a rough 
collection of ideas and notes into a narrative. I can never adequately repay 
these many gifts. 

Contents 
Preface 
11 
Part One: Language 
1 .  T H E  H UM A N  P A R A DO X  
An Evolutionary Anomaly 
21 
Technical Difficulties and Hopeful Monsters 
28 
The Missing ࡣimple Languages 
39 
2. A L O SS FO R W O R DS 
Gymnastics of the Mind 
47 
In Other Words 
51 
The Reference Problem 
59 
3. SYM B O L S A R E N 'T SIM P L E  
The Hierarchical Nature of Reference 
69 
The Symbolic Threshold 
79 
Unlearning an Insight 
92 
7

4. O UT SIDE T H E  B R A IN 
Chomsky's Handstand 
102 
The Other Evolution 
llO 
Emerging Universals 
ll5 
Better Learning Through Amnesia 
122 
Part Two: Brain 
5. T H E  SIZE O F  IN T EL L IG E N C E  
A Gross Misunderstanding 
145 
Brains in Bodies 
153 
Thinking Your Own Size 
159 
6. G R O W IN G  A PA R T  
The Chihuahua Fallacy 
165 
Using Fly Genes to Make Human Brains 
174 
The Developmental Clock 
187 
7. A DA R W IN IA N  E L EC T R IC IA N  
Musical Chairs 
193 
Displacement 
207 
An Alien Brain Transplant Experiment 
214 
Beyond Phrenology 
220 
8. T H E  T A L KIN G B R A IN 
Hoover's Brain 
225 
Visceral Sounds 
230 
Why Don't Mammals Sing Like Birds? 
236 
A Leveraged Takeover 
247 
9. SYM B O L  M IN DS 
Front-Heavy 
254 
Making Symbols 
264 
1 0 . L O C AT IN G  L A N G UA G E  
Forcing Square Pegs into Round Holes 
279 
The Illuminated Brain 
288 
Where Symbols Aren't 
300 
Taking Sides 
309 
8 < Contents

Part Three: Co-Evolution 
11. A ND THE WORD BEC A ME FLESH 
The Brain That Didn't Evolve 
Language Adaptations 
Ho10 symbolicus 
The Co-Evolutionary Net 
The Writing on the Wall 
1 2. SYMBOLIC ORIG INS 
A Passion to Communicate 
Why Human Societies Shouldn't Work 
A Symbolic Solution 
Ritual Beginnings 
1 3. A SEREN DIPITOUS MIN D 
The Fail-Safe Computer 
The Sphinx 
No Mind Is an Island 
1 4. SUC H ST UFF A S  DRE A MS A RE MA DE O N  
Ends 
To Be or Nat to Be: What Is the Difference? 
Reinventing the Mind 
Notes 
AddffionaiReadings 
Bibliography 
Index 
321 
334 
340 
349 
365 
376 
384 
393 
401 
411 
416 
423 
433 
438 
455 
465 
485 
489 
511 
Contents > 9


Preface 
The conviction persists, though history shows it to be a 
hallucination, that all the questions that the human mind has asked 
are questions that can be answered in terms of the alternatives that 
the questions themselves present. But in fact, intellectual progress 
usually occurs through sheer abandonment of questions together 
with both of the alternatives they assume, an abandonment that 
results from their decreasing vitalism and a change of urgent 
interest. We do not solve them, we get over them. 
-John Dewey 
A 
number of years ago I was giving a brief talk about the evolution of 
the brain when spmeone asked a question I couldn't answer. It was not 
a complicated question. It didn't come from a colleague who had 
found a weakness in my theory or a graduate student who had read about 
a new experiment that contradicted my data. It came from a child in my 
son's elementary school class. I had given school talks on being a scientist 
before, and I thought I knew what to expect. I never expected an eight-year 
old to stump me. 
I was talking about brains and how they work, and how human brains 
are different, and how this difference is reflected in our unique and com-
11

plex mode of communication: language. But when I explained that only hu­
mans communicate with language, I struck a dissonant chord. 
"But don't other animals have their own languages?" one child asked. 
This gave me the opportunity to outline some of the ways that language 
is special: how speech is far more rapid and precise than any other com­
munication behavior, how the underlying rules for constructing sentences 
are so complicated and curious that it's hard to explain how they could ever 
be learned, and how no other form of animal communication has the logi­
cal structure and open-ended possibilities that all languages have. But this 
wasn't enough to satisfy a mind raised on Walt Disney animal stories. 
"Do animals just have SIMPLE languages?" my questioner continued. 
"No, apparently not," I explained. "Although other animals communicate 
with one another, at least within the same species, this communication re­
sembles language only in a very superficial way-for example, using 
sounds-but none that I know of has the equivalents of such things as 
words, much less nouns, verbs, and sentences. Not even simple ones." 
"Why not?" asked another child. 
At this I hesitated. And the more I thought about it, the more I recog­
nized that I didn't really have an answer. As far as I could tell no other sci­
entists had seriously considered the question in this form. Why are there 
no simple languages, with simple forms of nouns, verbs, and sentences? It 
is indeed a counterintuitive fact. Myths, fables, fairy tales, animated car­
toons, and Disney movies portray what common sense suggests ought to be 
the case: that other animals with their simpler minds communicate and rea­
son using simpler languages than ours. Why isn't it so? 
I'm not sure why I hadn't noticed this paradox before, or why other sci­
entists hadn't. Most mammals aren't stupid. Many are capable of quite re­
markable learning. Yet they don't communicate with simple languages, nor 
do they show much of a capacity to learn them-if our pets are any indica­
tion. Perhaps we have been too preoccupied with trying to explain our big 
brains, or too complacent with the metaphoric use of the term animal lan­
guage, to notice this contradictory little fact. But the question may also have 
been unconsciously avoided because of the intellectual costs of consider­
ing it seriously. Indeed, the more deeply I have pursued this question, the 
more it seems like a Pandora's box that unleashes troubling doubts about 
many other questions that once seemed al but settled. This isn't the ques­
tion we had been asking, but maybe it should have been. As Dewey sug­
gests, the alternatives we pose in our scientific questions may not even 
address the most crucial issues. 
This book starts with this curious question, because it supersedes many 
12 < Preface

of the questions we thought were more important, and because it stubbornly 
refuses to resolve itself as a side effect of the superiority of human intelli­
gence or the savantlike language ability of young children. But in my efforts 
to answer it, I am forced to reopen many questions long thought to have 
been resolved, or at least reduced to a few alternatives which now appear 
less informative than we once thought. 
In the chapters that follow, I investigate how language differs from other 
forms of communication, why other species encounter virtually intractable 
difficulties when it comes to learning even simple language, how human 
brain structure has evolved to overcome these difficulties, and what forces 
and conditions initiated and steered us along this unprecedented evolu­
tionary course. What results is a detailed reappraisal of human brain and 
language evolution that emphasizes the unbroken continuity between 
human and nonhuman brains, and yet, at the same time, describes a sin­
gular discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds, or to be more 
precise, between brains that use this form of communication and brains that 
do not. My somewhat unprecedented approach to these questions unfolds 
as a step by step argument, in which each chapter builds on the questions, 
analyses, and evidence provided in prior chapters. At almost every step of 
the argument, I arrive at different interpretations from what might loosely 
be called the accepted theories in the field. So I suggest approaching this 
narrative as one might approach a mystery novel, where the order and pre­
sentation of clues are critical to the plot, because encountering the clues 
and unexpected conclusions out of context might require some tricky men­
tal gymnastics to discover how they fit back together. 
The presentation is broken up into three major sections. The first part 
of the book-Language-focuses on the nature of language and the rea­
sons that it is virtually confined to the human species. The second part of 
the book-Brain-tackles the problem of identifying what is unusual about 
human brain structure that corresponds with the unique problems posed 
by language. ࡤhe third part of the book-Co-Evolution-examines the pe­
culiar extension of natural selection logic that is behind human brain and 
language evolution, and tries to identify what sort of communication "prob­
lem" precipitated the evolution of our unprecedented mode of communi­
cation. The book ends with some speculations on the significance of these 
new findings for the understanding of human consciousness. 
A major intent of the book is to engage the reader in a reexamination of 
many tacit assumptions that lie behind current views. In service of these 
aims I have tried to make my presentation accessible to the broadest pos­
sible scientific audience and, I hope, to a scientifically interested lay audi-
Preface > 13

ence. Whenever possible I have tried to explain technical points in non­
technical terms, and although I have not avoided introducing biological and 
neuroanatomical terminology when it is relevant, I have tried to illustrate 
some of the more technical points in graphic form. Some readers may find 
the middle section of the book-Brain-a bit rough going, but I believe that 
a struggle with this material will be rewarded by seeing how it leads to the 
novel reassessment of human origins and human consciousness that I offer 
in the more accessible and imaginative last section of the book. 
Almost everyone who has written on the origins oflanguage recounts with 
a sense of irony how the Societe Linguistique de Paris passed a resolution 
in 1866 banning all papers on the origins of language. This resolution was 
meant to halt a growing flow of purely speculative papers, which the So­
ciete deemed to be contributing little of substance and occupying other­
wise valuable time and resources. A young discipline eager to model itself 
after other natural sciences could ill afford to sponsor research in a topic 
that was almost entirely without empirical support. But the shadow of sus­
picion that looms over language origins theories is not just due to this his­
torical reputation. Language origins scenarios no more empirically 
grounded than their banned predecessors still abound in the popular sci­
ence literature, and they provide a perennial topic for cocktail party dis­
cussions. What's worse, assumptions about the nature oflanguage and the 
differences between nonhuman and human minds are implicit in almost 
every philosophical and scientific theory concerned with cognition, knowl­
edge, or human social behavior. It is truly a multidisciplinary problem that 
defies analysis from any one perspective alone, and where the breadth of 
technical topics that must be mastered exceeds even the most erudite schol­
ars' capabilities. So it is hard to overestimate the immensity of the task or 
the risks of superficial analysis, and it is unlikely that any one account can 
hope to achieve anything close to a comprehensive treatment of the prob­
lem. 
I take this as a serious caution to my own ambitions, and must admit from 
the outset that the depth of coverage and degree of expertise invested in 
the topics considered in this book clearly reflect my own intellectual biases, 
drawing primarily on my training in the neurosciences and in evolutionary 
anthropology and supplemented by a dilettante's training in other impor­
tant areas. Consequently, the book focuses on the various implications of 
only this one human/nonhuman difference in mental abilities-particu­
larly neurological implications-and ignores .many other aspects of the 
brain-language relationship. I have not attempted in any systematic way to 
review or compare the many alternative explanations proposed for the phe-
14 < Preface

nomena I consider, and I have only discussed specific alternative theories 
as they serve as counterpoints to make my own approach clearer. An ex­
haustive review of competing explanations would require another book at 
least as long as this one. I apologize to my many scientific colleagues, who 
also have labored over these issues, for making this a rather personal ex­
ploration that does not do full justice to other theories, and does not explain 
why I do not even mention many of them. My own contributions are only 
possible because of the labors of untold dozens of previous researchers 
whose work has informed and influenced my own, and to whose contribu­
tions I have added only a handful of new findings. For those interested, I 
have tried to provide a reference to other approaches to these same puz­
zles in the end notes. 
In what follows, it may appear as though I am a scientist with a naturally 
rebellious nature. I must admit that I have an attraction to heresies, and 
that my sympathies naturally tend to be with the cranks and doubters and 
against well-established doctrines. But this is not because I enjoy contro­
versy. Rather, it is because, like Dewey, I believe that the search for knowl­
edge is as often impeded by faulty assumptions and by a limited creative 
vision for alternatives as by a lack of necessary tools or critical evidence. So 
I will have achieved my intent if, in the process of recounting my thoughts 
on this mystery, I leave a few unquestioned assumptions more questionable, 
make some counter-intuitive alternatives more plausible, and provide a 
new vantage point from which to reflect upon human uniqueness. 
Preface > 15


The 
Symbolic 
Species 


P
A
R
T
 
0 
N 
E 
Language 


C 
H 
A 
P 
T 
E 
R 
0 
N 
E 
The Human Paradox 
. . .  the paradox is the source of the thinker's passion, and the thinker 
without a paradox is like a lover without feeling: a paltry mediocrity. 
-S•ren Kierkergaard 
An Evolutionary Anomaly 
A
s our species designation-sapiens-suggests, the defining attribute 
of human beings is an unparalleled cognitive ability. We think differ­
ently from all other creatures on earth, and we can share those 
thoughts with one another in ways that no other species even approaches. 
In comparison, the rest of our biology is almost incidental. Hundreds of mil­
lions of years of evolution have produced hundreds of thousands of species 
with brains, and tens of thousands with complex behavioral, perceptual, and 
learning abilities. Only one of these has ever wondered about its place in 
the world, because only one evolved the ability to do so. 
Though we share the same earth with millions of kinds ofliving creatures, 
we also live in a world that no other species has access to. We inhabit a world 
21

full of abstractions, impossibilities, and paradoxes. We alone brood about 
what didn't happen, and spend a large part of each day musing about the 
way things could have been if events had transpired differently. And we 
alone ponder what it will be like not to be. In what other species could in­
dividuals ever be troubled by the fact that they do not recall the way things 
were before they were born and will not know what will occur after they 
die? We tell stories about our real experiences and invent stories about imag­
ined ones, and we even make use of these stories to organize our lives. In 
a real sense, we live our lives in this shared virtual world. And slowly, over 
the millennia, we have come to realize that no other species on earth seems 
able to follow us into this miraculous place. 
We are all familiar with this facet of our lives, but how, you might ask, 
could I feel so confident that it is not part of the mental experience of other 
species-so sure that they do not share these kinds of thoughts and con­
cerns-when they cannot be queried about them? That's just it! My answer, 
which will be argued in detail in the following chapters, has everything to 
do with language and the absence of it in other species. The doorway into 
this virtual world was opened to us alone by the evolution oflanguage, be­
cause language is not merely a mode of communication, it is also the out­
ward expression of an unusual mode of thought-symbolic representation. 
Without symbolization the entire virtual world that I have described is out 
of reach: inconceivable. My extravagant claim to know what other species 
cannot know rests on evidence that symbolic thought does not come innately 
built in, but develops by internalizing the symbolic process that underlies 
language. So species that have not acquired the ability to communicate sym­
bolically cannot have acquired the ability to think this way either. 
The way that language represents objects, events, and relationships pro­
vides a uniquely powerful economy of reference. It offers a means for gen­
erating an essentially infinite variety of novel representations, and an 
unprecedented inferential engine for predicting events, organizing mem­
ories, and planning behaviors. It entirely shapes our thinking and the ways 
we know the physical world. It is so pervasive and inseparable from human 
intelligence in general that it is difficult to distinguish what aspects of the 
human intellect have not been molded and streamlined by it. To explain this 
difference and describe the evolutionary circumstances that brought it 
about are the ultimate challenges in the study of human origins. 
The question that ultimately motivates a perennial fascination with 
human origins is not who were our ancestors, or how they came to walk up­
right, or even how they discovered the use of stone tools. It is not really a 
question that has a paleontological answer. It is a question that might oth-
22 < The Symbolic Species

erwise be asked of psychologists or neurologists or even philosophers. 
Where do human minru come from? The missing link that we hope to fill 
in by investigating human origins is not so much a gap in our family tree, 
but a gap that separates us from other species in general. Knowing how 
something originated often is the best clue to how it works. And we know 
that human consciousness had a beginning. Those features of our mental 
abilities that distinguish us from all other species arose within the handful 
of million years since we shared a common ancestor with the remaining 
African apes, and probably can mostly be traced to events that took place 
only within the last 2 million. It was a Rubicon that was crossed at a defi­
nite time and in a specific evolutionary context. If we could identify what 
was different on either side of this divide-differences in ecology, behav­
ior, anatomy, especially neuroanatomy-perhaps we would find the critical 
change that catapulted us into this unprecedented world full of abstractions, 
stories, and impossibilities, that we call human. 
It is not just the origins of our biological species that we seek to explain, 
but the origin of our novel form of mind. Biologically, we are just another 
ape. Mentally, we are a new phylum of organisms. In these two seemingly 
incommensurate facts lies a conundrum that must be resolved before we 
have an adequate explanation of what it means to be human. 
Advances in the study of human evolution, the brain, and language 
processes have led many scientists confidently to claim to be closing in on 
the final clues to this mystery. How close are we? Many lines of evidence 
seem to be converging on an answer. With respect to our ancestry, the re­
maining gaps in the fossil evidence of our prehistory are being rapidly filled 
in. Within the last few decades a remarkably rich picture of the sizes and 
shapes of fossil hominid bodies and brains has emerged. It is probably fair 
to say that at least with respect to the critical changes that distinguish us in 
this way from other apes, there are few missing links yet to be found, just 
particulars to be filed in. That crucial phase in hominid evolution when our 
ancestors' brains began to diverge in relative size from other apes' brains is 
well bracketed by fossils that span the range. As for the inside story, the neu­
rosciences are providing powerful new tools with which it has become pos­
sible to obtain detailed images from working human brains performing 
language tasks, or to investigate the processes that build our brains during 
development and distinguish the brains of different species, or even to 
model neural processes outside of brains. Finally, linguists' analyses of the 
logical structure of languages, their diversity and recent ancestry, and the 
patterns that characterize their development in children have provided a 
wealth of information about just what needs to be explained, and com par-
Terrence W. Deacon > 23

ative studies of animals' communications in the wild and their languagelike 
capacities in the laboratory have helped to frame these questions with ex­
plicit examples. 
Despite all these advances, some critical pieces of the puzzle still elude 
us. Even though neural science has pried ever deeper into the mysteries of 
brain function, we still lack a theory of global brain functions. We under­
stand many of the cellular and molecular details, we have mapped a num­
ber of cognitive tasks to associated brain regions, and we even have 
constructed computer simulations of networks that operate in ways that are 
vaguely like parts of brains; but we still lack insight into the general logic 
that ties such details together. On the whole, most neuroscientists take the 
prudent perspective that only by continuing to unmask the details of sim­
ple neural processes in simple brains, and slowly, incrementally, putting 
these pieces together, will we ever be able to address such global theoret­
ical questions as the neural basis for language. We must add to this many 
new problems arising out of the comparisons of animal communication to 
language. If anything, these problems have become more complex and 
more confusing the more we have learned about the sophistication of other 
species' abilities and the paradoxes implicit in our own abilities. But the most 
critical missing piece of the puzzle is access to the brains in question: an­
cestral hominid brains. Though we have considerable information about 
brain sizes in fossil species, and a little information about brain shapes, the 
relevant anatomical information, the internal microarchitecture of these 
brains, has left no fossil trail. With respect to fossil brains, we will never find 
the "smoking gun"-the first brain capable of language. We will only have 
access to circumstantial information. 
So, what business do we have speculating about the beginnings of lan­
guage? Given the complexity of the human brain, our current ignorance of 
many of its crucial operating principles, and the fact that neither languages 
nor the brains that produce them fossilize, there would appear to be many 
more immediate questions to be answered before even considering this one. 
There seem to be too many loose ends and gaps in the supportive evidence 
to provide solid leads in the search for clues to the nature of the human mind 
in the origins of language. 
But this ignores the significance of the fact that language is a one-of-a­
kind anomaly. Often the most salient and useful hints about the underlying 
logic of nature's designs are provided when unique or extreme features in 
two different domains are found to be correlated. Some notable examples 
include the correlation between superconductivity and extreme cold; be­
tween greater cosmic distances and the increasing redness of starlight; be-
24 < The Symbolic Species

tween the massive extinctions of fossil species and evidence of extraterres­
trial impacts; between the peculiarity ofhaplo-diploid genetics and war, sui­
cidal defense, and infertile castes in social insects; and so on. Each of these 
correlations cried out for an explanation and in so doing offered a critical 
clue to a more general principle. The more two related features diverge 
from what is typical in their respective domains, the more penetrating the 
insight that can be gleaned from their underlying relationship. 
In this context, then, consider the case of human language. It is one of 
the most distinctive behavioral adaptations on the planet. Languages 
evolved in only one species, in only one way, without precedent, except in 
the most general sense. And the differences between languages and all other 
natural modes of communicating are vast. Such a major shift in behavioral 
adaptation could hardly fail to have left its impression on human anatomy. 
Even superficial appearances bear this out. We humans have an anom­
alously large brain and a uniquely modified vocal tract. Though these clues 
offer no more than a starting point, they suggest that the structural and func­
tional relationships underlying these superficial correlations are likely to be 
robust and idiosyncratic to us. 
Ironically, then, the problem of language origins may actually offer one 
of the most promising entry points in the search for the logic linking cog­
nitive functions to brain organization. To the extent that the unique men­
tal demands of language are reflected in unique neuroanatomical 
differences, we may find an unequivocal example of how nature maps cog­
nitive differences to brain structure differences. Though the details of this 
mystery are challenging, no critical pieces of this puzzle lie buried in the 
deep evolutionary past or inaccessible to current technology. They are ob­
servable in the differences in cognitive abilities and brain structures to be 
found in living species. 
I think that the difficulty of the language origins question is not to be 
blamed on what we don't know, but rather on what we think we already 
know. We think we know that what keeps language from being a widespread 
phenomenon is its byzantine complexity and the incredible demands it 
places on learning and memory. We think we know that language became 
possible for our ancestors when these impediments to language learning 
were overcome by some prior change in the brain. Depending on which as­
pects of language are deemed to be most complex, different prior adapta­
tions are invoked to explain how language became possible. Perhaps it 
required an increase in intelligence, a streamlining of oral and auditory abil­
ities, a separation of functions to the two sides of the brain, or the evolu­
tion of a sort of built-in grammar. I think we can be sure of none of these 
Terrence W. Deacon > 25

things. In fact, I think that the problem is more basic and far more coun­
terintuitive than is assumed by any of these accounts. 
There are a few common assumptions shared by all of these explanations 
that I think are the root of a deeper problem. In general, these arguments 
parallel many others that continually resurface along that age old divide be­
tween nature and nurture. Is language imposed from the outside or does it 
reflect what is already inside? For decades, the superficiality of this stale 
dichotomy has been evident, exposed by research in the psychological and 
biological sciences that demonstrates how truly complex and interdepen­
dent the biological and environmental contributions to development can be; 
but we still find it difficult to conceive of these phenomena in other terms. 
We have reinvented the same old answers in new guises in each generation, 
stubbornly insisting that the answer to the question oflanguage knowledge 
must be found in one of just a few major alternative paradigms (depicted 
in cartoon fashion in Figure 1.1). 
At one end of this spectrum is the assumption that the architecture of 
language originates entirely outside (simple associationism); at the other end 
is the assumption that it originates entirely inside (mentalese). What other 
alternatives could there be, that are not captured between these extremes? 
And if there are no other alternatives, then shouldn't answering this ques­
tion also point to the solution to the language origins question? Discover­
ing which aspects of language knowledge are contributed by nature and 
which by nurture ought to tell us what difference in us was necessary to 
bridge the original language acquisition gap. If the answer lies more toward 
the associationist end of the spectrum, then evolution must have given us 
language by endowing us with exceptionally powerful learning and mem­
ory. If the answer lies more toward the mentalese end, then evolution must 
have endowed us with remarkably sophisticated instinctual knowledge of 
language that made learning completely unnecessary. 
In light of these intuitively compelling alternatives, the approach I am 
about to take may seem misguided. Not only do I think that these alterna­
tives confuse the nature/nurture problem more than they illuminate it, I 
think that the whole question of where language knowledge originates dur­
ing development is secondary. Though a young child's almost miraculous 
development oflanguage abilities is indeed a remarkable mystery-one that 
will be considered in some detail later (in Chapters 4 and ll)-I think that 
the cause of language origins must be sought elsewhere, and by pursuing 
some very different kinds of research questions. While we have been wor­
rying about where knowledge oflanguage comes from, we have been avoid­
ing a more basic question: What sort of thing is knowledge of language 
26 < The Symbolic Species

meanings as mental images 
meanings as associative mappings 
,-- -
_
-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-
.J-
::
. -
-
--- _-_- _
-
_n
-_-_-
_
-1
-
-:-
-;
-: 
'
'
' 
a. p y 0 
·{ 
t 
innate arammatical knowledge 
innate mentallanauage 
Figure 1.1 Four cartoon depictions of some of the mnjor theoretical paradigms pro­
posed to explain the basis of human language. Top left: The notion that word mean­
ing is created when the perception of the sound of a spoken word is associated with 
an object both as perceived and as stored in the mind in the form of a mental image. 
In this simple common sense view, stringing together words in a sentence leads the 
listener to bring together images in the mind. Top right: The notion that both word 
meaning and knowledge of language structure are learned by internalizing patterns 
of the associative probabilities linking words to one another, and linking words and 
objects. B. F. Skinner was the most prominent defender of this view, but recently 
more sophisticated versions of this basic idea have been reformulated with the aid 
of insights gained by studying parallel distributed learning processes. Knowledge of 
language is depicted as analogous to the distributed connection patterns in a neural 
net. Bottom left: One of the most influential views of grammatical knowledge con­
ceives of it as built in prior to language experience, like firmware in a desktop com­
puter (depicted as a computer chip inserted in the brain). The structure of language 
is imposed on strings of words (that presumably would still be meaningful, just less 
useful, without Jhis structure). This view was first explicitly formulated by the lin­
guist Noam Chomsky. Bottom right: The extreme innatist view of knowledge of lan­
guage conceives of it as an external reflection of an internal lingua franca of the brain 
called "mentalese. " In Steven Pinker's words (The Language Instinct, p. 82), "Know­
ing a language, then, is knowing how to translate mentalese into strings of words 
and vice versa. People without language would still have mentalese, and babies and 
many nonhuman animals presumably have simpler dialects. Indeed, if babies did 
not have a mentalese to translate to and from English, it is not clear how learning 
English could take place, or even what learning English would mean. " None of these 
views provides a satisfactonj explanation of the paradox explored in this chapter. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 27

anyway? Before turning to this question, however, it is worth while re­
flecting on some of the equally misleading evolutionary assumptions that 
reinforce the traditional theoretical alternatives. 
Technical Difficulties and Hopeful Monsters 
One of the most common views about language evolution is that it is the 
inevitable outcome of evolution. Evolution was headed this way, our way. 
As the only species capable of conceiving of our place among all others, we 
see what looks like a continuous series of stages leading up to one species 
capable of such reflections. It goes without saying that a more articulate, 
more precise, more flexible means of communicating should always be an 
advantage, all other things being equal. In terms of cooperative behaviors, 
a better ability to pass on information about distant or hidden food re­
sources, or to organize labor for a hunt, or to warn of impending danger, 
would be advantageous for kin and the social group as a whole. Better com­
munication skills might also contribute to more successful social manipu­
lation and deception. The ability to convince and mislead one's competitors 
or cooperate and connive with one's social and sexual partners could also 
have provided significant reproductive advantages, particularly in social 
systems where competition determines access to defendable resources or 
multiple mates. In fact, it's difficult to imagine any human endeavor that 
would not benefit from better communication. Looked at this way, it ap­
pears that humans have just developed further than other species along an 
inevitable progressive trend toward better thinking and better communi­
cating. 
Surely we must be part of a trend of better communication in some form? 
It seems to be an unstated assumption that if biological evolution contin­
ues long enough, some fonn oflanguage will eventually evolve in many other 
species. Are chimpanzees the runners-up, lagging only a little behind on the 
road to language? As in Planet of the Apes, a science fiction movie in which 
our more hairy cousins catch up to a human level of mental and liguistic 
abilities, we imagine that if given sufficient time, something like language 
is prefigured in evolution. We even imagine that if there is life on other plan­
ets, and if it has been evolving as long as life on earth, or longer, there will 
be "intelligent" species with whom we may someday converse.1 The Re­
naissance notion of a "Great Chain of Being" gave rise to nineteenth­
century theories of phylogeny that ranked species from lower to higher, from 
mechanism to godly, with humans just below angels. Though later nine­
teenth- and twentieth-century evolutionists rejected the static ranking of 
28 < The Symbolic Species

phylogeny and replaced it with the theory of evolutionary descent, the an­
thropocentric perspective was simply rephrased in evolutionary terms. Hu­
mans were presumably the most "advanced" species. Carrying this notion 
to its extreme, some people now suspect that there may be spaceships vis­
iting earth, carrying beings that are "more highly evolved" than we are. 
On the surface, progress seems to be implicit in natural selection. Grad­
ual improvement of adaptations seems to imply that the longer evolution 
continues the better the design will become. Indeed, many scientists talk 
as though a special kind of retrograde selection would be necessary to halt 
the progress of inevitably increasing intelligence. Small-brained species are 
often considered primitive or throwbacks to earlier forms, left out of the 
main trend. From an anthropocentric perspective, it seems unquestionable 
that more intelligent species will outcompete less intelligent ones. Intelli­
gence is always an advantage, right? Brain over brawn. We rank genius and 
mental retardation on a single scale, and presumably rank chimpanzees, 
dogs, and rats on the low end of the same scale. Human evolution is often 
termed an "ascent" to imply a climb from lower to higher intelligence. And 
from this it seems to follow that humans are just the pinnacle example of 
an inevitable trend. The winner in a war of neurons. 
The apparent reasonableness of this view reflects our familiarity with 
technological progress in Western societies. The interchangeability of terms 
like consciousness expansion, social progress, and evolution is now almost 
commonplace in the popular press, and these ideas are seldom entirely dis­
entangled even in the most sophisticated accounts of human evolution. But 
the idea of progress in evolution is an unnoticed habit left over from a mis­
informed common sense, from seeing the world in terms of design. The 
problem is that our intuitive model for evolution is borrowed from the his­
tory of technological change, which has been a cumulative process, adding 
more and more tidbits of know-how to the growing mass of devices, prac­
tices, and records each day. In contrast, biological evolution is not additive, 
except in some ࡢry limited ways. The human repertoire of expressed genes 
is about the same as that in a mouse or frog, and the body plans of al ver­
tebrates seem to be mostly modifications of the same shared plan--even 
for the brain. Though we are on the large end of the range of body and brain 
sizes, this is not the result of adding new organs but merely enlarging ex­
isting ones with slight modifications. 
Evolution is an irreversible process, a process of increasing diversifica­
tion and distribution. Only in this sense does evolution exhibit a consistent 
direction. Uke entropy, it is a process of spreading out to whatever possi­
bilities are unfilled and within reach of a little more variation. Evolution does 
Terrence W. Deacon > 29

not continue to chum out ever better mousetraps, even if it has produced 
some remarkable examples along the way. But this pattern of spreading into 
unfilled niches does place us in one of the more extreme niches. 
Evolution is diversification in al directions, but there are more options 
available in some directions than others. Organisms started out small and 
short-lived and couldn't get much smaller, but they could always get larger 
and more long-lived. For the smallest organisms, the resources that can be 
devoted to internal representations of the world are limited, though even 
bacteria appear able to use their one information-storage system, their 
genes, to take in information from around them and modify their behav­
iors appropriately. But the upper end of the range of information-handling 
abilities was not similarly bounded, and so the difference between the low 
end and the upper end of this range has increased over the hundreds of mil­
lion years of animal evolution as part of this diversification. Nevertheless, 
the number of small-brained creatures has not diminished because of com­
petition with those with big brains, and the no-brainers-all the plants and 
single-celled organisms-vastly outnumber the rest of us. It just happens 
that one very, very minor evolutionary direction is toward niches where 
doing a lot of information processing during one's life is a good way to pass 
on genes. Inevitable? Well, it's about as inevitable a direction in evolution 
as the development of arctic fish with antifreeze in their blood or electric 
eels who use electricity to sense their way through muddy Amazonian wa­
ters. The niche was just there, and was eventually filled. Stil, in some mea­
sure, we are near the extreme of this distribution. 
The question, then, is whether the evolution oflanguage was somehow 
prefigured in this trend. Is there a general trend toward better communi­
cation? It's easy in hindsight to arrange the history of long-distance com­
munication from telegraphs to telephones to cellular phones to Star Trek 
communicators. It is not so easy to determine if animal communication has 
been steadily getting better and if human language is a part of such a trend. 
Certainly, there were advances in distance and signal clarity in evolution, 
but even if we narrow our comparison to vocal communication, there is no 
evidence in living species that some inevitable progressive trend leads to 
us. Apparently simple species can use highly complex methods of sound 
communication, and some highly complex species can be oblivious to their 
advantages. There are also many great sound tricks, such as echolocation, 
that are completely beyond human ability. Among our closest relatives, the 
great apes, there are both highly vocal (chimp) and nearly silent (orangutan) 
species. In fact, most birds easily outshine any mammal in vocal skills, and 
though dogs, cats, horses, and monkeys are remarkably capable learners in 
30 < The Symbolic Species

many domains, vocalization is not one of them. Our remarkable vocal abil­
ities are not part of a trend, but an exception. 
We also tend to underestimate the complexity and subtlety of much non­
human social communication. In recent decades, field studies of social 
communication in nonhuman species have demonstrated that many birds, 
primates, and social carnivores use extensive vocal and gestural repertoires 
to structure their large social groups. These provide a medium for organizing 
foraging and group movement, for identifYing individuals, for maintaining 
and restructuring multidimensional social hierarchies, for mediating ag­
gressive encounters, for soliciting aid, and for warning of dangers. 2 Indeed, 
even in our own species, a rich and complex language is still no substitute 
for a shocked expression, a muffled laugh, or a flood of silent tears, when 
it comes to communicating some of the more important messages of human 
social relationships. 
However, although they are complex, these elaborate repertoires of calls, 
displays, and gestures do not seem to map onto any of the elements that 
compose languages. Although various researchers have suggested that par­
allels to certain facets oflanguage are to be found in the learned dialects of 
birdsong, the external reference evident in vervet monkey alarm calls or 
honeybee dances, and the socially transmitted sequences of sounds that 
make up humpback whale songs (each of which will be considered in some 
detail in Chapter 2), these and many other examples like them only exhibit 
a superficial resemblance to language learning, word reference, or syntax, 
respectively. Even if we were to grant these parallels, no nonhuman species 
appears to put these facets of language together into a coordinated, rule­
governed system. 
Could we have missed recognizing nonhuman languages because they 
are as alien to us as our speech is to them? People have long entertained 
this possibility at least in mythology and children's stories. They offer the 
fantasy that we might someday overcome the communication boundaries 
that separate pumans and other animals and share memories, beliefs, hopes, 
and fears with them. In the popular children's book made into a movie, Dr. 
Doolittle enlists the aid of a "multilingual" parrot to translate between an­
imal and human speech. But is even a very superficial "translation" possi­
ble? What do you tell a child who asks, 'What is the kitty saying?" Do 
animals' vocalizations and gestures explain, describe, ask, or command? Do 
they argue, disagree, bargain, gossip, persuade, or entertain one another 
with their thoughts? Are there any corresponding elements in animal com­
munication that map onto the elements ofhuman language? Unfortunately, 
animal calls and displays have nothing that corresponds to noun parts or verb 
Terrence W. Deacon > 31

parts of sentences, no grammatical versus ungrammatical strings, no mark­
ing of singular or plural, no indications of tense, and not even any elements 
that easily map onto words, except in the most basic sense of the beginning 
and ending of a sound. 
One quite reasonable caution against making strong claims about the ab­
sence of nonhuman languages is that our study of other species' commu­
nication systems is still in its infancy. Isn't it more prudent to remain agnostic 
until we have learned a great deal more about other species communica­
tions? It is always wise not to prejudge the evidence, especially with respect 
to a subject about which we have undeniable prejudices. And there are far 
more species about whose communicative behavior we know next to noth­
ing than there are whose communication has been studied. Nevertheless, 
I think that we have sufficient information to make a reasonably confident 
claim even about species whose communicative behaviors have been only 
superficially studied. What makes this a fairly safe guess is not the sophis­
tication of our behavioral analyses, but rather the striking characteristics that 
would be evident in a nonhuman language. Where the differences should 
be glaring, the sensitivity and sophistication of observations and tests can 
be minimal. 
What would be the characteristics of a nonhuman language that would 
allow us instantly to recognize it as a languagelike form of communication, 
even if it were quite alien with respect to all human languages? This is the 
sort of question that scientists scanning the heavens with radio telescopes 
listening for signals from unearthly species must ask themselves, or that 
might be asked by those engaged in electronic surveillance interested in dis­
tinguishing the transmission of coded or encrypted signals from random 
noise. Interestingly, many of these characteristics are exhibited in the sur­
face structure of the signals, and require no special insight into meaning or 
referential function, and no obvious correspondence with natural language 
grammars, to discern. 3 Here are a few general features that ought to stand 
out. A languagelike signal would exhibit a combinatorial form in which dis­
tinguishable elements are able to recur in different combinations. It would 
exhibit a creative productivity of diverse outputs and a rather limited amount 
of large-scale redundancy. And although there would be a high degree of 
variety in the possible combinations of elements, the majority of combina­
torial possibilities would be systematically excluded. In terrestrial examples, 
where it would be possible to observe the correlations between signals and 
contextual events, there should be another rather striking and counterin­
tuitive feature. The correlations between individual signals and the objects 
and events that form the context of their production should not exhibit a 
32 < The Symbolic Species

simple one-to-one mapping. The correlations between sign elements and 
their pragmatic context should differ radically yet systematically from oc­
casion to occasion, depending on how the signals are arranged in combi­
nation with respect to one another. These, of course, are all general features 
associated with syntax, though not just language syntax. Human games, 
mathematics, and even cultural customs exhibit these features. 
If a radio-telescope observer identified a signal emanating from distant 
space with these characteristics it would make world headlines, despite the 
fact that the meaning of the signal would remain completely undecodable. 
With far more to go on than this, in even superficially studied animal com­
munications, we can be reasonably sure that for the vast majority of likely 
candidate species such a signal has not yet been observed. Instead, though 
highly complex and sophisticated, the communicative behaviors in other 
species tend to occur as isolated signals, in fixed sequences, or in relatively 
unorganized combinations better described by summation than by formal 
rules. And their correspondences with events and behavioral outcomes, in 
the cases where this can be investigated, inevitably tum out to be of a one­
to-one correlational nature. Though an as yet undescribed example of an 
animal communication system that satisfies these criteria cannot be ruled 
out, it seems reasonable to conclude that the chances are poor that it would 
have gone unobserved in common animal species, any more than we would 
miss it in a cosmic radio signal. 
My point is not that we humans are better or smarter than other species, 
or that language is impossible for them. It is simply that these differences 
are not a matter of incommensurate kinds oflanguage, but rather that these 
nonhuman forms of communication are something quite different from lan­
guage. For this reason I think that the comparison is misguided, and use­
ful only at a very superficial level. This fact should not be too difficult to 
appreciate because we all have personal experience of just the sort of in­
commensurability I am talking about. There are numerous human coun­
terparts to othpr animals' nonlinguistic communicative behaviors. We too 
have a wide range of innately produced and universally understood facial 
expressions, vocalizations, and gestures. As in other species, they are an ir­
replaceable component of human social communication. Yet this is not 
analogous to being bilingual. This other repertoire of communicative be­
haviors is not a language of gestures instead of words. It is something else. 
And although these human calls and gestures comprise an entirely familiar 
system, we find the same difficulty translating them into word equivalents 
as we do with animal calls and gestures with which we are far less familiar. 
The problem is not their unfamiliarity but rather that it simply makes no 
Terrence W. Deacon > 33

sense to ask what kind of word a laugh is, whether a sob is expressed in past 
or present tense, or if a sequence of facial gestures is correctly stated. The 
problem isn't a difficulty mapping human to nonhuman languages, but 
rather a difficulty mapping languages to any other form of naturally evolved 
communication, human or otherwise. 
Of no other natural form of communication is it legitimate to say that 
"language is a more complicated version of that." It is just as misleading to 
call other species' communication systems simple languages as it is to call 
them languages. In addition to asserting that a Procrustean mapping of one 
to the other is possible, the analogy ignores the sophistication and power 
of animals' nonlinguistic communication, whose capabilities may also be 
without language parallels. Perhaps we are predisposed to see other species' 
communications through the filter of language metaphors because lan­
guage is too much a natural part of our everyday cognitive apparatus to let 
us easily gain an outside perspective on it. Yet our experience of its natu­
ralness, its matter-of-factness, belies its alien nature in the grander scheme 
of things. It is an evolutionary anomaly, not merely an evolutionary ex­
treme. 
This lack of precedent makes language a problem for biologists. Evoiu­
tionary explanations are about biological continuity, so a lack of continuity 
limits the use of the comparative method in several important ways. We can't 
ask, 'What ecological variable correlates with increasing language use in a 
sample of species?" Nor can we investigate the "neurological correlates of 
increased language complexity." There is no range of species to include in 
our analysis. As a result, efforts to analyze the evolutionary forces respon­
sible for language have often relied on crude substitutes to make up for the 
lack of homology between language and nonhuman forms of communica­
tion. It is tempting to try to conceive oflanguage as an extrapolated extreme 
of something that other species produce, such as calls, grunts, gestures, or 
social grooming.4 1t is also tempting to tum to some other feature of human 
anatomy that can be more easily compared to other species as an index of 
language evolution. Humans can, for example, be ranked along with other 
species with respect to brain size, group size, social-sexual organization, for­
aging strategy, etc. But even if humans are at the extreme in many of these 
measures, the correlations among these attributes are not obvious, and 
their linkage to language is dubious, since trends in these attibutes in other 
species occur irrespective of language. 
Interpreting the discontinuity between linguistic and nonlinguistic com­
munication as an essential distinction between humans and nonhumans, 
however, has led to an equally exaggerated and untenable interpretation of 
34 < The Symbolic Species

language origins: the claim that language is the product of a unique one­
of-a-kind piece of neural circuitry that provides all the essential features that 
make language unique (e.g., grammar). But this does not just assume that 
there is a unique neurological feature that correlates with this unique be­
havior, it also assumes an essential biological discontinuity. In other words, 
that language is somehow separate from the rest of our biology and neu­
rology. It is as though we are apes plus language-as though one handed a 
language computer to a chimpanzee. 
This reminds me of a wonderful piece of modem mythology from a re­
cent Hlm entitled Short Circuit. A sophisticated robot is accidentally trans­
formed from a mechanism that "just runs programs" into a conscious, 
self-aware being as a result of being struck by lightning. The power surge 
damaged its circuits in just the right way. The now conscious robot, of 
course, does not think of this as "damage." From his perspective, the light­
ning bolt corrected a design limitation. As a cinematic device, the bolt of 
lightning accomplishes two important things. The catastrophic and unpre­
dictable nature of lightning provides a vehicle for invoking drastic and un­
precedented change, and its intrinsically chaotic-and, by tradition, 
miraculous-character obviates any possibility of describing exactly what 
alterations changed a computer mechanism into a human-type mind. For 
the sake of the story, we suspend critical analysis and allow this miraculous 
accident to stand in place of an otherwise inexplicable transformation. As 
an allegory of human mental evolution, it offers a paradigm example of what 
biologists call a "hopeful monster" theory: the evolutionary theorist's coun­
terpart to divine intervention, in which a freak mutation just happens to pro­
duce a radically different and serendipitously better-equipped organism.5 
The single most influential "hopeful monster" theory of human language 
evolution was offered by the linguist Noam Chomsky, and has since been 
echoed by numerous linguists, philosophers, anthropologists, and psychol­
ogists. Chomsky argued that the ability of children to acquire the grammar 
of their first language, and the ability of adults effortlessly to use this gram­
mar, can only be explained if we assume that all grammars are variations of 
a single generic "Universal Grammar," and that all human brains come 
with a built-in language organ that contains this language blueprint. This is 
offered as the only plausible answer to an apparently insurmountable learn­
ing problem. Grammars appear to have an unparalleled complexity and sys­
tematic logical structure, the individual grammatical "rules" aren't explicitly 
evident in the information available to the child, and when they acquire their 
first language children are still poor at learning many other things. Despite 
these limitations children acquire language knowledge at a remarkable rate. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 35

This leads to the apparently inescapable conclusion that language infor­
mation must already be "in the brain" before the process begins in order 
for it to be successful. Children must already "know" what constitutes an 
allowable grammar, in order to be able to ignore the innumerable false hy­
potheses about grammar that their limited experience might otherwise sug­
gest. 
This device, a "language organ" unique to the human brain, could also 
account for the failure of other species to acquire language. The appeal of 
this scenario is that it eliminates many troublesome questions in one fell 
swoop: the discontinuity between human and nonhuman communication, 
the larger human brain (adding a new part enlarges it), the systemic inter­
dependent nature of grammatical rules (they al derive from one neuro­
logical source), the presumed universal features of language structure 
(ditto), the intertranslatability of languages (ditto), and the ease with which 
language is initially acquired despite an insufficient input and a lack of 
grammatical error correction by adults. 
Another appeal of the hopeful monster story is that it promises a defi­
nite and dramatic transition from one stage to another in the evolutionary 
sequence. It offers a single-step evolutionary account that is much easier 
to comprehend and organize in one's thinking than continuous changes in­
volving multiple factors interacting and overlapping in time in complex 
ways. It tantalizes the imagination to hear that the story of human origins 
was written in the course of a single dramatic and decisive prehistoric event. 
In one step, some ancestor crossed the threshold into humanity. But such 
a crucial transition could hardly occur without leaving a trail of evidence at­
testing to its discontinuity. If modem language abilities appeared al of a sud­
den in human prehistory, then we ought to find numerous other correlates 
of a radical reorganization of human behavior and biology. Inspired by this 
possibility, researchers in many fields have combed through their own data 
for signs of sudden transitions that might be the result of such an incredi­
ble language mutation. Not surprisingly, many have been "discovered" in 
the record of human prehistory. They include: abrupt technological transi­
tions (e.g., the first appearance of stone tools or of extensive cultural vari­
ations in tool design); possible punctuated speciation events (e.g., the 
origination of anatomically modem humans from a "mitochondrial Eve"); 
rapid population changes (e.g., the demise of the Neanderthals); and signs 
of major innovations in cultural artefacts (the first appearance of durable 
representative art, such as carvings and cave paintings in Europe). But be­
cause they offer evidence that is indirect, at best, and so sparse and frag­
mentary, paleontological finds can appear irregular for many other reasons, 
36 < The Symbolic Species

not least of which is our predisposition to organize the evidence in cate­
gorical tenns. 
An accidental language organ requires no adaptive explanation for the 
structure oflanguage. If this hypothetical organ was plugged into the brain 
in a single accident of prehistory, rather than evolving bit by bit with respect 
to its functional consequences, then no functional explanations would be 
necessary. If it was just an accident, any utility would be entirely acciden­
tal as well, discovered after the fact. This too might account for the many 
little idiosyncrasies oflanguage and its discontinuities when compared with 
other nonhuman forms of communication. But I think that this story is far 
too neat and tidy precisely because it suggests that so many questions do 
not need to be addressed. The accidental language organ theory politely 
begs us to ignore the messy details of language origins, abandon hope of 
finding precedents in the structure of ape brains or their cognitive abilities, 
and stop looking for any deep design logic to the structural and functional 
relationships oflanguage grammars and syntax. This is a lot to ignore. What 
does this hypothesis provide instead? 
One of the characters in Moliere's play The Imaginary Invalid, 6 is asked 
by his physician-examiners to explain the means by which opium induces 
sleep. He replies that it induces sleep because it contains a "soporific fac­
tor." This answer is applauded by the doctors. The playwright is, of course, 
satirizing the false expertise of these apparently learned men by showing 
their knowledge to be no more than sophistry. The answer is a nonexpla­
nation. It merely takes what is in need of explanation and gives it a name, 
as though it were some physical object. Like phlogiston, the substance once 
hypothesized by pre-atomic chemistry to be the essence that determined 
flammability, the "soporific factor" fails to reduce the phenomenon in need 
of explanation to any more basic causal mechanisms. 
For many linguists, grammatical knowledge is what needs to be ex­
plained, and what is lacking is an adequate account of the source of chil­
dren's grammatreal and syntactic abilities in tenns of antecedents in the 
child's experience of language. We are thus like the characters in Moliere's 
play, who know what is produced but don't know how it is produced. Fail­
ing to discover a satisfactory explanation for how grammatical knowledge 
could be impressed upon children's minds from the outside, we naturally 
tum to the possibility that it does not come from the outside at all. But sim­
ply assuming that this knowledge is already present, and so doesn't need to 
pass from outside to inside, only restates this negative finding in positive 
tenns. A grammar instinct or a universal grammar serve as place holders 
for whatever could not be learned. The nature of this presumed innate 
Terrence W. Deacon > 37

knowledge oflanguage is described only in terms of its consequences. Lin­
guists have progressively redefined what supposedly cannot be learned in 
ever more formal and precise terms, and so we may have the feeling that 
these accounts are approaching closer and closer to an explanation. But al­
though the description of what is missing has gotten more precise, ultimately 
it is only a more and more precise version of what is missing. These "ex­
planations" of the nature of a language instinct are inevitably presented in 
the guise of elaborate definitions of grammatical principles or else as some­
thing akin to computer programs, and in this way they are only more for­
mal restatements of the problem of the missing information. Saying that the 
human brain alone produces grammar because it alone possesses a gram­
mar factor ultimately passes the explanatory buck out of the hands of lin­
guists and into the hands of neurobiologists. 
To be fair, the intent oflanguage organ theories is not to address the ques­
tion of initial language origins, but rather to explain the source of language 
competence in development. For this reason, it is not wedded to the hope­
ful monster assumption. Steven Pinker, a proponent of the Universal Gram­
mar view of language abilities and an articulate champion of many of 
Chomsky's original insights about the uniqueness of language, argues in a 
recent book (The Language Instinct) that innate grammatical knowledge is 
not at all incompatible with an adaptationist interpretation of its origins. He 
argues that a language instinct could have gradually evolved through the ac­
tion of natural selection. On the one hand, this is a far more biologicaly plau­
sible alternative to miraculous accidents and it challenges us to face some 
of the difficult problems ignored by theories relying on miraculous accidents 
to fill in the gaps. On the other hand, an adequate formal account of lan­
guage competence does not provide an adequate account of how it arose 
through natural selection, and the search for some new structures in the 
human brain to fulfil this theoretical vacuum, like the search for phlogis­
ton, has no obvious end point. Failure to locate it in such a complex hier­
archy of mechanisms can always be dismissed with the injunction: look 
harder. 
A full evolutionary account cannot stop with a formal description of what 
is missing or a scenario of how selection might have favored the evolution 
of innate grammatical knowledge. It must also provide a functional account 
of why its particular organization was favored, how incremental and partial 
versions were also functional, and how structures present in nonhuman 
brains were modified to provide this ability. The language instinct theory 
provides an end point, an assessment of what a language evolution theory 
ultimately needs to explain. It rephrases the problem by giving it a new 
38 < The Symbolic Species

name. But this offers little more than the miraculous accident theory pro­
vided: a formal redescription of what remains unexplained. Unfortunately, 
I think it also misses the forest for the trees, even in this endeavor. I don't 
think that children's grammatical abilities are the crucial mystery of lan­
guage. 
The Missing Simple Languages 
The two dominant paradigms for framing the language origins ques­
tion-the evolution of greater intelligence versus the evolution of a spe­
cialized language organ-have one thing in common: both are stated in 
terms of the problem of learning a very large and complex set of rules and 
signs. They assume that other species are poor language learners because 
language is just too complicated for them to learn, and too demanding for 
them to perform. It requires rapid and efficient learning, demands im­
mense memory storage, takes advantage of almost supernatural rates of ar­
ticulation and auditory analysis, and poses an analytic problem that is worthy 
of a linguistic Einstein. Both approaches assume that the difficulty for other 
species is the complexity of language, but they disagree on the source of 
this difficulty and on what is required to overcome it. Do human children 
merely need to be very much more intelligent than other species in order 
to learn language, or is language so complicated that it is impossible to learn 
without some built-in language information to "jump start" the process? Ac­
cepting one or the other assumption leads to opposite claims about the na­
ture of the evolution of language and the human mind. If language is just 
difficult to learn, then the neural adaptation that supports it could be quite 
general in its effect on cognitive abilities. Iflanguage is, for al practical pur­
poses, impossible to learn, then the neural adaptation necessary to support 
it would need to be quite specific. However one looks at these problems, 
it appears that overcoming the limitations imposed by the obvious com­
plexity oflanguage is a prerequisite to language evolution. I say it "appears" 
this way, because I think that something has been missed in both views of 
the problem, something fundamental. These alternatives, and many plau­
sible intermediates, only address one of the main problems in need of ex­
planation, and it is not the critical one. 
A task that is physically too difficult to perform may exceed our strength, 
our endurance, our rate of performance, our precision of action, our capacity 
to do many things at the same time, etc. In cognitive terms, these corre­
spond to our ability to focus attention, the persistence of our memories, our 
rate of learning, and our short-term memory span, etc. When we say that 
Terrence W. Deacon > 39

a skill is difficult to learn, we mean that the desired movement sequence 
severely taxes our ability precisely to time, control, or coordinate the com­
ponent movements. When we say that a perceptual task is difficult to learn, 
we mean that it requires utilizing cues too subtle or fleeting to detect, too 
irregular to discover their commonalities, or embedded in too many dis­
tracting cues to sort out. And when we say that a cognitive task is difficult 
to learn, we mean that there are too many associations to be held in work­
ing memory at one time or too many to be considered in too little time or 
simply too many to be remembered. Each demands too much, from too lit­
tle, in insufficient time. Both the complexity of the task and the resources 
one has available will determine its relative difficulty. 
Clearly, language is complicated in all these ways. Linguistic communi­
cation requires us to learn and perform some remarkably complicated skills, 
both in the production of speech and in the analysis of speech sounds. In 
addition, there is a great deal to learn: thousands of vocabulary items and 
an intricate system of grammatical rules and syntactic operations. And it's 
not enough that language is complicated. According to many linguists, we 
aren't even offered sufficient outside support to deal with it. We are forced 
to figure out the underlying implicit rules of grammar and syntax without 
good teaching and with vastly inadequate examples and counterexamples. 
This apparent lack of adequate instruction adds insult to injury, so to speak, 
by making a too complicated task even harder. The degree to which the sup­
port for language learning undershoots this need is (exponentially) pro­
portional to how complicated the task is to begin with, and so the complexity 
of language is doubly limiting. 
How could anyone doubt that language complexity is the problem? Lan­
guages are indeed complicated things. They are probably orders of magni­
tude more complicated than the next-most-complicated communication 
system outside of the human sphere. And they are indeed almost impossi­
bly difficult for other species to acquire. The question is whether this com­
plexity is the source of the difficulty that essentially limits the use oflanguage 
to our species alone. Although this would seem to be the obvious conclu­
sion, it is not quite so obvious as it might first appear. The most crucial dis­
tinguishing features of language cannot be accounted for merely in terms 
of language complexity. 
The challenge to the complexity argument for human language origins 
rests on a simple thought experiment. Imagine a greatly simplified language, 
not a child's language that is a fragment of a more complicated adult lan­
guage, but a language that is logically complete in itself, but with a very lim­
ited vocabulary and syntax, perhaps sufficient for only a very narrow range 
40 < The Symbolic Species

of activities. I do not mean "language" in a metaphoric sense, the way that 
all communication systems are sometimes glossed as languages. But I also 
do not restrict my meaning to speech, or to a system whose organizational 
principles are limited to the sorts of grammatical rules found in modem lan­
guages. I mean language in the following very generic sense: a mode of com­
munication based upon symbolic reference (the way words refer to things) 
and involving combinatorial rules that comprise a system for representing 
synthetic logical relationships among these symbols. Under this definition, 
manual signing, mathematics, computer "languages," musical compositions, 
religious ceremonies, systems of etiquette, and many rule-governed games 
might qualifY as having the core attributes oflanguage. More important, no 
more than a tiny "vocabulary" of meaningful units and only two or three 
types of combinatorial rules would be necessary to fulfill these criteria. A 
five- or ten-word vocabulary and a syntax as simple as toddlers' two- and 
three-word combinations would suffice. Reducing the definition oflanguage 
to such minimal conditions allows us to conceive of languagelike systems 
that are far simpler even than the communicative repertoires found to 
occur in the social interactions of many other species. 
So this is the real mystery. Even under these loosened criteria, there are 
no simple languages used among other species, though there are many 
other equally or more complicated modes of communication. Why not? And 
the problem is even more counterintuitive when we consider the almost in­
surmountable difficulties of teaching language to other species. This is sur­
prising, because there are many clever species. Though researchers report 
that languagelike communication has been taught to nonhuman species, 
even the best results are not above legitimate challenges, and the fact that 
it is difficult to prove whether or not some of these efforts have succeeded 
attests to the rather limited scope of the resulting behaviors, as well as to 
deep disagreements about what exactly constitutes languagelike behavior. 
Both the successes and failures that have come of this research are never­
theless highly informative with regard to both what animals can and can't 
do and how we zonceive of language itself, but the few arguable successes 
must be seen against the background of domesticated animals and family 
pets that never seem to catch on, despite being raised in a context where 
they are bombarded with a constant barrage of commands, one-sided con­
versations, and "rhetorical" questions. For the vast majority of species in the 
vast majority of contexts, even simple language just doesn't compute. This 
lack of simple languages in the wild and inability to learn simple languages 
under human tutelage don't make sense! Many of these species engage in 
natural communicative behaviors that are far more complex than a simple 
Terrence W. Deacon > 41

language, and they are capable of learning larger sets of associations than 
are necessary for constructing a simple language. So why is language such 
a problem? The difference cannot be simple versus complex. 
The complexity of language is important. It demands an explanation, as 
does the ability of young children to make sense of it, seemingly without 
sufficient feedback or time at their disposal. These are remarkable aspects 
of the language mystery, but they are secondary to a more basic mystery that 
has a lot more to do with the human/nonhuman difference. Despite the in­
telligence of other species, and the fact that they engage in communicative 
behaviors that are as complex in other ways as a simple language might be, 
no other language systems exist. And it's not just a matter of their not being 
needed. For some reason even a simple language seems impossibly diffi­
cult for nonhumans. This poses a profound riddle. So why has it been ig­
nored? Perhaps we have been too preoccupied by the details to recognize 
this simpler problem. Or maybe we have been too eager to cast the prob­
lem in terms of progress in communication, with humans in the lead. What­
ever the reason, it's time we recognized that the questions we thought 
needed to be explained by a theory of language origins were secondary to 
a more fundamental mystery: Why aren't there any simple languages? And 
why are even simple languages so nearly impossible for other species to 
learn? 
This changes everything. If complexity is not the problem, then theories 
that purport to explain language evolution in terms of overcoming com­
plexity lose their justification. A small vocabulary should not require vast 
intelligence or memory capacity or articulatory skill to master. Lower in­
telligence of our primate and mammalian relatives cannot, then, be the rea­
son they don't catch on. A simple grammar and syntax should also be a trivial 
matter to learn. No special built-in encoder-decoder for grammars should 
be necessary if the combinatorial analyses are simple and the possible al­
ternatives are relatively few. Even minimal powers of inductive learning 
would suffice. The whole raison d'etre of an innate Universal Grammar or 
language organ evaporates when it comes to simple languages. Finally, 
complex phonology, rapid articulation, and automated speech sound analy­
sis are equally unnecessary. The learning problems addressed by all these 
theories do not explain the absence of nonhuman languages, they only ex­
plain why nonhuman languages should not be as complicated as human 
ones. They point to issues that are relevant to complex modem human lan­
guages, but they do not illuminate the phenomenon we originally thought 
they explained. They don't provide any clue to why language evolved in the 
human lineage and nowhere else. This is an apples-versus-oranges prob-
42 < The Symbolic Species

lem, not a complicated-versus-simple one. It's not just curious that other 
species haven't started on this evolutionary path; it defies common sense. 
What is left that is difficult about learning language, if its complexity is 
not at issue? When we strip away the complexity, only one significant dif­
ference between language and nonlanguage communication remains: the 
common, everyday miracle of word meaning and reference. 
Neither grammar, nor syntax, nor articulate sound production, nor a 
huge vocabulary have kept other species from evolving languages. Just the 
simple problem of figuring out how combinations of words refer to things. 
Why should this be so difficult? Why should the curiously different way that 
languages represent things have imposed such an almost impenetrable bar­
rier in evolution? If we succeed in explaining this one paradoxical difficulty, 
we may catch a glimpse of the critical evolutionary threshold that only our 
own ancestors managed to surmount. 
The first major task of this book, then, is to describe precisely the dif­
ference between this unique human mode of reference, which can be 
termed symholic reference, and the forms of nonsymbolic reference that are 
found in all nonhuman communication (and in many other forms of human 
communication as well). The second task is to explain why it is so incredi­
bly difficult for other species to comprehend this form of reference. And 
the third task is to provide an explanation for how we humans (and a few 
other animals in carefully structured language learning experiments) have 
managed to overcome this difficulty. Even though this aspect of the lan­
guage origins mystery is only a part of the story of language evolution, and 
understanding this difference offers no immediate answers to why lan­
guages are as complex as they are today, or why they obey seemingly inex­
plicable design rules, or how it is possible for human children to make 
sense of these otherwise byzantine and atypical details, none of these other 
questions can be answered without taking symbolic reference as a given. 
But it is not a given. Grammatical rules and categories are symbolic rules 
and categories. Syntactic structure is just physical regularity when consid­
ered irrespective of the symbolic operations it is intended to encode. The­
ories oflanguage and mind that fail to address this issue head on, or suggest 
that it needs no explanation, ultimately assume what they set out to explain. 
We must explain the curious difficulty of symbolic reference first. 
In hindsight, the centrality of this problem was recognized all along, at 
least implicitly. It would not be an exaggeration to suggest that more philo­
sophical ink has been spilt over attempts to explain the basis for symbolic 
reference than over any other problem. Yet despite its intuitive familiarity 
(or because of it), and notwithstanding the efforts of some of the greatest 
Terrence W. Deacon > 43

minds of each century, it remains curiously unresolved. Linguists, too, have 
struggled with this problem in the form of semantic theories, with parallel 
difficulties. For this reason, we should not be surprised to find that it resur­
faces as the central riddle in the problem oflanguage origins. Linguists, psy­
chologists, and biologists cannot be blamed for failing to solve this basic 
mystery of mind before turning their efforts to other aspects of the language 
problem. Grammar and syntax can be studied and compared from lan­
guage to language and the correlations between language processes and 
brain functions can also be identified irrespective of solving the problem of 
symbolic reference. Even many facets of language learning can be studied 
without considering it in any depth. But theories that purport to explain the 
human/nonhuman difference in language abilities cannot ignore it, nor can 
accounts of what makes human minds different from nonhuman minds. 
But if the way language represents things has been the primary barrier 
to language evolution in other species, then we wil also need to rethink a 
great many other aspects of human mental evolution. Iflanguage complexity 
is a secondary development with respect to this more primary cognitive 
adaptation, then most theories have inverted the evolutionary cause and ef­
fect relationships that have driven human mental evolution. They have 
placed the cart (brain evolution) before the horse (language evolution). If 
neither greater intelligence, facile articulatory abilities, nor prescient gram­
matical predispositions of children were the keys to cracking this symbolic 
barrier, then the evolution of these supports for language complexity must 
have been consequences rather than causes or prerequisites of language 
evolution. More important, these adaptations could not have been the most 
critical determinants of brain evolution in our species. Approaching the lan­
guage origins mystery from this perspective is like stepping out of a mirror 
to find everything to be the reverse of what we assumed. 
From this perspective language must be viewed as its own prime mover. 
It is the author of a co-evolved complex of adaptations arrayed around a sin­
gle core semiotic innovation that was initially extremely difficult to acquire. 
Subsequent brain evolution was a response to this selection pressure and 
progressively made this symbolic threshold ever easier to cross. This has in 
tum opened the door for the evolution of ever greater language complex­
ity. Modem languages, with their complex grammars and syntax, their mas­
sive vocabularies, and their intense sensorimotor demands, evolved 
incrementally from simpler beginnings. Though simple languages exist in 
no society found today, they almost certainly existed at some point in our 
prehistory. These simple languages were superseded by modem complex 
44 < The Symbolic Species

languages, and the brains that originally struggled to support simple lan­
guages were replaced by brains better suited to this awkward adaptation. 
Somehow, despite their cognitive limitations, our ancestors found a way 
to create and reproduce a simple system of symbols, and once available, 
these symbolic tools quickly became indispensable. This insinuated a novel 
mode of information transmission into the evolutionary process for the first 
time in the billions of years since living processes became encoded in DNA 
sequences. Because this novel form of information transmission was par­
tially decoupled from genetic transmission, it sent our lineage of apes down 
a novel evolutionary path-a path that has continued to diverge from all 
other species ever since. This inversion of cause and effect has enormous 
consequences. If the human predisposition for language has been honed 
by evolution for a significant fraction of our prehistory, then our unique 
mentality must also be understood in these terms. The incessant demands 
of efficiently reconstituting a symbolic system in each generation would have 
created selection pressures to reshape our lineage's ape brains to fit this new 
function. The implications for brain evolution are also profound. The human 
brain should reflect language in its architecture the way birds reflect the 
aerodynamics of flight in the shape and movements of their wings. That 
which is most peculiar about language processing should correspond to that 
which is most peculiar about human brains. So if what is most unusual about 
language is its symbolic basis, what is most unusual about our brains? 
Human brains are unusually large: three times larger than they should 
be for an ape with our size body. But large brain size is only the most su­
perficial symptom of a substantial reorganization at deeper levels. Un­
packing this complicated anatomical problem and mapping it onto the 
special computational demands posed by language is the purpose of the 
middle section of this book. Looking more closely, we will discover that a 
radical re-engineering of the whole brain has taken place, and on a scale 
that is unprecedented. Interpreting these differences as consequences of 
the functional demands imposed by eons oflanguage processing may offer 
new insight iyto the relationship between differences in cognitive function 
and differences in large-scale brain organization. In the co-evolution of the 
brain and language two of the most formidable mysteries of science con­
verge, and together they provide a substantial set of clues about their rela­
tionship to one another. 
Though neuroanatomists have been searching for a "Rosetta Stone" of 
human brain function for centuries, it has been far from a trivial task to sort 
out the significant from the incidental differences in brain structure and it 
Terrence W. Deacon > 45

will take considerable effort just to identify exactly what has changed and 
how. As with the problem of determining what is fundamentally different 
about language, an analysis of how the brain has responded to these influ­
ences will require us to delve well below brain sizes and superficial differ­
ences in brain structures, to probe the processes that build brains in 
embryos. Brains are the most intricate and powerful computing devices on 
the planet. Linguistic communication is the most complex behavior known. 
Evolution is the epitome of inscrutability, indirectness, and opportunism­
seldom following an obvious or elegant path. Now we must throw into this 
already daunting mix of problems the equally perplexing problem of ex­
plaining symbolic reference. A puzzle of such magnitude is unlikely to have 
an easy solution, nor do I imagine that what little evidence we have is suf­
ficient to do any more than begin the process of hunting in the right places 
for more clues. But arranging the clues in the appropriate order is a first 
step, and considering an old problem from a novel perspective is often the 
best way to escape the maze of assumptions that prevents us from recog­
nizing the obvious. Perhaps by juxtaposing these linked mysteries from dif­
ferent domains we will recognize the common thread of logic that runs 
through them all. Like the famous Rosetta Stone, on which the same text 
was written in three radically different scripts, these pieces of the cognitive 
and neural puzzle, aligned side by side, may enable us to discover how each 
translates the other. 
46 < The Symbolic Species

C 
H 
A 
P 
T 
E 
R 
T 
W 
0 
A loss for Words 
If the only tool you have is a hammer, you tend to treat everything 
as if it were a nail. 
-Abraham Maslow 
Gymnastics of the Mind 
W
e often find that an apparently simple task is difficult, not because 
it is cmpplicated but because it is awkward. Sometimes, for instance, 
you just lack the right tools for the job. No matter how easy it is in 
principle to tighten a screw, if it has a slotted head (-) and all you have is a 
Phillips screwdriver ( + ), forget it. This is a familiar source of difficulty in 
physical activities. We humans are unprepared to perform a number of tasks 
that other species perform with ease. Other species can boast such adap­
tations as streamlining and fins for swimming, large flexible mobile surfaces 
for gliding and flying, claws· for clinging to the trunks of trees or snagging 
prey, or sharp canines for tearing flesh. Attempt a task that you are poorly 
47

suited for and your performance is at best inelegant and clumsy, and often 
it just doesn't succeed. 
Such awkwardness is, in essence, the opposite of preadaptation-that 
lucky chance of evolution when preexisting body parts coincidentally hap­
pen to be predisposed for a novel adaptational challenge. In comparison, 
this kind of built-in ineptness might be called "pre-maladaptation." Pre­
maladaptation accounts for our difficulties trying to sleep standing up, cut 
meat without a knife, or distinguish friends from foes by their smell, though 
certain other species do each well. In the same way that we find certain ac­
tions or movements to be impossible unaided, or find ourselves maladroit 
at manipulating certain objects, certain kinds of mental tasks can also be 
unwieldy for a brain predisposed to different sorts of analyses. In addition, 
certain mental predispositions that serve well in some domains can get in 
the way of accomplishing otherwise trivial tasks that require a new per­
spective or logic. Cognitive pre-maladaptations might also include predis­
positions to behave inappropriately, in ways that are opposite to how events 
tend to occur, or preferences that lead us to pay attention to irrelevant or 
misleading details. This is, of course, the secret to many magicians' tricks 
and the basis for animals' protective coloration. These could make an oth­
erwise simple task difficult by misdirecting attention and interfering with 
appropriate actions. 
Learning is not any one general process. Learning always occurs in a par­
ticular context, involving particular senses and types of motor actions, and 
certain ways of organizing the information involved. The process of learn­
ing is also not just committing an association to memory under the influ­
ence of reinforcement. Learning involves figuring out what is relevant and 
then figuring out how the relevant variables are associated. It involves sort­
ing and organizing, and sometimes recoding what we have already learned. 
When a pigeon learns that pecking at a red-lighted button will cause food 
to be delivered and that pecking at a blue-lighted button will shut off an 
aversive noise, it does not just commit these links to memory, it also learns 
to ignore a great deal that is irrelevant: the talking in the background, the 
time of day, the temperature of the room, the pecking of neighboring pi­
geons, odors that periodically waft by, and the other lights and buttons and 
structures of the cage. Success or failure at learning and problem solving 
depends on habits of attention, what we find salient and what we don't tend 
to notice, and how easily one can override and reprogram these tendencies. 
There are also internal distractions, in particular those that arise from 
past learning experiences. Interference effects of this sort are a common 
experience. Old associations provide a sort of repository of hypotheses. In 
48 < The Symbolic Species

many circumstances in the real world, events with similar features will pro­
duce similar outcomes. Generalizing from resemblances of present to past 
associations can often provide useful shortcuts that avoid wasting long pe­
riods of trial-and-error learning. Sometimes, however, superficial similari­
ties are just that, and the responses they elicit are off track. If the habits are 
strong, the opportunities to compare different habits are few, or the feed­
back about incorrect responses is weak, forgetting the old in order to learn 
the new can become a practical impossibility. As a result, certain problems 
can be difficult because they require us to think in ways that are not typi­
cal: to infer what's missing, to work back from an end, to assume the oppo­
site of what we want to demonstrate, and so on. Trick questions and riddles 
stump us, not because the question is complicated but because the solu­
tion is counterintuitive. Jokes are endlessly fascinating because they pro­
vide an insidiously logical punch line that we are unable to anticipate or 
predict. A successful punch line cannot be just a non sequitur, it must fol­
low inevitably and obviously, if only after the fact. The minor cognitive im­
plosion summed up by "Now I get it" is in part an experience of admiration 
at being fooled so well, so simply, and yet so logically. As with a magic trick, 
the key to a good joke is misdirection; and the most effective misdirection 
is self-imposed. The ways we naturally think about the subject of the joke 
are precisely the causes of our capacity to be fooled. 
Intelligence tests and "brain teasers" often challenge our capability to 
think outside of self-imposed and overly narrow contexts, and we consider 
the facility to make leaps oflogic a mark of intelligence. Indeed, the crite­
rion for calling something a work of genius is seldom its complexity, but 
rather how innovative the approach and how many others were unable to 
see it. This is why some of the great discoveries in many fields hmre been 
made by people outside the inner circle of true experts, because the experts 
are often too acquainted with a problem to see it in a novel way. As the great 
biologist Thomas Huxley is said to have exclaimed after learning of Dar­
win's theory of natural selection, "How stupid of me not to have thought of 
that!" Sometiࡡes what we do best works against us. 
The difficulties that a problem poses are a function of both its intrin_sic 
complexity and the learner's predispositions to attend to its most relevant 
aspects. Comparative psychologists have long struggled to untangle ques­
tions of general learning ability from specific learning abilities in different 
species. As they have become more sensitive to the problem of under­
standing a species' capabilities in the context of its natural environment, they 
are finding correlated differences in learning. Animal breeders have noticed 
these patterns for generations. Some breeds of dogs make better shepherds, 
Terrence W. Deacon > 49

some make better hunters, some make better Seeing Eye dogs. And there 
are almost always trade-offs: behavioral predispositions that are well suited 
to one sort of task often conflict with others. This sort of complementarity 
is also evident in studies of the effects of brain damage on animal learning. 
It is not uncommon to find that rather than producing impairment across 
the board, localized brain damage enhances learning of some tasks at the 
same time that it impairs learning of others. Such paradoxical enhancement 
shows that learning is not a monolithic brain process. Learning rates are 
species- and task-specific, and depend on the subject's particular balance 
between alternative predispositions. The notion that one can be better or 
worse at all forms of learning ignores the intrinsically competitive nature 
of different learning paradigms. The best attentional and mnemonic strate­
gies for one type of task may be exactly wrong for another. Just as our past 
experiences and accumulated knowledge can in some cases pose impedi­
ments to solving a novel problem, so can the evolutionary heritage of a 
species set it up to handle some cognitive problems well and others poorly. 
To the extent that members of a species are innately biased to attend to ir­
relevant details and to ignore critical elements of a problem, they are pre­
maladapted. 
This suggests a very different way to approach the language mystery. 
Could there be something about the way even a simple language must be 
learned that is just awkward for other species? Could symbolic reference 
be naturally counterintuitive? 
The fact that language is an unprecedented form of naturally evolved 
communication, compared to other forms, suggests that it likely requires a 
rather different problem-solving orientation in order to learn it. The point 
of the "missing languages paradox" is that the difficulty most species have 
in learning a language does not appear to be sufficiently diminished, even 
when the language being taught is vastly simplified. Somehow, they don't 
"get" what the language problem is about. This suggests that it is not only 
difficult but also goes against certain other predispositions that are quite 
strong. Language may require learning in ways that run counter to other 
more typical learning strategies. Just getting started, getting what it means 
for a word or sign to represent something-not simply point to it or bring 
it to mind by association but symbolize it-may require a kind of mental 
gymnastics for which most nonhuman brains are pre-maladapted. Even with 
considerable human social experience or specific training and support for 
their vocal limitations, only a select few nonhuman animals have ever come 
to grasp the symbolic relationships we have tried to teach them. Instead, 
most exhibit a remarkable capacity for anticipating our responses, mimic-
50 < The Symbolic Species

king our actions, or committing large sets of paired associations to mem­
my-sophisticated abilities all, but not symbolic abilities. 
In Other Words 
How could something as simple as word meaning be counterintuitive and 
awkward for other species to grasp? This question has its own special awk­
wardness. The explanation of the nature of word meaning has challenged 
thinkers since before recorded philosophy, and it continues to plague every 
field where explanations of thought processes are important. Thousands of 
years and thousands of texts later, we still do not fully understand the basis 
of the relationship that invests words with their meanings and referential 
capacity. To be blunt, we do not really understand one of our most com­
monplace experiences. We know how to use a word to mean something and 
to refer to something. We know how to coin new words and to assign new 
meanings to them. We know how to create codes and artificial languages. 
Yet we do not know how we know how to do this, nor what we are doing 
when we do. Or rather, we know on the surface, but we do not know what 
mental processes underlie these activities, much less what neural processes 
are involved. The fact that a conceptual problem this basic has gone unre­
solved for so many generations suggests that something more than mere 
technical difficulty stands in the way of our understanding. It is not just a 
difficult puzzle; the concept seems to be as counterintuitive for us to un­
derstand as it is simple for us to use. 
Few topics have generated as much debate and confusion. So one might 
think that this question is hardly the place to choose to begin an analysis of 
human language origins. Don't we risk getting stuck in the philosophical 
mire even before getting started? Yes, but there is something to be said for 
framing the most difficult and critical questions first, in order to avoid fol­
lowing pointless leads. 
Dozens of theories purport to explain the many aspects of the relation­
ship between a w'ard and its meaning. Philosophers, psychologists, and lin­
guists have been arguing for centuries over such matters, and the debates 
have approached a new intensity in recent years because of the rise of com­
puter technology and the hint of a possibility of building "intelligent" ma­
chines. In this context, I find it curious that scholars and engineers fail to 
take into account the anomalous nature ofthis form of reference. Shouldn't 
the lack of counterparts to words and sentences in the rest of the biologi­
cal world play a significant role in our thinking about the problem? Of all 
the enormously powerful computing devices that we find in the heads of 
Terrence W. Deacon > 51

birds and mammals, only one uses a symbolic mode of reference. What hints 
about its nature have we missed because we ignored its rarity? 
The main reason that this seems to have been ignored is that it is gen­
erally assumed that other species do exhibit counterparts to words and sen­
tences in their natural repertoires. Ambiguous definitions of what 
constitutes words, sentences, and languages on the one hand, and reference, 
meaning, and understanding on the other, allow researchers to stretch 
metaphorical uses of these terms to fit. Isn't any family dog able to learn to 
respond to many spoken commands? Doesn't my dog understand the word 
"come" if he obeys this command? There doesn't seem to be anything spe­
cial about learning to associate a sound and an object, and isn't that the 
whole basis of word reference? Just multiply such associations and add syn­
tax to string them together into different combinations and you have a sim­
ple language, right? Not exactly. We think we have a pretty good idea of what 
it means for a dog to "understand" a command like "Stay!" but are a dog's 
understanding and a person's understanding the same? Or is there some 
fundamental difference between the way my dog and I understand the same 
spoken sounds? Common sense psychology has provided terms for this dif­
ference. We say the dog learned the command "by rote," whereas we "un­
derstand" it. But this is a notoriously difficult difference to specify. Our 
uncertainty about this not only makes it difficult to figure out what animals 
are capable of, and what they are not, it also blurs the distinction between 
animal communication and language. 
One reason we have such difficulty is that we don't know how to talk 
about communication apart from language. We look for the analogues of 
words and phrases in animal calls, we inquire about whether gestures have 
meanings, we consider the presence of combination and sequencing of 
calls and gestures as indicating primitive syntax. On the surface this might 
seem to be just an extension of the comparative method: looking for the evo­
lutionary antecedents of these language features. But there is a serious 
problem with using language as the model for analyzing other species' com­
munication in hindsight. It leads us to treat every other form of communi­
cation as exceptions to a rule based on the one most exceptional and 
divergent case. No analytic method could be more perverse. Social com­
munication has been around for as long as animals have interacted and re­
produced sexually. Vocal communication has been around at least as long 
as frogs have croaked out their mating calls in the night air. Linguistic com­
munication was an afterthought, so to speak, a very recent and very idio­
syncratic deviation from an ancient and well-established mode of 
communicating. It cannot possibly provide an appropriate model against 
52 < The Symbolic Species

which to assess other forms of communication. It is the rare exception, not 
the rule, and a quite anomalous exception at that. It is a bit like categoriz­
ing birds' wings with respect to the extent they possess or lack the charac­
teristics of penguins' wings, or like analyzing the types of hair on different 
mammals with respect to their degree of resemblance to porcupine quills. 
It is an understandable anthropocentric bias-perhaps if we were penguins 
or porcupines we might see more typical wings and hair as primitive stages 
compared to our own more advanced adaptations-but it does more to ob­
fuscate than clarify. Language is a derived characteristic and so should be 
analyzed as an exception to a more general rule, not vice versa: 
This inversion of evolutionary logic leads to persistent attempts to model 
animal communication as some version of language minus something. I 
often hear animal behaviorists or linguists remarking that "animal languages 
just lack a grammar and syntax." In short, we analyze animal communica­
tion systems as though they were truncated or degenerate languages. Words 
without syntax, or names without semantics. Moreover, we often imagine 
the early stages of language evolution as though our ancestors spoke a sort 
of crippled language or child's language. Serious, well-received theories have 
suggested that we consider the speech of linguistically impaired brain­
damaged adults (Broca's aphasics) or the speech of very young infants as 
models of the early stages oflanguage evolution. 1 Notice, however, that just 
by treating other species' communication as partial languages, modem lan­
guage becomes the implicit end point, as adult language is the end point of 
children's language development and recovered language is the ideal goal 
of rehabilitation after brain damage. Of course, this apparent "final causal­
ity" is an illusion created by a sort of Orwellian rewriting of the evolution­
ary past in terms of the present. 
Treating animal calls and gestures as subsets oflanguage not only reverses 
the sequence of evolutionary precedence, it also inverts their functional de­
pendence as well. We know that the nonlanguage communication used by 
other animals is self-sufficient and needs no support from language to help 
acquire or inter}>ret it. This is true even for human calls like sobbing or ges­
tures like smiling. In contrast, however, language acquisition depends crit­
ically on nonlinguistic communication of all sorts, including much that is as 
innately prespecified as many nonhuman counterparts. Not only that, but 
extensive nonverbal communication is essential for providing the scaffold­
ing on which most day-to-day language communication is supported. In con­
versations, demonstrations, and explanations using words we make extensive 
use of prosody, pointing, gesturing, and interactions with objects and other 
people to disambiguate our spoken messages. Only with the historical in-
Terrence W. Deacon > 53

vention of writing has language enjoyed even partial independence from this 
nonlinguistic support. In the context of the rest of communication, then, 
language is a dependent stepchild with very odd features. 
But if language evolved subsequent to hundreds of millions of years of 
success with these nonlinguistic modes of vocal communication, and even 
now functions only by virtue of their presence, this should warn against in­
verting the relationship and treating language as the measure of these other 
forms. Language did not supersede or replace other forms of communica­
tion. Language evolved in a parallel, alongside calls and gestures, and de­
pendent on them-indeed, language and many human nonlinguistic forms 
of communication probably co-evolved (a dynamic that will be discussed in 
later chapters). This is demonstrated by the fact that innate call and ges­
ture systems, comparable to what are available to other primates, still exist 
side by side with language in us. Their complementarity with and distinc­
tion from language are exemplified by the fact that they are invariably pro­
duced by very different brain regions than are involved in speech production 
and language comprehension (details of these differences will be reviewed 
in Chapters 8-10). In many ways, these human counterparts to innate calls 
and gestures in other species offer the best source of intuitions concerning 
this difference. Who, for example, would even bother to consider the pos­
sibility that somehow smiles, grimaces, laughs, sobs, hugs, kisses, and al the 
rest of our panhuman nonlinguistic communications were words without 
syntax? 
The popular notion that the calls and gestures constituting the commu­
nications of other species are like words and sentences can mostly be traced 
to misconceptions about the concept of reference. The problem of refer­
ence has always been a major topic of debate in the study of animal com­
munication (see Figure 2.1). On the one extreme, some animal behaviorists 
have argued that calls and gestures are merely external correlates of inter­
nal states, and so have no external reference; on the other extreme, some 
cognitive ethologists have argued that many animal calls, grunts, and ges­
tures should be considered the equivalents of words that name specific ob­
jects in the world. One study, in particular, played a central role in rekindling 
debate on the role of reference in animal communication. In the mid-
1980s, Robert Seyfarth, Dorothy Cheney, and their colleagues reported that 
vervet monkeys produced alarm calls that appeared to act something like 
names for distinct predators. 2 Their observations demonstrated that dis­
tinctly different calls were produced to warn other troop members of the 
presence of either eagles, leopards, or snakes (an even wider range of calls 
is now recognized). In response to hearing one of these calls, other troop 
54 < The Symbolic Species

Honeybee 
Recruitment 
Dance 
Returning 
forager 
dances for 
others to 
communicate 
direction and 
distance to 
food source. 
' 
. - · · · Ǵ .. : 
# 
... . .. 
# 
• 
# 
I 
' 
I 
' ' 
# 
I 
\ 
I 
.: 
: : ,¯ .
.. . . . 
·Ɯt. .. 
I 
I 
I .  
.. 
I 
I 
'f/ 
\ 
.. 
I 
' ' 
\ 
,. 
,
,
 
' 
' 
. 
' 
. 
' 
. 
' ' 
Angle to vertical = 
angle of flight to 
food source with 
respect to sun. 
Intensity of waggle 
indicates distance 
to food source 
Humpback Whale Song 
Hertz (X1 00) 
Themes 
\
0] ,. .. 1. õ .°.:_ J ... ,.1_ J .J I A 
1 0] .. -
--
I B 
1 .  
- -
--
. 
\or·rrrrrrr r r r rrrrr lc 
Song is composed of themes that are altered each year, and sung by all males of the group. 
Vervet 
6 
45 
Distinct 
Monkey 
8 4 
eagle 
calls are 
c:o 
Alarm 
c:o 
given for 
E. 2 
distinct 
Calls 
N ... 
predators 
Ql 
= 
0 
& produce 
0 
0.5 sec 
distinct 
6 
escape 
8 
I 
leopard 
behaviors. 
c:o 4 
c:o 
E. 2 
N ... 
Ql 
= 0 
0 
0.5 sec 
1 sec 
1 .5 sec 
Figure 2.1 Three often-cited examples of animal communication systems: honeybee 
recruitment dance, humpback whale songs, and veroet nwnkey alann calls (discussed 
in the text). Each exhibits features that are similar to features thought to be special 
to language. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 55

members either raced out of the trees (eagle), climbed into the trees (leop­
ard), or just rose up to peer into the bushes around them (snake). Thus, dis­
tinct calls referred to distinct classes of predators, not simply to some state 
of the caller (though they indicated a fearful state of mind as well). 
It is not difficult to reconstruct the evolutionary processes that produced 
such distinctive calls and referential relationships. The key can be found in 
the behaviors that the calls induce in other troop members. These preda­
tors attack using very different approaches, and the appropriate defense be­
haviors for each tum out to be mutually exclusive. The worst place to be 
when a leopard is prowling nearby is on the ground. But since leopards can 
also climb trees, it is best to wait out on the thinner branches of trees. Un­
fortunately, this is the worst place to be when eagles are threatening. Best 
to be hiding under a tree on the ground. Imagine, then, the dilemma if this 
species had only a single type of alarm call. To ascend or descend, that is 
the question. Just to sit frozen with indecision or stand up and peer around 
is the worst response of all (unless a snake is the predator, for which there 
is another call), since it leaves you vulnerable to both. Consequently, pre­
dation selects against individuals that have trouble determining which call 
is which, and it will select against the kin of animals that do not in some way 
provide distinct information that helps with this choice, such as sound dif­
ferences. This evolutionary logic is what is generally termed disruptive se­
lection: selection against the intermediate (compromise) value of a trait and 
favoring the extremes. The referential specificity of these calls evolved over 
time, then, as the consequences of warning and escape provided selection 
pressures that changed the calling and responding predisposition of mem­
bers of the species. Not surprisingly, a similar evolutionary logic has also 
shaped the alarm calls of many other species, and other design factors are 
also often involved, such as the localizability of the sounds themselves.3 
Cheney and Seyfarth originally suggested that vervet alarm calls were 
analogous to "names" for these predators, and might be used in the way we 
shout the warning: "Fire!" This led many to argue that this system of calls 
was like a very simple language. Some even suggested it was comparable to 
the way that infants just beginning to learn to speak will use single words 
like "juice," to request a drink, or "doggy," to indicate that they want to pet 
a dog, and so on. Such human examples of single word sentences lacking 
overt syntax (though often with characteristic gestural support) have been 
called holophrastic utterances, though there is considerable debate about 
how much potential syntax can be read into these. The core of the alarm 
call argument is that these calls are different from a pain cry or a grimace, 
in the same way that words are different. In other words, they refer to some-
56 < The Symbolic Species

thing other than the animal's mental and physical state. This of course in­
cludes an unmentioned assumption that other sorts of calls or gestures like 
pain cries and grimaces can't be referential. 
This interpretation implicitly invites us to imagine a species with many 
more of these distinctive types of calls, some for foods, some for important 
objects, maybe even sounds to identify specific individuals (for example, dol­
phins appear to use distinctive "signature whistles" to identifY themselves). 
Would an elaborate repertoire of this kind constitute a kind of protolan­
guage? Are the calls essentially like a vocabulary? This even suggests a com­
pelling language evolution scenario: Individual calls evolved first, they 
increased in number and in variety, they were combined in various ways, 
and eventually a grammar and syntax evolved to systematize the patterns of 
combinations.4 Unfortunately, the entire house of cards is dependent on call 
reference being equivalent to word reference, and this resemblance is not 
complete in some important ways. Let's see if we can be more precise about 
how they are not the same. 
Reference itself is not unique to language, in fact it is ubiquitous through­
out animal communication. Even a symptom can refer to something other 
than itself and other than the state of the body that produces it. Take, for 
example, human laughter: a symptom of being in a highly amused state of 
mind. Laughter is an excellent example of a human innate call (I will re­
turn to analyze both the evolution and physiology of this call in later chap­
ters). Like other calls it need not be intentionally produced; it often erupts 
spontaneously even when we would rather suppress it, even though it can 
also be faked (with variable success) if the social context demands. For the 
most part we tend to think of it as a way to work off feelings inspired by a 
joke or an awkward social situation. But laughter also refers to things as well. 
For example, when someone walks into a room laughing, it suggests that 
they probably heard or saw something funny just outside, before entering. 
The laughter points to this something else that caused it. And it specifies 
some of the characteristics that this cause probably exhibits; specifically, it 
was not a source of sorrow, not a disgusting or repulsive scene, not a real 
threat, and so on. It categorizes the event that induced it by virtue of what 
the laughter tells us about the state of the Iaugher. It points to a definite 
class of experiences that are deemed funny. But notice how different the 
reference to the same event is when the person stops laughing and says, "I 
just heard a great joke." Alarm calls refer to objects the way laughter does, 
not the way words do. 
Another difference, subsequently noted by Cheney and Seyfarth,5 has 
to do with the way we use words and sentences to transmit information from 
Terrence W. Deacon > 57

one to another. Specifically, they were interested in determining whether 
these calls were used intentionally to communicate information or just in­
cidentally communicated information, and how this might relate to what 
individuals know about what others know and don't know. 
Some critical features that distinguish automatic (unintended) forms of 
communication from intentional communications are characteristic of 
laughter. Laughter provides others with information about the Iaugher's 
state of mind and recent history, but it also exerts a more direct effect, a 
sort of compulsion to laugh along. We often acknowledge this by saying that 
laughter is contagious. Sitting in a room full of laughing people, one finds 
it difficult not to laugh as well, even though the reason for their laughter 
may not be entirely clear. Indeed, so strong is this odd compulsion, that ar­
tificial laughter produced by a mechanical device (e.g., a laugh box or the 
laugh track on a TV sitcom) can induce us to laugh, even though we are fully 
aware that it is not real laughter. To add insult to injury to our sense of self­
control, the faked laughter actually induces us to experience things as fun­
nier as a result. This involuntary power oflaughter is shared by many other 
innate social signals as well, including sobbing, smiling, grimacing, etc., and 
contrasts sharply with the absence of such an echoic tendency in normal 
language communication. Not only do we seldom parrot what we have just 
heard from another, such a response is generally oddly annoying, as most 
children at some point discover to their glee and their siblings' and parents' 
distress. How odd and unnatural it would feel to enter a room where peo­
ple were echoing each other's speech in the same way that they tend to echo 
each other's laughter! This may be why certain ritual practices that employ 
such patterns oflanguage use are at the same time both disturbing and pow­
erful, depending on whether one feels included or excluded. 
In general, even casual conversation takes a certain degree of conscious 
effort and monitoring. Following another's speech takes at least a modicum 
of attention and intentionally controlled analysis-something that quickly 
becomes obvious when one conversant's mind begins to wander. Part of this 
derives from the fact that what one says is typically influenced to some de­
gree by assumptions about what the other already knows. So a common fac­
tor in the use oflanguage is an intention to convey something that the other 
person presumably doesn't know. The influential philosopher H. P. Grice 
has even argued that a sort of reflexive logic of the form "I believe that you 
believe that I believe x" is an essential component of communicating mean­
ing in language.6 But in this regard, both laughter and vervet monkey alarm 
calls ultimately fail the test in part because both are involuntary and con­
tagious. When one vervet monkey produces an alarm call, others in the troop 
58 < The Symbolic Species

both escape and echo the call again and again, and all will join in until the 
general excitement is gone. This redundancy provides a minimum of new 
predator information for any troop members subsequent to the first pre­
sentation (though it may indicate that danger is still present). It almost cer­
tainly has more to do with communicating and recruiting arousal than 
predator information, as is analogously the case with laughter and humor. 
Knowing that another saw a predator does not appear to inhibit the velVet's 
tendency to call and knowing that another also got a joke does not appar­
ently inhibit a person's tendency to laugh-indeed, both may be potenti­
ated by this knowledge. 
So, in this regard, the example of velVet alarm calls offers a false lead. 
Reference is not the difference between alarm calls and words. Both can 
refer to things in the world and both can refer to internal states, but there 
is a difference. This difference is the source of the most common misun­
derstanding about the nature of linguistic versus nonlinguistic communi­
cation. It is a difference in the kind of reference. We tend to confuse 
different forms of reference with one another or else dichotomize refer­
ential versus nonreferential communication, instead of recognizing that 
modes of reference may differ and may depend on one another in compli­
cated ways. We cannot hope to make appropriate comparisons between dif­
ferent forms of human communication, much less comparisons between 
human language and other species' forms of communication, unless we can 
clear up this confusion and discover what exactly constitutes this difference. 
The Reference Problem 
So what is the difference between the way a word refers to things and 
the way a veiVet monkey alarm call, a laugh, or a portrait can refer to some­
thing else? Word meaning has always fascinated people because it is at once 
so simple and yet so elusive in the way it works. On the surface it seems 
to be no more. than a mapping or pairing between one thing and another­
a sound or conventional set of markings (the "signifier") on the one hand, 
and an object, process, or state of things (the "signified") on the other (see 
Figure 2.2). How the thing signified is brought into correspondence with 
the signifier is thought to distinguish different forms of reference. The dif­
ference between words and other means of referring to things appears to 
be the arbitrarity and conventionality of the linguistic link. But a little fur­
ther probing into these relationships demonstrates that there must be 
more to it. 
Precisely identifYing this difference has probably nowhere been more 
Terrence W. Deacon > 59

signifier 
= 
signified 
= 
biplanar theory 
(physical relationships) 
Figure 2.2 Depiction of the classic distinctions between diferent fonns of referential 
and meaningful relationships. In this view, two sets (or "planes") of elements-sig­
nifiers (e.g., signs, words, pictures) and signified objects-are associated by a con­
ceptual relationship (semantics) that maps individual elements in one set to those 
in the other. Most theories recognize at least two sorts of semantic or meaning rela­
tionships, transparent and opaque: those that link signifiers and signifieds by virtue 
of their similarity are "transparent" to the extent that they require no additional 
knowledge to "see" the one through experience of the other; and those that link them 
by virtue of some arbitrary coding or mapping are "opaque" because they require 
knowledge of the code. The transparent kind of signifier is often referred to as an 
icon; the opaque variety is often referred to as a symbol (though these tenns have a 
history of widely varying uses). Considered irrespective of semantics, in tenns of 
merely physical or mechanical correlations with other objects, signifiers are often 
called signals. Thus , for example, a light on the dashboard of a car might be a sig­
nal that the engine is low on oil by virtue of its being electrically linked with an oil 
pressure sensor. Later, I will refer to this as an index. This biplanar account, based 
on an oppositional categorical scheme (transparent/opaque; correspondingly pat­
terned/arbitrary; natural/conventional; semanticlnonsemantic), obscures the un­
derlying interdependence of these fonns of referential relationship. 
troublesome than in studies that have attempted to teach other species to 
use language. No one suspects that when a parrot says, "Pretty bird!" he re­
ally "lmows" that these sounds are supposed to refer to his (or another 
bird's) appearance. He has learned to mimic the sound of the words, that's 
all. Sometime in the past he was rewarded for producing this phrase (even 
if only by the intrinsic reward of mimicking a sound, something parrots do 
in the wild) and he now produces it spontaneously. But what if he is taught 
to say, "Wanna cracker!" and rewarded with a cracker every time he says it? 
60 < The Symbolic Species

Presumably, when he wants a cracker, he will say so. Is this different? 
Should we now say that he knows what the words mean? 
Referring to the interpretation of a call or gesture as its "meaning" again 
betrays a Procrustean linguistic bias in our analysis of communication. 
Though words and sentences have meanings, there is something odd about 
saying that laughter has a meaning. A more accurate statement is that a per­
son's laughter indicates something, both about the person and about the 
context. We would only say it means something (except in a sort of 
metaphorical looseness of phrase) under rather special circumstances, when 
it is used as a prearranged signal; e.g., for someone to enter the room. Here 
too, we would tend to say that it indicates the right moment to enter, not 
that it means "Enter!" 
The late nineteenth-century mathematician-philosopher Gottlob Frege 7 
provided a concise distinction between these two often-confused aspects 
of word meaning. He distinguished between the sense of a term and its ref­
erence. Its sense is the idea one has in mind that corresponds with consid­
ering a particular word or phrase. This is distinguished from the reference 
of the same word or phrase, which is something in the world which corre­
sponds with this term and its sense. The logic of this distinction has influ­
enced most subsequent theories and is only slightly redefined by such 
complementary terms as intension (as distinct from intention) and exten­
sion, respectively, in later philosphical discussions. One might summarize 
this as "sense is something in the head" and "reference is something in the 
world." Frege offers the example of "the morning star" and "the evening 
star," which refer to the same physical object, the planet Venus, but have 
different senses. In this case, these different senses trace back to a histor­
ical context when this common reference was not recognized.8 
Numerous philosophers of language and mind have built on this origi­
nal insight. One classic view argues that sense (intension) is used to deter­
mine reference (extension). This fits the common sense insight that what a 
word refers to rftsults from the idea that it invokes. This invites the obvious 
questions: what do we mean by idea in this context, and how does this de­
termine reference? Candidate interpretations of "idea" include mental im­
ages, stimulus-stimulus associations, something like a dictionary definition 
or encyclopedia entry, or checklists of "features" or qualities of objects. Al 
may play some role. But how such mental objects pick out external physi­
cal objects, or whether they do, remains a thorny philosophical problem. 
A number of critics of this classic conception have demonstrated that the 
referential power of words can be otherwise independent of their sense in 
Terrence W. Deacon > 61

many cases. They point out that there are cases (particularly in the exam­
ple of names, which have somewhat minimalistic senses) where we discover 
that the sense of a term does not correspond to the reference we all along 
accepted. For example, if we were to discover that William Shakespeare was 
a pseudonymous proxy for Sir Francis Bacon, who actually wrote the famous 
plays and sonnets (a claim that has been argued by some), it would not 
change the reference of either name to a particular historical figure, just 
statements made about the men the names refer to. Other philosophers 
have employed more exotic examples to demonstrate this same point be­
cause they show how radical falsifications of meaning still do not change 
reference.9 For example, imagine someday discovering that all mosquitos 
were not animals but really stealth devices designed by extraterrestrials for 
obtaining human DNA samples. This would not undermine the reference 
of the term rrwsquito. The proponents of this view explain it by arguing that 
the reference in such a case was previously determined in a more concrete 
and causal fashion by the correlation in space and time of the use of the word 
with the presence of the physical objects to which it refers. The word and 
the object must have co-occurred at least at some point in the past, and all 
modem uses derive their reference by virtue of an unbroken causal­
historical link to some such reference-establishing event or events. The ideas 
we entertain about this link between a name and what it names may thus 
help perpetuate and refine its use, but they are not its crucial determinants. 
It is interesting, however, that a more subtle version of this logic can prob­
ably account for the evolution of a link between alarm calls and predators 
and between laughter and humorous experiences, via biological evolution­
ary history. This demonstrates that reference in general does not require 
some conscious concept or meaning to determine it. But whereas a smile 
may exhibit only this aspect of reference, it seems that words exhibit this 
and more. In other words, reference may have a sort of hierarchic charac­
ter. The way we so often need nonverbal gestures to get across the mean­
ing of things or to explain what we have in mind is another reflection of this 
dependence of word reference on more basic forms of reference. 
A more complicated terminology is necessary, then, to begin to differ­
entiate between the way that words, as opposed to laughter and other non­
language signs, refer to things. We need terms that cut beneath word 
reference and from which word reference can be derived as a special case, 
since that is the way it evolved and the way it develops in each of us. Words 
are not just sounds, configurations of ink on paper, or light on a computer 
screen. What endows these otherwise inanimate things with the capacity to 
refer to other things is an interpretive process, a critical part of which 
62 < The Symbolic Species

(though not all) occurs "in the head." If I am unable to produce an appro­
priate symbolic interpretive response to an unfamiliar foreign word, I can 
only use physical co-occurrence to guess at what objects or events might be 
relevant to what is being said. Clearly, what distinguishes a dog's ability to 
get one sort of reference from a phrase and a person's to get that and some­
thing more is the result of something additional that is produced in the head 
of the person. So maybe taking this approach to the problem can help de­
fine the distinction. 
Ultimately, reference is not intrinsic to a word, sound, gesture, or hi­
eroglyph; it is created by the nature of some response to it. Reference de­
rives from the process of generating some cognitive action, an interpretive 
response; and differences in interpretive responses not only can determine 
different references for the same sign, but can determine reference in dif­
ferent ways. We can refer to such interpretive responses as interpretants, 
following the terminology of the late nineteenth-century American philoso­
pher Charles Sanders Peirce. In cognitive terms, an interpretant is what­
ever enables one to infer the reference from some sign or signs and their 
context. Peirce recognized that interpretants can not only be of different 
degrees of complexity but they can also be of categorically different kinds 
as well; moreover, he did not confine his definition only to what goes on in 
the head. Whatever process determines reference qualifies as an interpre­
tant. The problem is to explain how differences in interpretants produce 
different kinds of reference, and specifically what distinguishes the inter­
pretants required for language. 
So, what are some of the interpretants of words? Probably the most 
common view of word meaning is that a word is interpreted when one gen­
erates a mental image of something that it refers to: for example, an image 
of a familiar dog for "dog" or of someone throwing a baseball for "pitch." 
Though once treated as a sort of fairy tale of introspectionism, mental im­
agery has in recent years become recognized as an experience that has 
clear neural and behavioral correlates. The relative "locations" of features 
on an imagined object, or its size, shape, and movement in imagination, or 
other changes, can have a direct effect on such factors as the time and ef­
fort required to consider these features and what parts of the brain might 
be involved. But a mental image (or the neural process that constitutes it) 
is only one sort of interpretive response that a word might elicit, and it may 
not be the most important one. 
A word also might bring to mind something like a dictionary definition, 
or another word that has a related meaning, or it might induce us to act out 
some behavior, or it even might produce a vague visceral feeling correlated 
Terrence W. Deacon > 63

with past experiences of what is referred to. All of these are interpretants, 
but the way they bring a particular word-reference relationship into being 
can be quite diverse, and of course many can be present simultaneously. 
The kind of interpretive response determines the nature of the reference 
relationship. The interpretant is the mediator that brings a sign and its ref­
erent together. Differences in the form of reference are due to differences 
in the form of this mediation process. 
Though producing a mental image may be an inevitable product of com­
prehending certain words, it is not the mediator that distinguishes symbolic 
reference. A mental image may also be the primary interpretive action in 
numerous nonsymbolic processes of reference. For example, smelling the 
scent of a skunk while walking in the woods might bring to mind the men­
tal image of a skunk, as it might also do for a dog who previously had a nasty 
skunk experience. A more experienced dog or dog owner might even find 
that the odor produces a revulsion response, which, like the mental image, 
could also contribute to the reference relationship. In this way the scent 
refers to the animal by virtue of a mental image. For both the human and 
the dog the scent would have acquired this reference from past skunk ex­
periences. To a naive puppy or child, however, with no past experience to 
base an interpretation on, it is just a strong odor. Simply reading these 
words, of course, might also bring to mind a visual image or a skunk "odor 
image." This emphasizes that it is not the thing that is ultimately brought 
into reference, nor even the common images that are elicited, that deter­
mines the difference in the ways that words and odors can derive their ref­
erence; it is rather how these responses are produced. In the case of these 
words, there is something more, some additional interpretants that are cru­
cial to their symbolic capacity, and a great deal of additional learning has 
intervened to make their production possible. 
The symbolic basis of word meaning is mediated, additionally, by the elic­
itation of other words (at various levels of awareness). Even if we do not 
consciously experience the elicitation of other words, evidence that they are 
activated comes from priming and interference effects that show up in 
word association tests. Words referring to abstract qualities, such as "jus­
tice," "false," and "peculiarity," that don't easily lend themselves to imagery, 
may produce word association effects that are just as robust as more con­
crete words. But there are function words for which we seem unable to think 
up either kind of interpretant. Words such as "that," "which," and "what" 
function to point to other words and phrases, but not to specific categories 
of meanings, and don't evoke mental images. Nevertheless, they produce 
certain expectations about the grammatical structure of what is to follow 
64 < The Symbolic Species

that we recognize when they are violated. Though we hesitate to call these 
interpretants "meanings" in the same sense as for common nouns and verbs, 
they are functionally equivalent. Finally, consider the complicated mixtures 
of interpretants that are produced in response to whole phrases, sentences, 
and larger narratives or arguments. These can be too abstract to elicit clear 
imagery and yet have clear meanings. So what does it matter if the inter­
pretive responses were learned and reproduced by rote, like the parrot say­
ing, "Wanna cracker!" when it's hungry, or learned in some other way, or 
not learned at all? What matters that these learning differences will pro­
duce different patterns of mental action, so to speak, and although what is 
referred to may be the same, this difference in the interpretive process will 
dictate the nature of the referential link that results. So, to distinguish 
forms of reference, we need to understand the learning processes that pro­
duce the competence to interpret things differently. 
It is probably possible to train almost any intelligent mammal to use a 
complicated arbitrary sign system, so long as the medium of expression is 
appropriate to its sensorimotor abilities. All that is necessary is to train in­
dividuals both to produce certain behaviors under specific stimulus cir­
cumstances and to respond to these same signals produced by others with 
an appropriate behavior, and so on. Depending on the mnemonic limita­
tions of the animals, the repertoire could become arbitrarily large. This is, 
in skeletal form, the recipe for learning language that the famous Ameri­
can behaviorist B. F. Skinner imagined more than fifty years ago, and al­
though it has been challenged as inadequate to produce grammar and 
syntax, many still implicitly conceive of word reference this way. Recently, 
in a study involving pigeons in separate training cages linked electronically 
so that the responses of the one pigeon could be registered as signals in the 
cage of the other, the Harvard psychologist Richard Herrnstein and his col­
leagues demonstrated that one could set up a pattern of linked associative 
learning tasks for multiple subjects so that the resultant behaviors resem­
bled communic࡝tion with learned arbitrary signs.10 Using pigeons trained 
in adjacent cages, he set up the relationships between the stimuli and the 
responses in each so that only one bird got a signal for food availability but 
was not able to access it directly. Instead, its response would become a sig­
nal transmitted to the second bird in the other cage, who by responding to 
this could make the food accessible to both. In the end, the first bird trans­
mitted the crucial information to the second bird via an arbitrary code. One 
could easily imagine complicating the system to include more subjects and 
signals. Hernnstein offered this experiment as a challenge to primate lan­
guage researchers at the time who had shown similar interindividual lan-
Terrence W. Deacon > 65

guagelike communication in chimpanzees (though it is not clear to me 
whether he intended to show that this form of communication wasn't equiv­
alent to language or rather that linguistic reference was just this simple). 
To me, this experiment demonstrates the simplicity and mechanical na­
ture of this form of reference. And how its key features-learned associa­
tions, arbitrarity, reference, and transmission of information from one 
individual to another-are not sufficient to define symbolic reference. Any 
bright undergraduate could write a short computer program or build a sim­
ple mechanical device to stand in for one of the pigeons. Nevertheless, a 
system of dozens of signals arranged in such interlocking relationships to 
one another, and with respect to events and objects of interest to all, could 
be a powerful communication system. Probably a significant fraction of the 
communications used by many highly social animals are either partially or 
wholly dependent upon use of signs in this way. It doesn't matter whether 
they are learned and arbitrary, as were those used by the pigeons, or innate 
and physically linked to some state of arousal. Many animal groups in the 
wild exhibit regionally variable social behaviors and displays for communi­
cation, much of which may be learned and passed from individual to indi­
vidual by mimickry and association. But such a system is not just words 
without syntax. 
There is something mechanical about innate calls as well as behaviors 
learned by rote. In our own experiences of learning, we have a sense for 
the difference between what we have learned by rote and what we say we 
"understand." At various stages oflearning mathematics, we often find our­
selves manipulating symbols and numbers according to certain specific in­
structions, and although we come up with the correct answer if we follow 
the instructions exactly, in t4e end we know what we did without knowing 
what we did. We were unclear on the concept. Actually, this experience is 
becoming more common for me as a result of using computers and calcu­
lators, which have now become my necessary prostheses. I type in a bunch 
of numbers and select a few computational operations and a string of val­
ues and graphs comes back. At one time I knew why certain operations pro­
duced the results that I now produce with a few keystrokes-I learned them 
the hard way, by rote, until I figured out the significance-but much of that 
support has faded in my memory. I am left with knowing that pushing cer­
tain buttons in certain orders does what I need, and have stopped worry­
ing why. 
This is the same intuition we have about words. Kids, trying to impress 
their friends (or scholars trying to impress their colleagues), may repeat a 
technical phrase they have heard in conversation, without really knowing 
66 < The Symbolic Species

what they mean. It often works if the context is right, and so long as no one 
asks too many questions, but the application is quite limited. One way we 
learn about new meanings is to figure out what the right contexts are; but 
knowing five or ten more contexts in which the same phrase works does not 
really change the superficial nature of the reference. Learning more and 
more appropriate contexts does not in itself constitute understanding the 
meaning or significance. Yet, when we know what the phrase means, the 
problem of remembering al the applicable contexts becomes irrelevant, and 
innumerable novel contexts can be immediately recognized as appropriate. 
In between these alternatives there is not just a quantitative increase, but 
a radical change in cognitive strategy. 
Many have suggested that the key to this flexibility of word reference is 
arbitrarity. Innate calls and gestures have some features built in from birth, 
but learned vocalizations and movements can be freely associated with dif­
ferent external stimuli. For this reason, we might argue that what makes an 
alarm call or a laugh different and limited in its referential ability is the fact 
that there is a built-in association between the production of these calls and 
a specific emotional state. However, there is a sense in which even an alarm 
call isn't necessarily linked to its referent. As in a learned association, each 
vervet alarm call repeatedly co-occurred with a distinct class of predator and 
escape and fear responses during evolution. The apparent inflexibility of 
their relationship is just a momentary stage in evolution. The difference be­
tween this link and one based on an arbitrarily learned behavior is only a 
matter of degree. Both are, in one sense, internalizations of external cor­
relations of events. One is built in before birth, one after birth. 
But there is a sense in which a degree of necessary association is involved 
in all the nonlanguage examples we have discussed, and this is an impor­
tant clue. If the parrot stopped getting fed when he squawked the words, 
'Wanna cracker!" or the dog stopped being let out when he nosed the door­
knob, eventually both would probably stop producing these signs. If I 
started going ou࡞ the door every time I said to my dog, "Do you want to 
eat?", I suspect it wouldn't take too long for him to reverse his old habits of 
interpretation. And if the vervet monkeys' predators disappeared from 
Africa, then future evolution would see vervet monkey alarm calls disap­
pear from their repertoire (or perhaps become coopted for some other pur­
pose). All rely on a relatively stable correlation with what they refer, in order 
to refer. 
This is not true of words. Or not in the same way. If our use of words 
failed to correspond in some way with things in the rest of the world, they 
would be of little use, but there is something rather odd about this corre-
Terrence W. Deacon > 67

spondence when we compare it to each of the examples above. If my use 
of the word "skunk" to refer to a certain animal was sustained by this crit­
ter being present, even a small percentage of the times that I used the word 
(in other words if there had to be a physical correlation), then the associa­
tion would have been extinguished long ago. A learned association will tend 
to get weaker and weaker if some significant degree of co-occurrence of 
stimuli is not maintained. I very seldom find myself in the company of 
members of this species, if I can help it, and yet I read and talk about them 
often. Despite this, I don't have the impression that the strength of the ref­
erential link between the animals and the name is any less strong than that 
between the word "finger" and my flesh-and-blood finger, which is always 
present. There is some kind of word-object correspondence, but it isn't 
based on a physical correlational relationship. 
To understand this difference, then, we need to be able to describe the 
difference between the interpretive responses that are capable of sustain­
ing associations between a word and its reference, irrespective of their 
being correlated in experience, and those rote associations that are estab­
lished and dissolved as experience dictates. When we interpret the mean­
ing and reference of a word or sentence, we produce something more than 
what a parrot produces when it requests a cracker or what a dog produces 
when it interprets a command. This "something more" is what constitutes 
our symbolic competence. 
68 < The Symbolic Species

C 
H 
A 
P 
T 
E 
R 
T 
H 
R 
E 
E 
Symbols Aren't Simple 
Alice laughed. "There's no use trying," she said: "one can't believe 
impossible things. " 
"I daresay you haven't had much practice," said the Queen. 
'When I was your age I always did it for half-an-hour a day. Why, 
sometimes I've believed as many as six impossible things before 
breakfast. " 
-Lewis Carroll, Alice Throuth the Lookint-Siass 
The Hierarchical Nature of Reference 
T
he assumption that a one-to-one mapping of words onto objects and 
vice versa is.the basis for meaning and reference was made explicit in 
the work of the tum-of-the-c࡟ntury French linguist Ferdinand de Saus­
sure. In his widely influential work on semiology (his term for the study of 
language), 1 he argued that word meaning can be modeled by an element­
by-element mapping between two "planes" of objects: from elements con­
stituting the plane of the signifiers (e.g., words) to elements on the plane 
of the signified (the ideas, objects, events, etc., that words refer to). On this 
view, the mapping of vervet monkey alarm calls onto predators could be con­
sidered a signifier-signified relationship. But how accurately does this model 
word reference? Although it is natural to imagine words as labels for ob-
69

jects, or mental images, or concepts, we can now see that such correspon­
dences only capture superficial aspects of word meaning. Focusing on cor­
respondence alone collapses a multileveled relationship into a simple 
mapping relationship. It fails to distinguish between the rote understand­
ing of words that my dog possesses ar:td the semantic understanding of 
them that a normal human speaker exhibits. We also saw that the corre­
spondence of words to referents is not enough to explain word meaning be­
cause the actual frequency of correlations between items on the two planes 
is extremely low. Instead, what I hope to show is that the relationship is the 
reverse of what we commonly imagine. The correspondence between words 
and objects is a secondary relationship, subordinate to a web of associative 
relationships of a quite different sort, which even allows us reference to im­
possible things. 
In order to be more specific about differences in referential form, 
philosophers and semioticians have often distinguished between different 
forms of referential relationships. Probably the most successful classifica­
tion of representational relationships was, again, provided by the American 
philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce. As part of a larger scheme of semiotic 
relationships, he distinguished three categories of referential associations: 
icon, index, and symbol. 2 These terms were, of course, around before Peirce, 
and have been used in different ways by others since. Peirce confined the 
use of these terms to describing the nature of the formal relationship be­
tween the characteristics of the sign token and those of the physical object 
represented. As a first approximation these are as follows: icons are medi­
ated by a similarity between sign and object, indices are mediated by some 
physical or temporal connection between sign and object, and symbols are 
mediated by some formal or merely agreed-upon link irrespective of any 
physical characteristics of either sign or object. These three forms of ref­
erence reflect a classic philosophical trichotomy of possible modes of asso­
ciative relationship: (a) similarity, (b) contiguity or correlation, and (c) law, 
causality, or convention. The great philosophers of mind, such as John 
Locke, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, and 
many others, had each in one way or another argued that these three modes 
of relationship describe the fundamental forms by which ideas can come to 
be associated. Peirce took these insights and rephrased the problem of 
mind in terms of communication, essentially arguing that all forms of 
thought (ideas) are essentially communication (transmission of signs), or­
ganized by an underlying logic (or semiotic, as he called it) that is not fun­
damentally different for communication processes inside or outside of 
brains. If so, it might be possible to investigate the logic of thought processes 
70 < The Symbolic Species

by studying the sign production and interpretation processes in more overt 
communication. 
To get a sense of this logic of signs, let's begin by considering a few ex­
amples. When we say something is "iconic" of something else we usually 
mean that there is a resemblance that we notice. Landscapes, portraits, and 
pictures of all kinds are iconic of what they depict. When we say something 
is an "index" we mean that it is somehow causally linked to something else, 
or associated with it in space or time. A thermometer indicates the tem­
perature of water, a weathervane indicates the direction of the wind, and a 
disagreeable odor might indicate the presence of a skunk. Most forms of 
animal communication have this quality, from pheromonal odors (that in­
dicate an animal's physiological state or proximity) to alarm calls (that indi­
cate the presence of a dangerous predator). Finally, when we say something 
is a "symbol," we mean there is some social convention, tacit agreement, or 
explicit code which establishes the relationship that links one thing to an­
other. A wedding ring symbolizes a marital agreement; the typographical 
letter "e" symbolizes a particular sound used in words (or sometimes, as in 
English, what should be done to other sounds); and taken together, the 
words of this sentence symbolize a particular idea or set of ideas. 
No particular objects are intrinsically icons, indices, or symbols. They are 
interpreted to be so, depending on what is produced in response. In sim­
ple terms, the differences between iconic, indexical, and symbolic rela­
tionships derive from regarding things either with respect to their form, 
their correlations with other things, or their involvement in systems of con­
ventional relationships. 
When we apply these terms to particular things, for instance, calling a 
particular sculpture an icon, a speedometer an indicator, or a coat of arms 
a symbol, we are engaging in a sort of tacit shorthand. What we usually mean 
is that they were designed to be interpreted that way, or are highly likely to 
be interpreted that way. So, for example, a striking resemblance does not 
make one thing.an icon of another. Only when considering the features of 
one brings the other to mind because of this resemblance is the relation­
ship iconic. Similarity does not cause iconicity, nor is iconicity the physical 
relationship of similarity. It is a kind of inferential process that is based on 
recognizing a similarity. As critics of the concept of iconicity have often 
pointed out, almost anything could be considered an icon of anything else, 
depending on the vagueness of the similarity considered. 
The same point can be made for each of the other two modes of refer­
ential relationship: neither physical connection nor involvement in some 
conventional activity dictates that something is indexical or symbolic, re-
Terrence W. Deacon > 71

spectively. Only when these are the basis by which one thing invokes an­
other are we justified in calling their relationship indexical or symbolic. 
Though this might seem an obvious point, confusion about it has been a 
source of significant misunderstandings. For example, there was at one 
time considerable debate over whether hand signs in American Sign Lan­
guage (ASL) are iconic or symbolic. Many signs seemed to resemble pan­
tomime or appeared graphically to "depict" or point to what was 
represented, and so some researchers suggested that their meaning was 
"merely iconic" and by implication, not wordlike. It is now abundantly clear, 
however, that despite such resemblances, ASL is a language and its elements 
are both symbolic and wordlike in every regard. Being capable of iconic or 
indexical interpretation in no way diminishes these signs' capacity of being 
interpreted symbolically as well. These modes of reference aren't mutually 
exclusive alternatives; though at any one time only one of these modes may 
be prominent, the same signs can be icons, indices, and symbols depend­
ing on the interpretive process. But the relationships between icons, indices, 
and symbols are not merely a matter of alternative interpretations. They are 
to some extent internally related to one another. 
This is evident when we consider examples where different interpreters 
are able to interpret the same signs to a greater or lesser extent. Consider, 
for example, an archeologist who discovers some elaborate markings on clay 
tablets. It is natural to assume that these inscriptions were used symboli­
cally by the people who made them, perhaps as a kind of primitive writing. 
But the archeologist, who as yet has no Rosetta Stone with which to decode 
them, cannot interpret them symbolically. The archeologist simply infers 
that to someone in the past these may have been symbolically interpretable, 
because they resemble symbols seen in other contexts. Being unable to in­
terpret them symbolically, he interprets them iconically. Some of the ear­
liest inscription systems from the ancient Middle Eastern civilizations of the 
Fertile Cresent were in fact recovered in contexts that provided additional 
clues to their representations. Small clay objects were marked with re­
peated imprints, then sealed in vessels that accompanied trade goods sent 
from one place to another. Their physical association with these other arti­
facts has provided archeologists with indexical evidence to augment their 
interpretations. Different marks apparently indicated a corresponding num­
ber of items shipped, probably used by the recipient of the shipment to be 
sure that all items were delivered. No longer merely iconic of other generic 
writinglike marks, they now can be given indexical and tentative symbolic 
interpretations, because something more than resemblance is provided. 
This can also be seen by an inverse example: a descent down a hierar-
72 < The Symbolic Species

chy of diminishing interpretive competence, but this time with respect to 
interpretive competences provided by evolution. Let's consider laughter 
again. Laughter indicates something about what sort of event just preceded 
it. As a symptom of a person's response to certain stimuli, it provides con­
siderable information about both the Iaugher and the object of the laugh­
ter, i.e, that it involved something humorous. But laughter alone does not 
provide sufficient information to reconstruct exactly what was so funny. 
Chimpanzees also produce a call that is vaguely similar to laughter in cer­
tain play situations (e.g., tickling). Consequently, they might also recognize 
human laughter as indicating certain aspects of the social context (i.e., play­
ful, nonthreatening, not distressing, etc.), but they would likely miss the ref­
erence to humor. I suspect that implicit in the notion of humor there is a 
symbolic element, a requirement for recognizing contradiction or paradox, 
that the average chimpanzee has not developed. 3 The family cat and dog, 
however, probably do not even get this much information from a human 
laugh. Not sharing our evolved predisposition to laugh in certain social re­
lationships, they do not possess the mental prerequisites to interpret even 
the social signaling function oflaughter. Experience may only have provided 
them with the ability to use it as evidence that a human is present and is 
probably not threatening. Nevertheless, this too is dependent on some level 
of interpretative competence, perhaps provided by recalling prior occasions 
when some human made this odd noise. Finally, there are innumerable 
species of animals from flies to snails to fish that wouldn't even produce this 
much of a response, and would interpret the laughter as just another vi­
bration of the air or water. The diminishing competences of these species 
corresponds with interpretations that are progressively less and less specific 
and progressively more and more concrete. But even at the bottom of this 
descent there is a possibility of a kind of minimalistic reference. 
This demonstrates one of Peirce's most fundamental and original in­
sights about the process of interpretation: the difference between different 
modes of reference can be understood in terms of levels of interpretation . 
. 
Attending to this hierarchical aspect of reference is essential for under-
standing the difference between the way words and animal calls are related. 
It's not just the case that we are able to interpret the same sign in different 
ways, but more important, these different interpretations can be arranged 
in a sort of ascending order that reflect a prior competence to identifY 
higher-level associative relationships. In other words, reference itself is hi­
erarchic in structure; more complex forms of reference are built up from 
simpler forms. But there is more to this than just increasing complexity. This 
hierarchical structure is a clue to the relationships between these different 
Terrence W. Deacon > 73

modes of reference. Though I may fail to grasp the symbolic reference of 
a sign, I might still be able to interpret it as an index (i.e., as correlated with 
something else), and if I also fail to recognize any indexical correspon­
dences, I may still be able to interpret it as an icon (i.e., recognize its re­
semblance to something else). Breakdown of referential competence leads 
to an ordered descent from symbolic to indexical to iconic, not just from 
complex icons, indices, or symbols to simpler counterparts. Conversely, in­
creasing the sophistication of interpretive competence reverses the order 
of this breakdown of reference. For example, as human children become 
more competent and more experienced with written words, they gradually 
replace their iconic interpretations of these marks as just more writing with 
indexical interpretations supported by a recognition of certain regular cor­
respondences to pictures and spoken sounds, and eventually use these as 
support for learning to interpret their symbolic meanings. In this way they 
trace a path somewhat like the archeologist learning to decipher an ancient 
script. 
This suggests that indexical reference depends upon iconic reference, 
and symbolic reference depends upon indexical reference-a hierarchy di­
agrammatically depicted in Figure 3.1. It sounds pretty straightforward on 
the surface. But this simplicity is deceiving, because what we really mean 
is that the competence to interpret something symbolically depends upon 
already having the competence to interpret many other subordinate rela­
tionships indexically, and so forth. It is one kind of competence that grows 
out of and depends upon a very different kind of competence. What con­
stitutes competence in this sense is the ability to produce an interpretive 
response that provides the necessary infrastructure of more basic iconic 
and/or indexical interpretations. To explain the basis of symbolic commu­
nication, then, we must describe what constitutes a symbolic interpretant, 
but to do this we need first to explain the production of iconic and indexi­
cal interpretants and then to explain how these are each recoded in tum to 
produce the higher-order forms. 
So, we need to start the explanation of symbolic competence with an ex­
planation of what is required in order to interpret icons and build upward. 
Usually, people explain icons in terms of some respect or other in which two 
things are alike. But the resemblance doesn't produce the iconicity. Only 
after we recognize an iconic relationship can we say exactly what we saw in 
common, and sometimes not even then. The interpretive step that estab­
lishes an iconic relationship is essentially prior to this, and it is something 
negative, something that we don't do. It is, so to speak, the act of not mak­
ing a distinction. Let me illustrate this with a very stripped-down example. 
74 < The Symbolic Species

-
c.,) 
= 
... 
t; 
c 
symbolic relationship 
f 
-
Q) 
... 
c:t. 
indexical relationship 1 ,  indexical relationship 2 ... s 
·= 
8 
r-------•4------" 
iconic relationship 1 + iconic relationship 2 
Figure 3.1 The hierarchic relationships between the three fundamental forms of ref 
erence-iconic, indexical, and symbolic. Symbolic relationships are composed of in­
dexical relationships between sets ofindices and indexical relationships are composed 
of iconic relationships between sets of icons (diagrammed more pictorially in Figs. 
3.2 and 3.3). This suggests a kind of semiotic reductionism in which more complex 
forms of representation are analyzable to simpler forms. In fact, this is essentially 
what occurs as forms are interpreted. Higher-order forms are decomposed into ( re­
placed or represented by) lower-order forms. Inversely, to construct higher repre­
sentation, one must operate on lower-order forms to replace them (represent them). 
In C. S. Peirce's terminology, each is an interpretive process, and the new signs sub­
stituted for the previous signs at a diferent level are "interpretants" of those prior 
signs (see text for details). 
Consider camouflage, as in the case of natural protective coloration. A moth 
on a tree whose wings resemble the graininess and color of the bark, though 
not perfectly, can still escape being eaten by a bird if the bird is inattentive 
and interprets the moth's wings as just more tree. Admittedly, this is not the 
way we typically use the term iconic, but I think it illuminates the most basic 
sense of the concept. If the moth had been a little less matching, or had 
moved, or the bird had been a little more attentive, then any of the differ­
ences between the moth and the tree made evident by those additional dif­
ferences would qave indicated to the bird that there was something else 
present which wasn't just more tree. If the bird had been in a contempla­
tive mood, it might even have reflected on the slight resemblance of the 
wing pattern to bark, at least for the fraction of a second before it gobbled 
the hapless moth. Some features of the moth's wings were iconic of the bark, 
irrespective of their degree of similarity, merely because under some in­
terpretation (an inattentive bird) they were not distinguished from it. 
Now, it might seem awkward to explain iconicity with an example that 
could be considered to be no representation at all, but I think it helps to 
clarify the shift in emphasis I want to make from the relationship to the 
Terrence W. Deacon > 75

process behind it. What makes the moth wings iconic is an interpretive 
process produced by the bird, not something about the moth's wings. Their 
coloration was taken to be an icon because of something that the bird didn't 
do. What the bird was doing was actively scanning bark, its brain seeing just 
more of the same (bark, bark, bark . . .  ). What it didn't do was alter this 
process (e.g., bark, bark, not-bark, bark . . .  ). It applied the same interpre­
tive perceptual process to the moth as it did to the bark. It didn't distin­
guish between them, and so confused them with one another. This 
established the iconic relationship between moth and bark. Iconic reference 
is the default. Even in an imagined moment of reflective reverie in which 
the bird ponders on their slight resemblance, it is the part of its respond­
ing that does not distinguish wing from bark that determines their rela­
tionship to be iconic. Iconic resemblance is not based on some prior ground 
of physical similarity, but in that aspect of the interpretation process that 
does not differ from some other interpretive process. Thus, although a re­
spect in which two things are similar may influence the ways they tend to 
be iconicaly related, it does not determine their iconicity. !eonism is where 
the referential buck stops when nothing more is added. And at some level, 
due either to limitations in abilities to produce distinguishing responses or 
simply a lack of effort to produce them, the production of new interpre­
tants stops. Whether because of boredom or limitations of a minimal ner­
vous system, there are times when almost anything can be iconic of anything 
else ( stuff, stuff, stuff . . . ) . 
What does this have to do with pictures, or other likenesses such as busts 
or caricatures that we more commonly think of as icons? The explanation is 
essentially no different. That facet or stage of my interpretive recognition 
process that is the same for a sketch and the face it portrays is what makes 
it an icon. I might abstractly reflect on what aspects of the sketch caused 
this response, and might realize that this was the intention of the artist, but 
a sketch that is never seen is just paper and charcoal. It could also be inter­
preted as something that soaked up spilled coffee (and the spilled coffee 
could be seen as a likeness of Abe Lincoln!). Peirce once characterized an 
icon as something which upon closer inspection can provide further infor­
mation about the attributes of its object. Looking at the one is like looking 
at the other in some respects. Looking at a caricature can, for example, get 
one to notice for the first time that a well-known politician has a protrud­
ing jaw or floppy jowls. The simplification in a diagram or the exaggeration 
in a cartoon takes advantage of our spontaneous laxness in making distinc­
tions to trick us into making new associations. In this way a caricature re­
sembles a joke, a visual pun, and a diagram can be a source of discovery. 
76 < The Symbolic Species

In summary, the interpretive process that generates iconic reference is 
none other than what in other terms we call recognition (mostly perceptual 
recognition, but not necessarily). Breaking down the term re-cognition says 
it all: to "think [about something] again." Similarly, representation is to pre­
sent something again. Iconic relationships are the most basic means by 
which things can be re-presented. It is the base on which all other forms of 
representation are built. It is the bottom of the interpretive hierarchy. A sign 
is interpreted, and thus seen to be a representation, by being reduced (i.e., 
analyzed to its component representations) to the point of no further re­
duceability (due to competence or time limitations, or due to pragmatic con­
straints), and thus is ultimately translated into iconic relationships. This does 
not necessarily require any effort. It is in many cases where interpretive ef­
fort ceases. It can merely be the end of new interpretation, that boundary 
of consciousness where experience fades into redundancy. 
Interpreting something as an indexical relationship is this and more. 
Physical contiguity (nearness or connectedness) or just predictable co­
occurrence are the basis for interpreting one thing as an index for another, 
but as with the case of icons, these physical characteristics are not the cause 
of the indexical relationship. Almost anything could be physically or tem­
porally associated with anything else by virtue of some extension of the ex­
perience of nearness in space or time. What makes one an index of another 
is the interpretive response whereby one seems to "point to" the other. To 
understand the relationship that indexical interpretations have to iconic in- . 
terpretations, it is necessary to see how the competence to make indexical 
interpretations arises. In contrast to iconic interpretations, which can often 
be attributed to interpretive incompetence or the cessation of production 
of new interpretants, indexical interpretations require something added. In 
fact, icons arise from a failure to produce critical indices to distinguish 
things. 
Consider the example of a symptom, like the smell of smoke. When I 
smell smoke, I bࡥgin to suspect that something is burning. How did my abil­
ity to treat this smell as an indication of fire arise? It likely arose by learn­
ing, because I had past experiences in which similar odors were traced to 
things that were burning. After a few recurrences it became a familiar as­
sociation, and the smell of smoke began to indicate to me that a fire might 
be near. If we consider more closely the learning process that produced the 
indexical competence, the critical role of icons becomes obvious. The in­
dexical competence is constructed from a set of relationships between 
icons, and the indexical interpretation is accomplished by bringing this as­
sembly of iconic relationships to bear in the assessment of new stimuli. The 
Terrence W. Deacon > 77

smell of smoke brings to mind past similar experiences (by iconically rep­
resenting them). Each of these experiences comes to mind because of their 
similarities to one another and to the present event. But what is more, 
many of these past experiences also share other similarities. On many of 
these occasions I also noticed something burning that was the source of the 
smoke, and in this way those experiences were icons of each other. 
There is one important feature added besides al these iconic recogni­
tions. The repeated correlation between the smelling of smoke and the pres­
ence of flames in each case adds a third higher-order level of iconicity. This 
is the key ingredient. Because of this I recognize the more general simi­
larity of the entire present situation to these past ones, not just the smoke 
and not just the fire but also their co-occurrence, and this is what brings to 
mind the missing element in the present case: the probability that some­
thing is burning. What I am suggesting, then, is that the responses we de­
velop as a result of day-to-day associative learning are the basis for all 
indexical interpretations, and that this is the result of a special relationship 
that develops among iconic interpretive processes. It's hierarchic. Prior 
iconic relationships are necessary for indexical reference, but prior index­
ical relationships are not in the same way necessary for iconic reference. 
This hierarchic dependency of indices on icons is graphically depicted in 
Figure 3.2. 
Okay, why have I gone to al this trouble to rename these otherwise 
common, well-established uses of perception and learning? Could we just 
substitute the word "perception" for "icon" and "learned" association for 
index? No. Icons and indices are not merely perception and learning, they 
refer to the inferential or predictive powers that are implicit in these neural 
processes. Representational relationships are not just these mechanisms, but 
a feature of their potential relationship to past, future, distant, or imaginary 
things. These other things are not physically re-presented but only virtu­
ally re-presented by producing perceptual and learned responses like those 
that would be produced if they were present. In this sense, mental processes 
are no less representational than external communicative processes, and 
communicative processes are no less mental in this regard. Mental repre­
sentation reduces to internal communication. 
What, then, is the difference between these uncontroversial cognitive 
processes underlying icons and indices and the kind of cognitive processes 
underlying symbols? The same hierarchical logic applies. As indices are con­
stituted by relationships among icons, symbols are constituted by relation­
ships among indices (and therefore also icons). However, what makes this 
a difficult step is that the added relationship is not mere correlation. 
78 < The Symbolic Species

/7 0 
0 <- S -> 0  
: · 
o <Cl 
<C;J 
O o  
ICON: Associated by stimulus 
generalization or conventional 
similarity 
s 
'V 
0 
INDEX: Associated by spatial­
temporal correlation or part­
whole contiguity 
Figure 3.2 A schematic diagram depicting the internal hierarchic relationships be­
tween iconic and indexical reference processes. The probability of interpreting some­
thing as iconic of something else is depicted by a series of concentric domains of 
decreasing similarity and decreasing iconic potential among objects. Surrounding 
objects have a decreasing capacity to serve as icons for the target object as similar­
ities become unobvious. The form of a sign stimulus (S) elicits awareness of a set of 
past stimulus memories (e.g., mental "images") by virtue of stimulus generalization 
processes. Thus, any remembered object (O) can be said to be re-presented by the 
iconic stimulus. Similarly, each mental image is iconic in the same way; no other 
referential relationship need necessarily be involved for an iconic referential rela­
tionship to be produced. Indexical reference, however, requires iconic reference. In 
order to interpret something as indexical, at least three iconic relationships must be 
also recognized. First, the indicating stimulus must be seen as an icon of other sim­
ilar instances (the top iconic relationships); second, instances of its occurrence must 
also correlate (arrows) with additional stimuli either in space or time, and these need 
to be iconic of one another (the bottom iconic relationships); and third, past corre­
lations need to be interpreted as iconic of one another (indicated by the concentric 
arrangement of arrows). The indexical interpretation is thus the conjunction of three 
iconic interpretations, with one being a higher-order icon than the other two (i.e., 
treating them as pqrts of a whole). As pointed out in the text, this is essentially the 
kind of reference provided by a conditioned response 
The Symbolic Threshold 
The common sense idea is that a symbolic association is formed when 
we learn to pair a sound or typed string with something else in the world. 
But in the terms we have been developing, this is what we mean by an in­
dexical association. The word (iconically associated with past occurrences 
of similar utterances) and the object (iconically associated with similar ob-
Terrence W. Deacon > 79

jects from past experiences) and their past correlations enable the word to 
bring the object to mind. In this view, the association between a word and 
what it represents is not essentially distinguished from the kind of associa­
tion that is made by an animal in a Skinner box. We might, for example, train 
a rat to recognize a correlation between hearing the sound of the word 
"food" and food being dropped into a tray. The conditioned stimulus takes 
on referential power in this process: it represents something about the state 
of the apparatus for the animal. It is an index of the availability of food in 
the Skinner box; a symptom of the state of the box. Words can serve indexical 
functions as well, and are sometimes used for this purpose almost exclu­
sively, with minimal symbolic content. Consider, for example, the use of 
function words like "there," exclamations like "Aha!", or even proper names 
like "George Washington." These derive reference by being uniquely linked 
to individual contexts, objects, occasions, people, places, and so on, and they 
defy our efforts to define them as we would typical nouns or verbs. 
One indication that someone understands the meaning of a new word is 
whether they can use it in a new sentence or novel context. If the new word 
was just learned as a part of an unanalyzed phrase, or mapped to some re­
stricted acquisition context, then we might not expect it to be correctly used 
out of this context. But the ability to use a word correctly in a variety of con­
texts, while fair evidence of symbolic understanding, is not necessarily con­
vincing as a proof of understanding. The ability to shift usage to a novel 
context resembles transference of one learning set; and indeed, searching 
for the common learning set features among the many contexts in which 
the same word might be used is a good way to zero in on its meaning. If 
someone were to learn only this-i.e., that a particular phrase works well 
in a range of contexts that exhibit similar features or social relationships­
they might well be able to fool us into believing that they understood what 
they said. However, on discovering that they accomplished this by simply 
mapping similar elements from one context to another, we would conclude 
that they actually did not understand the word or its role in context in the 
way we originally imagined. Theirs would be an iconic and indexical un­
derstanding only. Being able easily to transfer referential functions from one 
"set" to another is a characteristic of symbols, but is this the basis for their 
reference? 
Psychologists call transfer of associations from one stimulus to another 
similar one "stimulus generalization," and transfer of a pattern of learning 
from one context to another similar context the transfer of a "learning set." 
These more complex forms of indexical association are also often confused 
with symbolic associations. Transference oflearning from stimulus to stim-
80 < The Symbolic Species

ulus or from context to context occurs as an incidental consequence of 
learning. These are not really separate forms of learning. Both are based 
on iconic projection of one stimulus condition onto another. Each arises 
spontaneously because there is always some ambiguity as to what are the 
essential parameters of the stimulus that a subject learns to associate with 
a subsequent desired or undesired result: learning is always an extrapola­
tion from a finite number of examples to future examples, and these sel­
dom provide a basis for choosing between all possible variations of a 
stimulus. To the extent that new stimuli exhibit features shared by the fa­
miliar set of stimuli used for training, and none that are inconsistent with 
them, these other potential stimuli are also incidentally learned. Often, 
psychological models of this process are presented as though the subject 
has learned roles for identifYing associative relationships. However, since 
this is based on an iconic relationship, there is no implicit list of criteria that 
is learned; only a failure to distinguish that which hasn't been explicitly ex­
cluded by the training. 
Words for kinds of things appear to refer to whole groups of loosely sim­
ilar objects, such as could be linked by stimulus generalization, and words 
for qualities and properties of objects refer to the sorts of features that are 
often the basis for stimulus generalization. Animals can be trained to pro­
duce the same sign when presented with different kinds of foods, or trees, 
or familiar animals, or any other class of objects that share physical attrib­
utes in common, even subtle ones (e.g., all hoofed mammals). Similarly, the 
vervet monkeys' eagle alarm calls might become generalized to other aer­
ial predators if they were introduced into their environment. The grouping 
of these referents is not by symbolic criteria (though from outside we might 
apply our own symbolic criteria), but by iconic overlap that serves as the 
basis for their common indexical reference. Stimulus generalization may 
contribute essential structure to the realms to which words refer, but it is 
only one subordinate component of the relationship and not what deter­
mines their reference. 
This same lࡠgic applies to the transference of learning sets. For exam­
ple, learning to choose the odd-shaped object out of three, where two are 
more similar to each other than the third, might aid in learning a subsequent 
oddity-discrimination task involving sounds. Rather than just transferring 
an associated response on the basis of stimulus similarities, the subject rec­
ognizes an iconicity between the two learning tasks as wholes. Though this 
is a hierarchically more sophisticated association than stimulus generaliza­
tion-learning a learning pattern-it is still an indexical association trans­
ferred to a novel stimulus via an iconic interpretation. Here the structure 
Terrence W. Deacon > 81

of the new training context is seen as iconic of a previous one, allowing the 
subject to map corresponding elements from the one to the other. This is 
not often an easy association to make, and most species (including humans) 
will fail to discover the underlying iconicity when the environment, the train­
ing stimuli, the specific responses required, and the reinforcers are al quite 
different from one context to the next. 
There are two things that are critically different about the relationships 
between a word and its reference when compared to transference of word 
use to new contexts. First, for an indexical relationship to hold, there must 
be a correlation in time and place of the word and its object. If the corre­
lation breaks down (for example, the rat no longer gets food by pushing a 
lever when the sound "food" is played), then the association is eventually 
forgotten ("extinguished"), and the indexical power of that word to refer is 
lost. This is true for indices in general. If a smokelike smell becomes com­
mon in the absence of anything burning, it will begin to lose its indicative 
power in that context. For the Boy Who Cried Wolf, in the fable of the same 
name, the indexical function of his use of the word "wolf' fails because of 
its lack of association with real wolves, even though the symbolic reference 
remains. Thus, symbolic reference remains stable nearly independent of any 
such correlations. In fact, the physical association between a word and an 
appropriate object of reference can be quite rare, or even an impossibility, 
as with angels, unicorns, and quarks. With so little correlation, an indexical 
association would not survive. 
Second, even if an animal subject is trained to associate a number of 
words with different foods or states of the box, each of these associations 
will have little effect upon the others. They are essentially independent. If 
one of these associations is extinguished or is paired with something new, 
it will likely make little difference to the other associations, unless there is 
some slight transference via stimulus generalization. But this is not the case 
with words. Words also represent other words. In fact, they are incorporated 
into quite specific individual relationships to all other words of a language. 
Think of the way a dictionary or thesaurus works. They each map one word 
onto other words. If this shared mapping breaks down between users (as 
sometimes happens when words are radically reused in slang, such as "bad" 
for "very good" or "plastered" for "intoxicated"), the reference also will fail. 
This second difference is what ultimately explains the first. We do not 
lose the indexical associations of words, despite a lack of correlation with 
physical referents, because the possibility of this link is maintained implic­
itly in the stable associations between words. It is by virtue of this sort of 
dual reference, to objects and to other words (or at least to other semantic 
82 < The Symbolic Species

alternatives), that a word conveys the information necessary to pick out ob­
jects of reference. This duality of reference is captured in the classic dis­
tinction between sense and reference. Words point to objects (reference) 
and words point to other words (sense), but we use the sense to pick out 
the reference, not vice versa. 
This referential relationship between the words-words systematically 
indicating other words-forms a system of higher-order relationships that 
allows words to be about indexical relationships, and not just indices in 
themselves. But this is also why words need to be in context with other 
words, in phrases and sentences, in order to have any determinate refer­
ence. Their indexical power is distributed, so to speak, in the relationships 
between words. Symbolic reference derives from combinatorial possibili­
ties and impossibilities, and we therefore depend on combinations both to 
discover it (during learning) and to make use ofit (during communication). 
Thus the imagined version of a nonhuman animal language that is made up 
of isolated words, but lacking regularities that govern possible combinations, 
is ultimately a contradiction in terms. 
Even without struggling with the philosophical subtleties of this rela­
tionship, we can immediately see the significance for learning. The learn­
ing problem associated with symbolic reference is a consequence of the fact 
that what determines the pairing between a symbol (like a word) and some 
object or event is not their probability of co-occurrence, but rather some 
complex function of the relationship that the symbol has to other symbols. 
This is a separate but linked learning problem, and worse yet, it creates a 
third, higher-order unlearning problem. Learning is, at its base, a function 
of the probability of correlations between things, from the synaptic level to 
the behavioral level. Past correlations tend to be predictive of future cor­
relations. This, as we've seen, is the basis for indexical reference. In order 
to comprehend a symbolic relationship, however, such indexical associations 
must be subordinated to relationships between different symbols. This is a 
troublesome shift of emphasis. To learn symbols we begin by learning 
symbol-object cxrrelations, but once leamed, these associations must be 
treated as no more than clues for determining the more crucial relation­
ships. And these relationships are not highly correlated; in fact, often just 
the reverse. Words that carry similar referential function are more often 
used alternatively and not together, and words with very different (com­
plementary) referential functions tend to to be adjacent to one another in 
sentences. Worst of all, few sentences or phrases are ever repeated exactly, 
and the frequency with which specific word combinations are repeated is 
also extremely low. Hardly a recipe for easy indexical learning. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 83

One of the most insightful demonstrations of the learning difficulties as­
sociated with the shift from conditioned associations to symbolic associa­
tions comes not from a human example, but from a set of experiments that 
attempted to train chimpanzees to use simple symbols. This study was di­
rected by Sue Savage-Rumbaugh and Duane Rumbaugh,4 now at the Lan­
guage Research Center of Georgia State University, and included four 
chimps, two of which, Sherman and Austin, showed particular facility with 
the symbols. It is far from the "last word" on how far other species can go 
in their understanding oflanguagelike communication, and further studies 
of another chimpanzee (from a different subspecies) that show more de­
veloped abilities will be described subsequently (see Chapter 4),5 but this 
work has the virtue of exposing much of what is often hidden in children's 
comparatively easy entry into symbolic communication, and so provides an 
accessible step-by-step account of what we usualy take for granted in the 
process. In what follows I will outline these experiments briefly. Only the 
most relevant highlights wil be described and other aspects will be simpli­
fied for the sake of my purpose here. Of course, my attempts to "get inside 
the chimps' heads" during this process are fantasy. Though I will use some­
what different terminology from the experimenters to describe this transi­
tion from indexical to symbolic communication, I am reasonably confident 
that my interpretation is not at odds with theirs. However, the interested 
reader should refer to the excellent account of these experiments and their 
significance in Savage-Rumbaugh's book describing them. 
The chimps in this study were taught to use a special computer keyboard 
made up oflexigrams-simple abstract shapes (lacking any apparent icon­
ism to their intended referents) on large illuminated keys on a keyboard 
mounted in their cage. Duane Rumbaugh's previous experiments (with a 
chimp named Lana)6 had shown that chimps have the ability to learn a large 
number of paired associations between lexigrams (and in fact other kinds 
of symbol tokens) and objects or activities. But in order to respond to crit­
ics and more fully test other features of this ability, Duane and Sue began 
a new series of experiments with a group of chimps to test both chimp­
chimp communication and chimps' ability to use lexigrams in combinations 
(e.g., syntactic relationships). Not surprisingly, the chimps exhibited some 
interesting difficulties when they were required to use lexigrams in com­
binations, but they eventually solved their learning problems and exhibited 
a use of the lexigrams that was clearly symbolic. In so doing they have pro­
vided us with a remarkably explicit record of the process that leads from 
index to symbol. 
In order to test Sherman and Austin's symbolic understanding of the lex-
84 < The Symbolic Species

igrams, the chimps were trained to chain lexigram pairs in a simple verb­
noun relationship (a sequence glossed as meaning "give," which caused a 
dispenser to deliver a solid food, and "banana" to get a banana).7 Initially 
there were only 2 "verb" lexigrams and 4 food or drink lexigrams to choose 
from, and each pair had to be separately taught. But after successful train­
ing of each pairing, the chimps were presented with all the options they had 
learned independently, and were required to choose which combination was 
most appropriate on the basis of food availability or preference. Curiously, 
the solution to this task was not implicit in their previous training. This was 
evident in the fact that some chimps tended stereotypically to repeat only 
the most recent single learned combination, whereas others chained to­
gether all options, irrespective of the intended meanings and what they 
knew about the situation. Thus they had learned the individual associations 
but failed to learn the system of relationships of which these correlations 
were a part. Although the logic of the combinatorial relationships between 
lexigrams was implicit in the particular combinations that the chimps 
learned, the converse exclusive relationships had not been learned. For ex­
ample, they were not explicitly trained to avoid any number of inappropri­
ate combinations such as "banana juice give." Though these errors are 
implicit for us, who treat them symbolically from the start, the combinato­
rial rules that allow pairing in some but not other cases was vastly under­
determined by the training experience (as it is also in a child's experience 
of others' word use). 
It is not immediately obvious exactly how much exclusionary informa­
tion is implicit, but it turns out to be quite a lot. Think about it from the 
naive chimpanzee perspective for a moment. Even with this ultra-simple 
symbol system of six lexigrams and a two-lexigram combinatorial grammar, 
the chimpanzee is faced with the possibility of sorting among 720 possible 
ordered sequences (6°5°4°3°2°1) or 64 possible ordered pairs. The train­
ing has offered only four prototype examples, in isolation. Though each 
chimp may begin with many guesses about what works, these are unlikely 
to be in the form 'or rules about classes of allowed and disallowed combi­
nations, but rather about possible numbers of lexigrams that must be 
pressed, their positions on the board, their colors or shape cues that might 
be associated with a reward object, and so on. Recognizing this limitation, 
the experimenters embarked on a rather interesting course of training. 
They set out explicitly to train the chimps on which cues were not relevant 
and which combinations were not meaningful. This poses an interesting 
problem that every pet trainer has faced. You can't train what not to do un­
less the animal first produces the disallowed behavior. Only then can it be 
Terrence W. Deacon > 85

immediately punished or at least explicitly not rewarded (the correlation 
problem again). So the chimps were first trained to produce incorrect as­
sociations (e.g., mistaking keyboard position as the relevant variable) and 
then these errors were explicitly not rewarded, whereas the remaining ap­
propriate responses were. By a complex hierarchic training design, involv­
ing thousands of trials, it was possible to teach them to exclude systematically 
all inappropriate associative and combinatorial possibilities among the small 
handful of lexigrams. At the end of this process, the animals were able to 
produce the correct lexigram strings every time. 
Had training out the errors worked? To test this, the researchers intro­
duced a few new food items and corresponding new lexigrams. If the chimps 
had learned the liquid/solid rule, and got the idea that a new lexigram was 
for a new item, they might learn more quickly. Indeed they did. Sherman 
and Austin were able to respond correctly the first time, or with only a few 
errors, instead of taking hundreds of trials as before. What had happened 
to produce this difference? What the animals had learned was not only a 
set of specific associations between lexigrams and objects or events. They 
had also learned a set of logical relationships between the lexigrams, rela­
tionships of exclusion and inclusion. More importantly, these lexigram­
lexigram relationships formed a complete system in which each allowable 
or forbidden co-occurrence of lexigrams in the same string (and therefore 
each allowable or forbidden substitution of one lexigram for another) was 
defined. They had discovered that the relationship that a lexigram has to 
an object is a function of the relationship it has to other lexigrams, not just 
a function of the correlated appearance of both lexigram and object. This 
is the essence of a symbolic relationship. 
The subordination of the indexical relationships between lexigrams (sym­
bol tokens) and foods (referents or objects) to the system of indexical rela­
tionships between lexigrams is schematically depicted in three stages of 
development in Figure 3.3. Individual indexical associations are shown as 
single vertical arrows, mapping each token to a kind of object, because each 
of these relationships is independent of the others. In contrast, the token­
token interrelationships (e.g., between lexigrams or words), shown as hor­
izontal arrows interconnecting symbols, form a closed logical group of 
combinatorial possibilities. Every combination and exclusion relationship 
is unambiguously and categorically determined. The indexical reference of 
each symbol token to an object after symbolic reference is achieved is de­
picted with arrows reversed to indicate that these are now subordinate to 
the token-token associations. 
In the minimalistic symbol system first learned by Sherman and Austin, 
86 < The Symbolic Species

3. SYMBOLIC 
2. TRANSITIONAL 
SJ 
ss 
SJ 
1 .  INDEXICAL 
3 
os 
07 
sa 
I 
8 
2 
logical relationships 
between tokens 
physical / pragmatic 
relationships 
patterns of token 
combinations 
relationships 
between objects 
sign stimuli 
(tokens) 
objects of 
reference 
Figure 3.3 A schematic depiction of the construction of symbolic referential rela­
tionships from indexical relationships. This figure builds on the logic depicted in Fig­
ure 3.2, but in this case the iconic relationships are only implied and the indexical 
relationships are condensed into single arrows. Three stages in the construction of 
symbolic relationmips are shown from bottom to top. First, a collection of diferent 
indices are individually learned (varying strength indicated by darkness of arrows). 
Second, systematic relationships between index tokens (indexical stimuli) are rec­
ognized and learned as additional indices (gray arrows linking indices). Third, a shift 
(reversal of indexical arrows) in mnemonic strategy to rely on relationships between 
tokens (darker arrows above) to pick out objects indirectly via relationships between 
objects (corresponding lower arrow system). Individual indices can stand on their 
own in isolation, but symbols must be part of a closed group of transfonnations that 
links them in order to refer, otherwise they revert to indices. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 87

reference to objects is a collective function of relative position within this 
token-token reference system. No individual lexigram determines its own 
reference. Reference emerges from the hierarchic relationship between 
these two levels of indexicality, and by virtue of recognizing an abstract cor­
respondence between the system of relationships between objects and the 
system of relationships between the lexigrams. In a sense, it is the recog­
nition of an iconic relationship between the two systems of indices. Although 
indexical reference of tokens to objects is maintained in the transition to 
symbolic reference, it is no longer determined by or dependent on any phys­
ical correlation between token and object. 
This makes a new kind of generalization possible: logical or categorical 
generalization, as opposed to stimulus generalization or learning set gen­
eralization. It is responsible for Sherman and Austin's ability to acquire new 
lexigrams and know their reference implicitly, without any trial-and-error 
learning. The system of lexigram-lexigram interrelationships is a source of 
implicit knowledge about how novel lexigrams must be incorporated into 
the system. Adding a new food lexigram, then, does not require the chimp 
to learn the correlative association of lexigram to object from scratch each 
time. The referential relationship is no longer solely (or mainly) a function 
of lexigram-food co-occurrence, but has become a function of the rela­
tionship that this new lexigram shares with the existing system of other lex­
igrams, and these offer a quite limited set of ways to integrate new items. 
The chimps succeed easily because they have shifted their search for asso­
ciations from relationships among stimuli to relationships among lexigrams. 
A new food or drink lexigram must fit into a predetermined slot in this sys­
tem of relationships. There are not more than a few possible alternatives to 
sample, and none requires assessing the probability of paired lexigram­
food occurrence because lexigrams need no longer be treated as indices of 
food availability. Like words, the probability of co-occurrences may be quite 
low. The food lexigrams are in a real sense "nouns," and are defined by their 
potential combinatorial roles. Testing the chimps' ability to extrapolate to 
new lexigram-food relationships is a way of demonstrating whether or not 
they have learned this logical-categorical generalization, which is a crucial 
defining feature of symbolic reference. 
At some point toward the end of the training, the whole set of explicitly 
presented indexical associations that the chimps had acquired was "re­
coded" in their minds with respect to an implicit pattern of associations 
whose evidence was distributed across the whole set of trials. Did this re­
coding happen as soon as they had learned the full set of combination/ex­
clusion relationships among their lexigram set? I suspect not. Try to imagine 
88 < The Symbolic Species

yourself in their situation for a moment. You have just come to the point 
where you are not making errors. What is your strategy? Probably, you are 
struggling to remember what specific things worked and did not work, still 
at the level of one-by-one associations. The problem is, it is hard to re­
member all the details. What you need are aids to help organize what you 
know, because there are a lot of possibilities. But in the internal search for 
supports you discover that there is another source of redundancy and reg­
ularity that begins to appear, besides just the individual stimulus-response­
reward regularities: the relationships between lexigrams! And these 
redundant patterns are far fewer than the messy set of dozens of individ­
ual associations that you are trying to keep track of. These regularities 
weren't apparent previously, because errors had obscured any underlying 
systematic relationship. But now that they are apparent, why not use them 
as added mnemonics to help simplifY the memory load? Forced to repeat 
errorless trials over and over, Sherman and Austin didn't just learn the de­
tails well, they also became aware of something they couldn't have noticed 
otherwise, that there was a system behind it all. And they could use this new 
information, information about what they had already learned, to simplifY 
greatly the mnemonic load created by the many individual rote associations. 
They could now afford to forget about individual correlations so long as they 
could keep track of them via the lexigram-lexigram rules. 
What I am suggesting here is that the shift from associative predictions 
to symbolic predictions is initially a change in mnemonic strategy, a recod­
ing. It is a way of offloading redundant details from working memory, by 
recognizing a higher-order regularity in the mess of associations, a trick that 
can accomplish the same task without having to hold all the details in mind. 
Unfortunately, nature seldom offers such nice neat logical systems that can 
help organize our associations. There are not many chances to use such 
strategies, so not much selection for this sort of process. We are forced to 
create artificial systems that have the appropriate properties. The crucial 
point is that when such a systematic set of tokens becomes available, it al­
lows a shift in mnemonic strategy that results in a radical transformation in 
the mode of representation. What one knows in one way gets recoded in 
another way. It gets re-represented. We know the same associations, but we 
know them also in a different way. You might say we know them both from 
the bottom up, indexically, and from the top down, symbolically. And be­
cause this recoding is based on higher-order relationships, not the individ­
ual details, it often vastly simplifies the mnemonic problem and vastly 
augments the representational possibilities. Equally important is the vast 
amount of implicit knowledge it provides. Because the combinatorial rules 
Terrence W. Deacon > 89

encode not objects but ways in which objects can be related, new symbols 
can immediately be incorporated and combined with others based on in­
dependent knowledge about what they symbolize. 
The experimenters working with Sherman and Austin provided a further, 
and in some ways even more definitive, demonstration of the difference be­
tween indexical reference oflexigram-object correlations and symbolic ref­
erence in a subsequent experiment that compared the performance of the 
two symboling apes (Sherman and Austin) to a previous subject (Lana), who 
had been trained with the same lexigram system but not in the same sys­
tematic fashion. Lana had learned a much larger corpus oflexigram-object 
associations, though by simple paired associations. In this new experiment 
(see Figure 3.4), all three chimps were first tested on their ability to learn 
to sort food items together in one pan and tool items together in another 
(Lana learned in far fewer trials than Sherman and Austin). When all three 
chimps had learned this task, they were presented with new foods or tools 
to sort and were able to generalize from their prior behavior to sort these 
new items appropriately as well. This is essentially a test of stimulus gen­
eralization, and it is based on some rather abstract qualities of the test items 
(e.g., edibility). It shows that chimps have a sophisticated ability to con­
ceptualize such abstract relationships irrespective of symbols. Of course, 
chimpanzees (as well as most other animal species) must be able to distin­
guish edible from inedible objects and treat each differently. Learning to 
sort them accordingly takes advantage of this preexisting categorical dis­
crimination in a novel context. In this sense, then, what might be called an 
indexical concept of food and nonfood precedes the training. Each bin is 
eventually treated as indexical of this qualitative sensory and behavioral dis­
tinction, and so the ability to extend this association to new food and non­
food items involved stimulus generalization (though of an indirectly 
recognizable stimulus parameter). 
This sorting task was followed by a second task in which the chimps were 
required to associate each of the previously distinguished food items with 
the same lexigram (glossed as "food" by the experimenters) and each of the 
tool items with another lexigram ("tool"). Initially, this task simply required 
the chimps to extend their prior associations with bins to two additional stim­
uli, the two lexigrams. Although all three chimps learned this task in a sim­
ilar way, taking many hundreds of trials to make the transference, Sherman 
and Austin later spontaneously recoded this information in a way that Lana 
did not. This was demonstrated when, as in the prior task, novel food and 
novel tool items were introduced. Sherman and Austin found this to be 
a trivial addition and easily guessed without any additional learning which 
90 < The Symbolic Species

f{ 
A 
training 
\;J• o // 
\\/ 9\ll 
II 
• 
ll••-1 
ltool) 
c 
training 
.. 
B 
.. 
D 
w 
testing 
/ 012-3 
;" i3/ 01/) 
• 
a 
ltooll 
lloofl 
testing 
Figure 3.4 Summary of part of a 1980 test of lexigram reference in chimpanzees by 
E. Sue Savage-Rumbaugh and her colleagues. This compares three levels of sym­
bolic learning of lexigram reference by the chimps Sherman and Austin to the in­
dexical learning of lexigram reference by another chimp, Lana, who is unable to 
complete tasks requiring symbolic reference. The panels on the left depict training 
trials and the panels on the right depict items added in test trials. Test trials intro­
duced new lexigrams and tested to detennine generalization to items for which 
there was no previous experience. The top task was merely a sorting task to deter­
mine that all animals understood the distinction between foods and tools (nonfood). 
The second task required identification with one of two lexigrams ('food," "tool"). 
Though all three learned it, only Sherman and Austin made the shift to symbolic 
categorization of reference and were able to generalize to new items (because of past 
symbol-learning experience). Lana was excluded from the remaining two procedures 
(not shown), where Sherman and Austin learned first to associate lexigrams to pic­
tures of the foods and tools, and then to associate individual food and tool lexigrams 
with the appropriate general lexigram for food or tool. 
lexigram was app,ropriate. Lana not only failed to extend her categorization 
to the new items, the novelty and errors appeared to produce a kind of coun­
terevidence that caused her to abandon her prior training in a subsequent 
test. Though on the surface this task resembles the sorting task, these con­
flicting results demonstrate that there is a critical difference that under­
mined the rote learning strategy used by Lana and favored the symbolic 
recoding used by Sherman and Austin. The difference is probably related 
to the fact that the sorting task involved a physical-spatial association of sign 
and object, whereas the lexigram "labeling" involved only temporal corre­
spondence. Lana appeared not to be using these underlying qualities to 
Terrence W. Deacon > 91

solve the task. For her, each lexigram object association was an indepen­
dent datum, and so provided no information about other associations. 
In contrast Sherman and Austin, as a result of their experience with a 
previous symbol system, recoded these new lexigram-object associations 
into two new symbolic categories that superseded the individual associa­
tions. It took them hundreds or thousands of trials to learn the first simple 
one-to-many associations. This was because they began with no systemic re­
lationship in their still small lexigram repertoire for a general reference to 
"food" or "tool." They had to learn them the hard way, so to speak, indexi­
cally. But as soon as they did learn these associations, they were primed to 
look for another higher-order logic, and once it was discovered, they were 
able to use this logic to generalize to new associations. Instead of hundreds 
or even thousands of trials, the availability of a symbolic coding allowed them 
to bypass further trials altogether, an incredible increase in learning effi­
ciency. The chimps essentially knew something that they had never explic­
itly learned. They had gained a kind of implicit knowledge as a spontaneous 
byproduct of symbolic recoding. 
I have chosen to recount this ape language study not because it portrays 
any particularly advanced abilities in chimpanzees, or because I think it is 
somehow representative. In fact (as noted earlier), more recent studies by 
these same experimenters, with a pygmy chimpanzee (or bonobo) named 
Kanzi, have demonstrated far more effortless and sophisticated symbolic 
abilities.8 Rather, I have focused on this earlier study because of the clarity 
with which it portrays the special nature of symbol learning, and because 
it clearly exemplifies the hierarchic relationship between symbolic and in­
dexical reference. The reductio ad absurdum training ploy is particularly 
instructive, not because it is an essential element but because it provides 
an explicit constructive demonstration of the index-by-index basis of the 
eventual symbolic relationship. It also demonstrates how normal associa­
tive learning strategies can interfere with symbol learning. Indexical asso­
ciations are necessary stepping stones to symbolic reference, but they must 
ultimately be superseded for symbolic reference to work. 
Unlearning an Insight 
The problem with S)'mbol systems, then, is that there is both a lot oflearn­
ing and unlearning that must take place before even a single symbolic re­
lationship is available. Symbols cannot be acquired one at a time, the way 
other learned associations can, except after a reference symbol system is es­
tablished. A logically complete system of relationships among the set of sym-
92 < The Symbolic Species

bol tokens must be learned before the symbolic association between any 
one symbol token and an object can even be determined. The learning step 
occurs prior to recognizing the symbolic function, and this function only 
emerges from a system; it is not vested in any individual sign-object pair­
ing. For this reason, it's hard to get started. To learn a first symbolic rela­
tionship requires holding a lot of associations in mind at once while at the 
same time mentally sampling the potential combinatorial patterns hidden 
in their higher-order relationships. Even with a very small set of symbols 
the number of possible combinations is immense, and so sorting out which 
combinations work and which don't requires sampling and remembering a 
large number of possibilities. 
One of the most interesting features of the shift in learning strategy that 
symbolic reference depends upon is that it essentialy takes no time; or 
rather, no more time than the process of perceptual recognition. Although 
the prior associations that will eventually be recoded into a symbolic sys­
tem may take considerable time and effort to learn, the symbolic recoding 
of these relationships is not learned in the same way; it must instead be dis­
covered or perceived, in some sense, by reflecting on what is already known. 
In other words, it is an implicit pattern that must be recognized in the re­
lationships between the indexical associations. Recognition means linking 
the relationship of something new to something already known. The many 
interdependent associations that will ultimately provide the nodes in a ma­
trix of symbol-symbol relationships must be in place in order for any one 
of them to refer symbolically, so they must each be learned prior to recog­
nizing their symbolic associative functions. They must be learned as indi­
vidual indexical referential relationships. The process of discovering the new 
symbolic association is a restructuring event, in which the previously learned 
associations are suddenly seen in a new light and must be reorganized with 
respect to one another. This reorganization requires mental effort to sup­
press one set of associative responses in favor of another derived from 
them. Discovering the superordinate symbolic relationship is not some 
added learning step, it is just noticing the system-level correspondences that 
are implicitly present between the token-token relationships and the object­
object relationships that have been juxtaposed by indexical learning. What 
we might call a symbolic insight takes place the moment we let go of one 
associative strategy and grab hold of another higher-order one to guide our 
memory searches. 
What I have described as the necessary cognitive steps to create sym­
bolic reference would clearly be considered a species of "insight learning," 
though my analysis suggests that the phrase is in one sense an oxymoron. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 93

Psychologists and philosophers have long considered the ability to learn by 
insight to be an important characteristic of human intelligence. Animal be­
haviorists have also been fascinated with the question, Can other animals 
learn by insight? The famous Gestalt psychologist Wolfgang Kohler de­
scribed experiments with chimpanzees in which to reach a fruit they had 
to "see" the problem in a new wayY Kohler set his chimp the problem of 
retrieving a banana suspended from the roof of the cage and out of reach, 
given only a couple of wooden boxes that when stacked one upon the other 
could allow the banana to be reached. He found that these solutions were 
not intuitively obvious for a chimpanzee, who would often become frus­
trated and give up for a long period. During this time she would play with 
the boxes, often piling them up, climbing on them, and then knocking them 
down. At some point, however, the chimp eventually appeared to have rec­
ognized how this fit with the goal of getting at the banana, and would then 
quite purposefully maneuver the boxes into place and retrieve the prize. 
Once learned, the trick was remembered. Because of the role played by 
physical objects as mnemonic place-holders and the random undirected ex­
ploration of them, this is not perhaps the sort of insight that appears in car­
toons as the turning on of a light bulb, nor is it what is popularly imagined 
to take place in the mind of an artist or scientist. On the other hand, what 
goes on "inside the head" during moments of human insight may simply be 
a more rapid covert version of the same, largely aimless object play. We rec­
ognize these as examples of insight solely because they involve a recoding 
of previously available but unlinked bits of information. 
Most insight problems do not involve symbolic recoding, merely sensory 
recoding: "visualizing" the parts of a relationship in a new way. Transfer­
ence of a learning set from one context to another is in this way also a kind 
of insight. Nevertheless, a propensity to search out new "perspectives" 
might be a significant advantage for discovering symbolic relationships. 
The shift in mnemonic strategy from indexical to symbolic use of food and 
food-delivery lexigrams required the chimps both to use the regularities of 
symbol-token combinations as the solution to correct performance, and to 
discover that features of the food objects and delivery events correspond 
to these lexigram combination regularities. In other words, they had to use 
these combination relationships to separate the abstract features of liquid 
and solid from their context of indexical associations with the food-delivery 
events. The symbolic reference that resulted depended on digging into 
these aspects of the interrelationships between things, as opposed to just 
mapping lexigrams to things themselves. By virtue of this, even the specific 
combinations of tokens cannot be seen as indexical, so that it is not just that 
94 < The Symbolic Species

the ability to combine tokens vastly multiplies referential possibilities, in the 
way that using two digits instead of one makes it possible to represent more 
numerical values. Which tokens can and cannot be combined and which can 
and cannot substitute for one another determines a new level of mapping 
to what linguists call "semantic features," such as the presence or absence 
of some property like "solidity." This is what allows a system of symbols to 
grow. New elements can be added, either by sharing reference with se­
mantic features that the system already defines, or by identifying new fea­
tures that somehow can be integrated with existing ones. Even separate 
symbol groups, independently constructed, can in this way become inte­
grated with each other. Once the relationship between their semantic fea­
ture sets is recognized, their unification can in one insight create an 
enormous number of new combinatorial possibilities. 
The insight-recoding problem becomes increasingly difficult as addi­
tional recoding steps become involved in establishing an association. For 
this reason, a child's initial discovery of the symbolic relationships underly­
ing language is only the beginning of the demand on this type of learn­
inglunleaming process. Each new level of symbols coding for other symbolic 
relationships (i.e., more abstract concepts) requires that we engage this 
process anew. This produces a pattern of learning that tends to exhibit 
more or less discrete stages. Since the number of combinatorial possibili­
ties that must be sampled in order to discover the underlying symbolic logic 
increases geometrically with each additional level of recoding, it is almost 
always necessary to confine rote learning to one level at a time until the sym­
bolic recoding becomes apparent before moving on to the next. This limi­
tation is frustratingly familiar to every student who is forced to engage in 
seemingly endless rote learning before "getting" the underlying logic of 
some mathematical operation or scientific concept. It may also contribute 
to the crudely stagelike pattern of children's cognitive development, which 
the psychologist Jean Piaget initially noticed.10 However, this punctuated 
pattern of symbolic conceptual development is a reflection of symbolic in­
formation proce;sing and not an intrinsic feature of developing brains and 
minds. 
The ability of Sherman and Austin to discover the abstract symbolic ref­
erences for "food" and "tool" provides an additional perspective on the dif­
ference between indexical associations and symbolic associations. Consider 
the potential conflict between the lexigram-object relationships they had 
previously acquired and this new set of associations. If their prior associa­
tions were supported only by the correlations in lexigram-object-reward oc­
currence, then re-pairing the same objects with a new lexigram would be 
Terrence W. Deacon > 95

expected to partially if not totally extinguish the prior association. Although 
it would be possible to provide additional contextual cues to enable the 
chimps to decide which of two competing associative strategies to use (e.g., 
simply run trials without the alternatives available) and thus learn and re­
tain both, there would still be interference effects (i.e., their prior associa­
tions might interfere both with relearning the new associations and with 
shifting between them in different contexts). Unfortunately, data to assess 
this are not available, but we can infer from Sherman and Austin's learning 
shifts, and their subsequent maintenance of the prior symbolic associa­
tions, that neither extinction nor interference was a significant problem. 
Though it was not tested explicitly in this series of experiments, we should 
expect that this should also distinguish Sherman and Austin from Lana. Cer­
tainly Lana's rapid decline in performance when new items were added 
points to such effects. 
This ability to remember large numbers of potentially competing asso­
ciations is an additional power of symbolic reference that derives from the 
shift in mnemonic strategy to token-token relationships. Competition ef­
fects grow with increasing numbers of overlapping associative categories in 
typical indexical reference relationships. Not only would the choice among 
alternatives in any use become a source of confusion, but because they were 
competing for reinforcement, each would weaken the association of the oth­
ers. Though some of the interference effects also attend symbol use, and 
often are a cause of word retrieval errors and analysis delays, in terms of as­
sociative strength there is an opposite effect. Competing sets of overlapping 
associative relationships on the indexical level translate into mutually sup­
portive higher-order semantic categories on the symbolic level. These be­
come sources of associative redundancy, each reinforcing the mnemonic 
trace of the other. So, rather than weaken the strength of the association, 
they actually reinforce it. 
This helps to explain where the additional associative glue between words 
and their referents comes from. Though token-object correlations are not 
consistently available to the symbol user, indeed are rare, this loss of asso­
ciative support is more than compensated by the large number of other as­
sociations that are available through symbolically mediated token-token 
relationships. Individually, these are comparatively weak associations, with 
a low correlated occurrence of any two tokens in the same context; but they 
are not just one-to-one associations. They are one-to-many and many-to­
one associations that weave symbol tokens together into a systematic net­
work of association relationships, and the pattern has a certain coded 
isomorphism with relationships between objects and events in the world. 
96 < The Symbolic Species

As a result of sharing many weak interpenetrating indexical links, each in­
dexical association gains mnemonic support from a large number of others 
because they are multiply coded in memory. Together, their combined as­
sociative strengths make them far more resistant to extinction due to di­
minished external correlations with objects than are individual indexical 
associations. Thus, not only is symbolic reference a distributed relationship, 
so is its mnemonic support. This is why learning the symbolic reasons be­
hind the bits of information we acquire by rote learning offers such a pow­
erful aid to recall. How else could the many thousands of different words 
we use every day be retrieved so rapidly and effortlessly during the act of 
speaking or listening? 
Numerous neuropsychological probes of semantic field effects demon­
strate this for word meaning. Hearing, memorizing, or using a word can be 
a source of priming effects for subsequent recall or identification of other 
words in overlapping categories. For example, hearing the word "cat" might 
prime later memory tasks involving "dog" or "animal." Even more inter­
esting is the fact that this also transfers to indexical associations involving 
these words as well. Receiving a mild electric shock every time you hear 
the word "cat" would cause you to learn to spontaneously produce physio­
logical correlates of stress response (such as change in heart rate or galvanic 
skin response) upon hearing that word repeated. But a similar but less in­
tense response will also be produced whenever you hear a word like "dog," 
even though there had never been shocks associated with these sounds. A 
lesser response wil also be produced whenever you hear a word like "meow" 
or "animal," demonstrating lexical (word-word) associations, and in re­
sponse to a rhyming word like "mat," demonstrating stimulus generaliza­
tion effects. All of these distinct associative relationships are brought into 
relationship to one another by the symbolic relationship. Because each 
arouses an associative network that overlaps with that of the shock­
conditioned word, the shared activation raises an arousal level also associ­
ated with shock. Twe extent of both the symbolic and indexical overlap 
appears to correlate with the extent of the transference. Though analogous 
to stimulus generalization, it is clearly different. There are no shared stim­
ulus parameters that distinguish "dog" and "cat" from "car," which does not 
produce a similar priming. The difference is also reflected in the fact that 
there is an independent transference to words that rhyme, like "flat" or "sat." 
Rhyme associations are true stimulus generalization effects and also show 
some transference of physiological responses. 
This analogy between effects involving shared stimulus features and 
shared semantic features shows that the brain stores and retrieves both sym-
Terrence W. Deacon > 97

bolic and nonsymbolic associations as though they were the same sort of 
thing. Just as the contingencies of co-occurrence and exclusion in the same 
context determine the strengths of stimulus associations, so too do these sta­
tistics in language affect the strengths of word associations. 
With each shift of referential control to a token-token system of rela­
tionships, it became possible for Sherman and Austin to add new lexical 
items to their growing symbol system with a minimum of associative learn­
ing, often without any trial-and-error testing. This produces a kind of thresh­
old effect whereby prior associative learning strategies, characterized by an 
incremental narrowing of stimulus response features, are replaced by cat­
egorical guesses among a few alternatives. The result is a qualitative shift 
in performance. The probabilistic nature of the earlier stage is superseded 
by alternative testing that has a sort of ali-or-none character. This change 
in behavior can thus be an indication of the subject's shift in mnemonic strat­
egy, and hence the transition from indexical to symbolic reference. The sim­
plest indicator of this shift is probably the rate of acquisition of new lexical 
items, since this should be highly sensitive to the hundred- to thousand-fold 
reduction in trial-and-error learning required to reach 100 percent perfor­
mance. 
In young children's learning oflanguage, apparent threshold effects have 
long been noticed in vocabulary growth and sentence length. Vocabulary 
and utterance length are of course linked variables in two regards. First, the 
more words a child knows, the more there are to string together. But this 
does not simply translate into larger sentences. Creating a larger sentence 
in a human language cannot just be accomplished by stringing together 
more and more words. It requires the use of hierarchic grammatical rela­
tionships, as well as syntactic tricks for condensing and embedding kernel 
sentences in one another. Thus, not only does vocabulary need to grow, but 
the types of words must diversify. In other words, the regular discovery of 
new grammatical classes must be followed by a rapid filling of these classes 
with new alternative lexical items. 
Each time a new logical group is discovered among a set of tokens, it es­
sentially opens up one or more types of positional slots that can be filled 
from an open class of symbols. Each slot determines both a semantic and 
a grammatical category. Recall that although Sherman and Austin could add 
new food items to their lexigram "vocabulary" with little difficulty, when they 
had to learn to recode food items in terms of the higher-order semantic cat­
egory "food," they essentially had to start over. Their prior knowledge of the 
symbolic designations of distinct foods with respect to food-delivery modes 
was of no help. It may even have been a source of interference, since the 
98 < The Symbolic Species

same foods were now being linked with different lexigrams. But again, once 
this new symbolic association was established, adding new items proved triv­
ial, usually involving no errors. 
In the small symbol system initially learned by Sherman and Austin, the 
semantic features that were implicit in the few combinatorial possibilities 
available might be specified in terms of solid versus liquid and food versus 
delivery (of food). Discovering the combinatorial rules was the key to dis­
covering these semantic features, and, conversely, these semantic features 
provided the basis for adding new symbols without needing to relearn new 
correlations. Al that was necessary was prior knowledge of the object to be 
represented with respect to one or more of the relevant semantic features 
in order to know implicitly a token's combinatorial possibilities and refer­
ence. Beginning with any initial core, the system can grow rapidly in re­
peated stages. Each stage represents a further symbolic transition that must 
begin with incremental indexical learning. But past experience at symbol 
building and a large system of features can progressively accelerate this 
process. 
In summary, then, symbols cannot be understood as an unstructured col­
lection of tokens that map to a collection of referents because symbols 
don't just represent things in the world, they also represent each other. Be­
cause symbols do not directly refer to things in the world, but indirectly refer 
to them by virtue of referring to other symbols, they are implicitly combi­
natorial entities whose referential powers are derived by virtue of occupy­
ing determinate positions in an organized system of other symbols. Both 
their initial acquisition and their later use requires a combinatorial analy­
sis. The structure of the whole system has a definite semantic topology that 
determines the ways symbols modify each other's referential functions in 
different combinations. Because of this systematic relational basis of sym­
bolic reference, no collection of signs can function symbolically unless the 
entire collection conforms to certain overall principles of organization. 
Symbolic referell(e emerges from a ground of nonsymbolic referential 
processes only because the indexical relationships between symbols are or­
ganized so as to form a logically closed group of mappings from symbol to 
symbol. This determinate character allows the higher-order system of as­
sociations to supplant the individual (indexical) referential support previ­
ously invested in each component symbol. This system of relationships 
between symbols determines a definite and distinctive topology that all op­
erations involving those symbols must respect in order to retain referential 
power. The structure implicit in the symbol-symbol mapping is not present 
before symbolic reference, but comes into being and affects symbol com-
Terrence W. Deacon > 99

binations from the moment it is first constructed. The rules of combination 
that are implicit in this structure are discovered as novel combinations are 
progressively sampled. As a result, new rules may be discovered to be emer­
gent requirements of encountering novel combinatorial problems, in much 
the same way as new mathematical laws are discovered to be implicit in 
novel manipulations of known operations. 
Symbols do not, then, get accumulated into unstructured collections 
that can be arbitrarily shuffled into different combinations. The system of 
representational relationships, which develops between symbols as symbol 
systems grow, comprises an ever more complex matrix. In abstract terms, 
this is a kind of tangled hierarchic network of nodes and connections that 
defines a vast and constantly changing semantic space. Though semanticists 
and semiotic theorists have proposed various analogies to explain these un­
derlying topological principles of semantic organization (such as +I- feature 
lists, dictionary analogies, encyclopedia analogies), we are far from a satis­
factory account. Whatever the logic of this network of symbol-symbol re­
lationships, it is inevitable that it will be reflected in the patterns of 
symbol-symbol combinations in communication. 
Abstract theories oflanguage, couched in terms of possible rules for com­
bining unspecified tokens into strings, often implicitly assume that there is 
no constraint on theoretically possible combinatorial rule systems. Arbitrary 
strings of uninterpreted tokens have no reference and thus are uncon­
strained. But the symbolic use of tokens is constrained both by each token's 
use and by the use of other tokens with respect to which it is defined. 
Strings of symbols used to communicate and to accomplish certain ends 
must inherit both the intrinsic constraints of symbol-symbol reference and 
the constraints imposed by external reference. 
Some sort of regimented combinatorial organization is a logical neces­
sity for any system of symbolic reference. Without an explicit syntactic 
framework and an implicit interpretive mapping, it is possible neither to pro­
duce unambiguous symbolic information nor to acquire symbols in the first 
place. Because symbolic reference is inherently systemic, there can be no 
symbolization without systematic relationships. Thus syntactic structure is 
an integral feature of symbolic reference, not something added and sepa­
rate. It is the higher-order combinatorial logic, grammar, that maintains and 
regulates symbolic reference; but how a specific grammar is organized is 
not strongly restricted by this requirement. There need to be precise com­
binatorial rules, yet a vast number are possible that do not ever appear in 
natural languages. Many other factors must be taken into account in order 
to understand why only certain types of syntactic systems are actually em-
100 < The Symbolic Species

played in natural human languages and how we are able to learn the in­
credibly complicated rule systems that result. 
So, before turning to the difficult problem of determining what it is 
about human brains that makes the symbolic recoding step so much easier 
for us than for the chimpanzees Sherman and Austin (and members of all 
other nonhuman species as well), it is instructive to reflect on the signifi­
cance of this view of symbolization for theories of grammar and syntax. Not 
only does this analysis suggest that syntax and semantics are deeply inter­
dependent facets of language-a view at odds with much current linguis­
tic theory-it also forces us entirely to rethink current ideas about the 
nature of grammatical knowledge and how it comes to be acquired. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 101

C 
H 
A 
P 
T 
E 
R 
F 
0 
U 
R 
Outside the Brain 
Nothing that is worth knowing can be taught. 
-Oscar Wilde 
Chomsky's Handstand 
0 ver the last few decades language researchers seem to have reached 
a consensus that language is an innate ability, and that only a signifi­
cant contribution from innate knowledge can explain our ability to 
learn such a complex communication system. Without question, children 
enter the world predisposed to learn human languages. All normal children, 
raised in normal social environments, inevitably learn their local language, 
whereas other species, even when raised and taught in this same environ­
ment, do not. This demonstrates that human brains come into the world 
specially equipped for this function. Few would argue with this sense of the 
term innate. 
But many linguists and psychologists propose a more thoroughly pre-
102 

formationist interpretation of this same phenomenon. They argue that the 
child's remarkable feat oflearning a first language is the result of an innate 
"language competence." When we say that people are competent at a skill, 
for example, typing, we generally mean that they possess some proficiency 
in it, and not just a potential or talent that might be realized under the right 
conditions. A competence is an available skill, normally one learned or ac­
quired previously. So by analogy an innate language competence is an abil­
ity to perform certain language tasks as though they had previously been 
learned. If language competence is innate in this sense, then language 
knowledge itself, in some form, is already present in the human brain prior 
to gaining knowledge from any experience with language. But is it really? 
There is, without doubt, something special about human brains that en­
ables us to do with ease what no other species can do even minimally with­
out intense effort and remarkably insightful training. We not only have the 
ability to create and easily learn simple symbol systems such as the chimps 
Sherman and Austin struggled to learn, but in learning languages we ac­
quire an immensely complex rule system and a rich vocabulary at a time in 
our lives when it is otherwise very difficult to learn even elementary arith­
metic. Many a treatise on grammatical theory has failed to provide an ade­
quate accounting of the implicit knowledge that even a four-year-old appears 
to possess about her newly acquired language. No wonder so many linguists 
have thrown up their hands, exclaiming that "language must be unleamable" 
and claiming that it is all a magician's trick, that the rabbit (grammatical 
knowledge) must have been in the hat (the child's brain) from the begin­
ning. But in what form? And how could it have gotten there? Unfortunately, 
as we have seen, the theory that innate knowledge of grammar is the her­
itage of all human children simply asserts the answers to these messy ques­
tions, and leaves it to evolutionary biology and neuroscience to explain how 
the answers are to be derived. Before scientists in these fields commit their 
experimental resources and theoretical modeling efforts to exploring this 
theory's claims, it may be worth asking if they are biologically plausible and 
if there really are no alternatives. 
The idea that an innate Universal Grammar is the only way to account 
for language abilities was first argued by the MIT linguist Noam Chomsky.1 
Three insights originally motivated his claim. First, he showed that the log­
ical structure of grammars was more complex and difficult to specify than 
anyone had previously suspected, and yet that normal speakers of a language 
seem to know an enormous number of complex grammatical rules and ap­
plications without an explicit knowledge of what they know. Second, he ar­
gued that although languages appear incredibly variable on the surface, they 
Terrence W. Deacon > 103

share a common deep logic, or "deep structure," from which the specific 
rules used by each can be derived by a sort of deductive logic. This, how­
ever, further complicates the discovery of the rules, because what is pre­
sented to the language learner is only the surface consequences of applying 
these rules. The rules have to be inferred from this indirect representation. 
Third, he argued that to learn a logical system of such subtlety and com­
plexity should require extensive trial-and-error experience with explicit 
feedback, and yet young children rapidly develop a sophisticated knowledge 
of grammatical rules and their applications in the absence of these. 
Many have taken this last point one step further. They argue that even 
much more extensive experience of the type that children do not get might 
still be insufficient to allow one to discover the abstract rules that consti­
tute the grammar of a natural language. To put it another way, no one could 
learn a language in the same way that one learns the names of the presi­
dents, the letters of the alphabet, or the rules of long division. Grammar is 
too complex, and the rules exhibited by spoken examples only obliquely re­
flect its logic. Some researchers have argued that even a scientist or logi­
cian would be unable to discover the rules of grammar inductively from texts 
of a language, except by reference to some previously known grammar. 2 This 
difficulty of discovering the rules, even in theory, is epitomized by the fact 
that modem linguists still disagree about what is the most appropriate for­
mal description of natural grammatical rule systems. So how could very 
young children, who are apparently far less sophisticated in their analytic 
abilities, nevertheless become rapidly competent language users? In 
essence, then, the argument supporting the existence of an innate Univer­
sal Grammar is an argument from incredulity. How is it possible otherwise? 
The conclusions appear inescapable. If grammatical knowledge cannot 
be acquired by inductive learning in childhood, then knowledge about the 
rules of grammar (that we al end up possessing after just a few years) must 
come from somewhere else. And if acquiring this knowledge does not de­
pend on experience, then paradoxically the knowledge must already be 
present in some form prior to experience. It must be available as a corpus 
of already assumed (innately known) rules that need only to be compared 
to the available input. Those innate rules which predict the structure of the 
experienced language are adopted; the remainder are ignored. 
This is a compelling argument, but innate Universal Grammar (UG for 
short) is a cure that is more drastic than the disease. It makes sweeping as­
sumptions about brains and evolution that are no less credible than the claim 
that children are super-intelligent learners. 
The critics of the UG theory mainly take issue with what they claim are 
104 < The Symbolic Species

straw-man assumptions about the language-learning context: a restricted 
conception oflearning as induction, and the claim that language experience 
provides no feedback. Children are not just fed a sequence of speech in­
puts and forced to discover the abstract rules of their production. Children's 
language experiences are embedded in a rich and intricate social context, 
which provides them with multiple routes to pragmatic social feedback. 
Moreover, the language interactions that young children engage in are often 
simplified by the adults, and certain features are exaggerated to make them 
more salient. In short, the critics argue that no paradox needs explaining, 
that a general theory of learning may be enough. It is demonstrably true 
that children learn language in a rich social context, but the claim that 
learning alone can account for this ability begs as many questions as the in­
nate knowledge theory. We cannot discount the obvious and immense gap 
that separates what children accomplish easily from what otherwise highly 
intelligent species and even sophisticated inductive-learning algorithms 
cannot. This is especially compelling since young children are quite limited 
in other aspects of their learning abilities. We need to confront the para­
dox directly. Some kind of prior preparation for language must be present. 
But what kind, and where? These are questions that must be answered, not 
avoided, by either gambit. 
There is another possibility that has been almost entirely overlooked, and 
it is the point of the remainder of this chapter to explore it. I think Chom­
sky and his followers have articulated a central conundrum about language 
learning, but they offer an answer that inverts cause and effect. They assert 
that the source of prior support for language acquisition must originate from 
inside the brain, on the unstated assumption that there is no other possible 
source. But there is another alternative: that the extra support for language 
learning is vested neither in the brain of the child nor in the brains of par­
ents or teachers, but outside brains, in language itself. To explain what I 
mean, let me begin by offering a couple of extended analogies that I think 
portray a similar problem. I'll start with a computer analogy. 
" . . .  And you'll ࡛ee why 1984 won't be like 1984." Thus ended an award­
winning television commercial seen by millions of Americans watching the 
Super Bowl in January 1984. It was the commercial for Apple Computer 
Inc.'s new personal computer, the Macintosh, aired just once during the big 
game then retired to history, its message sent. Apple depicted a hypnoti­
cally transfiXed audience of human drones staring, mouths agog, at a huge 
screen on which the image of George Orwell's "Big Brother" intoned his 
propaganda about world domination and the good of all mankind. Then, 
through the high-tech corridors and the numbly nodding masses, chased 
Terrence W. Deacon > 105

by uniformed techno-storm troopers, an athletic young woman ran, carry­
ing a large hammer. In the midst of the chanting mass she whirled around 
and let the hammer fly into the screen, shattering the image of the face of 
Big Brother, and breaking the hypnotic spell. 
What Apple was announcing was not just a new computer but a new way 
of thinking about computing. The company that brought computers from 
the tinkerer's garage into the average home was unveiling a computer that 
was "user-friendly." Before this, computers were machines that you had to 
figure out. To get them to do what you wanted, you had to use their logic­
the logic of program codes, I/0 functions, and endless varieties of com­
mands and names, some of which were acronyms like "DOS," "bios," and 
"CD" or truncated words like "txt," "cmd," and "bak," but many of which 
were just programmers' syntactic operators, such as " . . .  " and "\" And if 
you didn't type the code line just right, or didn't quite know the right spac­
ing, order, or sequence of commands, you were stuck, left trying to figure 
out what happened to the previous day's work. 
In 1984, everyone knew that computers were very complicated machines 
that only engineers and technicians really understood, and so in order to 
use them it was inevitable that you needed training or experience or a lot 
of time to read stacks of manuals. But the gurus at Apple had a different 
idea-an idea they borrowed from a group of computer visionaries assem­
bled years earlier in a Xerox research project. The idea was to make inter­
acting with a computer intuitive. Instead of having to figure out how to get 
a program or data file to do what you wanted, why not represent them with 
the images of familiar objects, virtual objects on a screen made into a vir­
tual desk top? And instead of using commands and codes to control what 
happens to programs and data, why not just arrange the system so that by 
manipulating these virtual objects, as you might think of doing if they had 
been out there on your real desk top, you were activating programs and 
modifying your data? This, of course, was the birth of personal computers 
with "object-oriented" interfaces. Instead of having to page through a stack 
of unreadable manuals, it was possible to experiment, to learn by trial and 
error, in an environment where your intuitive guesses were likely to be good 
ones. Apple may not have banished Big (Blue) Brother, but today few per­
sonal computers and work stations lack for icons, windows, and pointing de­
vices. Computer operations have been adapted more to people so that 
people need to adapt less to computers. 
Given the complexity oflanguage and its evolutionary novelty, one might 
imagine that every two-year-old faces an incredibly complicated set of syn­
tactic rules and thousands of words like a computer novice facing an un-
106 < The Symbolic Species

forgiving "C>," and without technical manuals to help in sorting them out. 
This seems to be the implicit assumption behind the claims of the propo­
nents of theories of innate grammatical knowledge. If language were in­
vented and just thrust upon us poor users, we might be justified in thinking 
of it as not very "user-friendly," in which case a built-in on-line instruction 
manual might be a necessity. But this inverts the actual relationship. The 
engineering constraints of computer operations are quite unlike any infor­
mation processes we normally engage in. Operating systems and program­
ming languages are limited by the requirements of the machine architecture 
more than by the requirements oflearnability. But languages have evolved 
with respect to human brains, not arbitrary principles or engineering con­
straints. There need be few compromises. The problem faced by a child 
learning a first language should not be analogous to the problem faced by 
a computer neophyte trying to learn to use an unforgiving mechanism. In­
stead, we should expect that language is a lot more like an intuitive and user­
friendly interface. Over countless generations languages should have 
become better and better adapted to people, so that people need to make 
minimal adjustments to adapt to them. With this alternative model in mind, 
let's compare the typical competing explanations of language acquisition. 
Chomsky argues that much of the child's knowledge of grammar and syn­
tax is not learned in the way words are. I agree. It is discovered, though not 
by introspection of rules already available in the brain. On the surface, it 
simply appears that children have an uncanny ability to make "lucky guesses" 
about grammar and syntax: they spontaneously anticipate the ways words 
work together. I think this appearance oflucky coincidence accurately cap­
tures what happens, though it is not luck that is responsible. The rules un­
derlying language are acquired by trial-and-error learning; but there is a 
very high proportion of correct trials. Why are kids such "lucky" guessers? 
Turning this observation around, we might notice that children do not sam­
ple the full range of possible alternative ways of organizing words. They are 
strongly biased in their choices. If language were a random set of associa­
tions, children wo࡜ld likely be significantly handicapped by their highly bi­
ased guessing. But language regularities are not just any set of associations, 
and children's guesses are biased in a way that usually turns out to be cor­
rect. How else could this happen except by endowing children with some 
foreknowledge of what constitutes a likely correct guess? I think the object­
oriented computer operating system example suggests the alternative. 
Things could be arranged so that intuitive guesses are more likely to work. 
Let me illustrate the logic of this alternative answer to the riddle with 
another story. Imagine a gambling establishment and the following inge-
Terrence W. Deacon > 107

nious scheme to defraud it. A disgruntled casino employee has decided that 
he wants to get back at the owners by making them lose big. He does not 
want to leave any way for the owners to get back their losses even if they 
catch him. So instead of stealing or embezzling the money, he decides to 
help an unsuspecting gambler break the bank. In order to accomplish this 
he needs to find a gambler who has characteristic betting habits, or super­
stitions-for example, someone who always places large bets on numbers 
containing the digit 5. If the employee can rig the Roulette wheel so that 
fives appear far more often than chance, he can tum the unsuspecting gam­
bler into a millionaire. The gambler has no special knowledge of the future 
numbers that will tum up, even though the games have been rigged to con­
form to his biased guesses. His lucky guesses are not based on innate knowl­
edge about the wheel or about the future. It appears as though the gambler 
has foreknowledge of the outcomes, but in reality he has only a sort of"vir­
tual knowledge," as seen in hindsight. He might even come to believe that 
he has a clairvoyant ability to see into the future, but irrespective of what 
he thinks he knows, he is simply being fooled. The point is that one cannot 
always be sure that apparent knowledge, inferred from successful predic­
tions and guesses, is really what it seems. 
Finaly, let me offer an analogy that every clever teacher or animal trainer 
will find familiar. The first time I visited an aquarium where trained dol­
phins performed, I was astonished by the way they had been taught to jump 
high out of the water, tum somersaults in midair, and "stand" on their tails. 
Later, when I had become acquainted with some of the staff, I asked if dol­
phins could be trained to do this because they were particularly smart. No, 
they said, dolphins spontaneously produce similar behaviors in the wild and 
the trainers simply taught them to exaggerate and modify things that they 
already tended to do naturally. If the trainers had tried to teach them to per­
form a completely novel behavior, without considering the dolphins' innate 
predispositions, the trick would have been very difficult if not impossible 
to train. Successful animal trainers carefully select the tricks they attempt 
to train their subjects to perform to fit with their subjects' spontaneous be­
havioral tendencies. What learning psychologists call "shaping" of an oper­
ant behavior must begin with a spontaneous behavior to be shaped. Even 
very unusual and exotic behaviors can be taught, if one begins with what an 
animal already tends to do, then step by step extrapolates and generalizes 
to new variations on the theme. The training will be minimized because the 
animal already"knows" what to do to please its trainer and receive a reward. 
Each of these examples offers a twist on the Macintosh (and Windows) 
strategy. The learning is not so likely to fail if what needs to be learned is 
108 < The Symbolic Species

"user-friendly," organized in a way that the learner is predisposed to think­
ing and working. One way to facilitate children's inspired "guessing" about 
language, and thus spare them countless trials and errors, would be to pre­
sent them with a specially designed language whose structure anticipated 
their spontaneous guesses. If we could study children in "the wild" to dis­
cover their natural tendencies, we could then design the perfect language 
that took advantage of what kids do spontaneously. Learning this artificial 
language would then be more like trying on new clothes and discovering 
that they just happen to fit, as opposed to going on a diet in order to fit into 
clothes that don't. Children's minds need not innately embody language 
structures, if languages embody the predispositions of children's minds! 
Okay. Although this is a very interesting fantasy, we are not brilliant lan­
guage trainers with complete insight into our children's minds. We have few 
enough insights into our own minds. And we don't consciously tailor lan­
guage for children, except for the rather lame simplifications and exagger­
ations we call "baby talk" and "motherese." We don't design language at all. 
It "designs" itself. Languages just change spontaneously over the course of 
many generations. Every effort to design a language has flopped. If no one 
ever studied children in order to design language for them, then how could 
any sort of "preestablished harmony" between language and children ever 
get set up? It seems as if we have to postulate the same kind of miraculous 
accident for language as has been suggested for explaining the origins of a 
language organ. Do we gain any more explanatory credibility by postulat­
ing infant-friendly languages as opposed to language-savvy infants? How 
could such a preestablished harmony arise if no one is "throwing the game"? 
Someone or something is throwing the game, and I don't mean a divine 
designer. Languages don't just change, they evolve. And children themselves 
are the rigged game. Languages are under powerful selection pressure to 
fit children's likely guesses, because children are the vehicle by which a lan­
guage gets reproduced. Languages have had to adapt to children's sponta­
neous assumptionࡘ about communication, learning, social interaction, and 
even symbolic reference, because children are the only game in town. It 
turns out that in a curious sort of inversion of our intuitions about this prob­
lem, languages need children more than children need languages. 
In short, we failed to notice that a flurry of adaptation has been going on 
outside the brain. The reason we haven't considered the relevance of this 
process before is that we tend to think on a human scale. Focusing on a life­
time scale and the rapid changes that take place in the few years in which 
a child learns a first language, we naturally think of this as the flexible half 
of the equation and of language as though it is some fixed entity. But from 
Terrence W. Deacon > 109

an evolutionary perspective, the situation is just the reverse. Biological 
change is vastly more slow and inflexible than language change. Brain evo­
lution takes place on a geological time scale. Even slight changes probably 
take hundreds of thousands of years to become widely represented in a 
species, and the basic architecture of brains has been remarkably conserved 
since the origins of vertebrates. Languages, on the other hand, can become 
unrecognizably different within a few thousand years. Language evolution 
is probably thousands of times more rapid than brain evolution. Such a vast 
difference in evolutionary mobility suggests that we may have assumed that 
the wrong half of the evolutionary equation contained the critical variables. 
The Other Evolution 
The world's languages evolved spontaneously. They were not designed. 
If we conceive of them as though they were invented systems of rules and 
symbols, intentionally assembled to form logical systems, then we are apt 
either to assign utility and purpose where there is none, or else to interpret 
as idiosyncratic or inelegant that for which we cannot recognize a design 
principle. But languages are far more like living organisms than like math­
ematical proofs. The most basic principle guiding their design is not com­
municative utility but reproduction-theirs and ours. So, the proper tool 
for analyzing language structure may not be to discover how best to model 
them as axiomatic rule systems but rather to study them the way we study 
organism structure: in evolutionary terms. Languages are social and cultural 
entities that have evolved with respect to the forces of selection imposed 
by human users. 
The structure of a language is under intense selection because in its re­
production from generation to generation, it must pass through a narrow 
bottleneck: children's minds (a relationship depicted in cartoon fashion in 
Figure 4.1). Language operations that can be learned quickly and easily by 
children will tend to get passed on to the next generation more effectively 
and more intact than those that are difficult to learn. So, languages should 
change through history in ways that tend to conform to children's expecta­
tions; those that employ a more kid-friendly logic should come to outnum­
ber and replace those that don't. From this perspective, children don't have 
to be particularly smart, and parents don't have to be particularly gifted 
teachers. The limitations of the learners and the teachers are an unavoid­
able part of the ecology of language transmission. Language structures that 
are poorly adapted to this niche simply will not persist for long. 
If, as linguists often point out, grammars appear illogical and quirky in 
110 < The Symbolic Species

variety and errors in 
language production 
learning 
differences 
of young brains 
produce 
biased replication 
of language structures 
intergenerational 
adjustment of 
language structure 
to mature brains & 
pragmatic contexts 
Figure 4.1 Cartoon suggesting the possibility that languages must go through the ''fil­
ter" of children's reduced associative learning and short-term memory constraints 
in order to be passed on most effectively from one generation to the next with any 
degree of fidelity. Children selectively hear some structures and ignore other.s, and 
so provide a major selection force for language structure that is "child-friendly. " 
their design, it may ovly be because we are comparing them to inappropriate 
models and judging their design according to functional criteria that are less 
critical than we think. Instead of approximating an imaginary ideal of com­
municative power and efficiency, or following formulae derived from an al­
leged set of innate mental principles, language structures may simply reflect 
the selection pressures that have shaped their reproduction. 
In some ways it is helpful to imagine language as an independent life form 
that colonizes and parasitizes human brains, using them to reproduce. Ver­
sions of this idea have been independently proposed by many thinkers over 
Terrence W. Deacon > 111

the years. My own view is probably closest to that proposed in a recent paper 
by Morton Christiansen.3 The key ingredient that unites our approaches is 
the recognition of a co-evolutionary dynamic between language and its 
host. By imagining language as a parasitic organism, we can come to ap­
preciate the potential for conflicting reproductive interests, where some lan­
guage features might occur at the expense of the host's adaptations, and the 
possibility that many features may have more to do with getting passed on 
from generation to generation than with conveying information. 
Of course, languages are entirely dependent on humans, and are not sep­
arate physical organisms, replete with their own metabolic processes and 
reproductive systems. And yet their very different form obscures deep sim­
ilarities to living processes. They might better be compared to viruses. 
Viruses are not quite alive, and yet are intimately a part of the web of liv­
ing processes. Viruses are on the liminal border between the living and non­
living because they lack organs in any normal sense, including any vestige 
of metabolic or reproductive systems. They are minimally packaged strings 
of DNA or RNA that regularly happen to get themselves insinuated into 
cells that mistake them for their own nucleotides and haphazardly replicate 
them and transcribe their base sequences into proteins. Though relatively 
inanimate collections of macromolecules in and of themselves, the infor­
mation implicit in them nevertheless evolves and adapts with frightening 
efficiency, as recent epidemics so vividly illustrate. 
From this perspective it is not so far-fetched to think of languages a bit 
as we think of viruses, neglecting the difference in constructive versus de­
structive effects. Languages are inanimate artifacts, patterns of sounds and 
scribblings on clay or paper, that happen to get insinuated into the activi­
ties of human brains which replicate their parts, assemble them into sys­
tems, and pass them on. The fact that the replicated information that 
constitutes a language is not organized into an animate being in no way ex­
cludes it from being an integrated adaptive entity evolving with respect to 
human hosts. 
The parasitic model is almost certainly too extreme, for the relationship 
between language and people is symbiotic. There are many familiar exam­
ples of parasitic symbionts in nature. Two well-known examples are the mi­
croorganisms that colonize human and termite digestive systems. Both aid 
their host's digestive processes and neither parasite nor host could survive 
without each other. The endosymbiont in termites secretes an enzyme that 
helps break down cellulose, a trick no eukaryotic organism seems to have 
evolved on its own. Such useful parasites are not just passively replicated. 
Because of its critical importance to tem1ite life, termites have even evolved 
112 < The Symbolic Species

ways to ensure their symbiotic parasite's reproduction and passage into 
other hosts. When a growing termite molts and sheds its old exoskeleton, 
this infected shell is immediately eaten either by its owner or by other 
members of the colony, passing on copies of the parasite in the process. Sym­
biotic relationships naturally evolve to bring the reproduction of the two or­
ganisms into closer alignment, since this is the best way to insure the success 
of both. 
In the case of language and human beings, by analogy, we should not be 
surprised to find complex human adaptations to language on the one hand, 
whose purpose is to ensure that language is successfully replicated and 
passed from host to host, and language adaptations to children on the other, 
whose purpose is to make languages particularly "infective" as early as pos­
sible in human development. Modem humans need the language parasite 
in order to flourish and reproduce, just as much as it needs humans to re­
produce. Consequently, each has evolved with respect to the other. Each 
has become modified in response to the peculiar constraints and require­
ments of the other. The adaptation of the parasite to its hosts, particularly 
children, provides the basis for a theory of prescient language learning. 
Though this is a caricature, it is no less so than the nativist and empiricist 
alternatives, and it captures much more accurately the dynamic push and 
pull of biases that have shaped both languages and the human brain. 
Of course, the analogy with an organism treats language as far more au­
tonomous and individuated than is warranted, since any particular language 
is at most a fuzzy statistical entity and language as a whole is even less well 
defined. Yet there are a number of useful parallels. For example, the words 
and rules that constitute a language are not simply members of a collection, 
they are highly organized and interdependent as are the genes and organs 
of an organism. From a single individual's perspective, the analogy is even 
stronger. The logical structure of languages is replicated (acquired) and 
passed on as a complete system, not just a collection of words. Even though 
it may be learned word by word and phrase by phrase, what is acquired only 
becomes a langUage when the prescribed ways of using these words have 
been internalized to the point that one is theoretically capable of knowing 
how to phrase all thoughts for which words are available and able to de­
termine the grammaticality of any novel sentences of known words. Though 
children may take years to develop an extensive vocabulary, they quickly 
master the central core of rules, which will give all new words a predefined 
grammatical function. We might think of this self-sustaining core, consist­
ing of a grammar and syntax and a sufficient number of words to determine 
al critical word classes, as the completed organ system of an embryonic or-
Terrence W. Deacon > 113

ganism. Additional vocabulary items enlarge the whole, cause it to grow and 
mature, but do not alter its basic organization. 
Languages are abstractions. They are fuzzy collections of behaviors that 
happen to be reasonably well described by logical rule systems. And al­
though what one person knows about his native language may in some large 
measure be describable this way, what an entire population of English or 
Japanese speakers shares in common is only statistically clustered. Like most 
characteristics of biological species and social groups, the common language 
that links a social group might be described as a collection of similar but 
not identical languages. Like a species, then, the language of a whole soci­
ety is a natural reservoir of variation, with some features becoming less di­
verse and others becoming more diverse over time. 
Variation in language use points to the final and most relevant parallel: 
languages evolve. As a language is passed from generation to generation, 
the vocabulary and syntactic rules tend to get modified by transmission er­
rors, by the active creativity of its users, and by influences from other lan­
guages. Isolated language communities which begin with a common 
language will follow divergent patterns of spontaneous change. Eventually 
words, phraseology, and syntax will diverge so radically that people will find 
it impossible to mix elements of both without confusion. By analogy to bi­
ological evolution, different lineages of a common ancestral language will 
diverge so far from each other as to become reproductively incompatible. 
This immiscibility is reflected in the brains of fluent bilingual speakers, who 
tend to have different neural localization for the two languages they know. 
This is demonstrated by the fact that in such individuals stroke, electrical 
stimulation, and other neuropsychological disturbances can affect each lan­
guage independent of the other. The physical separation is almost certainly 
dictated by the fact that the two languages would otherwise compete for 
use of the same neural systems and so interfere with each other (see Chap­
ter 10). At the level of what an individual knows, a language is very much 
like one's own personal symbiotic organism. 
Similar analogies have been suggested as a way to describe the dynam­
ical interdependence between many biological and social evolutionary 
processes. Although evolutionary models are not new to the social sciences, 
and have an even longer history in linguistics than in biology, only recently 
have researchers begun to conceive of this relationship as though artifacts, 
techniques, customs, and even ideas and beliefs were separate organisms. 
This is more than just a metaphor. There is an important sense in which ar­
tifacts and social practices evolve in parallel with their living hosts, and are 
not just epiphenomena. They must be reproduced from one generation to 
114 < The Symbolic Species

the next and replicated as each new person learns them, copies them, em­
ulates them, or is forced to conform to them. But because of this there is a 
potential for innovations and errors like recombinations and mutations in 
biological evolution, that introduce new variety into the process over time. 
Biases can creep into the process and affect what does and does not get re­
produced, just as natural selection favors certain genetically specified traits. 
Those bits of copied cultural information (Richard Dawkins has dubbed 
them "memes" as a cultural analogue to genes) which happen to lead to an 
increased probability of being reproduced will persist longer, and spread 
over time to be used by more individuals, than those that don't potentiate 
their own reproduction. Sources of selection that determine what does and 
does not get passed to future generations not only include the utility of these 
memes and their consequences, but also the biases imposed by their mode 
of transmission (human minds) and the peculiarities of their cultural ecosys­
tems (systems of other memes). 
Language is a social phenomenon. To consider it in purely formal, psy­
chological, or neurobiological terms is to strip away its reason for being. So­
cial phenomena like language cannot be adequately explained without 
appealing to a social evolutionary dynamic as well as a biological one. The 
source of information that is used to "grow" a language lies neither in the 
corpus of texts and corrections presented to the child, nor in the child's brain 
to begin with. It is highly distributed across myriad interactions between 
children's learning and the evolution of a language community. 
The key to understanding language learnability does not lie in the richly 
social context of language training, nor in the incredibly prescient guesses 
of young language learners; rather, it lies in a process that seems otherwise 
far remote from the microcosm of toddlers and caretakers-language 
change. Although the rate of social evolutionary change in language struc­
ture appears unchanging compared to the time it takes a child to develop 
language abilities, this process is crucial to understanding how the child can 
learn a language that on the surface appears impossibly complex and poorly 
taught. The mech࡙nisms driving language change at the sociocultural level 
are also responsible for everyday language learning. 
Emerging Universals 
I believe that recognizing the capacity of languages to evolve and adapt 
with respect to human hosts is crucial to understanding another long­
standing mystery about language that theories of innate knowledge were 
developed to explain: the source of language universals. Grammatical uni-
Terrence W. Deacon > 115

versals exist, but I want to suggest that their existence does not imply that 
they are prefigured in the brain like frozen evolutionary accidents. In fact, 
I suspect that universal rules or implicit axioms of grammar aren't really 
stored or located anywhere, and in an important sense, they are not deter­
mined at all. Instead, I want to suggest the radical possibility that they have 
emerged spontaneously and independently in each evolving language, in re­
sponse to universal biases in the selection processes affecting language 
transmission. They are convergent features of language evolution in the 
same way that the dorsal fins of sharks, ichthyosaurs, and dolphins are in­
dependent convergent adaptations of aquatic species. Like their biological 
counterparts, these structural commonalities present in all languages have 
each arisen in response to the constraints imposed by a common adaptive 
context. Some of the sources of universal selection on the evolution oflan­
guage structures include immature learning biases, human mnemonic and 
perceptual biases, the constraints of human vocal articulation and hearing, 
and the requirements of symbolic reference, to name a few. Because of 
these incessant influences, languages independently come to resemble one 
another, not in detail, but in terms of certain general structural properties, 
and any disruption that undermines a language's fit with its hosts wil be se­
lected against, leading to reconvergence on universal patterns. The forces 
of selection should be most intense at the level of the logical structure of a 
language (grammar and sytax), because features at this level are most crit­
ical to its successful replication, but less intense converging forces should 
also influence features as apparently fluid and culture-specific as word ref­
erence and sound-meaning relationships. 
In fact, probably the best understood example of this co-evolutionary 
convergence process, though seldom recognized as such, is a case of con­
vergent word reference: the evolution of color terms in different languages 
and different societies. This is an ideal example because it combines the ap­
parently complete arbitrariness and idiosyncrasies associated with assign­
ing a name to a position on a qualitative continuum, on the one hand, with 
a well-understood human neurobiological universal, on the other. The as­
signment of color term reference is essentially unconstrained because: (a) 
the name of a color can be any combination of human vocal sounds; (b) the 
human eye can see every gradation of color between certain limits of wave­
length; and (c) people can assign any term to any point on the visible light 
spectrum. So any association between utterable sound and perceivable light 
frequency is possible, in principle. Surprisingly, in the real world's lan­
guages, the mappings of color terms to light frequencies are not only lim­
ited, they are essentially universal in many respects. In this regard, they are 
116 < The Symbolic Species

a lot like other language universals. But does this mean color terms are built 
into the brain as an intrinsically modular and categorical form? Or have all 
the color terms in the world derived by diffusion from a single parent lan­
guage? Though these answers are logically possible, the evidence does not 
support either. The answer is far more interesting and sheds important light 
on other language universals. 
Interest in this problem was sparked by the work of Brent Berlin and Paul 
Kay, who in a series of cross-cultural comparisons demonstrated an inter­
esting regularity in the presence or absence of terms for different colors in 
different societies.4 What they showed was a hierarchic sequence in the 
order in which color terms were included or not in different languages. In 
societies where they found the fewest terms for colors, there were at least 
three terms: the equivalents of black (dark), white (light), and red. In lan­
guages where there were only two color terms in addition to black and white, 
these always were red and green. In languages where there were three or 
four color terms, either yellow or blue or both were added. The pattern be­
came progressively less predictable as languages with more terms were 
considered, but in general, additional color terms were acquired in com­
plementary pairs fitting between prior color terms, with the "primary" col­
ors (e.g., red, green, blue) leading the pack (see Figure 4.2). Of course, the 
fewer the terms, the more broadly they are applied, so that societies lack­
ing a term for "blue" might refer to blue objects as "dark green." This, how­
ever, brings up an additional finding discovered subsequently by Elenor 
Rosch and her colleagues.5 The best physical exemplars of particular color 
terms, irrespective of how many are present in the language, are essentially 
the same when chosen from an arbitrary set of color samples. In other 
words, though the boundaries between one color and the next for which 
one has a term tend to be graded and fuzzy, i.e., not categorical, color terms 
do apparently have something like a category center; a best red or best 
green. Surprisingly, the best red and the best green, whatever the terms 
used, are essentially agreed upon by people from around the world. Though 
the words themsel࡚es are arbitrary and the colors continually grade into one 
another, words are not arbitrarily mapped to points on the color spectrum. 
They are universally constrained. 
To understand why this might be so, we need to consider two things: the 
way the brain transforms light frequency into the subjective experience of 
color, and the way this might influence the nongenetic evolution of color­
word/color-perception associations in a society. The important fact about 
color perception is that color is in a sense a feature that is created by the 
brain as a means of maximizing distinctive experiences of photons striking 
Terrence W. Deacon > 117

!! 1 00 
20 
color term foci in twenty lanpa1es 
.. 
® 
'! 
.. 
50 
• 
.. 
. E 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
400 
A 
1 00 
!! 
• 
.a 
.. 
.. 
50 
­ 
.. 
1§ 
.2 
400 
B 
En1lish coding of color 
500 
BOD 
Wavelength (nml 
after De Valois et al., 1 966 
c 
0 
1 0  
400 
color term introduction sequence in diferent societies 
white 
blue 
purple 
pink 
-
red 
green 
-
brown 
-
black 
yellow 
orange 
ǳflY 
.. 
, 
after Berlin and Kay, 1 969 
Figure 4.2 The factors underlying the evolution of near universality of color naming. 
Correspondences between neural and linguistic coding of color. (A) Response char­
acteristics of neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus (LGN), the 
first central nervous system relay for visual inputs, in response to diferent wave­
lengths of light. Different neurons respond preferentially to diferent wavelengths 
with essentially no overlap in response to opposite colors (e.g., red vs. green, blue 
vs. yellow). (B) When presented with color samples that span the visual spectrum 
and asked to rank them according to closeness to four primary colors, English speak­
ers also show nearly categorical separation of opposite colors and close correspon­
dence to neural response patterns. (C) Wavelengths of samples chosen by informants 
that "best" correspond with each of twenty languages' primary color terms. The ex­
emplars of these category centers for each primary color term map across languages, 
are categorically distinct from one another both across and between languages, and 
correspond with neural category centers. Their categorical distinctness is more pro­
nounced than is the neural distinction that underlies it. (D) Sequence from left to 
right in which languages tend to add new color terms. 
the cones of the retina in blended streams of different wavelengths. The 
neural computational logic of this enhancement process is called opponent 
processing because it pits the signals from each of the three different types 
of cones (photoreceptors in the retina with different wavelength sensitivi­
ties) against one another, to derive a difference signal. This second-order 
signal best corresponds with the color discriminations we actually see (which 
often do not correspond to specific matching frequencies of incoming light). 
118 < The Symbolic Species

It is this oppositional sampling process that determines color complemen­
tarity (i.e., that red is opposite green and yellow is opposite blue on a color 
wheel representing all the colors). 
It is also the source for biases that underlie the universality of color nam­
ing. Not that we see these colors as discrete, or even that we are biased only 
to name certain points on the spectrum (the advertising and paint indus­
tries have proven that thousands of color distinctions can be given individ­
ual names), but rather that this will bias the co-evolution of color names. 
The patterns of errors in use and transmission of color terms will be biased 
like a loaded die, so that over time the linguistic references will converge 
to match the neuropsychological foci of perceptual experience. It is a case 
of neurological bias acting as a relentless selective force in social evolution. 
To show how this biasing of language change might work, consider the 
thought experiment of coining a new name for the color of a specific ob­
ject, say the color of a kind of moss. Let's call this color "grue."6 Assume 
also that there is no color term other than red preexisting in the language. 
Since the moss is unlikely to be exactly the same green as is perceptually 
opposite to the category center for red, this new term will begin with a ref­
erence that is idiosyncratic and specific to that object. But it is unlikely to 
stay that way if it persists for very long in the language. This is because both 
the memory of the color of the moss and the ability to communicate exactly 
what color is meant by "grue," particularly in the absence of the original 
moss, are prone to error and imprecision. In the absence of any biases 
these errors would be random, and we would expect that over time the ref­
erence of grue would drift away at random from the original reference. But 
since the perceptual spectrum has high and low points, so to speak, the drift 
will not be entirely random. Errors in remembering and communicating the 
original reference of grue will tend to be biased toward the perceptually 
most salient and the pragmatically most contrasting opposite color to red: 
green. These errors in transmitting the precise color reference are the so­
cial and psycho!ogical analogues to mutations. The biases our brains intro­
duce in the way we remember and reproduce the reference are the 
analogues to natural selection favoring some variants, but not others. As a 
result, the reference will tend to evolve in adaptation to human nervous sys­
tems and to the pragmatic constraints of human uses. Grue will eventually 
evolve to refer to green if there is no term for green, or blue if there is, or 
to refer to the most salient intermediate if both already exist. 
In summary, the universality of color term reference is an expression of 
shared neurological biases, but-and this is a crucial point-the translation 
of this biological constraint into a social universal is brought about through 
Terrence W. Deacon > 119

the action of nongenetic evolutionary forces. In the absence of a social evo­
lution process, color term references would remain forever idiosyncratic to 
individual users and brief historical epochs in each society. The mediation 
of this relationship by evolutionary tendencies amplifies the effects of slight 
biases in much the same way as a statistical analysis amplifies our ability to 
identify small biases affecting large samples. Because both errors of indi­
cating exemplary objects and ambiguities of describing what is meant are 
biased in similar ways, they each amplify the other in tens of thousands of 
repeating sampling errors from generation to generation. 
In many ways, primary color term reference relationships are as invari­
ant and universal in character as is any aspect of the deep logic of human 
grammars, and yet it is clear that color terms themselves are not built into 
the brain, and that choice of what color to designate with a particular word 
is not dictated by any mental compulsion. What is universally built into the 
brain is a rather subtle set of perceptual biases that have none of the cate­
gorical and symbolic properties of words. Now, this may at first appear to 
be a comparatively trivial example of some minor aspect of language, but 
the implications for other aspects of language evolution are truly stagger­
ing. It demonstrates that even weak biases, if constantly and invariably pre­
sent, can produce social evolutionary consequences that appear so 
ubiquitous as to be considered completely determinate. Consider the sub­
tlety of the differences in perceptual salience of colors and how little con­
strained we are in assigning names to colors. Such slight biases in the 
introduction and retention of naming errors can hardly be a source of in­
tense selection pressures. Yet consider the effect: nearly universal consis­
tency of color reference. Phenomenologically, this qualifies as a true 
linguistic universal, even though it is neither a necessary design feature of 
language nor even an innate linguistic category. 
If tiny biases can produce near-universal language features, then imag­
ine what strong biases might do! How much more powerful might the se­
lection pressures be for some of the more limiting constraints on human 
attention, working memory, sound production, and automation of functions? 
The effects of such fundamental and universal cognitive boundary condi­
tions on the social selection of syntactic habits must be profound. And what 
about biases from our visual-manual-dominated primate heritage? Is it any 
wonder that so many descriptive and explanatory devices in languages 
throughout the world borrow heavily from visual and manipulative analo­
gies? Some have even suggested that these ubiquitous patterns of expres­
sion, such as using spatial metaphors to refer to semantic dimensions (e.g., 
"higher truth," "further developed," "distantly related") are the result of in-
120 < The Symbolic Species

nate cognitive concepts. 7 But once we recognize this evolutionary process 
as the primary source behind the universality of linguistic features, and 
abandon the assumption that to be universal a feature must be hard-wired 
into the brain, it becomes evident that we may have vastly underestimated 
the range and variety of language universals, or near universals. Benjamin 
Lee Whorf suggested that different languages might be so radically diver­
gent that many basic modes of thinking expressed in one might be found 
to be utterly untranslatable. I think, in contrast, we should not be surprised 
by the extent to which even high-level conceptual patterns oflinguistic rep­
resentation and discourse share near-universal features in most languages, 
simply because we are all members of the same species, sharing many com­
mon perceptual, behavioral, and emotional biases. 
Whether or not we can draw an exact parallel for all aspects of the uni­
versal features of grammars, it is clear that no matter which formal, cogni­
tive, or phonological universals of language we consider, they probably 
arose as a result of biases affecting nongenetic evolutionary processes oflan­
guage in a manner that is similar to the way that the designation of colors 
in different languages tends to converge on the same referents and multi­
ply color terms along parallel lines. There is nothing necessary or prede­
termined about such a process. It is just exceedingly unlikely that, even if 
introduced, any exceptions to these tendencies will survive for more than 
a very brief period of time. Language universals are, in this interpretation, 
only statistical universals, but supported by the astronomical statistics of mil­
lions of speakers over tens of thousands of years. They are, despite their al­
most epiphenomenal origin, for all practical purposes categorically 
universal. 
The theory that there are innate rules for grammar commits the fallacy 
of collapsing this irreducible social evolutionary process into a static formal 
structure. It not only ignores the effect of forces that could modify word 
formation and syntax over time, and of factors promoting converging or par­
allel trends, it also ignores the forces that stabilize language structure and 
are thus responsible for maintaining concordant use among contemporary 
individuals. All this is "given" without explanation if we assume universally 
fixed instructions for deriving language structures. My point is not that 
these instructions are located outside the child in the language community, 
but that there are no instructions (except in the imaginations of those who 
write texts on innate or "proper" grammar and syntax). A set of basic de­
sign rules or principles is simply superfluous. Once we accept the fact that 
the link from psychological universals to linguistic universals is exceedingly 
Terrence W. Deacon > 121

indirect at best, it becomes evident that the explanation for language struc­
ture will require that we broaden the search to include a wide variety of bi­
asing factors. Language structures at all levels are the products of powerful 
multilevel evolutionary processes, to which innate mental tendencies con­
tribute only one subtle source of the Darwinian selection biases. 
Thus, even if all the paradoxical problems posed by Universal Gram­
marians-the theoretical unleamability of grammars, the apparently mirac­
ulous acquisition abilities of children, and the universality of often illogical 
abstract rules of grammar and syntax-are real, we nevertheless do not need 
to tum to a theory of innate linguistic knowledge to explain them. They can 
be understood as the products of convergent social evolutionary trends, as 
spontaneous parallel adaptations of language structure to the unavoidable 
and ubiquitous limitations and biases provided by human brains, especially 
children's brains. Languages have adapted to human brains and human 
brains have adapted to languages, but the rate of language change is hun­
dreds or thousands of times more rapid than biological change. The un­
derlying architecture of all languages remains highly conserved across great 
distances in space and time, and despite modifications and corruptions re­
mains learnable, because the less learnable variants-less well adapted to 
human minds-are continually selected against. Even if the syntax of some 
natural language was once as "unhuman" as the syntax oflow-level computer 
languages, it would not have persisted long. Slow learning rates and high 
error rates during use would have slated it for rapid extinction or selected 
for variants in its structure that eased the burdens. Human children appear 
preadapted to guess the rules of syntax correctly, precisely because lan­
guages evolve so as to embody in their syntax the most frequently guessed 
patterns. The brain has co-evolved with respect to language, but languages 
have done most of the adapting. 
Better Learning Through Amnesia 
The paradoxical ease with which young children acquire their knowledge 
of language is not the only aspect of children's behavior that has seemed to 
offer support for the concept of a language instinct. An apparently equally 
compelling reason for an innate, highly specialized, and modular acquisi­
tion mechanism is that children seem to do a lot better than adults at ac­
quiring language. They appear to learn it in a very different way. In fact, 
even before Chomsky, researchers had suggested that there was a "critical 
period" for acquiring language. This concept has old roots. Sigmund Freud's 
theories of the formative influence of very early sexual and socialization ex-
122 < The Symbolic Species

periences on adult personality patterns and disorders have long provided a 
precedent for theories about the special nature of early experiences. Stu­
dents of natural animal behaviors (ethologists) have provided numerous ex­
amples of special learning patterns in very young animals. One of the 
founding fathers of the field, Konrad Lorenz, demonstrated, for example, 
that newly hatched geese exhibited a very specialized rapid learning of the 
features of their caretaker, whether goose or human. This was called "im­
printing," and after they imprinted on a caretaker shortly after hatching, the 
birds exhibited an intense emotional attachment and would stay as close to 
the imprinted animal, person, or object as possible at all times. A more rel­
evant example, discovered subsequently and still the subject of intense 
study, is the acquisition oflocal "dialects" ofbirdsong. Young songbirds learn 
the sound of their local variant of the species' song shortly after hatching, 
and appear to use this as a sort of perceptual "template" against which to 
compare and match their own singing when they finally begin singing at pu­
berty. Like imprinting, the acquisition of this perceptual exemplar of the 
local song occurs rapidly and during a specific brief stage of development. 
If no appropriate inputs are presented during this period in their lives, song­
birds lose the ability fully to supplement what was not acquired, and their 
later behavior is significantly affected. They are sensitive to a very restricted 
class of inputs during a critical period when their ability to learn those de­
tails is greatly amplified. For this reason it is often called "prepared learn­
ing" or even "superlearning." 
The similarities to how children acquire language are obvious. In the con­
text of otherwise poorly developed learning abilities, children show one glar­
ing, time-dependent, island of competence for learning language. The ages 
that children tend to pass through corresponding stages of pre-language and 
language development are remarkably similar from individual to individ­
ual, despite very different rearing contexts, and young children's acquisi­
tion of a second language tends to be more rapid and more complete than 
what most adults achieve. Children's perceptual responses to speech sounds 
appear to become "committed" to features that are present in their first lan­
guage by as early as the first year of life, and this tends to produce a per­
manent difficulty in distinguishing phonemes (individual sound elements 
of syllables) that they did not hear or produce during their childhood. Chil­
dren who for some reason were deprived of the opportunity to learn a lan­
guage when young, such as so-called feral or wild children raised in contexts 
with minimal human contact, appear to demonstrate considerable difficulty 
acquiring a normal language facility at older ages and tend to exhibit per­
manent language deficits. Finally, there have been numerous reports which 
Terrence W. Deacon > 123

demonstrate the difference in the effects of brain damage on the language 
abilities of younger versus adult patients. Even surgical removal of most of 
the left hemisphere, including regions that would later have become clas­
sic language areas of the brain, if done early in childhood, may not preclude 
reaching nearly normal levels of adult language comprehension and pro­
duction. In contrast, even very small localized lesions of the left hemi­
sphere language regions in older children and adults can produce massive 
and irrecoverable deficits. All these facts seem to provide powerful argu­
ments for the existence of a specialized language acquisition device (LAD) 
deployed during a critical period in children's development and later shut 
off. This seems like the obvious human counterpart to a songbird's instinct 
to sing a particular type of song and rapidly acquire information about how 
to modify it during a special window of opportunity in early development. 
However, the significance of these patterns may not be quite what it 
seems. We have seen how the grammatical and syntactic structures most 
commonly represented in languages may have been selected with respect 
to the constraint of children's brains. Could a parallel inversion of the clas­
sic interpretations of these patterns of children's development shed new 
light on this apparently critical period? A new clue to an alternative approach 
has again been provided by efforts to teach a languagelike communication 
system to chimpanzees. 
The most advanced symbolic capabilities demonstrated by any nonhu­
man species to date appear to have developed almost by accident in a very 
young chimp named Kanzi. 8 Kanzi, who is a bonobo or pygmy chimpanzee, 
as opposed to a common chimpanzee, joined the chimp language studies 
of Sue Savage-Rumbaugh and Duane Rumbaugh a few years after the stud­
ies involving the common chimps Sherman, Austin, and Lana summarized 
in Chapter 3. Kanzi developed the ability to communicate using the same 
visual lexigram system that Sherman and Austin were trained to use. But 
Kanzi has far outshined his predecessors. He is now capable not only of com­
municating symbolically with a lexigram keyboard but has also demon­
strated sophisticated comprehension of normal spoken English, including 
the ability to analyze a variety of grammatical constructions. For example, 
Kanzi has demonstrated nearly 90 percent correct responses to novel, prag­
matically anomalous, but syntactically correct requests to manipulate foods, 
object, or tools ("Put the soap on the apple"). This demonstrates that he is 
not merely using semantic analysis to guess at the meaning of the sen­
tences. He even appears to have spontaneously regularized lexigram com­
binations to produce a minimal but consistent syntactic order in his output. 9 
These abilities alone pose a significant challenge for theories which argue 
124 < The Symbolic Species

that language abilities are unattainable without some innate knowledge to 
jump-start the analysis of grammar. But this is not what I want to focus on 
and is not the most devastating challenge Kanzi offers to the nativist, Chom­
skyan perspective. Although we might suspect that Kanzi's more sophisti­
cated abilities are a result of continual improvements in training methods 
as the experimenters have become more savvy at training chimps, in fact, 
Kanzi's success cannot be attributed to experimental sophistication. Kanzi 
learned to understand speech and use lexigrams symbolically without ex­
plicit training. 
Kanzi was raised by a foster mother, Matata. It was Matata who was the 
subject of the experimenters' training efforts, while Kanzi was clinging to 
her and climbing on her during the process. In the end, Matata was a good 
foster mother but a very poor language learner. Kanzi, on the other hand, 
surprised everyone by demonstrating that all the while his mother was 
struggling in vain to figure out what these experimenters were on about, he 
was spontaneously, even vicariously, picking up on the game while playing 
and crawling about his mother and generally being more of a distraction 
than a participant. When the experimenters decided to tum their attention 
to him, at a point when they assumed he might now be old enough to be 
trainable, he showed them that he already knew most of what they were 
planning to teach him and more. The incidental student was far more adept 
than any previous chimpanzee at the language tasks explicitly posed to him 
for the first time, and he has continued to develop and use these abilities 
in the years since. So, whereas Sherman and Austin required very explicit 
and carefully structured training to overcome natural learning predisposi­
tions that worked against their discovery of the symbolic reference associ­
ations of the lexigrams they were taught, Kanzi avoided these cui-de-sacs 
and crossed the same cognitive threshold supported mostly by his own 
spontaneous structuring of the learning process. 
There are two possible interpretations of Kanzi's success. One is that it 
derives from a species (or subspecies) difference. Perhaps bonobos are just 
innately better at language-type tasks. Sue Savage-Rumbaugh has even 
suggested that bonobos in the wild might engage in spontaneous symbolic 
communication of a sort, though nothing quite so sophisticated and lan­
guagelike has yet been demonstrated. There is, however, a somewhat more 
conservative, easier to defend, and to my mind far more intriguing possi­
bility. Kanzi learned better simply because he was so immature at the time. 
This possibility is more intriguing because of its implications for human lan­
guage development and evolution. It forces us to tum our attention away 
from an essentialist perspective, focused on the contribution of something 
Terrence W. Deacon > 125

intrinsic to the species (i.e., an innate language competence or predisposi­
tion), and to pay attention to the relevance of maturational factors. IfKanzi 
benefited in symbol acquisition and in the development of speech com­
prehension as a result of his youth at the time of exposure, then he appears 
to exhibit a critical period effect, as though some special language-learning 
mechanism is activated at this time of life. 
It is not surprising that the other chimps who have been trained in lan­
guagelike communication were not quite so immature. Compared to human 
infants, chimps are relatively mature at birth, roughly equivalent to a human 
child of one year of age, so the comparable age of peak acquisition in chil­
dren would be just shortly after birth for a chimp. But like a human tod­
dler, young chimps need to be constantly in the care of their mothers (or a 
very good substitute). There is another pragmatic reason why slightly older 
chimps were preferred. Previously, chimpanzee infants have been found to 
be rather poor at learning to perform complicated tasks, and so were as­
sumed to be poor candidates for language training as well. Just like young 
children, they have poor memories for details, are extremely distractible and 
difficult to motivate, and they get bored easily. Of course, for children, this 
parallels an apparent advantage when it comes to language learning, and 
this seems to be the case for Kanzi as well. There are other ways in which 
Kanzi's abilities resemble the patterns that children exhibit and which are 
characteristic of what we would consider to be critical period effects. Sue 
Savage-Rumbaugh notes (in personal communication) that Kanzi seems to 
have a far better sense of what is and is not relevant to symbolic and lin­
guistic communication. He attends to the appropriate stimulus and context 
parameters whereas other chimps, trained at older ages, seem to need a lot 
of help just recognizing what to pay attention to. Like a child attuned to the 
phonemes of the local language, Kanzi's whole orientation seems to have 
been biased by this early experience. 
But observing an apparent critical period effect in Kanzi and then in­
ferring that some special language-learning mechanism is activated at this 
time oflife ignores a troubling contradiction. The glaring problem with this 
explanation as applied to Kanzi is that chimps in the wild do not learn a lan­
guage. So, there is no reason why Kanzi's brain should have evolved a 
language-specific critical period adaptation. If the critical period effect is 
evidence of a language acquisition device, then why should an ape whose 
ancestors never spoke (and who himself can't speak) demonstrate a critical 
period for language learning? Kanzi's example throws a monkey wrench into 
the whole critical period argument as it applies to language acquisition in 
children. If early exposure to language is even part of the explanation for 
126 < The Symbolic Species

Kanzi's comparatively exceptional language acquisition, then it must be at­
tributable to something about infancy in general, irrespective of language. 
And, if some nonspecific feature of immaturity accounts for Kanzi's re­
markable success, then it must at least in part also account for human chil­
dren's abilities as well. But how? 
In a famous paper produced shortly after Chomsky suggested that gram­
mars might be unlearnable, a linguist-philosopher named Gold tried to pro­
vide a more rigorous proof of Chomsky's argument. 10 He provided a logical 
proof which concluded that, without explicit error correction, the rules of 
a logical system with the structural complexity of a natural language gram­
mar could not be inductively discovered, even in theory. What makes them 
unlearnable, according to this argument, is not just their complexity but the 
fact that the rules are not directly mapped to the surface forms of sentences. 
They are instead embodied in widely distributed word relationships, and 
are applied to them recursively (i.e., rules are applied again and again to 
the results of their application). The result is that sentences exhibit hier­
archic syntactic structures, in which layers of transformations become 
buried and implicit in the final product, and in which structural relation­
ships between different levels can often produce word-sequence relation­
ships that violate relationships that are appropriate within levels. From the 
point of view of someone trying to analyze sentence structure (such as a 
linguist or a young language learner), this has the effect of geometrically 
multiplying the possible hypothetical rules that must be tested before dis­
covering the "correct" ones for the language. Without explicit error cor­
rection, an astronomical number of alternative mappings of word 
relationships to potential rules cannot be excluded, especially in the lim­
ited time that children appear to take to master their first language. Few 
contemporary theories rely on this argument alone to support claims of in­
nate grammatical knowledge, but it has provided one of the clearest for­
mulations of why natural language grammar should be exceedingly difficult 
to learn. 
A critical factur in this argument is the way that learning is understood. 
Learning is construed in its most generic sense as logical induction. An in­
duction process begins with a set of positive instances (a set of grammati­
cal sentences) and derives the general rules that produce them by 
comparing their similarities. The hypothesized rules are thus only con­
strained by the statistical relationships implicit in the input strings. 11 This 
logic has also been adapted to the language-learning problem in an in­
triguing discussion by the philosophers William Ramsey and Stephen Stich, 
who argue that even an empirical scientist with all the reasoning and analy-
Terrence W. Deacon > 127

sis tools of modem science would be unable inductively to determine the 
rules of a language by analyzing a finite set of grammatical utterances.12 The 
number of possible variants of rule systems that could be induced from this 
sampling of utterances, even under a variety of simplifYing conditions, 
makes it hopeless to test each in a limited time frame. They conclude that 
only by comparing against some independent and limited set of grammat­
ical rules (such as the scientist's own knowledge of Universal Grammar) 
would the scientist be able to succeed. But this logical problem may not 
quite match the pragmatic problem faced by real language learners. Gram­
matical rules allow one to predict which word combinations are and are not 
likely to convey unambiguous symbolic propositions in a language. To be 
able to do this is essential to successful communication. But inductively de­
riving grammatical rules isn't the only way to arrive at this competence with­
out relying on preformed hypotheses. Despite the statement that it applies 
to any empirical induction method, this way of posing the problem of what 
must be learned and how it may be learned is still overly restrictive. 
Learning is not one process, but the outcome of many. The efficiency 
with which one learns something depends in part on the match between 
the learning process and the structure of the patterns to be learned. What 
provides efficient learning in one situation may be very inefficient in an­
other. In the last chapter I argued that symbolic relationships themselves 
are difficult to learn because their structure violates expectations that are 
appropriate for more typical learning paradigms. Individual symbols are 
markers for points in a global pattern of relationships that are only quite in­
directly reflected by individual instances. Consequently, attending to the 
surface details can actually be a disadvantage. The problem is similar for 
learning the logic of grammar and syntax, in large measure because these 
facets oflanguage are also surface expressions of the deep web of symbolic 
relationships. 
Recently, researchers from a number of cognitive science labs have taken 
a novel approach to the language-leamability problem, by exploring our as­
sumptions about the kind of learning processes that are best suited for de­
veloping a skill as complex as using syntactically structured speech. The most 
fruitful approach to this seems to have come again from a somewhat coun­
terintuitive inversion of common sense thinking about learning. This ap­
proach is summed up by the phrase "less is more," suggested by Elissa 
Newport as a possible clue to an explanation of the paradoxical nature of 
child language learning. 13 Like the innate grammar theorists, she was struck 
by this savantlike ability to learn something that seemed on the surface to 
be far more difficult than other things that children are unable to learn. For 
128 < The Symbolic Species

example, the younger the child, the more difficulty he or she has with tasks 
that require conscious memorization of novel associations. Not only is mem­
ory consolidation itself apparently less efficient in younger compared to 
older children, but both their distractibility and the brief span of their work­
ing memory contribute additional handicaps to explicit learning. This is re­
flected by our common sense practice of keeping children out of school until 
they are at least four to six years of age, because they are just not ready for 
explicit classroom instruction. Rather than concluding that this paradoxical 
ability proved that learning couldn't account for children's language acqui­
sition ability, Newport wondered instead whether children's learning limi­
tations might actually be advantageous when it comes to language. 
In this regard, Newport's theory shares a similar logic to the language evo­
lution arguments sketched above. Just as constraints affecting the sorts of 
errors in transmitting and reproducing bits of language can powerfully 
shape the patterns of language structure, so can constraints and biases in 
learning shape what is and is not learnable. In designing a learning device 
capable oflearning the widest possible range of arbitrary associations, there 
might be an advantage in making it unbiased. But language is not just any 
system of association. As we have seen, its deep logic of associations, which 
derives from the indirect systemic logic of symbolic reference, is highly dis­
tributed and nonlocal, and the syntactic implementation of these relation­
ships tends to form complicated hierarchic patterns. Computer and 
cognitive scientists have both come to recognize that this sort of distributed 
pattern recognition problem is easily capable of defeating "brute force" 
learning approaches, and requires, instead, some special tricks to focus 
learning at the right level of analysis and avoid cul-de-sacs created by false 
leads. Starting small and simple, with a learning process incapable of tack­
ling the whole problem, might offer this sort of learning constraint. Fol­
lowing these clues, Newport and others have attempted to find independent 
support for the less-is-more intuition about language learning. 
In a series of efforts to model the effect of different learning biases on 
language learning: many researchers have turned to neural network simu­
lations. To understand these approaches, it is necessary to know at least su­
perficially the way that neural networks "learn," as well as a few details about 
the design of the specific type of neural network architectures that are 
most successful at language-learning simulations. Calling these model sys­
tems neural networks (neural nets, for short) is at best a very loose analogy. 
As the term implies, these computer models borrow some design features 
that we imagine to be crucial to information processes in brains. In fact, 
however, the vast majority of neural nets are programs that are "run" on the 
Terrence W. Deacon > 129

A 
e e e e  
output 
• • • •  
- 
. t 
i 
.M 
. ..... . .. i 
1
1
0
0
 
0
1
1
0 
l'-7 .t ti  
1 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
0 
before training 
after trainina 
Figure 4.3 The basic logic of neural network simulations. A neural network can be a 
real electronic circuit made of physical nodes and connections, or, more often, a com­
puter simulation of the behavior of such a device. A basic neural network consists 
of three "layers" of nodes (input, output, and hidden units) and the connections be­
tween them. 
A. In this diagram circles represent nodes, lines represent connections between 
nodes, and the thickness of the lines represents difering connection strengths. Input 
values on input nodes (ls and Os) cause them to send an "on" or "off' signal to all 
hidden unit nodes (nodes with no direct links to input or output) they are connected 
to, which affect the values on these units according to the strength of the connec­
tion. Training a network requires using output consequences to strengthen or weaken 
connections (shown by diferent thickness lines) between nodes in such a way that 
it correlates with success or failure to predict "correct" associations. 
B. In order to produce predictions of future sequences, a recurrent network de­
sign can be used which reenters previous values of the hidden units into subsequent 
stages of processing. This was the sort of network design used by Jeff Elman for a 
grammar-predicting network (see text). Elman's "simple recurrent net" design in­
cludes multiple levels of hidden units, as well as feedback of past hidden unit infor­
mation which provides a sort of "memory" input to modulate the immediate input. 
usual sorts oflarge, fast digital computers. It is the "virtual architecture" of 
the way these programs handle information that gives them their name and 
their interesting characteristics. 
Neural nets are composed of simple elements (nodes) that respond in 
simple ways (e.g., turning on or om to their inputs, and connections between 
nodes that convey signals indicating the states of other nodes (see Figure 
4.3). The nodes are the analogues of neurons and the connections are the 
analogues of the axons and dendrites through which neurons are linked. The 
operation of a neural net is determined by each node's "reading" the sig­
nals on its input connections from other nodes, and, using some very sim-
130 < The Symbolic Species

pie input-output transformation rule, producing a signal that is sent out 
through its output connections to other nodes. To create a network capa­
ble of interesting behaviors, a large number of nodes are connected to­
gether, often in semi-randomly specified and highly interconnected 
patterns. In addition, some nodes are connected to external input signals 
and others to external output registers. Those not connected directly to ei­
ther inputs or outputs are called "hidden units." The function of the net is 
determined by the global patterning of signals from output nodes with re­
spect to the patterns presented to input nodes. These input-pattern to 
output-pattern relationships are thus mediated via the patterning of signals 
distributed through the web of interconnections that link output to input 
nodes, by way of the intervening hidden nodes, and not by the state or ac­
tivity of any individual node. 
What makes the behavior of such nets interesting, and similar to their 
biological counterparts, is that they can be set up so that all connections be­
tween nodes can be modified with respect to their correlation to certain 
input-output patterns. If individual "connection strengths" can be adjusted 
to weaken or strengthen the effect of one node on another, the net's behavior 
can be progressively adapted to fit a given rule linking input patterns to out­
put patterns. This is the analogue to training and learning. There is an al­
most unlimited range of possible strategies for organizing and training nets. 
Al share the common logic of modifying the local connection with respect 
to some index of global behavior. Over the course of many trials with many 
inputs, the performance of a net can thus be trained to converge on a given 
target set of input-output relationships. The network becomes progres­
sively adapted to produce a given set of behaviors as a result of an incre­
mental and indirect selection of certain minimal design elements. 
Trained neural networks exhibit remarkable pattern recognition abilities, 
something that is difficult to program digital computers to do using top­
down approaches with step-by-step instructions for analysis. Networks 
trained to "categorize" one set of stimuli (i.e., respond similarly to them) 
wil often also produce this response when presented with novel stimuli sim­
ilar to those on which they were trained. In other words, they are capable 
of (susceptible of) something like stimulus generalization. This property is 
also reflected in their response to "damage." If one were to cut a handful 
of connections or pull a chip out of a digital computer at random, or even 
just insert nonsense strings into a program running on it (as periodically hap­
pens when disk information gets corrupted), the inevitable outcome is cat­
astrophic failure: a "crash," as computer vernacular describes it. In contrast, 
if a trained network is damaged by randomly eliminating nodes or connec-
Terrence W. Deacon > 131

tions, its behavior seldom fails in an ali-or-none fashion. Instead, the per­
formance of a damaged neural net degrades incrementally as the extent of 
the damage is increased. This, too, is reminiscent of the way neJVous sys­
tems appear to behave in response to damage, and demonstrates that the 
analogy is not entirely superficial. 
The essence of these behaviors lies in the way these nets distribute the 
information they embody within all parts of the whole. Such a global rep­
resentation of information has often been compared to a hologram (a laser­
light interference "photograph" that produces a three-dimensional image 
when viewed from different angles, examples of which can now be found 
on most credit cards). Holograms "contain" multiple views of a three­
dimensional image. Which perspective is visible depends on the angle at 
which the hologram is viewed. Even when only a fragment of the original 
remains, there is some angle at which it can be viewed to see the imaged 
object, though the smaller the fragment, the more limited the perspectives 
viewable.14 In a neural network, the relationship that maps input to output 
is decomposed into minute facets of the whole that are distributed through­
out the net and are literally embodied in its connectional logic. Since the 
input-output relationship is in effect computed by the whole network, it is 
called parallel distributed processing (PDP) of information. 
One of the pioneers in applying this approach to language learning prob­
lems is Jeff Elman of the University of California at San Diego.15 He and 
his colleagues used a modification of neural net design in order to create a 
net that was able to learn to predict sequentially presented patterns, not just 
categorize static ones. For this, his nets needed something analogous to 
short-term memory in order to represent the immediate past and future 
states to the present state of the net. He accomplished this using an archi­
tecture called a recurrent net, in which the past states of the hidden units 
were reentered as additional inputs to these same units at subsequent stages 
of processing. This allowed him to translate the syntax-learning problem into 
a predictive mapping of past sequences to future sequences of inputs. Given 
an incomplete series of inputs, the net would be required to predict which 
output should most likely follow; more specifically, given a partial sentence, 
it would predict which word should most likely follow according to English 
grammar and syntax. The inputs he fed into the net consisted of a corpus 
of simple sentences, in which different words were encoded as distinct 
strings of Os and ls (in other words, meanings were treated as irrelevant). 
The training consisted in comparing predicted next "words" with actual next 
words, and then modifying network connection strengths according to how 
each contributed to correct predictions. 
132 < The Symbolic Species

A fully trained net that could make correct predictions for novel sen­
tences (analogous to stimulus generalization) would necessarily embody as­
pects of the statistical structure of English grammar and syntax in its 
architecture, even though it would not contain any semantic information. IS 
If a net could be trained to do this as well as a person, it would indicate two 
things: ( 1) that the statistics of the relationships between grammatical classes 
of words in the training strings contained sufficient structure from which 
to recover grammatical regularities; and (2) that these regularities were 
learnable in some form without explicit (rule-based) error correction. 
Elman showed that recurrent nets were indeed capable of extrapolating 
what they learned from a set of kernel sentences used in training to novel 
kernel sentences composed of the same wordsP However, when trained 
with sentences that were only a bit more complicated, the recurrent nets 
failed to learn. As soon as recursive structures were introduced (e.g., em­
bedded clauses or structural transformations), which had the effect of sep­
arating and inverting simple contiguity relationships between words as 
found in kernel sentences, no amount of training seemed to converge to­
wards predictability. Up to this point, the experiment exemplified Gold's 
theorem. 
Elman realized that this problem was a variant of something commonly 
observed in other neural net experiments. Neural nets often tend to con­
verge on suboptimal solutions to complex mapping problems that provide 
only weak predictability, because they get attracted by local patterns that 
"obscure" more global ones. They can get stuck in suboptimal response 
"basins" (sort of like statistical potholes in the learning landscape) because 
training produces only incremental changes, which can only converge on a 
solution if closer approximations provide ever-increasing predictive accu­
racy. Learnability, then, depends on a certain match between the learning 
algorithm and the structure of the problem, so that optimal solutions are 
found in the "vicinity" of local solutions. Apparently, natural language syn­
tax and simple cQnditional learning processes don't match in this way. In­
deed, a variety oflearning problems show this same nonlocality feature, and 
thereby defeat many otherwise powerful learning paradigms. In general, 
solving them requires recoding the inputs in such a way as to reduce the 
distributed character of the associations.18 Preventing neural nets from get­
ting trapped in learning potholes can sometimes be accomplished by in­
troducing "noise" into the net to disrupt convergence toward weakly 
predictive states, and forcing a wider "sampling" of possible solutions, or 
else by introducing biases against features that are common only to subop­
timal solutions, if there are any. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 133

Elman employed both strategies to aid his nets in overcoming this diffi­
culty. First, he found that staged training, starting with an initial set of sim­
ple sentences followed later by training with sets of more complex 
sentences, could produce nets eventually able to predict complex syntax. 
The early restricted training essentially provided enough of a biased sam­
ple of within-clause relationships to minimize the training influence of ex­
ceptions produced by higher-order between-clause relationships. Second, 
he found that by randomly disrupting recurrent inputs (essentially degrad­
ing the short-term memory) during early training, then gradually decreas­
ing this "noise," the net could learn complex syntax from a corpus of complex 
sentences presented right from the beginning. At early stages of learning, 
the net would essentially be unable to retain a trace of local regularities long 
enough to produce any persistent changes in structure; but more global reg­
ularities of the input would be more redundantly represented throughout 
the net, and so would produce weak but consistent changes in structure. 
When the net eventually was made capable of retaining a trace of local as­
sociative relationships, it was already biased against incorporating infor­
mation from those that violated the large-scale statistics of word associations. 
Though Elman describes this pattern of learning as "starting smal," it is 
probably more accurate to describe it as "starting crude"; it is more like in­
terpreting a visual image by starting with a very blurred version of the 
whole and then progressively resolving individual details, than like trying 
to assemble many independent close-up views of the image at fine detail 
into a complete picture. Both of Elman's incremental learning strategies ef­
fectively partitioned the learning processes so that learning to predict pat­
terns at one level of structure was partially decoupled from learning to 
predict patterns at other levels. By structuring the learning process so that 
certain aspects of the problem could not be learned from the outset, he pre­
vented the learning of relationships that are employed at different levels of 
language structure from interfering with one another. 
This simulation thus demonstrated that it was possible to design a de­
vice that could learn to predict grammatically correct sentence structure in 
a purely inductive fashion, given nothing more than a corpus of positive ex­
amples of allowable texts-exactly what the UG theorists had said was im­
possible. The key to accomplishing what many had "proved" was impossible 
was to structure the learning process differently at different stages oflearn­
ing. What was available for learning at early stages was "filtered" (either by 
the training sequence or by the competence of the net), so that only some 
aspects of the input were available at any time. This set up learning biases 
that just happened to correspond with crucial structural features of the 
134 < The Symbolic Species

problem space. Although the information embodied in this incremental 
learning strategy was extrinsic to the language data presented to the net, it 
was far less explicit than a Universal Grammar, or indeed any specific gram­
matical information. There is no difficulty imagining how such generic con­
straints could happen to be available to support the learning of grammatical 
speech. Although critics might argue that such a simulation hardly demon­
strates the ability consistently to generalize this finite statistical "knowledge" 
of grammar to the theoretically infinite variety of possible grammatical sen­
tences that would be specifiable by a set of grammatical rules, and indeed 
that it doesn't demonstrate induction of rules of grammar at all, it does show 
how important the structure of the learning process is to what can and can­
not be learned. More important, it suggests that the structure oflanguage 
and the way that it must be learned are linked. What may be essentialy in­
accessible under quite general learning conditions may become more ac­
cessible under more limited conditions. 
This provides some novel clues about why children might be more facile 
language learners than adults and why early language experience might have 
aided Kanzi's access to language as well. Being unable to remember the de­
tails of specific word associations, being slow to map words to objects that 
tend to co-occur in the same context, remembering only the most global 
structure-function relationships of utterances, and finding it difficult to 
hold more than a few words of an utterance in short -term memory at a time 
may al be advantages for language learning. This is the proposal that Elman 
and Newport each offers to counter the strong nativist alternative. Precisely 
because of children's learning constraints, the relevant large-scale logic of 
language "pops out" of a background of other details too variable for them 
to follow, and paradoxically gives them a biased head start. Children can­
not tell the trees apart at first, but they can see the forest and eventually 
the patterns of growth within it emerge. 
The co-evolutionary argument that maps languages onto children's learn­
ing constraints caR be generalized one step further to connect to the most 
basic problem of language acquisition: decoding symbolic reference. Sym­
bolic associations are preeminent examples of highly distributed relation­
ships that are only very indirectly reflected in the correlative relationships 
between symbols and objects. As was demonstrated in the last chapter, this 
is because symbolic reference is indirect, based on a system of relationships 
among symbol tokens that recodes the referential regularities between their 
indexical links to objects. Symbols are easily utilized when the system-to­
system coding is known, because at least superficial analysis can be re­
duced to a simple mapping problem, but it is essentially impossible to 
Terrence W. Deacon > 135

discover the coding given only the regularities of word-object associations. 
As in other distributed pattern-learning problems, the problem in symbol 
learning is to avoid getting attracted to learning potholes-tricked into fo­
cusing on the probabilities of individual sign-object associations and thereby 
missing the nonlocal marginal probabilities of symbol-symbol regularities. 
Learning even a simple symbol system demands an approach that postpones 
commitment to the most immediately obvious associations until after some 
of the less obvious distributed relationships are acquired. Only by shifting 
attention away from the details of word-object relationships is one likely to 
notice the existence of superordinate patterns of combinatorial relationships 
between symbols, and only if these are sufficiently salient is one likely to 
recognize the buried logic of indirect correlations and shift from a direct 
indexical mnemonic strategy to an indirect symbolic one. 
In this way, symbol learning in general has many features that are simi­
lar to the problem ofleaming the complex and indirect statistical architec­
ture of syntax. This paralel is hardly a coincidence, because grammar and 
syntax inherit the constraints implicit in the logic of symbol-symbol rela­
tionships. These are not, in fact, separate learning problems, because sys­
tematic syntactic regularities are essential to ease the discovery of the 
combinatorial logic underlying symbols. The initial stages of the symbolic 
shift in mnemonic strategies almost certainly would be more counterintu­
itive for a quick learner, who learns the details easily, than for a somewhat 
impaired learner, who gets the big picture but seems to lose track of the 
details. In general, then, the initial shift to reliance on symbolic relation­
ships, especially in a species lacking other symbol-learning supports, would 
be most likely to succeed ifthe process could be shifted to as young an age 
as possible. The evolution of symbolic communication systems has there­
fore probably been under selection for early acquisition from the beginning 
of their appearance in hominid communication. So it is no surprise that the 
optimal time for beginning to discover grammatical and syntactic regular­
ities in language is also when symbolic reference is first discovered. How­
ever, the very advantages that immature brains enjoy in their ability to make 
the shift from indexical to symbolic referential strategies also limit the de­
tail and complexity of what can be learned. Learning the details becomes 
possible with a maturing brain, but one that is less spontaneously open to 
such "insights." This poses problems for brain-language co-evolution that 
will occupy much of the rest of the book in one form or other. How do sym­
bolic systems evolve structures that are both capable of being learned and 
yet capable of being highly complex? And how have human learning and 
136 < The Symbolic Species

language-use predispositions evolved to support these two apparently con­
trary demands? 
Elissa Newport was one of the first to suggest that we should not neces­
sarily think of children's learning proficiency in terms of the function of a 
special language-learning system. She suggests that the relationship might 
be reversed. Language structures may have preferentially adapted to chil­
dren's learning biases and limitations because languages that are more eas­
ily acquired at an early age will tend to replicate more rapidly and with 
greater fidelity from generation to generation than those that take more time 
or neurological maturity to be mastered. As anyone who has tried to learn 
a second language for the first time as an adult can attest, one's first lan­
guage tends to monopolize neural-cognitive resources in ways that make it 
more difficult for other languages to "move in" and ever be quite as effi­
cient. Consequently, strong social selection forces will act on language reg­
ularities to reduce the age at which they can begin to be learned. Under 
constant selection pressure to be acquirable at ever earlier and earlier stages 
in development, the world's surviving languages have all evolved to be 
learnable at the earliest age possible. Languages may thus be more diffi­
cult to learn later in life only because they evolved to be easier to learn when 
immature. The critical period for language learning may not be critical or 
time limited at all, but a mere "spandrel,"19 or incidental feature of matu­
ration, that just happened to be coopted in languages' race to colonize ever 
younger brains. 
So immaturity itself may provide part of the answer to the paradoxical 
time-limited advantage for language learning that Kanzi demonstrates. 
Kanzi's immaturity made it easier to make the shift from indexical to sym­
bolic reference and to learn at least the global grammatical logic hidden be­
hind the surface structure of spoken English. But equally important is the 
fact that both the lexigram training paradigms used with his mother and the 
structure of English syntax itself had evolved in response to the difficulties 
this imposes, anq so had spontaneously become more conducive to the 
learning patterns of immature minds. The implications of Kanzi's advantages 
are relevant to human language acquisition as well, because if his prodigious 
abilities are not the result of engaging some special time-limited language 
acquisition module in his nonhuman brain, then such a critical period mech­
anism is unlikely to provide the explanation for the language prescience of 
human children either. The existence of a critical period for language learn­
ing is instead the expression of the advantageous limitations of an imma­
ture nervous system for the kind of learning problem that language poses. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 137

And language poses the problem this way because it has specifically evolved 
to take advantage of what immaturity provides naturally. Nat being exposed 
to language while young deprives one of these learning advantages and 
makes both symbolic and syntactic learning far more difficult. Though older 
animals and children may be more cooperative, more attentive, have bet­
ter memories, and in general may be better learners of many things than 
are toddlers, they gain these advantages at the expense of symbolic and syn­
tactic learning predispositions. This is demonstrated by many celebrated 
"feral" children who, over the years, have been discovered after they grew 
up isolated from normal human discourse. Their persistent language limi­
tations attest not to the turning off of a special language instinct but to the 
waning of a nonspecific language-learning bias. 
This may also be responsible for another curiously biased language phe­
nomenon that linguists have taken as evidence for innate knowledge oflan­
guage structure: the transition from pidgin languages to creole languages. 
Pidgins are forced hybrids of languages that have arisen in response to the 
"collision" oflanguages, typically arising as a result of colonization or trade 
relationships. They are not the primary language of anyone and often have 
enjoyed a very transient history, typically disappearing within a generation 
or so. They are like makeshift collections of language fragments from both 
languages that are used as a common translation bridge that is mutually un­
derstandable. But during recorded history, a number of populations have 
also evolved new languages directly from pidgins, which differ from either 
"parent" language. Such "creole" languages appear to be able to originate 
quite rapidly-within as little as one or two generations-especially when 
a population finds itself transported and isolated in a new context, such as 
periodically occurred as a result of the slave trade of the past few centuries. 
What is even more remarkable, according to the linguist Derek Bickerton, 
is that the syntactic structures of different creole languages often appear to 
be more similar to one another than to the languages that spawned them, 
despite being isolated in different parts of the world.20 For example, they 
all tend to be minimally inflected, use particles to replace tense markers, 
use repetition in place of adjectives and adverbs, and have restricted word 
order. 
Historically, linguists dismissed such similarities as a result of compar­
ing simplified languages, like comparing the syntax of newspaper headlines, 
or as a result of coincidental similarities between the languages involved, 
or just coincidences resulting from the limited numbers of major syntactic 
alternatives available. But most contemporary comparative linguists have 
come to recognize that the coincidences are real and too numerous to be 
138 < The Symbolic Species

explained by spontaneous parallelisms. This has suggested to some that 
these similarities are evidence for a single historical origin (possibly from 
the early Mediten-anean pidgin, Sabir, carried by the first Portuguese ex­
plorers). This explanation seems no less incredible to other linguists, how­
ever, because of the separate eras and great distances involved, the lack of 
Portuguese contact in many cases, and the fact that the local pidgins and 
creoles exhibit specific roots directly traceable to the colonial English, 
French, Spanish, Portuguese, etc., spoken by colonists in these areas. More­
over, pidgins and creoles that have developed without European influence 
also appear to share these features.21 In response to the implausibility of 
both alternatives, Bickerton interprets such similarities as evidence for an 
innate grammatical template reasserting itself in each case. But I think 
there is an intermediate alternative suggested by the co-evolutionary ap­
proach, which parallels Bickerton's approach in the same way that the co­
evolutionary theory of child language acquisition parallels the UG approach. 
Creolization occurs when children are exposed to a pidgin as their first 
and only language and so reflects the ways that these young minds reinter­
pret a partial symbolic system as though it were complete. In this regard, I 
follow Bickerton in suggesting that the similarities between creoles reflect 
how children spontaneously fill in what is missing and recategorize what is 
given. As such, these similarities provide a special opportunity to view the 
distorted mirror through which children view language, and so offer an in­
sight into what children normally bring to the problem. Instead of reflect­
ing a built-in knowledge of grammar, however, I think the similarities 
between create generic learning constraints that nonetheless strongly bias 
what is learned and what is spontaneously "invented." 
Given children's constrained learning abilities, which force them to em­
ploy a top-down global-to-specific reconstruction of the language presented 
to them, they are initially forced to ignore many details present in the input 
in their effort to decode the basis of its symbolic reference-the first and 
most basic demllnd they face. This may help to explain certain biased 
choices that seem to be consistently made in creolization, as well as in nor­
mal language development. For example, early recognition of global rep­
resentational relationships, necessary to discover the symbolic reference of 
words and phrases, and an inability to track local word-association patterns, 
lead young children to initially treat many phrases as unanalyzed wholes or 
else to ignore all but the most salient elements relevant to their symbolic 
analysis of meaning and reference. Normally, subsequent maturation of 
learning abilities enables children to later pick up the word-association pat­
terns buried within phrases that previously escaped their notice, and this 
Terrence W. Deacon > 139

forces a recoding with respect to within-phrase structure. This is con­
strained, however, by their previous symbolic commitment to global phrase 
relationships, and biases them to seek out subordinate symbolic functions 
for these later combinatorial patterns. This may be the bias that favors the 
hierarchic phrase structure reflected in both acquisition and evolution of 
languages. So, how might this also help to explain commonalities in cre­
olization? The constraints of the acquisition process are similar irrespective 
of whether the input is a full-blown language or a pidgin, except that in the 
latter case there will be insufficient variety of phrase structures to force 
within-phrase dissection of elements. As a result, whole phrase units may 
become crystallized as wordlike units, modifiers will be minimally dissected 
from phrases, and the lack of grammatical morphemes that ensues will 
tend to be compensated by syntactic operations instead. These limitations 
would naturally lead to a minimally inflected, constrained word-order lan­
guage, as is characteristic of most creoles and well-developed pidgins. So 
we have come full circle. Not only does it appear that languages have 
evolved to take advantage of the learning biases of children, but to what­
ever extent prior language input is impoverished, it appears that these 
learning biases tend to reshape language to fit. Universal (i.e., convergent) 
trends emerge either way in the absence of a specific preexisting plan, 
whether in the input or in the mind. 
This strategy of employing learning handicaps as a means of overcom­
ing certain learning difficulties also has considerable generality beyond 
symbols, grammar, and syntax. It may, for example, offer an insight into the 
remarkable sparing of certain special learning abilities exhibited by so­
called idiot savants. Individuals who may be mentally handicapped in other 
ways sometimes show geniuslike abilities in very restricted domains of cog­
nition-often quite specific "talents," such as lightning calculation abilities, 
prodigious musical talent, or artistic-spatial skills. This has led some to 
speculate that these individuals possess some special modular "organ" or 
"instinct" for such talents. Brains have evolved to be able to employ many 
different learning strategies at different times and in different circum­
stances and these strategies are often competitive with one another in their 
recruitment of neural resources. This is why a severe impairment affecting 
one learning strategy can inadvertently provide a release of resources to 
some other complementary, or mutually exclusive, learning strategy. 
In summary, I have argued that the underlying source of each of the ap­
parent paradoxes oflanguage learning is a misleading assumption that learn­
ing is a one-dimensional process, in which a collection of individual 
memories is built up bit by bit, like adding items to a list, and in which gen-
140 < The Symbolic Species

eral rules can only be derived by inductive generalizations from a finite set 
of instances. This blinkered view of learning has limited both our under­
standing of the nature of symbolic reference and our analysis of how chil­
dren acquire competence in producing a symbolic system that is structured 
like a hierarchic rule-governed logical system. Both what is learned and the 
context in which something is learned may have characteristic invariant fea­
tures that can be incorporated into learning strategies to increase the com­
patibility between the learning and the learned. Specific learning handicaps 
are examples from this more general class of learning biases. Biases affect­
ing how often and when different learning strategies are employed or with­
held can radically change what can be learned and how easy or difficult it 
is to learn it. 
Immaturity of the brain is a learning handicap that greatly aids language 
acquisition. Despite its counterintuitive symbolic basis, however, immatu­
rity is not the whole explanation for the human language capacity. It is only, 
in a way, an evolutionary afterthought that has arisen as languages have 
adapted to take advantage of their host organisms' natural biases. The sim­
ple fact that other species experience nearly insurmountable difficulties with 
even simple language learning, and even when immature, demonstrates that 
significant modifications of the human brain during our evolution addi­
tionally enable us to overcome these same difficulties. One might be 
tempted to cal such neural predispositions a "language instinct," as Steven 
Pinker suggests, because these predispositions are both innate and univer­
sal, and because they determine that we alone find linguistic communica­
tion natural. But this tends to be interpreted in terms of a false dichotomy 
that has deeply confused research into the basis for language. It is mis­
leading to imagine that what is innate in our language abilities is anything 
like foreknowledge of language or its structures. Rather than a language 
organ or some instinctual grammatical knowledge, what sets human beings 
apart is an innate bias for learning in a way that minimizes the cognitive in­
terference that ,other species encounter when attempting to discover the 
logic behind symbolic reference-a bias that is far more intense and ubiq­
uitous than mere immaturity. 
Thinking of our mental difference in these terms provides a crucial clue 
to the mystery of human brain evolution. Just as incomplete differentiation 
of neural circuitry can be responsible for the helpful learning biases of 
young children, and congenital brain abnormalities are likely responsible 
for the learning biases of idiot savants, differences in the global organiza­
tion of human brains are likewise responsible for the more extensive learn­
ing biases that help human children alone among species surmount the 
Terrence W. Deacon > 141

symbolic threshold and learn an immensely complex language. So instead 
oflooking for neural language modules, or postulating some global increase 
in general learning abilities, we need to begin to think of human brain evo­
lution in terms of changes that could have produced certain biases in how 
we tend to learn. But the relevant biases must be unlike those of any other 
species, and exaggerated in peculiar ways, given the unusual nature of sym­
bolic learning. Such unprecedented differences in human brain function 
must be supported by equally unprecedented differences in human brain 
structure. Discovering how these two radical departures from the general 
pattern correspond to one another will likely provide important insights con­
cerning the design principles behind global brain functions. 
142 < The Symbolic Species

P 
A 
R 
T 
T 
W 
0 


C 
H 
A 
P 
T 
E 
R 
F 
V 
E 
The Size of Intelligence 
When an idea is wanting, a word can always be found to take its 
place. 
-Goethe 
A Gross Misunderstanding 
H 
aving identified a previously unrecognized cognitive problem that is 
the cause of the language-learning barrier, we can now tum our at­
tention back to the mystery of human evolution charged with a new 
aim: to determine what happened to human brains to make it possible for 
our ancestors to break through this barrier. If the symbol-learning problem 
is the threshold that separates us from other species, then there must be 
something unusual about human brains that helps to surmount it. This one­
of-a-kind difference ought to be readily apparent, but only if we know what 
to look for. Part of the problem is that something else which appears more 
obviously relevant has captured our attention, and like the too obviously 
145

guilty suspect in a murder mystery, this one fact about human brains is the 
perfect distraction causing us to miss the pattern of more subtle clues. 
Despite the glaring fact that the relationships between brain structure 
and brain function are still poorly understood, many feel that the explana­
tion for the exceptional nature of human mental abilities is known-in fact, 
that it has been known for a century! The answer can be found in almost 
every textbook on human origins and in most popular books and magazine 
articles about the mind and brain. According to these sources, it is a well­
established fact that the human brain is a better, more powerful comput­
ing device than any other species' brain because it is proportionately bigger 
and can process and retain more information. As a result of this greater men­
tal capacity, humans can build more sophisticated mental models of the 
world, solve more complicated social and survival problems, and learn to 
communicate with more complicated signal systems (e.g., language). The 
idea that human beings' encephalization-the extent to which we have 
large brains for a primate our size-is so much a part of our culture that it 
has essentially achieved the status of unquestioned fact. It has become syn­
onymous with the definition of what it means to have humanlike mental abil­
ities to the extent that even science fiction caricatures of "advanced" alien 
species are portrayed with oversize brains. 
The accepted view can be reduced to a simple phrase: "Bigger is smarter." 
Well, almost. Researchers do not all agree on how best to measure the ef 
fective size increase-whether absolute size or some measure of relative size 
is most relevant (a problem we will return to shortly)-but there is broad 
agreement that some measure of human brain expansion will be found to 
be the primary correlate of our increased mental abilities. All that seems 
left to determine is exactly how the increase in the one translates into in­
crease in the other. Most researchers believe that they know what the an­
swer should be; it's just that they are not quite sure how to derive it from 
the evidence. 
Though there is undoubtedly some correspondence between the size of 
a brain and its capabilities, I suspect that it is far less obvious than we tend 
to imagine. There are two critical errors hidden in these flattering assump­
tions. First is the notion that either brain size or intelligence can be usefully 
treated as a unitary linear trait, and second that the relative quantity ofbrain 
tissue compared to nonbrain tissue in the body somehow correlates with 
something like the relative amount of uncommitted computational power. 
Together, these presumptions have blinded us to innumerable other features 
of brain evolution and differences in brain function related to issues of 
146 < The Symbolic Species

scale. An understanding of the relationship between human brain size and 
language abilities has been one of the major casualties. 
The presumed relationship between brain size and intelligence is an in­
tuitively compelling idea. It has produced a century of ideologically moti­
vated studies of the relationship to genius and criminality, ignited 
acrimonious debates about how best to measure these variables, and gen­
erated hundreds of papers examining the potential behavioral and ecolog­
ical correlates of brain size from every conceivable aspect. Still, after more 
than a century of rethinking the possibilities, theories about the function of 
brain size remain in a state of continuous flux. This is not because we 
haven't yet discovered what intelligence is good for. Everyone agrees that 
more intelligence should be good for any number of things, and almost every 
conceivable use for more intelligence has been suggested in some theory 
to explain why human brains are large. But that's just the trouble. With such 
a vague and general answer already assumed, it is hard to phrase the re­
search question clearly enough to be able to rule out spurious correlations. 
What if brain size is not a single trait, but a reflection of many possible com­
plex internal changes in brain organization, each of which has quite differ­
ent functional consequences? And what if mental functions reflect a delicate 
balance of many complementary and competing learning, perceiving, and 
behavioral biases, not just a single "capacity"? 
Indeed, we shouldn't be surprised to find out that nature has not been 
straightforward in its design of brains. The brain is by far the most complex 
organ of the body, and one whose outward appearance provides little hint 
of its functional organization. Brains don't do only one thing, and different 
brain functions are not uniformly distributed throughout the brain. If 
human brain size is a complex trait, enfolding numerous deeper changes in 
brain structure and function, then al the correlative studies looking for what 
might have caused brains to grow may be pointless mathematical exercises, 
and the differences in neural architecture that make the difference in 
human cognitive, abilities will continue to elude us. We can't afford to as­
sume that the human brain is just bigger, and put all our efforts toward dis­
covering what selected for its size. We need to look deeper. 
My own perspective has also been well stated by Ralph Holloway of Co­
lumbia University, one of the pioneering figures in the analysis of fossil ho­
minid brain casts. He wonders in dismay at the forest of comparative brain 
size studies that seem oblivious to the likely possibility that neither intelli­
gence nor brain size is a simple trait. How can we imagine, he asks, that the 
brain is some "unitary organ with a simple behavioral task to accomplish 
Terrence W. Deacon > 147

such as 'intelligence,' 'language,' 'adaptive behavior,' or any other such ped­
agogical fig leaf to cover our ignorance about how the brain evolved?"1 If a 
unique function (language), global assessment of function capacity (intel­
ligence), and the crudest possible measure ofbrain structure (size) have any­
thing to do with each other, it will probably be discovered in the 
neurobiological details and not in global extrapolations from these most su­
perficial features. 
In the preceding chapters we encountered a series of paradoxical results 
suggesting that the language-learning problem is not just difficult, it is 
counterintuitive, in the deepest sense of that word. Both the hierarchic­
recursive logic of sentence structure and the distributed multilevel asso­
ciative relationships that support symbolic reference are essentially 
unlearnable by "brute force" information-processing approaches. This ex­
plains why even simple languages are nearly impossible for nonhuman 
brains to learn-not because of other species' limited learning abilities, but 
because their intrinsic learning biases undermine the process before it can 
even get started. The point was driven home by the fact that the learning 
handicaps of immature brains may actually be beneficial for some aspects 
oflanguage learning. But these odd results do not fit easily into a bigger-is­
smarter interpretation of the crucial human mental difference. Evolving a 
more powerful learning device is not the solution to the language-learning 
problem. This suggests that some critical distinctions may have been missed 
by assessing the evolution of human intelligence in global terms. 
And yet there is no escaping the fact that human brains are unusually 
large, in both absolute and relative terms. Any story about human brain evo­
lution that does not incorporate this fact ignores a major clue to the mys­
tery of the human difference. The question is not whether brain size is an 
important correlate of human brain evolution. It is. It is not whether our 
unusually large brains and the differences in our cognitive abilities are 
somehow linked. They undoubtedly are. The question is: What other 
changes in brain organization correlate with this global change in brain size, 
and what are their functional consequences? We can be certain that some­
thing having to do with the sizes of brain structures is central to the origins 
of the human mind, but what? To answer this, we need to get some gen­
eral idea of how quantitative changes affect brain functions. 
There are two aspects of the size question that need to be addressed. 
First, exactly how is this change in size distributed within the human brain? 
Is it global, like enlarging a photograph; is it an extrapolation from a more 
complicated trend exhibited in many other species as well; does it only in­
clude certain limited parts of the brain? Determining which of these op-
148 < The Symbolic Species

tions is the case is more difficult than one might suspect. Second, what are 
the possible ways that differences in the size of the brain or its parts can in­
fluence its functions? For this we have little more than crude analogies to 
go on. Few neuroscientists have seriously investigated this question, except 
in the most general way. There are many dimensions of size-correlated ef­
fects that we might need to consider before we determine that we under­
stand the significance of the human example. Larger brain structures may 
mean more storage capacity or discriminatory ability, but they may also 
mean changes in rate of processing, changes in relative excitatory or in­
hibitory influence over other linked systems, or a difference in intrinsic sig­
nal production tendencies (like longer periodicity of cyclic activities). How 
can we be sure we know which is most relevant? But there is an even more 
basic problem: size is not so simple as it appears. The question is always 
"large or small with respect to what?" 
As large-brained apes on the top rung of the ladder of biological progress 
and perfectibility-or so we like to think-we habitually rank people's men­
tal abilities for various purposes, in work, school, and casual conversations. 
We naturally feel comfortable ranking other species this way as well. As­
sessing intelligence has become a widely used tool for deciding who should 
and should not be able to do all manner of things, from play quarterback 
to enter medical school. We assume that we all have a certain amount of 
intelligence, like height, and that it can be measured and compared from 
person to person. Since intelligence seems to change little if at all over one's 
lifetime, we assume that it has a fixed value determined very early in life. 
We have devised tests to measure this computational power, IQ tests, and 
we encourage the gatekeepers in our society-school administrators and 
employers, among others-to wield them freely. We cannot begin to mea­
sure what we gain and lose thereby, just as we cannot isolate exactly what 
intelligence is. But the comparatively large size of human brains seems to 
provide a satisfying confirmation that the amount of mental ability one has 
is related to thࡒ amount of tissue one devotes to producing it. 
Assessing the human brain size difference is not just a matter of com­
paring weights, volumes, or even neuron numbers. The question is, what 
do we want to know about this difference? Just size? Our brains are not the 
biggest, nor do they have the most neurons or connections. Elephants and 
whales are vying for that honor. We do have large brains for our bodies, but 
in simple ratio terms mice are more brainy. Exactly how most usefully to 
assess brain size is not obvious, and it turns out that the same problems sur­
face in this analysis whether we are considering the brain as a whole or the 
sizes of its parts. Perhaps we can gain a clearer idea of the problem by con-
Terrence W. Deacon > 149

sidering some less complex organ system as an analogy. A good candidate 
is body musculature. 
Larger muscles are capable of generating more force, a larger heart is 
capable of pumping more blood per minute, and a larger gland is able to 
synthesize more hormone in a given period of time. By analogy, a larger 
brain should be capable of greater computing power, of processing more 
information per second, and of producing more complex mental represen­
tations and communications than smaller brains. If the brain secreted 
thought as a gland secretes hormones, then this might make sense, but it 
doesn't. There are some ways in which such quantitative analogies can help 
make sense of differences in brain functions, but also many ways in which 
they can be misleading. 
Even though a large animal with greater total muscle mass can exert more 
force with its limbs than a smaller one, it may not be able to jump propor­
tionately higher or run proportionately faster as a result. Larger bodies 
need more muscle mass to move them with the same facility as smaler ones. 
This is essentially the difference between gross strength and net strength. 
Gross strength probably correlates well with total muscle mass, but net 
strength depends on many other factors. The amount of weight one can lift 
is a fair predictor of gross muscle mass. Larger bodies with larger muscle 
mass can lift heavier weights. Certain athletic performances and exercises­
the standing broad jump, pull-ups, and push-ups, for example-provide in­
dices of net strength of certain muscles with respect to body mass as a whole. 
The number of sit-ups or pull-ups one can perform does not favor large over 
small individuals, but rather those whose abdominal or arm muscles, re­
spectively, are most developed in comparison to the rest of their bodies. 
This emphasizes one crucial difference between gross and net strength. 
There is only one measure of gross strength, but there are innumerable dif­
ferent measures of net strength, even for a single individual. This is because 
net strength is a comparison of part to whole. Any particular measure of net 
strength depends entirely on what part is being compared to the whole. 
Having greater net leg strength for body mass might produce a longer long 
jump, while having greater arm strength might produce a greater number 
of pull-ups. But these two net results are to some extent mutually exclusive. 
Increasing the one decreases the other. And even though by combining re­
sults from a large number of diverse physical tests, one might be able to ar­
rive at a single value with which to compare individual athletes (which 
might provide an assessment of muscle to fat content), it would miss most 
of the relevant and interesting aspects of net strength and would have only 
modest predictive power for sports abilities. 
150 < The Symbolic Species

Analogous arguments apply to size-function relationships of the brain. 
The amount of brain tissue an animal posesses is probably proportional to 
something like gross information storage and processing capacity, but as­
sessing net brain power is far more problematic, and there may be no one 
best measure. Psychologists have long argued over this implicit problem 
with respect to intelligence tests. But the problem reappears in only slightly 
modified form for brain size issues or brain structure size comparisons. 
Something about human brain size almost certainly is the clue to the human 
cognitive difference, so to solve this mystery we must first sort out this 
gross/net problem, even if in the end we conclude that, like muscle strength, 
there is no single answer possible. 
Whether gross or net strength is important depends on the context. 
Often both are important in different aspects of an activity and both may 
interact to determine performance in complicated ways. For most behav­
ioral purposes net strength is probably more significant than gross strength, 
since it correlates with locomotor capabilities and postural support. Nev­
ertheless, there will be some adaptations for which gross strength will be 
far more important. It is crucial for certain kinds of foraging where some 
threshold amount of force is necessary to gain access to food. Some nuts 
and seeds, for example, are protected by strong shells; only species with jaw 
muscles of sufficient gross strength (and appropriate teeth) will be capable 
of cracking them. Physical combat can also select for increasing gross 
strength with respect to net strength. Highly sexually dimorphic species, in 
which (typically) males physically compete with one another for territories 
or mates, are good examples. The more intense the physical combat, the 
greater the disparity in physical size between males and females. Selection 
for greater gross strength can be achieved by increased total size, if the costs 
in net strength are ofless importance. So extending this analogy to the prob­
lem of brain size, we first need to understand the difference between gross 
and net information processing. 
The idea thࡓt natural selection is driven by use or disuse of an organ has 
a long and influential history in evolutionary thinking. Nineteenth-century 
evolutionists took it for granted that habitual use of an organ, over many 
generations, could bring about evolution to develop and enlarge it, and that 
organs that were not used would eventually become reduced or vestigial. 
The presumed correlation of use with the evolutionary enlargement or re­
duction of organs is, even now, seldom questioned. Large size means more 
used; small size means less used. Obvious examples spring to mind in the 
shapes of animal bodies. A kangaroo's large hind limbs reflect selection for 
their specialized form of locomotion, whereas its small forelimbs reflect 
Terrence W. Deacon > 151

their evolutionary disuse as a means of support. The analogy between the 
effects of exercise on muscle size during the lifetime and during evolutionary 
time appears to be straightforward. Indeed, natural selection theory bor­
rowed this conception of use and disuse from Lamarckian theories, based 
on the inheritance of acquired characteristics, where exercise was thought 
directly to alter genetic transmission. The Darwinian reinterpretation of the 
role of use and disuse in evolution replaced exercise as the cause of varia­
tion in organ size, with differential selection for spontaneous variations in 
organ size. Nevertheless, the size-use correlation has become an almost ax­
iomatic rule for analyzing morphological evolution. 
In terms of the musculo-skeletal system, a Darwinian interpretation of 
this rule might be phrased as follows: "Larger, more robustly reinforced 
bones can endure greater stresses and larger muscles can generate greater 
forces. Therefore, in an environment in which a particular part of the skele­
tal or muscular system is habitually subjected to unusual stresses, genera­
tion after generation, those individuals that tend from birth to grow more 
robust muscles and bones will tend to thrive and reproduce better than 
those who do not. These individuals will tend to pass on this propensity to 
a greater percentage of offspring, resulting in an increasing prevalence of 
increased muscle and bone mass in future generations." Parallel arguments 
can be made for any number of organs that appear subject to size variation 
in response to the stresses or demands of use, including glands and diges­
tive organs. But it is important to understand how size contributes to the 
function under consideration, and to know whether this factor is free to vary 
independently of other features of organism design, before assuming that 
this logically reasonable argument applies across the board to all organs. 
In the case of muscles, bones, and glands, we have a relatively unam­
biguous correlation between functional demand and size as a result of phys­
iological changes during a lifetime. Physical exercise can cause muscle mass 
to increase and inactivity can cause muscles to atrophy. Changes in hormonal 
demand are often associated with increase or decrease in the size of en­
docrine glands, as in gonad enlargement at puberty or adrenal hypertrophy 
under conditions of chronic stress. The analogy between changes in a life­
time and changes in evolution appears to work in this case. The size-use rule 
seems naturally to extend from physiological arguments to evolutionary ar­
guments. In evolutionary theories, however, the order of the argument 
tends to be reversed from consequence to antecedence. When we infer an 
evolutionary cause for large muscular limbs, it is like guessing that a per­
son with large arm muscles must have been doing a lot of weightlifting. An 
animal with an atypically enlarged or reduced organ is automatically sus-
152 < The Symbolic Species

pected of having evolved under conditions where more or less was required 
of that organ, respectively. We tend to feel quite confident of many such 
extrapolations into the evolutionary past because of the correlations we ob­
serve in living species. 
The physiological analogy can be both informative and misleading. Evo­
lution has equipped vertebrate bodies so that they are adapted to certain 
functional demands, but it has also built in some flexibility as well. This al­
lows room for fine-tuning. These mechanisms for physiological fine-tuning 
can parallel evolutionary mechanisms in some ways but not others. For ex­
ample, there is more than one way that muscles or glands can appear al­
tered in size. On the analogy of weightlifters versus couch potatoes, one 
might expect to find comparatively muscle-bound species and comparatively 
weak species in the world. Surprisingly, differences in the proportions of 
muscle mass in mammals do not tend to parallel this difference. Larger 
species have correspondingly more total muscle mass supporting them, but 
species that are roughly the same size do not run the spectrum from muscle­
bound to weakling. The proportion of muscle to body weight in mammals 
exhibits a remarkably predictable relationship from species to species across 
the full size range. So the analogy is only provisionally useful, and clearly 
fails to take some crucial factors into account. 
This caveat is particularly relevant for brain evolution. Unlike muscle 
mass, brain size does not increase or decrease with use during the lifetime, 
independent of normal growth, aging, and pathological atrophy. 2 There is 
no way to appeal to a physiological adaptation where habitual brain use is 
associated with enlargement or reduction in brain size. And, whereas we 
seem to be on pretty solid theoretical footing when we extrapolate changes 
in force and structural strength from changes in size of bones, teeth, or mus­
cles (because we can appeal to the physics of forces and lever arms), it is 
not at all clear that we have a corresponding theory that is adequate for pre­
dicting changes in information-processing functions from changes in size 
of the brain. The first step, then, is to see if we can determine what kind of 
relationship this might be. 
Brains in Bodies 
To begin this investigation, let's start with whole brains and bodies and 
progressively narrow down our search to find exactly what has changed in 
human brains. In the long history of comparative psychology, a failure ad­
equately to disentangle net and gross brain function has been a consistent 
source of confusion. Even the most basic questions remain unsettled. At 
Terrence W. Deacon > 153

present, there appears to be wide agreement among those who analyze the 
statistics of comparative brain size that a version of net brain function fits 
best with our data and intuitions about brain size and intelligence. The basic 
intuition underlying this interpretation is that some fraction of brain func­
tion must always be devoted to handling the information-processing de­
mands of the body, and is therefore unavailable for other cognitive uses. 
Thus, gross brain function might be partitioned into a visceral and a cog­
nitive fraction as a first step toward analyzing net brain function. If larger 
brains also have to service the information-processing demands of larger 
bodies, they will not necessarily offer their possessors any net increase in 
cognitive power with their greater size. All other things being equal, we 
might expect that brains wil at least keep pace with the demands of the body 
as bodies get larger, so that degree of neural control over hormonal, diges­
tive, and basic somato-sensory and muscular functions should not distin­
guish species with different body sizes. But how do we figure out how 
much information-processing capacity must be dedicated to maintaining so­
matic functions? 
A simple and obvious possibility is that the fraction of brain size that must 
be dedicated to body maintenance is directly proportional to body size it­
self. If this were true, then the ratio of brain to body size would reflect the 
ratio between cognitive and somatic brain functions. Individuals and species 
with a higher ratio of brain to body size should have more of their brains 
free for nonsomatic functions-a higher net cognitive capacity.3 Brain 
weight is a much smaller fraction of body weight in fish, reptiles, and am­
phibians than in mammals and birds, and we tend to think of these cold­
blooded vertebrates as less mentally sophisticated than our warm-blooded 
compatriots. A low ratio of brain to body size has also been used to argue 
for low intelligence in large dinosaurs and to explain the apparently greater 
intelligence of humans compared to larger-brained whales and elephants. 
Unfortunately, a simple ratio approach fails to make sense of the high ratio 
of brain to body size in mice (as much as twice the ratio in humans) and 
other small mammals, since no one seems ready to claim that mice have a 
slight intellectual edge over humans and a large advantage over other great 
apes. Moreover, the difference in ratio is not compensated by differences 
in neuron densities. Small mammals' brains are more densely packed with 
neurons because density increases with decreasing size. As a result, the ratio 
of neuronal number to body size favors small mammals even more than does 
the brain/body ratio. Neither an appeal to absolutely large size nor to greater 
size ratio adequately fits with intuitions about comparative intelligence. 
Mice are not alone in exceeding the human brain/body ratio. In fact, most 
154 < The Symbolic Species

very small mammals have comparable brain/body ratios to humans. This re­
flects the fact that the ratio steadily decreases with increasing body size in 
most groups of animals. Common experience and intuitions about the men­
tal abilities of animals do not suggest that such abilities decline with in­
creasing size, but by the late nineteenth century, a number of scientists 
recognized that within this relationship was a hint of a way to salvage the 
intuition that intelligence increases with increasing brain size. As a result 
of a somewhat obscure study of an extinct sea cow, which possessed a brain 
that was absolutely larger than human brains, Alexander Brandt in 1867 
speculated that a simple fractional comparison was insufficient for an ac­
curate assessment of intelligence. Instead, he argued that the brain's size 
might rather have something to do with its special relationship to metabo­
lism and to the body surface. Brandt suggested that brain size might scale 
with respect to metabolism (which researchers at the time thought was di­
rectly related to heat dissipation by the body surface-this turns out not to 
be true, but more of that later). He also suggested that the mass of the brain's 
sensory and motor systems should be related to the body's surfaces, not its 
total size. 
The modem era of research on brain size effectively began in 1892, 
when a German physician named Otto Snell took this analysis to its logical 
conclusion.4 Snell showed that mammalian brains and bodies were enlarged 
with respect to one another according to the power function 2/3 (see Fig­
ures 5.1 and 5.2). He derived this value by taking the average of log­
transformed brain and body weight differences from pairwise comparisons 
of a number of different species across a range of body sizes. Snell provided 
compelling, if not systematic, evidence that the relationship of brain to 
body size in mammals was essentially comparable to a surface-to-volume 
relationship. The idea that brain and body weights were related by a sys­
tematic function begged the question of what this regularity had to do with 
brain function. But a metabolic interpretation of this pattern, initially pro­
moted by botq men, was soon supplanted by alternative interpretations and 
analyses that attempted to link it with intelligence 
Snell's finding stimulated a burst of interest in the scaling of brain size 
and body size that has lasted to the present day. In the century that has fol­
lowed, this basic insight has been the starting point for dozens of alterna­
tive statistical approaches and many hundreds of theoretical analyses of its 
significance. Differences in numerical methods have suggested alternative 
scaling exponents. Differences in the pattern among different taxonomic 
groupings have suggested that there is more than one regularity to explain. 
But the vast majority of interpretations all share two assumptions in com-
Terrence W. Deacon > 155

-
E 
ƙ -
.a: 
1:11 
·a; 
ll: 
c 
'ii .. oCI 
1:11 
..5! 
mon. First, that comparative intelligence is a function of how much of the 
brain is left when that fraction which is dedicated to basic body functions 
is analytically subtracted. Second, that this proportion is somehow directly 
reflected in the comparative scaling of brains to bodies. The regularity of 
this relationship offered a frame of reference. It determined a means of pre­
dicting what a typical mammal brain or body weight would be, and thereby 
indicated the outliers. It was natural also to assume that "average mammals," 
as predicted by this trend, should also be of average, and therefore com­
parable, intelligence, and that outliers were of respectively greater or less 
than average intelligence. In this view, intelligence is construed as the net 
or surplus brain function left over after the bodily needs of brain processes 
are subtracted. 
The logic behind this conception found its clearest explanation in a 
widely cited book on the evolution of intelligence by Harry Jerison.5 Jeri­
son based his assessment of brain evolution on a concept he called "proper 
mass." On the assumption that evolution is miserly, and will tend to pro­
vide only as much of each tissue as is optimal in the context of the other 
systems of the body, one might expect that a larger and more costly organ 
should reflect a greater need for its function, and vice versa. The size of each 
organ should thus tend toward a proportion that is scaled to its relative im­
portance to the rest of the body. In these terms it seems almost like a tau-
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
human 
s 
, . . . 
c ;,r·. • · 
· .. t. 
,.. 
. 
.. 
-ƚ 
. .Ǳ: ǲ 
--:-· .. ·· . 
.. :.r¬· 
• !18:A. . 
• .. . 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
log body weight (kg) 
7 
Figure 5.1 Plot of brain 
and body size in a wide 
selection of mammals 
showing the almost lin­
ear distribution in log 
coordinates and the rel­
ative position of the 
human value with re­
spect to the others. Hu­
mans show a greater 
divergence from pre­
dicted brain size for our 
body size than any other 
species. In general, mon­
keys, apes, and dolphins 
occupy the upper left 
8 edge of the distribution 
along its length. 
156 < The Symbolic Species

tologous expression of natural selection theory, a sort of metabolic economy 
argument. Brain size should, on average, tend to reflect the balance between 
the evolutionary advantages and costs of neural information processing, so 
that the average mammalian brain size for a given body weight should pro­
vide a useful index of the "proper mass" of brain for a given body. From this 
it should follow that the mammalian trend in brain versus body size should 
reflect an optimum balance of the costs and benefits conferred by the size 
of the brain, at least when all other things are equal. 
Jerison argued that the fraction of total brain computation that is dedi­
cated to serving the demands of body maintenance and overhead functions 
should scale to the 2/3 power of body size, because most neural represen­
tations of the body reflect maps from the sensory surfaces of the body. 6 Bas­
ing the assessment of proper mass on this empirical relationship is a 
powerful simplifying assumption, but is it as straightforward as the trend in 
mammal brain and body sizes suggests? One problem is that a whole or­
ganism economy of proper mass cannot be assessed solely in terms of 
information-processing capacity; other costs and benefits may scale ac­
cording to independent factors. For example, one major cost that will scale 
with respect to the size of the brain is its metabolic demand. The brain is 
the most metabolically expensive organ at rest, consuming up to ten times 
more glucose and oxygen for its mass than any other organ. 7 Since basal me­
tabolism scales to the 3/4 power of body mass in mammals (not 2/3 as 
Brandt and Snell and others had predicted from surface-to-volume heat dis­
sipation assumptions), this cost must also be factored into the equation of 
proper mass. But precisely because such noncognitive costs must be con­
sidered, we should not expect that the average scaling of brain size to body 
size reflects anything like a line of isometric intellectual capacity. Proper 
mass, assessed in morphological terms, cannot be equated to net compu­
tational power, and so equivalent encephalization at different scales is not 
a reliable index of equivalent cognitive capacity. Indeed, there are many rea­
sons to suspect, that it misses some of the most important effects of scale 
on neural functions. 
An assessment of net brain function is further complicated by its non­
linearity. A nonlinear mathematical relationship is one in which some frac­
tion of the result must be figured into the calculation itself. Compounded 
interest on a debt has this characteristic (a painfully familiar example for 
many of us). Unpaid interest on a debt adds to the total debt, which in­
creases the debt and so results in higher interest payments, and so on. This 
kind of relationship exists in estimates of net strength because muscles 
have to move themselves as well as other structures. Though having greater 
Terrence W. Deacon > 157

muscle mass increases the amount of force that can be generated, it also 
increases the amount of mass that must be moved. This means that when 
weightlifters put on more muscle mass, they do not get an increase in net 
strength that keeps pace with their increase in gross strength. This is one 
reason why most athletes, especially those who depend in significant ways 
on net strength (e.g., gymnasts), do not merely add muscle bulk as they train. 
There are clearly diminishing net strength gains with increasing muscle pro­
portion beyond a certain level. (When that level is passed, we say that some­
one is muscle-bound.) 
In terms of brain function, there are probably many counterparts to this 
sort of nonlinear relationship. Consider an analogy between the 
information-processing demands of a business and those of a brain. Growth 
of a business not only increases the need for more workers but also the need 
for increasing levels of bureaucracy. As the number of workers increases, 
so must the numbers of managers, administrators, and secretaries. These 
mid-level workers are necessary to keep track of other workers' hours, pay­
checks, duties, and so on. Though managers and secretaries comprise only 
a modest fraction of the total number of employees, this fraction tends to 
increase with the size of the business, because such middle-level employ­
ees themselves must be managed and paid, and so further contribute to the 
managerial overhead. As organizations grow, they tend therefore to in­
crease the proportion of employees who handle employees, as compared 
to employees who directly handle the product or service being offered. Ex­
pansion of gross output inevitably demands a slight increase in the net pro­
portion of management to production work in order to break even. 
Undoubtedly analogous information-management demands come with 
increased brain size. Like an expanding business, brains may have to de­
vote an increasingly larger proportion of their information-processing ca­
pacity to managementlike functions, just to maintain equivalent levels of 
functional integration and control in the face of increased size and com­
plexity. The proportion of neural computations that can be devoted to input­
output functions may consequently decline with size, leaving larger brains 
progressively less efficient in terms of the number of computations per­
formed per functional output. Larger brains will thus tend to gain a greater 
gross computational capacity, but with a decreasing net computational ef­
ficiency. A larger body will demand a larger proportional commitment of 
managerial functions in order to break even. We can consider this man­
agerial work to be analogous to the "higher functions" of a brain, those func­
tions that direct, coordinate, and monitor input-output functions. From this 
perspective, larger brains will inevitably need to be more and more top-
158 < The Symbolic Species

heary, so to speak. More and more will need to be devoted to "middle man­
agement," and the executive hierarchy will need to grow new levels just to 
deliver comparable performance. With larger size, there will be more com­
putational overhead that must be subtracted with respect to input-output 
capacity. This is an important figure-background shift in the analysis. It is 
not at all clear that what we generally mean by net intelligence is something 
like a surplus capacity, or that any simple analytical "subtraction" will be able 
to take this into account. More important, it provides a reason to suspect 
that larger brains will need to be differently organized from smaller brains, 
with different proper masses required for different component functions, 
further complicating comparisons across ranges of size. 
Thinking Your Own Size 
Intuition suggests that small-brained creatures like bats, moles, and mice 
are less intelligent, or at least less "cognizant" of the many possible options 
and consequences of their activities, than are large-brained creatures such 
as horses, lions, and elephants. The differences seem even more obvious 
when we compare large mammals to lizards, amphibians, and fish whose 
brains are usually smaller than the smallest mammal brains. And what about 
the tiny brains of insects? It takes a very big leap of imagination to extend 
to them even a fraction of the mental representational abilities of the lowli­
est vertebrates. Very large differences in absolute brain size seem to have 
an undeniable correlation with some aspects of mental ability that we rec­
ognize as intelligence. But is the number of neurons the only relevant fac­
tor, or is there more to it? 
One facet of the brain size/intelligence problem that has been almost uni­
versally ignored is the fact that different-sized animals live in very differ­
ent worlds. Since the pioneering work of D' Arcy Thompson on the effects 
of scale on organism design,8 it has been clear that natural forms are sub­
ject to quite different types of forces and physical constraints if they differ 
significantly ir size. Change in geometric relationships of body parts in re­
sponse to size (e.g., surfaces with respect to volumes, forces with respect 
to support structures) is only one such expression of scale. The old adage 
about "fleas on the backs of fleas on the backs of fleas . . .  ad infinitum" is 
not strictly possible, because at each level of scale totally different chemi­
cal and structural principles apply. Fleas must be designed very differently 
from the dogs that they parasitize. Dog-size fleas and flea-size dogs are im­
possible. Likewise, the bacterial microorganisms that parasitize the fleas are 
totaly different in design from either fleas or dogs. Although the range in 
Terrence W. Deacon > 159

sizes is not so extreme among different vertebrates as to require radically 
different body structure, there is still a range of many orders of magnitude 
in scale-enough to make a difference. Within mammals we find a range 
of sizes that is nearly as extreme as that between dogs and fleas, and yet the 
body plans of all mammals, including their brains, are surprisingly similar. 
Nevertheless, the information-processing demands of being large as com­
pared to small almost certainly make very different sorts of demands on 
large and small species' brains. 
A telescoping of time correlates with size. Small animals' reflexes must 
be quicker in order to control much smaller limbs and respond to rapid lo­
comotor feedback. Further, decision making must be streamlined in small 
species because their high metabolic rates and minimal energy reserves 
offer little leeway in foraging activities, defending against predators, or 
mating behaviors. And, perhaps most important, a short lifetime offers lit­
tle time for learning from experience. As a result, being short-lived puts a 
premium on the effectiveness of preprogrammed behavior patterns that re­
quire little in the way of environmental priming or fine-tuning. Large ani­
mals, in comparison, can get by with rather slower reflexes, can afford to 
vary their sexual and foraging behaviors in an effort to better optimize their 
behaviors, and may have a considerable opportunity to learn by observa­
tion and trial and error. Being longer-lived puts a greater premium on learn­
ing and memory, and less on automatic preprogrammed behaviors. In 
addition, living a long time or having the capacity to travel for long distances 
(which are often though not always linked) is more likely to expose an ani­
mal to significant changes in the environment. Consequently, large, long­
lived animals must be able to assess the effects of and adapt their responses 
to changing environmental conditions, whereas small, short-lived species 
don't face such changes within a single lifetime. There will be correlated 
differences in strategies of intergenerational information transfer. Large 
species will tend to do better by transferring learned information from par­
ent to offspring, and by focusing effort on just a few malleable offspring, 
whereas small species will tend to do better to sample alternative adapta­
tional strategies by producing large numbers of offspring with different vari­
ants of preprogrammed behavior patterns, and leaving the rest to natural 
selection. Many of these cognitive correlates of scale are schematically sum­
marized in Figure 5.2. 
Scaling brain functions up or down with size and life span, then, is not 
simply a matter of more or less computing power. Size changes have inverse 
consequences in a number of information-processing domains. A small 
species' brain simply scaled up for a large body or a large species' brain sim-
160 < The Symbolic Species

size 
brain/body ratio 
lifespan 
reproductive rate 
smaller 
integration of functions 
processing & reaction time 
reliance on instinct 
reliance on learning 
stimulus-bound learning 
transfer learning 
Figure 5.2 A summary of some of the cognitive diferences that correlate with dif­
ferences in scale of brain, body, and lifespan (left to right = increasing scale; verti­
cal thickness of triangular bars indicates extent or importance). Other general body 
features (shown above the depiction of three diferent-sized species' brains) include 
a reduction in brain/body ratio and reproductive rate with increasing size. A few 
cognitive correlates are depicted by the triangles below. These include a reduction 
of integration of functions,due to a more subdivided and less interconnected brain, 
and a corresponding increase in processing time and reaction times; a reduced re­
liance on inbuilt responses and an increased reliance on learning, because of a 
greater tolerance for less efficient but more flexible trial-and-error adaptation; and 
a shift in learning strategies from highly stimulus-bound learning to learning that 
is more open to generalization and transfer of information between diverse contexts. 
For example, transfer of training to conditions where associative relationships are 
exactly reversed has been shown to correlate fairly well with increased total brain 
size, but not with encephalization alone (see for example Rumbaugh and Pate, 1984; 
Rumbaugh et al. 1996), suggesting that this is a correlate of "gross" as opposed to 
"net" information processing capacity. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 161

ply scaled down for a small body would both be maladapted. Even in the 
domain of learning, though most species benefit from the ability to learn 
to adapt to temporary conditions, the emphasis may be on very different 
learning strategies at different levels of scale. For example, though both 
large and small species will likely be selected for learning to respond to im­
mediately present noxious or rewarding stimuli, there is likely to be an in­
creasing emphasis on responses to distant stimuli, and those that have 
merely predictive value, as the species' size increases. Larger species may 
also display an increase in the value of the ability to modify learned re­
sponses from one situation to fit another, and even a value to learning that 
is slowed by playful curiosity and exploration. To the extent that size­
correlated differences in information processing are reflected in brain struc­
ture, we might expect a correlated allometry of brain structure relationships 
in animals of different size. 
Perhaps the most serious problem faced by large brains is due to an in­
evitable geometric feature of network structure: as the number of neurons 
increases, the number of connections between them must increase in geo­
metric proportions in order to maintain a constant level of connectional in­
tegration. This relationship is generalizable to many information and control 
processes. In brains that differ by millions or billions of neurons, maintaining 
a comparable degree of functional connectivity would require astronomi­
cal increases in connections, well beyond any reasonable hope of housing 
in one body. In addition, the metabolic constraints on the size of individual 
neurons also limit the number of synaptic connections any one neuron can 
support. So, inevitably, it is impossible to meet this scaling-up demand in 
any real brain, and a progressive reduction in many dimensions of connec­
tivity is required with increasing size. 
In real brains, the connections per neuron increase slightly with size, but 
the proportion of the brain's neurons to which any one is linked drops 
rapidly, decreasing the relative "fan-out" and "fan-in" of connections to and 
from different areas. Consequently, increasing size means an increasing 
fragmentation of function. It also means loss of speed, both because of the 
increased distances and because of the increased numbers of nodes that 
must be traversed by a signal to reach comparably removed sites in the over­
all network. Compared to electronic computers, the conduction of impulses 
along axons and across synapses is very slow. Though long, projecting axons 
incorporate design features (myelination) that speed and protect the prop­
agation of action potentials, propagating signals over greater distances be­
tween brain structures inevitably takes more time in larger brains. This time 
penalty on larger size will also be amplified by the geometric increase in 
162 < The Symbolic Species

connections and indirectness of connectivity. Finally, a vastly larger and less 
integrated network will also tend to be far more susceptible to local per­
turbations, making the neural activities far more "noisy." This, too, will slow 
down recognition and decision-making processes and impede processing ef­
ficiency. 
Thus, even if size confers greater information-carrying capacity, these 
gains may be balanced by significant costs in other areas of function. The 
inevitable information-processing geometry of size determines that bigger 
brains cannot be just scaled-up small brains, and this makes the brain 
size/intelligence equation all the more messy and complicated. But reduced 
processing speeds and loss of integration of function may not be prohibi­
tive prices to pay for increased discrimination and storage capabilities, so 
long as its larger size also shields the organism from the need to produce 
rapid learning and responses. Again, it appears that bigger is different as 
far as cognition goes. 
A few functional features do not change much with scale. These tend to 
be the functions that are more directly determined by molecular and cel­
lular processes. Paradoxically, basic learning may be one such feature. The 
basic mechanisms that allow experiences to leave their trace in brain struc­
ture changes are highly conserved cellular and molecular mechanisms that 
are shared by most animals, from snails to simians. For example, a cellular­
biochemical process known as long-tenn potentiation allows synaptic con­
nections to be progressively strengthened or weakened in their effective 
transmission of information from cell to cell. And there appear to be par­
allel means by which the signals it carries can change a neuron's capacity to 
propagate signals through the different sectors of its extensive arbor of 
input branches (dendrites) and modulate signals down its one output line 
(axon). 
Such processes as these are the basis for transforming patterns of expe­
rience to patterns of neural behavior-i.e., learning and memory-and it 
appears that eyen very simple nervous systems are built around essentially 
the same basic learning principles as the most complex ones. In a chal­
lenging book on brain size and intelligence, Euan MacPhail has criticized 
the idea that brain size is correlated with intelligence in any comparative 
sense, because he finds little evidence that basic learning abilities differ sig­
nificantly across species of vastly different brain size.9 He documents re­
markably sophisticated learning abilities in a wide range of vertebrates not 
generally assumed to exhibit well-developed cognitive abilities. This could 
also be expanded to include a wide range of invertebrate learning studies 
as well. Sophisticated learning in honeybees, for example, has many re-
Terrence W. Deacon > 163

markable parallels with vertebrate learning, in both the rate and complex­
ity of learning. 10 At the very least, MacPhail's analysis offers the caveat that 
for basic neuronal processes, such as general patterns of simple associative 
learning, we should not expect brain size to have a very significant effect. 
Where size should matter most is in terms of differences in reliance on al­
ternative learning strategies and perhaps extent or organization of 
mnemonic storage. One of the clearest demonstrations of this has come 
from studies of different species' abilities to transfer learned information 
across tasks and stimulus conditions. This second-order learning capacity, 
which enables animals to produce novel "emergent" responses by reusing 
information in new contexts, has been shown to correlate with brain size 
but not encephalization. 11 
This pattern of size-correlated differences in the relative importance of 
different learning strategies is of particular relevance to the special learn­
ing problems posed by language. Relatively flexible and indirect learning 
strategies can only be of use if there is sufficient time to employ them. This 
is even more of a problem for multistage learning-recoding-unlearning 
processes. Such learning strategies would have little utility for a short-lived, 
smaller animal. Smaller brains should instead be biased against such learn­
ing strategies, since there will not be sufficient time for them to pay off. This 
may help explain why symbolic communication didn't evolve until fairly 
large-brained, long-lived, ecological generalists like apes evolved. Since 
language learning is an extreme example of a highly distributed learning 
problem, smaller-brained species would likely be far more biased against 
the appropriate learning strategies than larger-brained species. Thus, ab­
solute brain size might have played an important limiting role in language 
evolution irrespective of any increase in computing power. 
164 < The Symbolic Species

C 
H 
A 
P 
T 
E 
R 
s 
X 
Growing Apart 
. . . nothing is great and little otherwise than by comparison. 
-Jonathan Swift, So/liver's Travels 
The Chihuahua Fallacy 
D 
ifferences in relative brain and body proportions are not always what 
they seem. Encephalization-the degree to which an animal's actual 
brain size exceeds what would be predicted for a typical animal of its 
size-is a relationship between the brain and body, and so it can be affected 
by changes in either. This problem is dramatically demonstrated by a fa­
miliar example: the differences in brain and body sizes in domestic dog 
breeds. An average-sized dog has a brain approximately the size that would 
be predicted for an average mammal of that size (a bit lower than for feral 
canines such as wolves), but small dogs have comparatively high ratios of 
brain to body size and large dogs have comparatively low ratios of brain to 
body size, because brain size is far less variable than body size between dog 
165

breeds. From the point of view of encephalization, very small dogs are 
among the most encephalized of all mammals, and very large dogs are 
rather poorly encephalized. Do we generally think of small dogs as being 
unusually intelligent and large dogs a'> unusually dull? There isn't any sup­
port for such a pattern of comparative dog intelligence, 1 and anecdotal ev­
idence does not indicate that higher relative intelligence is found in smaller 
breeds. 
Body size is far more variable than brain size within a species. Plotting 
log brain size against log body size for intra species samples produces trend 
lines of a low slope when compared to interspecies brain/body propor­
tions. 2 Smaller individuals within the same species have only slightly smaller 
brains than much larger individuals. Since middle-sized dogs are near the 
general mammalian prediction, the effect of breeding for large or small size 
shifts individuals up or down this shallow slope, exaggerating the deviation 
from the general mammalian trend. Thus, small dogs appear hyper­
encephalized and large dogs appear hypo-encephalized compared to typi­
cal mammals (see Figure 6.1). 
What if anything can we deduce from this about the mental abilities of 
dogs as a result of breeding? Stanley Coren, who has written a wonderfully 
infonnative book on dog intelligence, does not rank chihuahuas or peki.nese 
among the smartest of dogs, even though they are among the most highly 
encephalized. 3 Although there may be variations in the mental abilities and 
predispositions of various breeds-some of which were intentionally se­
lected by breeders-no one imagines that breeding for smartness would in­
evitably produce miniaturization or that breeding for dullness would 
produce giantism. We assume that chihuahua brains are fairly typical dog 
brains (possibly even deformed by miniaturization), with fairly typical dog 
abilities. They are just in very small dog bodies. Differences in dog en­
cephalization are the result of breeding for body size effects, as well as for 
a number of other body proportions (relative leg length, head shape, etc.). 
There are numerous ways to alter the ratio between brain and body size in 
dogs that have nothing to do with selection for cognitive traits per se. Com­
paring breeds only in terms of encephalization obscures all these other 
possible influences on the statistic of encephalization. Dogs bred for short 
legs only and dogs bred for generally reduced trunk dimensions could have 
the same encephalization for very different reasons, and in neither case 
would it reflect selection operating on brain traits. Natural or artificial se­
lection may favor a variety of combinations of body-segment proportions, 
and in different cases it is not easy to determine which are the independent 
and which are the dependent variables-which features constitute the fig-
166 < The Symbolic Species

A 
log body weight 
e 
 
-
.: 
.!!I 
cu 
ll= 
r:: 
'ii 
.. 
.1:1 
8 
1 000 
1 00 
1 0  
1 
1 0  
- S?  
1 00 
1 000 
1 0,000 1 00,000 
body weight (gm) 
Figure 6.1 The problem with comparative brain size as an index of brain evolution is 
well demonstrated by the diferent ways large or small brain size can be achieved. 
A. Graphic depiction of the four possible mechanisms that can cause an animal 
to diverge from the typical scaling of brain and body size of the group to which it 
belongs (e.g., all mammals, all primates, etc.). These deviations have usually been 
explained only as relative encephalization (±E), but here it is pointed out that evo­
lutionary change in body size without concomitant change in brain size (somatiza­
tion; ±S) is at least as likely to be involved. 
B. Simplified graph of the relationship between brain and body scaling in do­
mestic dog breeds compared to the trend for carnivores in general. Notice that the 
smallest dog breeds are above the carnivore trend and the largest dog breeds are 
below it because of the flatter within-species allometry. The smallest breeds could 
either be said to be more encephalized or less somatized than the average carnivore. 
The relative position with respect to the trend does not provide sufficient informa­
tion to distinguish which, but information about other breeds and dog-breeding his­
tory indicates that the apparent encephalization of small dogs was rather an indirect 
product of selection on small comparative body size irrespective of brain size. The 
dom-estic dogs' trend line is actually below wild can ids like wolves, but breeding has 
produced much greater variation of body size. 
ure and which constitute the stable background. The problems arise from 
our desire to collapse a multivariate relationship into a bivariate relation­
ship. Since the one variable, body size, is so much more inclusive than the 
other, it wil likely contain the source of much more of the variance in the 
relationship, all of which will be obscured in an analysis of encephalization. 
Independent variations in all manner of body proportions are as likely to 
be evident in nature as in dog shows. 
Curiously, though we might imagine people having an interest in breed­
ing dogs for superior intelligence, it doesn't appear that this breeding cri­
terion is the sine qua non of any particular breed. In fact, this should cause 
Terrence W. Deacon > 167

us to wonder if any domestic animal is bred for increased general intelli­
gence. This was clearly not the guiding principle in the breeding of small 
dogs. In fact, it appears that domestic breeds have, on average, smaller com­
parative brain sizes than their feral cousins. This turns out to be the case 
for domesticated species of all sorts: horses, cows, pigs, goats, and so on.4 
Taking the encephalization argument literally, some brain size researchers 
have argued that in the process of domestication, we inevitably select breed­
ing stocks for their dullness, not intelligence. But this, too, suffers from the 
same cephalic bias. Breeding species of farm animals for gross strength, 
meat production, milk production, and so forth, probably has been a major 
factor in this trend as well. 
The problem with focusing on the brain/body relationship, then, is that 
it is usually not the brain that makes the difference. How this might affect 
our interpretation of comparative brain size can be dramatized by a simple 
thought experiment. Imagine that all other breeds of dogs but the smallest 
ones had perished at some point in recent prehistory along with support­
ing fossil evidence. Scientists coming upon one of these miniature dogs for 
the first time might not see them as miniatures of some larger type, but sim­
ply as smal carnivores with large brains. Brain and body size statistics would 
confirm that this is a remarkably encephalized species. Researchers might 
even be tempted to theorize about the possible cognitive causes for their 
braininess-complex cooperative hunting, large social groups, and so forth. 
In the imaginary scenario of the single surviving extreme dog breed, we 
know that the predisposition to assume brain evolution is unjustified; but, 
I submit, scientists studying brain evolution have consistently taken this 
same leap of faith with no more solid justification. Why? What makes se­
lection on brain size a more attractive hypothesis than selection on body 
size? Is brain evolution a more parsimonious assumption? Is there inde­
pendent evidence that brain size evolution is far more prevalent than body 
size evolution? As far as I can tell, there is not. I am afraid that our predis­
position to see brain size evolution where there is none mostly grows out 
of extra-scientific prejudices having to do with the comparatively large size 
of our own brains. 
If the link between encephalization and intelligence is measured in "extra 
neurons," then the chihuahua example is hard to explain away. We might 
try to salvage the theory by introducing arbitrary special conditions \vith re­
spect to types of encephalization. Chihuahuas and human dwarves are en­
cephalized because their body growth has been stunted. Perhaps we can 
simply exclude such cases. I think this is on the right track, but a different 
neural logic must be invoked to explain why this should matter. We could 
168 < The Symbolic Species

not simply frame the argument in terms of the proportions of neurons to 
body mass, since by this measure it doesn't matter whether brain or body 
proportions are the source of the shift. So why aren't chihuahuas the dar­
lings of comparative psychology, and why isn't human dwarfism a source of 
great genius? The answer must be that, just as encephalization doesn't 
carve the body into the appropriate units of analysis, the extra neuron hy­
pothesis doesn't carve the brain appropriately either. 
How can we sort out figure from ground when analyzing body-part 
growth? When we see a dog like a dachshund, we immediately recognize 
that it has been bred for short legs with respect to trunk length because we 
have a frame of reference-an average dog body-to compare it to. Pro­
portional differences between a part of the body and the whole body tend 
to reflect change in the part with respect to a stable whole, all else being 
equal, but this is not always a safe assumption. Using dogs as our model, we 
can see that there are at least two kinds of morphological information that 
can prevent us from jumping to mistaken conclusions. Selecting a single 
body part, such as the brain, to compare to the size of the rest of the body 
introduces an unwarranted bias because it considers this one part out of con­
text. To control for this, the rest of the body needs also to be analytically di­
vided into segmental units that are roughly at the same level of the 
anatomical hierarchy (e.g., limbs I trunk I head or muscles I digestive or­
gans I cardiopulminary organs I brain). Only in this way can we hope to find 
unbiased evidence of which is figure and which is ground. In general, I sus­
pect that most of those mammals we determine to be poorly encephalized 
are analogues of great danes, selected for larger overall body size, and most 
of those mammals we determine to be highly encephalized are analogues 
of chihuahuas, selected for small body size. Unfortunately, the multivariate 
data necessary to pursue this question are unavailable for most species. For­
tunately, there is another source of evidence that may help resolve this ques­
tion for primate and human brain evolution. 
One of the least controversial claims about brain size evolution is that pri­
mates tend to ha've larger brains for their size than most other mammals. 
When seen in terms of encephalization, primates have nearly twice as much 
brain for their body size as other typical mammals, and humans have almost 
three times more brain than a typical primate. It would appear that during 
the primate radiation, there was an increase in brain size over other mam­
mals, and that this trend culminated in human brain size evolution. A great 
deal has been made of the apparent importance of brain evolution in the pri­
mate order. Most researchers take this to mean that primates are on average 
smarter than other mammals and that humans are the smartest of the pri-
Terrence W. Deacon > 169

mates. Because of the tendency to see evolution from an anthropocentric per­
spective, and human brain evolution as the culmination of a much larger 
trend, we tend to view other primates (beginning with our closest relatives, 
the great apes) as having achieved an intermediate level of "higher intelli­
gence" over and above other mammals. But are the larger proprtions of pri­
mate brains with respect to their bodies a reflection of more rapid brain 
growth or reduced body growth ?We can determine whether brains increased 
with respect to bodies or bodies reduced to brains in primate evolution, as 
we did with dog breeds, by using information about patterns of growth. Since 
there is a limited set of patterns by which the masses of brains and bodies 
grow within young mammals, a comparison of growth patterns can help de­
termine which of these two variables is figure and which is background. 
One might expect there to be different brain/body growth trajectories 
with diverse slopes and ratios for each speciࡔs, owing to their unique adap­
tational specializations. But, remarkably, the curves that describe brain/body 
growth for all mammal fetuses tend to cluster along just two parallel tra­
jectories during fetal development: one that includes primates, cetaceans, 
and elephants, and a second that includes the remainder of the mammals 
(see Figure 6.2A). During this early phase of growth, individuals' brains and 
bodies grow almost in unison, so that enlargement is essentially isometric 
for all mammal fetuses (like an expanding picture on a balloon being in­
flated). This suggests that growth rates are likely the same throughout the 
whole body. Growth is multiplicative: tissue duplicating itself at the same 
rate will produce progressively more rapid growth. As development pro­
ceeds, bodies and brains are growing absolutely faster, but at the same 
weight most fetal mammals grow at the same rates: a 5-gram cat fetus and 
a 5-gram cow fetus will add the same amount of new tissue in the same pe­
riod of time, even though they are at different points along their respective 
developmental trajectories and headed toward very different end points. 
So what accounts for the difference between primates and most other 
nonprimate mammals? Surprisingly, primate brains grow at essentially the 
same rate as other mammal brains. Brains that reach the same size at birth 
take approximately the same amount of time to get there, whether in a pri­
mate or nonprimate species (see Figure 6.2B). Primates do not grow their 
brains faster than other mammals, but they grow their bodies slower. From 
an early embryonic stage, primates have smaller bodies than expected for 
their age. The apparent increase of encephalization in primates is then, 
more accurately, a decrease in somatization. The locus of primate en­
cephalization is not in the head! 
This poses a serious challenge to the traditional view of primate evolu-
170 < The Symbolic Species

1 000 
p 
NP 
0 
pig 
• 
macaque 
X 
human 
i 1 00 
e 80 
 
X 
0 
-
-
X 
.c: 
.c: 
60 
0 
I 
til 
til 
ii 
·a; 
• x lll 
• 
 
 
e.pq· 
c: 
1 0  
Fetal pattern 
c: 
40 
ii 
·c; 
'!fcxx 
.. 
P = primate 
.. 
Cl 
NP = nonprimate 
.CI 
0' 
20 
II;, 
... 
qp •• x 
1 
0
0 
• 
1 0  
1 00 
1 000 
1 0000 
1 00,000 
200 
A 
body weight (gm) 
B 
days post-conception 
Figure 6.2 The common shapes but diferent intercepts of developmental brain/body 
growth curves distinguishing primates and nonprimate mammals are shown in a 
slightly idealized comparison of mammalian growth. The left graph schematically 
depicts the general pattern exhibited by brain/body growth throughout life for four 
mammals, startingfrom early embryonic stages. Both curves demonstrate a two­
phase pattern of brain/body growth caused by the fad that the brain ceases growth 
earlier than the rest of the body. P stand˛ for the typical primate fetal brain/body 
growth pattern and NP for the nonprimate pattern. Notice that the primate line is 
considerably shifted to the left. Comparison of brain-body growth in mammals 
shows that all anthropoid primates follow the same growth trajectory prenatally and 
most other mammals follow one other right-shifted parallel trajectory. Adult al­
lometries within these two groupings of mammals are the result of a scalar expan­
sion of the whole growth curve. The leftward shift of the primate growth curves 
(producing larger brain per body) is evident from the youngest embryos. The graph 
on the right shows total brain growth rates for two of these species (pig and macaque) 
as well as for humans. This demonstrates that the left-shifted primate growth is not 
the result of Jaster brain growth but reduced body growth. Human brains follow 
this pattern also. 
tion as characterized by selection for increased intelligence. If primates were 
selected for inoreased intelligence, why should this produce a change in 
body growth but not brain growth? Shouldn't we instead consider primates 
to be examples of phyletic dwarfism, rather than brain hypertrophy? We are 
faced once again with the chihuahua question: Are we justified in inferring 
anything about brain evolution from a reduction in body growth with re­
spect to brain growth? 
Perhaps the answer can be approached by determining how primate bod­
ies have been reduced. Is the primate transformation of fetal growth rela­
tionships what we should expect for dwarfism? In other words, does primate 
Terrence W. Deacon > 171

brain and body growth differ from other mammal patterns the way chi­
huahua brain and body growth differs from the growth patterns of other 
dogs? In fact, these two paths to reduced body size without a correspond­
ing reduction in brain are different. Dwarfed animals exhibit slowed body 
growth in the later phases (late fetal and postnatal), but they track along with 
more normal members of their species (and order) for most of fetal devel­
opment. Primates, however, follow a shifted, parallel gestational growth 
curve compared to that of other mammals from the start. Fetal brain/body 
growth in primates is isometric, as in other mammals. Within each fetus, 
brains and bodies are growing at nearly identical rates, yet the whole pri­
mate body is smaller at all corresponding stages of gestation, even though 
primate brain growth keeps pace with other mammals. It is as though a sig­
nificant fraction of the rest of the body is missing from the very first mo­
ment that head and somatic divisions of the body become evident in the 
embryo. So primates are like chihuahuas only in a superficial sense. Both 
have relatively big heads and brains due to reduced body growth, but pri­
mates start out with small bodies while chihuahuas only end up with small 
bodies. 
What about humans? According to the traditional view of our place 
among other mammals, primates evolved bigger brains than other mam­
mals as a response to a more cognitively demanding niche, and humans sim­
ply carried this trend further than any other primate. But now that it appears 
that primates did not evolve bigger brains, just smaller bodies, we need to 
reconsider the view that human brain evolution was simply an extrapola­
tion of the primate trend. A comparison of human and nonhuman primate 
brain and body growth patterns (see Figure 6.3) shows us deviating from a 
typical primate trajectory only postnatally. Thus, we have not shifted away 
from other primates the way primates have shifted away from other mam­
mals, and so have not simply extrapolated the primate deviation. Instead, 
like dwarves, the difference between human and monkey-ape growth pat­
terns appears to be the result of a truncation of the growth curve. And yet 
we are not dwarfed primates. We are among the very largest of primates, 
and our adult brain size is greater in both absolute and relative proportions 
than in any other primate. Although our growth curve appears to be cut off 
early, as in dwarfism, our body growth rates are not suddenly slowed im­
mediately after birth as would be the case in dwarfism. We start out grow­
ing according to the standard fetal primate plan, and our brains continue 
to grow for longer than expected. Further proof that hominid brain size did 
not arise by somatic miniaturization is provided by fossil evidence. We are 
172 < The Symbolic Species

1 000 
e 
Ƙ 
1 00 
-
-= 
.!!!I 
CD 
ǰ 
1 0  
= 
'i! 
.a 
1 
1 0  
1 00 
1 000 
1 0,000 
body weight (gm) 
¢ adult human 
brain & body size 
A hypothetical primate 
with human brain size 
but scaled body size 
1 00,000 
1 ,000,000 
Figure 6.3 A somewhat idealized graph showing the human brain/body growth curoe 
as compared to other species of primates ( H = human, C = chimpanzee, M = macaque 
monkey). Squares and diamonlU indicate average adult values of brain and body 
weight for selected primates. The gray line is the average adult brain and body size 
allometric trend for primates. Human fetal growth follows the fetal primate trajec­
tory, but the overall shape of the curoe is altered so that the early phase is compar­
atively extended and the postnatal phase is comparatively truncated. If our body 
growth followed the pattern indicated by our brain growth, we would grow to be a 
very large ape (indicated by the dashed line and the upper right triangle). This also 
contributes to the necessity of giving birth at an earlier stage in the maturation of 
our offspring. The common trajectory we share with other primate during the fetal 
phase indicates that increased human encephalization compared to other primates 
is not an extrapolation of the process that caused primates to diverge from other 
mammals. Ours is a diferent mode of encephalization. 
among the largest members of our order (the primates), and the fossil 
record leading up to us suggests that there was an absolute increase-not 
decrease--of body size, with an even more extensive increase in brain size 
at a somewhat slower pace. In humans, the locus of the change was indeed 
the brain. 
Nevertheless, the rate of human brain growth does not distinguish us 
from other mammals. Differences in adult mammal brain sizes are a func­
tion of duration of growth, and our brains reach their large size in about the 
same amount of time as we should expect to find in a large dolphin or a very 
Terrence W. Deacon > 173

large ungulate with a brain this size. Our brains grow as though in a pri­
mate with an adult body size that well exceeds 1,000 pounds, and yet our 
body growth pattern is quite similar to that of a chimpanzee. Both the 
human brain and the rest of the human body grow according to expected 
trends for their target adult sizes. These trends just don't normally belong 
together in the same individual. It's as though the "designer" got the parts 
mixed up. 
Our preoccupation with brain size and encephalization has led us to ig­
nore the differences and confuse these three distinct processes: dwarfism 
in small mammal breeds, embryonic reduction of body growth but not 
brain growth in primates, and brain growth prolongation in humans with­
out an extension of body growth. To treat them all as reflections of a single 
progressive evolutionary trend not only equates very different biological 
phenomena on the basis of superficial appearance, it also leads us to ignore 
the likely important role of developmental processes on functional out­
comes. These three very different modifications of brain and body growth 
almost certainly have significantly different implications for brain organi­
zation, cognitive function, and the selection pressures that produced them. 
What we need to figure out is just how these differences in means effect 
differences in ends. The first problem, of course, is to understand how such 
differences come about, and this is just beginning to be understood. 
Using Fly Genes to Make Human Brains 
What determines which fractions of a developing embryo will become 
brain and non brain structures of the body and which will become the dif­
ferent brain structures? We owe thanks to the lowly fruit fly for providing 
the initial clues that are helping to solve this mystery. The position within 
an embryo where the brain, heart, stomach, limbs, and other organs will 
develop is controlled by a constellation of genes known as homeotic genes, 
so named because their expression patterns correlate with the repetition of 
similarly organized segments along the body axis (homeo meaning "similar;" 
sharing a common underlying plan). What is most significant about these 
body-plan genes is their evolutionary conservatism. Corresponding 
homeotic genes appear to be critical for determining segmental organiza­
tion in the developing bodies of worms, vertebrates, and insects. A homeotic 
gene important for the development of the human head and brain has even 
been transferred to mutant fly embryos whose development is abnormal be­
cause the corresponding genes have been inactivated, and this human gene 
has been able to compensate partially for the fly abnormality. This attests 
174 < The Symbolic Species

to the miserly nature of evolution, not just in genes but in their functions 
as well, especially when it comes to the events of early embryogenesis.s 
Homeotic genes all tend to all have one thing in common: they each en­
code a DNA-binding region that enables the protein molecule they produce 
to bind to other sites on a chromosome and so regulate the expression of 
other genes. The most common version of this DNA-binding region is 
termed the homeobox, because of its homeotic functions. Homeobox­
containing genes appear to have the ability to control whole suites of other 
genes, including other homeotic genes. It is probably this hierarchic feed­
back among different families of homeotic genes that enables them to or­
chestrate the same sequence of genetic events, with slight variations on the 
same theme, at different locations along the developing body, and at dif­
ferent stages in development. 
Homeotic genes initiate pattern formation in the embryo by virtue of dif­
ferent genes switching on in spatially separated groups of cells in a series 
of progressively restricted subdivisions of the embryo. Beginning with genes 
that are differentially activated in the head and tail halves, and the front 
(belly) and back halves, and progressing to the formation of regular bands 
of expression down the length of the body, to more complicated combina­
tions of these patterns created by orthogonal and overlapping expression 
patterns, the cells in the developing embryo inherit developmental fates 
from their precursors to become distinct adult cell types. At the early stages 
there is considerable similarity between very diverse species, so that the ex­
pression patterns of different homeotic genes in the developing vertebrate 
embryo produce a series of bands that resemble the segments of a worm 
or caterpilar. As in such more obviously segmental animals, these vertebrate 
body segments are each essentially replicas of one another to some degree, 
containing corresponding parts in corresponding positions. Vertebrae, ribs, 
and limbs resemble each other because they are corresponding elements 
in segmental units. Unlike a segmented worm or insect larva, however, the 
segments in vertebrates become obscured as the fetus develops, both be­
cause individual segments grow to differ and because they do not all remain 
in simple serial alignment. This is particularly the case with the develop­
ment of the head. 
The great German eighteenth-nineteenth-century writer and philoso­
pher of science Johann Wolfgang von Goethe was one of the first to suggest 
that the serial repetition of vertebrate body segments might be continued 
in cryptic form in the construction of the head. Later nineteenth-century bi­
ologists took up Goethe's hypothesis, including the influential anti-Darwinist 
Richard Owen. But determining whether there was such a correspondence 
Terrence W. Deacon > 175

was complicated by the large number of structures that are unique to heads 
(e.g., special sense organs like the eyes and ears). Only after almost two cen­
turies have developmental geneticists uncovered evidence that partially vin­
dicates this insight. In the body of the embryonic fruit fly, where the effects 
of homeobox genes were first understood, it is easier to find structures of 
the head that appear homologues to those of the rest of the body. For ex­
ample, the segmented structure of the antennae resembles the segmented 
structure of the limbs. Mutations affecting homeobox genes expressed in the 
head have shown that these similarities are deep. A homeotic mutation 
called antennapodia actually causes antennae to develop into limbs. This sug­
gests that the same basic program of genetic expression is slightly modified 
by homeotic controller genes to make both limbs and antennae. 
In mammals, too, homeotic genes are expressed in the developing head 
and brain, and most of these have fly counterparts. But in the vertebrate 
brain, there is an apparent breakdown of strict serial segmentation of gene 
expression (and later structure) as compared to the patterns in the brain 
stem and spinal cord. The early nervous system begins as a long tube run­
ning down the back from the head to the tail end of a wormlike, undiffer­
entiated body. A set ofhomeobox genes, called Hox genes in the mouse (and 
which correspond to a nearly identical series of HOM genes in flies), are 
expressed in serial order along this neural tube axis in partially overlapping 
patterns like tubes in a telescope. This pattern is depicted in Figure 6.4, and 
can be seen to become active in a nested pattern during development, with 
the first Hox genes to be expressed occupying the full length of the brain 
stem and spinal cord, and later Hox genes turning on within progressively 
more restricted and posterior subsets of the tube. The Hox genes produce 
a segmental pattern that is nearly as regular as their counterparts in flies, 
and they are arrayed in roughly the same front-to-hack order.6 
In the early stages of brain development, the front end of the neural tube 
enlarges to either side, producing two small, balloonlike bulges. These even­
tually form the telencephalon, made up of the cerebral cortex, limbic sys­
tem, and basal ganglia, on either side, which will expand to dominate the 
cranial cavity. In the middle between them is the front end of the tube, which 
will become the diencephalon (composed of the thalamus and hypothala­
mus); behind it is a bent section of the tube that will become the mesen­
cephalon, or midbrain (so named because it is midway between the 
hindbrain and spinal cord below and forebrain above); and further back is 
a regular set ofbulges that will become the cerebellum, pons, and brain stem. 
From the midbrain forward, the Hox genes are not expressed, and this cor-
176 < The Symbolic Species

responds to a transition from relatively simple seriality of organization to a 
more complicated geometry. This transition occurs roughly at the same 
point as the front end of the notochord (the mesodermal rod that foreshad­
ows the developing vertebral column and influences the formation of the 
neural tube), at which point the neural tube appears to curl around the end 
of the notochord, as though it has lost its linear organizing influence. It is an 
interesting coincidence that this transition zone roughly corresponds to the 
point where neural tube formation is initially induced, where major path­
ways into and out of the brain cross over to opposite sides, and where mat­
urational processes tend to begin and then propagate forward and backward. 
Although strict segmentation breaks down forward of this point, a sort 
of modified segmental gene expression continues to subdivide the head end 
of the neural tube. The forebrain homeobox genes, whose expression pat­
terns are most similar to the segmental expression patterns of Hox genes, 
derive from two families of two genes each. These are designated by the 
acronyms "Emx" and "Otx," named for their associated mutation effects in 
the developing fly head (Emx = Empty Spiracle and Otx = Orthodenticle) 
where their homologues were first identified. Like the Hox genes, these 
genes are expressed in a nested pattern in the vertebrate brain 
(0tx2>0txl>Emx2>Emxl, shown in Figure 6.4), with the largest domain 
(Otx2) extending from the front of the brain to the back of the midbrain, 
and the smallest domain centered in the dorsal telencephalon roughly cor­
responding to the entire isocortex (Emxl).7 The timing of gene expression 
from largest to smallest expression region is like that of Hox genes, except 
that the direction of these expression trends is reversed. Hox genes are 
turned on in a front-to-hack order and Otx-Emx genes are turned on in a 
roughly back-to-front order. One other major difference, however, is that 
the expression of the Otx and Emx genes is mostly confined to the upper 
or dorsal part of the forebrain neural tube, whereas Hox genes are ex­
pressed in complete cross-sectional segments of the tube. These are only a 
few of the homeotic genes that are expressed in the developing forebrain 
and that play niajor roles in determining its organization, but the segrega­
tion of dorsal from ventral gene expression and the back-to-front segmen­
tation appear to be common to most other forebrain genes' expression 
patterns. 
The discovery of homeotic genes has initiated a revolution in the study 
of brain development and brain evolution. Because they determine the 
boundaries of the major classes of cell lineages and growth fields within the 
developing brain, they provide an important new source of data about pre-
Terrence W. Deacon > 177

head 
thorax 
abdomen 
9 
fly embryo 
s:n=8e dm76lkl 
+, 
j \ 
N 
N 
HOM 
-
-
- - -
- - -
fly genes 
ô 
Emx1 ,2 
homologies I 
..l.. I 
I L...l.J ª
«
 
ór""S 
+ + + t t rrl f f f f t 
Hoxa 
- - - - - - -
- - -
-
m 
o Hoxb 
- - - - - - - - -
: Hoxc 
- - -
- - - - - -
e Hoxc 
-
- -
Figure 6.4 Expression in the developing fly and mouse of three families of homeotic 
genes (which are presumed to be the same in humans). These include the HOM, or­
thodenticle, and empty spiracle gene families in flies; and the corresponding Hox, 
Otx, and Emx gene families in mammals. Each small rectangle on a line depicts the 
position of a gene on a string of DNA in a chronwsome. Vertical arrows indicate prob­
able honwlogies; also there are many gene duplications in mammals. Note the spa­
tial correspondence of expression patterns along the body axes of both species. The 
Hox genes are expressed in the brain stem and spinal cord in spatially overlapping 
segments, with the earliest to be expressed covering the largest portion of the neural 
tube (indicated by the innernwst line curving around the top of the embryonic 
mouse brain). Each successive Hox gene to be expressed starts a little further down 
the brain stem (indicated by lines overlapping), creating a segmental expression pat­
tern that plays an important role in determining the segmental positions of the var­
ious sensory and nwtor nuclei of the brain stem and also organizes the segmentation 
of major body parts (e.g., limbs). The Otx and Emx genes are expressed in the mid­
brain and forebrain of mammals and are nwstly confined to dorsal structures (i.e., 
on the outside of the curve of the forebrain). The earliest to be expressed is Otx2, which 
covers the largest sector of the dorsal forebrain after becoming successively restricted 
to this region over time from an initial distribution that includes nwst of the undif­
ferentiated embryo. The last of these to be expressed, Emxl, iY alnwst entirely con­
fined to the region that will develop into cerebral cortex. S 
= spinal cord, C = 
cerebellum and brain stem, M = midbrain, D = diencephalon, and T = telencephalon. 
178 < The Symbolic Species

viously cryptic sources of information used to design brains. These corre­
spondences are particularly relevant for understanding how evolution might 
be able to adjust proportions in bodies and brains, as it has in the human 
case. Indeed, transgenic embryos of mice, chicks, frogs, and flies in which 
the expression of homeotic genes has been experimentally modified often 
exhibit significant changes in body plan, including even the addition or 
deletion of segmental divisions of the brain. So, the sorts of changes in body 
plan that are characteristic of both the primate shift and the human shift in 
brain/body proportions may well be traceable to homeotic gene effects. U n­
fortunately, although the expression domains of these genes have been well 
mapped out in developing mouse brains and bodies, there is almost no cor­
responding information for comparing human and nonhuman primate 
brains. Though it is almost certain that highly similar patterns ofhomeotic 
gene expression will be present, we are not in a position to make the ap­
propriate direct comparisons to decide whether subtle expression differ­
ences determine either the primate shift in body development or the human 
shift in brain development. Nevertheless, because of the incredible con­
servatism of these developmental genetic mechanisms, some important 
clues to the genetic basis for these primate and human differences can be 
extrapolated from experiments involving other species' embryos, even those 
of nonmammals. 
How might changes in homeotic gene expression affect such global 
neural proportions? An extreme example is provided by a recently de­
scribed gene called Liml (the initial version of this gene type was identi­
fied in roundworms). In mice, the corresponding gene appears to be critical 
for initiating head formation. Mouse embryos lacking a working copy of this 
gene fail to develop heads altogether, though most of the postcranial struc­
tures develop relatively normally. 8 Though head deletion is hardly a useful 
adaptation, such independent determination of head and body development 
suggests that whole suites of other developmental events may also J:>e able 
to affect heads and bodies differentially. This may help explain the relative 
ease with which hody growth and proportions can be readily affected by se­
lective breeding, while heads and especially brains change comparatively 
little (as in small and large dog breeds). 
An even more relevant experimental manipulation of brain and body pro­
portion has been demonstrated in frogs (see Figure 6.5). The expression of 
the frog version of the Otx2 gene (X-Otx2; X- for Xenopus, a genus of frog), 
has been followed from the fertilized egg to the late stage embryo, and has 
been shown to become progressively restricted over development to the 
head end of the body, where it is eventually only expressed in the forebrain, 
Terrence W. Deacon > 179

as in mice. This narrowing and focusing of expression appears partly con­
trolled by interactions with other genes and gene products in the embryo. 
The extent to which X-Otx2 becomes restricted to the head end of the neural 
tube can be experimentally manipulated by bathing the embryo in another 
differentiation factor (retinoic acid). This decreases X-Otx2 expression lev­
els all over, and causes the head and brain to recruit a much-reduced frac­
tion of the embryonic body as a result. An inverse effect is induced ifX-Otx2 
expression is artificially increased (e.g., by injecting extra X-Otx2 RNA into 
the zygote). This causes overall X-Otx2 expression to be higher throughout 
the embryo, and results in a much-enlarged fraction of the embryonic body 
becoming recruited to head and brain development. Such experiments sug­
gest that concentration threshold effects may play a crucial role in the 
global proportioning of these large segmental distinctions during develop­
ment. Relative timing or rate of gene product production might thus be im­
portant factors distinguishing species where these proportions have become 
modified. 
One likely means of increasing levels of expression that seems to be uti­
lized by homeotic gene systems is gene duplication. Gene duplication is a 
common evolutionary phenomenon that has produced most families of re­
lated genes, such as the many variants of hemoglobin genes that are active 
at different times of mammal development corresponding to different 
oxygen-transfer requirements (e.g., in the womb as opposed to out of it). 
Gene duplication is also quite prevalent among homeotic genes, as in the 
Hox, Otx, and Emx gene families discussed above. There is clearly some de­
gree of redundancy of developmental effect in many of these genes, because 
it is not uncommon for knockout mutants (missing working copies of a par­
ticular gene) to develop relatively normally or with only minor structural 
modifications, even where ectopic expression (turned on indiscriminately 
in inappropriate body regions) of the same gene may cause significant struc­
tural modifications. Variants of the same gene active at nearly the same time 
in overlapping domains may contribute to a selective expansion of corre­
sponding segmental expression domains within the neural tube by shifting 
the relative concentration gradients, where threshold levels produce bor­
ders between regions determining different cell fates. Thus, a homeotic 
gene duplication in evolution might be the genetic equivalent of the ex­
perimental introduction of extra gene product in the frog embryos de­
scribed above. 
Though we are still a ways from proving any clear association between a 
known homeotic gene difference and any naturally occurring species brain 
structure difference, the field is still very young. We at least know where 
180 < The Symbolic Species

ALTERED FROG 
EMBRYOGENESIS 
neural tube 
formation 
+ X-Otx protein 
in zygote 
+ retinoic acid 
in solution 
brain formation 
Figure 6.5 Schematic depiction of the effects on embryonic brain and body propor­
tions of rrwdifying X-Otx2 gene expression in developingfrog embryos (X-Otx and X­
Hox refer to Xenopus horrwlogues of mammalian Otx and Hox-cluster genes). The 
normal growth pattern (middle right) is depicted from the stage of initial neural tube 
formation to the point at which the major forebrain structures are formed. The top 
right image depicts the effects of increasing levels ofX-Otx2 in the cells (added to em­
bryonic stem cells). The results are a posterior shift of the transition between the ex­
pression ofX-Otx and X-Hox genes (demarcated by the black arrow), a corresponding 
increase in the size of the head and brain (beginning at the level of the midbrain), and 
a corresponding decrease in the postcranial body. The bottom right image shows the 
reverse effect produced by blocking X-Otx expression. When X-Otx is present in low 
levels, it becomes restricted to only a very small part of the front of the neural tube, 
resulting in a greatly reduced midbrain and forebrain. The images graphically sum­
marize experiments described by Boncinelli and Mallamaci (1995). P = prosen­
cephalon (early st-age telencephalon + diencephalon); M = midbrain; S = spinal cord. 
Recently the development of a mutant mouse lacking Otx2 has been described by 
Ang et al. (1996). These mouse embryos are abnormal from the gastrula stage and 
fail to develop the mast forward part of the brain. 
we should be looking for the appropriate developmental genetic links. Con­
sider in this context the reduction of the primate body with respect to the 
bodies of other mammal embryos. The nature of the shift in proportions 
and the timing of its appearance are important clues about possible devel-
Terrence W. Deacon > 181

opmental genetic correlates. Since this shift in proportions is evident at the 
earliest point in embryogenesis at which primate and non primate brains are 
distinguishable, it suggests that there has been some change in the expres­
sion of some of the very early acting genes responsible for establishing this 
segmental distinction. The Otx experiments offer a good model for 
processes that would affect proportions at this stage of development. Com­
parative neuroanatomical data should be able to guide us to the appropri­
ate juncture in development, to the extent that it can specifY exactly where 
segmental shifts in proportions have occurred. In fact, information about 
the deviation of human brain gro\1\-th from other primates may actually be 
of sufficient resolution to enable us to make a more precise prediction 
about its genetic correlates. 
Large sets of quantitative data comparing human to other primate brain 
structures have been available for decades, and these have been subject to 
numerous statistical analyses. To date, none of these analyses has utilized 
information about the patterns of brain development analytically to carve 
the brain into the appropriate growth fields and to determine the nature of 
the underlying segmental shifts in proportions, because until recently such 
information was unavailable. And this is critical. To measure things appro­
priately, it helps to know the locations of the natural developmental divi­
sions. If one wanted to study the growth of the human body during 
childhood, it would not be useful to measure arbitrary divisions (such as the 
distance from the neck to the middle of the forearm compared to the dis­
tance from the middle of the forearm to the first knuckle). It would make 
better sense to measure body segments that grow separately, for example, 
long bones as measured from joint to joint. Since the homeobox gene ex­
pression boundaries determine the "joints" between brain growth fields, 
they should be the most useful guides in determining which measurements 
will be most informative. 
The analysis of brain structure allometries, like the analysis of brain/body 
allometries, has been led down many blind alleys because of this uncertainty 
about the appropriate units for analysis, and a failure to pay attention to de­
velopmental patterns. In addition to a lack of developmental clues, two other 
analytical problems have complicated the interpretation of quantitative 
brain data and have led to confusing and conflicting assessments. These have 
mostly derived from a failure adequately to control for size effects in 
part/whole comparisons, similar to the brain/body problems we encountered 
earlier. But unlike the brain and body comparisons, where brains make up 
a small fraction of the body at best, some brain parts constitute a large frac-
182 < The Symbolic Species

tion of the brain, and so proportional comparisons can misrepresent growth 
relationships by failing to treat the parts separately.9 This is a particularly 
thorny problem for brain development and evolution. The size of a body 
structure (especially a subdivision of the brain, such as a thalamic nucleus 
or a cortical area) is determined both by the number of cells generated (pro­
liferation), and by nonproliferative processes that carve this field into func­
tional subdivisions (parcellation). Development proceeds via the 
interactions of both functions at different stages (these processes are dis­
cussed in the next chapter). The complication for quantitative analyses is 
that whereas cell multiplication has a scalar influence on all structures in­
volved, parcellation is a zero-sum process in which enlargement of one 
structure only occurs at the expense of another. So, failure to distinguish 
comparisons that are within from those that are between growth fields can 
produce confusing and misleading results. 10 
The shift in human brain/body and brain structure proportions inevitably 
involves both effects. Since proliferative effects are primary, and occur in 
the context of homeotic segmentation, we should initially try to match the 
quantitative neuroanatomical analyses to comparisons that roughly corre­
spond to the hierarchy ofhomeotic segmentation processes in brain devel­
opment. In general, more global proliferative effects will be expressed 
earlier and local parcellation effects will be determined later in develop­
ment. So let's begin with large-scale size relationships and progressively 
focus in on more localized effects in the search for what is different about 
human brains. 
The discovery of growth deviations is aided by the fact that in general 
the relative proportions of different brain structures are predictably scaled 
with respect to overall brain size. When the volumes of mammal brain 
structures are plotted, the points marking the volumes of pairs of structures 
in different species tend to fall neatly along a smooth curve (or a straight 
line in logarithmic coordinates). These highly predictable relationships be­
tween the sizes of major brain structures are a reflection of the fact that 
brains of vastly different sizes derive from a similar highly conserved 
homeotic starting point chiefly by extrapolating global proliferative 
processes. The numerical predictability of brain structures differs somewhat 
from one mammalian order to another; but within orders, families, and gen­
era there is progressively less individual divergence from the trends. 
We have established that the fetal brain/body growth pattern for human 
development is essentially the same as for any "generic" monkey or ape, so 
we need to look one level down (and later in development) for what might 
Terrence W. Deacon > 183

be the human difference. When comparing such major brain "segments" 
as the telencephalon, diencephalon, and so on, patterns of deviation begin 
to emerge, and a clear, regionally correlated shift away from typical primate 
proportions is evident when we begin to consider major subdivisions of each. 
When the values for structures in the human brain are added to plots of the 
corresponding structures of other primate species, the curves extrapolated 
from other primate data predict the sizes of many, but not all human brain 
structures. Those major structures that are predictable from typical primate 
size trends tum out to be located within contiguous segmental divisions of 
the human brain. Thus, components of the basal ganglia (such as the stria­
tum and the pallidum) are matched in size to one another according to the 
pattern typical of primates, and these are also matched in size to major com­
ponents of the diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus). But the human 
volumetric relationships most consistently deviate from the primate ex­
trapolations only in certain comparisons between separate brain structures. 
For example, when we compare any of the basal or subcortical forebrain 
structures (basal ganglia, thalamus, hypothalamus) to the cerebral cortex, 
or compare the brain stem and spinal cord to the adjacent cerebellum, this 
predictability breaks down (see Figure 6.6). The nonhuman primate data 
underestimate how these structures have scaled up in size with respect to 
one another in the human brain, so that, for example, the cerebral cortex 
is roughly twice as big as predicted for many other forebrain structures, and 
three times as big as predicted for the brain stem, spinal cord, and the rest 
of the body (see Figures 6.6 and 6.7). 
The patterning of these deviations is interesting. Two of the most deviant 
structures, the cerebellum and cerebral cortex, originate from the dorsal (or 
back) side of the developing neural tube (as does the dorsal midbrain, which 
also appears enlarged compared to ventral-front oriented-structures). 
This deviation from primate patterns suggests that the growth relationship 
between major dorsal and ventral segments of the developing forebrain has 
been somehow altered, whereas the many relationships within each of these 
broad divisions have remained relatively constant. Such a general pattern 
is an important clue. It indicates that the extensive functional interdepen­
dence of these dorsally and ventrally derived brain regions is not crucial for 
determining their respective growth (though one might have predicted that 
the cerebral cortex would need to be strongly coupled in size with its major 
sources of inputs and major targets for outputs). On the other hand, the fact 
that there is growth linkage between major groups of structures that are not 
so extensively interconnected or functionally dependent suggests that the 
184 < The Symbolic Species

30 
human • 
25 
-
.. 
E 20 
.§ 
E 1 5  
::1 
-
ftl 
1 0  
·;: 
t:l 
5 
5 
10 
1 5  20 
25 
30 
A 
diencephalon (mm3) 
-
.. 
E 
.§ 
>C 
G 
t: 
Cl 
u 
Cl 
G 
c 
35 
B 
1 200 
1000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
human 
• 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
diencephalon (mm3) 
Figure 6.6 Two examples of human brain structure proportions showing both pro­
portional and disproportional relationships. 
A. Proportional expansion (i.e., predicted by the primate allometric growth pat­
tern for these structures) of the diencephalon and striatum in the human brain (both 
mostly confined to the ventral forebrain. 
B. Deviation from the predicted relationship between the size of the cerebral cor­
tex of the diencephalon, showing increased cortex despite the intimate functional and 
connectional interdependence between these structures (data from Stephan, Frahm 
and Baron, 1981). 
shift must be determined at a fairly early stage in neuroembryogenesis, when 
these segmental divisions are just forming. At this stage, only crude divi­
sions of the brain are specified, neural stem cells have not yet given rise to 
the differentiated neurons and glia (additional support cells around neu­
rons) that will comprise these structures. 
When we trace back the developmental history of those structures in 
human brains that are significantly enlarged versus those that are only 
slightly enlarged, they divide up the neural tube in a pattern that corresponds 
to the expression domains of distinct groups ofhomeotic genes. The regions 
of the embryo that will give rise to enlarged structures in the human brain 
tend to be on the dorsal surface of the neural tube, and they form an es­
sentially continuous sheet from the cerebellum to the dorsal telencephalon 
(see Figure 6. 7B ). This is paralleled by a mostly dorsally restricted sequence 
of gene expression domains of the Otx and Emx homeobox genes, and 
matches the general segregation of homeotic gene expression for this dor­
sal/ventral forebrain distinction. Though we should not simply ascribe the 
human neuroanatomical divergence to the actions of Emx and Otx genes, 
their expression matches the entire pattern particularly well, and suggests 
Terrence W. Deacon > 185

% of prediction 
based on body size 
hypothetical shifts in 
embryonic cell production 
adult brain 
proportions 
300 
200 
1 00 
-
Key 
correspondences 
with homeotic 
gene expression 
A 
8 
Figure 6. 7 Figure summarizing the size deviation in major structural divisions of the 
human brain compared to what would be predicted for a "typical" ape brain for 
human body proportions (i.e., slightly larger than a chimpanzee). 
Key. Graphic indicator of brain proportions with lighter shades of gray indicat­
ing greater relative expansion. 
A. Corresponding regions of the developing human embryonic brain that must 
have undergone additional early stem cell production to produce the adult pattern 
of proportions. The expression domains of Otx and Emx genes are superimposed to 
show the correspondence with expanded regions. The arrow indicates that cerebel­
lar granule cells originate from the midbrain and migrate to the cerebellum so that 
this structure is a sort of mosaic made up from the combination of developmentally 
distinct lineages of cells. 
B. Schematic depiction of relative proportions in adult human brains compared 
to what would be appropriate for an ape with our body size (e. g., a large chimpanzee), 
with proportional deviations indicated by gray levels corresponding to the key. 
that the human difference is correlated with their expression in this region. 
What can we conclude from this parallel between gene expression do­
mains and growth field differences in the human brain? First, the differ­
ence is not the result of a segmental shift at the level of the whole brain and 
body, as it appears to be in primate evolution, because the whole brain is 
not uniformly enlarged. Second, the embryological patterning of prolifer­
ative differences that produces this proportional shift in structures corre­
sponds with the segmental pattern of certain gene expression domains in 
the brain. Whether or not these homeotic genes directly contribute to the 
human shift in cell production in these regions, it seems clear that the ef­
fect is restricted to the cell lineages specified by them. Indeed, as we have 
seen, there are experimental precedents for changes in the expression of 
186 < The Symbolic Species

one of these gene groups ( Otx) affecting brain proportions by a fairly sim­
ple concentration effect, so it does not take a great leap of imagination to 
imagine a mechanism (such as additional gene duplication) whereby the 
human proportional shift might be produced. 
The Developmental Clock 
The cells that comprise large and small animals differ only modestly in 
size. What determines an organism's size is mostly how many cells are pro­
duced. But the signals that tell embryonic mouse cells to undergo a smaller 
number of cell divisions than embryonic elephant cells has yet to be iden­
tified. The number of cell divisions that ensue after fertilization of an ovum 
is not just the crucial determinant of the size of the whole body; the same 
mechanism also indirectly specifies the size of each major organ and region 
of the body. Though there are many tantalizing clues about how this de­
velopmental clock is linked to other developmental mechanisms, what we 
don't know about this clock has kept one of the most important variables of 
organism design shrouded in mystery. 
The decision about how many cell divisions will be needed to build a 
mammal body appears to be made quite early in development. Some of the 
best hints about the size-determination process come from work with early 
embryos. One of the earliest multicelled stages is called the blastula and 
consists of a ball of cells that forms from the earliest divisions of the fertil­
ized egg. The ability to separate and manipulate cells from this structure 
has played a crucial role in genetic engineering. If these cells are removed 
and maintained in suspension in a culture dish bathed by an appropriate 
growth medium, they can continue to divide over and over again without 
beginning the first steps toward differentiation that, in a normal embryo, 
would eventually lead to a nondividing final form. In this undifferentiated 
state, they can be placed into another blastula where they will be recruited 
to differentiate along with its own cells, and there they can come to assume 
any of the possible cell types of the developing host body. But one feature 
of their development appears to be invariant: whether placed in an em­
bryonic body or an adult body, they appear to develop on a schedule that 
reflects the rate at which they would normally develop, irrespective of 
whether placed in a fetal, adult, or different species context. At the start of 
the differentiation process, in whatever context this begins, the cells acti­
vate an internal developmental clock that determines the number of cell 
divisions that are allowed before becoming committed to final cell fates and 
ceasing mitosis. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 187

The regulation of the relationship between cell differentiation and mi­
tosis probably involves an interaction between gene products in the cyto­
plasm of the cell and the genes within its nucleus. In experiments where 
the nucleus of a cell destined to become a frog skin cell is reimplanted into 
a zygote that has had its own nucleus removed, the genes within the skin 
cell nucleus are able to start the whole embryonic process all over again and 
produce an entire frog. Presumably, the actions of the genes produce cu­
mulative changes in the contents of the cytoplasm that exert a feedback ef­
fect on gene activity. A similar rate-concentration effect also may account 
for the difference in the setting of the developmental clock in species with 
different adult body sizes. Slower production or accumulation of these sig­
naling molecules will allow more mitotic cycles to occur between succes­
sive transitions to more restricted cell fates. The starting of this clocklike 
interaction appears to affect numbers of cell divisions primarily by deter­
mining when crucial differentiating genes, like homeotic genes, get turned 
on. Most vertebrate embryos regulate differentiation irrespective of cell pro­
liferation once the process has started. This is demonstrated by removing 
a significant fraction of the as yet undifferentiated cells from a vertebrate 
blastula and letting it continue to develop. The result will be a dwarfed but 
otherwise normal body that develops at a normal rate. 
Another clue to this process is provided by species of frogs and sala­
manders that have enormous amounts of DNA in their genomes (the ex­
cess is apparently redundant, noncoding DNA). These species have a few 
other curious traits in common. They are all very slow-developing dwarves 
compared to other related species with normal genomes, and they all have 
very low metabolic rates and very slow cell-proliferation rates. It seems that 
by forcing the gene transcription and replication processes to sort through 
reams of superfluous genetic information, the ticking of the developmen­
tal clock is slowed, along with metabolism and cell-division rates. Normally, 
a slowed developmental clock would allow more divisions between se­
quential stages of development, producing a larger organism. The large 
genome species are the exceptions that prove the rule. In them, fewer cell 
divisions take place between the greatly prolonged developmental transi­
tions. 
For brain development, the autonomy of the developmental clock means 
that the number of cell divisions completed by the time the cells of the brain 
have taken on their final fates is decided before there is any sign of a brain 
or other body regions in the embryo. From that point on, the size of the 
brain depends on what fraction of the developing embryo is selected to be­
come neural tissue by the expression of homeotic genes. The relative in-
188 < The Symbolic Species

dependence of homeotic parcellation and proliferation processes can be 
demonstrated by modifying differentiation at the middle stages in devel­
opment. The induction of neural tube formation11 can be duplicated in a 
single embryo if another inducer region from another embryo is implanted 
into the developing embryo. As a result, a second neural tube will be in­
duced to form, and if allowed to mature, it will produce Siamese twins with 
linked bodies but separate nervous systems. An important feature of 
Siamese twinning, for questions of brain size, is that although the mass of 
the whole body is lower than for two separate individuals, the two brains 
are generally not so correspondingly reduced in size. A similar indepen­
dence is also demonstrated by cross-species transplantation (or xenotrans­
plantation) experiments. In one insightful experiment, whole segments of 
the embryonic neural tube from Japanese quail embryos were transplanted 
into embryonic chick brains.12 Japanese quails are much smaller than chick­
ens, and as adults they have much smaller brains. When major parts of the 
quail brain are substituted for corresponding parts of a chicken brain shortly 
after neural tube formation, the resulting chimeric birds grow up with quail 
brain structures that are diminutive compared to the host brain structures. 
This tendency to grow to appropriate size even when in an inappropriate 
developmental context applies to other body structures and other combi­
nations of animals as well. In our laboratory, we have transplanted dissoci­
ated cells from embryonic pig brains into adult rat brains. Even in this 
altered context, they still develop on a pig schedule to become pig-size neu­
rons (which are slightly larger, with longer axons and dendrites, than rat neu­
rons; see Figures 6.8 and 6.9),13 
These unnatural manipulations demonstrate that early setting of the de­
velopmental clock results in a kind of preestablished growth harmony 
among all subsequent organ systems. The setting of the clock thus appears 
to differ from species to species, though not from cell to cell within an in­
dividual. This explains why the growth of the brains and bodies of differ­
ent species tend:; to be so similarly orchestrated and produces almost 
mathematical regularity in allometries. Embryos that are initially carved up 
in the same way but whose cells have different settings of the clock follow 
a common growth plan that is merely extrapolated to produce systemati­
caly different end points. 
A number of evolutionary theorists in the first half of the twentieth cen­
tury, noticing that in certain ways human adults resembled ape fetuses 
(large brains/small faces for our bodies; hairlessness), suggested that this 
might reflect a sort of arresting or retardation of human development re­
sulting in the retention of fetal-like traits. But the superficial resemblance 
Terrence W. Deacon > 189

A 
quail 
chicken 
B 
embryo 
embryo 
CNS 
CNS 
prosencephalon 
mesencephalon 
• 
rhombencephalon 
midbrain 
reduced 
removal & 
midbrain 
somites 
transplant 
around 
spinal cord 
normal 
chicken 
brain 
Figure 6.8 Results of transplanting a segment of the neural tube from the central ner­
vous system of a developing quail embryo to that of a developing chicken embryo. 
Since quails are smaller than chickens, by the time the birds hatch the inserted quail 
region has grown to quail proportions but not chick proportions, indicating that the 
developmental clock is intrinsic to the cells. 
of human proportions to fetal-ape proportions is no more than a resem­
blance, because there is no global sense in which humans appear to have 
slowed development or differentiation of cells. However, there is a more 
subtle sense in which developmental timing mechanisms may have been 
reset in human evolution. The rate of human brain maturation is appropriate 
for the size brain we have, but it is prolonged compared to other primates 
of our same body size. In this regard, our brain's developmental clock has 
been extended, though the effect is not equivalently mapped to cell­
proliferation and differentiation processes throughout the body. 
Where does all this leave us in our analysis of the disproportionate growth 
of the dorsal forebrain of human embryos? At the present time, we have 
taken this reductionistic analysis down as far as the clues, and our current 
knowledge of the relevant processes, allow. But now that we know the "sig­
nature" of such a segmental change in cell production, we can begin to look 
for other examples involving other species, other brain structures, and other 
genes, and to use these as models to investigate the sort of molecular mech-
190 < The Symbolic Species

A 
fetal rat 
neural 
transplant 
B 
fetal pi& 
neural 
transplant 
FETAL GRAFT AXON GROWTH IN ADULT RAT BRAINS 
rapid maturation 
of rat neurons 
prolonged 
maturation 
of pig neurons 
maturation time 
limited 
growth of 
donor axons 
extensive 
growth of 
donor axons 
Figure 6.9 Correlations between size and the setting of the developmental clock for 
brain structures are derrwnstrated by fetal neural grafting experiments. 
A. Transplantation of neural cells from a rat embryo brain into an adult rat brain 
does not result in full regrowth of long axonal connections because the adult brain 
inhibits axon extension and thus slows growth so that when the cells reach maturity 
(after a few weeks at rrwst), the axonal connections have only grown a fraction of a 
millimeter: 
B. Xenotransplantation experiments derrwnstrate that the prolongation of the de­
velopmental clock of larger brains is even reflected in the development of isolated 
neural cells, irresyJective of context. Fetal cells from a larger species (pig) transplanted 
into an adult brain of a smaller one (rat) actually grow further to reach distant tar­
gets (bottom right) than do rat donor cell axons (top right). This appears to be the 
result of the much longer time ( rrwre than 4 rrwnths) during which pig axons remain 
immature and able to grow. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 191

anisms that must have been recruited in our own evolution. Despite the lack 
of a mechanism fully to explain human brain segment disproportions, we 
have a considerable base of developmental and comparative data at our dis­
posal from which to reconstruct how these changes affected brain evolu­
tion, brain structure, and brain function. The critical clues have already been 
provided by developmental neurobiology. These can help explain why it 
matters how the human difference in brain size was achieved. So we tum 
to these other neurodevelopmental processes in the next chapter. 
192 < The Symbolic Species

C 
H 
A 
P 
T 
E 
R 
S 
E 
V 
E 
N 
A Darwinian Electrician 
We all agree that your theory is crazy. The question which divides 
us is whether it is crazy enough. 
-Niels Bohr 
Musical Chairs 
B
rain evolution should be impossible! DaiWinian explanations require 
that incretp.ental stages in the evolution of any adaptation always must 
be ends in and of themselves. Each must be useful. Classic theories 
of brain evolution have long been haunted by a conundrum posed by this 
requirement. If brains evolved piecemeal, structure by structure, then how 
could a new structure be added or modified in any significant way and have 
any hope of being useful, given that it must be linked up in a highly sys­
tematic fashion with hundreds of thousands or millions of other neurons in 
dozens of other brain regions? This would seem to require the simultane­
ous occurrence of matching mutations in a large number of independent 
structures. So many parts of the brain are connected so intricately to so many 
193

others that it should be astronomically unlikely that adding new brain re­
gions or even modifying old ones could produce a result that worked well 
together, much less provide a functional advantage. Even changes in the pe­
riphery are difficult to reconcile, since for them to be functional a corre­
lated change must occur in the way the brain handles the input it provides. 
A mismatch between brain and peripheral organs would be less than use­
less. In far less complicated mechanisms, like computers or TV sets, slight 
changes are far more likely to degrade the function of the whole than im­
prove it. 
Luckily, brains aren't designed the way we design machines. Neither in­
credibly fortuitous and intricate mutations, nor immense amounts of evo­
lutionary time, nor intermediate functions that bridge the gap tum out to 
be necessary to address this riddle. The reason is that evolution builds 
brains using evolution itself as a design tool. As it matures, a brain literally 
adapts to its body. 
It would not be too much of a simplification to say that the size and shape 
of my hand and the types of cells that compose it were mostly determined 
by processes that took place in my hand during its development. Morpho­
genesis of most body parts is a result of local cell-cell interactions in which 
signaling molecules from one cell affect neighboring cells. So that when a 
genetic accident produces a mutated hand, it is fair to assume that the dam­
aged genes expressed in hand cells produced this effect. Cells are smal, so 
most cellular communications act over short distances. But this model of 
development is inadequate to explain brain development. It is not neces­
sarily the case that a modification in the size or shape or function of part of 
the brain is determined by the actions of cells within that region. Indeed, 
the processes that determine where functions will come to be located may 
depend more critically on what is going on in a number of other very dis­
tinct parts of the brain during its development. This is because the devel­
opmental assignment of neural functions to different regions of the brain 
is in many respects systemically determined. In a very real sense, the brain 
as a whole participates in designing its parts. The implications of this un­
usual developmental logic are only beginning to be appreciated for brain 
evolution. 
Unlike other cells of the body, neurons can be in direct contact with many 
cells that are located quite far apart from one another, by virtue of their long 
output (axons) and input (dendrite) branches. Because neurons are spe­
cialized for cell-cell communication over long distances, they can utilize an 
additional level of structural information over and above the regional seg­
regation of tissues and cell lineages to help organize their functions. As it 
194 < The Symbolic Species

matures, a neuron will send out a long axonal process with a specialized tip 
(a growth cone) that selectively extends the axon to contact cells in other 
regions guided by molecular signals expressed along the way. Eventually, 
growing axons will make contact with target neurons, often located in dis­
tant parts of the brain. Within target regions, axons establish functional con­
nections (synapses) with target neurons. Such connections are the basis for 
the specialized form of cellular communication-neurotransmission-that 
underlies the brain's information-processing functions. 
In the early stages of making synaptic connections, these synaptic links 
between nerve cells are also a force for structural differentiation. Because 
axonal extension allows populations of cells located distant from one another 
in the brain directly to interact and influence one another, it superimposes 
a nonlocal developmental logic on top of the local regional differentiation 
that preceded it. This complex interplay oflocal and distant cell interactions 
is capable of producing far more cellular heterogeneity, and therefore far 
more potential for functional differentiation, than is possible in any other 
organ system. Neurons born in distant regions and following very different 
developmental trajectories can directly and specifically communicate with 
each other, and so affect each other's differentiation. This introduces a 
whole new level of cell- and tissue-differentiation possibilities that makes 
brain development particularly complicated and counterintuitive. It makes 
it possible for the nervous system as a whole to participate actively in its own 
construction. It also offers an important source of variations and adaptations 
that can play a role in brain evolution. 
Classic neuroanatomical theories assumed that the differentiation of 
each brain structure was an independent trait, which would mean that dif­
ferent parts of the brain could be subject to independent evolutionary in­
fluences. But this turns out to be unlikely. One of the most important 
insights to come from neurobiology is that nongrowth processes play major 
roles in determining the size, organization, and function of brain regions. 
Many of thesȸ processes are actively self-destructive. For example, cell 
death-sometimes spontaneous, and sometimes driven by competition be­
tween cells for local resources-turns out to be a very important mecha­
nism for the developmental sculpting of parts of the nervous system, serving 
to match the proportions of one to another (see Figure 7.1). The logic of 
this process is essentially a Darwinian logic: overproduction of random vari­
ants followed by selective support of some and elimination of most. It is sim­
ilar to building a door by first building a wall and then later removing the 
portion of it that will serve as the doorway. Such a strategy, while appear­
ing somewhat wasteful of material, is highly efficient in its use of informa-
Terrence W. Deacon > 195

immature 
immature 
exuberant 
axonal 
growth 
B 
t 
A 
mature 
axonal 
competition, 
retraction, & 
cell death 
normal 
sparing by 
neuronal 
additional 
cell loss 
limb graft 
MUSCLE SYNAPSES 
SPINAL CORD MOTOR NEURONS 
Figure 7.1 Darwinian processes in development of the peripheral nervous system. 
A. Duringfetal development, axons growing out from spinal cord motor neurons 
compete for access to synaptic targets on muscle fibers. Initial axonal growth is es­
sentially nonspecific (though constrained by such factors as distance and substrates) 
and overlaps in its projections. Competition ensues in which only one neuron will 
occupy synapses on one muscle fiber; those that end up losing all their connections 
die out. The result is that the neuronal population is matched to the muscle cell pop­
ulation. 
B. Motor neuron cell bodies in the ventral hom of the spinal cord are initially 
produced in greater numbers than will survive to adulthood. But if a supernumer­
ary limb is grafted onto the developing embryo (this can be done with chick and frog 
embryos),fewer cells are eliminated. 
tion. It circumvents the difficulties of planning ahead and allows develop­
ment to proceed with a minimum of design or regulatory mechanisms. 
Since distant neuronal structures must engage in complex cooperative 
interactions in mature brains, the functional matching of cell populations 
and connections is particularly important. Programmed neuronal death 
plays a first role in this process by matching different but interconnected 
cell populations to one another. Some of the first evidence for the role of 
196 < The Symbolic Species

selective cell death in the netvous system came from studies of peripheral 
netves and their external connections. Normally, a significant fraction of the 
initial population of motor neurons is eliminated from the spinal cord. In 
addition, animals from which muscles or whole limbs have been experi­
mentally removed early in embryogenesis lose an even larger proportion of 
the motor neurons of the spinal cord and brain stem that would have pro­
jected to these peripheral structures. But in graft experiments where addi­
tional tissue is added to a developing embryo (e.g., an extra limb), fewer 
neurons than normal are lost from the areas connected to these grafts. 
Extra neurons were not initially produced, but neurons that would normally 
die were spared by the enlarged target (see Figure 7.1). Nature prefers to 
overproduce and trim to match, rather than carefully monitor and coordi­
nate the development of innumerable separate cell populations. 
This logic also describes the development of connectivity. Fetal axons 
have only rather general target attraction and avoidance information avail­
able to them, and so they don't "know" with any precision where to grow 
or on which cells they should terminate (see Figure 7.2). Recent studies 
have begun to demonstrate that a variety of guidance mechanisms assist a 
growing axon in locating a target region elsewhere in the brain. Among these 
are guide filaments extended from non-neuronal cells, regional differences 
in cell-surface adhesion, spatial patterns of attraction and repulsion mole­
cules, mechanical properties of tissues, and specific growth factors released 
by cells within target regions which help support axons that have arrived at 
the correct destination. These mechanisms are sufficient to bias axon growth 
toward selected general target regions, but they are insufficiently precise 
to specify any but the most global target distinction. More specific con­
nectivity is instead specified post hoc, so to speak, as many connections be­
come selectively culled in response to functional processes. 
One reason for this lack of specificity is that the amount of information 
necessary to specify even a few percent of neural connections between 
cells would dȹmand incredible amounts of genetic information. Further ev­
idence that there must be an outside source of brain-wiring information is 
provided by the relative constancy of genome size across vast differences 
in brain size and correspondingly astronomical differences in connections. 
Although the human brain probably possesses hundreds or even thousands 
of times the number of neurons that are in some of the smallest vertebrate 
brains and millions of times more connections, it does not appear that this 
has correlated with a significant increase in genome size. 
But there is another constraint on the developmental process that has 
dictated this design strategy. The genetic signaling mechanisms (regulatory 
Terrence W. Deacon > 197

NORMAL CONNECTIONS 
spinal 
cord 
neocortex 
layers 
/" 3-4 
5 
-.... & 
neocortex 
& thalamus 
neocortex 
& neocortex 
neocortex 
& midbrain 
thalamus 
& midbrain 
.J.* 
" 
Figure 7.2 Four kinds of evidence that suggest that diferent regions of developing 
cerebral cortex all begin without specific input and output affinities, though corti­
cal layers do show connectional specification, and that spatial position and com­
petitive interactions between axons determine local function and connection patterns 
that distinguish functional areas. 
Left. Normal connection patterns between cortex and other subcortical structures. 
Right. In tissue culture (in vitro) experiments, where explanted cerebral cortex 
and thalamus (the major input nucleus) slices are allowed to grow axons into one 
another, there are no preferred associations between specific thalamic nuclei and 
cortical regions. There are, however, other more selective patterns between cortical 
layers. For example, layers 3 and 5 can connect to any cortical structure (lower left); 
layer 5 can also project to midbrain tissue, but not to thalamus (top); and layer 6 
neurons do not project to cortex, only to thalamus (top). Relationship between thal­
amus and midbrain is predicted from the other combinations and natural patterns, 
but has not been demonstrated by experiment. These patterns suggest many pre­
dicted patterns that are untested. The figure summarizes studies from Molnar and 
Blakemore (1991) and Yamamoto, et al. (1989; 1992; 1995), among others who have 
corroborated these results. Asterisks indicate axons that fail to grow into the co­
cultured tissue. 
genes) that initially partition the neural tube into major regions operate by 
cell contact and the diffusion of large signaling molecules, and there is an 
upper limit to the size of the embryo within which such molecular diffu­
sion processes can operate effectively. Since essentially identical molecu­
lar processes are involved in establishing the initial brain divisions in animals 
198 < The Symbolic Species

as different in brain size as mice and humans, the same partitioning of neural 
segmental divisions must be extrapolated over a vast range of sizes. Larger 
brains will be less able to rely on genetic mechanisms to determine struc­
tural differences and more prone to proportional perturbations due to ex­
trapolated growth processes. The added design information has to come 
from somewhere else in larger brains, but little of the extra information 
seems to come directly from genes. In the same sense that Darwinian 
processes have created new design information for building organisms dur­
ing the course of the evolution of life, Darwinian-like processes in brain de­
velopment are responsible for creating the new information required to 
adapt large brains to themselves and to their bodies. 
Striking evidence for the generality of the information involved in spec­
ifying connections in the brain comes from neural transplantation experi­
ments that cross species boundaries. It seems reasonable to assume that the 
determination of circuitry in different species' brains should rely on dif­
ferent guidance signals for specifying connectional development. For ex­
ample, it is often assumed that human brains are different because human 
neurons receive different genetic instructions about where to grow and 
where not to grow, and which cells to connect with and which not to con­
nect with. Taking a bit of brain tissue from one species and placing it in an­
other species' brain should therefore mess up the neural "switchboard," so 
to speak, by flooding it with misrouted connections. The chimeric brains 
that result from such interspecies transplantation experiments should be 
dysfunctional in the extreme, and the greater the species difference, the 
greater should be the disruption of function. 
Surprisingly, this turns out not to be the case. In xenografting experiments 
(see Figure 7.3) in which fetal neural cells or even whole sections of em­
bryonic brain tissue are transplanted from one species into another, the 
donor neurons make connections that are not only appropriate but func­
tionally integrated with the host. In one series of experiments, we trans­
planted cells f:mm selected regions of fetal pigs' brains into various regions 
of adult rats' brains. When we analyzed them later, we discovered that the 
growing axons of pig cells correctly interpreted the signals provided by 
their rat host's brain to grow to regions of the brain that would have been 
normal targets for corresponding rat neurons.1 They apparently utilized the 
very same generic connection information that rat axons use during normal 
rat brain development. So, at this level of target specification, it appears that 
the signals for guiding the formation of neural connections in rat and pig 
brains are interchangeable. The implications for brain evolution are chal­
lenging. Rat brains are not pig brains, nor are pig brains merely bigger. It 
Terrence W. Deacon > 199

A 
c 
Normal connection patterns in 
mature rat (and pig) brains 
Growth of axons from fetal pig 
striatal cells implanted in striatum 
B 
Growth of axons from fetal pig 
cortex cells implanted in striatum 
0 ventral midbrain cells* 
dopamine cells e striatal cells e cortical cells 
Figure 7.3 Experiments implanting embryonic pig cells into rat brains (see also Chap­
ter 6, Figure 6. 9) demonstrate that initial axon guidance clues are not highly species­
specific, but instead are shared by species as diferent as pigs and rats. Even though 
the donor neurons are from a very diferent species, and are sometimes implanted 
in places in the brain where such neurons are not normally found, their axons are 
still able to use the host brains signals to guide their growth to appropriate targets 
(as in A). Neural cells from the embryonic cortex (B), striatum (C), and ventral mid­
brain (D) are shown transplanted into the striatum in separate experiments. It even 
seems probable that many of these guidance signals are shared with nonmammal 
species. This evolutionary conservatism suggests that species diferences in brain de­
sign may not be determined by specific "wiring instructions," but by other less di­
rect mechanisms. The asterisk indicates that the ventral midbrain contains both 
dopaminergic (light gray) and nondopaminergic (white) neurons, which are trans­
planted together but whose axons grow to very diferent targets. 
is of course possible that there are unique target signals in each, but the 
similarities suggest that the majority of connectional differences between 
pig and rat brains mostly emerge without cell-by-cell instruction. When a 
pig neuron grows up in a rat brain environment, it integrates \vith other neu­
rons according to rat rules. We must look elsewhere for the source of their 
differences-to a sort of micro-ecology of axon growth. 
So, how do precisely organized neural circuits develop from information 
200 < The Symbolic Species

growing 
axons in 
immature 
brain 
maturation 
A 
NORMAL DEVELOPMENT OF THALAMIC AND CORTICAL INPUTS 
cortical area 
transplanted 
to a different 
location 
maturation 
8 
DEVELOPMENT AFTER HETEROTOPIC CORTICAL TRANSPLANT 
damage 
to visual 
thalamus 
& tactile 
input 
neocortex 
thalamus 
visual & 
tactile inputs 
normal 
connections 
& functions 
develop 
axons 
grow 
to novel 
thalamic 
& cortical 
targets 
C 
DEVELOPMENT AFTER INPUT INTERRUPTION AND NEARBY TARGET DAMAGE 
Figure 7.4 Manipulations in developing animals that involve altering nonnal axonal 
competition relationships demonstrate how this can alter the wiring pattern of the 
brain. 
A. Nonnal pattern of connections. 
B. Transplantation of the frontal cortical (motor) region to the occipital (visual) 
region, prior to the development of axonal connections, causes the transplanted sec­
tor to develop connections appropriate to the visual, not the somatosensory area 
(Stanfield and O'Leary, 1985). 
C. Removing inputs destined for specific thalamic targets can allow other inputs 
to take over the vacated region and induce this part of the thalamus to transmit dif­
ferent sensory infonnation to the cortex changing its function (Sur and Benson, 1988; 
Frost and Metin, 1985). This indicates that the projections to thalamic nuclei also 
lack specific restrictions as to which specific nuclei they can enter: 
Terrence W. Deacon > 201

that is this generalized and vague, and how do species brain differences arise 
if not by specific instructions about which connections to change? Neurons 
overcome the problem of underdetermined target specificity by the same 
sort of logic that is used to match cell populations: selective elimination. 
They tend to overproduce branches of their growing axons, and these sam­
ple a large number of potential targets during the early stages of develop­
ment, though only a fraction of these connections are retained into 
adulthood. The remainder are eliminated in a competition between axons 
from different neurons over the same synaptic targets (Figure 7.4). This 
Darwinian-like process is responsible for much of the fine-tuning of neural 
connection patterns that accounts for the adaptive precision of brain func­
tions. 2 Like Darwinian evolution, the adaptive structure of neural circuitry 
emerges out of the selective promotion and elimination of specific variant 
patterns. By initially overproducing connections that have been spread to 
a wide variety of targets, and then selecting from among these on the basis 
of their different functional characteristics, highly predictable and func­
tionally adaptive patterns of connectivity can be generated with minimal 
prespecification of the details. This design logic also provides a means by 
which adaptive structural differences in neural circuitry can evolve in dif­
ferent species with a minimal number of correlated genetic changes. Al that 
is required are changes that bias either the initial growth and variety of ax­
onal connections or changes that bias the selective processes that cull some 
connections in favor of others. 
Biases influencing axonal selection can arise from both functional and 
quantitative factors. The central rule underlying this selection process is be­
lieved to be the degree of temporal correlation of firing patterns of input 
axons and output neurons. A neuron generally receives hundreds or thou­
sands of inputs from other neurons. No one of these inputs is sufficient to 
cause the receiving neuron to initiate an output signal; only the near­
synchronous firing of many inputs will succeed in activating the recipient 
to fire. By a simple cellular mechanism (initially hypothesized by the psy­
chologist Donald Hebb),3 axons that regularly release their neurotransmit­
ters in synchrony with the firing of the recipient cell (which indicates 
synchrony with a large fraction of the other input axons) will tend to have 
their links to that cell strengthened, perhaps by the release of some growth 
factors. Those that tend to fire out of synchrony will, conversely, tend to lose 
support, and eventually may be eliminated. Though initially proposed as a 
mechanism for learning, this mechanism can account for more than just the 
strengthening or weakening of connectional influences. In the context of 
the developing brain, where the numbers of connections are significantly 
202 < The Symbolic Species

output 
) 
signal 
A 
l r. l * 
input 
* __; "--
© .,_ signal 
SELECTIVE ELIMINATION OF SYNAPSES 
8 
axon 
IMMATURE - - - _. 
MATURE 
Figure 7.5 Top: Presumed basis for synaptic competition between axons is the cor­
relation of their firing patterns with other axons synapsing on the same cell. Axons 
firing relatively more out of sync ( 0) with the majority (A) will tend to be eliminated 
(B), probably due to failure to receive growth factors from the receiving cell. 
Bottom: Development of cerebral cortical projections to the brain stem and spinal 
cord begins with most areas of cortex projecting nonspecifically to most potential 
targets (C). During subsequent development, collateral projections that do not both 
receive and connect to other systems with similar signalling characteristics are elim­
inated, leaving connections with functionally segregated topographically organized 
connection patterns (D). 
in excess of what will be maintained to maturity, it determines which con­
nections will "win" in a biological variant of the children's game "musical 
chairs," where the numbers of viable targets decrease over time (Figure 
7.5A and B). 
The best illustrations of this competitive determination of connectivity 
and functional parcellation in brain regions come from studies of cortical 
development in mammals. Let's begin by considering the functional and ar­
chitectural specificity of different sectors of the cortical surface. The adult 
Terrence W. Deacon > 203

mammal cerebral cortex is divided into a number of distinct regions, de­
fined in terms of cell structure, functional specificity, and connections to 
other brain structures. In the rhesus monkey brain, for example, the dis­
tinct visual cortical areas alone may number in the dozens. The develop­
mental processes that are responsible for this "parcellation" of cortex involve 
some genetic specification of regionality, but surprisingly little. 
Another fetal transplant paradigm in which fetal cortex from one region 
is moved to another region has been employed by Dennis O'Leary and his 
colleagues at the University of California in San Diego in order to probe 
for factors controlling the establishment oflong-distance connections of cor­
tical neurons. these studies have provided some of the most dramatic ev­
idence of nonspecificity and selection processes in brain development. 
When immature tissue is transplanted from one site to another in the rat 
cortex-at a stage before any connections have been established-the con­
nections don't follow the move, but connect as though nothing had hap­
pened, apparently uninfluenced by the site of origin of the transplanted 
tissue (see Figure 7.4B). Related studies by many researchers have demon­
strated the mechanism that underlies this flexibility.4 In the early stages of 
cortical maturation, axons from every region of the cerebral cortex grow to 
al the potential targets for a cortical neuron. Subsequently, cortical neu­
rons in different regions selectively lose their connections with some tar­
get regions but maintain their connections with others, and complementary 
patterns of retained and lost connections develop in different cortical re­
gions (Figure 7.5C and D). By the later stages of development, strict re­
gional differences in connectivity remain so that cortical efferents from one 
area project to targets that all have similar modality of function (i.e., all­
motor or all-visual structures). 
But what biases the competition so that one region of cortex ends up spe­
cializing in visual and one in motor outputs? The complementary bias comes 
from input projections that nearly al arrive by way of the thalamus. But thal­
amic inputs to cortex also exhibit nonspecificity. This has been shown by 
growing brain tissues together in a dish (explantation as opposed to trans­
plantation). When randomly chosen chunks of embryonic fetal thalamus and 
cerebral cortex are grown near to one another in tissue culture, different 
sectors of cortex and thalamus are equally likely to grow linking connections 
(see Figure 7.2). This is not totally nonspecific growth because thalamic con­
nections will not grow to most other brain structures in similar conditions. 
Such growth appears more affected by physical proximity and the physical 
constraints inadvertently created by neighboring axons than by any spatial 
signal specificity (see Figure 7.5). 
204 < The Symbolic Species

In normally developing brains, however, not every thalamic structure is 
likely to get an even chance to innervate every cortical structure. Differ­
ences in timing of axonal growth, molecular gradients, and proximity may 
each offer subtle growth biases. The topology (i.e., relative spatial position 
of points) of connection maps from brain region to brain region tends to be 
maintained with only subtle variation from individual to individual within 
a species (and even to a large extent across species); also simply because 
projections tend to have difficulty crossing through one another in differ­
ent directions, and tend in most systems to separate into parallel bundles. 
Nevertheless, this spatial organization is only approximate in the early 
stages, and many divergent connections are made; but as development pro­
ceeds, most of these spatially aberrant projections are culled by competi­
tion. Within specific projection areas there is even a further degree of 
shaping up of connectional specificity. Projections that initialy ramify lo­
cally over a many-millimeter-wide area eventually become confined to very 
narow columns of recipient neurons to create precise maps that exhibit sen­
sory and motor topography. Thus, beginning from crude spatial and tem­
poral gradients which contribute initial biases to global afferent connection 
patterns, competitive processes at progressively more localized levels am­
plify these into what eventualy become fine-grained, point-to-point maps. 
Intrinsic factors clearly play a role and may introduce additional functional 
biases, but these are expressed in the context of many levels of previous bi­
asing and shaping processes that have roughed out what is connected to 
what. 
Cells in different areas of the brain are not their own masters, and have 
not been given their connection orders beforehand. They have some crude 
directional information about the general class of structures that make 
appropriate targets, but apparently little information about exactly where 
they should end up in a target structure or group of potential target struc­
tures. 
In a very litࡕral sense, then, each developiQg brain region adapts to the 
body it finds itself in. There is a sort of ecology of interactions determined 
by the other brain regions to which it is linked that selects for appropriate 
brain organization. This process provides the answer to the problem of cor­
related adaptations in different parts of such a complex system as brain and 
body. There need be no "preestablished harmony" of brain mutations to 
match body mutations, because the developing brain can develop a corre­
sponding organization "on line," during development. Paradoxically, the ini­
tially crude determination of targets is what allows the topographic precision 
of connections within the brain, because it allows for progressively more de-
Terrence W. Deacon > 205

tailed fine-tuning. After adapting to invariant features of the rest of the brain 
and body, neural connections can further take advantage of the wealth of 
invariant patterning that is intrinsic to the stimuli the organism encounters 
in its environment as well, by virtue of the micro-changes in synaptic dis­
tribution and strength linking individual neurons that constitute most of 
learning in mature organisms. Learning, then, is only the late-stage ex­
pression of a fine-tuning process that progresses from patterns involving the 
whole brain to those involving its smallest cellular branches. 
Thus, contrary to a century of speculative accounts of brain evolution, 
phylogenetic differences in the sizes and functions of particular cortical or 
nuclear regions cannot generally be attributed to the addition of cells to that 
area or to changes in gene expression in that area. This sort of evolutionary 
phrenology is inconsistent with the processes that underlie differences in 
brain organization. The relative sizes of the different cortical areas, the spe­
cific connections that they have with other brain structures, and even at­
tributes oflocal cellular architecture are not locally determined. If a cortical 
region appears to have changed size or function in the course of evolution 
it is likely because of a systemic change affecting a number of brain regions 
whose connections happen to converge on it. This indirect and distributed 
determination of brain structure and connectivity radically changes how we 
must think about the evolution of the nervous system. 
Evolution is thus provided with a power tool for adaptive flexibility. The 
brain does not have to be redesigned every time that the body is restruc­
tured. The eyes can converge or diverge, the olfactory apparatus can shrink 
or expand, limbs can be reduced to vestigial proportions or radically re­
structured for different forms oflocomotion, or tactile receptors can be con­
centrated into the tips of sensitive digits or tails over the course of phylogeny, 
and the very same neural developmental mechanisms can produce a brain 
that is appropriate. This explains why pig or human fetal neurons trans­
planted to the brain of a rat host grow to appropriate targets and produce 
appropriate functional consequences-for a rat. Each species does not 
need its own revised axonal growth instructions. The developmental infor­
mation is highly conserved precisely because it can be general, relying on 
Darwinian-like developmental processes to produce the detailed adapta­
tions of neural networks to one another. This introduces an evolutionary 
logic that runs counter to many of the most basic assumptions of clasࡖic the­
ories of brain evolution. We do not need to invoke all sorts of specific and 
highly improbable mutations of brain structure design in order to account 
for changes in the relationships between the parts of brains. But we are also 
206 < The Symbolic Species

not able to call on genetic micro-management of neural wiring to explain 
brain and cognitive differences between species either. 
Displacement 
Because the construction of neural circuitry has a crude and initially un­
specified character, subtle differences in such biasing influences as devel­
opmental timing, neuronal numbers, and correlated activity patterns can 
be a source of species differences in brain function. If the determination 
of which connections persist and which are retracted depends on the cor­
related activity of other axons projecting to the same target region, then the 
relative quantities of projections that arrive in any target region are a par­
ticularly important selective bias affecting which connections will be elim­
inated or not. Among competing structures, the structure that sends the 
greatest number of axons to a particular target will tend to drive the activ­
ity patterns of cells in that target more effectively, and this will give con­
nections that are from a larger source population a "voting" advantage in 
determining which connections will remain. This has very important im­
plications for understanding the patterns and processes of brain evolution, 
because it means that modifications of the relative proportions of periph­
eral and central nervous system structures can significantly alter connec­
tion patterns. So, although genetic tinkering may not go on in any significant 
degree at the connection-by-connection level, genetic biasing at the level 
of whole populations of cells can result in reliable shifts in connection pat­
terns. 
This suggests that regional brain and peripheral nervous system size ef­
fects play a major role in mammalian brain evolution.5 I call this evolutionary 
mechanism displacement. In general terms, relative increases in certain neu­
ronal populations will tend to translate into the more effective recruitment 
of afferent and efferent connections in the competition for axons and 
synapses. So, a genetic variation that increases or decreases the relative sizes 
of competing source populations of growing axons will tend to displace or 
divert connections from the smaller to favor persistence of connections from 
the larger (see Figure 7.6). Differences in the relative sizes of alternative 
target structures will have a complementary effect. The relative enlarge­
ment of one target or another will tend to attract connections away from 
the smaller since the competitive elimination is more fierce within the 
smaller structure than in the larger structure. 
The notion of axonal displacement helps explain a number of cases of 
Terrence W. Deacon > 207

NORMAL DEVELOPMENT 
immature 
normal 
mature 
DISPLACEMENT EFFECTS 
increased 
input 
decreased 
input 
Figure 7.6 Examples of some general mechanisms of cell and axonal displacement ef­
fects influenced by relative size changes in diferent brain or peripheral neural 
structures. 
Left: Normal culling of projections from a source to a target (idealized thalamo­
cortical connections are depicted) results in a parcellation of the target structure into 
functionally discrete regions (two shades of gray). 
Right: Changes in either target or source cell populations can shift the balance 
of competition and produce displacement effects, with cascading consequences in 
other brain structures. Relatively increasing ( +) or decreasing (-) the numbers of 
inputs from diferent peripheral sources (e.g., due to normal cell proliferation dif­
ferences in diferent species or due to early damage) effectively reduces one of the 
competing input sources and modifies the parcellation at subsequent levels as well. 
Enlargement or reduction of the target with respect to its sources of inputs can also 
bias the axonal competition in complementary ways. Change in the relative popu­
lation of neurons in a source or target can even induce projections to invade "phy­
logenetically new" territories. 
species-specific brain reorganization described in the literature of both de­
velopmental and comparative neuroanatomy. Some of the most labile 
components of the nervous system, in terms of size, are the peripheral 
sensory and movement systems. Once the sizes and spatial geometries of 
these structures have been determined in each species independent of the 
brain, they contribute stable biases whose influences can propagate 
through many levels of central nervous system organization. Thus, changes 
in the total numbers or proportions of sensory receptors (size of retina, 
increased receptor density in specialized tactile surfaces, etc.) should have 
significant organizing consequences in the developing brain. This is ex­
emplified in a series of studies with newborn ferrets in which the as-
208 < The Symbolic Species

cending projections from tactile centers of the spinal cord were cut so that 
few reached their destination in the thalamus, the major relay station be­
tween most inputs and the cerebral cortex, and also in which the major 
thalamic targets for visual projections from the retina were damaged (see 
Figure 7.4C). These combined insults caused the undamaged visual pro­
jections-which lacked a normal target-to reroute to the region of the 
thalamus that otherwise would have received the now-severed tactile pro­
jections. As in the cortex, different parts of the thalamus were equally will­
ing to accept almost any of the class of thalamic inputs, irrespective of the 
type of information they carried. Since the thalamus still sent connections 
to the cortex, the information that arrived in a region that otherwise 
would have handled touch was visual information-and, remarkably, this 
tactile area of cortex became responsive to visual stimuli. Similar studies 
involving newborn rats, ferrets, and hamsters have shown that the 
rerouted information can even induce structural changes in the cellular 
organization of cortex that are appropriate for the change in modality of 
inputs. 
Dennis O'Leary has completed this loop of inferences by showing that 
experimentally produced changes in inputs that modify the pattern of cor­
tical maps can also contribute to the patterning of the cortical output con­
nections as well. Cortical regions that get rerouted visual inputs and lack 
normal somatic and motor information eventually lose all but those output 
connections that contact to visual system targets of the tectum. (Compare 
Figure 7.4C to Figure 7.5 C and D.) Input information is essential for 
sculpting the output connections. Neither the inputs nor the outputs are 
predetermined intrinsically. 
In an analogous manner the potential for developmental displacement 
harbors a potentially important source of variability that can be unmasked 
during the course of evolution in different species. For example, transient 
connections that are eliminated during the development of an ancestral 
species might not be eliminated under differently biased conditions that 
could arise in' a later lineage. An interesting example of such a possibil­
ity has been discussed by O'Leary. 6 He notes that fibers projecting in a 
bundle called the fornix, which originate from the hippocampus (a lim­
bic cortical structure of the cerebral cortex) and terminate in targets 
mostly in the diencephalon (including the mammillary bodies of the pos­
terior hypothalamus and the anterior nuclei of the thalamus), also project 
beyond these normal targets to reach central midbrain regions during a 
transient period in the early development of the rat brain. They are culled 
as the rat matures. But in some brains, this connection appears to be re-
Terrence W. Deacon > 209

TYPICAL RODENT PATTERN 
BLIND MOLE RAT PATTERN 
Figure 7.7 The blind mole rat (Spalax) provides an example of neural displacement 
effects in evolution of the brain. This species' nearly vestigial eyes provide so few vi­
sual projections to the thalamic visual targets that during development they are out­
competed for this target by auditory inputs. As a result, a normally visual nucleus 
(the lateral geniculate nucleus, LGN) receives auditory projections that would usu­
ally be confined to an adjacent nucleus (the medial geniculate body, MGB), and 
passes auditory signals to cortex to take over territories usually involved in visual 
sensory analysis. The figure summarizes findings from Heil, et al. ( 1991 ), and Doran 
and Wollberg (1994). 
tained into adulthood. Elephant brains (and some human brains), for ex­
ample, have a clear postmammillary fornix that persists in this midbrain 
region in adults. It is entirely possible that the size differences in these 
species is what contributes to a different competitive milieu that favors 
retention of this connection (and conversely biases against it in small 
brain species). 
More generally, sensorimotor specializations of the brain may be 
achieved in different species simply by the enlargement or reduction of pe­
ripheral structures. In cave-dwelling and subterranean species, we see a 
trend toward a reduction of eyes. This is the natural counterpart to lab ex­
periments involving interrupting visual inputs in early development. Dis­
placement is clearly evident in these cases. For example, in a species of 
"blind" mole rat (Spalax), the cerebral cortex is almost entirely lacking vi­
sual areas, while somatic, motor, and auditory areas seem to have expanded 
to take over the territory that vision would have occupied in a non blind ro­
dent counterpart (see Figure 7.7).7 This displacement of functional regions 
clearly corresponds to the nearly complete reduction of the eyes and the 
massive expanse of muscles of the head and neck that are important for dig-
210 < The Symbolic Species

ging. Analysis of connections in the brain of this species demonstrates that 
there has been axonal displacement at the level of the visual thalamus and 
below. Although the lateral geniculate nucleus (typically the primary reti­
nal receptive nucleus) of the thalamus projects appropriately to the poste­
rior dorsal cortex (the location where visual cortex normally would reside), 
it receives projections from the inferior colliculus, the major midbrain au­
ditory analyzer that normally would project to the neighboring medial genic­
ulate nucleus of the thalamus. Thus, as in the experimentally manipulated 
perinatal brains, radically altering the proportions of peripheral projections 
from different systems can produce axonal displacement effects that cas­
cade throughout the developing brain, spontaneously matching the central 
organization to the peripheral specializations. 
But not all quantitative shifts of inputs and outputs are caused by evo­
lutionary modifications of peripheral sensorimotor organs. Since body plans 
for both the smallest and the largest mammals must be scaled up from sim­
ilar embryonic beginnings, significant allometric shifts in body and brain 
proportions may result from this extrapolation process. These, too, should 
contribute displacement effects, but they will tend to correlate with scale. 
One of the first patterns of cortical "evolution" recognized by neu­
roanatomists at the beginning of the twentieth century was the progressive 
decrease in the relative proportion of highly specialized sensory cortical 
areas (koniocortex) and the relative increase in more generalized cortex (the 
so-called association areas) in the presumed evolutionary "ascent" from 
small insectivores to large primates. This has long been interpreted to mean 
that there had been a trend toward more elaborate "higher-order" cogni­
tive functions in brains with a higher proportion of association cortex. But 
this pseudo-evolutionary trend is highly correlated with size. The relative 
proportions of koniocortex and association cortex can be predicted from 
brain size alone. 
In the last chapter, I suggested that scaling patterns of different brain 
regions might !n part reflect internal information-handling problems (in­
formational allometry and analogous to the increase in middle-level man­
agement with business size). This might be achieved by displacement 
effects. For example, larger animals do not have proportionately larger 
eyes. Their eyes and the number of cells on the retina are negatively allo­
metric with body size and even with brain size, so as animals get larger, these 
retinal projections probably become a smaller and smaller fraction of the 
projections to the thalamus during development. If the allometry of brain 
and spinal cord is indicative, this also seems to be true of somatic inputs 
Terrence W. Deacon > 211

and skeletal motor outputs, since the brain is larger with respect to the spinal 
cord in larger species. As result, direct peripheral projections probably di­
minish in proportion to intrinsic projections to the thalamus. The decreas­
ing proportion of "projection" cortex and the increasing proportion of 
"association" cortex with increasing brain size might thus reflect a cascade 
of size-correlated displacements. 
The displacement process is likely to be most informative in the case of 
the human. As we have seen, the most robust differences distinguishing 
human brains from other primate brains have to do with size. In the mys­
tery of the human brain, the displacement process provides the crucial link 
between global changes in brain growth patterns and changes in functional 
organization. Our relatively larger brain and its comparatively prolonged and 
out-of-sync growth suggest that displacement may have played a crucial role 
in restructuring the relationships within it, ultimately resulting in some 
very different functional relationships from those in other primates and 
other mammals generally. Major shifts in proportions between the enlarged 
human brain and the peripheral nervous system structures of a relatively 
unenlarged body should have produced a cascade of displacement effects 
within the brain. Major shifts in the initial proportions of major brain divi­
sions should also have added unique internal displacement effects, none of 
which have clear precedents in other primates. Unlike speculations about 
unique human functions based upon hypothetical special mutations mod­
ifying the local wiring of this or that brain structure, or adding this or that 
new region-all of which appear to be ruled out by the Darwinian nature 
of brain development-there are quite specific rules of inference we can 
apply to the analysis of quantitative changes and their effect on neural cir­
cuitry. Knowing something about the general patterns of early target de­
termination, and the types of biasing influences that translate these into final 
architecture, we are in a much better position to extrapolate from other, 
better-understood mammal brains to human brains. 
Now we can see why it matters how the human brain became enlarged 
with respect to the body. And why the level of encephalization exhibited in 
adulthood does not necessarily have consistent neural or cognitive corre­
lates. What distinguishes human encephalization from that of other primates 
and from chihuahuas is not so much the extent of encephalization, but at 
what point during development the size differences appࡗred, and which 
structures accounted for the growth disproportions. The major displace­
ment processes that shape the proportions and patterning of neural circuitry 
are completed around or shortly after birth. At this point in development, 
212 < The Symbolic Species

growth of most of the body is still at an early stage. Proportional variations 
that develop later in life will thus have a minimal impact on brain structure. 
The chihuahua, which develops along a brain/body growth trajectory very 
similar to that of larger dogs in utero and only significantly deviates from 
this pattern after birth, does not develop its neural architecture in the con­
text of significantly modified central versus peripheral proportions. In a chi­
huahua, while in the womb and just around birth, the brain is adapting to 
a typical-size fetal dog body. 
But the situation for primates as compared to chihuahuas and to most 
other mammals is different. Even if primate encephalization is a conse­
quence of reduced body growth and not accelerated brain growth, as is sug­
gested by developmental growth curves, the shift in these proportions is 
present throughout fetal development. Immature primate brains do in­
deed adapt to bodies that are proportionately smaller than in most other 
mammals. The deviation of primate brain organization from more typical 
mammalian patterns, then, depends on exactly how these proportional dif­
ferences are distributed in the fetal body. Is the primate head, including the 
brain, eyes, and ears (but not face, mouth, or nasal region), spared from this 
postcranial reduction, or just the brain itself? If, for example, primate eyes 
do not participate in this postcranial reduction, then we would predict that 
visual projections will exert greater success at recruiting sensory brain re­
gions when compared to tactile and motor systems. I suspect that this is the 
case, given the comparatively large percentage of primate cortex that is vi­
sual; however, neither fetal body segment data nor adequate brain region 
data are currently available to test this possibility. In whatever way this shift 
in proportional growth partitions primate bodies, it will initiate a series of 
competitive biases that ramify through the primate brain during develop­
ment, and cause it to differ systematically in connection patterns and re­
gional proportions from those of other mammals. Even if we are not willing 
to conclude that primates are more intelligent than other mammals as a re­
sult, we can conijdently predict that their brains will operate with very dif­
ferently distributed sensory, motor, and cognitive resources. 
Human brains, too, will have a unique shift of cognitive resources, dis­
tinct both from other primates, whose encephalization is the result of em­
bryonic reduction of body size, and from chihuahuas, whose encephalization 
is the result of dwarfism. The disproportionate expansion of human dorsal 
forebrain structures from a point in early fetal development should have 
produced a unique signature of connectional and functional shifts as well. 
Some, due to the global shift in brain I body proportions, will further ex-
Terrence W. Deacon > 213

trapolate the primate pattern of brain structure deviations. Others, due to 
the segmental differences between brain regions, will have no nonhuman 
counterpart. Both are relevant to the evolution of language. 
An Alien Brain Transplant Experiment 
While attending a conference in Santa Fe, New Mexico, I came across 
an advertisement for a lecture by a New Age guru. The lecture promised 
revelations that would unite both the biblical and evolutionary versions of 
the Creation story and explain many mysteries from human nature to the 
Egyptian Pyramids. Though I was unable to attend, I learned that the lec­
turer presented evidence that humans are an artificial species, created by 
a race of aliens/gods as a result of an advanced genetic experiment. Pre­
sumably, this experiment involved a modification of the brain, perhaps the 
genetic analogue of a brain transplant. Though I am not in any way sug­
gesting that we seriously consider an alien experiment scenario for human 
origins,8 there is at least one sense in which the thought experiment of a 
hominid brain transplant leads to interesting consequences. The altered 
growth process that produces a human brain can perhaps best be described 
as though a human child is growing a brain from a much larger primate 
species. The human pattern ofbrain growth is appropriate for a gigantic ape, 
while the pattern of body growth is appropriate for a large chimp. So, imag­
ine that alien scientists literally transplanted the brain from the embryo of 
a giant ape into the head of a chimpanzee embryo. The species known as 
Gigantopithecus-an extinct eight-foot ape that left fossils in Asia and Eu­
rope perhaps as recently as a few hundred thousand years ago-would be 
a good choice for the donor species. When we try to imagine how this fan­
ciful experiment would affect the host's brain development, some interest­
ing predictions result. 
The large adult size of the transplanted fetal brain compared to the adult 
size of its host body would radically alter the normal competitive "balance" 
between connection systems originating peripherally and centrally. Pro­
jections from peripheral organs like the host eye and the tactile sensory in­
puts from the host body would recruit target populations of neurons within 
the donor brain that were appropriate for the number of inputs they sup­
ply. But since the chimp body would only be a fraction as large as would 
normally cary a brain this size, the space within this brain that these inputs 
would recruit would be significantly reduced compared to what would hap­
pen in a normal Gigantopithecus body. Similarly, as in embryos where limbs 
are removed prior to motor innervation, there would probably be greater 
214 < The Symbolic Species

cell loss in motor-output systems and less recruitment of central brain areas 
for motor functions than in a typical Gigantopithecus brain. In general, the 
disproportions of body and brain would ramify through the developing 
brain as each stage in competition for connections was influenced by prior 
biases. The adult brain that would result would be quite different from ei­
ther the donor or host species' brains. Many structures and functional di­
visions of the transplanted brain would be smaller than expected for a 
Gigantopithecus brain, but others would be larger, if they inherited neural 
space from those that were more constrained by peripheral connections. 
So let's return to reality. Though a chimpanzee-Gigantopithecus chimera 
is a product of science fiction, it offers a remarkably close analogue for un­
derstanding the special problems of human brain development, and a good 
predictor of human brain structure proportions. This science fiction sce­
nario leads us to expect some curious discrepancies in our brains compared 
to more typical primate patterns. In general, we should expect that brain 
structures more directly tied to or dependent upon peripheral systems 
should be the most constrained in size to match them, and that those most 
synaptically removed from the periphery should be the least constrained in 
the competition for neural space. 
For over a century neuroanatomists have been collecting and compar­
ing data on the sizes of brain structures in human and nonhuman brains. 
However, without an adequate understanding of how growth processes and 
developmental competition effects interact to produce these quantitative 
results, interpretations of these data often did not consider the ways that 
relative size differences at all levels may be linked. The result has been that 
brain evolution was treated as a sort of mosaic affair, in which changes in 
different parts were considered independently. If one structure appeared 
enlarged, it was thought to have become more important or a more pow­
erful information processor (following a gross or net functional logic). The 
Gigantopithecus brain transplant analogy suggests, however, that local struc­
tural changes .can be developmental consequences of large-scale changes 
in relative size of the brain and body, and so may not be independent adap­
tations, even if all may influence neural processes. 
Consider the visual cortex as an example of this linkage between global 
and local size effects. The Columbia University paleoneurologist Ralph 
Holloway was one of the first researchers to notice that an unexpectedly 
small proportion of the human cerebral cortex was taken up by visual pro­
jections.9 Though not small in absolute terms, in comparison to other pri­
mate visual cortices it was smaller than would be predicted for a primate 
brain as big as the human brain. Thus, to extend the analogy, when cor-
Terrence W. Deacon > 215

rected for our large brain size, our primary visual cortex appears to occupy 
less surface than it would in a super Gigantopithecus' brain. Holloway of­
fered this as evidence that the human brain had not just evolved increased 
size, but had become differently organized as well. But does this suggest 
that in some way vision became less important, or that other nonvisual areas 
became more important than this one and took up more space in our evo­
lutionary past?10 
The imaginary example of the alien brain transplant experiment pro­
vides another way to look at these proportions. Consider the interrela­
tionships between the eyes and the visual structures to which they project. 
Both the lateral geniculate nucleus, which receives direct inputs from the 
retina, and area 17 of the cerebral cortex, which receives lateral genicu­
late inputs relayed from the retina, are significantly smaller than would be 
predicted in a primate brain that reached human proportions. This is be­
cause an ape of the immense proportions that would normally carry such 
a large brain would also have had much larger eyes than we have; the num­
ber of visual projections to that brain would have been far greater than for 
the human retina. In the Gigantopithecus-chimp chimera, the propor­
tions of these visual structures would be matched to a relatively reduced 
input, and would be more typical of chimp proportions than Gigantop­
ithecus proportions. A similar argument can be made for the human vi­
sual analyzers. Our visual cortex is not small for our brain size because of 
some reduced importance of vision or because of the independent addi­
tion of other nonvisual areas to the cortex. The human brain does not have 
a reduced visual cortex, but the appropriate amount of visual cortex for its 
retina (see Figure 7.8). 
A similar pattern characterizes motor and tactile systems as well. The 
primary motor cortex is also closely linked to the periphery, but by ef­
ferent (output) rather than afferent (input) connections. The boundaries 
of this cortical region are clearly demarcated in microscope sections by 
the presence of unusually large output neurons located in layer five of 
the six-layered cortex. These are termed Betz cells. The limiting factor 
that determines how many Betz cells are in the motor cortex, and thus 
its total size, is probably the number of long direct axonal connections 
that can be established with primary motor neurons in the ventral hom 
of the spinal cord. The number of spinal motor neurons thus determines 
the number of cortical motor neurons that will take on the morphology 
characteristic of these giant long-distance projection neurons. The num­
ber of spinal motor neurons in tum is determined by their competition 
for muscle fibers. This peripheral competition between motor axons is 
216 < The Symbolic Species

Figure 7.8 Quantitative deviation of human cerebral cortical regional areas as a 
function of the sizes predicted for a "typical" ape brain of human brain size (this is 
analogous to studying the brain of a 1,000 lb. ape: the size that a primate would be 
if it had a human size brain but fit the typical brain-body trend for rrumkeys and 
apes). Many of the data are incomplete and insufficient for statistical tests, but for 
prefrontal and oq;ipital cortices the values are sufficiently deviant and the data are 
sufficiently complete to know that these structures are significantly diferent in size 
than expected. The figure points out a global pattern to these proportional changes. 
Structures with relatively direct peripheral links (from eyes, nose, touch senses, mus­
cles) tend to be constrained in size by the size of these sources or targets (which are 
proportional to the body). Prefrontal cortex lacks direct peripheral connections, as 
do auditory and parietal areas for which data are not available. This pattern is also 
observed for relay nuclei between these areas and the periphery. Thus, the human 
cerebral cortex reflects significant displacement efects, due to the shift in brain/body 
proportions in our evolutionary history. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 217

probably even better understood than that which occurs in the central 
nervous system. As we saw in the beginning of this chapter, it results in 
both a retraction of supernumerary ( outcompeted) projections and the 
death of some spinal neurons in the process of matching neuron num­
bers to muscle fiber numbers during early development (see Figure 7.1 
and earlier discussion). Studies of other peripheral sensory systems that 
have been rewired from birth suggest that this effect will be passed on 
up the line, and that the size of the cortical motor region (as identified 
by the presence of Betz cells) will, in tum, be indirectly determined by 
the production of fetal muscle fibers. 11 Cells in primary tactile, motor, 
and visual regions of the cortex are just one synapse removed from the 
corresponding peripheral representations, and the corresponding thala­
mic nuclei of these two sensory areas are only one synapse away, so it is 
not surprising that these structures are among the most appropriate in 
size to their peripheral connections and the most reduced with respect 
to typical predictions for brain size (Figure 7.8). 
So, a bigger brain in the same-size body will also be a very different brain, 
but it will be predictably different, and the developmental causes and con­
sequences of this should not be difficult to trace to changes in body struc­
ture and proportions. The relative sizes of the brain's functional divisions 
are determined in a systemic competition for space driven ultimately by pe­
ripheral constraints and shifts in segmental proportions determined in early 
embryogenesis. Though this does not rule out functional and adaptational 
consequences of individually enlarging or reducing brain structures, it 
forces us to understand such size variations in terms of systemwide ef­
fects:12 they are not isolated adaptations. With peripheraly specialized input 
and output systems recruiting less synaptic "space" than would be expected 
in such a large ape brain, some other systems must stand to benefit instead. 
Those nuclei and cortical areas that receive little or no input from periph­
eral nervous structures should stand to inherit extra space because they are 
relatively insulated from peripheral constraints. 
Among cortical areas it appears as though the prefrontal cortex may have 
inherited additional territory in the human brain, perhaps from reduced 
motor areas nearby. According to separate extrapolations derived from in­
dependent data sources (see Figure 7.9), I have estimated that human pre­
frontal cortex is roughly twice the size that would be predicted in an ape 
brain as big as ours. 13 This is probably the most divergently enlarged of any 
large brain region (the olfactory bulbs are probably the most divergently 
reduced). The magnitude of this expansion of the prefrontal lobes has been 
so extensive that it has been recognized by researchers since the late nine-
218 < The Symbolic Species

(both hemispheres) 
Cone hemisphere) 
400 
• 
200 
• 
.. 
...-
.. 
... 
"' 
"' 
! 300 
E 
! 150 
E 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
À 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
À 
u 
N 
0 200 
N 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0 100 
"' 
¨ 
"' 
u 
101. 
101. 
E 
I 
E 
5 
:s 
y 
100 
.. 
i 
50 
101. 
101. 
0 
0 
0 
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
0 20 40 60 80 
A 
all other neocortical areas (em 2> 
B 
precentral (em 2 )  
Figure 7.9 Human prefrontal cortex allometry assessed using two independent data 
sets and corrected for part/whole artifacts. 
A. Scaling of prefrontal cortex surface with respect to the remaining surface of 
the cerebral cortex shows that, for the trend extrapolated from other monkeys and 
apes, the human proportions are anomalous (data from Brodmann, 1912). 
B. Human disproportion of prefrontal cortex with respect to the adjacent pre­
motor cortex (data from Blinkov and Glezer, 1968) compared to the trend extrapo­
lated from the other apes and a baboon. 
teenth century, based on gross comparisons of human and nonhuman brains 
and skulls. To get some idea of how this compares to systems that are con­
strained by peripheral representations, consider that it is roughly six times 
larger (in absolute size) than the chimpanzee prefrontal cortex, though 
chimpanzee and human bodies are nearly comparable. Prefrontal cortex re­
ceives only very indirect relayed information from peripheral systems, 
mostly via connections from other cortical areas. Its thalamic inputs come 
from nuclei that receive limbic and dorsal midbrain information conveying 
arousal and orienting signals. All these inputs are from brain structures that 
have been part of the embryologically expanded brain regions, so it is not 
surprising that the prefrontal cortex should be among the least constrained 
in size. Though this relative size increase is an indirect consequence of these 
many converging competitive processes during development, it neverthe­
less contributes one of the more extreme shifts in net human brain func­
tion, compared to other species. 
So in all these ways, the Gigantopithecus-chimp brain transplant anal­
ogy provides a reasonable model for a variety of human brain structure pro­
portions. However, neither the whole brain nor even the whole forebrain 
has enlarged in humans, only the dorsal portions of the forebrain (as de­
scribed in the last chapter). Thus, the effects on connectional organization 
Terrence W. Deacon > 219

are somewhat more complex than are envisioned by this imaginary ex­
traterrestrial experiment. The divergence in size of the human dorsal ver­
sus the ventral forebrain has shifted connectional patterns in ways that are 
radically different from other species' brains. These tum out to be critical 
to understanding two of the most central features of the human language 
adaptation: the ability to speak and the ability to learn symbolic associations. 
Specifically, I will argue that the ability to produce skilled vocalizations can 
be traced to changes in motor projections to the midbrain and brain stem, 
while the ability to overcome the symbol-learning problem can be traced 
to the expansion of the prefrontal cortical region, and the preeminence of 
its projections in competition for synapses throughout the brain. The func­
tional consequences of these displacement effects will be discussed in some 
detail in the next two chapters. But before we can consider these issues, 
we need to consider briefly some general problems of interpreting the re­
lationship between size and brain function that we encountered in the pre­
vious chapter. 
Beyond Phrenology 
This developmental approach to brain morphology gives a new meaning 
to a classic theory concerning the relation of brain structure to function: the 
concept of "proper mass." As we saw in the last chapter, the concept of 
"proper mass" is usually invoked along with the assumption that larger 
brain structures are more powerful analyzers or more spacious storage de­
vices than smaller ones. So, the presence of a comparatively large auditory 
region might have suggested that its possessor had a greater capacity for 
sound analysis and a heavier demand for sound analysis in its niche. This 
"bigger-is-more-powerful" perspective has thus been applied at the re­
gional as well as whole brain level of analysis. Indeed, the regional inter­
pretation is probably older. It was the basis for one of the first theories of 
localized brain functions-phrenology-proposed at the tum of the nine­
teenth century by Franz Josef Gall. Gall and his student Spurzheim rea­
soned that the shape of brains and the effects of localized brain damage 
suggested that brain functions were organized in local centers. He further 
hypothesized that there should be individual differences in brain structure 
that corresponded to differences in talents, propensities, and other per­
sonality traits, and that these should be reflected in the relative sizes of the 
corresponding centers for these functions. Greedy people should have a 
large aquisitiveness center, musicians should have a relatively large musi­
cal center, and so on. This also led to the prediction that head shape should 
220 < The Symbolic Species

reflect underlying enlargements or reductions of the various centers, al­
lowing phrenologists to collect evidence for their theories by studying pat_ 
terns of cranial geometry. Though Gall's choice of functions to assign to brain 
centers seems curious from a modem perspective, the logic of his under­
lying theory is alive and well. 
These phrenologically derived notions are to some extent in conflict with 
developmental data which suggest that the sizes of individual brain struc­
tures are not determined in isolation. Both peripheral-central matching 
processes and region-by-region competitive effects play a role, along with 
initial more global cell-production processes. A larger retina or a more 
densely innervated tactile receptor surface will require a larger network in 
order simply to break even, in information-processing terms, and their 
projecting axons wil compete in proportion to their numbers with other pro­
jections for the synaptic space that corresponds to that information­
processing need. This rule of thumb can be extended to other brain regions 
that do not directly link to the periphery, though the analysis becomes com­
plicated by the cascade of converging parcellation influences from many dif­
ferent sources. 
The logic of the developmental processes that determine brain structure 
sizes may offer some initial clues about the resulting functional conse­
quences. Since a Darwinian-like process in brain development determines 
the relative sizes of functional brain regions and their patterns of connec­
tion, there is reason to suspect that a Darwinian-like functional conse­
quence should result. The brain's wiring is determined by virtue of the 
interaction of information conveyed by its connections, so the way that in­
formation is analyzed ultimately becomes reflected in the way brain regions 
are "designed" by this activity. This is a competitive selection process, a sort 
of rapid local evolutionary process on a microscopic scale. It makes sense, 
then, to predict that the principal effect of changes in relative scale within 
the brain will also have a competitive-selective consequence on function. 
The relative eqlargement of one structure with respect to another may give 
the larger some sort of competitive advantage in the battle for influence over 
target synaptic activity. In other words, if one brain structure is relatively 
enlarged compared to another, this should translate into both displacement 
of connections during development and displacement of computational in­
fluence in adulthood with respect to other competing inputs from other 
brain structures. More inputs equals more votes influencing the computa­
tional outcome. 
Parcellation is a zero-sum game. When one structure become partially 
enlarged, another is reduced. Applying this analogy to cognitive functions 
Terrence W. Deacon > 221

would suggest that shifts in relative proportions will be translated into 
functional trade-offs. The class of neural computations supported by an en­
larged region will tend to have more influence over final global outputs 
than that supported by a reduced region. This argument has analogies to 
some of the effects of brain damage. When a structure is damaged, not 
only is there a loss of function but there is also inevitably a gain of func­
tion-though not an improvement-in the form of "released" behaviors, 
which appear to be disinhibited by the removal of a competing influence. 
A zero-sum size effect is also suggested by studies of the effects of quan­
titative differences in connections. For example, differences in the num­
ber and extent of fibers projecting between two major structures within 
the hippocampus14 (a limbic structure that has been strongly implicated in 
the consolidation of certain kinds of memory) correspond with inverse pat­
terns of learning improvements and impairments on complementary tasks 
(such as maze learning versus passive avoidance learning). Differences in 
relative hippocampal size with respect to the rest of the brain have also 
been correlated with food-caching behaviors in birds and their ability to 
recall a large number of observed hiding places in tests. If this too reflects 
a trade-off, one might predict that species with relatively smaller hip­
pocampi would outperform their food-storing counterparts in some other 
complementary mnemonic tasks, though I do not believe this has been 
studied. 
But this zero-sum logic which applies to parcellation processes in de­
velopment also applies to growth processes, which are also involved and are 
of special importance for the expansion of the human brain. Differential 
growth alters the context of functional competition and parcellation so that 
certain classes of connections-those with input and output connections to 
other enlarged regions-gain an unfair competitive advantage. For them, 
the competition is less severe and the game is thrown in their favor. Thus, 
the developmental interpretation that led us to assume a functional inter­
pretation of size relationships cannot strictly apply to these systems. In de­
velopmental terms, these changes are addition effects that are prior to and 
independent of the competitive parcellation processes. By analogy, however, 
we could argue that larger recruitment fields reflect some "virtual" com­
petitive parcellation. It is as though they were being recruited by some mas­
sive input projection, or were supported by a massive output target from 
outside, though in fact this is not the case. From an adaptational perspec­
tive, the source of the competitive bias is irrelevant. The final connectional 
proportions are what will determine function. 
Recasting the problem of net versus gross function of different brain re-
222 < The Symbolic Species

gions in this way provides a new tool for thinking about the functional con­
sequences of proportionately enlarged human brain structures, not in terms 
of their being more "powerful" computers, but rather in terms of shifting 
the balance of computational influences in the whole brain: size difference 
as a source of cognitive bias. It is as though the enlarged structure's share 
of the workload of information handling has been increased, and its ability 
to recruit and dominate the computations going on in other structures has 
also increased. The relatively enlarged regions of the human brain should 
thus tend to shift the balance of information processing towards the sorts 
of sensory, motor, and mnemonic processes that characterize these struc­
tures in other species. 
In summary, the Darwinian nature of neural connectional development 
suggests a new interpretation of the functional consequences of neural al­
lometry-that functions will be modified in response to proportional 
changes by a kind of functional displacement of some computational ten­
dencies by others, not just increase or decrease of localized functional ca­
pacities. Considering the displacement of connections that distinguishes 
species of different sizes and relative proportions, and the displacement of 
competing mental computation processes that results, forces us both to ex­
tend and modify the classic notions of proper mass as applied to brain struc­
ture, by extrapolating the analysis to circuitry relationships. 
The displacement theory offers a powerful predictive tool for interpret­
ing the significance of quantitative differences in brain structure. In par­
ticular, displacement effects can help answer the troubling question raised 
by the difference in development of chihuahuas, primates, and humans. 
When and how such disproportions arose and how they are distributed in 
the developing brains and bodies of these different species have everything 
to do with how they become wired up in the end. Chihuahuas' brains and 
bodies are growing along typical dog trends during the phase when axonal 
competition divides up the brain, so their brains should not diverge signif­
icantly in de.sign from other dog brains, but primates depart from the 
brain/body trend of other mammals right from the beginning of embryo­
genesis, so their brains should depart in some interesting ways, as well. The 
initial changes in proportions within the human brain also are expressed 
early in development and so inevitably produce a novel pattern of internal 
structural proportions and correspondingly shifted distribution of func­
tional relationships. The details of these displacement processes, though not 
yet directly analyzable in human brains, should be at least broadly pre­
dictable from well-known general processes of brain development. These 
differences should be the best clues to the functional demands that selected 
Terrence W. Deacon > 223

for them. The resultant shifted pattern of regional parcellation in human 
brains can be interpreted as though enlarged systems were deluged with 
some massive new set of peripheral inputs. This input is not supplied from 
the periphery but internally, as a result of shifts in the early production of 
neurons. It is an evolutionary response to a sort of virtual input, with in­
creased processing demands. This suggests that the difference between 
human and nonhuman brains may be far more complex and multifaceted 
than simply an increase in extra neurons over and above the average pri­
mate or mammal trend. Working backwards from these brain changes to 
shifts in function offers the best hope of developing a model of just what 
sorts of virtual inputs were responsible for these changes in the first place. 
224 < The Symbolic Species

C 
H 
A 
P 
T 
E 
R 
E 
G 
H 
T 
The Talking Brain 
Silence is deep as Eternity, speech is shallow as Time. 
-Thomas Carlyle 
Hoover's Brain 
0 ne evening in the mid-1980s my wife and I were returning from an 
evening CQ.Iise around Boston Harbor and decided to take a water­
front stroll. We were passing in front of the Boston Aquarium when 
a gravelly voice yelled out, "Hey! Hey! Get outa there!" Thinking we had 
mistakenly wandered somewhere we were not allowed, we stopped and 
looked around for a security guard or some other official, but saw no one, 
and no warning signs. Again the voice boomed, "Hey! Hey you!" It now 
sounded a bit thick-tongued. Perhaps it was the half-conscious territorial 
threat of a wine-drinking vagrant sitting in a dark comer. The words were 
repeated again, and again we searched for the origin, calling back with no 
reply besides the repeated commands. As we tracked the voice we found 
225

ourselves approaching a large, glass-fenced pool in front of the aquarium 
where four harbor seals were lounging on display. No guard, no drunk, no 
prankster; just harbor seals. Incredulous, I traced the source of the com­
mand to a large seal reclining vertically in the water, with his head extended 
back and up, his mouth slightly open, rotating slowly. A seal was talking, not 
to me, but to the air, and incidentally to anyone within earshot who cared 
to listen. Perhaps it was a practical joke and someone was hiding nearby. I 
stood there for a long time trying to figure out the trick, expecting to dis­
cover a slip that would show this seal to be a ventriloquist's dummy, an un­
witting accomplice to someone hiding in the shadows, laughing at the 
gullible passers-by. But there seemed to be no voice when he was under­
water or when he closed his mouth, and no place for a speaker to hide. Still, 
just to make sure, the next morning I placed a call to the aquarium. 
"Oh, yes," I was told. "That's Hoover, our talking seal. He's become our 
star attraction." I was dumbfounded. How come this wasn't national news? 
Were scientists studying him? Was the ability to train seals to talk common 
knowledge, except to scientists? When I was put in touch with the staff in 
charge of the animals, I learned Hoover's brief life story. It seems he was 
discovered as an orphaned and sickly pup by a fisherman in Maine, who took 
him in and nursed him back to health. But harbor seals grow quickly and 
require incredible amounts of food. In no time, he was getting into every­
thing and eating his benefactor out of house and home. As a result, he was 
named for the famous vacuum cleaner, and the Boston Aquarium was asked 
to become his foster home soon after. 
Hoover did not talk from infancy, not until many years later, in fact, as 
he approached puberty. During the interim he became a sort of mascot of 
the aquarium staff, continuing to get into things and live the life of a pet. 
He was also very sick more than once, and it was thought he might even 
have suffered a bout with encephalitis. He was weakly, and did not seem to 
do well with other harbor seals, especially males. But most peculiar were 
his efforts to vocalize. What started out as rather odd but unclear vocaliza­
tions as a growing pup developed into a few reasonably clear phrases that 
he used in no particular order and to no apparent purpose, perhaps just out 
of the boredom of captivity. These included "Hoova!" "Hey!" "Hey hey hey 
hey!" "Hey you!" "Get outa there!" and a sort of gurgling or laughing sound 
like "Yadda yadda yadda" that no one could seem to translate. He also had 
the standard seal vocalizations, which he used socially with other seals. 
Opinions were mixed on where and how he learned these phrases. Some 
were convinced that he learned them from the staff, or was taught by them 
as he began to vocalize in ways that sounded speechlike; but the story that 
226 < The Symbolic Species

seemed to ring true was that he sounded just like the old fisherman who 
originally took him in, years before. I thought from the beginning that he 
had sort of a down-east, old-salt accent. And something else fit with this 
story. 
It had been known for more than a decade that many songbirds learn a 
dialect version of their species' song when they are nestlings, but only start 
singing when they approach puberty. Their first singing, called subsong, is 
a rather crude version that they soon hone to reflect their parents' song, ir­
respective of the songs currently being sung around them. Apparently, they 
have a sort of auditory template, remembered from the earlier stage, that 
they try to match (a mechanism verified by isolating and deafening birds at 
different ages and seeing how this affects their song). Though we will never 
know for sure, the image of Hoover guzzling the food in the cupboard and 
the old fisherman yelling, "Hey! Hey! Hoover! Hey you! Get outta there!" 
has a persuasive feel, or twisted irony. 
Staff members made some attempts to study his speech, and some ef­
fort to train him to produce it more predictably, for a fish reward. I too rec­
ognized that Hoover was worth paying attention to. It took little convincing 
to find a Harvard undergraduate who was interested in studying this curi­
ous fellow with me. The student, T. H. Culhane, and I began to videotape 
Hoover's speech and other behaviors for later analysis. Over the course of 
an academic year we followed his speech and behavior patterns. When did 
he speak? What else he was doing when he spoke? Did he speak to other 
seals, or to people, or to no one? And how did he respond to training ef­
forts? There were some interesting patterns. For example, he did not seem 
to speak more during the mating season, though adult male seals are most 
vocal at that time. If anything, his speech decreased and his normal seal vo­
calizations increased at that time, and he did not lack for the normal reper­
toire of harbor seal barks, grunts, and cries. His response to training was 
not very promising, either. Not only did he not learn any new words or 
phrases; our qata suggested that training might be causing him to increase 
the proportion of short phrases and decrease the more complex ones, prob­
ably Hoover's way to increase the rate of fish thrown to him. In other words, 
his speech did not appear to be made up of modified seal vocalizations. It 
was something independent. 
What if Hoover had been taught to speak? Seals (usually sea lions) are 
often trained to perform rather complicated tricks, even easily trained to 
bark on command. The aquarium staff had many expert trainers and they 
presented some marvelous seal and dolphin acts, though Hoover wasn't in­
volved. Had these trainers found a way to train a new trick? I don't think 
Terrence W. Deacon > 227

so. Hoover was one of a kind. Efforts to train other young seals to mimic 
speech have not, to my knowledge, produced any new talking seals. Nor 
does just being around people during development seem to get other seals 
to speak. It turns out that there are good reasons to suspect it would not. 
And this is what makes Hoover's speech so curious. 
Hoover's speech, like our own, begs a question: why are other mammals 
so poor at vocal learning? It is a curious fact that, except for some dolphins 
and whales, other mammals have quite limited vocal abilities. Mammals are 
poor at learning to produce any new vocalizations that are not minimal vari­
ants on their innate ones, and even their natural vocalizations tend to be 
limited in articulatory variety and complexity. They are no match for most 
birds in this regard. The vocal repertoires of birds appear far more flexi­
ble and are far more dependent on learning to develop normally. Many 
species of birds learn distinctive local song dialects as nestlings, and some 
have the ability to learn complex arbitrary sound patterns. Humans, some 
species of dolphins, and some species of whales seem able to learn more 
than the vocal calls they are born with, but even these other vocal species 
seem to learn and use their new vocalizations in quite restricted ways. 
More important, it is no accident that the other highly vocal mammals are 
al cetaceans (the order of mammals including al the dolphins and whales), 
because they don't produce sounds the ways that other mammals do. Their 
sound production appears to depend on air passing through specialized si­
nuses leading to their blowholes, which are modified nasal openings on the 
top of the head, and not on vibrations of the vocal folds of the larynx. The 
details of this unique mechanism are still poorly understood, but it almost 
certainly involves structures and muscles that have no similar function in 
terrestrial mammals or even seals. But Hoover's throaty speech was not ex­
actly produced like ours, either. He would lean his head back, prop his 
mouth open, and with only a slight movement of his tongue and lips, like 
a novice ventriloquist, he would say his piece. No special muscles or vocal 
structures were involved, probably fewer than we normally use to produce 
similar sounds. This made his speech sound a little slurred, but everyone 
who heard it recognized it as speech, and it took little imagination to un­
derstand him. 
The single mockingbird that wakes me each morning sounds more like 
a carefully directed choir of birds, with one bird species after another 
singing its short phrase. This is probably what mockingbird singing was se­
lected for during their evolutionary past: providing the illusion of a terri­
tory overfilled with birds. Sometimes I am even convinced that I hear a eat's 
228 < The Symbolic Species

meow or the approximation of a car door squeak. The mocking bird's abil­
ity and propensity to mimic the sounds it hears around it are unusual, even 
for birds, but many other unrelated bird species have independently evolved 
this trick, which is an extreme variation on the more widespread ability to 
modulate singing behavior dependent on the variants of song sung by one's 
local population. But although many bird species are chosen as pets because 
of their ability to copy human speech, no mammals are, or could be. Such 
abilities are not just rare, they are nearly nonexistent. Why? It's not because 
mockingbirds are particularly bright, or that dogs, cats, and monkeys are 
less bright. Monkeys and apes are also well known for their mimickry, ex­
cept when it come to vocalization. Theirs is not a failure of general cogni­
tive abilities, but the lack of a special skill for producing diverse vocal sounds 
and of a predisposition to match them to some model. 
So, why can't most mammals learn to sing or talk? Why can birds? And 
why can we? What crossing of connections or shift of emphasis in neural 
function or unprecedented developmental experience changed this one 
seal's brain to give him an isolated fragment of human uniqueness. What 
treasure was locked up in Hoover's brain? 
The story of Hoover has an unfortunate end-for Hoover and for sci­
ence. A little less than a year after I first heard his gravelly imperatives, 
Hoover died. It was during the annual fall molt, when a harbor seal's sum­
mer fur is shed and he can become prone to skin infections and other more 
serious complications. By the time I was told of Hoover's death, his body 
had been autopsied. And as parts of that talkative old fellow were sent out 
to determine the cause of death, I lost track of the one clue to his anom­
alous capabilities, his brain. The autopsy report noted that Hoover had 
died of an infection. In addition, the veterinarian who examined his body 
noted in passing that there was an unusual degree of calcification in his cra­
nium, probably associated with early encephalitis or other brain damage. 
To my knowledge, no further analysis of Hoover's brain has been done. For 
the pathologist and the aquarium staff, the case was closed. Hoover died of 
natural causes. No one's negligence was to blame. 
For me the case remains open and unsolved. This "believe it or not" odd­
ity has never been explained. Had congenital or infantile brain damage con­
tributed to his curious foray into the world of speech? Was Hoover's speech 
the result of just a few critical short circuits in his brain? Though Hoover's 
brain will not provide the answer, it's reasonable to suspect that by some 
misfortune it was modified in a way that parallels our own. This prompts 
us to ask whether there might be some common aspect of brain organiza-
Terrence W. Deacon > 229

tion that is shared in common by all articulate species? If so, it might pro­
vide a clue to what happened both to Hoover and to Honw sapiens. 
Visceral Sounds 
It turns out that communicative behaviors in a wide range of vertebrate 
species, including members of every class from fish to birds to mammals, 
are funneled into a final common pathway that consists of structures in the 
central midbrain and brain stem. The midbrain is the transition zone be­
tween the brain stem and the forebrain. It is the first point, ascending from 
the spinal cord, where the long-distance senses, vision and hearing, are in­
tegrated with information about touch and movement. As a result, we find 
that structures of the midbrain effectively provide the first tier of complex 
behavioral control. Together, the behavioral programs built into midbrain 
structures comprise what might be called "higher-order" or "second-level" 
reflexes. These include a variety of automatic tracking and orienting re­
sponses of the senses, as well as an integration of head and body movements 
to support these automatic processes. 
The midbrain contains sensorimotor-orienting systems involved in au­
tomatically shifting gaze and attention, and turning the head in the direc­
tion of interesting stimuli. It also contains descending motor pathways and 
a number of intrinsic motor-control systems. One of the most crucial but 
still poorly understood motor systems is distributed within the reticular for­
mation (an amorphous collection of nuclei, located about midway between 
the dorsal and ventral midbrain). The reticular formation surrounds a cen­
trally located canal through which cerebrospinal fluid flows between fore­
brain and hindbrain, and it derives its name from the crisscrossing fibers of 
the sensory and motor systems that enter and leave at this level. But these 
are not just fibers passing through. The reticular formation monitors inputs 
from most sensory nuclei and sends outputs to most motor nuclei of the mid­
brain and brain stem. Most neuroanatomists believe it to be the locus of 
arousal and a gateway to the majority of mid-level innate motor programs, 
including everything from chewing and swallowing to threatening or cow­
ering. 
At the core of the midbrain, surrounding the fluid-filled central canal that 
connects the forebrain ventricles (fluid-filed chambers) with the fourth ven­
tricle and spinal canal, lies a cell-dense structure called the central gray (or 
periaqueductal gray) area of the midbrain (see Figure 8. 1). The central gray 
area appears to be endowed with numerous hormone receptors, and pass­
ing nearby are ascending pain-projection systems and other ascending 
230 < The Symbolic Species

MOTOR CONTROL 
OF VOCALIZATION 
hypothalamus 
to respiratory motor neurons 
Figure 8.1 Output control systems for the major muscles of the vocal tract used to vo­
calize in humans and primates. The trigeminal and facial motor nuclei are typical 
skeletal motor output nuclei for controlling face and jaw muscles, respectively. The 
hypoglossal nucleus is a special motor region that controls the tongue muscles. The 
nucleus ambiguu˚ controls laryngeal muscles. The reticular regions contain circuits 
that are substrates for many automatic movement patterns, and reticular regions 
around the nucleus ambiguus and further down the brain stem are premotor regions 
for breathing. The muscles of the tongue and face are more directly accessible to cor­
tical motor and premotor control, whereas the muscles of the larynx and respira­
tory system are indirectly influenced by limbic structures such as the hypothalamus, 
amygdala, and cingulate cortex. Many of the limbic structures were once called the 
rhinencephalon ("nose brain") because the olfactory input is most direct. Stimula­
tion of most limbic structures (not the olfactory bulbs) can elicit stereotypic vocal­
izations from mammal species, but motor cortex stimulation cannot. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 231

pathways carrying autonomic nervous system feedback on their way to the 
forebrain. Descending inputs arrive from areas of the forebrain limbic areas 
(hippocampus, amygdala, and cingulate cortex) and hypothalamus, which 
are specifically associated with emotional state and autonomic arousal. 
Among the output targets of the central gray area are both respiratory pre­
motor regions of the brain stem reticular region and motor neurons that con­
trol the larynx (nucleus ambiguus). The central gray area is also a source of 
outputs controlling other visceral "behaviors" via the autonomic peripheral 
nervous system. Together with the surrounding dorsal tegmentum, the cen­
tral gray area is thus part of a core system for coordinating relatively auto­
matic vegetative and arousal functions of the organism, including ingestion 
and respiration. 
Not surprisingly, behaviors that communicate arousal and emotional 
states in most vertebrates depend on this core midbrain center. The ma­
jority of communicative signals that animals produce, whether vocal or 
nonvocal, are associated with sensory/motor systems of the head. As the mo­
bile "turret" on which all the long-distance sense organs are mounted, and 
also often the carrier of some of the most formidable "social" weapons (e.g., 
teeth, antlers), the head is a crucial source of information about an animal's 
direction of attention, motor readiness, and emotional state. Such impor­
tant indicators of one's present and future propensities are crucial bits of 
information to make available to members of one's social group, in order to 
help mediate collective behaviors. Situated at the top of the spinal cord, the 
midbrain and brain stem are the locus for input -output systems of the head, 
and so it is not surprising that they should play crucial communicative func­
tions. 
Vocalization, in particular, has a special association with these midbrain 
systems because it involves the interaction of the oral and respiratory tracts. 
To organize vocalization requires the coordinated activation of clusters of 
motor neurons that control the muscles for breathing, the tension of the lar­
ynx, and the movements of the oral and facial muscles. The motor neurons 
controlling all of these are located in the upper brain stem. Even premo­
tor neurons controlling the diaphragm and intercostal muscles for breath­
ing can be found in this region, though the primary neurons for these 
muscles are located in the upper spinal cord. The premotor neurons for res­
piration include a distributed set of"pacemaker" neurons in the lower brain 
stem (the medulla oblongata) that control the breathing cycle. These receive 
inputs relaying information about oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in the 
blood, and are responsible for automatically adjusting the rate and volume 
of breathing during different states of activity and metabolic demand. Like 
232 < The Symbolic Species

most systems of the brain that control visceral functions, the pacemaker neu­
rons comprise a network that is spontaneously active and autonomous. This 
enables breathing to be completely reflexive and automatic. The pace­
maker system in tum controls motor neurons in the spinal cord which di­
rectly control the diaphragm and intercostal muscles that inflate the lungs. 
But the oral tract has to serve two partially conflicting functions: both 
breathing and ingestion of food. Since swallowing and breathing are exclu­
sive functions, the larynx plays a pivotal role as the gateway to the respira­
tory tract. When a bolus of food is pushed back by the tongue into the 
pharynx, an automatic swallowing reflex becomes engaged. With the initi­
ation of this automatic movement pattern, breathing is momentarily inhib­
ited and the larynx is briefly closed. Though well protected by the physical 
position of the epiglottis, which forces food behind and around the open­
ing in most mammals, the laryngeal constriction prevents air movement 
from inadvertently diverting the passing food into the airway. Many infant 
mammals and some adult mammals can continue to breath, albeit in a 
slightly altered pattern, while swallowing liquids (e.g., during suckling), but 
this capability is unavailable to adult humans because of a much lower po­
sition of the larynx in the throat. As adults, we are much more dependent 
on laryngeal closure to protect the air passage from food and liquid than 
are other mammals (a curious difference we will return to in Chapter 11). 
There are other reasons for adjusting the flow of air through the larynx. 
By constricting the air passage to a greater or lesser extent during different 
modes of breathing, pressure within the lungs can be adjusted. This can af­
fect oxygenation during exertion, as well as modulate rigidity of the trunk 
in synchrony with locomotor activities that also need to make use of trunk 
muscles. 
These problems of coordinating swallowing and breathing, and adjust­
ing subglottal air pressure, have dictated an ancient linkage between the 
motor control of such processes. The muscle systems involved in eating and 
breathing are largely automatic, like many other visceral muscles, such as 
those that contr'ol digestion. Breathing, for example, needs to continue 
whether we are conscious or not, and so it defaults to an autonomous re­
flexive behavior. But these prepattemed behaviors can sometimes be in­
tentionaly inhibited and modified in response to changing circumstances, 
and there are times when it may become critical to stop breathing for a sec­
ond or two. For the most part, however, the links among swallowing/breath­
ing behaviors are not modifiable. The reason for all this should be obvious. 
If we needed consciously to inhibit inspiration of air while swallowing, 
sooner or later we would make an error and choke. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 233

Not infrequently, we hear of cases where even the automatic system fails. 
This is probably far more common in human beings than in any other 
species because of the peculiarly long distance from mouth to larynx, and 
so has made the Heimlich maneuver an important addition to an otherwise 
automatic protection. Nevertheless, even animals that are less susceptible 
to choking because of a higher position of the larynx tend to alternate 
breathing and swallowing, or significantly modify their breathing during 
swallowing. 
The functional organization of the breathing-swallowing-chewing sys­
tems is also reflected in the anatomical organization of the nuclei that con­
trol these functions in the brain stem. The groups of neurons that control 
the muscles for these behaviors are lined up in side-by-side columns, or nu­
clei, within the brain stem. At one end is the skeletal motor column (con­
trolling voluntary muscles of the mouth and face), at the other end the 
visceral motor column (controlling automatic muscle systems for swallow­
ing, breathing, and heart rate); and between them is the branchia-motor 
column, which connects to muscle systems that have both automatic and 
voluntary functions (i.e., controlling the tongue). The branchia-motor nu­
clei get their name from their position near the branchial arches that form 
where the embryonic head meets the neck. In fish embryos, these arches 
develop into gill arches. 
The visceral motor systems were probably coopted for communication 
during terrestrial vertebrate evolution because changes in respiration pat­
terns provide some of the most useful indices of arousal state. Accentuat­
ing the symptoms of respiration by making a hissing sound-produced as 
air passes through the narrow constriction of the throat and mouth-may 
have provided some of the earliest forms of vocal communication. The sub­
sequent differentiation and specialization of sound-breath patterning has 
likely built upon this otherwise primitive index of arousal. Because of this 
ancient pattern, vocal communication has inherited many of the organiza­
tional features of a partly automatic, partly controllable motor system. These 
include the automatic, reflexlike production of sounds when in an appro­
priate arousal state; stereotypic vocalizations; and a minimal role for learn­
ing. 
Vocalization, like swallowing, requires linked synchronous activity of the 
oral, vocal, and respiratory muscles, and so depends on a more central site 
that connects to all. This convergence center appears to be the central gray 
area of the brain. Electrical stimulation of the central gray area in cat, squir­
rel monkey, and macaque monkey brains appears to be capable of produc­
ing the full range of vocal calls for these species. The corresponding 
234 < The Symbolic Species

structure has been shown to elicit communicative gestures, postures, and 
sound production in essentially every vertebrate species that has been stud­
ied, including fish, frogs, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Stimulation of other 
linked brain stem sites (e.g., individual motor nuclei involved in vocaliza­
tion) only produces isolated movements of the corresponding muscles. The 
central gray area is the critical central link among the surrounding reticu­
lar nuclei and brain stem motor nuclei comprising a distributed network for 
innate sound production.1 It seems clear that call-production "programs" 
are actually embodied within this network of structures linked with the cen­
tral gray area. Damage to components of this system can alter the form and 
sound of calls, 2 and transplantation of the entire midbrain from quail to chick 
embryos can "transfer" some of the quail's calls to the chick.3 
Vocalizations do not occur in a behavioral vacuum. They are inevitably 
one component in a more complex visual-auditory display that also includes 
postural and gestural information (e.g., facial expressions). Although the net­
works that embody the innate motor programs underlying species-typical 
vocal behaviors are located in midbrain and brain stem circuits, they can 
be activated by arousal from a number of higher structures, including the 
hypothalamic and limbic system structures located deep within the fore­
brain. The limbic system contains the brain regions mostly responsible for 
emotional experience, motivation, and attentional processes, as well as for 
their associated autonomic and hormonal responses. Rather than an isolated 
behavior, innate vocalization is one of the outward manifestations of an in­
tegrated state of emotional and behavioral arousal. Other output systems 
that tend to be simultaneously activated may include postural, autonomic, 
and hormonal changes. Decades of electrophysiological and lesion studies 
of these structures in monkey brains have mapped out the forebrain sites 
that contribute directly and indirectly to call production. In general, the fur­
ther these sites are removed from the midbrain, in connectional terms, the 
more integrative and less direct their effects on vocalization. This is often 
reflected in considerable delay between electrical stimulation of a site and 
the productiin of a vocalization. In some regions, vocalizations are only pro­
duced after the electrical stimulation is turned off, producing a kind of re­
bound effect. These forebrain systems provide multiple levels of control 
over vocalizations. 
The motor programs for most innate mammalian vocalizations are highly 
modular. They are relatively invariant from birth; learning plays little or no 
role in their form and often can do little to influence when a vocalization is 
produced or inhibited. The links between specific vocalizations and distinct 
states of emotional arousal are also highly automatic and invariant. Appro-
Terrence W. Deacon > 235

priate calls are produced when arousal rises above some threshold in cer­
tain fairly stereotypic contexts. Different arousal states, such as fear or sex­
ual arousal, are correlated with very different activity patterns within the 
structures of the limbic system and the hypothalamus. In some sense, the 
circuits that are active at a given time provide a signature of a particular emo­
tional state. Not surprisingly, different limbic circuits project their outputs 
to the midbrain vocalization system through independent pathways, which 
are divided along lines that correspond to alternative arousal states. When 
directly stimulated, these pathways can also elicit vocalizations. Since each 
distinctive arousal state has a characteristic activity signature, its pattern of 
outputs can serve as a sort of code sent to the midbrain that specifies which 
vocal program to run. This linkage has other consequences as well. Because 
of this relatively invariant association, vocal calls are quite literally symp­
toms of specific emotional and arousal states. 
The reflexlike links between perceiving and producing calls, and the 
emotional states associated with them, are made evident by the "infec­
tiousness" of some of our own species' innate calls, specifically laughter and 
crying. Newborn babies lying in a maternity ward demonstrate this innate 
primitive linkage as they are induced to cry by hearing the cries of other 
babies, but many of us are also familiar with the personal experience of being 
induced to tears by the crying of others over the death of someone we do 
not know, or made to laugh by the irritating but effective "laugh track" that 
underlines and "sells" the jokes on television's situation comedies. Like the 
motor systems underlying innate vocalizations, the call analysis process also 
works on many levels at once. Before even arriving at forebrain auditory cen­
ters, auditory inputs are relayed in midbrain analyzers. Here, an initial cat­
egorization may occur, sufficient to activate initial orienting responses to 
evolutionarily important classes of stimuli. The emotional response elicited 
by innate species calls is also probably mediated by cortical analysis, since 
the cortex is the major source for sensory input into limbic structures. Links 
between midbrain structures may, however, provide the substrate for an in­
dependent tendency to call in response to a call, that, in effect, short­
circuits higher-order analysis. 
Why Don't Mammals Sing Like Birds? 
The key to the vocal difference between birds and mammals can be 
traced to some interesting differences in their anatomy. Though human 
speech depends critically on structures of the cerebral cortex and rapid, 
skilled movements of the oral and vocal muscles, this is not true of vocal-
236 < The Symbolic Species

izations in other mammals. The human, cetacean, and bird "solutions" to 
skilled vocalization are quite different, but some interesting parallels offer 
important clues. What these exceptions to the rule share in common is what 
they avoid: leaving vocal communication under the control of the visceral 
motor systems of the brain. 
In order to learn and produce skilled movements, many regions of the 
brain must become involved that are unnecessary for innate gestures and 
vocalizations. The visceral muscle systems that are most directly involved 
in mammal vocalizations are not well suited to this task, precisely because 
these systems must be capable of operating autonomously, according to a 
few set motor programs. Such programs are the epitome of modular brain 
functions that are closed to any interference from other systems. Once they 
are activated, they tend to run their stereotypic course irrespective of our 
awareness or monitoring of the process. In addition, such modular programs 
tend to be quite specifically localized to circuits interconnecting midbrain 
and brain stem nuclei. Skilled behaviors, in contrast, are associated with the 
skeletal muscle systems, such as the limb muscles. Since locomotor needs 
are so varied and unpredictable in most species, this system has to be ca­
pable of considerable plasticity and modifiability. Ongoing behaviors must 
be capable of being monitored and must be open to interruption and mod­
ification. Just the opposite of autonomous and modular. Nevertheless, once 
a behavior program has been learned, it can be "offloaded" to other motor 
systems that allow it to be treated as an unanalyzed modular program. Con­
sequently, highly skilled behaviors can be as rapid and autonomous as any 
innate behaviors. Not surprisingly, the systems of the brain that support 
these plastic motor abilities are quite widely distributed. The cerebral cor­
tex and cerebellum of mammals are among the most critical structures for 
consciously elicited movement, as well as for the development and modi­
fication of skilled behaviors. 
Damage to the primary motor cortex in a mammal brain (motor cortex 
lies along a vertical strip running down either side of the cortex just ahead 
of the halfwhy point from back to front) can produce a complete loss of 
movement on the opposite side of the body that corresponds to the posi­
tion of the damaged region in an inverted map of muscles from legs and 
feet at the top, to head and mouth at the bottom of the motor strip. Dam­
age to the cortical area for oral and facial muscles on one side produces a 
partial paralysis that can affect the use of the mouth and tongue during eat­
ing, and bilateral damage can completely paralyze these muscles. The other 
parts of the brain that are involved in skilled behavior, such as the basal gan­
glia and cerebellum, play a complementary role to the cortex, and appear 
Terrence W. Deacon > 237

to be particularly important for fine-tuning and automating skilled move­
ment patterns. It is probably accurate to view the motor cortex as helping 
to compose and test a behavioral subroutine that will eventually be run with 
little cortical intervention by these subcortical systems. In birds, although 
there is nothing quite like a motor cortex (in fact, no cerebral cortex as in 
mammals), there are forebrain nuclei that play a similar role in orchestrat­
ing intentionally monitored movements and programming deeper brain 
systems to run the programs for well-learned behaviors. 
The superior vocal abilities of birds are probably a consequence of a pe­
culiar quirk of anatomy having to do with the adaptation to flight. The evo­
lution of flying provided intense selection pressure for weight reduction. 
One aspect of this was an elimination of the heavy teeth and bones of the 
mouth and jaw, which were replaced by a much lighter bill and a reduced 
tongue. In this process, the larynx was also simplified to accommodate spe­
cial breathing problems imposed by flight. In birds, unlike most mammals, 
the larynx has become vestigial and is not the major regulator of air flow to 
and from the lungs. Birds control air flow with a paired muscular structure 
called a syrinx, which is located somewhat deeper in the chest cavity near 
the divergence of the bronchial tubes projecting to the two lungs. The sy­
rinx functions like the larynx in mammals by selectively pinching off the flow 
of air; but being situated lower, it provides the possibility of independent 
control of the air flow through each bronchial tube. Tensing the syringeal 
muscles is also what produces the tones ofbirdsong. Some of the complexity 
in such song stems from the interaction of sounds produced by the two sy­
ringeal pathways. But why should this have also conferred more flexible 
vocal abilities and the possibility of vocal learning? 
This difference between birds and mammals is related to the difference 
between the tongue and laryngeal muscle control in mammals. The larynx, 
as we saw, is controlled by the visceral motor system, which mostly produces 
stereotypic preprogrammed movements. In contrast, the tongue is con­
trolled by systems intermediate between visceral and skeletal motor sys­
tems, and is capable of both stereotypic movements and some more 
deliberate movements. The muscles of the tongue run both radially and lon­
gitudinally. Radially oriented tongue muscles control its elongation by con­
tracting at right angles to one another and squeezing the larynx in on itself, 
like the way that squeezing a balloon elongates it. Longitudinally oriented 
muscles of the tongue extend into it from attachments behind the tongue 
and aim the extended tongue to either side or up and down. One right and 
left pair of these connect at their posterior ends to the paired styloid 
processes, little spikes of bone extending from the frontal base of the skull, 
238 < The Symbolic Species

and another pair connect to the hyoid bone-a small, horseshoe-shaped 
bone that encircles the top of the larynx and bottom of the epiglottis. The 
tiny hyoid bone is not directly attached to other bones, but "floats" freely 
in the throat, suspended by long, thin ligaments and muscles that attach it 
to the base of the skull and the tip of the jaw. Contraction of the hyoid­
tongue (hyoglossal) muscles retracts the tongue with respect to the larynx, 
and contraction of the hyoid-jaw (geniohyoid) muscles raises the larynx and 
epiglottis, at the same time compressing the tongue against the roof of the 
mouth and the back of the throat to push food along during swallowing. 
Contracting the muscles that link the hyoid to the jaw also aids in extend­
ing the tongue, by pulling it forward in the mouth. 
Al of these tongue muscles are controlled by fibers coursing through the 
hypoglossal nerve (named for its position "beneath the tongue"), which 
carries impulses from motor neuron cell bodies in the middle of the brain 
stem. These motor neurons form a cluster of brain stem columns collec­
tively known as the hypoglossal nucleus (after the nerve that grows from 
it). A few years ago, a colleague (Alan Sokoloff) and I put some of the fin­
ishing touches on a half century of anatomical investigations of this most 
complicated muscle of the body by showing that in monkeys, each class of 
intrinsic and extrinsic tongue muscles is innervated by its own columnar sub­
nucleus of the hypoglossal nucleus.4 This point-to-point organization is 
what makes possible the remarkable articulatory control that is necessary 
for food preparation and for speech, at least in humans. 
As far as we can tell, the human and monkey hypoglossal nuclei contain 
entirely corresponding columnar divisions, and these have parallels in many 
other vertebrates as well. One part of this motor map of tongue muscles 
stands out as particularly relevant to the bird-mammal comparison. Among 
the muscles involved in tongue movement, the muscle between the hyoid 
and the jaw (the geniohyoid muscle) is the exception. It is the only muscle 
that controls tongue movement without actually attaching within the tongue 
body. The motor neurons that control it occupy a column of the hypoglos­
sal nucleus thgt is correspondingly separated from the rest, at the ventral­
most tip of the nucleus. Since mammals lack a syrinx, the comparison is 
difficult, but it appears that the syringeal muscles are not simply laryngeal 
muscles that have been shifted to a lower position, and their innervation re­
flects a sort of mix of mammalian larynx-and-tongue control systems. Dif­
ferent syringeal muscles are controlled by neurons in both the nucleus 
ambiguous (larynx) and the hypoglossal nucleus (tongue). Curiously, the ven­
tral hypoglossal subnucleus that controls the geniohyoid muscle in mammals 
appears in the same relative position as the subnucleus that is the major con-
Terrence W. Deacon > 239

LAND MAMMAL 
CETACEAN 
BIRD 
reduced tongue & larynx 
SOUND FROM: 
laryngeal muscles 
blow hole (facial) muscles 
syringeal muscles 
Figure 8.2 Comparison of structures that control the musculature of sound produc­
tion in terrestrial mammals, dolphins and whales, and birds. 
Left: In terrestrial mammals there is a clear segregation of the skeletal rrwtor nu­
clei that control the rrwvement of the tongue and the visceral rrwtor nuclei that con­
trol the respiratory tract, including the laryngeal muscles. This limits coordination, 
control over automatic vocalization patterns, and vocal skill learning. 
Middle: Dolphins and whales may get around this limitation because they prob­
ably do not make much use of their larynx in sound production and instead appear 
to use muscles associated with sinuses and the blowhole. These are derived from 
skeletal muscles of the face and thus have links to skilled volitional rrwtor systems. 
Right: In birds, though their brains are organized quite diferently, there is con­
siderable participation by forebrain auditory, rrwtor, and association regions. 
Diferent muscles of the tongue in mammals are controlled by subnuclei in the 
hypoglossal nucleus. One of these divisions controls an extrinsic tongue muscle in 
mammals that links the small horseshoe-shaped hyoid bone with the the inner tip of 
the jaw and can cause the whole body of the tongue to protrude. It is controlled by 
a subnucleus of the hypoglossal nucleus that is situated just ventral to the rest of the 
nucleus (compare bird and land mammals). In birds, in contrast, vocalization is pro­
duced by contraction of a paired muscular structure at the branch point of the 
paired bronchial tubes. By a curious twist of evolution, this structure is controlled 
by the ventral subnucleus of the hypoglossal nucleus (designated Xllts ), which prob­
ably corresponds to the part that controls the geniohyoid muscle in mammals. Thus, 
a function subserved by visceral control in mammals is provided with skilled rrwtor 
control in birds. 
troller of muscles of the syrinx in birds (see Figure 8.2). Perhaps with the 
reduction of the skull, the loss of the jaw and teeth, and the modifications 
of the upper respiratory tract in birds, the corresponding neJVes and mus­
cles were recruited to control syringeal tension rather than tongue protru­
sion. By whatever means this occurred, this subdivision of the tongue-control 
240 < The Symbolic Species

nucleus appears in birds to have taken on the problem of breath control and 
sound production, thus handing over a visceral motor function to a skeletal 
motor control system. 
This shift to a more deliberate and monitored control of air flow is prob­
ably an adaptation to the special demands of flight. For birds, flying and 
breathing are intimately linked. With massive flight muscles strapped to the 
sternum and alternately pulling against the rib cage, expanding and col­
lapsing the rib cage in order to breathe could become complicated if the 
two functions were not coordinated. Unfortunately, this cannot be accom­
plished by simply linking breathing and wing flapping together in some 
stereotypic motor program. Flight requires the ability continually to adjust 
wing movements in the face of the unpredictable demands of changing wind 
conditions and obstacles. An ability to adjust related breathing and wing 
movements thus required involving the skeletal motor systems also in the 
control of air flow. Since the control of air flow is the basis for sound pro­
duction, this too has come under more deliberate control as a side effect of 
the evolution of flight. 
In addition to our own species, and perhaps Hoover, there is one group 
of mammals that exhibits some significant degree of vocal flexibility and 
learning ability: the cetaceans (dolphins and whales). In many ways, they 
are the exceptions that demonstrate the rule of visceral versus skeletal 
motor control. Though much of cetacean sound production remains poorly 
understood, it is generally believed that the many sounds they are capable 
of emitting probably are not produced by the larynx. Instead, dolphins and 
whales appear to generate squeaks, clicks, and whistles within an elaborate 
system of sinuses that are located in the front of the skull (behind the large, 
sound-focusing "melon" in dolphins) and that feed into the blowholes on 
the top of the head. This is probably controlled by passing air through con­
strictions between sinuses tightened by the contraction of underlying mus­
cles. These blowhole muscles correspond to face muscles in other mammals, 
and are almost certainly controlled by the skeletal motor nuclei of the brain 
stem (probably the facial motor nucleus). Deliberate control of air flow to 
and from the blowholes is of course particularly important in these aquatic 
mammals. Like birds' adaptation for breathing in flight, but recruiting an 
entirely different muscle system, this special mammalian adaptation for ad­
justing air (and perhaps water) flow seems to have incidentally opened the 
door for more controllable sound production as well. 
So, how might this anatomical logic shed light on our own vocal facility? 
Humans have not entirely shifted phonation to skeletal muscle systems, as 
have birds and cetaceans. Like other mammals, we produce most vocal 
Terrence W. Deacon > 241

sounds by constricting our laryngeal muscles. And yet a large fraction of 
sound variation in speech is only minimally explained by changes in laryn­
geal tension. Most speech sounds involve both muscle systems: a modifi­
cation or interruption of laryngeally produced sounds by movements of the 
skeletal muscles that control the jaw, lips, and tongue. Some speech 
sounds-such as fricatives (sss orff), plosives (p), and clicks (sounds not 
used in European languages but used by, for example, the !Kung San Bush­
men of Africa and produced by variously snapping the tongue off the palate, 
cheek, or teeth under a slight negative pressure)-are produced entirely by 
oral muscles. So there are some interesting anatomical parallels between 
cetaceans, birds, and humans in the flexibility of sound production. It 
demonstrates the general rule: only when the skeletal muscle control sys­
tem enters into the process is there any significant capacity for flexibility, 
learning, and the intentional control of sound production. 
But a shift of most sound manipulation to oral muscles is not the whole 
story. Ours is a dual or hybrid vocalization process. The articulation of the 
tongue in the mouth must be precisely orchestrated with the production 
and modification of sounds produced in the larynx. Not surprisingly, the lin­
guistic roles of variation of fundamental frequency and gating of sound pro­
duction are mostly related to sound continuance. Though many languages 
(Chinese is one) use a few patterns of tone shifts as phonemes, only a very 
small number of such distinctions (e.g., rising, falling, stable) ever play a 
major role in speech. Most tonal variation plays a paralinguistic role in 
speech prosody-the tonal, amplitude, and rhythmic variations that convey 
attentional and arousal information in speech-and most of this occurs 
subconsciously and automatically with the corresponding shifts in affect. In 
this regard, laryngeal activity functions much as it does in the vocalization 
of most mammals: as a symptom of limbic arousal. 
But singing demonstrates the extent of our capability systematically to 
control specific tone production by an independent mechanism. Such a pre­
cise control of relative vocal frequency and timing exemplifies an un­
precedented capacity for laryngeal control that is only minimally 
incorporated into any language. Moreover, the crucial role of laryngeal 
sound production in distinguishing phonemes (e.g., by differences in voice­
onset time) to partition words and mark phrases must be coordinated to mil­
lisecond accuracy with the movements of the lips and tongue, and these 
carefully choreographed combinations must be learned so that they can be 
deployed at a moment's notice in a vast array of contexts. Clearly, then, more 
than just a shift in emphasis to oral muscles underlies our speech abilities. 
242 < The Symbolic Species

There must also be a difference in our capacity to control laryngeal move­
ments that reflects differences not just at the periphery but within the 
brain. 
Humans have a degree of voluntary motor control over the sound pro­
duced in the larynx that surpasses any other vocal species. Indeed, this de­
gree of voluntary control is otherwise found only in motor systems controlled 
by cerebral cortical and cerebellar motor pathways projecting ultimately to 
skeletal muscles. This suggests a difference in the neural control of the 
human larynx that is the neural equivalent of the shift from visceral to 
skeletal muscles that underlies vocal skill in birds and cetaceans. Though 
direct evidence of such a change in the human brain's motor output to the 
larynx is not yet available, the circumstantial evidence is abundant. One way 
or another, the human larynx must be controlled from higher brain systems 
involved in skeletal muscle control, not just visceral control. Additional ev­
idence for such a shift is supplied by the partial decoupling of sound pro­
duction from emotional arousal states in language, as it is also in birds and 
cetaceans. 
This separation is particularly evident in bird species that are capable of 
mimicking other animals' sounds or being taught speech. Though it may be 
necessary to be sufficiently aroused to vocalize at all, a particular vocaliza­
tion is only arbitrarily linked with a particular emotion. A similar dissocia­
tion of specific vocal sounds from specific emotions is also characteristic of 
humpback whale songs, which change annually (see Figure 2.1 in Chapter 
2), as well as of many of the vocalizations that dolphins produce. This dis­
sociation from specific affective states is an essential requirement for learn­
ing novel vocalizations. It is my suspicion that Hoover's speech was also 
dissociated from any specific emotional states, except perhaps just being 
bored. His speech did not replace any typical harbor seal vocalization. He 
seemed to produce speech less often in threatening social contexts or dur­
ing the mating season, when he used typical seal vocalizations instead. And 
his most vocal periods seemed to be at times when he was aimlessly "pac­
ing" back and forth (in his case swimming repeatedly back and forth) in his 
enclosure and periodicaly punctuating this boredom by reclining back in 
the water and speaking. 
But the motor/emotion dichotomy is not absolute. Not only do we ex­
hibit a mix of arousal-independent learned vocalizations (speech and song) 
and highly stereotypic vocalizations that are innately linked to certain emo­
tions (laughter and sobbing), but our visceral-emotional and skeletal­
muscle-skill-learning systems often compete for access over vocalization, as 
Terrence W. Deacon > 243

well as often complementing each other in the same vocal behavior. It is as 
though we haven't so much shifted control from visceral to voluntary means 
but superimposed one upon the other. 
One of the more intriguing examples of the interactions between inten­
tional motor systems and automatic calling tendencies has been provided 
in an observation by Jane Goodall.5 Chimpanzees often produce food calls 
when they come upon a new food source. This stereotypic call attracts hun­
gry neighbors to the location, often kin who are foraging nearby. Goodall 
recounts one occasion where she observed a chimp trying to suppress an 
excited food call by covering his mouth with his hand. The chimp had found 
a cache of bananas she had left to attract the animals to an observation area, 
and as she suggests, apparently did not want to have any competition for 
such a desirable food. Though muffling the call as best he could with his 
hand, he could not, apparently, directly inhibit the calling behavior itself. 
People are often faced with circumstances of this sort. For example, there 
are many times when humorous events threaten to make us laugh, but for 
reasons of politeness we feel compelled to stifle the tendency. To suppress 
an irresistible laugh, we resort to such tricks as gritting our teeth, clench­
ing our jaws and lips, putting our hands over our mouths, or simply turn­
ing so as not to face someone who might take offense. Even for humans, 
the essentially automatic and unconscious nature of many stereotypic cals 
causes them to erupt without warning, often before there is time indirectly 
to interfere with their expression. Some degree of self-consciousness may 
be a prerequisite for such control. This curious conflict between simulta­
neously produced intentional and unintentional behaviors offers a unique 
insight into the nature of language. The superimposition of intentional cor­
tical motor behaviors over autonomous subcortical vocal behaviors is, in a 
way, an externalized model of a neural relationship that is internalized in 
the production of human speech. It graphically portrays the functional 
bridge that links the vocal communication of primates to the speech of hu­
mans. The evolution of speech effectively occurred at this neurological in­
terface. Understanding this relationship is a first step in the process of 
deconstructing language into its evolutionary antecedents. 
Though the cerebral cortex plays little role in the production of vocal­
izations in most mammals, some cortical systems appear to regulate call pro­
duction by superimposing or relaxing inhibitory control over these 
spontaneous tendencies. The only cortical areas involved in call production 
in primates are located in the medial frontal cortex (anterior cingulate cor­
tex).6 These areas are intermediate between limbic cortex and neocortex, 
and are otherwise involved in sustaining attention and initiating intentional 
244 < The Symbolic Species

actions. Extensive bilateral damage to this region in human brains pro­
duces at least a temporary immobility and mutism, though not actual paral­
ysis or language loss. Damage to nearby medial and ventral frontal cortical 
areas may also produce disturbances of affect and emotional expression in 
both monkeys and humans. Though most mammal calls are not learned, 
these cortical regions appear to be critical for learning under which cir­
cumstances one needs to facilitate or inhibit the tendency to call. 
The cerebral cortex in most mammals includes areas that control move­
ments of the oral and vocal muscles, but these cortical areas are probably 
most involved in controlling movements of the mouth, tongue, and lips dur­
ing grooming, food preparation, and eating. When these areas are damaged, 
or their output nerves are severed, paralysis of the facial and oral muscles 
occurs. Bilateral destruction of these areas in a monkey's brain makes it im­
possible to eat, and yet, though paralyzed and severely incapacitated in other 
uses of the oral pathway, these animals can still produce calls whose form 
is not radically altered from normal. Despite the fact that cortical motor 
damage does not disrupt call production in the monkeys that have been 
studied, motor cortical areas may nevertheless play an indirect role. Pro­
jections to oral and vocal motor nuclei in the brain stem may offer a route 
for direct intentional inhibition of calls. The direct superimposition of other 
competing motor output signals can help to inhibit or block call production 
under circumstances where arousal cannot be suppressed, but where such 
calls might result in unfortunate consequences. Consider, for example, the 
tendency to produce distress calls when separated from a group, or fright 
calls when startled. An animal that suspects that a predator is nearby may 
need to be able to suppress these tendencies in order to avoid giving its lo­
cation away. 
Again the comparison to bird brains is instructive. Forebrain structures 
are intimately involved in both birdsong production and learning (although 
bird forebrains are organized quite differently from mammal forebrains, 
correspondences become more obvious in midbrain and brain stem). Many 
of the structure; that contribute to singing can be compared to limbic struc­
tures in mammal brains and contribute to arousal thresholds for initiating 
singing, but a number of other structures have been shown to be essential 
for song learning and even to the organization of the song structure. These 
include the forebrain auditory nuclei, and motor nuclei as well as structures 
that play integrative roles between them. When the motor nucleus of the 
bird archistriatum (RA) is damaged, for example, singing is disrupted; but 
if more anterior auditory and association structures are damaged, song 
learning and song structure may be disrupted while singing remains possi-
Terrence W. Deacon > 245

ble. This difference from most mammals is analogous to the difference be­
tween humans and other primates. Only in humans does damage to or 
stimulation of the cortical auditory and motor cortex produce an analogous 
disturbance of the structure of vocalizations. 
One reason why calls are largely unaffected by cortical motor damage is 
that they do not generally involve complex articulatory movements of the 
mouth and tongue. Instead, vocalization is produced along with specific 
stereotypic positions and shapes of the lips and tongue, sometimes with the 
addition of simple repetitive stereotypic movements of the mouth. Seg­
mentation of calls is mostly marked by the onset and offset of air flow and 
the associated frequency shifts (e.g., on and off sound production, or rising 
and falling tonality). These features are also well exemplified by the two 
most distinctive human innate calls, laughter and sobbing. Both involve 
rhythmic sound production and very stereotypic breathing patterns that seg­
regate the sound into repeating units (laughs and sobs). Both are also as­
sociated with relatively stable mouth-tongue positions and no articulation 
of the lips, or of the tongue against other oral structures. The fixed stereo­
typic positioning of the mouth and tongue during these human calls often 
makes it impossible to speak at the same time. 
Speech, in contrast, involves extensive and rapid articulation of the 
tongue with lips, tongue, and palate, along with simultaneous changes in 
lip shape, and opening and closing of the jaw. Though phonation is often 
interrupted by articulatory movements that momentarily cut off expira­
tion, and tonality may be varied slightly as we speak to mark distinctive fea­
tures or to provide emotional or attentional information, vocalization during 
speech is fairly continuous and invariant compared to the stereotypic on and 
off patterns demonstrated in calls. Breaks in sound production may be nec­
essary to take a breath or may signal a break between thoughts or sentences, 
but individually vocalized words or syllables separated by silences are not 
normal, and may occur as a symptom of some types of brain damage (see 
the discussion of Broca's aphasia in Chapter 10). 
In neurological terms, calls are characterized by foreground visceral 
motor programs on a background of relatively stable oral facial postures. 
The skeletal motor system is subordinated to the visceral motor system. 
Speech inverts this relationship. When humans speak, the skeletal motor 
components of the oral tract take the foreground against a comparatively 
more stable vocal-respiratory background. Most of the information that dis­
tinguishes individual speech units is encoded in rapid articulatory move­
ments. These are superimposed on a background of constant expiratory 
pressure and more slowly varying tonality. Thus, although both calls and 
246 < The Symbolic Species

speech require the coordinated action of the subcortical motor systems that 
control respiration and vocalization as well as the cortical skeletal motor sys­
tems that control the jaw, lips, and tongue, the patterns are inverted. Hu­
mans are perhaps at an intermediate stage between birds, who have usurped 
vocal control from visceral motor systems, and the chimp with his hand over 
his mouth trying to stifle a call produced with visceral systems using a limb 
controlled by voluntary cortical systems. Cortical motor movements during 
speech are superimposed over a relatively stabilized visceral motor activ­
ity. In this case, oral muscles rather than hand muscles are involved in mod­
ifying the vocal output, and so the control is more complete and the 
modifications more facile and subtle. The fact that chimps (and indeed the 
vast majority of mammals) cannot exercise a more direct cortical motor con­
trol over either their phonation or their oral movements at this time demon­
strates that even at this low level in the neural control of sound production, 
human brains must be unusual. 
A Leveraged Takeover 
In all mammals, the cortex includes neurons (called "pyramidal cells" be­
cause of their shape) that send output axons to deeper structures of the 
brain. In the motor cortical region, these output neurons are particularly 
large, and send their axons into the brain stem and spinal cord. There they 
contact the dendrites of premotor interneurons (one step removed from 
final output neurons) and motor neurons responsible for muscle activation. 
The brain stem of a typical mammal also receives direct cortical inputs into 
regions of the reticular motor system. These are widely distributed premotor 
structures, some of which send their outputs to the motor neurons that di­
rectly control the muscles of the face and jaw (the facial and trigeminal 
motor nuclei, respectively). In the nonprimate mammals we and others have 
studied, relatively few if any cortical projections contact the output motor 
neurons directly. The separate reticular regions relay signals from the motor 
cortex to the 
• tongue motor nucleus (the hypoglossal nucleus), and to the 
laryngeal motor nucleus (the nucleus ambiguus). 
Compared to most other mammal species, however, the projections from 
the monkey cerebral cortex are more extensive (Figure 8.3). The cortical 
inputs to the spinal cord in monkeys include the intermediate premotor lay­
ers that are innervated in most mammals, but also extend all the way to in­
clude the ventral-most layers of the spinal cord, where they likely contact 
motor neurons directly. In the brain stem, there is a similar pattern. Not 
only do axons from the motor cortex connect to reticular regions, they also 
Terrence W. Deacon > 247

brainstem motor nuclei 
cortical-brainstem projections 
nonprimate 
primate 
Figure 8.3 Two evolutionary shifts producing increasing cortical control over 11Wtor 
output from brain stem articulatory and vocal systems. These shifts were produced 
by an increase in the proportions of the cerebral cortex in comparison to these brain 
stem stmctures. 
Left: Basic relationships between brain stem nuclei (neuronal cell clusters) con­
trollingface-jaw-tongue and larynx-respiration muscles. 
Right: This shows the progression from a typical terrestrial mammal plan (far 
left of the three) with minimal direct cortical input to these systems (11Wstly indi­
rect via the reticular regions of the brain stem) to the 11Wnkey-ape condition (cen­
ter image), where increased forebrain size gives cortical projections a favorable 
competitive bias, to the possible human condition (far right), with extensive re­
cmitment of even visceral 11Wtor systems due to the massive cortical projection to 
these regions. The asterisk indicates increased projection to spinal respiratory 11Wtor 
neurons as well. 
connect directly with the facial, trigeminal, and hypoglossal motor nuclei. 
Not contacted by cortical inputs are the visceral motor nuclei. The nucleus 
ambiguus, for example, still only receives indirect projections via the retic­
ular regions, as it does in other mammals. The consequence of direct cor­
tical motor neuron connections in monkeys is probably their increased 
voluntary control over the movements of hands and fingers. The importance 
of this for primate locomotion and foraging is obvious. Shifts to more vol­
untary control of the facial and mouth muscles could also be important for 
preparing food and communicating by gestures. 
How has this takeover of motor nuclei by cortical inputs been achieved 
in primate brain evolution? Primate forebrain expansion provides a sort of 
vertical rendition of the displacement process responsible for the connec­
tional changes in the brain of the blind mole rat, Spalax. As a result of the 
reduction in proportions of the postcranial body compared to the head and 
brain there has been a change in relative proportions between the forebrain 
as compared to the brain stem and spinal cord, and this embryological shift 
248 < The Symbolic Species

in neural proportions is a recipe for displacement. With so many more de­
scending axons vying for space in the primate motor system, the more nu­
merous cortical axons displace the less numerous local connections, since 
these displaced connections arose from systems that were scaled for a 
smaller body. In nonprimate brains, the initially overexuberant and some­
what nonspecific cortical projections to these brain stem motor nuclei are 
outcompeted by local projections and pruned back during development to 
leave only those projecting to premotor regions of the brain stem and spinal 
cord. In primate brains, on the other hand, the initial cortical projections 
are so numerous that they outcompete the local connections and persist in 
far greater numbers in many additional motor nuclei. 
This same logic can be extrapolated to the human case. The 
primate/human difference is characterized by an additional increase in cor­
tical/brain stem disproportion. Though of different embryological origin, 
this additional human shift in embryonic neural numbers should provide 
an analogous displacement, compared to the typical primate pattern. Be­
cause of their greatly expanded numbers, human cortical axons should 
enjoy an even greater ability to recruit brain stem and spinal cord targets 
during development. But where else are there targets for human cortical 
axons to invade? They will almost certainly increase in proportions in face 
and tongue muscle nuclei, with the consequence that the voluntary control 
of these systems will be greater than in other primates. In addition, how­
ever, the more extensive human cortical projections have probably also in­
vaded nuclei in the brain stem and neurons in the spinal cord that even 
primates do not have voluntary control over: nuclei-controlling visceral 
muscle systems. Two of these, in particular, are relevant to speech: the 
motor neurons that control the larynx (the nucleus ambiguus), and those 
that control breathing (in the brain stem and upper spinal cord). 
Neurologists have long assumed that humans have direct cortical con­
trol over the larynx because of the tendency of cortical motor damage to 
produce muteness. Uwe Jurgens, Detlev Ploog, and their colleagues at the 
Max Planck Institute have provided additional circumstantial evidence for 
a primate/human dichotomy in this regard by demonstrating that monkeys 
lack direct cortico-ambiguus connections, and by showing that cortical 
motor damage does not eliminate a monkey's ability to vocalize.7 They sur­
mise that such a difference might explain the behavioral difference in re­
sponse to brain damage, and might also explain the well-known difficulty 
in getting monkeys and apes to vocalize from learned associations, much 
less form articulate words. But gaining volitional control over laryngeal 
functions is only part of the story. In order to produce complicated skilled 
Terrence W. Deacon > 249

vocal sounds, the laryngeal muscles need to be coordinated with breathing, 
and with muscle movements of the tongue, lips, and jaw. The human abil­
ity to speak is probably a consequence of all these systems being brought 
under common cortical control. 
One of the more interesting sources of evidence for a shift in motor con­
trol over vocalization and breathing is suggested by studies of laughter. 
Laughter is not only highly stereotypic in form and similar in sound struc­
ture in al normal people, it is also quite different in some important respects 
from corresponding vocalizations in other primates. Though chimpanzees 
also produce a laughterlike vocalization-often as a result of tickling or re­
lated tactile play-which is made up of similar short, rapidly alternating in­
halations and exhalations, chimps vocalize on both the outbreath and the 
inbreath, whereas humans vocalize almost exclusively on the outbreath 
(though there are individual differences in this regard). 8 This may not seem 
to be particularly noteworthy, but consider the curious fact that although 
many other primate vocalizations also involve this in-out vocalization pat­
tern, as though the larynx is just set at a fixed tension irrespective of breath­
ing, no typical human vocalizations, whether calls or speech, have this 
character. Why not? We tend to relax the larynx on inhalation, even when 
we are not thinking about it. It is indeed quite difficult and almost painful 
to speak while inhaling. 
For speech, this asymmetry has obvious communicative value. A large 
number of units of sound distinction (phonemes and syllables) and the 
sound units of meaning (words and morphemes, like word stems and pre­
fixes) can be produced during a single exhalation by modifying the reso­
nances of laryngeal sound production by complicated sequences of upper 
vocal tract movements. These are far less effectively produced during in­
halation (try reading this sentence aloud while inhaling). Because of this, 
during speech we rapidly inhale between phrases in order to set up for each 
subsequent prolonged, controlled, sound-producing exhalation. This rapid 
inhalation is facilitated by completely opening the laryngeal folds. Rapid al­
ternation between orally modified vocalization and nonvocalized inhalation 
increases the information transmission rates of spoken information by ef­
fectively shifting the focus of information transmission from breath units to 
articulatory units. It appears, then, in the interest of speech, that the rela­
tively inflexible link between laryngeal movements and breathing has been 
broken and subordinated in a rather thorough way to skilled articulation. 
Human laughter and sobbing are like primate calls in that they tend to be 
based around alternation of the presence and absence of vocal sounds, su­
perimposed on relatively more stable mouth postures. They are bottom-up, 
250 < The Symbolic Species

viscerally driven patterns. In speech, this relationship is reversed. Relatively 
slower tonal changes and exhalation patterns become precisely timed and 
subordinated to match the rapidly fluctuating articulatory movements of the 
mouth and tongue. Speech is thus comparatively top-down in its control. 
The skeletal motor systems driving mouth and tongue movements dictate 
breathing and laryngeal patterns. 
The predominance of cortical projections to these visceral motor systems 
also explains another, often ignored oddity of human vocalization: the un­
precedented babbling of human infants. Within a few months of birth, 
human infants begin spontaneously and incessantly experimenting with 
sound production, sampling most of the range of possible phonemes that 
speech will later employ. No other mammal species' babies produce even 
a tiny fraction of the sort of unstereotypic vocal play that human babies pro­
duce. And human infants don't need to get particularly excited or upset to 
babble; in fact, they only babble while emotionally calm. When they get 
upset, their babbling is interrupted by a more stereotypic call: crying. This 
propensity is a clear indication that human babbling is activated differently 
from other innate vocalizations. It is the first sign that human vocal motor 
output is at least in part under the control of the cortical motor system. Even 
the timing of the first appearance and maturation of babbling and vocal 
mimickry corresponds to the maturation of the cortical motor output path­
ways. Although newborns do engage in some vocalizations other than cry­
ing, the kind of vocal manipulation that characterizes babbling is not 
produced until a few months after birth. At this time the cortical motor tracts 
are just beginning to become encased in a sheath of cells filled with myelin 
(a fatty substance which acts like a sort of neural insulation, promoting fi­
delity of the signal and more rapid signal transmission). By the time a child 
produces its first words and its first steps (around one year of age), the pro­
jections that carry voluntary movement information to the brain stem and 
spinal cord have nearly reached adult levels of myelin. 
Since the displacement of noncortical inputs by cortical inputs in brain 
stem motor nuclei is an indirect consequence of the shift in brain and body 
proportions in our species, information about relative brain proportions can 
fortuitously provide an index of the degree of cortical vocal control in our 
fossil ancestors. Though fossil speech sounds weren't left behind in the fos­
sil record, nor even fossil vocal tracts, we do have numerous measurements 
of the brain and body sizes for each major hominid species. These data sug­
gest that human vocal skills first exceeded the capabilities of any living non­
human primate at least 2 million years ago, in the hominid fossil species 
Horrw hahilis, since this species marks the first significant upward shift in 
Terrence W. Deacon > 251

relative brain size (see Chapter 1 1  for discussion). Since the trend toward 
larger brains continued from that point until about 200,000 years ago, we 
can predict with some confidence that vocal abilities were enhanced con­
tinuously over this entire extended period of hominid evolution. These data 
suggest that it is unlikely that speech suddenly burst on the scene at some 
point in our evolution. The ability to manipulate vocal sounds appears to 
have been in a process of continual development for over 1 million years. 
However, there is an additional source of evidence for a shift in cortical 
control over respiration that is provided by hominid fossils. One correlate 
of our greater cortical control over breathing appears to be an enlargement 
of the thoracic (chest) spinal cord as compared to other primates. This is 
the region of the spinal cord that contains motor neurons that control the 
intercostal (between-rib) muscles and other trunk muscles involved in 
breathing. This enlargement may reflect a comparative increase of the 
numbers of motor neurons in this segment of the cord (because of reduced 
cell death?) and possibly an increase in descending connections terminat­
ing in this area. In their recent book on human evolution, the Johns Hop­
kins paleontologists Pat Shipman and Alan Walker suggest that the evolution 
of speech may be contingent on this enlargement. They looked for this fea­
ture in the relatively complete vertebral column from a fossil Horrw erec­
tus boy, but could not find a corresponding thoracic enlargement. They 
conclude from this that speech had not yet evolved at this stage in human 
evolution. Given the neurodevelopmental information suggesting that cor­
tical takeover of breathing control is a quantitative allometric effect-and 
not likely the result of a pair of all-or-none mutations that added new neu­
rons to this part of the cord and retargeted cortical axons to match-I sus­
pect that an intermediate interpretation is more likely. With a relative brain 
size intermediate between modem apes and modem humans, this erectus 
boy likely also had an intermediate level of cortical control over respiration, 
supported in part by an increase in cortical projections to thoracic motor 
neurons as well as to other higher respiratory centers. 
Did the use of speech have to wait until these modifications reached a 
modem level, or did the demands of vocal communication contribute some 
of the selection pressure that led to these modifications? These are ques­
tions that we will return to later (in Chapter 11), but in general, we can con­
clude that the modem human level of control over vocalization did not 
evolve overnight, and that upper vocal tract articulatory capabilities were 
probably always in advance of laryngeal capabilities, due to the target bias 
in favor of skeletal motor over visceral motor nuclei. This means that if this 
erectus boy and his contemporaries did communicate using something like 
252 < The Symbolic Species

a language, it may well have been one that was more reliant on orally pro­
duced sound variations than on laryngeally produced ones. In other words, 
it likely employed fewer vowels and rapid tonal variations, relied more 
heavily on consonants and oral clicks, may have been limited to short phras­
ing, and so probably required more nonverbal support as well. 
So, what about Hoover's speech? If most other species of mammals are 
unable to talk because the connections from the cortical motor centers to 
the vocal nuclei in the brain stem are pruned away during early develop­
ment, isn't it possible that perinatal damage to the limbic-midbrain pro­
jections in Hoover's brain turned the tables in favor of cortical motor 
projections to vocal systems? If more typical projections to vocal control sys­
tems had been damaged early enough, the usually transient cortical pro­
jections to these same nuclei might have been able to persist into adulthood. 
Brain damage could indeed have provided Hoover with more direct motor 
control over his tongue and larynx. In any case, it is probably not coinci­
dental that Hoover was an aquatic mammal. Unlike terrestrial mammals, 
for whom breathing can be left to run on autopilot, aquatic mammals need 
to have direct control over when and when not to breathe. Overriding au­
tomatic respiration via cortical control is almost certainly a prerequisite from 
an early age. How this is accomplished is not known, but we now can make 
some confirmed guesses. Though we will never know Hoover's secret, he 
may have taken a road toward speech that happened to converge with ours 
at these critical neural intersections of breathing, sound, and oral movement 
control. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 253

C 
H 
A 
P 
T 
E 
R 
N 
N 
E 
Symbol Minds 
If our brains were simple, we would be too simple to understand 
them. 
--Mario Puzo 
Front-Heavy 
A
gradual superimposition of cortical motor control on visceral motor sys­
tems for vocalization has made possible our modern speaking abilities, 
but the ability to produce articulate sounds is not in itself sufficient to 
make language possible. An articulate verbal ability is not sufficient to lift 
parrots across the symbolic threshold, nor has merely shifting to manual 
signing enabled apes to become articulate members of human society, de­
spite the hopes of some researchers. Even Kanzi-who more than any 
other nonhuman has demonstrated the extent to which language compre­
hension abilities are possible without any explicit language adaptations, and 
how providing a computer speech system can enhance access to symbolic 
communication-will probably not progress beyond the level of symbolic 
254

sophistication exhibited by a three-year-old human child (though he still has 
many years in which to prove me too pessimistic). This is because the more 
fundamental constraint affecting language evolution derives from learning 
and memory difficulties, not limited motor abilities. The evolution of vocal 
abilities might more accurately be seen as a consequence rather than the 
cause of the evolution of language. The changes in brain organization that 
have provided humans with the support necessary to surmount the 
symbolic-learning threshold are more critical. Symbol acquisition abilities 
provide the pacemaker for language evolution from which other adaptations 
for language must derive their usefulness. A greatly enhanced vocal artic­
ulatory ability would be of minor adaptive value if not coupled with sym­
bolic abilities. 
Human brains are not just large ape brains, they are ape brains with some 
rather significant alterations of proportions and relationships between the 
parts. We ought to expect a significant part of this shift in proportions to re­
flect adaptations to the unusual cognitive demands imposed by symbol 
learning. In other words, if the human brain is a more language-friendly ape 
brain, then the special demands of the language adaptation are likely to be 
reflected in the ways that human brain structure diverges from nonhuman 
brain structure. Given the completely unprecedented and indeed coun­
tervailing demands imposed by symbolic learning, as contrasted to all other 
forms oflearning, it seems inevitable that some equally unprecedented neu­
roanatomical changes must lie behind the human symbolic facility. The most 
extreme deviations in brain structure between human and other primate 
brains may thus offer clues to the neural computations that most distinguish 
human from nonhuman minds. 
As we saw in Chapter 6, these radical structural deviations in the human 
forebrain have resulted in a disproportionately enlarged human prefrontal 
cortex and a shift in connectivity favoring prefrontal connections in other 
systems. Let's examine this most dramatic brain renovation for clues to the 
kinds of comitive demands that drove human brain evolution (Figure 9. 1). 
What functional correspondence could link this remarkable neural dispro­
portion to our unusual mode of communication? Does this most modified 
structure reflect the most intense and unusual demands imposed by lan­
guage? If so, it is not the production of everyday speech and the compre­
hension of others' speech that is the main problem. These processes are only 
minimally affected by damage to prefrontal cortex; such damage seldom 
produces permanent difficulty producing speech, comprehending speech, 
or analyzing grammar. Disruption of these basic language abilities­
aphasias-typically results from damage to areas more closely associated 
Terrence W. Deacon > 255

Figure 9.1 Idealized depictions of the predominance of prefrontal influence over 
other brain structures. White arrou:s in the left image represent the relative expan­
sion of prefrontal cortical areas ( 1 ). Gray arrows in both images represent expanded 
prefrontal projections to other cortical areas, basal ganglia, and thalamus. Black ar­
rows signify projections that have expanded so as to invade novel targets: including 
(2) increased prefrontal projections into midbrain and brainstem vocalization cir­
cuits (discussed in the previous chapter) with respect to other limbic and midbrain 
sources; and (3) expanded interconnectivity of prefrontal regions and lateral cere­
bellar cortex, probably including connections with ventral prefrontal cortex (which 
has auditory-oral cortical links). For the first time in evolution, this would bring cere­
bellar systems into the loop of higher-order control of vocal-auditory processes (dis­
cussed later). 
with motor and auditory analysis: Broca's and Wernicke's areas, respec­
tively (these will be the subject of the next chapter). Prefrontal areas seem 
instead to be recruited during such tasks as planning complex behaviors. 
But the range of specific cognitive processes that are altered by prefrontal 
damage cannot be described in such simple terms, and searching for a 
common underlying pattern in prefrontal syndromes leads to an indirect 
and far more interesting connection to language and symbolic cognition. 
Just as prefrontal expansion can only be understood as a function of dy­
namic systemic interactions between many of the brain's structures during 
development, its structural and functional consequences also require an un­
derstanding of the systemic consequences of changes in size. This pre­
frontal enlargement as compared to the majority of brain structures in the 
cortex and elsewhere is a consequence of the developmental competitive 
advantage that its afferents have over other types of cortical afferents. These 
afferents come from such thalamic nuclei as the medial dorsal nucleus 
256 < The Symbolic Species

(which receives a majority of inputs from the midbrain tectum and dorsal 
tegmentum) and the anterior nuclei (which receive their inputs from lim­
bic cortex), and from a very wide range of other cortical areas, including all 
sensory and motor modalities. 
Of particular interest are the widespread cortical outputs that project 
back from the prefrontal cortex to every modality of cortex, including lim­
bic cortex and cortical projections onto the basal ganglia and into the mid­
brain, particularly to the tectum and dorsal tegmentum. Given the very large 
size of the prefrontal cortex compared to the size of its targets, it could be 
expected to recruit a far greater proportion of synapses in these structures 
during development than do other structures that send competing afferents 
to these targets. Compared with more typical primate and mammal brains, 
then, we should expect that in the human brain, prefrontal synapses will be 
in greater proportions within its targets. Consequently, prefrontal infor­
mation processing will likely play a more dominating role in nearly every 
facet of sensory, motor, and arousal processes. Irrespective of whether this 
structure has more "capacity" in some information-processing sense because 
of its size, it simply "has more votes" in whatever is going on in those re­
gions of the brain to which it projects. In general terms, human informa­
tion processing should be biased by an excessive reliance on and guidance 
by the kinds of manipulations that prefrontal circuits impose upon the in­
formation they process. We humans should therefore exhibit a "cognitive 
style" that sets us apart from other species-a pattern of organizing per­
ceptions, actions, and learning that is peculiarly "front-heavy," so to speak. 
But how can this be described in neuropsychological terms? 
Although, during development, the prefrontal region is probably carved 
out as a single projection field, in the mature brain the prefrontal cortex is 
not a single homogeneous structure with a single function. There is a dan­
ger of extrapolating from studies based on one prefrontal area to claims 
about the whole prefrontal region. Different prefrontal regions receive di­
versely diffe.rent cortical inputs and outputs which provide general hints 
concerning their functional differences. Many regions receive inputs from 
specific sensory or motor modalities, and others receive converging inputs 
from more than one modality. No prefrontal area, however, receives direct 
input from primary sensory or motor cortices. One reason the prefrontal 
region remains to some extent mysterious is that its map structure is diffi­
cult to discern. Unlike the cortical topography of most sensory areas, posi­
tions within prefrontal regions do not seem to correlate with the peripheral 
topography of any sensory receptor surface. Nor is there a clear map of 
motor topography. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 257

One hint concerning the sort of mapping of functions within the pre­
frontal regions, however, comes from studies of visual attention and the sub­
cortical structures that underlie it. Patricia Goldman-Rakic and her 
colleagues at Yale University have demonstrated that one portion of the pre­
frontal cortex in monkeys (the dorsal lateral prefrontal region, orprincipalis 
region, named for its location surrounding the principal sulcus) maps the 
direction of attention-driven eye movements with respect to the center of 
gaze. 1 As a result, damage to some sector of this region can selectively block 
the ability to learn to produce or inhibit directed eye movements in a par­
ticular direction, or in response to cues in a particular direction. Not sur­
prisingly, this subregion of the prefrontal cortex is located close to a region 
known as the frontal (motor) eye field, which directs eye movement. The 
eye-movementlattentional features of this region of the prefrontal cortex 
are also not surprising when considered in the context of its input/output 
association with the deep layers of the superior colliculus. And it has ex­
tensive connections with temporal and parietal visual areas.2 
Just above and below this prefrontal visual attention zone are regions that 
are reciprocally connected to the auditory and multimodal auditory/so­
matic cortical areas of the temporal lobe. 3 They likely also send projections 
to tecta! regions where auditory information is initially processed in the deep 
layers of the superior colliculus and the inferior colliculus. One way to un­
derstand the frontal cortical auditory areas is that they "map" auditory­
orienting processes in ways analogous to the way principalis cortex "maps" 
visual orienting. In addition to the sensory-associated prefrontal subdivisions 
on its lateral surface, there are also orbital and medial regions of the pre­
frontal cortex. These are less easy to find map correlations for. These have 
predominantly limbic and adjacent prefrontal cortical connections, and 
show output pathways that include structures more associated with visceral 
and arousal functions than sensory motor functions. 
The function of the lateral divisions of prefrontal cortex must, in part, 
be understood in terms of attentional mechanisms, both with respect to col­
licular systems and with respect to cortical systems to which they project 
outputs, whereas the function of orbital and medial divisions of prefrontal 
cortex must in contrast be more involved with arousal, visceral, and auto­
nomic functions. These two systems are not only structurally intercon­
nected but likely also to be functionally interdependent as well. Arousal, 
orienting, and attending are all part of the same process of shifting moti­
vation to regulate adaptive responses to changing conditions. The lateral 
divisions may provide a substrate for intentionally overriding collicular­
orienting reflexes, using orienting information as cues for working memory 
258 < The Symbolic Species

about alternative stimuli, or to select among many sensory configurations 
for further sensory analysis. The orbital and medial divisions may provide 
correlated shifts in arousal and autonomic readiness both to support shifts 
in attention and to inhibit the tendency for new stimuli to command at­
tentional arousal. 
So, what does the prefrontal cortex do? This is no simple question. In 
fact, it remains one of the more debated questions in neuropsychology. 4 The 
reason it is difficult is that the explanation cannot be tied directly to any sen­
sory or motor function. When prefrontal areas are damaged, there are no 
specific sensory or motor problems. Surgeons who performed prefrontal lo­
botomies used to point out that it didn't reduce their patients' IQs either. 
The consequences of prefrontal damage only show up in certain rather spe­
cific sorts of learning contexts; but these can be extensive and ultimately 
debilitating. Understanding these associations is also difficult because there 
is not one type of prefrontal deficit for the simple reason that there is not 
one homogeneous prefrontal area. Because different prefrontal areas are 
connected to different cortical and subcortical structures, when they are 
damaged, they produce slightly different types of impairments. Not only are 
there numerous competing theories that attempt to explain individual types 
of prefrontal impairments, there is no account of the family resemblances 
that link the many different deficits associated with different prefrontal sub­
areas. 
Let's begin this global overview of prefrontal functions, not by treating 
the prefrontal cortex as homogeneous, but rather by searching among pre­
frontal areas, connections, and deficits for common themes and family re­
semblances. I am encouraged that there are some common threads because 
of the global similarities in connecting architecture that link these areas with 
the rest of the brain. Like the numerous subareas of the visual cortical sys­
tem, I suspect that the different prefrontal regions share a common com­
putational problem, but have broken it up into dissociable subtasks in large 
brains, perhaps separated according to differences in modality. 
Let me begin by surveying a variety of interesting examples of tasks that 
are affected by damage to the prefrontal cortex in monkeys (see Figure 9.2). 
It is appropriate to start with the classical prefrontal task identified by Ja­
cobsen many decades ago.5 The highly schematized figure depicts the de­
layed response or delayed alternation task. In this task, a food object is 
placed in a covered container as the monkey watches; then the monkey is 
distracted for a few seconds, often by pulling down a blind; and finally he 
is allowed to retrieve the food object by uncovering it. This is no problem. 
But on a succeeding trial, the hidden food object is placed in the alternate 
Terrence W. Deacon > 259

A + 
B - 
c * 
IQ] 
('j @ @ () 
1J 
' 
@ @ f 0 
a 
b 
c 
@ d e @  
^ 
LJ 
IQ] 
( 
C) @ ('j @ 
' 
g 
_ ` 
F , 
go 
wait 5 sec. 
CiJ ! 
or 
Figure 9.2 Diagrammatic depiction of six diferent cognitive defu:its shown in mon­
keys with frontal lobe damage to diferent subregions (indicated by blackened re­
gions). A: Delayed response (delayed alternation) task associated with dorsal lateral 
prefrontal damage (Jacobsen, 1936). B: Self-ordered sampling task associated with 
dorsal lateral prefrontal damage (simplified from Passingham, 1985) C: Delayed 
non-match to sample task associated with ventral medial prefrontal damage (Mishkin 
and Manning, 1978). D and E: Conditional association tasks (spatial versus non­
spatial cues, respectively) associated with periarcuate prefrontal damage (Petrides, 
1982; 1985). F: Go/no-go task associated with periarcuate premotordamage but not 
prefrontal damage (Petrides, 1986). 
container, again in full view. Now, however, after the delay period, rather 
than looking in the new hiding place, the prefrontally damaged monkey 
again tends to look in the place where he found food before, not where he 
saw it being hidden.6 
Some have explained this as a problem with short-term memory. The 
260 < The Symbolic Species

monkey might be unable to use information from a past trial to influence 
his choice in a future trial. A simple memory problem, however, would tend 
to produce random performance. In general, the animal's perseveration in­
dicates that he does remember the previous successful trial, all too well, it 
would seem. Apparently he either can't inhibit the tendency to return to 
where he got rewarded the last time, or can't subordinate this previously 
stored information to the new problem. Historically, interpreters of pre­
frontal deficits have split evenly over whether they define this response in 
terms of memory or response inhibition. But before taking sides, let's con­
sider a few additional examples. 
Another, more sophisticated version of the same task has been investi­
gated by Richard Passingham.7 It offers some insight into how this task 
might have real-world adaptive consequences. As in the simple delayed­
response experiment, food is placed in food wells while the monkey watches 
(although the observation is not a necessary factor); but in this case food is 
hidden in all or many of a large number of wells. No delay is necessary. The 
monkey must simply sample through the wells to retrieve all the food ob­
jects. Monkeys with efficient sampling strategies won't tend to sample the 
same wells twice. Once food has been located in one place and taken, there 
is no reason to go back and check it again. Prefrontally damaged monkeys, 
however, fail to sample efficiently. They perseverate, return more often to 
previously sampled wells, and fail to sample others at al. Again, it is not clear 
whether to consider this as forgetfulness or as a failure to inhibit a repeti­
tion of past responses. The practical significance of such an ability is clear, 
however. This is precisely the sort of problem that might be faced by an an­
imal foraging in many different places. Once al the food has been eaten in 
one place, it makes no sense to go back looking for more, even if the food 
tasted particularly good there. 
Turning now to monkeys with medial frontal damage, we find a slightly 
different kind of deficit. Although such monkeys succeed at the tasks de­
scribed above, they fail at tasks where the shift in food location is cued by 
a shift in stimulus as well. The food object is hidden, and the location is cued 
by some stimulus. After the monkey succeeds at this task, the food object 
is rebidden and the hiding place is marked by a new stimulus, with the pre­
vious stimulus now marking no food. Thus the monkey must learn that the 
food wil always be hidden where the new stimulus of the two is placed. Me­
dial prefrontal damage appears preferentially to affect this kind of learn­
ing, but not delayed response, delayed alternation, or sampling tasks that 
are sensitive to dorsal lateral prefrontal damage. 
Compare this to tasks that are sensitive to posterior prefrontal regions. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 261

Such tasks have a multipart form, but common to them all is a dependency 
between two classes of cues or cues and behavior options. One cue stimu­
lus indicates that the food is hidden in the well with the lighted light, 
whereas the alternative cue indicates that the food is hidden in the well with 
the unlit light. The pattern is "If X then Z; if Y, then not Z." It is a condi­
tional relationship in which one stimulus indicates the relationship between 
another stimulus and the position of the food. Other variants that involve a 
similar dependency relationship, but differ in terms of the kind of response 
(e.g., choice of buttons to push instead of positions to check), also are sen­
sitive to damage in this region. Unlike the previous task, there is no spatial 
difference in food position; but like the last task, there is a conditional re­
lationship in which the stimulus indicates which of two alternatives is asso­
ciated with the food. Depending on what stimulus is presented, the monkey 
has to reverse his expectation about the association between the reward and 
some behavioral option. 
These tasks are all different and yet they share a number of common fea­
tures. Although all involve some apparent inability to inhibit responding, 
this is probably not itself the locus of the deficit. Prefrontaly damaged an­
imals do not show a problem with simple go/no-go tasks that require with­
holding a response. In this sort of task, the presentation of one of two 
different stimuli indicates whether an immediate response or the same re­
sponse just delayed a few seconds will produce a reward. Animals who have 
difficulty suppressing a response will be unable to learn such tasks because 
they will fail at the no-go task. This difficulty is, however, demonstrated by 
animals with premotor lesions, which additionally produce problems with. 
motor sequences and skilled movements. 
Another whole class oflearning abilities undermined by prefrontal dam­
age are those involving transfer of information from one learning task to an­
other-often referred to as transferring a "learning set." The analogy to the 
prefrontal tasks we've just been considering is that the transfer requires 
using information from previous trials, but divorcing it from specific stim­
uli. Probably the most difficult learning-set problems involve transfer of an 
inverse pattern of associations from one task to another. Only some of the 
larger brained primates succeed at such doubly demanding tasks (see Rum­
baugh, et al., 1996). This suggests some interesting species differences that 
may be correlates of both the size and relative proportions of prefrontal cor­
tex. 
One might argue that al of these tasks involve holding information in 
mind while not acting on it-a function some have called working memory. 
Arguing against a simple mnemonic interpretation of these errors is the fact 
262 < The Symbolic Species

that the deficit pattern always involves perseverative failures, that is, errors 
that result from repeating the previously successful performance. We could, 
for example, interpret the failures as resulting from information in short­
term memory that inappropriately dominates the tendency to respond. Al­
though a trace from previous trials must be retained in order to succeed at 
these tasks, what must be "held in mind" in these tasks is not just prior in­
formation, but information about the applicability of that information in a 
different context. One of the most salient common features of these tasks 
sensitive to prefrontal lesions is that they all in some way or other involve 
shifting between alternatives or opposites, alternating place from trial to 
trial, shifting from one stimulus to a new one, or from one pairwise associ­
ation to another depending on the presence of different cues. Tasks sensi­
tive to prefrontal damage thus involve short-term memory, attention, 
suppression of responses, and context sensitivity. But they all have one 
other important feature in common: each involves a kind of negation rela­
tionship between stimuli or stimulus-behavior relationships. They all have 
to do with using information about something you've just done or seen 
against itself, so to speak, to inhibit the tendency to follow up that correla­
tion and instead shift attention and direct action to alternative associations. 
Precisely because one association works in one context or trial, it is specif­
ically excluded in the next trial or under different stimulus conditions. An 
implicit "not" must be generated to learn these tasks, not just an inhibition. 
Similar deficits are well known in human patients,8 though associations 
between specific tasks and different prefrontal subareas are less well worked 
out in humans. For example, human prefrontal patients often fail at card­
sorting tasks that require them to change the sorting criteria. They also tend 
to have trouble generating word lists. In trying to generate lists of words 
according to some criterion or instruction, they barely get past the first few 
names of things before getting stuck or repeating already named items. 
These tasks are formally similar to conditional association and sampling 
tasks, respectively. To generate a word list, it is necessary to maintain at­
tention on the selection criterion and on previously generated words in 
order not to produce them again, but rather to elicit additional alternatives 
appropriate to these same criteria. 
Prefrontally damaged patients also often have difficulty learning mazes 
based on success/failure feedback, making plans, spontaneously organizing 
behavior sequences, and performing tasks that require taking another's per­
spective (allocentric as opposed to egocentric). The last are analogous to 
using a mirror. In order to think in allocentric terms, one is required to per­
form a systematic mental reversal of response tendencies, and so egocen-
Terrence W. Deacon > 263

hie information must continuously be used as the frame of reference, but 
responses based on it must be specifically inhibited and inverted. In gen­
eral, tasks that require convergence on only a single solution are minimally 
impacted by prefrontal damage, but those that require generating or sam­
pling a variety of alternatives are impaired. This capacity has been called 
divergent thinking by J. Guilford,9 and it may explain why prefrontal dam­
age does not appear to have a major effect on many aspects of paper and 
pencil IQ tests. Prefrontally damaged patients exhibit a tendency to be 
controlled by immediate correlative relationships between stimuli and re­
inforcers, and this disturbs their ability to entertain higher-order associa­
tive relationships. In summary, these human counterparts to different 
frontal lobe defects in monkeys also involve difficulties in using informa­
tion negatively. Impairment of the neural computations provided by these 
cortical areas makes it difficult to subordinate one set of associations to an­
other, especialy when the subordinate associations are more immediate and 
salient. 
Making Symbols 
These general insights about the contributions of prefrontal cortex in pri­
mate and human problem solving may not answer the riddle of prefrontal 
function in general, but they offer some useful clues to the significance of 
the disproportionately large size of this structure in human brains. What 
might an anomalously large prefrontal region have to do with that other 
human anomaly, language? Or to pose the question more specifically: Is 
there something about language that requires a predisposition for working 
with difficult conditional associative relationships, maintaining items in 
working memory under highly distractive conditions, or using negative in­
formation to shift associative strategies from concrete stimulus driven links 
to abstract associations? 
Phrased in these terms, the parallels with the cognitive processes re­
quired for symbol acquisition become obvious. The contributions of pre­
frontal areas to learning all involve, in one way or another, the analysis of 
higher-order associative relationships. More specifically, judging from the 
effects of damage to prefrontal regions, they are necessary for learning as­
sociative relationships where one associative learning process must be sub­
ordinated to another. These are the most critical learning problems faced 
during symbol acquisition, and less effective regulation of competing learn­
ing tendencies by the prefrontal cortex is almost certainly the primary road­
block to symbol learning in nonhuman species. Conversely, the expansion 
264 < The Symbolic Species

of this structure in human brains may reflect the advantage of exaggerat­
ing the predisposition to employ this learning strategy and giving it added 
strength over competing learning tendencies in order more efficiently to 
cross the threshold from indexical to symbolic associations. Though exper­
iments with chimpanzees have shown how it is possible to supplement the 
special attentional and mnemonic demands of symbol learning from the out­
side, the constant demand for this analytic process throughout human evo­
lution has apparently selected for a pattern of brain reorganization that 
shouldered more and more of this burden internally. 
The prefrontal cortex helps us inhibit the tendency to act on simple cor­
relative stimulus relationships and guides our sampling of alternative higher­
order sequential or hierarchic associations. Its role in language and symbol 
learning in particular is not, however, merely to increase something we 
might call prefrontal intelligence. Rather I suspect the importance of the 
size change can be thought of in displacement terms, in patterns of cogni­
tion as in patterns of brain development. Prefrontal computations out­
compete other cognitive computations and tend to dominate learning in us 
as in no other species. In simple terms, we have become predisposed to use 
this one cognitive tool whenever an opportunity presents itself, because an 
inordinate amount of control of the other processes in the brain has become 
vested in our prefrontal cortex. The way the parietal cortex handles tactile 
and movement information, the way the auditory cortex handles sound in­
formation, the way the visual cortex handles visual information are all now 
much more constrained by prefrontal activity than in other species. 
We should not, however, make the mistake of thinking that prefrontal 
cortex is the place in the brain where symbols are processed. It is not. Mas­
sive damage to the prefrontal cortex does not eliminate one's ability to un­
derstand word or sentence meaning. The symbolic associations that underlie 
the web of word meanings are probably much more dependent on the 
mnemonic support of sensory-based "images." This is supported by the high 
incidence of septantic disturbances after posterior cortex damage, especially 
damage to areas surrounding the posterior temporal cortex. It is also sup­
ported by our intuitions of mental imagery generated as we read stories, or 
of sound motor "images" as we search our memories for the right words to 
say or the correct names to match with familiar faces. It would be mis­
leading, however, to suggest that these images are all there is to symbols, 
any more than the words on this page suffice in themselves to convey their 
meanings. They are merely neurological tokens. Like buoys indicating an 
otherwise invisible best course, they mark a specific associative path, by fol­
lowing which we reconstruct the implicit symbolic reference. The symbolic 
Terrence W. Deacon > 265

reference emerges from a pattern of virtual links between such tokens, 
which constitute a sort of parallel realm of associations to those that link 
these tokens to real sensorimotor experiences and possibilities. Thus, it 
does not make sense to think of the symbols as located anywhere within the 
brain, because they are relationships between tokens, not the tokens them­
selves; and even though specific neural connections may underlie these re­
lationships, the symbolic function is not even constituted by a specific 
association but by the virtual set of associations that are partially sampled 
in any one instance. Widely distributed neural systems must contribute in 
a coordinated fashion to create and interpret symbolic relationships. The 
prefrontal cortex is only one of these. 
The critical role of the prefrontal cortex is primarily in the construction 
of the distributed mnemonic architecture that supports symbolic refer­
ence, not in the storage or retrieval of symbols. This is not just a process 
confined to language learning. The construction of novel symbolic rela­
tionships fills everyday cognition. A considerable amount of everyday prob­
lem solving involves symbolic analysis or efforts to figure out some obscure 
symbolic association. As soon as language processing leaves the realm of rel­
atively habitual phrases and uses, it, too, often involves some level of novel 
symbol construction. Almost certainly the confusing and idiosyncratic ways 
that information is weaved into the sentences and paragraphs of this book 
impose significant demands for symbolic analysis on its readers. It is in these 
circumstances that the language impairment of patients with damaged pre­
frontal cortex shows up. One of the most important uses of language is for 
inferential processes, for taking one piece of information and extrapolating 
it to consequences not obvious from the information given. This is essen­
tially using symbols to elicit or construct new symbols. 
The prefrontal cortex is not totally uninvolved in ongoing language pro­
cessing, and it is particularly important in language processing, where cor­
responding sequential, hierarchic, and subordinate association analyses are 
required. The recursive embedding of sentence clauses within one another, 
which provides language with its expressive economy, also takes advantage 
of our remarkable facility for manipulating conditional association hierar­
chies. Such syntactic constructions are specifically cued by sentence mor­
phology (using position, word, or inflectional markers) and so probably 
require only minimal prefrontal support to sort them out. Nevertheless, 
there may be occasions where the syntactic constructions are particularly 
tortuous, or where semantic cues directly interfere with the syntactic analy­
sis (e.g., "the cat the mouse killed"), which require the special contributions 
of prefrontal functions. Moreover, as word association tasks reveal, pre-
266 < The Symbolic Species

frontal control is likely critical for guiding word choices and shifts in logic 
during discourse. It is often noted that despite their control of the mechanics 
oflanguage production, prefrontally damaged patients are characterized by 
a disturbed "flow" of ideas and word choices, not to mention a sort of"con­
creteness" in their interpretations of sentence meaning. 
The more complicated the combinatorial relationships, or the more eas­
ily confused the correlated relationships, the more prefrontal systems are 
taxed. This is clearly demonstrated by imaging studies of the metabolic cor­
relates of different cognitive tasks in human subjects.10 Complex sorting 
problems and difficult word association tasks have been shown particularly 
to activate prefrontal metabolism. There is also indirect evidence that the 
difficulty of a task determines how much of prefrontal cortex gets recruited 
to that task. Electrical stimulation studies of awake neurosurgery patients 
have shown that patients with lower verbal IQs tend to have larger regions 
of prefrontal and parietal cortex susceptible to disruption oflanguage tasks.11 
In addition, when a difficult word association task (such as the example of 
producing appropriate verbs for rapidly presented nouns) is practiced so 
that the task format and the words presented are no longer novel, the level 
and extent of metabolically activated ventral frontal and cingulate cortex is 
significantly reduced (see discussions of PET scan studies in the next chap­
ter). Numerous tasks involving other cortical areas demonstrate a similar 
pattern of recruitment of additional cortical space to respond to novelty and 
difficulty, and a reduction of activity and extent of areas involved after prac­
tice. This might offer another correlate of cortical size-related effects. Hav­
ing a larger prefrontal cortex is analogous to having a large voting 
contingency in reserve to guarantee a majority even when the competition 
is stiff. A larger prefrontal region in general might increase the territories 
that can be easily recruited for diverse tasks that tax specific prefrontal com­
putations. 
The most critical effect of a disturbance of prefrontal functions to lan­
guage shoulp be most evident in the processes of symbol construction dur­
ing initial language learning. Prefrontal impairment early in life should thus 
be far more devastating than later in life, because it would make the criti­
cal shift away from rote, stimulus-bound learning of words and phrases far 
more difficult. A brain-damaged child, limited in his or her ability to pull 
attention away from the surface correlations between stimuli, would require 
much more extensive external support in order build up each minimal 
group of symbol-symbol relationships, and so might find language acquisi­
tion particularly rough going, for precisely the same reasons that other 
species do. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 267

Direct evidence that prefrontal damage in young children impairs lan­
guage learning comes from a survey study by Bates, Thai, and colleagues 
(1994). They found particular impairments in development of both vocab­
ulary and grammar after prefrontal damage in the critical period between 
nineteen and thirty-one months of age. The fact that such damage affects 
both semantic and syntactic aspects oflanguage is consistent with a general 
symbolic impairment. Bilateral prefrontal damage at this age produces a 
permanent deficit, but damage to either side alone can produce language 
delay. 
Language-learning difficulties are often associated with a reliance on 
rote-learned phrases and overly concrete interpretive responses. Such ten­
dencies are particularly characteristic of Down's syndrome and autism. The 
language-learning problems associated with these more global cognitive 
deficits are often compared with an inverse developmental pathology. 
Williams syndrome (WS) is one of the most enigmatic examples of selec­
tively spared language learning. It is characterized by highly verbal indi­
viduals who seem adept at storytelling and recitation of verbal information, 
but who also exhibit major cognitive deficits in analyzing thematic-level lan­
guage processes, very poor problem-solving abilities, and very impaired spa­
tial reasoning. Though they may have IQ scores in the range of 50, their 
vocabulary and speaking skills may test above normal at early ages. Along 
with their peculiar mix of language abilities and disabilities, they are also 
intensely social and gregarious, exhibiting an almost hypersocial personal­
ity, and they have a slight facial abnormality that is often described as pix­
ielike, with a constant wide grin. 
The paradoxically spared language skills of WS children caught the at­
tention of Ursula Bellugi, one of the pioneers in the study of deaf signers. 
She and her colleagues have mounted an extensive effort to study these in­
dividuals, and have compiled both extensive testing data and some of the 
first evidence concerning their brain abnormalities. WS children are espe­
cially interesting because their somewhat precocious verbal skills follow cu­
rious patterns. When asked to tell what they know about a familiar object, 
they can produce a long list of physical characteristics, places you might find 
one, things they are good for, and so on. But if you then ask whether the 
same object could be used for a novel purpose that could be simply figured 
out from its physical characteristics, they are often baffled. Normal children 
of the same age might not produce nearly as many descriptive characteri­
zations when answering the first question, but would find the second part 
easy to guess. The WS children's knowledge of words might be likened to 
that of someone who had memorized entries from a dictionary or an ency-
268 < The Symbolic Species

clopedia but had never had any experience with the things they know about. 
They have acquired extensive knowledge oflinguistic associations, but only 
a fraction of the web of additional experiential associations that link words 
to the world. 
The fact that WS children can appear to have well-developed verbal abil­
ities and yet very low IQ scores has been used to bolster arguments about 
the modularity oflanguage functions. On the surface, WS children demon­
strate spared grammar and syntactic ability, but their understanding oflan­
guage is in the context a somewhat shallow pragmatic understanding, and 
shows minimal problem-solving ability. For this reason, they have been 
cited as evidence of innate grammatical knowledge that is independent of 
other cognitive abilities. This interpretation is also consistent with the min­
imal consequences of aphasia on intelligence measures that exclude verbal 
performance tests. But it would be a mistake to think of these two ways that 
language and general intelligence dissociate under pathological conditions 
as reflecting an independence of language from intelligence. Intelligence 
isn't a unitary brain function, and language isn't walled off from other cog­
nitive functions. Nevertheless, in Williams syndrome we see a deficit in 
which cognitive functions are splintered in a manner that selectively spares 
certain processes most critical to language development, and in this way 
serves to reinforce the claim that the type oflearning biases that favor sym­
bolic learning may be quite different and even antagonistic to those useful 
in the majority of other learning contexts. 
Recently, anatomical data have suggested some curious abnormalities in 
the brains of patients with WS that may provide a clue to this paradoxical 
dissociation. Both postmortem analysis and MRI analysis have revealed 
brains with a reduction of the entire posterior cerebral cortex, but a spar­
ing of the cerebellum and frontal lobes, and perhaps even an exaggeration 
of cerebellar size. Currently, there is too little data to be sure that al WS 
patients show an intact frontal cortex and cerebellum, and the underlying 
pathology may. not always produce such gross abnormalities. Still, this sys­
tematic sparing may be the most consistent clue to their curious language 
symptoms (see Figure 9.3). 
This pattern of intact prefrontal cortex paired with a subnormal poste­
rior cortex may offer a hint to the paradoxical abilities and disabilities of peo­
ple with WS. These proportions represent an interesting twist on the human 
shift in prefrontal proportions, as compared to other primates. My argument 
has been that the enlargement of prefrontal cortex with respect to poste­
rior sensory and subcortical regions is responsible for the biased learning 
that enables human beings to employ symbolic representation strategies. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 269

Williams 
Figure 9.3 A somewhat idealized comparison of Williams syndrome neurological 
deficits to autism neurological deficits emphasizing their complementary neurolog­
ical patterns (as well as deficit patterns). Williams syndrome (which produces rel­
ative sparing of superficial linguistic abilities against a background of massive global 
intellectual impairment) appears to produce sparing of prefrontal cortex and cere­
bellum but has been associated with significant reduction of more posterior corti­
cal systems ( Galaburda, et al., 1994). Some forms of autism (which is associated with 
relatively severe communication dificulties in language and other modalities) ap­
pear often to be associated with apparent depression of prefrontal functions but rel­
ative sparing of posterior cortical functions, and have also been correlated with 
cerebellar abnormalities. Arrows point to areas most likely to exhibit anatomical re­
duction or abnormality. 
The learning and other cognitive and emotional biases in WS might offer 
clues to this transition to the extent that it too involves a prefrontal bias, 
though for quite different reasons. WS is not prefrontal enlargement, only 
an exaggerated prefrontal predominance compared to normal human 
brains, due to pathology that spares prefrontal cortex in the context of other 
widespread developmental damage. At the present time, there is not a suf­
ficient neuropsychological profile of WS to verify this prediction, but it 
nonetheless might help us to understand the peculiar language abilities of 
these people. In terms of symbol learning, recall that the contribution of 
the prefrontal areas is most critical for making the shift away from indexi­
cal token-object associations to rely on systematic token-token association 
patterns to organize reference. This shift is difficult because indexical as­
sociations are acquired by constant experience of immediate correlations 
between events that are highly salient, whereas the token-token patterns 
are only discovered by comparing their patterns of combination across 
many interactions with other speakers, and these are obscure because they 
are distributed across interactions and inconsistently correlated. Prefrontal 
270 < The Symbolic Species

predominance probably aids this process by biasing both attentional and 
mnemonic strategies to favor attention shifted from token-object associa­
tions to higher-order token-token relationships. 
Consider that one consequence ofWS is poor learning and problem solv­
ing (see Figure 9.3). In terms of referential abilities, this will inevitably trans­
late into poor indexical learning. Physical and pragmatic relationships 
between physical signs, objects, and their attributes-which for most peo­
ple and animals are rapidly and effortlessly accumulated in memory, and 
provide a dense network of indexical references-will be limited in indi­
viduals with WS. Although the salience of these associations inhibits the de­
velopment of symbolic abilities in other species, it is also what "grounds" 
symbolic reference in the first place. Semantic features are predicated on 
these potential indexical associations. In these terms, it appears that WS 
children exhibit a precocious ability to seek out and discover the higher­
order combinatorial connections among words. This skill may be exagger­
ated precisely because of their poorer than normal indexical learning 
abilities. Discovering an alternative mnemonic strategy to hold together a 
weak network of indexical associations may lead them to rely more heavily 
on higher-order combinatorial patterns than do normal children. But lack­
ing indexical support, they are far more trapped by word association logic 
alone. One of the peculiar features of the vocabulary of WS people is an 
apparent penchant for unusual words. This can be understood in terms of 
the insufficient information they have at their disposal to value different lex­
ical items comparatively. Their lack of experiential familiarity should pro­
vide far less influence over word salience, and thus the relative frequencies 
of typical and atypical words should differ less. But in addition, since learn­
ing frequency of occurrence, without ancillary indexical support as a guide, 
is itself based purely on correlation as an index of commonality, even this 
information will be denied them. 
Finally, their exaggerated sociality offers a particularly interesting clue 
both to the fupctional effects of prefrontalization and to the attentional bi­
ases that support symbol learning. It has long been known that prefrontal 
damage can often produce a disturbance in social behaviors. One of the first 
described and most celebrated cases of human prefrontal damage is that of 
a man called Phineas Gage. While he was working on a railroad crew in Ver­
mont in 1848, compacting blasting powder into a hole with an iron rod (a 
tamping iron), the powder accidentally exploded, propelling the tamping 
iron through his head, right through the middle of his prefrontal lobes. Gage 
lived, but was highly moody and emotionally unstable, and behaved quite 
inappropriately in public. The belief that prefrontal abnormalities might un-
Terrence W. Deacon > 271

derlie the inappropriate behaviors of schizophrenics later became a justifi­
cation for the use of prefrontal lobotomy, and the less damaging prefrontal 
leucotomy (cutting the fibers to and from the orbital prefrontal regions), as 
a means of controlling psychiatric patients. More recently, research in which 
the medial and orbital prefrontal areas were removed from the brains of 
monkeys demonstrated a paralel loss of appropriate social competence. The 
animals became both asocial, preferring isolation, and socially inept when 
forced into social contexts.12 If WS produces a comparative prefrontaliza­
tion by virtue of posterior impairment, we might explain exaggerated so­
ciality by an inverse mechanism: a preoccupation with and hypersensitivity 
to social information and social relationships. This may also aid the process 
of symbol acquisition, by virtue of exaggerated attention on social stimuli, 
particularly patterns of word use, at the expense of other information. Thus, 
speech and word-word relationships would be among the most salient of 
associative relationships. 
A related disorder initially appears as a precocious reading ability. It has 
recently been dubbed hyperlexia. At an age when most children are just 
learning to form their first words and sentences, a very few children demon­
strate incredible feats of symbol identification. They read words off cereal 
boxes, quote road signs, identify trade-marks, and know the names of al 
the letters and numbers. Unfortunately these abilities, which might herald 
the first signs of a literary or mathematical prodigy, tum out to be isolated 
abilities of a mind that in fact has a severely retarded ability to interpret 
these symbols. The comprehension of language is minimal, and their abil­
ity to reason or see the connections between the things they read is equally 
poor. Little is known of the neurological correlates of hyperlexia, but we 
might predict similar patterns of neurological impairment and sparing, and 
ofleaming and attention bias. Other pathologies, such as hydrocephaly, can 
also produce similar patterns oflanguage impairment, 13 so it is probably not 
that WS is produced by overexpressing some gene for language but rather 
that it reflects the biased cognition produced by a consistent pattern of pref­
erential damage and sparing of cortex and cerebellum. 
Interestingly, there appears to be good evidence for exactly which genes 
are responsible for Williams syndrome. Geneticists have identified two 
genes that are apparently deleted in all cases of the disorder. The first to be 
identified was the gene for elastin, a connective tissue protein which when 
absent results in a heart defect that is characteristic ofWS. In a collabora­
tive study with a colleague at the University of Massachusetts in Lowell, 
Thomas Shea, we found that elastin may also serve as a substrate on which 
axons can grow, so its absence could potentially be a problem during brain 
272 < The Symbolic Species

development. But recently, a more relevant gene located next to the elastin 
gene and also deleted in WS has been identified. 14 Its protein product is 
called LIMl kinase because of its structural similarity to a homeotic gene 
product called LIMl. Not coincidentally, the genes for both LIM! kinase 
and LIMl are expressed in the head region of developing embryos. Though 
much remains to be learned about how the absence of the gene for LIM! 
kinase may contribute to WS, there is one feature of the counterpart gene 
for LIMl that marks it as highly relevant. Transgenic mouse embryos that 
have had both copies of the LIMl gene knocked out fail to develop heads 
altogether, even though the remainder of the body seems to develop nor­
mally. (Also see the discussion of this gene in the context of other homeotic 
genes in Chapter 6). WS is essentially a human LIMl kinase knockout, 
which, analogous to this mouse knockout, seems to produce significant un­
derdevelopment of a large contiguous brain region (it also may be respon­
sible for the abnormal development of the face that produces the pixie 
appearance characteristic of WS). 
Williams syndrome provides a distorted mirror image of the genetic 
changes that must underlie the human symbolic bias. The underdevelop­
ment of much of the brain but sparing of the frontal cortex and cerebel­
lum, which occurs in a person with Williams syndrome, has given these two 
structures greater control over all cognitive processes. The effect is to ex­
aggerate the bias to learn symbolic associations, even though the capacity 
to learn nonsymbolic associations is severely impaired. This accounts for the 
hyperlexic tendencies of these children: their precocial vocabularies and 
reading abilities, their preoccupation with unusual words, and even perhaps 
their heightened sense of sociality (see Chapter 13 for a discussion of other 
social and emotional consequences of prefrontal bias). But this homeotic 
gene defect in people with Williams syndrome achieves an exaggerated pre­
frontal bias at the cost of poorer learning in all other realms, with the re­
sult that their understanding of symbols is almost entirely confined to lexical 
relationships-i.e., word-word relationships-and is lacking in supportive 
indexical links to objects and events. So Williams syndrome demonstrates 
that high general intelligence is not as critical for crossing the symbolic 
threshold as is growing up with a peculiar bias in learning tendencies. But 
Williams syndrome is more than just an exception that proves a rule about 
the evolution oflanguage abilities; it is also a clue to the sorts of genetic and 
neural developmental changes that lie behind that evolution. 
An interesting contrast to Williams syndrome is autism.15 Autism is most 
notably characterized by complete social withdrawal and a lack of commu­
nicative abilitv and/or desire. Severely autistic children avoid eve contact, 
Terrence W. Deacon > 273

are often not comforted but even disturbed by physical touch, seem not to 
notice the presence of others or find their presence disturbing, and tend to 
live their adult lives as relative loners. These social patterns have led some 
researchers to focus on their apparent lack of a "theory of mind," by which 
they mean an awareness of others as conscious agents and feeling beings. 
It is often said that autistic children tend to treat other people (and animals) 
no differently from other objects. This has led to theoretical excesses anal­
ogous to language organ claims. Recently, there have been a number of hy­
potheses about a "primary social cognition deficit" or impairment of a 
"theory of mind module" in the brain of autistic individuals. These sugges­
tions are at best premature. Not only is the modularity claim superfluous, 
but a focus on the social impairment alone is incomplete. An impairment 
in social cognition (however it might be represented in the brain) cannot 
alone explain the failure to develop normal language, nor a range of other 
attentional deficits and learning biases also common to autism. It seems 
more likely that the social deficit is a correlate and possibly a consequence 
of something more basic. Further clues to this are provided by the other 
cognitive and behavioral predispositions of autistic children and adults. 
They are highly likely to develop extensive and very stereotyped ritualized 
behavior patterns, both socially and in the ways they perform mundane tasks 
and manipulate familiar objects. As adults, they often run their lives by strict 
schedules and memorized lists that, if violated, throw them into confusion. 
The neurological basis of autism is still unresolved. Unlike WS, which is 
associated with a specific genetic abnormality, there are probably many po­
tential neurological causes for autism. Numerous studies have failed to 
identify any consistent structural abnormality distinguishing autistic from 
normal brains, but where abnormalities are observed, there are some com­
plementary patterns to those seen in WS. Remarkably, despite the symp­
tomatology of higher cognitive impairment involving language and learning, 
there is both minimal and confusing evidence of structural abnormalities 
involving the cerebral hemispheres. Many researchers have postulated in­
volvement of the limbic system, considering the emotional features of this 
disorder, but no solid evidence for a limbic pathology is apparent either. 
Structural abnormalities seem to predominate instead in the brain stem and 
cerebellum. Autistic brains are often reported to have smaler cerebellar 
lobes, especially on the midline, and a smaller brain stem than normal. This 
has led to all sorts of speculations about the role of the cerebellum in so­
cial and emotional development. However, at least one study has found that 
such deficits are not so much diagnostic of autism as of neural pathologies 
expressed late in fetal and neonatal development. Since the cerebellum is 
274 < The Symbolic Species

comparatively one of the latest structures to mature and shows the latest 
large-scale growth patterns, it may also be most susceptible to other less spe­
cific, cellular-based pathologies. The only direct evidence of cortical in­
volvement again seems to focus on the activity of the frontal lobes in autistic 
adolescents and adults. Like gross anatomical factors in autism, frontal lobe 
signs are also variable; but in studies that have looked for metabolic differ­
ences in cortical regions, a number have shown reduced cerebral blood flow 
and reduced metabolism of the prefrontal region.16 Recently, a number of 
psychologists have shown that autistic patients have a quite specific diffi­
culty with tasks that require imagining what is going on in other peoples' 
minds. Taking others' perspectives or recognizing that others have differ­
ent information due to their different perspectives on a task seems to be a 
problem for autistics. Not coincidentally, this too would be predicted for 
someone with prefrontal cortex damage. 
The significance of the cerebellum's being either specially spared (WS) 
or specially reduced (autism) in these two congenital syndromes preferen­
tially afecting language ability is curious, because the cerebellum is not gen­
erally incorporated into theories oflanguage processing, nor is it implicated 
in aphasia studies. The cerebellum is usually thought to be involved in the 
regulation of relatively automatic movements-such as preprogrammed 
ballistic movements like throwing a ball, jumping over a log while running, 
or playing a well-practiced scale on the piano. There are good reasons for 
imagining that it plays some role in the articulation of speech, and evidence 
that cerebellar damage can affect fluency, but this does not seem to be the 
factor of central importance in these congenital syndromes. Both syndromes 
appear to involve higher levels of language organization. Corresponding 
clues to cerebellar language functions come from imaging studies. Though 
the cerebellum is to some extent activated during speaking, it is most in­
tensely activated by difficult word association tasks (like the rapid produc­
tion of an appropriate verb for a noun in the task described earlier). Even 
when the con,tribution of the cerebellum to speaking is subtracted in PET 
(positron emission tomography) studies, its independent activation by the 
associative task is large. The cerebellar activation may aid this process by 
providing access to relatively automatic word-sequence subroutines, and 
possibly supporting the rapid shifts of attention that are required (see Fig­
ure 10.4 and the discussion in the next chapter). 
A central role for the cerebellum in attentional processes in humans has 
recently been recognized as a result of studies of patients with cerebellar 
resections and damage.17 Cerebellar damage in primates can produce im­
pairments for a number of the same tasks that are also sensitive to prefrontal 
Terrence W. Deacon > 275

damage, but more generally seems to impair a variety of perceptual and cog­
nitive tasks where timing issues are important. Rather than some totally dif­
ferent function of the cerebellum, this is probably analogous to the 
cerebellar role in motor functions. Many features of nonlocomotor activi­
ties require similar neural operations to those involved in movements, in­
cluding automatic prediction and preparation. If the cerebellum augments 
cortical processing by providing a repository for replaying previously learned 
sequences of activity and providing clocklike regulation of their perfor­
mance, it could play an important role in the support of a variety of rapid 
semi-automatic language processes to the extent that it was linked to the 
appropriate brain structures. 
The cerebellum also turns out to be one of the group of brain structures 
that has been selectively enlarged in humans as compared to other primates. 
This implies that it, too, may have displaced projections from other systems 
that are not expanded. Though the cerebellum receives inputs from the 
spinal cord conveying somatic information about muscle tension and joint 
position, and contributes a major spinal motor output via the red nucleus 
in the midbrain, the link between the cerebellum and the cerebral cortical 
systems is also extensive. Motor, premotor, and prefrontal projections com­
prise a major portion of inputs to the cerebellum by way of relays in the pons, 
the enlargement at the top of the brain stem. In humans, the prefrontal com­
ponent of this input system is likely to have been particularly enlarged, dis­
placing other inputs from the spinal and cortical motor systems. The 
cerebellar output nuclei also project back to the cortex by way of relays in 
the ventral lateral portion of the thalamus, which primarily projects upon 
motor and premotor areas. 
In other primates, there is an extensive array of cortical regions that pro­
ject to the cerebellum, including most motor and tactile sensory regions. 
There is also a modest projection from the dorsal parts of the prefrontal cor­
tex, probably from regions receiving tactile and motor information from 
other cortical areas. But in monkey brains, it does not appear that the ven­
tral parts of the prefrontal cortex send any outputs to the cerebellum. The 
extensive enlargement of prefrontal cortex in humans, however, has likely 
shifted these connectional relationships so that a greater number of con­
nections from a larger expanse of the prefrontal cortex project to the cere­
bellum as compared to other primate species. Areas of prefrontal cortex that 
do not project to the cerebellum in other primates, such as the ventral re­
gions, may thus take part in the cortical-cerebellar-cortical circuits in hu­
mans. This sector of the prefrontal cortex receives relayed auditory inputs, 
and is closely linked with both premotor vocal-articulatory areas of cortex 
276 < The Symbolic Species

and midline vocalization systems (see the next chapter for details). Bring­
ing the cerebellar system into the circle of these prefrontal functions would 
introduce a unique computational aid into the analysis of symbolic rela­
tionships, and one that has a novel affinity with symbols encoded as sounds. 
So, the cerebellum is probably far more involved with sound analysis in 
human beings than it is in any other species. This may be very important 
for the generation of word associations at a rate sufficient for speech. At the 
rate words are presented in speech, the speaker or listener must be able 
rapidly to generate associated words and avoid letting earlier associations 
interfere. The cognitive search process must be as rapid but as shallow as 
possible. Any slight tendency to perseverate would entirely derail the 
process. It is not a passive analysis that must be performed, but the rapid, 
controlled generation of relatively novel responses, though only relatively 
novel because word associations are recalled from innumerable previous as­
sociations in which they were elicited together in sentences. A word­
generation process analogous to conjugating a verb for a noun in rapid 
alternation must inevitably be part of al sentence production. Succeeding 
at this task appears to be greatly facilitated by linkage to the brain's rapid 
prediction computer, the cerebellum. The cerebellum may provide an in­
dependent generator of novel but predictable shifts of associations from one 
context to another, while prefrontal cortex is providing a selective inhibi­
tion of all but the one sample that fits the new criteria. In addition to the 
cerebellum, the cingulate cortex also seems to be intensely activated in a 
variety of tasks that require top-down intentional shifting of attention. 
This array of special prefrontal links with critical aspects of modem lan­
guage functions-enabling symbol construction, shifting control of vocal­
ization away from emotional systems, enhancing the tendency for social 
mimickry, and bringing rapid cerebellar prediction systems to the service 
of auditory-vocal analysis-almost seems like too much of a coincidence. 
Why should these changes in prefrontal cortex, derived from a global change 
in relative proP.ortions, just happen to provide what language needs? In fact, 
these apparent coincidences only appear coincidental when considered in 
hindsight, in terms of the way language works today. 
Considering these supports for our modem abilities to be prerequisites 
for language reverses the evolutionary logic behind them. In the co­
evolutionary interaction between brain and language evolution, both con­
verged toward the easiest adaptation to the cognitive and sensorimotor 
problems that were posed. As symbolic difficulties were eased by prefrontal 
cortex enlargement, the shifts in connectional relationships that resulted also 
incidentally provided increased auditory and vocal abilities and an increased 
Terrence W. Deacon > 277

propensity for vocal mimickry. Those symbolic communication systems that 
took advantage of such enhanced abilities would consequently have been 
more successful. And this in tum would have fed back on selection for 
greater elaboration and utilization of such abilities. The adventitious nature 
of co-evolutionary processes guarantees that when an opportunity presents 
itself, it will likely be taken advantage of, but in so doing it will set in mo­
tion processes that bias future evolutionary trends in this same direction. 
It's not that our exaggerated prefrontal cortex was an evolutionary prereq­
uisite for these many supportive language adaptations; rather, these features 
oflanguages have evolved to take advantage as well of other incidental pre­
frontal biases that symbolic evolution inadvertently produced. 
The curious logic of the co-evolutionary dynamic that has caused many 
otherwise unrelated language functions in addition to symbolic learning to 
converge on the same cluster of neurological changes in humans will be ex­
plored more fully in the third and final section of this book. But before we 
can tum to this topic, we need to complete the circle of logic that links the 
changes in human brain evolution with the way that other language func­
tions utilize the brain after this symbolic threshold has been crossed in child­
hood. How does this reanalysis of the core human language adaptation 
alter the way we need to think about language in the brain? 
278 < The Symbolic Species

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
T
E
 
Locating Languagi 
Everything is absolutely impeccable. There is only one, poor thing, 
which is mistaken inside. 
-Mr. L., an aphasic patient 
Forcing Square Pegs into Round Holes 
A 
man of about seventy years of age sits at a table holding a pencil in his 
hand. It, is cradled between his fingers as though he is preparing to 
write with it. 'What is this?" a woman asks, pointing to the pencil from 
across the table. "Uh, it's a wedge for the rain . . .  ?" he replies with a sort 
of questioning tone, and moves it in a vague writing gesture. "What do you 
use it for?" the lady continues. " . . .  For to rain for the scretch," he answers. 
''Very good," she responds. "Why to am I here to learn about this?" he asks. 
'We're here to see if we can help you with your words," she says. 
In reality, there will be very little she or others will be able to do. This 
man has suffered a stroke that damaged a part of his left cerebral hemi­
sphere near the auditory areas of his temporal lobe, and as a result he will 
279

spend the remainder of his life not quite getting the questions and not find­
ing the right words to answer. The damaged region of his cerebral cortex 
subserved a specific set of language operations that cannot be recovered, 
despite the fact that most of his brain and intellect are otherwise intact. He 
has not regressed to an earlier stage from which he will need to relearn 
words and meanings. He has not just lost some word memories. He has lost 
hold of the cognitive tools to map the sounds of words to what they mean. 
This loss of language abilities resulted from damage to a brain region that 
has come to be called Wernicke's area (after the nineteenth-century Ger­
man physician who discovered it, Carl Wernicke). And the deficit seems to 
suggest that such language functions might be highly localized to just a few 
regions of the brain. 
Historically, most of our information about how the human brain com­
prehends and produces language has come from insights provided by study­
ing people with localized brain damage that affects language functions. 
This information has been filtered through psychological theories about the 
nature of mind and language, and until recently it has been limited by the 
intrinsic messiness of studying organic pathologies. Now, however, a stream 
of information has emerged from new methods and techniques for study­
ing both normal and damaged brains, including ways to get images of me­
tabolism, blood flow, and electrical activity in whole, intact, functioning 
brains. These new windows into brain function are both extending and 
challenging traditional ideas about brain-language relationships. 
Loss of language abilities due to brain damage (termed aphasia, liter­
ally, "no speech") does not occur in only one way. When language abilities 
are lost, they do not regress to childlike forms, as some early researchers 
surmised. Brain-damaged adults have not simply lost the memory of lan­
guage or parts of language, and they are not analogous to children arrested 
at an earlier stage of language acquisition. Language tends to break down 
along distinct componential lines, in which the functional losses reflect spe­
cific processing difficulties, and not some generic diminution of language 
ability or complexity. The two most intuitive ways of dividing language func­
tions follow linguistic and behavioral categories, respectively. In linguistic 
terms, the most widely accepted dichotomy of language function is be­
tween semantic and syntactic structure. In many theories, these are essen­
tially treated as orthogonal dimensions of language function. Since such 
aspects oflanguage can be logically separated in language analysis, it seems 
reasonable to expect that these two aspects of sentences might require dif­
ferent neural substrates to process them. A dissociation of disturbance of 
280 < The Symbolic Species

the two functions after damage to different locations within the brain would 
strongly support this. Alternatively, an intuitively useful distinction in lan­
guage impairments can be made between the hearing ;md speaking func­
tions of language. These two fundamental modalities by which language 
enters and leaves the nervous system offer a natural division of functions 
that must be reflected in the neural organization of language. Both di­
chotomies have found their way into aphasia theories in various forms. 
The most influential categorization of aphasias, however, does not fol­
low either of these logics, but rather an anatomical logic. This is the classic 
division of aphasic disorders into Broca's and Wernicke's aphasia. Although 
a number of early nineteenth-century physicians suggested the existence 
of two major classes oflanguage disorders-a difficulty in remembering how 
words are produced as opposed to a difficulty in remembering how words 
sound-the systematic analysis of brain-damage language disorders was 
prompted by the discovery that different patterns of language dysfunction 
followed damage to different areas of the brain. 
In 1861, a French surgeon named Paul Broca demonstrated that dam­
age to the lower portion of the left frontal cortex could produce a profound 
disturbance of the ability to speak. He called this behavioral syndrome 
aphemia (literally, "no words," or more colloquially, "bad speech") to em­
phasize its motoric character, though the term Broca's aphasia came to re­
place Broca's own term. A little more than a decade later, in 187 4, a young 
German physician name Carl Wernicke demonstrated that damage to the 
posterior part of the temporal cortex on the left side produced a different 
language problem: a profound disturbance of the ability to understand 
speech, along with a tendency to speak fluently but with anomalous words 
and word combinations.1 This came to be termed Wernicke's aphasia. The 
corresponding brain regions that each of these physicians associated with 
their respective aphasias are now also referred to as Broca's and Wernicke's 
areas, respectively (see Figure 10. 1). 
Wernicke provided the first systemic analysis of the relationships between 
brain damage and aphasia. By organizing his theory around a diagrammatic 
analysis of cortical areas and putative connections with respect to input and 
output functions, he predicted a whole range of aphasic disorders defined 
by the possible ways that the physical connections between these presumed 
brain centers could be interrupted. Not only did he account for some of the 
prominent symptoms associated with auditory analysis and motor distur­
bance, but he predicted a number of additional syndromes that might re­
sult from damage to some of the presumed connections between these and 
Terrence W. Deacon > 281

midline 
B 
cortical connections 
Figure 1 0.1 Cerebral cortical areas most commonly associated with language func­
tions in the left hemisphere along with a depiction of a few of the major cortical con­
nectional pathways as identified in other primates. 
A. The classic language areas cluster around the horizontal fold called the Syl­
vian fissure, which divides the temporal lobe from parietal and frontal lobes. Broca's 
area can roughly be identified with the ventral premotor and prefrontal areas and 
Wernicke's area can roughly be identified with the superior and middle temporal 
gyrus. Midline areas are involved in initiation of speech (supplementary motor cor­
tex) and arousal-attentional control in comprehension and production of speech (an­
terior cingulate cortex). The angular gyrus was thought to be important for 
multimodal language processing, as in reading and naming objects. The corpus cal­
losum is the fiber bundle that links the hemispheres. 
B. The general pattern of major connections has been studied in other primates 
(but still cannot be determined in human brains). These cortical connections are rec­
iprocal (though connections are not symmetric with respect to layers innervated) 
and form a tiered organization in each modality (adjacent tiers are connected by 
short U-connections). The tiered pattern is reinforced by long intermodality con­
nections, which tend to link cortical areas at the same level across modalities. Con­
nectional data simplified from Deacon (1988 and 1992b ). 
other areas. Among these were predictions of "transcortical" aphasias due 
to interruption of links between input-output systems and "higher" cogni­
tive centers. 
More than a century has followed their ground-breaking discoveries, but 
even today, the syndromes associated with Broca and Wernicke provide the 
backbone of aphasia research. Yet a precise and broadly accepted inter­
pretation of these disorders or exactly what part of the brain is responsible 
for the component symptoms remains controversial. What made Wernicke's 
analysis so compelling was both its categorical logic and its surprising pre-
282 < The Symbolic Species

dictive power. Though few details of this theoretical scheme persist unal­
tered in present analyses of aphasia, his focus on the importance of anatom­
ical location and sensorimotor modality have continued to provide useful 
guides. Not surprisingly, in the more than a century since these men began 
to analyze the relationship between language breakdown and brain dam­
age, we have come to appreciate that aphasias occur neither along either 
strictly linguistic nor along strictly sensory versus motor lines. They have a 
logic all their own, an uneasy hybrid logic that results from the post hoc evo­
lutionary marriage between brain architecture mostly evolved in a world of 
concrete sensory and motor adaptations, prior to language, and a repre­
sentational system that depends on a decidedly nonconcrete logic. 
There are many problems with the enterprise of extrapolating from brain 
damage to brain function. Deterioration of a function is not just the reverse 
of development of that function, and loss of a brain region does not just re­
sult in a loss of function; the intact regions of a damaged brain are also 
changed in function by the loss. Nevertheless, aphasias and other patholo­
gies affecting language due to local brain damage provide essential clues 
about what brain regions contain parts of the network that are associated 
with different language functions. Wernicke's genius was in recognizing that 
brains needed to be analyzed in terms of circuits, and not just collections 
of regions with distinct functions. In recent decades, this insight has been 
carried much further than Wernicke could have imagined. Impairment of 
a specific language function following brain damage to a particular region 
does not mean that those language functions are located in that region. Some 
function that is crucial to these linguistic operations has been disturbed by 
damage in these cases, but the correspondence may be quite indirect. The 
task facing the neurolinguist is to decipher the code by which language 
symptoms can be translated into brain processes, but it is clearly not a one­
to-one mapping, especially for functions that cannot be specified in purely 
sensory or motor terms. The mismatch between linguistic and neural logic 
is probably exaggerated when dealing with such gross analytic distinctions 
as syntax and semantics. This difficulty is exemplified by the problems of 
explaining grammatical deficits that result from brain damage. 
Agrammatism is the term applied to disturbances of a patient's ability to 
analyze grammatical relationships in ways that cannot be accounted for by 
a general lexical impairment alone. The history of the study of agrammatic 
disorders reflects some of the pendulum swings of neurological theory dur­
ing the last century. Many theorists who divided language disorders into 
production versus comprehension difficulties tended to understand deficits 
in grammatical analysis in terms of lexical problems (therefore associated 
Terrence W. Deacon > 283

with Wernicke's area). Difficulties in stringing words together to make a sen­
tence, or syntactic difficulties, were considered merely motor problems. 
These difficulties were characteristic of Broca's aphasia; and so, beginning 
with such influential physicians as Sigmund Freud, Pierre Marie, and Henry 
Head at the start of the twentieth century, it became common to consider 
Broca's aphasia not a true language loss, only a speech production problem. 
Many modem aphasiologists still concur with this assessment, and they ad­
ditionally point to the fact that there seems to be a high incidence of re­
covery of function after damage to Broca's area, suggesting that there is no 
permanent loss of language knowledge per se. If language functions were 
located in discrete areas of cortex, then loss of the particular area that per­
formed grammatical operations should produce a severe persistent agram­
matism, just as damage to the primary visual cortex produces a permanent 
loss of vision in the quadrant of the visual field that corresponds to the dam­
aged sector. Of course, this is a big assumption to make. 
One of the most significant challenges to this simple dichotomy, which 
directly affected the interpretation of agrammatism, came with the discov­
ery in the 1960s that many Broca's aphasic patients had problems with 
grammatical comprehension. 2 Though the analysis of the major content 
words of a sentence seemed relatively unimpaired, when the logical struc­
ture of the sentence could not easily be guessed from the content words 
alone (i.e., when grammatical function words or word-order clues were es­
sential to understand how the nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs referred 
to each other), the patients tended to have difficulties. 
Of the many theories proposed to explain this difficulty, the one that has 
been most widely cited suggests that the patients behave as though they sim­
ply don't understand the grammatical function words. These include words 
like "was," "that," "who," "which," etc., that act like flags, signaling struc­
tural relationships within a sentence. Notably these sorts of words are by 
far the most frequent in any text or utterance, and form what amounts to a 
closed set within a language. Whereas new nouns, verbs, adjectives, and ad­
verbs are added and invented all the time, and in this sense form an open 
class, these little function words don't seem to allow any other logical space 
within the language for additions. One interpretation, then, might be that 
the disorder could be described as a disturbance of the lexicon of closed­
class words. Thus, two different lexical storage systems were invoked: one 
for closed-class words (associated with Broca's area) and one for open-class 
words (associated with Wernicke's area)-a challenge to the simple com­
prehension/production dichotomy. 
The difficulties in interpreting agrammatism have only become harder 
284 < The Symbolic Species

as researchers have attempted to test these opposed hypotheses. For ex­
ample, a simple lexical explanation (i.e., loss of the part of the mental dic­
tionary that contains grammatical function words) does not appear to 
account for patients' problems in cases where manipulations of word order 
are central, as in embedded sentences ("The girl the boy liked lived in a red 
house") and only partially accounts for passive tense difficulties in English 
clauses ("The dog chased by the cat . . .  "). Time also appears to be a criti­
cal factor. "On-line" analysis of spoken utterances tends to show significant 
impairments that seem to ameliorate if the patient is given written mater­
ial or a longer period to reflect on the analysis. In other words, it appears 
that the information about grammar is not lost in these patients; it is just 
very much less accessible, and its use is more subject to error. It is, 
metaphorically, as though the main route to this information has been dis­
rupted, forcing these patients to take more circuitous routes through the 
winding back roads of memory to connect the same end points. Again, it 
does not look as though grammar functions are "located" in Broca's area. 
Some aphasia researchers have countered that what we are observing in 
the impermanence of this deficit is a takeover by the paired homologue to 
Broca's area on the right hemisphere, by other spared neighboring regions, 
or just recovery of the remainder of an incompletely damaged brain sys­
tem. This interpretation, however, is harder to maintain in cases with more 
extensive or bilateral damage. It has also been implied that Broca's aphasia 
is just a motor deficit, and that with motor cortex damage there is a per­
manent loss of function in this domain. In this interpretation, the cognitive 
impairments might be blamed on motor interference effects. Even more 
serious chalenges have been offered by comparisons of agrammatism in pa­
tients who are native speakers of very different languages. Broca's aphasics 
who speak languages that are highly inflected, for example, do not seem to 
be as agrammatic as their English-speaking counterparts. More will be said 
about this variability later. 
Al these cballenges to the localization of grammatical functions to Broca's 
area are often couched in terms either of denying Broca's area status as a 
language area or of suggesting that other areas perform the functions that 
have traditionally been assigned to Broca's area. But there is a different way 
of approaching this question, and it depends on letting the notion of local­
ization of function go while retaining something like the localization of 
computation. Another way to put this is that we need to stop conceiving of 
localization of language functions and instead try to understand how lan­
guage functions map onto brain functions, which are likely to be organized 
to a very different logic. As with so many other body and brain functions, 
Terrence W. Deacon > 285

there may be a number of different ways of achieving the same goal. To offer 
a very simple analogy, throwing a ball at a target will utilize very different 
muscles and coordinated patterns of neuronal activity depending on 
whether it is thrown overhand, underhand, or backwards. The resultant 
flight of the ball and interaction with the target may be very similar, even 
though very different muscles and body movements produced them. Even 
recognizing that there are many commonalities (e.g., all may involve arm­
muscle flexion, rapid ballistic movement, and visual orienting to a target), 
what ties them together are not these but rather the requirements of the 
functional goal, and this is something extrinsic to the anatomy. 
I suggest that we need to think of language functions in a similar way, 
especially those that are imagined to be "deep" to the surface structure of 
speech. We need to treat them as composite behavioral products or logi­
cally defined outcomes, as opposed to neural operations. There need not 
be any specific association between a brain region or connection and a class 
oflinguistic operations, and there may even be many alternative neurolog­
ical means of achieving the same symbolic end. This does not assume that 
the human brain lacks local specializations for language, or that language 
abilities can be described in terms of general learning mechanisms alone. 
And it does not depend on any denial of area specialization within the cere­
bral cortex. It implies only that the neural distribution oflanguage functions 
need not parallel a linguistic analysis of those same functions. 
The assumption that there are distinct language areas in the brain that 
correspond to these language disorders (e.g., Broca's area and Wernicke's 
area) is an example of what, in another context, the philosopher Alfred 
North Whitehead called "misplaced concreteness." Abandoning the Pro­
crustean enterprise implicit in correspondence theories of brain and lan­
guage functions opens up a number of additional sources of information for 
understanding this relationship. One messy detail haunting classic theories 
was that Broca's and Wernicke's areas did not correspond to divisions of the 
cortex identified by distinctions of neural architecture, though many have 
insisted on trying to force a one-to-one correspondence. These areas even 
seem to vary in location from patient to patient. Not only are there no re­
liable microanatomical criteria for these areas, but the syndromes them­
selves are also not precisely delineated. They are not the same from person 
to person or language to language. Is it possible that there is no one ven­
tral frontal region always associated with Broca's aphasia, nor any one pos­
terior temporal region always associated with Wernicke's aphasia? 
Data from brain-damaged patients provide insufficient resolving power 
286 < The Symbolic Species

to probe below the level of behavioral or linguistic generalities in order to 
carve the language problem at its natural neurological joints, but research 
tools with better resolving power for studying function within intact brains 
are now rapidly becoming available. These can help overcome many of the 
limitations of anatomical precision and functional dissection. One conse­
quence is that we are being bombarded with a flood of new kinds of data 
that are often dissonant with existing paradigms. These data-derived from 
in vivo imaging techniques, electrophysiology, and numerous other ap­
proaches to brain function-often defy explanation along classic lines be­
cause they provide a view of these processes at a different level of structure 
and function from anything ever envisioned by classic theories. Classic 
high-level models oflanguage functions were conceived in order to explain 
the large-scale features of language breakdown, what might be called 
macrocognition. We now must face up to the daunting task of analyzing the 
microcognition oflanguage: analyzing phenomena at a level of scale where 
the functional categories often no longer correspond to any of the familiar 
behavioral and experiential phenomena we ultimately hope to explain. 
The central problem faced by researchers studying the brain and lan­
guage is that even the minutest divisions of cognitive function we hope to 
explain at the psychological level are ultimately products of the function­
ing of a whole brain--even if a damaged one-whereas the functions we 
must explain at a neurological level are the operations (or computations) of 
only a small fragment of this highly integrated and distributed network of 
structures. If there was ever a structure for which it makes sense to argue 
that the function of the whole is not the sum of the functions of its parts, 
the brain is that structure. The difficulty of penetrating very deeply into the 
logic of brain organization almost certainly reflects the fact that the brain 
has been designed according to a very different logic than is evident in its 
most elaborated behavioral and cognitive performances. This is precisely 
where the comparative and evolutionary approaches can provide their most 
crucial contribution . 
. 
Though other primate brains have not evolved regions that are specially 
used for language processes, those regions of the human brain that are did 
not arise de novo. The language areas are cortical regions that have been 
recruited for this new set of functions from among structures evolved for 
very different adaptations. They were selected during language evolution 
because what they already were doing offered the best fit to the new prob­
lems posed by language. Thus, we should stop thinking about Broca's and 
Wernicke's areas as "language areas." They are the areas that language most 
Terrence W. Deacon > 287

intensely utilizes. The question we should ask then is why? What is it about 
these areas that dictates the distribution of language functions that we ob­
seiVe? 
The simple answer, proposed by the nineteenth-century aphasiologists, 
is that their location is a function of the predominant input and output 
routes: sound analysis and speech production. Broca's area is adjacent to the 
mouth-tongue-larynx region of the motor cortex and Wernicke's area is ad­
jacent to the auditory cortex. In quite general terms, these are association 
areas for vocalization and sound analysis. But are there distinct anatomical 
structures that correspond to these operationally defined language struc­
tures? The answer probably is no. Broca's and Wernicke's areas represent 
what might be visualized as bottlenecks for information flow during lan­
guage processing; weak links in a chain of processes. Once we abandon the 
idealization that language is plugged into the brain in modules, and recog­
nize it as merely a new use of existing structures, there is no reason to ex­
pect that language functions should map in any direct way onto the 
structural-functional divisions of cortex. It is far more reasonable to expect 
language processes to be broken up into subfunctions that have more to do 
with neural logic than with linguistic logic. 
The one fact that is clear is that language functions are dependent on 
the interactions among a number of separated regions within the brain. Lan­
guages themselves are heterogeneous structures, which often encode com­
plementary functions in very different components of the speech signal. 
This probably aids the computational systems that support it by breaking it 
up in a way that most effectively allows the simultaneous processing of a 
number of parallel functions. The intense natural selection operating on lan­
guage forms should have produced variants that map easily to these pro­
cessing demands. Complementary linguistic operations should end up by 
being distributed to different brain structures, and differences in aphasic 
disturbances should reflect this. But language is fitted to an ape brain plan, 
and our ape brains, though modified in response as well, are by far the more 
inflexible element in this relationship. So what is the anatomical logic to 
which language has had to adapt? 
The Illuminated Brain 
The first source of brain-language data to offer a significantly different 
perspective from that provided by brain damage came from studies of the 
effects of electrical stimulation of the cortex in patients undergoing neuro­
surgery for unrelated pathologies. In the 1950s, a neurosurgeon by the 
288 < The Symbolic Species

name of Wilder Penfield perfected a technique for assessing functional lo­
calization by electrical stimulation of the exposed cortex of awake, locally 
anesthetized patients. By passing low-level electric current into the cortex 
near the presumed language areas of the left hemisphere, he found that he 
could selectively interfere with different language tests he had his patients 
perform. If he asked them to speak or name an object, he could selectively 
block speech, cause it to be distorted, make it difficult to come up with a 
name, and so on. Since neural impulses are also electrochemical processes, 
stimulation essentially bombards a region with very "loud" neural noise and 
thereby disrupts whatever function is mediated by that region. This effect 
is remarkably temporary and localized. It tends to cease immediately cur­
rent is cut off, and stimulation of closely adjacent cortical surfaces (within 
a few millimeters) can produce quite different effects. By probing many 
areas, Penfield and others mapped the extent of cortical areas where elec­
tirical stimulation interfered with language functions. This allowed sur­
geons to identifY those regions that would likely disturb language functions 
if removed during brain surgery to eradicate tumors or epileptic centers. 
Penfield's findings were consistent with what was known from brain 
damage-and yet also strangely different in many ways. He found that 
stimulation of presumed language areas was indeed very likely to produce 
language disturbances, but these disturbances were not like aphasias. More­
over, he found both a much wider distribution of language-disturbance 
sites than that suggested by aphasia, and a symmetry of posterior and frontal 
functions that did not match the apparently dichotomous effects of dam­
age. More recently, another neurosurgeon, George Ojemann, with his col­
leagues has carried this work much further, using more sophisticated 
neurolinguistic testing, stimulation, and recording. A composite summary 
diagram of many of these results is shown in Figure 10.2. 
What these stimulation studies demonstrate is that the regions where 
stimulation disrupts language function fan out from the frontal mouth area 
into the prefrontal lobes, and from around the auditory area back into the 
temporal and parietal areas. Those regions where stimulation reliably dis­
rupts the same language functions are organized in what appear to be tiers 
radiating outward from these two foci. Electrical stimulation of the regions 
closest to motor and auditory areas produces problems with phoneme iden­
tification and oral movements. Stimulation further out disrupts naming of 
familiar objects and grammatical assessments. And stimulation even further 
out appears to disrupt retention or recall of words. There is also a rough 
front-back mirror symmetry of these tiers, so that the very same responses 
are elicited by the second and third tiers both front and back. The language 
Terrence W. Deacon > 289

Cortical Electrical Stimulation 
phoneme identification 
namin&, readin&, &rammar 
short-term verbal memory 
& oral movement sequences 
Figure 1 0.2 Electrical stimulation studies of selected language tasks indicate that lan­
guage operations are fractionated and distributed in many regions of the left hemi­
sphere. Electrical stimulation (indicated by dots) appears to indicate a tierlike 
pattern of functional organization fanning out from the classic language regions into 
the prefrontal, temporal, and parietal areas. Areas more removed from primary 
motor and auditory cortex appear to be involved in processes with greater tempo­
ral integration. The figure graphically summarizes data from Penfield and Roberts 
(1959); Ojemann (1983; 1991); and Ojemann and Mateer (1979). 
regions cover a large fraction of the entire left hemisphere, but stimulation 
within these regions does not produce uniform results. In fact, stimulation 
of most sites produces no language disturbance in a given individual, and 
there may be only a few sites that disrupt each sort of language task. The 
stimulation maps of language functions are therefore composite maps, 
demonstrating statistical consistencies between patients. 
The most surprising pattern in these results is the mirror symmetry of 
anterior and posterior effects. This is an entirely different pattern from that 
derived from brain-damage studies. How does it change our understand­
ing of brain-damage effects and their distribution? The key to interpreting 
these differences is that electrical stimulation is something added, whereas 
damage is something removed. Though cortical areas just next to a stimu­
lation site might not be directly affected by the stimulation, areas some dis­
tance away may be, so noise from many sites may be able to feed into the 
stream of information supporting a given linguistic function. This should 
not be surprising, considering the high degree of interconnectivity of cere­
bral cortical areas. But the pattern of distribution and kinds of disturbance 
tell us more than just that there are lots of ways to mess up language sig­
nals. 
First, language functions extend into all major lobes of the neocortex, in­
cluding the temporal area (auditory), parietal area (tactile), and frontal cor-
290 < The Symbolic Species

Regional Cerebral Blood Flow 
automatic repetitive speech 
simple word perception 
word list eeneration 
Figure 1 0.3 Cerebral blood flow studies of selected language tasks indicate that lan­
guage operations are also fractionated and distributed with respect to this assay of 
relative metabolic demand of the given tasks. In these drawings, blood flow activa­
tion is superimposed on outline drawings of human brains; darker areas are more 
activated by the specific task. Wernicke$ area, the motor speech area, and ventral 
prefrontal areas associated with Broca's area are differentially recruited for differ­
ent language tasks. Ventral prefrontal cortex is recruited for both word perception 
and word association tasks (e.g., generating word lists). The figure graphically sum­
marizes data from Larsen, et al. (1978); Lassen, et al. (1978, 1980); and Roland 
(1985) 
tex (attention, working memory, planning) of the left hemisphere. This 
wide distribution suggests a far less localized language system than is sug­
gested by brain-damage results. Though the language impairments due to 
parietal and prefrontal damage are often not as noticeable and devastating 
as left temporal damage, both can produce problems with speech fluency, 
word finding, and certain sorts of semantic analyses. Second, the stimula­
tion sites that are located closer to the Sylvian fissure are mostly correlated 
with sensorimotor functions of language, while sites further out are corre­
lated with higher-level linguistic and cognitive functions. This is consistent 
with the the fact that the innermost tiers are located adjacent to primary 
tactile, auditocy, and motor areas, and the outer tiers are distributed within 
multimodal and association areas. One obvious interpretation of this hier­
archic pattern is that it parallels the layout of what are sometimes called sec­
ondary and tertiary association areas in each modality. But notice also that 
the differences from tier to tier reflect different degrees of linguistic inte­
gration and different language-processing time scales. From inner to outer 
tiers there is a progression from parts of words, to words and phrases, to 
verbal short-term memory. Analyzed temporally, the inner tier of areas 
deals with events that take place on a time scale of tens to hundreds of mil­
liseconds (phonemes), and the outer tier of areas deals with information that 
Terrence W. Deacon > 291

must be retained over many seconds (inter-sentential relationships, for ex­
ample, must be analyzed at this rate). 
Time is a critically important factor, especially in an information­
processing device that tends to operate almost entirely in parallel (instead 
of funneling all operations through a single processing unit, one after the 
other, as do most desk top computers). Processes that utilize information 
presented at very different rates tend to become segregated within the 
brain (as they must be in many other systems, from mechanical devices to 
bureaucracies). Maintaining a signal within a circuit long enough to ana­
lyze its part in some extended pattern would tend to get in the way of 
processes that require rapid and precise timing. Slow neural signal trans­
mission can also become a limiting factor in the brain, so that very rapid 
processes are best handled within a very localized region, whereas the ac­
cumulation of information over time might better be served by a more dis­
tributed and redundant organization that resists degradation. So it makes 
sense that for each modality, it might be advantageous to segregate its fast 
from its slow processes. This is probably one of the major factors that dis­
tinguishes the cortical subregions that we label "primary areas" (fleeting sig­
nals) and "association areas" (persisting signals). Separating processes 
according to a gradient of time integration may be every bit as important 
for handling potentially interfering functions as is the segregation of dif­
ferent modalities and submodalities. 
The symmetry between anterior and posterior functional representation 
can probably best be understood in connectional terms. Studies of axonal 
connections between cortical areas in primates have demonstrated that the 
connectional logic parallels the tierlike organization of secondary and ter­
tiary regions. Within a single modality, adjacent cortical areas tend to be 
more highly interconnected than to areas more distantly separated, but 
across modalities there appears to be a preference for connections at the 
same level in the sequence of areas progressively removed from primary 
input and output. Thus, the tierlike organization of stimulation effects in 
anterior and posterior cortex is probably a reflection of the direct inter­
connections between them, and of the comparability (possibly via syn­
chrony) of the temporal-processing domains in each. The apparent lack of 
interference across levels may reflect the relative temporal isolation of 
processes at these different levels. To sum up, evidence provided by elec­
trical stimulation suggests that there may be multiple areas in both the an­
terior and the posterior cortical regions that contribute to language 
processing at different levels of analysis and production, and that these may 
be linked in parallel in a temporal mapping relationship. 
292 < The Symbolic Species

Once we abandon the reification of language areas as modular language 
algorithm computers plugged into an otherwise nonlinguistic brain, it be­
comes evident that language functions may be widely distributed and 
processed simultaneously in many places at once. They may also be dis­
tributed according to a computational logic that is not necessarily obvious 
from the apparent external speech signal. Our experience of the linearity 
of speech belies an internal parallelism and hierarchy of the underlying cog­
nitive processes. Indeed, one possible interpretation of the hierarchic logic 
of grammatical and syntactic operations is that they evolved to accommo­
date this mismatch between cognitive processes and production constraints. 
This is important information to keep in mind for linguistic analysis. We may 
need to begin thinking of the various syntactic and morphological tricks used 
by languages to mark their logical and symbolic structure as markers that 
aid in rapidly breaking up the serial signal and distributing the processing 
of segments matched to different time domains to their most appropriate 
processors. For example, the small function words that are specialy im­
portant for grammatical analysis signal the breaks between syntactic tran­
sitions, as do pauses and tonal/rhythmic changes of voice. The hierarchical 
complexity of sentence structure and the multiplication of tricks for com­
pacting clauses into sentences with considerable analytic depth may not in 
fact add computational difficulty. They may instead be ways to distribute 
language processes more efficiently across many parallel and partially in­
dependent systems. 
Another window on the brain's control oflanguage processes is provided 
by techniques developed in the last decades for producing images of brain 
metabolism. The basic assumption of metabolic imaging is that regions of 
the brain that are more active will exhibit a greater turnover of glucose and 
will demand more blood than relatively quiescent areas. Thus, hot spots wil 
show up in areas intensely involved in a given cognitive task. Three differ­
ent metabolic-imaging techniques have been used to image functional 
changes during language tasks: regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF); 
positron emission tomography (PET); and functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI). For rCBF images, inert radioactive gas dissolved in blood 
indicates where blood flow has increased. For PET images, a radioactive 
analogue of glucose (the simple sugar that all neurons require for energy) 
is injected into the blood to measure cumulative metabolism in different 
brain regions.3 For fMRI images, the response of water molecules within 
the brain to intense magnetic fields produces images of brain structures, 
and magnetic solutions (called "contrast agents") are injected to visualize 
blood flow changes. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 293

In response to language tasks, the greatest increases in blood flow are 
seen in cortical regions that correspond with those damaged in acquired 
aphasias (Figure 10.3). The patterns for different tasks show that mouth 
movements of speech tend to activate motor cortex, and that listening to 
words tends to activate auditory regions of the left hemisphere. But there 
are other, more interesting patterns. Simply repeating words over and over 
(like counting to ten repeatedly) does not seem to activate the region we 
would call Broca's area. Instead, it activates mostly motor areas, and to a 
lesser extent auditory areas and a dorsal motor region known as the sup­
plementary motor area. 4 These studies also showed that listening passively 
to (nonrepeating) words does not activate motor areas. It activates auditory 
cortex, including the area that probably corresponds to Wernicke's area, and 
also a ventral prefrontal region just in front of what most researchers would 
call Broca's area. More complicated language tasks, however, such as gen­
erating lists of words without repeating any (for example, naming objects 
that can be held in the hand), produce cerebral blood flow patterns char­
acteristic of both speaking and listening. The ventral prefrontal area is ac­
tive and the motor areas are active, including areas that would be caled 
Broca's area (ahead of and below the motor mouth area). Uniquely re­
cruited to this task, too, are regions of the temporal and parietal lobes that 
probably contain multimodal responsiveness (association areas). 
These patterns reveal a number of features of functional organization that 
are not evident in either damage or stimulation effects. First, "mindless" 
repetition only minimally recruits classic language areas or association areas. 
Second, interpretation of words seems to involve both auditory and pre­
frontal regions, but apparently not what would have traditionaly been caled 
Broca's area.5 This ventral prefrontal region of the cortex is, however, often 
partially damaged in Broca's aphasics with large lesions, as is motor cortex 
for the mouth region. Notice also that this ventral prefrontal region is as­
sociated with naming and short-term verbal memory as a result of stimula­
tion and word list generation, though the degree of overlap or difference 
from task to task is unclear and suggests that different subdivisions may be 
involved in these tasks. The premotor part of Broca's area is most actively 
involved when both word analysis and speech are required. 
Data from another metabolic imaging technique, positron emission to­
mography (PET scanning for short), produce similar results to those from 
rCBF studies (see Figure 10.4).6 These data show that passively listening 
to novel words mostly produces auditory activity, with some ventral pre­
frontal cortex activity. Similarly, looking at novel written words involves vi-
294 < The Symbolic Species

sual cortex. Visual input does not, in this example, require significant audi­
tory activity to be interpreted (this may have something to do with the sim­
plicity of the task, as well). In the study summarized by the idealized 
drawings in Figure 10.4,7 the experimenters augmented their analysis by 
using an interesting subtractive technique. The images that were produced 
from tasks that involved word perception were subtracted from images that 
were produced from tasks that also involved speech, and both of these im­
ages were then subtracted from images produced from tasks that addition­
ally involved word association processes (generating a verb that is 
appropriate to a presented noun). Without this approach, the resulting im­
ages would have obscured the differences between more complicated tasks 
as they progressively occupied more and more of the brain. Subtracting im­
ages from one another isolates where in the brain activity is additionally re­
cruited to handle specific increases in task complexity, though it doesn't 
indicate that regions activated by previous simpler tasks do not also con­
tribute in unique ways to the computations of the higher-order task as well. 
Several things are revealed by these subtractions, when compared to pre­
vious results. First, though different modalities of stimuli can be used (e.g., 
visual versus auditory word presentation), the differential activity patterns 
produced by the more complicated tasks using these inputs are very simi­
lar. Second, the ventral prefrontal area again seems activated when word 
analysis is required. Third, areas on the midline are active. Repeating words 
seems to involve the supplementary motor area, and word analysis seems 
to involve the anterior cingulate cortex. The cingulate cortex seems essen­
tial for most tasks that require intense attention, and so may not be uniquely 
part oflinguistic processing (though essential). Fourth, both motor activity 
and word analysis independently produce intense activation of the cere­
bellum (on the opposite side of the brain, since the pathways linking cere­
bral cortex and cerebellum are crossed-see Figure 10.4, images 2 and 3). 
Not surprisingly, when this task is practiced and familiar words are shown 
repeatedly, tha task gets easier, and the activation level of all three of the 
differentially activated regions (left ventral prefrontal, anterior cingulate, 
and right cerebellar cortex) drops close to background levels. Other brain 
regions such as the insular cortex and striatum become slightly more active 
instead. The mental effort required for the task is thus reflected in the de­
gree of differential activation of these structures. 
It is surprising (from a classical perspective) that the cerebellum is re­
cruited for this task, not primarily as a repository for automatic behavior, 
but for overcoming such tendencies in the service of producing alternatives. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 295

1. hearing a rapid 
sequence of words 
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) 
2. shadowing: repeating 
rapidly presented words (-1 ) 
3. word association: 
generating a verb for noun ( -1 &21 
Figure 1 0.4 Positron emission tomography (PET) studies of language tasks reveal sim­
ilar patterns to those seen with cerebral blood flow imaging. In these drawings of 
PET image activation, patterns are superimposed on outline drawings of human 
brains; darker areas are more activated by the specific task. The three tasks are hi­
erarchically constructed: 1 = Listening only; 2 = repeating the input word; 3 = pro­
ducing a word associated with the word presented. The images to the right were 
produced by subtracting the results of those to the left to reveal diferences. Notice 
the critical involvement of the ventral prefrontal cortex in the word association 
task. The activated area below the back of the brain indicates an additional intense 
involvement of the contralateral cerebellum (see also Fig 9.1 ). The figure graphically 
summarizes data from Petersen, et al. (1988); Posner, et al. (1988); and reviewed in 
Posner and Raichle (1994). 
Congenitally reduced cerebellar development thus not only should be ex­
pected to produce a variety of problems associated with the learning of 
skilled movements requiring precise timing and complex coordination; it 
should also remove an important support for a variety of prefrontal func­
tions, particularly those demanding rapid production of novel associations. 
Since some of the most demanding language processes are likely to be 
those of generating the words that make up novel sentences we must pro­
duce in real time, this cerebellar-prefrontal link may play a critical role. 
Finally, I want to draw attention to the contribution of the ventral pre­
frontal region that is specially activated in all these examples of word analy­
sis. What is this region in anatomical terms? Evidence bearing on this 
question comes from my lab and others, and from experiments with mon­
keys, which have shown the connections that link the corresponding area 
with other cortical and subcortical regions. 8 This evidence shows that this 
region of the brain is the principal recipient and source of connections link­
ing the auditory areas with other prefrontal and frontal areas (see Figure 
296 < The Symbolic Species

lO.lB). The areas just behind it-between the prefrontal cortex and motor 
cortex that have classically been linked to Broca's area--do not get auditory 
inputs, but rather supplementary motor inputs, and inputs carrying tactile 
information about the mouth region. The ventral prefrontal region also con­
nects to the dorsal prefrontal areas (likely also those active in other word 
perception tasks) and with the anterior cingulate cortex, which also is highly 
active during this demanding word association task. As is suggested by elec­
trical stimulation studies, systems that must be co-activated in a given lan­
guage task often show evidence oflinkage, and different tasks are segregated 
both in terms of modality and in terms of the temporal domain. For exam­
ple, word association analysis in normal speech is required for interpreting 
the many relationships between words distributed throughout an utter­
ance, perhaps even between sentences. Single word production or per­
ception, on the other hand, involves articulatory precision at the level of 
individual phonemes, and the recognition of words requires little more 
than phoneme comparisons. These are distinguished by an order of mag­
nitude difference in time, as well as by a totally different mode of analysis. 
Comparing information from these very different methods for tracking 
the correspondence of language functions and brain regions makes it pos­
sible to begin to recognize repeating themes. The effects of ventral pre­
frontal stimulation on naming, grammatical decisions, and verbal short-term 
recall can help explain why Broca's aphasics often show poor fluency, rela­
tively spared word meaning analysis, and difficulties with grammar where 
positional cues in a sentence are most important. Some less well understood 
aspects of Broca's aphasia are also given a new context of interpretation. For 
example, it turns out that Broca's aphasics demonstrate some interesting 
word association biases as well. They tend to have difficulty with word lists 
but they have an easier time producing lists that are within categories (an­
imals) than those that involve shifts in the part of speech (i.e., noun-verb 
relationships). Additionally, Broca's aphasics have difficulty reconstructing 
hierarchical relationships among both words and objects. Finally, Broca's 
aphasics even exhibit word perception deficits, which is consistent with 
frontal activation in simple word perception tasks. 
In summary, images of the working brain doing language tasks show a 
hierarchic organization, which correlates both with time and with the 
hierarchic-segmental organization of sentences, and a segregation with re­
spect to the physical form, presentation, or manipulation of the signal. They 
also show that the classic language areas are not unitary modules, but rather 
complicated clusters of areas, each with different component functions. This 
Terrence W. Deacon > 297

is not consistent with the view that there is one self-contained "language 
organ" in the brain, even one dedicated only to grammar. If language had 
evolved as a consequence of the addition of a language module in the 
human brain, we should not expect such an extensive distribution of lin­
guistic processes in diverse cerebral cortical areas. If a grammar module ex­
ists, it is not localized to one cortical region, since subfunctions associated 
with grammatical and syntactic processes are found in both the anterior and 
the posterior regions. 
If we keep in mind that primate brains very much like our own have been 
around for tens of millions of years and that the mammal brain plan which 
our brain follows has probably been around for over 100 million years, it 
becomes evident that the logic of language is probably highly constrained 
to fit an ape brain logic. Though breaking up language analytically into such 
complementary domains as syntax and semantics, noun and verb, produc­
tion and comprehension, can provide useful categories for the linguist, and 
breaking it up according to sensory and motor functions seems easier from 
a global neuronal viewpoint, we should not expect that the brain's handling 
of language follows the logic of either of these categorical distinctions. The 
patterns we observe probably reflect, in a very indirect sort of way, the pro­
cessing problems produced by mapping a symbolic reference system en­
coded in a serially presented modality onto the processing logic of an ape 
brain. 
If brain regions are recruited during language acquisition on the basis of 
how they map to implicit modally and temporally segregated, parallel com­
putational domains, then we should also expect that the representation of 
language functions should be diversely and multiply implemented in dif­
ferent individuals' brains, and even within the same brain at different times 
in the life span or under other special conditions. Also, even within a sin­
gle brain there may be some degree of redundancy of functional capacity, 
so that alternative structures, besides those best optimized for linguistic op­
erations, could be recruited to handle linguistic tasks when these more op­
timal systems are unavailable (e.g., due to brain damage, to the interference 
of multilingual communication, or to pressure from simultaneous compet­
ing cognitive tasks). Such functional substitutions almost certainly would be 
associated with a significant decrement in efficiency, precisely because lan­
guage is not processed by some general learning capacity, but by quite het­
erogeneous cognitive subsystems, none of which is a language processor by 
design. 
Some of the most compelling theoretical models of language analysis 
argue that the incredible rate at which sentence analysis proceeds, and the 
298 < The Symbolic Species

relative automaticity and inaccessibility of our experience of these processes, 
can only be explained by postulating the existence of domain-specific mod­
ules that are closed to information from other systems. If speech analysis 
and sentence production are highly parallel processes mapped onto the se­
rial medium of speech, then we should indeed expect that the multiple com­
ponents of this process would run in comparative isolation from one another. 
The logic of distributed processing demands it, because significant levels 
of"cross-talk" between distinct processing domains would inject consider­
able interference. However, the logic of this sort of adaptive modularity is 
in many respects the reverse of that suggested by linguistic theories about 
grammatical processes. Indeed, grammatical cues, such as are embodied in 
small "function words," may be the primary agents for initially tagging and 
distributing sentence "chunks" to be separately processed. For this reason, 
it is precisely these features of language that need to be subject to minimal 
symbolic analysis. They serve a predominantly indexical function. And as 
we have seen, indices can be interpreted in isolation as automated, rote­
learned skills. 
In the interest of rapidly and efficiently organizing such highly distrib­
uted associative processes, some symbols had to be stripped of all but the 
vaguest symbolic content in order to provide a set of automatic "switches" 
for shuttling symbolic work to the appropriate regions of the brain. So, au­
tomatization of speech production and comprehension is accomplished by 
setting aside a small, closed set of symbols to be used as though they were 
indices. As a result of being stripped of semantic links, they can be learned 
by rote and implemented with minimal mnemonic search. And their rep­
resentation within the brain can be highly local, even subcortical. The func­
tion of these modular operations is to implement grammatical rules, but the 
rules are implicitly symbolic and therefore distributed. These automated 
language functions are not grammar modules, but merely symptoms of the 
grammar, which is itself probably highly distributed. 
Unlike clࡉsed modules, the separately processed levels of sentential in­
formation cannot be entirely "closed" to the information processed in oth­
ers. Parallelism requires synchrony in order to keep the partially decoupled 
processes organized with respect to one another, and selective cross-talk so 
that the results of some processes can constrain the operation of others. This 
too can be facilitated by breaking up language processing according to tem­
poral domains, because extended (and therefore more redundant) processes 
can serve as a frame within which many more rapid processes can be con­
strained; and conversely, the progression of a slower, more global associa­
tive process can serve as an integrator that helps overcome the intrinsic 
Terrence W. Deacon > 299

noisiness of the rapid processes, which must by design have minimal asso­
ciative scope. 
Where Symbols Aren't 
So, where in the brain might one expect to find symbols represented? 
The answer appears to be that individual linguistic symbols are not exactly 
located anywhere, or rather that the brain structures necessary for their 
analysis seem to be distributed across many areas. The systemic nature of 
symbolic reference suggests that the representation of symbolic associations 
within the brain should be distributed in diverse brain regions, and yet that 
similar classes of words ought to share neural commonalities. Though words, 
as symbol tokens, may be encoded by specific sound patterns or visual in­
scriptions, the symbolic referential relationships are produced by a con­
vergence of different neural codes from independent brain systems. 
Because they are symbolic, word comprehension and retrieval processes are 
the results of combinations of simpler associative processes in a number of 
quite separate domains, involving the recruitment of many separate brain 
regions. For this reason, they cannot be located in any single neural sub­
strate; rather, as each supportive representational relationship is brought to 
play in the process of producing or comprehending a word, each corre­
sponding neural substrate is activated in different phases of the process. 
To the extent that each higher-order form of representational relation­
ship must be constructed from or decomposed into lower levels of repre­
sentation, we can expect that their neural representations wil exhibit a 
similar nested hierarchic structure as well. There should be a sort of trun­
cated recapitulation of this acquisition hierarchy, in opposite directions, de­
pending on whether a symbolic relationship is being constructed or 
interpreted-from icon to index to symbol, or from symbol to index to icon, 
respectively. To predict how such a process might proceed within the brain, 
then, we need first to ask how iconic and indexical processes are likely to 
be represented. 
The lowest level of iconic relationships inevitably should map to 
processes within single sensory modalities. For example, similarities rec­
ognized between phonemes in different speech contexts or between visual 
shapes in different visual experiences are based on assessments of only a 
few sensory dimensions in a single modality. Such simple within-modality 
iconic processes likely have a highly localized character, perhaps repre­
sented in the cerebral cortex by activity in a contiguous sensory or motor 
territory. Words and familiar objects often require compound iconic analy-
300 < The Symbolic Species

ses involving more than one sensory dimension and sometimes more than 
one sensory modality, so depending on the object or relationship, the recog­
nition process might be distributed across many areas. In most pragmatic 
contexts, however, only a few features need to be assessed (and the rest im­
plied) in order to make a recognition decision, because the competing al­
ternatives are limited. That the whole constellation of iconic criteria has 
been activated to a minimal degree in the process becomes apparent only 
when one of these incidentally is found to be missing in the stimulus (as in 
the example described in Chapter 3 of discovering a previously camouflaged 
moth as it flies off the bark that it resembles). This linkage between differ­
ent iconic features is an indexical one, and reflects the intrinsic hierarchic 
relationship between these modes of representation. The mental repre­
sentation of a complex object is based on a correlation of numerous iconic 
associations in different dimensions or modalities which predict one an­
other's presence. The more complicated the object or relationship, the 
more numerous the iconic and indexical assessments that are required to 
recognize it. In this regard, there is only a difference in numbers and di­
versity of icons involved between learning to recognize objects, on the one 
hand, and learning to recognize relationships between objects or between 
events, on the other. Recognition and prediction processes can be stream­
lined as we learn to focus sensory analysis on only the assessment of the most 
relevant features. 
The indexical associations between words and associated objects tend 
mostly to involve cross-modality relationships (e.g., sound and vision). Con­
sequently, we should expect the substrates of word analysis to involve a 
highly distributed collection of brain regions, not even confined to a single 
modality. Recall that for symbolic reference to develop it is necessary (1) 
to establish a set of indexical associations between signs (e.g., words) and 
objects (things and events) in experience; (2) to establish a systematic set 
of indexical associations between different signs in the form of logical al­
ternation and substitution correlates; and (3) to recognize correspondences 
(iconisms) b]tween the combinatorial sign-sign relationships and the im­
plicit relationships between the various objects to which the signs refer. 
When all these pieces of the symbolic puzzle come together, a referential 
shortcut becomes available: it is possible to bypass each of the indexical in­
termediaries and use the relationships implicit in combinations of signs (e.g., 
phrases and sentences) directly to refer to relationships between physical 
objects and events. As the Ieamer comes to recognize this indirect mapping 
of sign relationships to object relationships, attention can be shifted away 
from the more concrete indexical associations (in effect unlearning them 
Terrence W. Deacon > 301

by diminishing the expectation of a physical correlation), allowing the more 
efficient and powerful combinatorial logic of between-sign relationships to 
provide the mnemonic support for retrieving and reconstructing them when 
needed. 
The symbolic recoding of systems of iconic and indexical relationships 
is so useful because it ultimately allows us to ignore most of the vast web 
of word-object, word-word, and object-object indexical associations. The 
availability of this mnemonic shortcut makes possible the incredible accel­
eration and compression of information transmission and reception during 
language production and comprehension, as compared to most other forms 
of communication. We become lightning calculators of reference. These ig­
nored indexical relationships are still the implicit grounding of word refer­
ence; it's just that these interpretive steps can be put off until it can be 
determined exactly which are relevant and which are not. The potential of 
being able to invoke these lower-order associations as elements in an in­
terpretive process or use them to cue steps in symbol construction (e.g., sen­
tence generation) is crucial. Symbolic reference is interpreted by supplying 
its indexical support, and these component indexical relationships are in tum 
interpreted by supplying their iconic support. This is a reductionistic 
process, like interpreting molecular interactions by considering the contri­
butions of their atomic and then subatomic constituents. Symbolic inter­
pretation requires a sort of idealized recapitulation of the indexical 
acquisition history that led up to the establishment of this referential rela­
tionship, which need not invoke anything but the most skeletal elements of 
the underlying indexical and iconic support-only what is essential to the 
immediate combinatorial and pragmatic context. 
Historically, many neuropsychologists have suggested that word refer­
ence requires the involvement of special association areas or multimodal 
areas of the brain (particularly of the cerebral cortex). Studies of cross-modal 
transfer of information from discrimination learning in different sensory 
modalities demonstrated that, at least in monkey brains, there were multi­
modal parietal, temporal, and prefrontal cortical regions that were critical 
to the ability to transfer learned associations across sensory modalities, such 
as recognizing by sight an object previously known only by shape. More re­
cent versions of these ideas have invoked a related concept-"convergence" 
zones in the cerebral cortex-in order to explain how distributed sensori­
motor traces of experiences might be interlinked to support word mean­
ings. This captures an essential aspect of word meaning, but not its symbolic 
aspect. Rather, these cross-modal associations between images and experi­
ences on the one hand and their associations with particular word sounds 
302 < The Symbolic Species

on the other provide the indexical associations of words, but their symbolic 
association-what we call the meaning-involves these and something 
more. The something more includes both the associative relationships be­
tween words and the logic of how these map to the more concrete indexi­
cal relationships. These components have long been implicit in theories of 
brain processes involved with retrieving meaning. 
Combining brain-imaging approaches with brain-damage approaches to 
language processing has made possible a renewed appreciation of the mul­
tifaceted nature of word association relationships and the corresponding dis­
tribution of their component processes within the brain. In general, studies 
of the mnemonic and lexical processing of words indicate that different brain 
regions may be differentially involved, depending both on the semantic fea­
tures and on perceptual features engaged in the analysis. One demonstra­
tion of this dissociability of the different aspects of word analysis involves 
the left ventral prefrontal region of the brain, the same region that is pref­
erentially engaged by verb-for-noun production tasks (discussed above). 
This same area also appears to play a critical role in retrieval of words rep­
resenting actions. A similar region is activated during word completion 
tasks, as shown by fMRI. However, PET studies of subjects responding to 
nouns with verbs reveal patterns of cortical activation that only partially 
overlap with nearly identical tasks involving responding to nouns with other 
nouns, or analyzing grammatical and lexical features of words (see Fig. 
10.5). This suggests that there are subtle differences in recruitment of the 
prefrontal areas as semantic relationships change. Moreover, the left ven­
tral prefrontal region does not appear to be so involved in the naming of fa­
miliar objects. Retrieval of object words versus persons' names in response 
to visual cues has been shown to be differentially impaired in patients with 
damage to different sectors of the left middle and ventral temporal lobe, 
and this distinction also appears to be paralleled by imaging studies show­
ing preferential activation of these areas in naming tasks (see Fig. 10.5). 
Interestirlgly, these inferior and middle temporal regions are not associ­
ated with either auditory processing or Wernicke's aphasia. In fact, anatom­
ical evidence suggests that these ventral temporal regions probably include 
cortical areas that are considered to be visual as well as auditory in func­
tion. This should not be entirely surprising because the stimuli were pic­
tures. Yet it is important to recognize that this does not simply reflect 
picture recognition processes. In these PET studies, the brain activation pat­
tern for the visual component of the task (as assessed by using data from 
parallel object recognition trials) was subtracted from the pattern exhibited 
in the picture-word association task, so the remaining pattern reflects some-
Terrence W. Deacon > 303

A Identifying grammar errors vs. 
semantic categories in a story 
8 
grammatical errors 
Ɨ semantic categories 
(PET) 
B Semantic vs. nonsemantic 
processing of words 
nonsemantic lexical 
semantic lexical 
(fMRI) 
Figure 1 0.5 Summary of brain-imaging studies investigating localization of seman­
tic processing of words and sentences. 
A. In this study, subjects were required to monitor a story either for grammati­
cal errors or for the occurrence of words in a specific semantic category. The two 
tasks produced slightly diferent, but overlapping PET activation patterns in frontal 
motor-premotor areas and in ventral prefrontal cortex. Anterior cingulate gyrus ( cg) 
cortex and supplementary motor area (sma) were also activated (arrow) (summa­
rized from Nichelli, et al., 1995). 
B. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (jMRI) used to distinguish between 
the effects of task dificulty of a lexical processing task and semantic processing of 
a similar task showing separate effects in adjacent ventral prefrontal areas (sum­
ma1ized from Demb, et al., 1995). 
C. Combined data from PET studies and patients with focal brain damage were 
used to construct maps of areas critically recruited for three categories of picture 
naming. Different temporal cortical areas (outside traditional Wernicke s area) were 
thing else. An additional visual processing stage appears to come into play 
in order to generate the word (though it may involve some of the same vi­
sual areas as were required for the object recognition task). A different use 
of visually encoded information appears to be playing a critical role in this 
lexical (i.e., word-word) level of the task, a use that differs depending on 
the category of the named object. The patterns of cortical recruitment thus 
appear entirely dependent on the lexical demands of the task. 
This differential recruitment of temporal-visual versus prefrontal re­
gions offers support for a theoretical speculation first proposed by the fa­
mous MIT structural linguist Roman Jakobson many decades ago. He 
proposed that one could analyze word associations underlying language 
304 < The Symbolic Species

C 
Naming errors (lesion) 
vs. picture naming (PET) 
§ people 
Ɩ animals 
-
tools 
(lesion & PET) 
D 
Processing of words 
or corresponding pictures 
= 
common to 
== 
both tasks 
(PET) 
recruited, depending on diferent lexical associative features of the words (pers, 
names, animal names, tool names). Lesions were confined to the temporal lobes. P1 
images additionally showed ventral frontal and cingulate cortex activation ( sw 
marized from Damasio, et al., 1996). Semantic processing appears to recruit difen 
ventral and lateral temporal lobe subdivisions depending on the semantic featw 
involved. (A similar pattern of anterior versus posterior temporal lobe recruitme 
in processing names for inanimate versus animate objects was also demonstrated , 
surface electrode recording in awake patients by Nobre, et al., 1994). 
D. Cortical areas that are activated during semantic judgments about eith 
words or pictures, identified using PET analysis of cerebral blood flow and su 
trading the areas uniquely activated by each task alone (summarized from Va 
denberghe, et al., 1996). All involve activation of ventral prefrontal cortex, as do 
the verb-for-noun word association task depicted in Figure 10.3. Additional i 
volvement of inferior temporal cortex demonstrates distributed recruitment of cc 
tical areas in semantic processing. 
processes into two broad categories of associative operations that he termed 
the syntagmatic and paradigmatic dimensions of word association,9 and he 
suggested that these processes should be distributed to frontal and poste­
rior regions of cortex, respectively. Paradigmatic operations are reflected 
in substitution relationships between words. Metaphors, anaphors, and pro­
nouns all serve this role. In the most general sense, all words of the same 
part of speech are paradigmatic of each other to some degree since they 
can substitute for one another. Words that serve the same function in a sen­
tence tend not to co-occur in the same sentence or context, except in a sort 
of renaming function. Syntagmatic operations are reflected in the comple­
mentary relationships between words from different parts of speech (e.g., 
Terrence W. Deacon > 305

nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, or articles) and the way these different 
classes of words alternate in sequence in a sentence. Word association by 
metonymy, such as in the sequence "glass-water-thirsty-lunch," also employs 
a similar logic of complementarity. The content words that combine in sen­
tences are almost invariably metonymically related to one another. In a sen­
tence or in the developing context of a description or story, subsequent 
words operate on one another, expanding or contracting semantic rela­
tionships, introducing new topics, or simply producing a sentential function, 
such as indicating or requesting something. This metonymic function is not 
merely a shift of paradigm (in Jakobson's sense) but a shift that involves some 
ground for one word to operate on the other with respect to determining 
reference. 
Producing a metaphoric association requires selecting words with com­
mon semantic features, whereas producing a metonymic association re­
quires shifting attention to specifically alternative features. This is why 
there may be a posterior cortical bias to metaphoric operations and a pre­
frontal cortical bias to metonymic operations. Associations cued by atten­
tion to common perceptual features are analogous to perceptual recognition 
processes and so should recruit the function of the corresponding poste­
rior cortical regions. However, associations that require a shift of attention 
in which some feature is used to generate its complement are likely to re­
quire prefrontal contributions. Metonymic word association thus offers a 
paradigm example of using information against itself to generate new com­
plementary alternatives. 
So, what parts of the brain should we expect grammatical and syntacti­
cal information processing to recruit? As with simple word association 
processes, the answer to this probably depends on processing demands, and 
not on some grammar-processing center. Syntactic operations and gram­
matical judgments can involve many different syntagmatic and paradigmatic 
processes, and these can differ from language to language. In languages like 
English and German, for example, word and phrase position in a sentence 
are used to determine many grammatical functions, such as relationships 
of possession or subordination, the difference between statements and 
questions, and certain changes in tense such as the passive tense. But in 
highly inflected languages, like Italian or Latin, affixes, suffixes or system­
atic changes in phonemes (as also in English verbs) tend to signal these func­
tional roles. If grammatical operations were handled by some central 
processor we should not expect to observe neural variations correlated with 
language variations, but since grammatical relationships are symbolic rela­
tionships, they are probably no less distributed and task-dependent in their 
306 < The Symbolic Species

localization in the brain than are word retrieval processes. Even within 
bilingual individuals different languages may be organized differently and 
separately, sometimes in ways not even restricted to cortex. For example, 
bilingual patients with subcortical (striatal) damage are often paradoxically 
more impaired in their native language than in their secondary one. 
The clearest demonstration of the variable relationship between lan­
guage structures and brain structures has recently come from studies of ac­
quired agrammatism: loss of grammatical analytic abilities due to focal 
brain damage in adults. Though it's long been unclear whether grammati­
cal ability could be linked to specific brain damage, English speakers ap­
pear to be especially susceptible to disruption of grammatical abilities as a 
result of damage associated with Broca's area. Thus, patients who have sig­
nificantly impaired speech fluency also tend to show difficulties interpret­
ing sentences that depend critically on grammatical function words, and 
particular difficulties interpreting sentences that depend entirely on trans­
formations of word order (like the passive tense in English). Such problems 
might suggest that this grammatical function is located in this part of the 
brain, and many have suggested just this. Curiously, however, a generalized 
grammatical deficit is not consistently associated with damage to Broca's 
area, and specifically, in speakers of highly inflected languages where word 
order is more free and where the passive tense is marked by grammatical 
words, morphemes, or inflections, there appears to be far less agramma­
tism associated with Broca's area damage. In these languages (such as Ital­
ian), Wernicke's aphasics, who also show disturbances of semantic analysis 
but not speech fluency, are more impaired in producing and analyzing the 
corresponding grammatical transformation than are patients with Broca's 
area damage (Figure 10.6). So if there is a grammar module, then the parts 
of this module map in very different ways to different grammatical opera­
tions, depending on the relative importance of positional or inflectional 
tricks for cuing grammatical decisions in different languages. This sort of 
module is a will-a' -the-wisp. 
Probably th\ crucial factor behind this difference is the need to use very 
different sorts of neural computations and mnemonic tricks to analyze word 
order as opposed to individual words, suffixes, prefiXes, and sound changes. 
Both coding methods offer viable means for marking the same grammati­
cal distinctions, and are quite variably employed in different languages. 
Those languages that extensively utilize change in word form to mark gram­
matical functions tend correspondingly to allow considerable freedom of 
word order, and vice versa. English, for example, makes minimal use of in­
flection and extensive use of word order and special "function words" to 
Terrence W. Deacon > 307

same grammatical operation 
• 
different syntactical encoding 
• 
different neural recruitment 
different association with 
aphasic disorders 
symbolic function 
,, 
word-order 
inflection 
Figure 1 0.6 Cross-linguistic comparison of aphasic patients is beginning to demon­
strate that the same deep grammatical operation may recruit diferent cortical re­
gions, depending on the way it is encoded syntactically. This is particularly evident 
when comparing languages that depend more on word-order cues to those that de­
pend on morphological and inflectional cues to express the same grammatical func­
tion. The arrows pointing to the brain indicate that when word order is more critical, 
damage to ventral frontal regions produces greater grammatical impairment; when 
inflection and morphology are more critical, damage to temporal regions produces 
greater grammatical impairment (for details, see the discussions in Bates and 
Wulfeck, 1989; Bates and MacWhinney, 199la). 
mark word-order interpretations. Italian and Latin, in contrast, rely almost 
exclusively on inflections and function words that change the grammatical 
function of content words they modify. If we took the view that a particu­
lar language function (e.g., the passive transformation) was a distinct prim­
itive operation that was "computed" by brain regions specialized for it, then 
we would be forced to conclude that English and Italian speakers have dif­
ferent kinds of brains with different types of language regions that make 
this possible. This, of course, is absurd. What happens is that in the process 
of learning one of these languages, particular syntactic functions tend to de­
mand most from areas of the brain that were previously specialized to per­
form similar manipulations of the signal (e.g., tracking order-dependency 
relationships). Over the course of maturation and in response to constant 
language use, the development of a certain degree of skill in this process is 
accompanied by progressive specialization of this region and progressive de­
cline of contributions from other areas, as all become more specialized and 
differentiated in function. 
Thus, a particular class of syntactical operation subserving a general 
308 < The Symbolic Species

grammatical function can come to "reside" somewhere in the brain, so to 
speak, and can be selectively lost due to focal damage, particularly in ma­
ture brains, and yet be located differently in the brains of speakers of dif­
ferent languages. Its localization is determined by the same competitive 
exclusion processes that hone all neural systems during development, in re­
sponse to habitual computational demands, but these demands are im­
posed by the surface characteristics of the syntactic device employed in a 
given language and not by the underlying grammatical (symbolic) logic that 
it supports. As with a computer that is deaf and dumb to the content and 
function of the data entered into its memory, the physical characteristics of 
the data that the brain must handle in language-i.e., whether they are im­
ages, characters, or operations to perform on other bits of data-are a much 
better clue to where they will be processed than what they mean. The sym­
bolic functions, the grammatical and representational relationships, are not 
processed in any one place in the brain, but arise as a collective result of 
processes distributed widely within the brain, as well as within the wider 
social community itself. Virtual reference is only virtually localized. 
Taking Sides 
It might seem odd that in a book on language and the brain, whole chap­
ters haven't been devoted to lateralization-the difference in functional rep­
resentation between the two cerebral hemispheres. This is in part merely 
a stylistic choice, a matter of emphasis on some otherwise less well known 
features of the brain-language relationship. But it is also a reflection of the 
fact that I consider this to be a side issue (bad pun) that is not an essential 
feature oflanguage processing, only an incidental feature of the way human 
brains have adapted to the computation problems oflanguage use. The fact 
that many specialized language functions are strongly lateralized to the left 
hemisphere in the vast majority of human brains has been a major impetus 
for theories suggesting that lateralization might have been a precondition 
for language evolution. Many argue that this robust side-to-side difference 
reflects some major organizational logic underlying language. But as with 
examples of the apparent preconditions for modem language abilities that 
were considered above, the logic of this argument is likely opposite to the 
evolutionary logic behind the correlation. Lateralization is almost certainly 
an effect and not a cause of brain-language co-evolution. Indeed, I think it 
is largely an effect oflanguage development in an individual's lifetime. The 
structure of languages has probably evolved to take advantage of intrinsic 
subtle biases in developing brains to break up and distribute their campo-
Terrence W. Deacon > 309

nent cognitive computations so that they can most easily be processed in 
parallel, and one important way this can be accomplished is by "assigning" 
functions to either side of the cerebral hemispheres. 
Unfortunately, the study of lateralization has been afflicted with the 
problem of being an interesting topic for popular psychology, and of offer­
ing an attractive source of analogies for theorizing about almost every as­
pect of the mind. As a result, everyone's favorite complementary pair of 
mental functions can be mapped onto a brain whose functions differ on op­
posite sides. Since the middle of the nineteenth century, physicians and psy­
chologists have argued over whether the left was female and the right male, 
the left verbal and the right nonverbal, the left linguistic and the right spa­
tial, the left rational and the right irrational, the left differentiated and the 
right undifferentiated, the left localized and the right holistic, the left pos­
itive emotion and the right negative emotion, the left ego and the right id, 
the left dominant and the right subordinate, and even the left human cog­
nition and the right primate cognition, to describe a few of the more promi­
nent dichotomies. The attraction of discovering the most elegant way of 
dividing up the mind into two major complementary cognitive systems is 
almost irresistible. 10 
Although I wouldn't dispute the importance oflateralized function as an 
important clue about the cognitive demands of language, I want to em­
phasize that lateralization is probably a consequence and not a cause or even 
precondition for language evolution. In fact, it is a dynamic functional con­
sequence of processing demands imposed by language performance dur­
ing development. There is plenty of evidence to suggest that lateralization 
of similar functions occurs in some other species, including other primates. 
Because of this, it is likely that such phylogenetic biases were present in ho­
minid brains prior to the evolution oflanguage. But I want to make the point 
that although these preexisting biases might help us to understand why lan­
guage could have become more commonly and more thoroughly dependent 
on the left and not the right hemisphere, these prior conditions do not ex­
plain lateralization. Lateralization is more an adaptation of the brain to lan­
guage than an adaptation of the brain for language. 
The starting point for thinking about lateralization is recognizing that al­
though human brains are strongly biased for left-side representation of 
many language functions, this is neither universal nor irreversible, at least 
early in life. Somewhere under 10 percent of people are not left-lateralized 
in this way, some are reversed, others have ambiguous lateralization, and 
handedness and lateralization for language do not always coincide. Anatom­
ical and maturational biases may stack the deck one way at birth and still 
310 < The Symbolic Species

not be sufficient to throw the game, so to speak. Cases of left hemi­
spherectomy in early childhood with largely spared language later in life 
have also been cited as a demonstration of the right hemisphere potential. 
Though claims that these children had complete language recovery were 
probably an exaggeration, it must be remembered that single-hemisphere 
language learning lacks any option of separating specialized functions or re­
lying on redundantly represented functions. The fact that hemispherec­
tomized children can learn any aspect of language is a miracle, and as an 
aside, further demonstrates the limitations of brain size alone as a sufficient 
predictor of language and intellectual ability. Even a 700-gram brain (as 
might result from hemispherectomy), if organized appropriately, can ac­
quire sophisticated language skills and pass as humanly intelligent. 
Further evidence of the developmentally derived nature of language 
lateralization comes from a study oflanguage development in children with 
focal brain damage. Bates, Thai, and colleagues (1994) report that right 
hemisphere damage as well as left can produce significant language devel­
opment delays (discussed in Chapter 9). This developmental plasticity in­
dicates that lateralization must be thought of as a dynamic process, driven 
by language and development of manual skills during childhood. Innate side 
biases are just that-biases in a competitive process that may involve both 
synaptic competition and competition for establishing memory traces of ex­
periences and behaviors. The representation of language functions proba­
bly develops primarily in response to the need to perform simultaneous but 
competing operations when speaking or listening to speech. This is sup­
ported by the fact that lateralization is not so much a commitment of one 
side to language and the other not, but rather a segregation of component 
language functions, as well as many other competing functions, to the two 
sides. Lateralization is thus another reflection of the role of competitive 
processes in determining the ultimate representation of functions in the 
cerebral hemispheres during development (see the discussion in Chapter 
6), a progressive streamlining of language operations, as competitive dif­
ferentiation processes cause competing complementary functions to re­
cruit corresponding opposite cortical areas on one side or the other. What 
is important for understanding the nature oflanguage processing is not how 
the particular human bias came about, but rather what drives it in each in­
dividual's development. 
Before we can begin to make sense of this functional competition, it is 
important to get one thing straight. The right hemisphere is not the non­
language hemisphere. It is critically and intimately involved in language pro­
cessing at many levels during both development and maturity. Perhaps 
Terrence W. Deacon > 311

most importantly, it is critical for the large-scale, semantic processing of lan­
guage, not word meaning so much as the larger symbolic constructions that 
words and sentences contribute to: complex ideas, descriptions, narratives, 
and arguments. Symbol construction and analysis do not end with the end 
of a sentence, but in many regards begin there. The real power of symbolic 
communication lies in its creative and constructive power. Since symbolic 
representation is intrinsically compositional, there is no upper bound to the 
compositional complexity of a symbolic representation. A whole novel can 
be used to convey a sense of a unique life experience, a research paper full 
of equations can be used to present a subtle but elegant idea about physi­
cal relationships, a joke can offer a new and curious way to represent an old 
assumption, and so on. Al of these are symbols in the same sense that a word 
or sentence is, but they require an extended effort at symbolic reference 
building. 
The best evidence for this right hemisphere language involvement comes 
from analysis of how right hemisphere damage affects such abilities as story 
and joke comprehension. ll Patients who have suffered extensive damage to 
their right but not left hemispheres are generally able to speak well, with­
out any unusual increase in grammatical errors or mistakes in choice of 
words; but when required to follow and interpret a short narrative, they 
seem to fail to grasp the logic of the whole. For example, they do not rec­
ognize when important steps in a story have been left out or inappropriate 
or anomalous events have been included, though they can recount the de­
tails. They seem to be unaware of the constraints of the context. Jokes pro­
vide another window into this difficulty. Humor depends crucially on 
understanding both what should ordinarily follow, and how the insidious 
twist of logic of the punch line undermines our expectations. Assessment 
of what makes something funny depends on an awareness of two conflict­
ing contexts: an expected, "appropriate" context, and a logically possible but 
very odd one. The aptness of the shift in contextual logic, the extent to which 
it effectively catches us off guard even when we know it is a joke, the way 
it caricatures what in a "straight" context might be serious or threatening, 
al these are the ingredients of good jokes. (How many scientists does it take 
to screw in a light bulb? Only one. It just takes him two years to get the grant 
support to do it.) Well, anyway, this poses a serious problem for someone 
unable to construct the appropriate narrative context in the first place. Pa­
tients with right hemisphere damage seem to rank jokes as funny based 
solely on the extent to which the punch line contains material that is dif­
ferent from what preceded it. (No, I do not have right hemisphere dam­
age.) 
312 < The Symbolic Species

Such inattention is also reflected in other aspects of their behavior. One 
of the more enigmatic symptoms of right hemisphere damage is a tendency 
to neglect or ignore things on the left side, including objects so placed, dress­
ing or shaving on that side, even the left sides of objects. Asked to draw a 
clock, a right hemisphere patient might scrunch all the hands and numbers 
to the right side, or simply leave something out on the left side of the draw­
ing. Another aspect of these patients' pattern of inattention is a disturbance 
of implicit learning. For example, when asked to keep track of how often 
an animal appears in a series of photographs of familiar objects, they do 
quite well. But when asked if there had been many pieces of furniture shown 
in that same same series of pictures, they will perform poorly. What was not 
being attended to did not register in background. 
These are attentional functions that are crucial to symbol building, be­
cause the basis of shifting attention from the details to the implicit logic that 
organizes them requires an ability to be aware of more than one network 
of contextual relationships at a time. I do not mean to suggest that the right 
hemisphere plays some special role in this process during development or 
in evolution. But as language abilities become progressively more sophisti­
cated with age and experience, the need to analyze symbolic relationships 
at many levels simultaneously grows. The highly automated interpretation 
of symbolic relationships encoded in word combinations and sentence struc­
ture requires a strategy of one rapid interpretation followed by another. It 
demands both rapid implementation and an ability to keep previous oper­
ations from interfering with subsequent operations. The same neural sys­
tems that subserve sentence-length analysis would probably also be critical 
for maintaining long-term mnemonic continuity of symbolic information. 
These simultaneous demands would thus likely conflict or interfere with one 
another, and so limit the efficiency of both processes. But because right and 
left brain structures are paired, it is possible to keep the processes from in­
terfering with one another by compartmentalizing them to opposite hemi­
spheres. 
The right hemisphere also subserves another important language func­
tion that is nonsymbolic, but in terms of neural computations probably is 
competitive with phonological analysis and word processing. It is the pro­
cessing of prosodic features of speech. Prosodic features are the rhythmic 
and pitch changes that we generally use to convey emotional tone, to direct 
the listener's attention to the more and less significant elements in a sen­
tence, and in general to indicate how aroused we are about the contents of 
our speech. Not surprisingly, many aspects of this speech melody have been 
shown to have features in common with the innate vocalizations of primates. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 313

These include the correlation of changing pitch, volume, and rate of pro­
duction with the level of arousal; changes in the quality of vocalization as 
an indication of type of interaction (hostile, submissive, etc.); and the over­
all phrasing with respect to breath control. Though the extent of localiza­
tion has been debated, there is a common association between both 
impairment in interpreting emotionality in speech and the production of 
prosodic speech in patients with right hemisphere damage. 
Here again, language production and analysis effectively require that we 
implement two different modes of phonetic analysis and vocal control si­
multaneously: prosodic and phonemic processes. These tasks would tend 
to compete for recruitment of the same brain structures (probably the clas­
sic Broca's and Wernicke's areas), and as a result would probably interfere 
with each other. It would be far more inefficient to trade off use of the same 
cortical system for both. Like the monitoring of thematic context in back­
ground, the monitoring of prosodic information tends to operate against a 
foreground attention to specific words and phrases. Though we are aware 
of this peripherally, it tends to be attended to implicitly rather than explic­
itly. Exaggerating the representation of this background function to the right 
hemisphere, and phonemic and word analysis to the left during develop­
ment, may similarly provide a means for processing these sources of infor­
mation in parallel with minimal cross interference. Consequently, the right 
hemisphere may become more intimately associated with the midbrain ho­
mologues of innate call circuits that still exist in the human brain. Con­
versely, if there is a consistent developmental bias favoring such a 
preferential linkage, this could tip the scales toward this pattern of lateral­
ization. 
But the right hemisphere may be far more capable of full-scale linguis­
tic functions than we normally imagine. Its abilities may be masked by this 
long developmental specialization, which actively reduces its roles in word­
and phrase-level analysis and production processes in order to avoid cog­
nitive conflicts. Could we find a way to observe right hemisphere abilities 
in conditions where there was no developmental selection to decrease its 
role in these processes? Data from schools that train simultaneous transla­
tors (such as are hired by the United Nations to listen to a speaker and si­
multaneously provide a moment-by-moment translation into a microphone 
for others to follow) suggest that under the special demands of this diffi­
cult language task, both hemispheres can to some extent become language 
hemispheres. The problem for the simultaneous translator is to keep the 
two languages from getting in each other's way. Listening to one while pro­
ducing the other is like that old problem of patting your head and rubbing 
314 < The Symbolic Species

your stomach with opposite hands, and then reversing what each hand is 
doing but leaving them in place; or chewing gum while playing the drums 
or dancing or just walking out of sync with each chew. The direct compe­
tition of simultaneous similar language functions is often further coupled 
with a consistent asymmetry of auditory input: most translators develop an 
ear preference for listening to the source language. Studies before and 
after training demonstrate that most students begin with a right ear (left 
hemisphere) preference for both languages, but may develop an opposite 
ear advantage for each language by the end of their training.12 
Thus, the two languages can come to be preferentially represented in op­
posite hemispheres. This is all the more remarkable since the shift from uni­
lateral preference to bilateral segregation can be induced in young adults, 
not infants (there is undoubtedly self-selection in this population of stu­
dents, so that such flexibility and language facility be the rule). This special 
case nonetheless demonstrate the general principle: when sensorimotor or 
cognitive operations tend to compete simultaneously for the same neural 
substrates, there is strong developmental selection pressure to segregate the 
competing operations to counterpart structures in the opposite hemispheres 
(Figure 10.7). Of course, any predispositions that contribute a bias that ac­
celerates this process during development will be favored in evolution. 
In general, then, it is misleading to think of language as though it is al 
in the left hemisphere. The right side is neither primitive nor mute. Both 
hemispheres contribute essential and complementary functions. These de­
velop in tandem, and the biases for a particular pattern of asymmetry 
evolved with respect to this complementarity of functions. Lateralization is 
not so much an expression of evolutionary adaptation as of adaptation dur­
ing one's lifetime, biased so as to minimize any neurological "indecisions" 
about what should go where. 
The logic of the bias that leads most humans to develop the same pat­
tern oflateralization may also reflect systematic temporal differences. Lat­
eralization functions in both the linguistic and the manual domain seem to 
be segregated according to speed. The left hemisphere seems more often 
adept at ultra-rapid analysis of sound changes and control of rapid, precise, 
skilled movement sequences. Similar patterns seem to characterize visual 
analysis and manual skills as well. Thus, in the developmental competition 
for functional representation, a left bias for more rapid rate of processing 
might be sufficient consistently to tip the scales in one direction. Subtle mat­
urational differences, myelination differences, cell-size differences, or dif­
ferences in the proportions of cortical inputs from sensory systems on the 
two sides could provide such initial biases. In human brains, these subtle 
Terrence W. Deacon > 315

intra­
sentential 
speed­
optimized 
syntax 
skeletal motor 
visceral motor 
bias 
bias 
inter­
sentential 
large time 
domains 
visual 
details 
prosody 
spatial 
relationships 
Figure 1 0.7 Examples of segregation of competing language-related functions that 
have displaced each other into the cortex of opposite cerebral hemispheres. 
developmental biases may be amplified further by the cumulative statisti­
cal effects of large brain size (e.g., longer maturation process; longer dis­
tances producing greater conduction time differences; larger networks 
tending to break up more easily into functional subdivisions; and so on). 
Similar biases are seen for other functions in species as diverse as birds, 
rodents, and primates. There are a number of crudely analogous patterns 
in other primates. Though there is no consistent species-handedness for 
fine-skilled manipulation, there does seem to be some consistent prefer­
ence for left-side supportive functions. More relevant, however, for language 
evolution, there appears to be evidence for a left hemisphere advantage for 
processing rapid auditory stimuli, and conspecific vocalizations in some 
monkeys (also probably biased by rate of analysis effects). The advantages 
of increasing the innate bias toward one pattern probably can be explained 
by a kind of disruptive selection against unbiased brains. Lack of innate bias 
might produce a kind of physiological indecision in the developmental com­
petition driving functional segregation. The hierarchic pattern of biases 
evolved to bias development is a consequence of the evolutionlike devel­
opmental wiring process. Like the disruptive evolution of different vervet 
monkey alarm calls, the intermediate unbiased state would be selected 
against. It didn't really matter which side "won" which function, just so long 
as the result was a decisive difference, and having both alternative outcomes 
as likely possibilities would increase the chances for stalemate. The preho­
minid biases, however slight, could have been enough to precipitate the evo-
316 < The Symbolic Species

lution of further innate biasing in the same direction. But there may be an 
additional source of bias to consider. 
A number of theorists suggest an evolutionary link between handedness 
and language lateralization. They argue that the left brain adaptation for 
more "dexterous" tool use might have paved the way for language evolu­
tion. The correlation between the asymmetry of language and of handed­
ness no doubt indicates that the independent advantages of each may have 
influenced the other in their evolution. This is a reflection of "evolutionary 
overdetermination": the apparent convergence of many independent adap­
tive advantages that contribute to the same structural change. Because evo­
lution is moved by patterns of biases, related biases from independent 
sources tend to reinforce each other over time. To the extent that either left 
hemisphere specialization for more precise manual skill or for more artic­
ulate verbal skill would have selected for similar biases in the neurological 
substrates, each would have increased the likelihood that the other func­
tion would co-localize in the same hemisphere. Lateralization for one or the 
other may have initially been slight, but their simultaneous co-evolution 
would have greatly amplified the resultant effect and linkage. One of these 
abilities need not be the evolutionary prerequisite of the other. 
How old is lateralization for language? Lateralized biases in many func­
tions appear to long antedate hominids. For example, corresponding later­
alized biases in spatial and sensory processing have been identified in many 
mammals and birds. Though human lateralization can probably be traced 
to these roots, the consistency and almost completely dissociated extent of 
lateralization of language functions that is characteristic of most human 
brains has probably developed gradually over the entire period of brain­
language co-evolution. Since the evolutionary course of the increase in 
vocal capabilities in hominids was probably protracted, beginning simply 
and taking more than 1 million years to become sophisticated, lateralized 
biases with respect to auditory processing have probably only recently 
reached their rpodem extremes. In contrast, as we will see in the next chap­
ters, stone tool use was probably around since the very earliest stages of sym­
bolic communication. If this was aided by lateralized biases for manual 
skills, then they may have been evolving in advance of vocal-auditory lat­
eralization. But the evidence for any strong selective disadvantage of am­
bidextrous abilities seems weak. Indeed, athletic and manual skills seem at 
least as well developed in ambidextrous and left-handed individuals as in 
strongly right-handed individuals. But in language processing, an "ambi­
phasic" brain would have become increasingly disadvantageous as speech 
Terrence W. Deacon > 317

information transmission rates increased during evolution. Evidence for 
handedness in stone tool manufacture may thus tell us more about the lat­
eralization advantages for language processing in these ancient toolmakers 
than anything about selection favoring handedness in their toolmaking. 
Even though lateralized tool manipulation could have offered an additional 
source of bias affecting language lateralization, it seems far more likely that 
the high incidence of right-handedness and left speech-processing biases 
in modem populations has been driven nearly to genetic fixation mostly by 
language. 
318 < The Symbolic Species



C 
H 
A 
P 
T 
E 
R 
E 
L 
E 
V 
E 
N 
And the Word Became Flesh 
The human race took centuries or millennia to see through the mist 
of dificulties and paradoxes which instructors now invite us to solve 
in a Jew minutes. 
--tancelot Hogben 
The Brain That Didn't Evolve 
T
he phrase from the Bible (John 1:14) that I have quoted as the title of 
this chapter reflec,ts an ancient mystical notion that certain words can 
invoke magical powers, and have a direct power to create or destroy. 
To know the "true name" of a thing was thought to be a source of power 
over it in many traditions. I want to invoke a similar sense of the autonomous 
power of words over things. I have borrowed this enigmatic biblical phrase 
out of context in order to describe an evolutionary process, not a divine mir­
acle, but the process I describe is no less miraculous because it is explain­
able by science. The evolutionary miracle is the human brain. And what 
makes this extraordinary is not just that a flesh and blood computer is ca­
pable of producing a phenomenon as remarkable as a human mind, but that 
321

the changes in this organ responsible for this miracle were a direct conse­
quence of the use of words. And I don't mean this in a figurative sense. I 
mean that the major structural and functional innovations that make human 
brains capable of unprecedented mental feats evolved in response to the 
use of something as abstract and virtual as the power of words. Or, to put 
this miracle in simple terms, I suggest that an idea changed the brain. 
Now this may seem a rather mystical notion on its own, inverting our 
common sense notion of causality that physical changes require physical 
causes, but I assure you that it is not. I do not suggest that a disembodied 
thought acted to change the physical structure of our brains, as might a god 
in a mythical story, but I do suggest that the first use of symbolic reference 
by some distant ancestors changed how natural selection processes have af­
fected hominid brain evolution ever since. So in a very real sense I mean 
that the physical changes that make us human are the incarnations, so to 
speak, of the process of using words. It is the purpose of the remainder of 
the book to make clear what I mean by this enigmatic pronouncement and 
to follow its implications. 
A subtle modification of the Darwinian theory of natural selection, first 
outlined almost exactly a century ago by the American psychologist James 
Mark Baldwin, 1 is the key to understanding the process that could have pro­
duced these changes. This variation on Darwinism is now often called 
"Baldwinian evolution," though there is nothing non-Darwinian about the 
process. Baldwin suggested that learning and behavioral flexibility can play 
a role in amplifYing and biasing natural selection because these abilities en­
able individuals to modify the context of natural selection that afects their 
future kin. Behavioral flexibility enables organisms to move into niches that 
differ from those their ancestors occupied, with the consequence that suc­
ceeding generations will face a new set of selection pressures. For exam­
ple, an ability to utilize resources from colder environments may initially 
be facilitated by seasonal migratory patterns, but if adaptation to this new 
niche becomes increasingly important, it will favor the preservation of any 
traits in subsequent generations that increase tolerance to cold, such as the 
deposition of subcutaneous fat, the growth of insulating hair, or the ability 
to hibernate during part of the year. In summary, Baldwin's theory explains 
how behaviors can affect evolution, but without the necessity of claiming 
that responses to environmental demands acquired during one's lifetime 
could be passed directly on to one's offspring (a discredited mechanism for 
evolutionary change proposed by the early nineteenth-century French nat­
uralist Jean Baptiste Lamarck). Baldwin proposed that by temporarily ad­
justing behaviors or physiological responses during its lifespan in response 
322 < The Symbolic Species

genetic 
transmission 
social 
transmission 
physical 
persistence 
Figure 1 1 .1 Schematic diagram of processes underlying Baldwinian selection. Ar­
rows pointing vertically depict three simultaneous transmission processes: genetic 
inheritance (left), social transmission by learning (middle), and persistence of phys­
ical changes in the environment produced by behavioral changes (right). Arrows 
pointing right indicate influences of genes on behavior and behaviors on the envi­
ronment. Arrows pointing to the left indicate the effects of changed selection pres­
sures on genes. The arrows for social transmission get thinner in each generation to 
indicate the reduced role of learning as a result of an increasing genetic influence 
to the behavior (indicated by arrows getting thicker from genes to behavior). 
to novel conditions, an animal could produce irreversible changes in the 
adaptive context of future generations. Though no new genetic change is 
immediately produced in the process, the change in conditions will alter 
which among the existing or subsequently modified genetic predispositions 
will be favored in the future (Figure 11.1). 
Some of the best understood examples of Baldwinian evolution come 
from cases where human behaviors have changed natural selection in un­
expected ways. ,The evolution of tolerance for the milk sugar, lactose, has 
long been seen as a case in point. Though the ability to utilize lactose is pre­
sent in most mammals during infancy, the enzymes necessary to break it 
down are eventually down-regulated after weaning, when they become un­
necessary. Most adult mammals are therefore unable to digest lactose and 
may develop digestive distress when it is broken down inappropriately by 
bacteria in the colon. This was probably the situation for most humans be­
fore the discovery of animal husbandry. It is no coincidence that the human 
populations with the highest percentage oflactose-tolerant adults are those 
where animals have been herded for the longest time, and those with the 
Terrence W. Deacon > 323

least lactose tolerance are those where herding was introduced most re­
cently or not at all. Though many independent factors have also played a 
role in the evolution of this digestive ability,2 it seems clear that the use of 
animal milk as a food source, despite digestive difficulties for some, favored 
the reproduction of those most tolerant to it. 
The story is further complicated by the various adjustments that people 
around the world have made to lactose intolerance. For example, letting the 
milk sour as bacteria break down the milk sugar, or making it into cheese 
where molds can modify it and not incidentally aid in its preservation, may 
have eased the consequences of intolerance and served as a bridge allow­
ing early herding populations to develop a greater dependence on milk. This 
allowed herding societies to move into more northerly and more moun­
tainous climates inappropriate for agriculture, where the reduced sunlight 
exposure accidentally provided an additional, more ubiquitous selection for 
even a slight degree of tolerance to lactose: the advantages of providing vi­
tamin D from milk to substitute for what is not produced endogenously due 
to reduced sunlight. Over time, large fractions of whole populations in Eu­
rope have become lactose-tolerant. 
In the 1950s and 1960s a pioneering British evolutionary biologist at Ed­
inburgh University, Conrad Waddington, described a related process he 
called "genetic assimilation." What he argued (and tried to demonstrate with 
breeding experiments using fruit flies) was that natural selection will tend 
to replace flexible adaptive responses to continuing environmental con­
straints with genetic predispositions. In his terms, the production of these 
adaptive responses will become progressively more "canalized." This means 
that after many generations their production during development will be­
come ever more strongly biased by genetic inheritance and less dependent 
on external signals. Developmentally "anticipating" an important response 
by making its expression obligatory rather than contingent on external con­
ditions provides a more efficient and less risky response than relying on an 
appropriate response being triggered by external signals. This account pro­
vides a more genetically and developmentally sophisticated description of 
an important class of Baldwinian processes. But Waddington was critical of 
overly deterministic models of genetic production of traits. "Canalization" 
refers to the more or less biased or constrained influences of genes on de­
velopment of body structures and behavior. Genetic assimilation was not 
meant to imply the one-to-one replacement oflearned adaptations with in­
stinctual counterparts, but rather to describe an evolutionary trend toward 
increasing developmental constraint. In many ways this is antithetical to the 
idea that there could be any simple mapping of a once facultative response 
324 < The Symbolic Species

to genes that produce it like an internalized set of instructions, but it is con­
sistent with an evolutionlike process of development. 
The indirectness of genetic assimilation is borne out by the fact that there 
are seldom obvious links between behaviors induced by environmental 
changes and their long-term evolutionary consequences. A typical example 
is offered by the evolution of a variety of genetic blood disorders in response 
to malaria. The best known of these is sickle cell anemia. This deadly dis­
ease results from inheriting two copies of a mutated gene for one of the com­
ponents of the oxygen-carrying molecule, hemoglobin. When the mutated 
hemoglobin gives up oxygen to the tissues of the body, it tends to precipi­
tate into microcrystalline structures that can rupture the red blood cells that 
contain it. The damaged appearance of these cells gives the disorder its 
name. The key to its evolution is its characteristic distribution in different 
populations, specifically, its high incidence in populations indigenous to cen­
tral Africa. A few decades ago, scientists discovered that people who had 
only one copy of the mutated gene thereby gained some resistance to 
malaria. This is because malaria is caused by a blood-home parasite that re­
produces within red blood cells during part of its life cycle within the host 
body. Having some sickle cell hemoglobin in one's blood cells (though not 
enough to produce rampant sickling of blood cells) interferes with the re­
production of the parasite. Sickle cell genes were thus selectively favored 
in a small proportion with respect to normal hemoglobin genes in the pop­
ulation because they conferred reproductive (survival) benefits for malaria. 
The cost of some individuals inheriting two such genes and dying from ane­
mia was balanced by this benefit. 
The sickle cell trait spread quite rapidly in Africa in recent prehistory be­
cause of human activity. The other host of the malaria parasite, by which it 
is passed from human host to human host, is the mosquito. Probably the 
critical historical event that catapulted malaria to an epidemic disease was 
the introduction of agriculture and animal husbandry into Africa, between 
five and ten thousand years ago. This culturally transmitted practice mod­
ified the tropical environment to create the perfect breeding ground for 
mosquitos. Slash-and-bum agriculture and animal husbandry replaced 
dense rain forests with land that tended to have lots of ponds and puddles 
of standing water, not to mention lots of human hosts, and mosquitos need 
both to breed. The introduction of agriculture thus changed natural selec­
tion affecting all three species, and the human population was thrust into 
a context in which powerful selection favored reproduction of any muta­
tion that conferred some resistance to malaria. Human ideas, in the form 
of agricultural practices, initiated an indirect cycle of Baldwinian evolution 
Terrence W. Deacon > 325

that ended with a mutated blood protein that is potentially deadly, but it 
did not produce mosquito-resistant skin or an abhorrence to standing water. 
When such a complex system is modified, there is no telling what will hap­
pen. Evolution seldom follows straight lines. In fact, in the case of the adap­
tation to malaria (and to tropical agriculture), there appear to have been a 
number of simultaneous parallel molecular adaptations of blood proteins 
to inhibit the disease, al with their own unique costs.3 
These two examples demonstrate how it is possible for human behav­
iors, in the form of agricultural practices, indirectly to affect the evolution 
of certain human genes and the physiological traits they contribute. But 
these examples also demonstrate that the route from behavior to evolu­
tionary consequence may not be as simple as the analogy to Lamarckian evo­
lution originally suggested, where what is accomplished by effort in one 
generation is accomplished by genetics in a later generation. Unlike the ana­
logue to Lamarckian inheritance of traits acquired by habit, where adap­
tive responses are presumed to be mapped one-to-one from outside to 
inside the genome, any traits that ease the costs imposed by behavioral adap­
tation to new conditions will be selectively favored by Baldwinian selection 
and thereby subject to genetic assimilation. There is an inherent difficulty 
in tracing causes and consequences in this sort of process because it involves 
a one-to-many mapping. Inevitably, a given adaptive response can be biased 
in its probability of appearance during development in a very large num­
ber of diverse ways, and all may be simultaneously modified by Baldwinian 
selection. 
Of al the forms of adaptation, the flexibility to learn new behavioral re­
sponses during one's lifetime can produce the most rapid and radical evo­
lutionary consequences. Indeed, the ability to learn and thus inherit 
acquired behaviors may be one of the most powerful sources of evolution­
ary change. It provides an organism with access to a repertoire of potential 
adaptations, and so amplifies and extends the range of the behavioral pre­
dispositions that can be "sampled" by natural selection. A learned behav­
ioral response can be genetically assimilated to become a behavioral 
predisposition by virtue of the costs that it imposes on the organism. There 
are costs in terms of learning time, costs for failing to learn or learning in­
correctly, and costs for simply being inefficient. Individuals who, for any 
number of reasons, learn more quickly and reliably and implement this be­
havior more efficiently will benefit in reproductive terms. One of the fea­
tures of this process is that any predisposition that even remotely 
contributes to producing a more reliable and efficient response will be pos­
itively selected. So again, unlike the Lamarckian caricature, what will tend 
326 < The Symbolic Species

to evolve is a constellation of many indirectly related contributory influences 
and biases, and not an innate replica of the prior facultative behavioral re­
sponse. 
Human brains have been changed by just such an evolutionary process. 
The question is just how specific and extensive these changes have been. 
Could it extend to such innate knowledge of grammar as innatists like N oam 
Chomsky envision? Though Chomsky himself has not suggested that gram­
matical knowledge could have been selected for during human evolution, 
others have. As discussed in chapters 1 and 4, the idea that an innate uni­
versal grammar could have evolved by Darwinian (and Baldwinian) 
processes has found its clearest explication in Steven Pinker's recent book 
The Language Instinct.4 In general, what Pinker means by the somewhat 
archaic biological term instinct is some behavioral predisposition that is pre­
formed and ready to operate prior to any experience. This is essentially 
equivalent to Noam Chomsky's notion of an innate competence or skill. Ex­
amples of such innate skills appear easy to recognize in other species be­
cause of the way they inevitably unfold as an animal develops, irrespective 
of experience or learning. For example, I am always amazed by the fact that 
young kittens can be so easily induced to use a box full of sand or Kitty Lit­
ter as a toilet, and inevitably scratch the dirt in the same stereotypic way. 
Even more surprising are nest-building behaviors in birds. An experienced 
bird watcher can tell what sort of bird built a particular nest because of the 
characteristic choice of materials and the specific way they are woven to­
gether. And there are instinctual skills that seem to extend across vast num­
bers of species, such as scratching and grooming behaviors. All these are 
what we commonly recognize as instinct. Clearly, even though many of these 
examples may involve some period of experience and shaping of the be­
havior, such predisposed skills have mostly been shaped by evolutionary 
processes. Wouldn't a biologist from another planet, observing the univer­
sality of human language development and the characteristic patterns by 
which the parts of a language are woven together to form a whole, consider 
it much as the bird biologist considers the structure of a bird nest: as an in­
stinct? Couldn't a large part of language skill and knowledge have evolved 
to be built into the human brain from the start? 
In Chapter 4 we found that it was possible to explain many of the re­
markable feats of language acquisition in children by taking into account 
the fact that languages themselves have been shaped by a sort of cultural 
equivalent to natural selection, in which children's special learning predis­
positions have shaped language to fit; but clearly brains have been shaped 
to fit the demands of language as well. The middle part of the book sys-
Terrence W. Deacon > 327

tematically outlined some of the most robust of these changes in the brain. 
In this chapter we will explore the evolutionary processes that were re­
sponsible for such massive changes, and the first step is to ask just what fea­
tures of brain and behavior are and are not susceptible to such a process. 
If evolution is capable of producing such massive changes in human brain 
structure, couldn't it also easily produce more subtle changes embodying 
the basic logic of a universal grammar? 
Both Pinker and I argue that a very simple protolanguage could have 
evolved in an early hominid ancestor in the absence of any specific language 
adaptations of the brain, and that the adaptive advantages oflanguage com­
munication would have subsequently provided selection for progressively 
internalizing certain crucial features oflanguage structure in order to make 
it more efficient and more easily acquired. Where we differ is in the de­
scription of what has and has not been internalized in this way, and more 
specifically in what theoretically could have been internalized. In formal 
terms, innate grammatical knowledge would aid language acquisition and 
could explain how an apparently unlearnable set of rules could nonetheless 
be mastered by children. It could also account for the apparently universal 
features of languages and the idiosyncrasies of language structure. The 
question is whether this is a biologically plausible explanation. Are there 
constraints on brain evolution that limit what knowledge can and cannot be­
come internalized during evolution? I will suggest that although our brains 
and sensorimotor abilities exhibit many adaptations for language that to­
gether might be called an instinct, grammatical knowledge cannot be one 
of them. 
To what extent could Baldwinian processes provide an explanation for 
the neurological basis for innate language abilities? This depends on the spe­
cific demands created by language use on human learning and behavior. 
Some behavioral adaptations may be able to contribute to Baldwinian evo­
lution and others may not. The key determining factors are the intensity of 
selection, the stability of the conditions being adapted to, and the invariant 
features of the adaptive response. Whether Darwinian or Baldwinian, the 
evolution of genetically based adaptation is a function of the long-term in­
variance of conditions that affect reproductive success or failure with re­
spect to some trait or traits. Depending on population size and the intensity 
of selection, the specific adaptive demands imposed by the environment 
must remain unchanged over hundreds or even thousands of generations 
in order to produce the levels of gene replacement necessary to cause a new 
trait to become a regular feature of a species. The question is whether such 
328 < The Symbolic Species

constant and consistent selection pressures are associated with language 
evolution. 
For a language feature to have such an impact on brain evolution that 
all members of the species come to share it, it must remain invariable across 
even the rrwst drastic language change possible. Though this might at first 
seem an overly restrictive constraint, it is an inevitable consequence of the 
very great difference in evolutionary rate between genetic evolution af­
fecting brain function and the speed of language change. Most researchers 
would agree that language change is likely to be many orders of magnitude 
more rapid than genetic change. The relative slowness of evolutionary ge­
netic change compared to language change guarantees that only the most 
invariant and general features of language will persist long enough to con­
tribute any significant consistent effect on long-term brain evolution. The 
evidence from Indo-European language histories suggests that massive lan­
guage changes can arise in just thousands of years, so even in the most min­
imal estimates of the age of modem languages, a vast range of tricks for 
mapping grammar to strings of words would have been sampled within 
every language lineage. Since the first languages emerged, innumerable 
variants of grammar and syntax could have arisen many times and faded 
again. Even in the extremely unlikely circumstance that the entire popula­
tion of language-using hominids was at some point relatively small and lo­
calized, and happened to be using a single language (as might be imagined 
in an extreme species "bottleneck" where all but one local population went 
extinct), the time from the appearance of a beneficial mutation to its fixa­
tion within the population would still likely extend across a vast sampling 
of possible language structures. 
For these reasons, there is little possibility for mental adaptations to 
specific syntactic structures. But there are many features of languages, 
from the presence of words and sentence units to the noun-part/verb-part 
distinction and many more subtle and idiosyncratic features, that are com­
mon to essentiallY. every natural language. Universal features of language 
do not change evȺn though their surface implementation does. So they 
could have persisted in all languages for hundreds of thousands of years. 
But unchanging persistence is only one facet of invariance. For genetic as­
similation to take place, this persistent aspect oflanguage must also impose 
consistent invariant demands on neural processes, and this is a more diffi­
cult criterion for language structures to satisfy. The problem with language, 
from an evolutionary perspective, is that what is relatively invariant across 
languages, what is often called the "deep structure" of grammar, following 
Terrence W. Deacon > 329

Chomsky, only weakly constrains the highly variable surface structures that 
implement it. Only if these deep grammatical invariances correlate with in­
variant neural computational processes can there be any degree of genetic 
assimilation. Despite the fact that a noun is a noun and a change in tense 
is a change in tense irrespective of the words involved and the syntactical 
manipulations that encode these functions, there can be no assimilation of 
its function by evolutionary processes unless these functional distinctions 
are always processed in the same way in all brains under all conditions. The 
key requirement for genetic assimilation is the existence of some invariant 
sensorimotor features or invariant mnemonic features of the adaptation. 
The impact of in variance of neurological representation can be illustrated 
by considering the evolution of vervet monkey alarm calls. Four stimulus­
response parameters remain unchanged for each type of alarm call. The first 
invariant features are the motor programs and sensory templates of the vo­
calizations themselves. Both could be encoded in brains as specific neural 
network architectures. Not only are these essential structural features likely 
to be highly localized in the networks of auditory and respiratory-vocal 
muscle circuits, they are likely to consist in similar circuit details. Second 
are the invariant sensory characteristics of the stimuli. Though the classes 
of vervet predators are distinguished by a number of sensory attributes, in­
cluding contextual cues, the visual appearances of individual eagles and 
leopards can be quite variable, and so only certain general sensory attrib­
utes will consistently distinguish the one predator from the other. Conse­
quently, only those reliable sensory distinctions that are consistently 
associated with distinct neural circuits will be subject to any degree of ge­
netic assimilation. Such general attributes as overall silhouette, size, move­
ment patterns, and whether silently framed against the sky or associated 
with the rustle and movement of bushes all may form part of the sensory 
templates that distinguish these predators. In addition, there are a number 
of more general "egocentric" features that distinguish between these classes 
of predators. For example, eagles attack from the air, and invariably ap­
proach from above their prey. Leopards attack from the ground, and are 
usually not above their prey. So, direction of sensory orienting to prey might 
itself be a major component of an invariant discriminative feature (it would 
be informative to know what kind of call would be given if a vervet mon­
key on the ground was startled by a leopard in a tree). Automatic orienting 
responses tend to be controlled by circuits localized to specialized regions 
of the dorsal midbrain. 
The third invariant feature is the emotional arousal state elicited by both 
330 < The Symbolic Species

calls and real predators. The startle and fright responses elicited by the sight 
of a predator are, of course, ancient and consistently localized features in 
the nervous systems of most species of vertebrates. So this component of 
the response would also be constant from one individual to the next, though 
not necessarily distinguishing one type of predator from the other. The 
fourth, and final factor is the invariant nature of any successful escape re­
sponse. The direction of escape is invariably opposite to the predator's di­
rection of approach (down in the case of eagles, and up in the case of 
leopards). Predators' distinctive attack modes also determine certain pre­
dictable locomotor requirements associated with the geometric features of 
trees, and so favor certain different predisposed vervet behaviors (e.g., a ten­
dency to leap upward with arms extended versus crouch down and cling). 
Similar nervous systems will encode all these behavior patterns in similar 
ways. 
In summary, a remarkable array of features implicit in the alarm-calling 
context can be correlated with consistent differences in neural architecture, 
either learned or inherited. The opposed and mutually exclusive nature of 
the best escape strategies, combined with the serious costs of failure to es­
cape, can produce consistent and powerful selection for calls that can be 
unambiguously distinguished, and selection for consistent linkage of these 
calls with a set of highly specific sensory, motor, and attentional predispo­
sitions. The evolution of these alarm call systems created a kind of innate 
"foreknowledge" of useful stimulus-response associations appropriate to the 
environment. These are the sorts of built-in predispositions that we would 
feel comfortable calling "instincts," and they have many of the features that 
might lend themselves to a genetic assimilation interpretation that paral­
lels Lamarckianism. 
Genetic assimilation here is analogous to associative learning in a num­
ber of ways. Associative learning also depends on reinforcing responses that 
anticipate certain invariant links between events in the surrounding envi­
ronment. But the differences are critical. The conditional relationships be­
tween stimulus parameters during genetic assimilation need to remain 
consistent across hundreds of generations, and different individuals must 
internalize these associations in identical ways. For this reason, the sorts of 
relationships that evolution can translate into neural architecture, and the 
level of detail to which they can be innately prespecified, are severely lim­
ited. This parallel between learning and evolution is particularly relevant 
for language, and the restrictions even more critical. The problem is this: 
the discontinuity between stimulus associations and symbolic reference as-
Terrence W. Deacon > 331

sociations, which is the basis of their function and which makes symbolic 
associations so difficult to learn, also makes them impossible to assimilate 
genetically. 
The evolution of specific indexical referential signals, such as vervet 
monkey alarm calls, was made possible by features unavailable to the evo­
lution of language. Languages exhibit minimal correlation between words 
and their references, and grammatical operations have even less of a cor­
respondence to things in the world, imposing a very nonphysical logic (i.e., 
subjects/predicates, articles, adverbs, etc.). Thus, there has never been 
much of an opportunity for the evolution of innate language reference. We 
each have had to learn these symbolic correspondences from scratch. But 
are there underlying neural computational constancies involved with lan­
guage processing? If the operation of determining the difference between 
a subject and predicate or of modifying tense of verbs in some way required 
the same patterns of neural activity in each and every person, there would 
be at least a possibility that this operation could have evolved an innate sub­
strate. Like words, the surface markings and syntactic transformations that 
are used to represent different grammatical functions vary extensively from 
language to language. So this level of analysis does not exhibit sufficient con­
stancy. But what about the underlying grammatical functions themselves? 
These are precisely what linguists have focused on as universal features of 
grammar. Are the deep grammatical functions that are ubiquitous in all 
human languages represented in brains by invariant neural processes? If so, 
they should be susceptible to Baldwinian evolution and would be candidates 
for genetic assimilation. If not, no level of adaptive importance, no amount 
of selection pressure, no extent of evolutionary time could contribute to in­
stantiating them as innate neural predispositions. 
This criterion of neural computational invariance does not require that 
there is some local structure in human brains in which this computation is 
performed. Sophisticated theories of innate language competence have 
come to avoid localizationist assumptions with respect to language acquisi­
tion "devices," etc. Many recent models instead appeal to computer soft­
ware metaphors and invariant "data structures" to explain the nature of 
language universals. But there is an important sense in which brain evolu­
tion requires specificity of the neural substrate, not just of the "program." 
Although "location" in the brain can refer to multiple and distributed cir­
cuits, in order for innate information to be "instantiated" in the brain it must 
utilize certain neural circuits in repeatable and consistent ways from one 
individual to another across a long stretch of time, so that selection re­
peatedly operates on the same morphogenetic processes generation after 
332 < The Symbolic Species

generation. The operations themselves need not be localized, but how they 
are distributed within different brain structures should be invariant. 
Evidence that such constancy is not characteristic of language-specific 
functions was provided by the neural variability of agrammatical deficits de­
scribed in the previous chapter. Speaking a highly inflected language means 
that a different part of the brain is more critical to a particular grammati­
cal function than it is in speaking a relatively uninflected language. The im­
plication for constancy of neural representation is that the same grammatical 
operation, when represented by very different surface features oflanguage 
structure, may also be represented by very different brain regions as well. 
Though the underlying logical-symbolic operation that is performed by 
these different syntactic strategies is the same one, this is not what deter­
mines which brain structures perform the operation. Rather, it is the ways 
that the surface operations on the words are carried out (i.e, the analyses 
of the physical signals themselves) that determine what part of the brain 
gets involved. This has important and little appreciated implications for evo­
lution. The majority of the deep structures of grammar that have been pro­
posed as universal are logical operations that have quite variable surface 
implementations from one language to another. The ways that questions are 
derived, the subject/predicate distinction, the marking of tenses or moods, 
the many other grammatical distinctions that must be encoded in words and 
their positions within sentences, and the deeper logical rules that govern 
the relationships between them are al subject to this variable link with sur­
face attributes of language structures. This hierarchic relationship is cru­
cial to their symbolic functions. But it poses an interesting riddle. The most 
universal attributes of language structure are by their nature the most vari­
able in surface representation, variably mapped to processing tasks, and 
poorly localizable within the brain between individuals or even within in­
dividuals. Therefore, they are the least likely features of language to have 
evolved specific neural supports. Those aspects of language that many lin­
guists would rank most likely to be part of a Universal Grammar are pre­
cisely those that arࡍ ineligible to participate in Baldwinian evolution! If there 
are innate rules of grammar in the minds of human infants, then they could 
not have gotten there by genetic assimilation, only by miraculous accident. 
Where does this leave us? Are there any grammatical and syntactic uni­
versals oflanguage that satisfy the criteria that would enable Baldwinian evo­
lution to take place? What about the most general and universal principles? 
Consider, for example, the subject-predicate distinction. If any categorical 
feature of grammar should correlate with a neural substrate distinction, the 
segregation of syntactic and semantic analyses according to some version 
Terrence W. Deacon > 333

of these complementary propositional functions should do so. It is always 
a necessary grammatical distinction, irrespective of the language, and with­
out its being assumed, few other grammatical categories and functions can 
be defined. For languages to have served as a means of indicating, com­
manding, and seeking additional information (have pragmatic or proposi­
tional functions as opposed to just a marking function), they would have 
needed something akin to what in modem languages we recognize as this 
distinction. Though the terms subject and predicate do not capture the full 
diversity of such complementary functional roles and phrase components 
oflanguage (other variants include topic-comment, agent-action, operator­
operand), they can serve to identify this core combined symbolic function 
present in all. 
The earliest symbolic systems would necessarily have been combinator­
ial and would have exhibited something like this operator-operand structure 
(and probably subject-predicate structure) right from the start. This is the 
minimum requirement to make the transition from indexical to symbolic ref­
erence. In other words, some form of grammar and syntax has been around 
since the dawn of symbolic communication. There was never a protolan­
guage that lacked these and yet possessed words or their equivalents. This 
satisfies the first requirement, consistency across al languages throughout 
time. But satisfying the second is much more difficult. Are the grammati­
cal and syntactical processes supporting the complementary subject/pred­
icate function always carried out the same way and utilizing the same brain 
systems, irrespective oflanguage differences? In terms of sensorimotor in­
variants, there is probably no invariant feature in the speech signal that can 
be relied on to mark noun and verb phrases. There are no universal words 
or sounds that mark them, not even any reliable intonation contour or or­
dering rule that invariably points to the elements in a speech stream that 
must be collected into each of these grammatical functional units. The the­
ory of deep structures paints itself into an evolutionary comer, so to speak, 
by recognizing the logical independence of universal features from surface 
features. In this regard, Chomsky's abandonment of Darwinian explanations 
for innate language knowledge is at least consistent. So what is left? 
Language Adaptations 
In the beginning chapters of this book we identified one unprecedented 
cognitive computational demand associated with language that is ubiqui­
tously associated with all symbolic activities. An unusual sort of contortion 
of normal leaming processes is required simply to overcome the mnemonic 
334 < The Symbolic Species

and attentional threshold that tends to prevent sets of rote indexical asso­
ciations from becoming recoded into symbolic systems of association. This 
one cognitive demand would introduce an incessant selection pressure in 
a society ofhominids habitually dependent on symbolic communication, in 
whatever form this symbolic communication took. As was explained in 
Chapter 9, the particular neural computations that are required to surmount 
this mnemonic-attentional threshold largely depend on processes that are 
carried out in the prefrontal cortex. Thus, the neural computations associ­
ated with symbol acquisition were unavoidably required by all languagelike 
behavior; they imposed a significant demand on a comparatively underde­
veloped cognitive process; they were invariant across a wide range of sen­
sorimotor applications; and they depended on a specific common neural 
substrate in all brains. This is a recipe for a powerful Baldwinian selection 
process. 
Did it have to be language that drove this process? Could language have 
emerged later, after this neural shift in emphasis arose for other reasons? 
In other words, could some other social or ecological demand have se­
lected for this particular learning bias and thus prepared the way for sym­
bolic learning? To some extent, selection for this cognitive function is 
implicit in the fact that prefrontal cortex is present in all mammal brains, 
and is particularly well developed in primates. There are a number of be­
havioral and learning contexts that require maintaining attention on some­
thing in short-term memory in order to do something opposite or something 
complementary. Foraging for a resource like fruit is one example, but there 
are likely many social contexts for which learning complicated conditional 
associations are relevant, as well. However, these almost certainly comprise 
the minor exceptions in a world where most adaptational contingencies can 
be based on immediate context, and thus correlational, indexical learning 
tends to far overshadow these more indirect modes. But it is not the pres­
ence of conditional learning/unlearning strategies that needs to be explained 
in the case ofhumࡎn evolution; some such ability is essential for many com­
plicated animal behaviors. What is unusual in humans is the radical shift in 
the balance between attention to higher-order recoding possibilities, and 
thus unlearning, as compared to more typical first-order learning processes 
which are more appropriate to the vast majority of physical and even social 
adaptations. 
What other adaptive demand could account for a such an exaggerated 
predisposition for this rarely needed mode oflearning? There certainly are 
few if any spontaneous analogues to the symbol-learning problem in nature. 
In order for a set of objects to serve as symbol tokens, they must be sus-
Terrence W. Deacon > 335

ceptible to being recoded in a consistent way. In other words, they need to 
be associated with one another in a pattern that maps to a closed logical sys­
tem. Such lucky coincidences of object relationships very rarely occur by 
chance or by physical constraint. Indexical information is sufficient to adapt 
to the majority of complex social relationships, since most are dependent 
on making highly reliable assessments of others' behavioral propensities, an­
ticipated by subtle behavioral symptoms. In fact, it appears that our pet dogs 
often do a more accurate job of reading a person's behavioral predisposi­
tions than we do, precisely because our far less reliable predisposition to rely 
on others' words and our own rationalized predictions gets in the way of rec­
ognizing nonverbal signals. In summary, I believe symbolic reference itself 
is the only conceivable selection pressure for such an extensive and other­
wise counterproductive shift in learning emphasis. Symbol use itself must 
have been the prime mover for the prefrontalization of the brain in hominid 
evolution. Language has given rise to a brain which is strongly biased to em­
ploy the one mode of associative learning that is most critical to it. 
Language adaptations don't end with symbolic cognition. There is a lot 
more to language than its representational and grammatical logic, and there 
are many other attributes that Hll the criteria for being subject to genetic 
assimilation. However, these are global perceptual, motor, and mnemonic 
regularities rather than universal logical regularities. They include a great 
many attributes of language that are associated with surface structures, 
such as those tricks used to map strings of sounds onto symbolic relation­
ships and logical operations between symbols, and those needed to extract 
symbolic information from them in the very limited time that the flood of 
speech information provides. Speech places particularly heavy demands on 
the employment of these general features by auditory and oral-vocal sys­
tems. Modem languages depend on production and analysis of dozens of 
phonemes (units of sound distinction or "sound-gestures"), produced at a 
rate of well over ten per second in the thousands of distinct combinations 
that make up words. This rate of production and analysis exceeds any pos­
sibility of doing the perceptual analysis or sound production movements in 
a one-at-a-time, phoneme-by-phoneme fashion. Not only must we be quick 
learners and skilled articulators, we must be able to "offioad" a significant 
part of the lower-level analysis and production of speech to some remark­
ably facile automatic systems. Uke the requirements for the genetic as­
similation of defense strategies in alarm calls, the requirements for efficient 
speech analysis and production have all the qualities to become progres­
sively internalized in patterns of neural architecture. It is even conceivable 
336 < The Symbolic Species

that there could be some degree of genetic assimilation of specific, highly 
regularized phoneme-distinction mechanisms. 
Use of language also places inevitable demands on neural systems not 
directly involved in the production or perception of speech. The amount 
and rate of the information that is presented during linguistic communica­
tion, and the requirement that symbolic reference must be constructed 
combining many component symbols, place special demands on short -term 
memory and attentional processes. For example, there seems to be a con­
tiguity requirement for the application of rules between words, and for 
marking phrase relationships, that probably reflects invariant mnemonic re­
quirements for speech processing. Though within the predicate part of a 
sentence there can be separation of aspects of a complex verb (as in the Ger­
man past perfect tense, where the verb for "to be" heads the verb phrase 
and the past participle ends it), there do not appear to be languages that 
chop up noun and verb phrases and intermix their parts. For the most part, 
the hierarchic structure of sentences derives from building higher-order 
units from contiguous parts. Here we may be able to extract an invariant 
feature of the input-output signal; but interestingly, this universal is precisely 
one that may have far more to do with selection pressures that sensory analy­
sis and mnemonic processes place on language evolution, rather than the 
other way around. Though adjacency dictates some bias in whether ele­
ments are analyzed as parts of a larger grammatical unit, there is no con­
stancy in what sorts of operations are governed by adjacency constraints, 
nor what markers indicate whether perceptually adjacent elements are or 
are not within the same phrase. It might even be because of this ambigu­
ity that languages inevitably evolve a small, closed class of marker words to 
indicate phrase boundaries. 
Another aspect of language learning that we tend to take for granted is 
the ability and the predisposition to mimic others' speech sounds. Though 
other species are known to mimic behaviors produced by parents or peers, 
there are few that equal the readiness that human toddlers show to mimic 
speech. Unlike the evolution of specialized modular abilities, such as those 
involved in speech sound analysis, the evolution oflearning predispositions 
is a more subtle and indirect result of Baldwinian processes. A predisposi­
tion to learn some particular class of associations, or to attend more closely 
to certain stimulus features during learning, or merely a bias in motivation 
toward certain realms of learning, all may be selectively favored by evolu­
tion. Unlike neural processes that map to specific perceptual or behavioral 
templates, however, differences in learning are probably not so readily lo-
Terrence W. Deacon > 337

calizable, because learning is ultimately based on links and biases among 
many separate neural systems. A learning predisposition may nevertheless 
be a consequence of genetic assimilation under circumstances where the 
demands on particular aspects of learning are consistent over time, and 
where the neural circuits that are involved are invariant from individual to 
individual. One of the challenges facing us is to try to understand how spe­
cific learning biases might be represented in brains. 
The relationship between the evolution of learning predispositions and 
of perceptual predispositions can be illustrated by considering another as­
pect of vervet monkey alarm calling. Evidence for which distinctive sensory 
attributes of predators are innately prespecified in the brains of these mon­
keys comes from observing alarm calling in young animals. Though juve­
niles begin life with an alarm-calling ability, they initially overgeneralize their 
alarm calling to many non predators. For example, they have been reported 
to give eagle calls in response to a variety of startling disturbances occur­
ring overhead, and to give leopard calls in response to a variety of startling 
ground-level disturbances. This suggests that the stimulus features that 
have been the most completely genetically assimilated are those associated 
with orientation, and that as they mature, young monkeys learn to associ­
ate these responses with a more limited subset of stimulus objects which 
share these characteristics. The features of the objects of alarm calling, 
though innately predisposed, have been incompletely "assimilated" into 
neural mechanisms. Learning must still bridge the gap between what has 
been internalized and what has not, possibly because the variety of possi­
ble predators makes genetic assimilation of any more specific predator 
identifiers unlikely. One could imagine that future vervet evolution might 
lead to more completely prespecified sensory templates for predators, if the 
same few species were always involved, though there will always be some 
level of genetic assimilation beyond which selection cannot push because 
of competing pressures and variable conditions. But the role oflearning in 
bridging the gap between outside and inside is also subject to genetic as­
similation effects. If there are constant attributes of the learning context, 
including social attributes, then the learning process by which these young 
monkeys come to respond selectively to these stimuli may be enhanced by 
the evolution of attentional and mnemonic biases of a slightly more gen­
eral sort. 
So the ability to learn is not some generic function, equally applicable to 
all stimuli. Learning biases are both cause and consequence of Baldwinian 
evolution. Whereas sensory and behavioral invariance with respect to some 
338 < The Symbolic Species

adaptive context may be a source for genetic assimilation of neural templates 
that correspond to the critical features of that context, invariant features of 
the learning context itself are also susceptible to genetic assimilation. Be­
sides considering the unchanging sensorimotor attributes of language use, 
then, we must also consider the possibility that there are invariants in the 
language-learning context that have become internalized in language evo­
lution. This almost certainly also includes adaptive biases to invariants in 
the social context of language development. It is not that all facets of our 
language adaptation are either innately predisposed or learned; some are 
strongly predetermined before language experience, some involve exten­
sive interaction between innate biases and experiences, and some are al­
most entirely unconstrained by human predispositions. The point is that it 
should be possible to predict which aspects of our language adaptations are 
more or less susceptible to genetic assimilation, by virtue of the in variances 
they demonstrate. Universality is not, in itself, a reliable indicator of what 
evolution has built into human brains. 
In summary, only certain structural universal features oflanguage could 
have become internalized as part of a "language instinct," and these tum 
out not to be those that are most often cited as the core of a Universal Gram­
mar. Instead, the best candidates for innate language adaptations tum out 
to be some very general structural characteristics of the primary language 
medium itself, speech, and the computational demands this medium im­
poses when it comes to symbolic analysis. Whatever learning predispositions 
are responsible for the unprecedented human facility with language, they 
specifically cannot depend on innate symbolic information. No innate rules, 
no innate general principles, no innate symbolic categories can be built in 
by evolution. A number of linguistic functions undoubtedly depend more 
on evolutionary specializations of certain brain areas than others, and are 
more available for genetic assimilation than others. But the evidence sug­
gests that the deep logic of grammatical rules lacks the invariant charac­
teristics that could allow them to be subject to natural selection. We must 
conclude that feࡏ. if any, aspects of the deep grammatical logic of language 
could have been prewired by natural selection in response to the demands 
of language use. The very abstraction from the surface implementation of 
morphology and syntax that provides the grammars with their generative 
power also shields them from the reach of natural selection. The noncor­
relative nature of symbolic reference has cut language off from forces that 
shape biological evolution, and instead has shifted the burden of adapta­
tion to a new level of information transmission. So, to expand on the argu-
Terrence W. Deacon > 339

ment in Chapter 4, the co-evolution of languages with respect to human 
neurological biases may not just be a plausible source for emergent uni­
versals of grammar, it may be the only plausible source. 
The remarkable expansion of the brain that took place in human evolu­
tion, and indirectly produced prefrontal expansion, was not the cause of 
symbolic language but a consequence of it. As experiments with chim­
panzees demonstrate, under optimal training conditions they are capable 
of learning to use a simple symbol system. So, it is not inconceivable that 
the first step across the symbolic threshold was made by an australop­
ithecine with roughly the cognitive capabilities of a modem chimpanzee, 
and that this initiated a complicated history of back-and-forth escalations 
in which symbol use selected for greater prefrontalization, more efficient 
articulatory and auditory capacities, and probably a suite of other ancillary 
capacities and predispositions which eased the acquisition and use of this 
new tool of communication and thought. Each assimilated change enabled 
even more complex symbol systems to be acquired and used, and in tum 
selected for greater prefrontalization, and so on. In other words, the com­
putational demands of symbolization not only are the major source of the 
selection pressures that could have produced the peculiar restructuring of 
our brains, they are likely also the indirect source for the selection pressures 
that initiated and drove the prolonged evolution of an entire suite of ca­
pacities and propensities that now constitute our language "instinct." 
Homo symbolicus 
Though the analysis of brain organization and function in modem species 
can tell us a great deal about the human/nonhuman difference with respect 
to language, it leaves open questions concerning the evolutionary transition 
from nonlanguage to language communication. It does, however, offer some 
new tools for approaching these old questions about language origins. When 
did languagelike communication first appear? Which hominid species first 
began to use it? What was it like? Did speech and language complexity de­
velop all at once or gradually? There is little physical evidence to support 
any but the most generic answers to such questions, but the brain struc­
ture/symbol-learning connection offers some important constraints which 
can guide our speculations concerning this critical phase in our prehistory, 
and which can help place language evolution on a timeline defined by other 
more robust sources of evidence about our fossil predecessors. 
For heuristic purposes, let's invent a new species designation: Homo 
symbolicus. This name, based on one trait, would apply to all hominid sym-
340 < The Symbolic Species

bol users. The first appearance of this species would correspond to the first 
hominids who habitually used symbolic communication. It thus refers to a 
sort of virtual species, not a genetic species, because it is based on some­
thing other than just genetic or morphological features. Its members are 
defined by a dual inheritance. The designation might, then, seem like an 
exercise that demonstrates the dangers of using behavioral traits as a basis 
for classification, because they are too prone to the influence of parallelism 
and convergence to be useful for tracing lineage relationships. 
But I don't propose this as an idle terminological exercise. Biological 
species are defined in terms of their ability to reproduce viable offspring, 
that is, to trace their genes from and contribute them to a common closed 
genetic pool. This genetic criterion has a clear semiotic counterpart. Al sym­
bolizing hominids are linked via a common pool of symbolic information, 
one that is as inaccessible to other species as are human genes. We are al 
heirs of symbolic forms that were passed from one generation to the next 
and from one group to another, forming a single unbroken tradition. We 
derive all our symbolic "traits" from this common pool and contribute to its 
promulgation. Being a part of this symbolic information lineage is in many 
respects a more diagnostic trait for "humanness" than any physical trait. 
Evolutionary phylogenies are defined in terms of inheritance of informa­
tion, but not all the information that determines a species' defining char­
acteristics is coded in genes. So, to the extent that there are partially 
independent forms of information transmission that are crucial for deter­
mining a species' attributes, they too can determine potentially indepen­
dent descent relationships. Horrw symbolicus might thus be termed a 
noo-species designation (in which "noo," from the Greek v6o§. refers to 
"mind") as distinct from a biological or zoo-species designation. It is 
nonetheless a biological classification. Without considering this lineage, the 
most distinctive physiological feature of the human species, a uniquely 
modified brain, would lack an evolutionary explanation. 
The phylogenetic history of Horrw symbolicus may cut across fossil phy­
logenies in more p;ofound ways than just including an ascending series of 
ancestral species. A number of paleospecies may be entirely contained 
within this superordinate noospecies, and others may be subdivided by it, 
with some individuals within each species included and others excluded. 
Also, because symbolic communication can be present without specific bi­
ological correlates, we shouldn't expect that its first appearance corresponds 
with any fossil species transition, so that we cannot rely on biological mark­
ers to identify members of this noospecies. Nevertheless, there are clear 
biological correlates to long-term symbolic communication produced by its 
Terrence W. Deacon > 341

selection on brain traits, specifically brain size and the correlated changes 
in internal organization that are so critical to symbol learning. These effects 
are evident in fossil skulls. They do not allow us to claim that a given species 
lacks symbolic abilities; rather, they can be used to identifY whether sym­
bolic activities have been present for some time and have provided selec­
tion pressures on brain organization. This can tell us which species must be 
included in Homo symbolicus, but not which can be excluded. Though the 
size of fossil hominid brains provides only very crude information about this 
most complex organ, and so should not be overinterpreted, it provides suf­
ficient evidence to answer a correspondingly broad question: Was lan­
guagelike communication present in a given fossil species? 
But aren't there distinctive anatomical features in brains that are capa­
ble of language? What about the evolution of the language areas of the 
brain? Might we be able to identifY the appearance of language-specialized 
brain regions in fossil species if we could actually see what their brains 
looked like? Indeed, it is possible to get a fair idea of the outward appear­
ance of fossil hominid brains. Paleoneurologists have long hoped that the 
patterns of bumps and grooves that are barely exhibited on the surface of 
fossil cranial endocasts5 might provide critical evidence for language origins. 
Two modem endocast researchers, Philip Tobias and Dean Falk,6 have 
each concluded that the patterns appearing on endocasts of Homo habilis 
specimens probably reflect the presence oflanguage abilities. 7 More specif­
ically, they argue that one habiline brain exhibits distinctive sulcal patterns 
that mark the location of Broca's area in modem brains (two sulci that as­
cend into the frontal lobe from the tip of the Sylvian fissure). These folds 
can be recognized in the lower-left frontal lobe of Homo habilis endocasts, 
but not in australopithecine endocasts. Could this indicate the first ap­
pearance or the special enlargement of a unique and critical language area? 
Though Broca's area is indeed a language area that is important for 
speech in most humans, these surface landmarks are only incidentally rel­
evant. Language areas are simply not the repositories of linguistic skill and 
knowledge that they were once thought to be. Though damage to the cor­
tex near this location was classically associated with Broca's aphasia, even 
in modem brains this is a variable correlation, and, as we have seen, distri­
bution of functions, individual differences, and language differences in 
aphasia effects do not support any simple localization oflanguage functions 
to this ventral-frontal brain region. More important, comparative evidence 
demonstrates corresponding brain regions in other primates, and develop­
mental evidence makes assumptions about localized additions or expansions 
untenable. As other paleoneurologists have noted, the appearance of addi-
342 < The Symbolic Species

tional folding in this region is probably an inevitable correlate of overall ex­
pansion in brain size.8 
The presence or absence of putative language-specialized areas is not the 
critical factor. They do not represent what is unavailable in other species. 
Though such surface details are not terribly informative about brain reor­
ganization, the far more general and unambiguous changes in relative brain 
size may be able to provide more specific evidence of reorganization. This 
is because the critical difference is not the addition of some essential brain 
structure, but the quantitative modification of relationships within the 
whole brain, particularly the relative contribution of the prefrontal cortex. 
Developmental analysis indicated that relative prefrontal size is deter­
mined by competitive processes during development, which involve inter­
actions converging from widely separated brain regions. The bias in favor 
of prefrontal circuits in modem brains is a function of disproportions be­
tween the developing cerebral cortex and other brain and peripheral ner­
vous structures. So, as the cerebral cortex became proportionately larger 
during hominid evolution, the connecting systems that determine pre­
frontal cortex recruited a greater fraction of potential targets. This means 
that the relationship between hominid brain and body size in fossil species 
can be used as an index of the degree of prefrontalization in their brains. 
The developmental constraints on brain structure allometries provide a 
means for unambiguously predicting innumerable details of neuroanatom­
ical organization from an easily estimated feature that is discernible in fos­
sil materials: brain size with respect to body size. We are no longer in the 
dark about what was inside the brains of our fossil ancestors. 
The main trends in the fossil record of brain size are clear (see Figure 
11.2). The size of the hominid brain increased almost threefold from African 
ape averages, which were similar to those of our australopithecine precur­
sors. There is httle disagreement among paleontologists that hominid brains 
first began to enlarge significantly in comparison to body size approximately 
2 million years ago, with the appearance of the paleospecies designated 
Homo habilis. This habihne increase was as much as 150 percent above aus­
tralopithecine values, from roughly 500 to 750 cc. The transition was not 
quite this simple, because an increase in stature made the net increase 
somewhat less, and because there is a considerable range in brain sizes 
among fossil specimens that have been categorized as Homo habilis. Sub­
sequent brain expansion took place incrementally up until the near present. 
Homo erectus fossils, which are dated as early as 1.8 million years ago and 
as recent as 350,000 years ago, overlap with the high end of Homo habilis 
and the low end of modem Homo sapiens brain volumes, that is, from 
Terrence W. Deacon > 343

80 
2000 
H.s. 
tiO 
u 
. 
::!S 
- - - - - - - - - - - -
- - - - - - - -
- - r 
.s 1500 
. I 
60 
.. 
E 
• =
. 
• 
• I 
"' 
H.e . 
.!!I 
! 
E 
"' 
't 
.. 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ,- -
• 
I 
c; 
. . , .. 
. . 
.. 
... 40 
t 
. . 
0: 1 000 
N.h. 
. . 
I . 
.. 
.. 
"i! 
• 
.. 
": 
.. 
.. 
A 
.. 
. . . 
.!l 
.. 
4-;i-!-. 
"' 
.. 20 
1i 500 
E 
i 4  
'ii 
E 
"' 
t; 
"' 
0 
0 
3.0 
2.0 
1 .0 
0 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0 
A 
million years before the present 
B 
million years before the present 
Figure 1 1 .2 Change in body size (A) and brain size (B) in hominid fossils from 3 mil­
lion years ago to the present. Dates and brain volumes are taken from published es­
timates; body sizes are estimated using published long bone and vertebral 
measurements by regressing on modem human long bone and vertebral measure­
ments. Though the data are from heterogeneous sources that may carry diferent 
biases, they provide a graphic demonstration of the dramatic increase in brain size 
during a period of relative stasis in body size. Dashed lines indicate modem mean 
values; letters only approximately indicate which points are from which species: A 
= australopithecines (all groups); H.h = Homo habilis; H.e. = Homo erectus; H.s. = 
Homo sapiens. 
about 800 to over 1,000 cc. Though it is conceivable to see these shifts as 
categorical between species,9 it is clear that within the erectus and sapiens 
lineages there are also brain size trends: a slight increase over time for erec­
tus, and a slight decrease in recent times for sapiens, finally settling to 
about 1,350 cc. (Figure 11.2). 
From these trends we can predict a correlated trend of internal brain 
structures: an increasing prefrontalization, with a corresponding shift in 
learning predispositions. It cannot be doubted that such a robust and per­
sistent trend in brain structure evolution reflects forces of natural selection 
acting on major brain functions, and it is hardly coincidental that these most 
salient changes in human brain structure correlate with the development 
of a unique human facility for symbols. For this reason, the increase in brain 
size in hominid evolution is an important record both of the relative ease 
with which symbols were able to be acquired by a given fossil species, and 
of the prior effects of selection on this ability. 
Though the evolution of most traits in most species can be explained in 
simple Darwinian terms, attempting to apply this model to the central fea­
tures of human evolution can lead to confusions about cause and effect. The 
arguments presented above suggest that human behavioral and brain evo-
344 < The Symbolic Species

lution in particular can only be adequately explained in terms of Baldwin­
ian evolutionary processes. 10 In general, behavioral adaptations tend to pre­
cede and condition the major biological changes evident in human evolution 
because they are far more facile and responsive than genetic and morpho­
logical changes. But once some useful behavior spreads within a popula­
tion and becomes important for subsistence, it will generate selection 
pressures on genetic traits that support its propagation. More than any 
other group of species, hominids' behavioral adaptations have determined 
the course of their physical evolution, rather than vice versa. Stone and sym­
bolic tools, which were initially acquired with the aid of flexible ape-learning 
abilities, ultimately turned the tables on their users and forced them to adapt 
to a new niche opened by these technologies. Rather than being just use­
ful tricks, these behavioral prostheses for obtaining food and organizing so­
cial behaviors became indispensable elements in a new adaptive complex. 
The origin of "humanness" can be defined as that point in our evolution 
where these tools became the principal source of selection on our bodies 
and brains. It is the diagnostic trait of Horrw symbolicus. 
Thinking of human evolution in these terms goes against some basic prej­
udices in our thinking about causes and effects. Learning abilities and be­
havioral flexibility in general complicate the analysis of causes and effects 
in evolution because they loosen the linkage between structure and func­
tion. This can significantly alter the rate and direction of evolutionary trends, 
both by buffering old adaptations from the influence of new selection pres­
sures, and by serving as a bridge between radically different adaptive re­
sponses. But many theories attempting to account for behavioral adaptations 
still implicitly assume a more rigid structure-function correlation, i.e., that 
a difference in behavioral adaptation must be predicated on some prior evo­
lutionary modification of the brain. This is clearly reflected in assumptions 
about the beginnings of tool use, language, and brain expansion in hominid 
evolution. 
Most scientists agree that the first significant increase in brain size should 
signal the origin of the genus Horrw, since this trait is specially characteris­
tic of our species. The once widely accepted assignment of the earliest ho­
minids to exhibit significantly enlarged brains to the species Horrw habilis 
reflects this conventional wisdom. Not coincidentally, this period in time is 
also marked by the beginnings of a stone tool record. The first stone chop­
pers appear in the fossil record some time between 2 and 2.5 million years 
ago. These tools were fabricated with a few sharp blows of stone on stone 
to create a sharp but not particularly refined cutting edge. They were al­
most certainly hand-held, and used for cutting flesh and chopping bone to 
Terrence W. Deacon > 345

get at the marrow. It is generally assumed that the first tools were manu­
factured by these first large-brained hominids. Together, these two lines of 
evidence are usually interpreted to demonstrate how increased intelligence 
made this new kind of adaptation possible. Though this seems to offer an 
obvious interpretation of such an association, the association is not so clear 
as it might appear. In examining some of the unresolved details of this tran­
sition, we begin to expose some weaknesses in the assumptions behind this 
view. 
First, there is considerable controversy about the associations between 
particular fossil species and stone tools from this time period. Part of this 
stems from the difficulty of finding clearly associated skeletal remains with 
the earliest stone tools. Second, the identification of fossil species from this 
period and of their associations with earlier and later hominid lineages is 
also in a state of flux. This too is a reflection of the fragmentary nature of 
the evidence, but also a result of the apparent diversity of concurrent forms. 
Depending on which expert is consulted, there are two or three potential 
candidates for the "true" ancestor to the subsequent Horrw erectus lineage, 
and each has traits that might be interpreted as ancestral to derived traits 
found in Horrw erectus, including reduced dentition, reduced jaw and face 
structure, increased relative brain size, changes in the opposability of the 
thumb and fingers, and so on. 
The question of identifYing the first toolmakers is not merely a matter 
of establishing a species-artifact correlation. Behavioral adaptations need 
not be uniquely linked to one species or one lineage, and because tool­
making and tool use are behavioral adaptations, there may not even be any 
biological features that distinguish the fossils of the first stone toolmakers 
from those who were not making and using tools. Stone toolmaking is not 
a physical trait like opposable thumbs or small canines. It is not passed on 
genetically. It is a learned skill, passed from individual to individual. As a 
result, it is not impossible that one species might under certain circum­
stances "inherit" a behavioral adaptation previously used by another, not ge­
netically but behaviorally. Human history provides ample evidence of the 
dissociability of socially inherited traditions and biological genealogies. Ac­
quired behavioral adaptations have frequently passed from one population 
to another, either as a result of retrieval of abandoned artifacts or by direct 
mimickry. The initial population to "discover" an adaptation may even sub­
sequently become extinct, and yet the adaptations they originated may sur­
vive in another. Indeed, many animals have been taught to make and use 
simple human tools, including stone tools. 11 
Due to the limited interactions between separate species, it is probably 
346 < The Symbolic Species

exceedingly rare for animals' behavioral adaptations to be transmitted even 
beyond a single lineage; but genetic continuity is not implicit. Species bar­
riers to information transmission are not absolute, and in the case of arti­
facts such as stone tools, which can persist longer than any specific use and 
can be retrieved and examined independent of another's use of them, there 
may be many opportunities for information transfer. The transmission of 
tools could even be aided by living out on the open savannah, where visi­
bility and group mobility might increase the likelihood of intergroup inter­
actions and observation. Although I pose this more as a possibility than as 
a serious hypothesis, it cannot be easily discarded as irrelevant. We cannot 
assume that all tool users were our ancestors. Paleontologists have even 
noted that later australopithecines had hands well equipped for simple tool 
use, with widened fingertips and more opposable thumbs than their fore­
bears. 
With this caveat in mind, let's reconsider the fossil origins of brain size 
increase and stone tools. The first stone tools slightly predate the first ap­
pearance of the genus Horrw, as defined in part by its expanded brain. But 
this difference in time may not only be due to their numbers and better 
preservation. The Baldwinian perspective suggests another possibility: that 
the first stone tools were manufactured by australopithecines, and that the 
transition into Horrw was in part a consequence rather than the cause of 
the foraging innovation they introduced. 
For most of their evolution, australopithecines were clearly not symbol 
users. There is no evidence of the changes in brain structure we can now 
associate with this function during their presence for millions of years be­
fore any such "humanlike" neural adaptations appeared. If some troop of 
australopithecines hit upon this communication trick, it did not take hold­
except for once. But when it finally took hold, perhaps as much as 2.5 mil­
lion years ago, it introduced selection for very different learning abilities 
than affected prior species. During this brief epoch, when the first symbolic 
systems flourished ࡐmong populations of australopithecines, they were 
being learned and used by individuals who had brains with an internal or­
ganization roughly comparable to that of the modem apes-brains, in other 
words, that were not well adapted for symbol learning. 
Earlier, we considered the problem of teaching symbols to apes and 
other species with brains that are not predisposed by evolution for symbol 
learning. The results of these animal "language-training" studies show that 
considerable external social support is necessary to attain minimal symbol 
learning. Nevertheless, under special circumstances, at least one species of 
ape (and possibly many other bird and mammal species) appears capable 
Terrence W. Deacon > 347

of making the conceptual leap necessary to support a basic symbol system, 
if provided with the necessary supports. This is probably a reasonably ac­
curate analogue of the symbolic abilities of the first symbol users, as well 
as of their needs for external support. During the initial phase of the sym­
bolic adaptation, considerable external support must have been required 
to back up even a very basic symbol system. As a result, these first symbolic 
abilities were likely dependent on fragile social adaptations that were sub­
ject to periodic failure. But as a consequence, any source of support that 
could be recruited to help overcome these handicaps and reinforce these 
fragile conditions of transmission would have been favored by evolution. 
The expansion of the forebrain, and specifically the prefrontal cortex, in 
Horrw habilis reflects only the core adaptation, supplemented over time with 
an increasing number of other diverse language supports. The introduction 
of stone tools and the ecological adaptation they indicate also marks the 
presence of a socio-ecological predicament that demands a symbolic solu­
tion (as we'll consider in Chapter 12). Stone tools and symbols must both, 
then, be the architects of the Australopithecus-Horrw transition, and not its 
consequences. The large brains, stone tools, reduction in dentition, better 
opposability of thumb and fingers, and more complete bipedality found in 
post-australopithecine hominids are the physical echoes of a threshold al­
ready crossed. 
One of the complications of dual inheritance is that independent trends 
in morphological evolution can be driven along parallel lines by common 
nongenetic inheritance. Parallelism in genetic evolution is exemplified by 
dolphins, seals, and manatees. As their ancestors adapted to the aquatic en­
vironment, each independently evolved reduced, flattened limbs and 
streamlining in response to the locomotor requirements of swimming. The 
environment created by the introduction of stone tools and symbols would 
have likewise contributed parallel selection pressures on whatever lineages 
used them, and would have selected for the same changes in body and brain 
organization, even if they remained genetically isolated. This may be rele­
vant to the problem of determining which, among the many potential fos­
sil species present 2 million years ago, was the ancestor of Horrw erectus, 
and ultimately ourselves. It now seems clear that there were at least two bi­
ological species that could be considered intermediate in time and mor­
phology between australopithecines and Horrw erectus. One had a large 
brain but australopithecine-like facial and teeth features, and the other had 
a small brain but other features more like Horrw erectus. Which of these 
was our biological ancestor? In terms of our mental evolution it will not be 
easy to determine, and may not much matter. Either could have been. 
348 < The Symbolic Species

The dawn of stone tool use and symbolic social communication among 
late australopithecines could have precipitated the diversification of many 
fossil lineages. In the period from the first appearance of stone tools, sep­
arate lineages that were each inheritors of this adaptive behavioral complex 
would likely have responded slightly differently to its effects depending on 
different initial conditions and environmental contingencies. But over time, 
we should expect these differences to converge. The many features that we 
might attempt to trace from this epoch to later lineages in order to estab­
lish phylogeny, such as reduced dentition, loss of sexual dimorphism, more 
efficient bipedalism, more complete precision grip, and increased brain size, 
could thus have been represented separately in isolated populations of early 
stone tool users. Even so, whichever lineage managed to survive would have 
eventually evolved parallel versions of these previously separate traits in re­
sponse to the selection pressures imposed by this common behavioral adap­
tation. Which transitional fossil lineage represented our true ancestor may 
not be as important as the fact that implicit in their stone tools and social­
ecological adaptations were the seeds of future human characteristics. Ul­
timately, all these curious physical traits that distinguish modem human 
bodies and brains were caused by ideas shared down the generations. 
The Co-Evolutionary Net 
Although the threshold that separates linguistic from nonlinguistic com­
munication is not the complexity or efficiency of language, human adapta­
tions for language that enable it to be so complex and yet so effective were 
also produced by selection on language abilities. Once symbolic communi­
cation became even slightly elaborated in early hominid societies, its unique 
representational functions and open-ended flexibility would have led to its 
use for innumerable purposes with equally powerful reproductive conse­
quences. The multitiered structure of living languages and our remarkably 
facile use of speech are both features that can only be explained as conse­
quences of this secondary selection, produced by social functions that re­
cruited symbolic processes after they were first introduced. These are 
secondary insofar as they became selection pressures only after symbolic 
communication was well established in other realms. They are, however, the 
primary causes for the extensive specialization that characterizes spoken lan­
guages and for the great gulf that now separates our abilities in these realms 
from those of other species. 
The evolutionary dynamic between social and biological processes was 
the architect of modem human brains, and it is the key to understanding 
Terrence W. Deacon > 349

the subsequent evolution of an array of unprecedented adaptations for lan­
guage. This is an important shift in emphasis away from what might be called 
"monolithic innatism," that is, the view that the "instinct" that humans have 
for language is some unitary and modular function: a language acquisition 
device (LAD). Co-evolutionary processes instead have produced an exten­
sive array of perceptual, motor, learning, and even emotional predisposi­
tions, each of which in some slight way decreases the probability of failing 
at the language game. Each by itself might appear to be a rather subtle shift 
from typical ape predispositions; but taken together, these many language 
adaptations (LAs) inexorably guide the learning process, the way carefully 
planted tidbits of misinformation can dupe a victim to fall prey to con 
artists. Though no one may be either indispensable or sufficient, together 
they guarantee the replication of language. 
Seen in hindsight, the myriad of spin-off uses of symbolic communica­
tion-from actively passing lrnowledge acquired in one generation to the 
next, to manipulating and negotiating with others about every aspect of so­
cial life-each can appear as independently converging selection pressures 
for language. Many competing scenarios of language origins differ in their 
focus on some particular social advantages deemed most likely to have been 
the source of selection for language abilities. Was language selected because 
of its importance in supporting close cooperation in mother-infant rela­
tionships, passing on tricks for extractive foraging, organizing hunts, ma­
nipulating reproductive competitors, attracting mates, recruiting groups for 
warfare and collective defense, or providing a sort of efficient social glue 
by which individuals could continually assess common interests and sup­
port networks, as grooming does for so many other primates? The answer 
is that all are probably significant sources of selection, not so much for lan­
guage origin, but certainly for its progressive specialization and elaboration. 
In this regard, they do not offer competing, mutualy exclusive hypotheses, 
but rather a list of domains into which symbolic communication has been 
successively introduced. The value of each of these uses, in turn, would have 
contributed new selection pressures that further supported and elaborated 
symbolic abilities. 
This spreading of selection pressures to support diverse adaptations is 
an inevitable outcome of the Baldwinian recruitment process. It is analo­
gous to the way a new technological innovation, developed for one appli­
cation, can become the device of choice for a vast number of totally 
unexpected applications. Any one or more of these spin-off uses could 
eventually become the primary support for its continued production. Yet 
in hindsight, historians who were not privy to the initial events might view 
350 < The Symbolic Species

any one of these ongoing uses as a reasonable candidate for the original use, 
or else could argue that all these needs played some role prompting the ini­
tial invention. A vast range of applications may be relevant to the persis­
tence of Velcro in late twentieth-century societies, for example, but have 
little or nothing to do with its invention (the achievement of a Swiss engi­
neer, George de Mestrel, attempting to mimic the clinging trick used by 
cockleburs). Many inventions were originally created for purposes for which 
they were soon found to be inapplicable, but they persisted because of a 
more relevant spin-off use.12 Building adaptational stories in hindsight, ex­
trapolating from current adaptational evidence to past initial conditions, 
floods us with false leads and a multitude of independently plausible ex­
planations. Because evolution is a historical process, it is like entropy in the 
sense that it cannot be analyzed backwards, the way a logical proof can be 
analyzed. Many paralel threads get ensnared in the net of natural selection 
and weave together as though they belonged together from the start. 
The biological version of this process has been termed exaptation by 
Stephen J. Gould and E. Vrba.13 In most cases of exaptation, whether in bi­
ological or technical realms, there is probably neither complete abandon­
ment of the original adaptive function nor takeover by a single new function. 
As the adaptive contributions of a novel structure become more diverse, the 
influence of selection becomes distributed over its parallel useful conse­
quences, and this increases the likelihood that it will be replicated in some 
form in future generations, whether or not any one function persists. A new 
innovation that is adaptive in one realm will tend to be applied to an ever­
widening range of additional uses as time goes by. Consider, for example, 
the evolution of feathers. What may at first have been an adaptation for heat 
retention has become the paramount component in an adaptation for bird 
flight. This exapted use eventually became "the tail wagging the dog," and 
played a prominent role in the evolution of feather shape and distribution. 
Both functions are stil contributors to the persistence of feathers; but in 
addition, many tࡑrtiary adaptations have subsequently arisen, including 
such functions as nest bedding, flotation, and mating display, to name a few. 
Of course, the more intrinsically flexible or general the adaptation, the 
more potential there is for diverse involvement in secondary functions. For 
this reason, neurological adaptations may be among the most highly sus­
ceptible to this spreading exaptation process. An important consequence 
of this is that neural adaptations should tend to evolve away from strict "do­
main specificity" toward functions that can be recruited for multiple uses, 
so long as the original domain-specific function is not thereby compro­
mised. This tendency should be even further exaggerated for neural adap-
Terrence W. Deacon > 351

tations that are one or two steps removed from perceptual and motor do­
mains, as are various learning predispositions. In this regard, symbolic 
strategies for communication and mnemonic support are minimally con­
strained. Once symbolic communication became essential for one critical 
social function, it also became available for recruitment to support dozens 
of other functions as well. As more functions came to depend on symbolic 
communication, it would have become an indispensable adaptation. And 
the more indispensable it became, the more this would have raised the re­
productive costs of failed symbol learning and awkward symbol use. 
Some sort of positive feedback process like this has been invoked by most 
theories of human cognitive evolution. And yet few have considered the con­
sequences of as much as 2 million years of such intense selection on the 
many diverse neural and body systems that are involved in the analysis and 
production oflanguagelike symbolic communication. Al aspects of sensory, 
motor, and cognitive function that are involved in language learning and use 
eventually may have been subject to adaptive changes to one degree or an­
other. All would have left their marks in brains, minds, bodies, and even 
human social institutions. However, because the ability to understand sym­
bolic relationships underlies all, selection for anything that benefited this 
prerequisite function would have been constant and intense throughout. 
This probably accounts for the increases in brain size (and prefrontaliza­
tion) that have continued for 2 million years since the introduction of sym­
bolic communication. 
But any source of support that could be recruited to help overcome 
handicaps to efficient symbolic communication would have been favored 
by evolution. Prefrontalization is only one facet of this process. Through­
out the last 2 million years, there must have been many other aspects oflan­
guage structure that evolved to maximize language reproduction by 
minimizing the impact of the limitations oflanguage users (this process and 
some examples are depicted in Figure 11.3). Effects would have been ex­
hibited not only in the vocabulary, grammar, and syntax of languages but 
also in the medium of communication. Their descendant features in mod­
em languages are still at least partially evident as the fragmentary "fossils" 
of the earlier stages of this process. Though most details of these prior lan­
guage adaptations have been worn away by the refining hand of selection, 
a number of major features of modem language have preserved a signifi­
cant impression of their past selection pressures, and these allow us some 
basis for speculative reconstructions. 
If the primary mystery oflanguage is the origin of symbolic abilities, the 
second mystery is how most symbolic communication became dependent 
352 < The Symbolic Species

laryngeal 
descent 
t 
SELECTION FOR SYMBOLIC LEARNING ABILITIES 
SELECTION FOR EFFICIENT COMMUNICATION 
Figure 1 1 .3 Diagram indicating how selection for the core symbolic function dis­
tributed selection to a wide variety of supportive adaptations that became signifi­
cant only once this core function was established. These in tum distributed selection 
pressure back on the core function as they became entrenched in later epochs of the 
process. As a result, prefrontal cortex became additionally recruited for other sup­
portive functions as well, as did the other systems. Numerous serendipitous "spin­
offs" would thus become coopted, or exapted, by the growing cluster of language 
adaptations. 
on one highly elaborated medium: speech. We employ symbolic represen­
tation in many realms of social and internal communication, yet the medium 
of speech has become its oveiWhelmingly most important conduit. Spoken 
language is the vehicle that first introduces the power of symbols to chil­
dren, and the principal means by which symbolic markers are insinuated 
into most human endeavors. But it was probably not always this way. This 
is a snapshot of only the most recent epoch in a long process of condensa­
tion and streamlining, in which one medium of symbolization has progres­
sively taken on an increasing fraction of the load of symbol transmission. 
This process is evolution's analogue of monopolization. Initially, it is 
likely that the "language" of the earliest symbolizers was far more multi­
modal than are modem languages, and that only later did spoken language 
become the relatively independent and closed system we would describe 
as a language today. In the 2 million years since the introduction of sym­
bolic communication, alternative modes for expressing symbolic informa­
tion have been in competition with one another, much in the way that 
Terrence W. Deacon > 353

alternative pronunciations of words compete for representation in future 
generations. Over time, vocal symbolic forms progressively took over func­
tions previously served by a variety of nonvocal symbolic forms, so that 
presently it appears nearly autonomous and complete in itself. Indeed, this 
apparent self-sufficiency is the implicit assumption of linguistic theories that 
endeavor to provide complete rule-governed accounts of language func­
tions. But this is an idealization of a communicative system that is still not 
completely freed from complementary nonverbal supports, despite a mil­
lion years of consolidation. 
Much of the evidence for the progressive assimilation of nonvocal sym­
bolic functions into vocal form still exists in cryptic form in modem lan­
guages. The structure of syntax often only vaguely conceals its pragmatic 
roots in pointing gestures, manipulation and exchange of physical objects, 
spatial and temporal relationships, and so on. For example, it is not un­
common for languages to demonstrate number, intensity, importance, pos­
session, etc., by corresponding conventional iconicity of repetition, 
inflection, adjacency, and so on, in their syntactic forms. Though children's 
language development likely does not recapitulate language evolution in 
most respects (because neither immature brains nor children's partial map­
ping of adult modem languages are comparable to the mature brains and 
adult languages of any ancestor), we can nevertheless observe a progres­
sive assimilation of nonverbal language supports to more flexible and effi­
cient vocal forms as their language abilities develop. 
The idea that the removal of vocal limitations released untapped lin­
guistic abilities has been a major theme of a number oflanguage origins the­
ories (most notably argued by Philip Lieberman, in a number of influential 
books and articles) .14 Though some have imagined that spoken languages 
could have emerged rather suddenly with the removal of constraints on vo­
calization, it would be an oversimplification of language processes to sug­
gest that this was the major constraint limiting language evolution, and it 
would also be an overinterpretation of the fragmentary fossil evidence to 
suggest that there were sudden discontinuous changes in these capacities. 
Nevertheless, increasing articulatory skill has probably been an important 
pacemaker for the evolutionary assimilation of symbolic functions to a sin­
gle medium, because vocal ability imposes significant constraints on the ca­
pacity and flexibility of the medium. Both the neurological basis for vocal 
learning and the anatomical basis for vocal sound production have changed 
radically with respect to the likely ancestral condition, but the development 
of skilled vocal ability was almost certainly a protracted process in hominid 
evolution, not a sudden shift. The incremental increases in brain size over 
354 < The Symbolic Species

the last 2 million years progressively increased cortical control over the lar­
ynx (see Chapter 8), and this was almost certainly both a cause and a con­
sequence of the increasing use of vocal symbolization. Though the record 
for vocal tract evolution is far less complete, comprised mostly of australo­
pithecine data at one extreme and Homo sapiens (including Neanderthal) 
data at the other extreme, the greater use of vocalization during successive 
epochs of brain evolution would inevitably have imposed selection on vocal 
tract structure to increase its manipulability during this same period. It is 
probably safe to conclude that although fully modem vocal abilities were 
not available to earlier Homo lineages, their vocal abilities were nowhere 
near as limited as those of other apes. 
In experiments begun in the 1950s and 1960s investigating the language 
abilities of apes, it was soon realized that despite their otherwise precocious 
and humanlike learning abilities, chimpanzees (and indeed al the great 
apes) were extremely limited in their vocal-learning abilities. Even with very 
intense efforts at language training and efforts physically to assist in mouth 
shaping with a: home-reared chimp named Vicki, only a couple of simple 
words could be trained. A breakthrough came in the late sixties, beginning 
with the work of Alan and Beatrice Gardner, who showed that, provided 
she was allowed to use a different expressive medium-manual signing­
their chimp, Washoe, seemed able to acquire a large "vocabulary" of Amer­
ican Sign Language (ASL) signs. Thus, freed of this one limitation there was 
a superficial appearance that language learning could be considerable in 
nonhuman primates. 
This suggested to many that signing might be the missing link in the lan­
guage origins story. The idea that human ancestors might have once com­
municated in hand signs had been suggested many times in earlier 
speculative accounts oflanguage origins. This history has been reviewed by 
one of its modem proponents, Gordon Hewes.15 Such "gestural origins" the­
ories offered a way to bridge the gap between the inarticulateness of apes 
and the fluency of humans. If the first languages were manual languages, 
they might have provided an intermediate stage between the ape and mod­
em human conditions. But great apes are not like persons mute from birth, 
nor are the signed languages used by modem deaf communities a useful 
model for the communication of our less vocal ancestors. The vocal medium 
was different, not unavailable to our early ancestors; auditory perception 
was not limited; and symbolic-learning abilities were significantly advanced 
over those of other apes but not so well supported as in modem brains. 
These facts suggest that gesture likely comprised a significant part of early 
symbolic communication, but that it existed side by side with vocal com-
Terrence W. Deacon > 355

Australopithecine & ape 
Modern human 
Figure 1 1 .4 Descent of the larynx in hu11Uln evolution. Relative positions of the 11Uljor 
structures of the vocal tract as in apes and australopithecines (left) and rrwdem 
Homo sapiens (right) depicting how relative reduction of the rrwuth and face and 
relative expansion of the cranium in hu11Uln evolution has resulted in a correlated 
descent of the larynx and epiglottis lower into the throat, enlargement of the phar­
ynx, and increase in the role of the tongue in rrwdulating the shape of the pharyn­
geal and oral cavities. This has significantly increased the range of sounds, especially 
vowel sounds, that can be produced and decreased the degree of nasality of speech 
sounds. The evolutionary time course of this shift in vocal tract anatomy is still a 
11Ultter of considerable debate, but rrwst researchers would agree that Homo erec­
tus' anatomy was rrwre or less intermediate between that ancestral ape state and the 
rrwdem state. 
munication for most of the last 2 million years. Rather than substitutes for 
one another, gesture and speech have co-evolved complex interrelationships 
throughout their long and changing partnership. Both should therefore ex­
hibit evidence of this prolonged evolution in some near-universal interde­
pendencies between them, as well as in predispositions that reflect the 
comparative recency or antiquity of these abilities. The current "symbio­
sis" between speech and gestural communication is abundantly reflected 
in culture-specific gesturing that accompanies most conversation. It is not 
difficult to imagine communication that is a much more complete hybrid 
of speech and gesture. 
Probably the last feature of the language adaptation complex to be in-
356 < The Symbolic Species

"N 
t: 
tD 
e 
-
= 
"' 
e 
... 
C> 
-
.., 
= 
C> 
u 
tD 
"' 
3000 
2500 
2000 
1 500 
1 000 
-
-
-
-
-
400 
600 
-... 
first formant (hertz) 
' 
/ 
800 
1 000 
I 
/ 
Figure 1 1 .5 Graph of the first 
and second formant ranges 
(major harmonic resonant 
frequencies of vocalizations) 
for three extreme vowel 
sounds (gray areas). The re­
gion encircled by the inner 
dashed region is a restricted 
range, where the two for­
mants are relatively more 
linked, such as might be char­
acteristic of the higher laryn­
geal position in early hominid 
ancestors. The arrows indi­
cate the relative increases of 
range as a result of greater in­
dependence, as well as of the 
range of pharyngeal and oral 
cavity volume changes that 
occurred during later hom­
inid evolution. 
corporated into the mix was the position of the larynx. Analyses of the com­
parative laryngeal anatomy of many vertebrates (particularly by Jan Wind)16 
and reconstructions of fossil hominid vocal tracts (by Phil Lieberman, Jeff 
Laitman, and Ed Crelin)1i have demonstrated that modem humans are un­
usual in exhibiting a comparatively low position of the larynx in the throat 
(see Figure 11.4). Lieberman has emphasized how this peculiar anatomi­
cal feature may have significantly influenced the range and distinguishability 
of vocal sounds that earlier hominids were able to produce. The higher vocal 
tract of other pr.imates and mammals significantly reduces the range and 
flexibility of sound production. In contrast, the low position of the human 
larynx increases the range of sounds that can be produced both by allow­
ing greater changes in the volume of the resonant chamber formed by the 
mouth and pharynx, and by shifting sound to the mouth and away from the 
nasal cavities. The major result is that the sounds that comprise the vowel 
components of speech are much more variable than could be produced by 
any other ape, and include such extremes of resonance combinations as the 
"ee" sound in "tree" and the "ah" sound in "flaw," both of which require the 
pharyngeal space (behind the mouth) to be relatively enlarged. Of equal im-
Terrence W. Deacon > 357

portance is the way this maximizes the ability of the mouth and tongue to 
modify vocal sounds. It is unlikely that the increase in vocal flexibility pro­
vided by this shift of laryngeal position was merely coincidental. This shift 
also comes with certain costs-easier choking-which might otherwise 
have selected against it (Figure 11.5). 
But the cause-and-effect relationships with respect to language evolu­
tion aren't obvious. It is not at all clear that a reduction in vowel range and 
an increased nasality of speech, such as in other apes, would by itself be a 
major impediment to articulate vocal communication. Though reducing 
both the range and distinctiveness of speech sounds, it would not eliminate 
the most critical sound elements of speech: the sounds made by partially 
or entirely interrupting the voice. These make up the majority of phonemes 
that we identify with consonant sounds. Thus, even australopithecines 
would have vocal tracts capable of this degree of articulation if only they 
had had the necessary degree of vocal motor control. However, their brain 
sizes suggest that they were not in fact able to exert such control over the 
muscles of the tongue and larynx. Our more recent larger-brained ances­
tors, Horrw habilis and Horrw erectus, would have had greater motor con­
trol, and probably also exhibited some intermediate degree of laryngeal 
descent as well. Honw erectus' speech might have been somewhat less dis­
tinctive as well as slower than modern speech, and the speech of Horrw ha­
bilis would have been even more limited. So, although their speech would 
not have had either the speed, range, or flexibility of today, it would have 
at least possessed many of the consonantal features also found in modern 
speech. 
These predictions have some interesting implications. First, they suggest 
that some nearly universal aspects of modern spoken language (e.g., con­
stants of consonant articulation) may have appeared as early as 2 million 
years ago. Second, they suggest that vocal articulation was not likely to have 
been the sole, or even the major vehicle, for the earliest forms of symbolic 
communication by the immediate australopithecine predecessors of Horrw 
habilis. Third, they suggest that there were many vocal abilities that were 
relatively late to appear in evolution, some possibly as recent as early Horrw 
sapiens, and so could not have been subject to selection for any significant 
period of time. Fourth, they suggest that the precision and speed of many 
aspects of vocal articulation were in continual development during most of 
human evolution, probably reflected in relative brain size. 
Considering the incredible extent of vocal abilities in modern humans 
as compared to any other mammal, and the intimate relationship between 
358 < The Symbolic Species

syntax and speech, it should not surprise us that vocal speech was in con­
tinual development for a significant fraction of human prehistory. The pace 
of evolutionary change would hardly suggest that such an unprecedented, 
well-integrated, and highly efficient medium could have arisen without a 
long exposure to the influence of natural selection. But if the use of speech 
is as much as 2 million years old, then it would have been evolving through 
most of its prehistory in the context of a somewhat limited vocal capacity. 
It is during this period that most predispositions for language processing 
would have arisen via Baldwinian evolution. This has very significant im­
plications for the sorts of speech adaptations that are present in modem hu­
mans. 
By studying the ways people analyze and produce speech sounds, Al 
Liberman and his colleagues at the Haskins Lab pioneered research dem­
onstrating human beings' unique adaptations for speech. This work pro­
vided some interesting clues to exactly which aspects of speech may have 
been subject to some degree of genetic assimilation over the course of 
human evolution.18 To summarize decades of research from the Haskins Lab 
and others in a single phrase: "speech is special." Humans utilize a re­
markably efficient and automatized system for compressing and decom­
pressing the information of the sound stream of speech, because speech 
perception mechanisms are largely automatic modular responses that pre­
process many sounds below the reach of conscious awareness. Surprisingly, 
unlike many other aspects of auditory perception, auditory processing of 
speech sounds does not appear to be based on extracting basic acoustic pa­
rameters of the signal, as a scientist might design a computer to do, before 
mapping them onto word sounds. Speech analysis appears designed instead 
to predict which oral-vocal movements produced them and to ignore the 
rest. 
Because the speech signal originates from a rather limited source, a 
human oral cavity, a full acoustic analysis is unnecessary; only the linguisti­
cally relevant information about what movement generated the sounds 
needs to be separated from the sound. What is important is the speaker's 
intended words, which are reflected in intended movements of oral and 
vocal muscles. Al else can be ignored for the sake of word analysis (though 
other slower-paced prosodic cues are simultaneously present), including size 
of vocal tract, rate of speech, failure to achieve intended acoustic targets, 
and so on. This is further aided by the social evolution of many speech sound 
distinctions to occupy ends of phonetic spectra where differences are not 
fuzzy. We tend to perceive speech sounds in terms of"articulatory gestures," 
Terrence W. Deacon > 359

whose boundaries and distinctions correspond to articulatory (i.e., somata­
motor) features, not just sound features, and this perceptual process is 
mostly automatic, taking place beyond the access of conscious analysis. 
Almost certainly, oral-aural adaptations have been fine-tuned for deal­
ing with the intense processing demands of spoken language during human 
evolution; however, the extent to which these are unprecedented in other 
species and language-specific is not clear. Given the incredibly rapid and 
facile nature of sound change in language (especially when compared to 
change of brain structures in evolution), and the powerful social evolution 
selection pressures that articulatory constraints and auditory-processing bi­
ases would contribute to such sound change, it should not be surprising to 
find that the articulatory distinctions recruited for indicating the units of 
speech make the best use of predispositions that were already present be­
fore the evolution of speech. 
An example of such a perceptual predisposition is provided by voice­
onset time, which is a measure of the time from the beginning of conso­
nant sound production to the point when vocal sound is begun. Consonants 
such as "p" and "b" are distinguished by differences in voice-onset time. 
When the "p" sound is produced, it is characterized by an initial pressure 
release at the lips in the absence of vocal sound. When it is combined with 
other sounds, as in 
"pa,
" there is a slight delay before this is followed by the 
vocalization we associate with the vowel. This is the "voice-onset time." In 
contrast, in the syllable "ba," vocal sound coincides or slightly precedes pres­
sure release at the lips, so the two phonemes are distinguished by their 
voice-onset time. What is curious about this unit-of-time delay is that it is 
highly predictable from phoneme to phoneme and language to language. 
Moreover, it seems to correspond to a perceptual categorical boundary. In 
a famous experiment, in which people were presented with artificial speech 
where the entire spectrum of possible voice-onset time distinctions was pre­
sented, they did not hear the sounds as grading into one another, but rather 
as one of two distinct forms (e.g., either "p" or "b"), and made the transi­
tion between the two in a surprisingly narrow band of delays, between 0 
and 0.05 seconds delay. Greater than 0.05 seconds delay and one always 
hears "p," and less than 0 (i.e., laryngeal sound production starts before the 
lips open) and one hears "b" in all normal circumstances. One might be 
tempted to treat this phonemic universal as a special, genetically assimilated, 
perceptual-motor adaptation for language, were it not for the fact that this 
same temporal delay has also been found to provide a categorical percep­
tual boundary in other species as well.20 This does not imply that genetic 
assimilation was totally uninvolved. Rather, it indicates that languages have 
360 < The Symbolic Species

taken advantage of predispositions for sound analysis already present in the 
nervous system, recruiting them for this special purpose. Because of this 
habitual new use, the importance of this predisposition has increased, and 
Baldwinian selection has undoubtedly enhanced both its analysis and pro­
duction. 
We not only hear this sound boundary, we produce speech sounds that 
quite distinctly fall to one side or the other, and avoid the intermediates. 
This subtle and facile skill has no clear animal precedent. Baldwinian evo­
lution has probably caused articulatory predispositions to evolve to com­
plement those of sound analysis, but the selection pressures of sound 
analysis have also constrained and guided the social evolution of speech 
sounds in every language. Evidence has been accumulating for many other 
parallel examples of a sort of "preestablished harmony" between articula­
tion patterns and sound processing used in language. In each case, a co­
evolutionary convergence has probably taken place, aided by the rapid 
adjustments of sound change in language to evolve toward optimal patterns 
of sound contrasts between alternative phonetic units. 
The quite extensive evidence of auditory specialization and automatiza­
tion is thus a sign of a longtime use of the corresponding articulatory ges­
tures by our ancestors. Oral-aural specializations that are extensively 
constrained and invariable from society to society likely have a compara­
tively ancient origin; those that are less specialized and more variable prob­
ably have become important more recently. Thus, differences in 
specializations for different aspects of speech production and analysis offer 
evidence for differences in the age of their incorporation into regular use 
in speech. The ranges and variability of features in modem languages, then, 
may be useful clues to their antiquity, and to the structure of truly ancient 
languages. 
For example, nearly al of the categorical production and perception spe­
cializations that have been demonstrated for speech seem to involve con­
sonants, not vowels. Vowel sounds grade easily into one another in both 
production and per[eption, they were among the last speech sound dis­
tinctions to get encoded into written phonetic languages, they are com­
paratively free to vary in some languages, and they are highly susceptible 
to change in language histories, dialects, and regional accents. This is con­
sistent with the independent evidence that changes in the position of the 
larynx in the throat have only quite recently allowed the full range of vowel 
production in hominid evolution. In the vocal repertoires of Horrw erectus, 
vowel variations were likely insufficient to serve as reliable features for dis­
tinguishing between words, and so language changes during that phase of 
Terrence W. Deacon > 361

prehistory would have continually selected against their use and would 
have provided minimal selection for any auditory specializations to treat 
them categorically as well. But the range of nearly universal consonant dis­
tinctions and the corresponding perceptual biases that appear to have 
evolved as a result provide evidence for ancient speakers who used an ex­
tensive array of these oral gestures to communicate. 
If something analogous to American Sign Language long predated spo­
ken languages and served as the bridge linking the communication processes 
of our relatively inarticulate early ancestors, then we should expect that a 
considerable period of Baldwinian evolution would have specialized both 
the production and the perception of manual gestures. Clearly, there are 
some nearly universal gestures associated with pointing, begging, threat­
ening, and so on, but these more closely resemble the nonlinguistic gestural 
communications of other primates both in their indexical functions and in 
the sorts of social relationships they encode, rather than anything linguis­
tic or symbolic. The absence of other similarly categorical and modularized 
gestural predispositions suggests, in comparison to speech specializations, 
that the vast majority of Baldwinian evolution for language has taken place 
with respect to speech. Pointing may be the exception that proves the rule. 
This universal gesture exhibits many features which suggest that its pro­
duction and interpretation are subject to innate predispositions. The fact 
that it appears prior to language as a powerful form of social communica­
tion in children (but not in other primates), and subsequently plays a very 
powerful role in children's language development, is particularly relevant 
evidence that it traced a complementary evolutionary path with the evolu­
tion of speech. The way it is recruited into manually signed languages and 
recoded symbolically for use as a pronominal marker with respect to sign­
ing position in space (among other uses distinct from its nonlinguistic in­
dexical role) demonstrates how such a predisposition might have enhanced 
the ease with which it entered symbolic communication in the past in lan­
guages that were somewhat less verbally facile. 
Early symbolic communication would not have been just a simpler lan­
guage, it would have been different in many respects as a result of the state 
of vocal abilities. A number of writers have speculated that early languages 
would have been like strings of words without regular grammar or syntax. 
Some have hypothesized that the labored, poorly articulated, and tele­
graphic speech of Broca's aphasics might be a good model for early language. 
Paradoxically, however, the limitations of a less facile articulatory ability 
might instead have been a major cause of structural complexity in early lan­
guages. With less articulatory skill and a reduced phonetic range as com-
362 < The Symbolic Species

pared to modem humans, our ancestors would have had fewer phonemic 
differences available to mark word differences, and these would have been 
less distinctive. This has two important consequences. First, it would in­
crease the chances of misinterpretation due to miscategorizing the sounds 
and confusing similar words. Second, possessing a smaller number of sound 
elements would probably, on average, lead to using longer strings of sounds 
to form each word and longer strings of words for each proposition.21 Thus, 
it would tend to be more error-prone and less efficient than modem lan­
guages. A greater utterance length might even have been further compli­
cated by a slightly slower articulation rate as well. All this would make 
interpretation more prone to another limitation, short-term memory. In­
creasing complexity of another sort might have helped. 
Consider the fact that the best way to compensate for noise or error­
proneness in communication is redundancy. We tend to repeat things, spell 
out important words, say the same thing in different ways, or add gestures 
and exaggerated tonality and volume in order to overcome the vicissitudes 
imposed by noisy rooms, distractions, inept listeners, or otherwise difficult­
to-convey messages. Redundancy is implicitly built into language structure 
as well. Highly predictable phonetic elements, grammatical markers that 
al must agree within a sentence, and predictable word-order constraints can 
help one anticipate what is coming. These are all direct contributors to re­
dundancy, while regular intonation patterns, breaks and pauses, nods and 
gestures are all parallel signals that provide additional clues to help mini­
mize interpretive errors. The more predictable the category of each word 
in an utterance, whether due to additional cues or to constrained phrase 
structure, the fewer the options that have to be distinguished from one an­
other. 
Thus, we should expect that early speech was constrained in word order, 
structured in small chunks, and embedded in a richer nonspoken matrix of 
gestures and exaggerated intonation. Just the opposite of the flat, unmarked, 
unstructured, and somewhat irregular speech of Broca's aphasics. This 
would be a better description of "motherese," the label often given to the 
exaggerated speech (usually richly embellished with gestures and embed­
ded in almost ritualistic schemas) that adults often spontaneously employ 
to communicate with young children. Social habits which enable one to dis­
tribute the interpretive workload redundantly across many communication 
channels at once, and embed small completed chunks of sentences within 
other chunks, lessen the communicative demands placed on short-term 
memory and articulatory skill. Conversations today are inevitably embed­
ded in rather ritualized markers for greetings, tum-taking, demonstrating 
Terrence W. Deacon > 363

assent or dissent, and indicating objects. It seems reasonable that such lan­
guage rituals would have been far more prominent during the early phases 
of brain-language co-evolution, not due to any greater innate predisposi­
tion but in response to intense social selection on communicative habits. 
With the final achievement of fully articulate speech, possibly as re­
cently as the appearance of anatomically modem Horrw sapiens just 100,000 
to 200,000 years ago, many early adaptations that once were essential to suc­
cessful vocal communication would have lost their urgency. Vestiges of 
these once-critical supports likely now constitute the many near-universal 
gestural and prosodic companions to normal conversation. Their persistence 
may be facilitated by long-evolved predispositions, but they have now be­
come somewhat free of these demands and have been recruited variably 
and to a much wider array of linguistic and paralinguistic adaptations in 
modem societies. Rather than being abandoned, many of these previously 
critical predispositions may have contributed to the increased effectiveness 
and efficiency oflanguage communication by offering new options. It may 
well be that with the advent of modem vocal abilities, languages for the first 
time fully assimilated many functions that were previously supported by 
nonvocal counterparts. With the added power of increased distinctiveness 
and more rapid articulation, more information could be packed into the 
same short-term memory time bins, and the full range of pragmatic func­
tions, previously supported by links to other simultaneous communications, 
was finally encoded as a series of syntactic operations. 
The one class of paralinguistic functions which probably had the longest 
co-evolutionary relationship with language is speech prosody: the changes 
in rhythm, volume, and tonality of speech that are used both to direct at­
tention to what the speaker deems to be more salient elements and to com­
municate correlated emotional tone. The evolution of this system of indices 
must also have been tightly linked to the evolution of speaking abilities be­
cause they are effectively opposite sides of the same neurological coin. As 
we discovered in Chapter 7, these prosodic elements of vocalization re­
semble stereotypic call systems in their use of intensity, frequency, and 
rhythmic modulation of vocal sound, and in their likely involvement of lim­
bic and midbrain vocalization circuits. Since human cortical control of these 
same output systems is achieved by a more direct set of projections, which 
bypasses these emotional-arousal pathways, the two systems are in this re­
spect parallel and complementary to one another anatomically as well as 
functionally. To some extent, they also operate on different though syn­
chronized time scales. Word articulation takes place within fractions of a 
second, whereas prosodic changes unfold over seconds across whole utter-
364 < The Symbolic Species

ances, punctuated by breath cycle. Their seamless complementarity is a sign 
of a long and consistent selection history. This may indeed be an additional 
clue to the origins of consistent laterality oflanguage-related functions. As 
noted in Chapter 8, sites of brain damage that produce aprosodic speech 
or difficulties in analyzing emotional information encoded in prosody often 
involve the right cerebral cortex, opposite the "language-dominant" hemi­
sphere. There may even be a sort of complementary mirror image location 
of Broca-like and Wernicke-like aprosodias. The significance of this func­
tional segregation could be as a response to the potential for competitive 
interference between these systems, since they share both a common out­
put pathway (speech) and a common feedback pathway (audition). An evo­
lutionarily predisposed bias, perhaps in the form of differential right/left 
proportions of limbic versus nonlimbic connectivity in the immature brain, 
might support a more reliable developmental segregation of these functions 
and minimize interference effects. 
Thus, as was also suggested for symbolic analysis, lateralization may not 
so much reflect the need to put speech under the control of only one hemi­
sphere-it clearly is not-but rather the advantages of isolating parallel and 
potentially competing speech functions from one another. The outputs 
from the right hemisphere, producing the slower modulations of back­
ground subglottal pressure and vocal muscle tension, and from the left 
hemisphere, producing the rapid-fire articulatory movements, can be su­
perimposed without conflict on the final common motor pathway analogous 
to the way a sound wave can be superimposed on a much faster carrier wave 
in a radio transmission. Rather than degenerating in the face of the takeover 
by cortical motor projections in human evolution, the systems involved in 
linking arousal and emotional state to vocalization have become more elab­
orated along with speech. This too provides strong evidence for the long 
use of vocal articulation in hominid evolution. 
The Writing on the Wall 
Our prehistoric ancestors used languages that we will never hear and 
communicated with other symbols that have not survived the selective sieve 
of fossilization. In their absence, it is tempting to use the minimal evidence 
of prehistoric material culture as an index of the mental and linguistic com­
plexity of our ancestors. It is almost certainly a reliable expectation that a 
society which constructs complex tools also has a correspondingly sophis­
ticated symbolic infrastructure, and that where tools and other artifacts dif­
fer from region to region, there is likely to be a corresponding diversity in 
Terrence W. Deacon > 365

traditions of tool use, resource production, and social organization. More­
over, a society that leaves behind evidence of permanent external symbol­
ization in the form of paintings, carvings, or just highly conventional 
doodlings likely includes a social function for this activity. In short, arche­
ological artifacts are one of the few windows through which we can glimpse 
the workings of the "mental" activity of a prehistoric society. 
The problem is that this logic is not valid in reverse. Though we can de­
duce from artifacts what minimal social conditions are required to produce 
them, we cannot so easily deduce from their absence that certain social con­
ditions are missing, and we certainly cannot deduce that the potential to pro­
duce them is lacking. This is evident from a comparative look at modem 
human societies. Prior to the twentieth century many believed that people 
in societies that still used stone tool technologies for hunting, farming and 
warfare were also more primitive in biological terms than were European 
or Asian people. This was an integral part of the Eurocentric conceit dur­
ing the colonial era, and was used to justify numerous injustices, from geno­
cide to slavery. Anthropologists in the early twentieth century quickly 
realized that the technological status of a society was no predictor of the 
complexity of its language or the symbolic richness of its traditions. In gen­
eral, the average member of any society probably has roughly the same 
amount of linguistic and cultural information "in his or her head." There 
are no living primitive languages, in the sense ofbeing more simple and el­
ementary in structure, not even in ancient written texts. Children who have 
come from societies that still utilize stone tool technologies can adapt to 
modem industrial society and absorb its intellectual tradition as easily as 
those born within it. Not only does a lack of preserved archeological mate­
rial say little about the likely extent of "perishable" culture; it says nothing 
about the capacity for it. It is instead a marker for a variety of ecological 
and historical variables that have selected for the social value of producing 
highly durable symbolic objects. 
There is another related problem that is particularly troublesome for 
stone age archeology. The artifacts we find are a very biased sampling of a 
culture's physical traces. Only certain kinds of objects in certain environ­
ments get preserved. The primary factors determining what gets found and 
what disappears after tens of thousands or millions of years are the per­
ishability or fragility of the material and the nature of the environments in 
which they have been left. In simple terms, this means that stone tools are 
preserved in the fossil record whereas wood and leather tools are not; or 
that paintings on cave walls and stone or ivory carvings are preserved 
whereas body decoration, clothing, wooden sculptures, and so on, are not. 
366 < The Symbolic Species

Most of the symbol use in a society, even excluding language, is not even 
embodied in any material, but only in ceremonies, habits, and rules that gov­
ern everyday life. And what we know about most artifacts is that the vast 
majority are made of perishable materials. This is particularly true of for­
aging peoples, who move continuously from place to place. Like the words 
that prehistoric people spoke, the vast majority of their creative efforts 
would have produced results that vanished with them, or shortly after­
wards. As in so many scientific enterprises, we must always keep in mind 
the caveat that "absence of proof is not proof of absence." 
Imagine the impoverished view of African Pygmy societies we would con­
struct from their bones and stone artifacts alone (excluding those things bor­
rowed from outside societies). We would miss the incredible richness of 
their ritual life, not know of their complex languages, be unaware of their 
use of natural poisons in hunting, and not realize that they had developed 
elaborate musical instruments and musical traditions, among the many 
other things of which we would be ignorant. The simplicity of their tool kit 
as compared to agricultural and metal-using societies might suggest to some 
future archeologist that a great mental gulf separated these people from 
other contemporary peoples. Since there is good reason to suspect that this 
small population could well disappear as a distinct people in the very near 
future, we can imagine this future archeologist interpreting their disap­
pearance, in the context of their few artefacts and smaller brains, to mean 
that their mental inferiority caused them to be supplanted by biologically 
more advanced hominids. 
We know, in this case, that such conclusions would be entirely erro­
neous. The Pygmy people of the forests of Central Africa are every bit our 
physiological and intellectual equals. The differences in nonperishable ma­
terial culture are simply the result of a sampling bias. This particular cul­
tural adaptation might even be argued to be optimal to the extent that, 
unlike the destructive use of this habitat that has come in the name of "de­
velopment," the JYgmy adaptation seems on the whole to be more in bal­
ance with the ecosystem and therefore more sustainable. 
The significance of this argument for interpreting archeological data is 
that artifacts are not reliable indicators of mental abilities, and that lack of 
artifacts does not indicate a lack of the potential to produce them. Infer­
ring intellectual and cultural complexity from preserved artifacts in a very 
different species, living a lifestyle that probably has no clear counterpart in 
recorded anthropology, should be even more prone to error than is sug­
gested by this Pygmy thought experiment. We should need to be even more 
restrained in our tendency to interpret what we don't see. Careful arche-
Terrence W. Deacon > 367

ology adheres to the maxim that the only supportable speculations are those 
that proceed from existing artifacts to what these require in the way of sup­
portive contexts (both physical and social) and what they alone imply about 
their possible uses. Reasoning from absence of artifacts can only be allowed 
in very special contexts. 
In the case of pre-agricultural peoples, we can be pretty sure about the 
introduction of behaviors associated with specialized tools, like fish hooks 
and harpoons, but can't know whether or not cave painting and ivory sculp­
ture were the earliest forms of representational art. The date of the intro­
duction of hunting or scavenging of meat cannot be definitely determined, 
but the point at which we can be sure it already exists can be inferred from 
the earliest appearance of tools designed for cutting flesh: sharpened stone 
tools. We can also argue that before these tools were available such activi­
ties were less efficient, and by further extrapolation, that they probably were 
a less critical component in the subsistence of earlier hominids (if they took 
place at all). 
These caveats are often ignored when it comes to the consideration of 
the evolution of language and intelligence in our ancestors. The assump­
tion that "simple tools mean simple minds" is often the tacit operating prin­
ciple. As a result, technological change and variety are often interpreted as 
evidence of cultural and biological advance, and, conversely, lack of tech­
nological change is often interpreted to reflect lack of advance, which from 
a modem, progress-centered "iewpoint is given the negative connotation 
of stagnation. 
This problem has followed many efforts to extrapolate from the physi­
cal cultural evidence left by our ancestors to their language abilities. For 
example, Horrw erectus can be traced through a fossil record spanning 1.5 
million years, but during this time archeologists have identified a relatively 
stable array of tool types and tool manufacture techniques across a vast range 
of dates and habitats throughout the Old World. In contrast to this appar­
ent stability, within the last one hundred thousand years of Horrw sapiens' 
presence on earth there were increasingly rapid advances in tool­
manufacturing tricks and a growing diversity of tool types. This has often 
been interpreted as evidence of a sort of cognitive stagnation in the erec­
tus epoch of hominid evolution, replaced by a subsequent rapid progress 
in Horrw sapiens. Part of this view may be the result of a misdating prob­
lem. Tools found in Southeast Asia, and originally thought to date to late 
stage erectus populations, reflected a pattern typical of the earliest stages 
in Africa. At this same later time in Africa there appear to be more sophis­
ticated tools. However, recently new dating of the Asian fossils has indicated 
368 < The Symbolic Species

that they are as ancient as the earliest African erectus fossils. Members of 
Homo erectus apparently spanned the extent of the Old World, from Africa 
to Java, within as little as a hundred thousand years after their first ap­
pearance in Africa. When these Asian erectus populations were thought to 
be more modem than their African counterparts, the apparently primitive 
tools found in Asia appeared to suggest a lack of technological innovation 
over a very long time. Some later erectus tools are made of volcanic glass 
and shaped with a chipping logic that involved multiple stages and chipping 
tools, and this is quite different from those found at the beginning of this 
species' evolution. There were also other technological adaptations that ap­
pear only in later stages of erectus evolution. It seems probable from the 
appearance ofhearthlike fire sites discovered in Africa, Europe, and China 
that later members of Homo erectus also used fire. Thus, reports of erec­
tus' mental stagnation are likely exaggerated. 
The pace of change and diversification of erectus' artifacts may pale in 
comparison to that which followed associated with groups of Homo sapi­
ens, but this is not sufficient evidence to suggest that erectus had reached 
some plateau or "grade" of mental evolution, which was only eclipsed by 
later Homo sapiens. Homo erectus achieved a highly successful adaptation. 
Almost certainly it was supported by a complex symbolic culture that al­
lowed them to organize reproduction, work, and social negotiations with an 
efficiency and a flexibility unknown in any previous species. Symbolic com­
munication would have been essential for passing on information about sur­
vival details that were specific to the incredible range of habitats they 
conquered. Their stone tool technology was a very successful adaptation, 
in part, because it needed little modification to succeed in very different 
habitats, from subtropical to subarctic climates. Hunting and butchery do 
not require entirely different tools for different habitats or different species 
of prey animal. What kills or cuts flesh in one place wil do so in another. If 
it works, it doesn't need fixing. This common tool technology could have 
been associated with considerable diversity of cultural and linguistic tradi­
tions. During their tenure on earth, members of Homo erectus used their 
symbolic and stone technologies to adapt to a diverse set of habitats and 
evolved brain sizes that match those of some normal humans living today. 
Now that more accurate dating has placed some of the Asian members of 
this species earlier in time, it also appears that there was a significant trend 
toward brain size expansion from the earliest to the most recent erectus pop­
ulations. Their brains and their symbolic forms of communication were un­
doubtedly co-evolving together, even if the tools they were using were not 
progressing at a comparable pace. Though the forms of symbolic commu-
Terrence W. Deacon > 369

nication used by these people may also not have been improving in any sim­
ple linear sense, it is likely that there was both considerable diversity from 
population to population and considerable change from early to late erec­
tus. Would we have called their symbolic communication "language"? Was 
it spoken? The answer to these questions is almost certainly both yes and 
no, because symbolic communication would not have been confined to one 
facet of social communication, any more than it is in modem societies. Re­
gional variations may have favored an emphasis on vocal symbols in one pop­
ulation and an emphasis on gestural forms in another, but as we have seen 
there are a number of reasons to suspect that vocal communication was not 
as autonomous and elaborate in erectus' societies as in modem societies. 
Another example of overzealous extrapolation from human artifacts to 
human minds has played a major role in theories stressing a relatively re­
cent origin of speech. Many scenarios for the origins of language have fo­
cused on the middle and later stages of the Upper Paleolithic period, 
between about 40,000 and 15,000 years ago, as a source of evidence for the 
first use of symbols. The paleocultures of this period represent a major 
change in the kinds and varieties of technological and cultural artifacts. They 
also include the first surviving evidence of something akin to representa­
tional art. Taken together, these two indications of cultural sophistication 
of a sort more recognizable by modem standards have been cited as signa­
tures of a major revolution in the symbolic capacity of these people-a rev­
olution created by the "discovery" of spoken language. 
Assuming a late discovery of speech also fit with early claims that N e­
anderthal populations lacked modem vocal abilities (and particularly some 
extreme claims that Neanderthals would have been incapable oflanguage). 
Circumstantial evidence of vocal tract structure in Neanderthals had sug­
gested to many researchers that their speech abilities might have been far 
more limited than those of modem humans. Because the major explosion 
of late Stone Age culture occurred only at the end of the Neanderthal oc­
cupation of Europe, and seemed largely to be confined to the more modem­
looking Homo sapiens, it seemed reasonable to see this transition from one 
population to another, from one tool technology to another, and from a pe­
riod without evidence of representational art to one with it as driven by some 
major change in information transmission. However, the timing and loca­
tion of the transition and its association with changes in hominid popula­
tions have also undergone recent revision. Modem humans did not evolve 
from Neanderthals, and the association of variable and sophisticated tools 
with anatomically modem humans and simpler stereotypic tools with more 
archaic humans is not so neat and simple. The classic image of the dumb 
370 < The Symbolic Species

and brutish Neanderthal pitted against a vocally and culturally sophisticated 
Cro-Magnon is not well supported by the evidence. 
More recent finds and more accurate dating of sites have demonstrated 
that the fossils of anatomically modem humans predate many Neanderthal 
fossils, though not in Europe. Evidence of more anatomically modem fa­
cial structure is found in fossils from caves in Africa that date to between 
75,000 and 115,000 years ago. This puts them in the same time range as 
some of the oldest Neanderthal fossils. In the Middle East, anatomically 
modem remains found in a cave at Qafzeh are probably at least 90,000 years 
old. This is particularly devastating to the view of Neanderthals as our an­
cestors because nearby Neanderthal remains, in Kebara Cave, are proba­
bly no more than 60,000 years old. In other words, both types of recent 
humans occupied the same region of the Middle East, and neither were 
using Upper Paleolithic tools or producing paintings and sculptures. 
The demise of the Neanderthals between 30,000 and 35,000 years ago 
is often portrayed in terms of classical survival-of-the-fittest competition: 
the replacement of an inferior subspecies by a superior one. The anatom­
ically modem subspecies is assumed to have been intellectually superior, 
and endowed with complex language abilities and more sophisticated tools. 
The Neanderthals are instead presumed to have been adapted to the rugged 
subarctic climate of the recent Ice Ages, where strength and endurance 
were thought to be more critical than wit and communication. In this sce­
nario, the anatomically modem populations presumably triumphed in an 
ecological competition with the Neanderthals because their superior abil­
ity to communicate made them able more efficiently to adapt to the chang­
ing climate of Europe as the ice sheets receded. There is considerable 
intuitive appeal to the view that Neanderthals were undone because they 
were mentally inferior, lacked modem language, and so had simpler tools; 
a smug comfort in imagining that the culturaly and intellectually superior 
Cro-Magnons vanquished the dumb brutes-that living by one's wits won 
over living by strength and endurance. This is the sort of interpretation that 
prompts Misia ࡃndau to warn of our tendency to read the fossil evidence 
through the lens of a hero myth.22 
For the period that Neanderthals occupied Europe there are mostly 
tools from what is called the Mousterian stone tool industry, one that was 
shared with earlier anatomically modem humans as well in other parts of 
the world, including the Middle East. After the Neanderthals are gone, 
there is indeed a development of more sophisticated types of tools and the 
first appearance of durable art, but is this an incidental temporal sequence 
or did this difference make the difference? These more complicated and 
Terrence W. Deacon > 371

varied tools appeared first in North Africa, tens of thousands of years ear­
lier, and only spread across Europe in an east -to-west direction with anatom­
ically modem populations and as Neanderthals were on the wane. It is 
unclear whether this technological change was a cause or merely a corre­
late of the disappearance of the Neanderthal populations, and Neanderthals 
were not left entirely out of the loop of this cultural modernization. There 
is now clear evidence linking a tool and artifact period called the Chatelper­
ronian with the last of the Neanderthals in France, approximately 34,000 
years ago. These artifacts include diverse tool types, a rich bone and ivory 
industry, and artistically crafted adomments.23 All of this makes it difficult 
to argue that better tools and a more sophisticated culture distinguished one 
of these two near-modem human groups and made the difference between 
its expansion and the other's demise, and it particularly calls into question 
the assumption that this replacement can be blamed on a hypothetical in­
feriority in Neanderthals' language abilities. 
In neurological terms, it seems likely that Neanderthals were fully mod­
em and our mental equals. They had a brain size slightly above modem val­
ues, and a slightly smaller stature, and so we can extrapolate that the internal 
proportions of their brain structures were consistent with a symbolic ca­
pacity equal to anatomically modem humans.24 The argument that the Ne­
anderthal vocal tract was not well suited to produce modem-sounding 
speech may also have been exaggerated, if we cannot rely on the assump­
tion of their primitiveness and some questionable extrapolations from re­
constructed skulls. The discovery of a Neanderthal hyoid bone and an 
analysis of the attachment facets (that should indicate its relative position 
in the throat) have provided evidence that they may have had a more mod­
em vocal apparatus than previously suspected.25 But even if we accept the 
more extreme reconstructions that place the N eanderthal la:rynx very high 
in the throat, we can hardly doubt that they possessed a symbolic commu­
nication system every bit as sophisticated as their anatomically modem 
contemporaries. 
Neanderthals were a local variant population of archaic Homo sapiens, 
isolated by geography and inbred due to their smal numbers. From this per­
spective, there are obvious similarities between the Neanderthal demise and 
the demise of many historically recent indigenous populations during the 
history of conquests in the Old World and the recent colonial expansions 
into the New World and the tropics. Perhaps the closest parallel is to the 
even more rapid decline of native populations in the Americas after Colum­
bus. Although the popular conception is of Conquistadores killing off the 
indigenous peoples in warfare, this actually accounted for only a fraction of 
372 < The Symbolic Species

the massive genocide that ensued. The real culprit, right from the begin­
ning, was disease. Within the first two centuries after contact, it is estimated 
that 80-90 percent of the native populations had been eliminated by dis­
eases introduced from Europe to which these populations had no immu­
nities. The pattern was repeated throughout the globe during the age of 
colonization by European powers, and took a particularly high toll on island 
populations, such as that of Hawaii, because of their relative reproductive 
isolation and inbreeding. 
In the circum-Mediterranean world, there had been millennia of mi­
grations, wars of conquest, long-distance trade relationships, and repeated 
convulsions of epidemics. As a result, Europeans had experienced millen­
nia of selection for resistance to diseases imported one after another from 
many continents, and causing widespread epidemics before burning them­
selves out. The buildup of resistance to these diseases in European de­
scendants was not just a result of elimination of those lacking resistance, 
but it was also supported by the genetic variety provided by extensive in­
terpopulation gene flow. However, when these same diseases were brought, 
en masse, so to speak, to smaller, more isolated and inbred populations, these 
many diseases hit all at once, like plagues upon plagues, and found hosts 
that were minimally resistant. It was not the superiority of the European 
mind, or even of European technology, that cleared the way for the Euro­
peanization of the New World, but their demographic history as part of a 
larger Old World pandemic and pangenic system. 
This historical tragedy bears many similarities to the interaction between 
Neanderthals and the encroachment of anatomically modem "colonists" 
from the South and East. The Neanderthals were scattered in small popu­
lations and were probably genetically isolated from the remainder of H onw 
sapiens for as much as a hundred thousand years, before this second con­
tact in Europe. They were surrounded by an anatomically modem popula­
tion that extended from South Africa to the Near East and parts of Asia. 
And during a comparatively brief period these outsiders began to move into 
Europe. Whether o; not warfare, resource competition, trade, peaceful co­
existence, or even mixing and interbreeding characterized their interaction, 
it seems almost certain that the Neanderthal gene pool would have been 
doomed from the moment of first contact. No special story about cultural 
and technical superiority or the origins oflanguage need be invoked to ac­
count for it. 
Though these comparatively recent events represent the most rapid and 
radical changes observed in the entire Paleolithic, there is no clear biolog­
ical transition to correlate with it. It occurs in the context of populations in 
Terrence W. Deacon > 373

Europe apparently adapting to somewhat more specialized hunting and 
gathering niches-beginning to utilize animal sources other than just the 
herds of ungulates that fed hominids since the dawn of stone tool technol­
ogy, including fish, seals, and mammoths among others-and perhaps ex­
periencing the consequences of their success as their efficient hunting 
progressively depleted precisely those resources they had specialized to ex­
ploit. There is, in short, another set of possible engines underlying rapid 
technological change and variation: changes in ecology, both as a result of 
climate change and as a result of human activity itself. The latter of the two 
has almost certainly become the more dominant force from that point on. 
It can hardly be coincidental that this expansion of anatomically modem 
populations heralds a recent epoch of large animals' extinction which 
claimed such Ice Age giants as the mammoth and the giant sloth. These tran­
sitions and the subsequent transition to agriculture in the Middle East 
probably both reflect a similar dynamic: the need to adapt to irreversible 
changes in the environment brought on in part by prior human adaptations. 
This is a view of "progress" that is not so much improvement as irre­
versibility, adaptations that are so successful that they are self-undermining, 
another twist on the adage, "Necessity is the mother of invention." In gen­
eral, we should not invoke biological evolution as a cause of cultural­
technological innovation where demographic and ecological processes can 
suffice to explain the changes. Conversely, we should not assume that rel­
ative stability of technological adaptations precludes continued biological 
evolution. 
The first cave paintings and carvings that emerged from this period do 
give us the first direct expression of a symbolizing mind. They are the first 
irrefutable expressions of a symbolic process that is capable of conveying a 
rich cultural heritage of images and probably stories from generation to gen­
eration. And they are the first concrete evidence of the storage of such sym­
bolic information outside of a human brain. They mark a change in the 
structure of human cultures at least to the extent that they are evidence of 
the use of media that have persisted to the present, but they don't corre­
late with any "advance" in human biology or neurology, and they probably 
don't demonstrate the origins of symbolic communication or even spoken 
language. Perhaps the effectiveness of new tools depleted a once-sustainable 
food source and forced these people to discover radical alternatives sup­
ported by new tool innovations; perhaps a changing foraging ecology altered 
group size and/or residence patterns, allowing people to accumulate and 
pass down objects other than just tools; perhaps the interaction of long­
isolated African and European populations spurred change in response to 
374 < The Symbolic Species

exchange of information and technology; perhaps the presence of a medium 
like ivory or the regular use of caves in a cooler climate provided a hitherto 
unavailable permanent medium for expression; or perhaps an abundant 
source of game simply led to a people with more time on their hands. 
The point of mentioning these alternatives is not to prove one or the other 
of these to be relevant, but to serve as a reminder that our ancestors were 
not inevitably headed toward painting, sculpture, and more varied and or­
namented artifacts. The appearance of these things just a few dozen thou­
sand years ago is more likely a reflection of incidental ecological changes 
and access to more durable media than it is an indication of some revolu­
tion in communication. Indeed, probably many of the events we view as ad­
vances, from our hindsight perspective, were desperate responses to the 
environmental degradation that human foraging success itself brought on. 
Nevertheless, though the invention of durable icons may not indicate any 
revolution in human biology, it was the beginning of a new phase of cul­
tural evolution-one that is much more independent of individual human 
brains and speech, and one that has led to a modern runaway process which 
may very well prove to be unsustainable into the distant future. Whether 
or not it will be viewed in future hindsight as progress or just another short­
term, irreversible, self-undermining trend in hominid evolution cannot yet 
be predicted. That we consider this self-undermining process advance­
ment, and refer to the stable, successful, and until just recently, sustainable 
foraging adaptation of Horrw erectus as "stagnation," may be a final irony 
to be played out by future evolution. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 375

C 
H 
A 
P 
T 
E 
R 
T 
W 
E 
L 
V 
E 
Symbolic Origins 
. . .  the human understanding is greatly indebted to the passions. 
-Jean Jacques Rousseau, Discourse on Inequality 
A Passion to Communicate 
W
e have some idea what happened to the brain and body in the 
process of language evolution, and we have an estimate of when this 
began and how it developed in our prehistory, but none of this an­
swers a more nagging question. Why? What was the spark that kindled the 
evolution of symbolic communication? If symbolic communication did not 
arise due to a "hopeful monster" mutation of the brain, it must have been 
selected for. But by what factors of hominid life? How can we discover the 
context of this initial push into such a novel form of communication? Can 
the forces favoring such an unprecedented evolutionary adaptation be re­
constructed in hindsight? Or are the conditions underlying the critical tran­
sition from indexical to symbolic communication, and from animal to human 
376

minds, forever lost to analysis along with with the flesh, blood, and day-to­
day behaviors of our fossil ancestors? 
On the cover of the Cambridge Encyclopedia of Human Evolution and 
also on the cover of the book Ape Man, a companion volume to the televi­
sion series by the same name (produced for the A&E Television network), 
there appear images of"morphed" faces that are not quite ape and not quite 
human.1 "Morphing" is a computer image manipulation whereby one gen­
erates a spectrum of intermediates between different images that, if ani­
mated, smoothly transform the one into the other. These two cover 
illustrations depict half-morphed stages between an ape and a human face. 
The eerie realism of these images resonates with a deep predisposition for 
what we might call "reconstructive hindsight." In thinking about evolution, 
we naturally imagine a sort of morphing from one species to another. But 
we should be wary of letting our images of evolutionary change direct our 
thinking about it, because hominid evolution doesn't resemble a 5-million­
year morphing from a chimplike species to Horrw sapiens. There never was 
a creature who was half-ape, half-human, who was a bit more dull than most 
people but slightly more savvy than most chimps, and who communicated 
with a half-language. We can't just extrapolate from present species and their 
adaptations back to a state before language and culture. We must instead 
try to reconstruct the adaptations of our ancestral species from principles 
of behavioral ecology, physiology, and information about brain structure and 
function. 
From the perspective of hindsight, almost everything looks as though it 
might be relevant for explaining the language adaptation. Looking for the 
adaptive benefits oflanguage is like picking only one dessert in your favorite 
bakery: there are too many compelling options to choose from. What as­
pects of human social organization and adaptation wouldn't benefit from 
the evolution of language? From this vantage point, symbolic communica­
tion appears "overdetermined." It is as though everything points to it. A 
plausible story could be woven from almost any of the myriad of advantages 
that better communication could offer: organizing hunts, sharing food, 
communicating about distributed food sources, planning warfare and de­
fense, passing on toolmaking skills, sharing important past experiences, es­
tablishing social bonds between individuals, manipulating potential sexual 
competitors or mates, caring for and training young, and on and on. This 
apparent lack of constraint on what constitutes a plausible hypothesis is one 
source of the frustration that caused past researchers to be less than char­
itable toward language origins scenarios. Could any significant reproduc­
tive advantage conferred by language be considered a plausible candidate 
Terrence W. Deacon > 377

for its prime mover? What would make some more plausible, more sup­
portable, or more falsifiable than others? Though many of the myriad uses 
for symbolic communication are probably sufficient to provide selection for 
enhancing symbolic learning and associated speech abilities, they already 
assume a form of symbolic communication that is intrinsically superior to 
all preceding forms of social communication. This is precisely what we can­
not assume to explain the origin of symbolic communication. 
Though modem languages exhibit these assumed communication ad­
vantages, the first symbolic systems were almost certainly not full-blown lan­
guages, to say the least. We would probably not even recognize them as 
languages if we encountered them today, though we would recognize them 
as different in striking ways from the communication of other species. In 
their earliest forms, it is likely that they lacked both the efficiency and the 
flexibility that we attribute to modem language. Indeed, I think it is far more 
realistic to assume that the first symbolic systems would have paled in effi­
ciency and flexibility in comparison to the rich and complex endowment of 
vocal calls and nonverbal, nonsymbolic gestural displays exhibited by any 
of our primate cousins. The first symbol learners probably still carried on 
most of their social communication through call-and-display behaviors 
much like those of modem apes and monkeys. Symbolic communication 
was likely only a small part of social communication. 
But that's only half the problem. As we have seen, even learning the sim­
plest symbolic relationships places heavy demands on a rather questionable 
learning bias. In this trade-off lies the explanation for the failure of lan­
guagelike, symbolic communication to evolve in all but one species. The 
cognitive requirements for efficient associative learning are in many ways 
in conflict with those that would enhance symbol learning. Attention to 
higher-order, more distributed associations and away from those based on 
temporal-spatial correlations may render these other forms of learning 
somewhat less efficient. And to learn symbols it's necessary to invest im­
mense effort in learning associations that aren't much use until the whole 
system of interdependent associations is sorted out. In other words, for a 
long time in this symbol-learning process nothing useful can come of it. Only 
after a complete group (in the logical sense) of interdefined symbols is as­
sembled can any one be used symbolically. To approach most learning prob­
lems with the expectations and biases that would aid symbol learning would 
be very inefficient for most species. Both the difficulty and the costs oflearn­
ing symbols have kept other species from evolving symbolic abilities. Only 
if there were significant advantages to symbolic communication, that greatly 
outweighed these costs, could there be selection that both favored the un-
378 < The Symbolic Species

usual learning strategy and compensated for the decline in effectiveness of 
others. 
Seen in this light, the problem of explaining symbolic origins is much 
more challenging. Even a small, inefficient, and inflexible symbol system is 
very difficult to acquire, depends on significant external social support in 
order to be learned, and forces one to employ very counterintuitive learn­
ing strategies that may interfere with most nonsymbolic learning processes. 
The first symbol systems were also likely fragile modes of communication: 
difficult to learn, inefficient, slow, inflexible, and probably applied to a very 
limited communicative domain. And we must assume that the vast major­
ity of social communication was mediated by a more or less typical primate 
repertoire of nonsymbolic vocal, olfactory, and gestural displays. If the ini­
tial symbolic adaptation was neither more efficient nor more flexible than 
preexisting forms of communication, then the incredible power that mod­
ern languages confer on their users cannot be invoked to explain the origin 
of language. Neurologically and semiotically, symbolic abilities do not nec­
essarily represent more efficient communication, but instead represent a 
radical shift in communicative strategy. It is this shift, not any improve­
ments, that we eventually need to explain. 
This form of communication must have provided a significant selective 
advantage to the majority of those who employed it. In what ways would 
symbolic communication, even if very rudimentary and inefficient, provide 
a means of adaptation that would be unavailable using other forms of com­
munication, even if far more sophisticated and efficient in comparison? A 
generally less efficient form of communication could only have gained a 
foothold if it provided something different, a communicative function that 
was not available even in a much-elaborated system of vocal and gestural 
indices. Given these disadvantages, what other possible selective advantage 
of symbolizing could possibly have led a group of hominids to incur such 
costs? What difference could have offset the enormous costs in cognitive 
effort, time, social organization, and reduced efficiency? To answer these 
questions, we need to know something about the context in which the first 
symbolic communication evolved. 
Before we can begin to understand the circumstances that provided the 
selection pressures to favor such a radical shift in communicative strategy, 
we need to understand more generally what circumstances tend to produce 
significant evolutionary changes in communication in other species. In gen­
eral, this occurs in the context of intense sexual selection. In the classical 
terminology of ethology, the process whereby some behavior became pro­
gressively modified and specialized for its communicative function was 
Terrence W. Deacon > 379

called "ritualization," by analogy to human ritual and ceremonial embell­
ishments of communication. The elaborate tail feather display of a male pea­
cock, the hanging-upside-down display of a male sulfur-crested cockatoo, 
or the straw archway elaborately decorated with shiny stones and bright­
colored objects pilfered from human societies by a male bower bird, all are 
elaborations of communication that have been driven by sexual competi­
tion between males in order to attract females. But it is not only males that 
may be affected. Consider also the incredible part-swimming, part-flying, 
part-walking display of male and female grebes as they run in paired for­
mation across the surface of a lake, or the head-bobbing conversations of 
mated penguins meeting on a crowded rookery. These are also forms of sex­
ual communication that evolved to negotiate. mate choice and pair-bond 
maintenance. But in these cases, the behaviors are not just used by males 
to attract prospective mates, they are used by both sexes to assess each other. 
In all these examples, we see the evolutionary elaboration of behaviors 
whose only significant function is communication. They occur at these 
times because communication is somehow more important for these con­
texts. How do the specific requirements of assessing prospective mates and 
choosing mates drive these evolutionary trends? 
In evolution, the transmission of genes is the bottom line, and the only 
way to do this is to reproduce or to help close relatives reproduce. But re­
production in complex animals often involves a lot more than just produc­
ing a fertilized ovum. This is particularly true for birds and mammals, where 
parental care can be a crucial part of reproducing. Not only must an ani­
mal grow and mature to the point that it is physiologically competent to re­
produce; it also may need considerable social experience to be successful. 
When caring for offspring demands a contribution from both sexes, com­
peting for access to many mates or finding mates with the best physical traits 
has less of an impact on reproductive output than does direct care of one's 
mate and offspring. The need to exchange information about parenting abil­
ity is similar in each sex, whereas obtaining information about desirable 
physical traits is not crucial. Even in species where only one sex is neces­
sary to care for the offspring (typically, but not always, the female), as is the 
case in the majority of mammals, the opposite sex (typically males) is not 
freed from the need for maturity and experience. Natural selection for 
basic survival abilities is amplified and supplemented by sexual selection for 
"desirable" traits in these cases. If one sex is essentially freed from the need 
to care for offspring, its energy can be redirected to maximizing copulatory 
access to the opposite sex by competing for optimal feeding territories or 
380 < The Symbolic Species

directly competing over mates. This can have significant reproductive con­
sequences, and in such a case the information-gathering needs of males and 
females may be quite different. 
The most common pattern of reproductive social behavior among mam­
mals is polygynous mating. In most mammals, the immense physiological 
and time investments of pregnancy and lactation make females and their 
access to food the limiting resources. Females make the most of their re­
productive effort, not by producing as many babies as possible, but by di­
recting as much support as possible to each infant. For a male in such a 
species, however, the number of fertile females that can be impregnated 
determines his reproductive potential. From the female's perspective, since 
only one male is likely to impregnate her at any one time, and all her ef­
forts will be directed toward his progeny, she must be much more selective 
in who she accepts as a mate than is the male. This tends to promote the 
evolution of complex means of extracting information about prospective 
male mates, and of means for producing information that can influence and 
otherwise manipulate the female's choice. In other words, males try to com­
municate information that favors them, and females try to receive infor­
mation that gives them a basis to choose between the males and cut through 
any potential misinformation provided by them. 
Often, this transmission and receipt of information is "incidental" to 
other activities, to the extent that communication is not the sole function. 
This is the case for fighting behavior. Where extensive competition exists 
among males for access to fertile females, threats and fighting behavior are 
common between males. Such species are often said to engage in "tourna­
ment'' behaviors. Although the point of male aggression in these conditions 
is to displace an adversary who is also vying for the same territory or the 
same mates, females can learn a good deal about the physical and mental 
abilities of the competing males by observing their confrontation, and thus 
make their choice based on performance. The success of one male or his 
ability to exclude all others from a valued territory may even be informa­
tion enough. If the competition accomplishes the assessment for the female, 
the details of what ensued in the process may add little other useful infor­
mation. The relative fighting succes of males is a representation-specifi­
cally, an index-of their comparable differences. As a result, the direct 
communication between male and female in such highly combative polyg­
ynous species may be minimal. If a female has sufficient information to de­
termine that a male has been the most successful defender of a territory or 
a group of females (something that may be implicit in the social context), 
Terrence W. Deacon > 381

then little else about his state may require cautious interpretation. There 
will be little selection pressure for females to develop special means of get­
ting more information from the males, or for the males to provide the fe­
males with any additional information about their physical state. Their 
communication mostly involves coordinating copulatory behavior-some­
thing that can be accomplished with a minimum of assessment and analy­
sis, and just a few relatively automatic responses. This is why, from a human 
perspective, sexual communication and copulation in highly polygynous 
species often appear as perfunctory acts with few preparatory or follow-up 
interactions. 
In contrast to the minimal communication between males and females 
in tournament systems, the communication between competing males 
under these circumstances may be extensive and highly elaborate. If a male 
in a highly polygynous and aggressive species misjudges another's physical 
prowess or willingness to risk physical harm, the consequences can be se­
rious. One possible outcome is getting needlessly injured. Iflosing and being 
harmed are inevitable, it's better not to have engaged in conflict in the first 
place, since this may diminish future reproductive chances. Alternatively, 
if overcoming one's opponent is very likely and the chance of harm slight, 
then failure to engage is costly in direct reproductive terms. For these rea­
sons, it may also be advantageous to provide misinformation to an oppo­
nent, to lead him to make a mistake in judgment; and inversely, it may be 
advantageous to check the information again and again in different ways, 
for signs of inconsistency. 
When the reproductive and health stakes are both high, there is intense 
selection pressure to provide high levels of disinformation to competitors 
and to elaborate and prolong the assessment process before aggressive en­
gagement in order to maximize the opportunity of seeing through the other's 
deception to gain a reliable estimate of the likely outcome. These comple­
mentary pressures cause both deception and detection adaptations to es­
calate over the course of evolution. This can produce a kind of short-term 
"runaway" process that is finally stopped when the other costs associated 
with continued elaboration of communication begin to diminish any value 
of doing a little better than one's competitors. In other words, spending too 
much time and energy deciding whether or not to attack or defend can be 
just as costly in reproductive terms as making periodic mistakes. 
Very different constraints and forces of sexual selection influence the evo­
lution of communicative behaviors in species where both males and females 
must care for and defend their offspring. Because of their common repro-
382 < The Symbolic Species

ductive interests, dual-parenting species tend to form cooperative pairs 
with strong exclusive (emotional) attachments to one another-pair bond­
ing. Nevertheless, the underlying dynamic of the evolution of communica­
tion is the same: where the potential for inaccurate assessment of the other 
is high, and the potential costs of misjudgment or the advantages of de­
ception are also high (in reproductive terms), communication will tend to 
be more elaborate and more complex. Pair-bonding species are under pres­
sure to assess the other's physical condition, resource defense capabilities, 
care-giving abilities, and likely fidelity. 
However, the interests of prospective mates are not entirely symmetric. 
A male can still improve his reproduction by cuckolding another male (who 
will consequently raise young that are not his own), and a female might be 
able to maximize both care-giving and genetically valued traits by soliciting 
copulations from multiple males, so long as at least one remains to care for 
her young. From the other's perspective, however, either deception is re­
productively costly. A philandering male is more likely to abandon one fe­
male for another, and a solicitous female is likely to cause her mate to spend 
time and energy supporting other males' offspring. Any tendencies that 
allow these deceptions to slip by unchecked will be strongly selected out. 
Evolution wil therefore favor mechanisms for avoiding getting stuck with 
an incompetent, unreliable, or unfaithful mate. This requires that one check 
out prospective mates very carefully ahead of time, and continually recheck 
them throughout the parenting relationship. Of course, prevention is more 
advantageous than post facto reliance on punitive responses, once the dam­
age is already done, and so courtship is the most important period in the 
relationship for accurate assessment. 
Thus, it is at the point in the life cycle where choice of mate takes place 
that evolutionary theory predicts we should find the greatest elaboration of 
communicative behaviors and psychological mechanisms in both pair­
bonding species and polygynous species, though the communicators and the 
messages may cJ!ffer significantly in these two extremes. Between these ex­
tremes there are many more complex mixtures of reproductive social 
arrangements that add new possibilities and uncertainties, and thus further 
intensifY selection on the production and assessment of signals. This is es­
pecially obvious in primate species living in large multi-male/multi-female 
groups, such as chimpanzees and baboons. In these species, communica­
tion about mate access and mate choice additionally involves group dy­
namics such as developing and sustaining coalitions between cooperating 
males or females, even as other aspects of physiology (for example, the 
Terrence W. Deacon > 383

highly arousing sexual swelling and solicitous behavior of females in estrus) 
act to undermine these relationships. 
Why Human Societies Shouldn't Work 
Though, on the surface, we might characterize the mating pattern of 
Horrw sapiens as pair bonding, this is a misleading oversimplification. Every 
fan of human drama-from Sophocles to Shakespeare to television soap 
opera-knows implicitly that the relationship between the sexes in human 
societies is at the mercy of powerful social and sexual undercurrents, which 
both form and destroy human reproductive bonds and so constantly 
threaten the facade of social stability. The inevitable conflict between sex­
uality and the constraints of social cooperation has led to elaborate means 
of regulating reproduction, and has produced the great variety of sanctioned 
reproductive arrangements in present-day human societies. This aspect of 
social life is where I suggest we focus our initial efforts at identifying the 
selection pressures that led to the evolution of such an unlikely and novel 
means of social communication as the use of symbols. Understanding how 
we differ in the social negotiation of reproductive activities is likely to pro­
vide the most important clue to the forces that shaped our social commu­
nication. 
Is there anything in the social context of hominid reproductive choices 
as unusual, compared to other species, as our distinctive mode of commu­
nicating? We are forced to tum to modem humans for the first clues, since 
the evidence of social behavior in our ancestors is only circumstantial at best. 
But despite the potential for getting misled by our own anthropocentric bi­
ases, this may not be a bad place to start, because it is likely that whatever 
first selected for this otherwise anomalous form of communication is still 
with us in some form. What trick of social engineering could have been so 
powerful and so peculiar in the history of animal communication that it re­
quired a totally novel form of communication? Such a trick--one that no 
other species has hit upon-is not likely to have been cast away too quickly 
in the subsequent evolution of our species. 
What do we see when we take an "outsider's" view of human reproduc­
tion and sexual selection? We have a tendency to view other animals' social 
and reproductive relationships in the image of our own, and therefore to 
perceive what we do as normal reproductive behavior; but such compar­
isons are almost universally erroneous. We humans engage in some quite 
anomalous patterns of social interaction around the problem of sexual re­
production when compared to other species. This has important implica-
384 < The Symbolic Species

tions for that other human anomaly, language. To see how unusual we are 
in this regard, we need to look into that favorite distinction of anthropolo­
gists, the difference between mating and marriage. Consider three of the 
most consistent facts about human reproductive patterns: 
1. Both males and females usually contribute effort toward the rearing of 
their offspring, though often to differing extents and in very different 
ways. 
2. In all societies, the great majority of the adult males and females are 
bound by long-term, exclusive sexual access rights and prohibitions to par­
ticular individuals of the opposite sex. 
3. They maintain these exclusive sexual relationships while living in mod­
est to large-sized, multi-male, multi-female, cooperative social groups. 
This pattern, of course, refers to marriage in its most general sense, 
though I do not mean to imply that monogamy is the rule-far from it­
rather only that adult males and females are assigned (sometimes by their 
kin and sometimes by their own choosing, with the consent of the larger 
social group) to specific mates, often for life, and that this entails explicit 
exclusion of sexual access by other group members. 2 Exactly who is included 
or excluded may differ from society to society, particularly along the polyg­
ynous dimension (e.g., one male, many female mates), but marriages every­
where have reproductive rights and obligations as their central content, and 
so specifY the reproductive status of the marriage partners within the pa­
rameters of the wider community, both family and nonfamily. Marriage is 
more than a reproductive arrangement, because it additionally establishes 
new rights and obligations for the larger kin groups to which marrying in­
dividuals belong. 
There are explicit rules about who can and can't marry, and these rules 
have some highly predictable general patterns. In the vast majority of so­
cieties, incestuouࡄ marriage is prohibited, though what constitutes incest 
differs somewhat from society to society. Also, in all but a very few societies 
in the world, two males almost never have simultaneous sexual access to the 
same reproducing female.3 A major factor contributing to differences in 
marriage patterns in different societies is the comparative difficulty of ob­
taining and defending reproductive resources, including women in many 
societies. Thus, tacit and explicit marriage agreements are about repro­
ductive access not only in the direct sense, but also in the broader sense in 
which kin group cooperation, property rights, and promises of mutual aid 
and defense must be understood as factors critical to reproductive success. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 385

In societies that rely mostly on foraged foods, as did all of our prehis­
toric ancestors until just ten or fifteen thousand years ago, the opportuni­
ties to accumulate, appropriate, and defend resources are minimal. Thus, 
group warfare, competition for polygyny, consolidation of wealth or politi­
cal power, and so on, were unlikely to have played any significant role in 
the early stages of symbolic communication. There is one feature of human 
foraging ecologies that has always stood out as specially related to human 
origins, because it is uncharacteristic of most other primate societies and 
because it is associated so closely with many indices of the rise of peculiarly 
humanlike behaviors. This is the use of meat. Recently, the classic "man the 
hunter" theories of human origins have been strongly criticized as too nar­
rowly focused on the activities of less than half the members Qf a society, 
and because there is a compelling argument to be made for scavenging as 
the earliest hominid meat-use adaptation. Yet the importance of this radi­
cal shift in foraging ecology cannot be ignored. The appearance of the first 
stone tools nearly 2.5 million years ago almost certainly correlates with a 
radical shift in foraging behavior in order to gain access to meat. And this 
clearly marks the beginnings of the shift in selection pressures associated 
with changes in the brain relevant for symbolic communication. Something 
about this complex of adaptations is central to the rise of Horrw symholi­
cus. But what? The key to unlocking this mystery, I think, does not have to 
do with the cognitive difficulties of hunting or the use of communication 
or increased intelligence for toolmaking. What is important about this shift 
to a novel food source is the unprecedented demands it placed on the 
whole fabric of social group organization. 
Women in foraging societies provide at least as large a fraction of the calo­
ries in the diet as do the men, but a mother carrying a dependent infant 
makes a comparatively poor scavenger and an even poorer hunter. She suf­
fers from .reduced mobility and the difficulty of employing stealth with a 
young child or infant in tow. Even more limiting is the threat from com­
peting predators and scavengers, who are also attracted by a kill, and might 
easily tum their attentions to a relatively poorly defended infant. Conse­
quently, men can provide access to a resource that is otherwise unavailable 
to women and children. Why should this introduce any special conditions 
into hominid social evolution? 
If meat provides a necessary component of the diet of foraging people, 
even if just to get through otherwise lean times when vegetable sources are 
poor, a woman foraging with one or more children would be unable to pro­
vide adequate essential resources. Under these circumstances, mothers 
with infants are dependent on hunting by the males for an important and 
386 < The Symbolic Species

concentrated food source to supplement other gathered foods. But in any 
species where males provide a significant contribution of resources to help 
raise infants, there are special selection pressures on certainty of sexual ex­
clusivity and predictability of male provisioning. A female who can't count 
on at least one male will have a high probability of losing her children to 
starvation and disease, and a male who can't rely on exclusive sexual access 
to at least some female will have a high probability of supporting the ge­
netic fitness of other males. 
In most mammalian species, sexual access is either determined by rank 
and ongoing competition, and results in polygyny; or else it is a result of a 
courtship process in which two individuals become "attached" to one an­
other, and then isolate themselves from other members of their species. In 
order to maximize paternity and minimize cuckoldry in competitive polyg­
ynous social groups, males wil threaten and fight with potential sexual ri­
vals. Rival males display and threaten the dominant individuals, and wil 
engage in direct physical contests or fights in efforts to depose them and 
gain access to females. In pair-bonding species, aggression is also a means 
of enforcing sexual exclusion, but it is often employed by both sexes to keep 
same-sex interlopers away from their shared territory and their mate. Under 
these conditions, long-term-even life-long-sexual exclusion can be com­
mon. Thus, the social mechanisms for maintaining sexual exclusivity in 
other mammals are ubiquitous, and exclusive sexual access is often main­
tained by the threat of physical harm. Almost certainly, such sexually moti­
vated defenses or attacks are among the most intense emotional events in 
an animal's life. 
Human reliance on resources that are relatively unavailable to females 
with infants selects not only for cooperation between a child's father and 
mother but also for the cooperation of other relatives and friends, includ­
ing elderly individuals and juveniles, who can be relied upon for assistance. 
The special demands of acquiring meat and caring for infants in our own 
evolution togethࡅr contribute the underlying impetus for the third charac­
teristic feature of human reproductive patterns: cooperative group living. 
Group living is not uncommon in the rest of the primates and in other 
mammals generally, but it is almost exclusively associated with polygynous 
reproductive patterns, or very special contexts in which nest sites or breed­
ing grounds are a very limiting resource.4 Reproductive access and repro­
ductive exclusion are determined by ongoing competition in a social group. 
Males are able successfully to exclude others from sexual access for only a 
short time, when they are in their prime, so reproductive exclusivity is in­
evitably transient and unpredictable in mixed social groups. This is one rea-
Terrence W. Deacon > 387

son why, under conditions where males must put a significant part of their 
energy into caring for offspring, male and female pairs tend to become iso­
lated. The other reason is that a male contribution to the offspring is more 
critical in niches where resources are scarce and a larger social group would 
not have enough to go around. In human foraging societies, these condi­
tions are not linked and pair bonding occurs in the context of group living. 
Resources are scarce enough that females can only rear their offspring with 
male support, and meat can only be acquired by groups of men. This pits 
two critical reproductive problems against one another: the importance of 
pair isolation to maximize the probability of sexual fidelity, and the impor­
tance of group size for access to a critical resource. 
From foraging societies to agricultural societies to industrial societies, the 
same general sexual exclusion and residential patterns persist, despite shifts 
in the probability of polygyny. What is common to all is something that is 
exceedingly rare in other species: cooperative, mixed-sex social groups, 
with significant male care and provisioning of offspring, and relatively sta­
ble patterns of reproductive exclusion, mostly in the form of monogamous 
relationships. Reproductive pairing is not found in exactly this pattern in 
any other species. Why not? What's so special or peculiar about this social 
arrangement? I think that the answer to this question offers important hints 
about the initial impetus for language evolution, though probably not in ways 
that anyone might expect. This pattern of social-sexual organization is rare 
because it tends to undermine itself in the course of evolution. The com­
bination of provisioning and social cooperation produces a highly volatile 
social structure that is highly susceptible to disintegration. 
In evolutionary terms, a male who tends to invest significant time and 
energy in caring for and providing food for an infant must have a high prob­
ability of being its father, otherwise his expenditure of time and energy wil 
benefit the genes of another male. As a result, indiscriminate protection and 
provisioning of infants will not persist in a social group when there are other 
reproducing males around who do not provision, but instead direct al their 
efforts toward copulation. Group size is an important factor because the 
chance of cuckoldry increases with increasing numbers, even when most 
are pair-bonded. The probability of cuckoldry should translate into the 
male's probability of abandoning a given female, so the complementary re­
productive dilemma faced by females in these conditions is equally vexing. 
In human foraging societies, meat offers a concentrated food source 
that is available far more reliably than fruit from season to season; but pre­
cisely when it should be most important for a female, when she is nursing 
388 < The Symbolic Species

an infant, she is least able to get it on her own. In order to be able to rely 
on this food source, she needs reliable provisioning from an individual or 
individuals not encumbered with an infant; a male or males. But a male 
' 
predisposed to provision females with whom he has copulated, will be an 
unreliable provider the more sexual access he has to other females. Coop­
erative hunting and scavenging by groups of males who each are provi­
sioning one or more females and infants inevitably requires that groups of 
females live and forage cooperatively as well. Group living is a disadvan­
tage both because of the proximity of many other sexually active females 
and because of their competing demands for the fruits of the hunt. In the 
face of these imminent reproductive threats, a female must find ways to en­
sure that some male will reliably provide her with meat and to minimize 
the probability of his opportunities for philandery. 
These problems are further amplified in a context where males and fe­
males forage apart a significant fraction of the time. This is inevitable if hunt­
ing and scavenging are an important method of procuring food. Males 
pursuing meat on the savannah can't defend against cuckoldry, can't pro­
tect females from abduction, and can't protect their infants from infanti­
cide by outside males. Females can't ensure that the males they depend on 
for meat are not copulating with females from another group and giving 
them meat that would otherwise have supported their own offspring. Hunt­
ing and provisioning go together, but they produce an inevitable evolu­
tionary tension that is inherently unstable, especially in the context of group 
living. Besides ourselves, only social carnivores seem to live this way. 
Most carnivores undertake significant food provisioning. But because 
hunting is a skill that requires a relatively mature body and takes a long time 
to learn effectively, there is a considerable period in the lifetime of carni­
vores when the young are too old to survive on mother's milk and too young 
to hunt for themselves. Many species cache their babies in dens and hunt 
for food that they wil bring back in some form to feed to the young. In some 
ways this is analogous to the situation of nesting birds. In some species of 
carnivores, males and females will pair-bond, and one will stay in the den 
(more often the female) while the other hunts and brings back some of the 
meat for the remaining mate and offspring. In other cases, where young can 
be safely cached, a single female can even raise her young without additional 
male investment. Such "single parenting" is common in some of the larger 
cats, such as the leopard and the cheetah. But there are also many carni­
vore species that engage in cooperative group hunting. Hunting in groups 
makes it possible to employ a wider range of hunting strategies and to prey 
Terrence W. Deacon > 389

on a wider class of animals, including those much larger than the predator 
itself. Social carnivores include wild dogs, wolves, hyenas, lions, and meer­
cats, among others. Certain reproductive and ecological conditions must be 
met for cooperative hunting with provisioning to be a mutually reinforcing 
aspect of an evolutionarily stable reproductive pattern. A few examples can 
help to demonstrate this. 
Lions are a well-known species of social hunters, but the cooperation and 
provisioning that take place largely occur among females within a pride who 
are likely all closely related (sisters, half sisters, aunts, nieces). Two and rarely 
three males may cooperate to take over a pride of females and their young 
from other males, and will defend it against intruders, but they play little 
role in provisioning the young. The females, however, may take turns re­
maining with cubs while the remainder of the adult females hunt cooper­
atively. Although the spoils of the hunt may be made available to the 
offspring of another female, she is a close relative. This relationship is also 
eventually reciprocated, since all adult females are reproducing, and ma­
ternity certainty is not in question. Because of the females' kin-based com­
mon reproductive interests, their lifetime continuity of membership in a 
pride, their reciprocally shared defense and feeding of offspring, the males 
are largely irrelevant to offspring care, except in one way. 
Male lions spend a good deal of time and risk their lives to defend the 
pride against other males, because the usurpers will likely kil the cubs. This 
infanticide brings lactating females back into estrus sooner and guarantees 
that the males will not be defending cubs who are not their own. Because 
males do not provide any significant provisioning to the cubs and have a 
common interest in female defense, cooperation between two or even three 
males in pride defense is also favored in evolutionary terms, so long as each 
has a roughly equal opportunity to mate. Common reproductive interests 
promote the evolution of cooperative behaviors between males and between 
females, for different reasons. The ability of the females to provision cubs 
without male contribution eliminates the value of paternity certainty, and 
thereby reduces the potentially disruptive effect of male-male copulatory 
competition within the pride. 
In a few carnivore species-for example, wild dogs and wolves-it is 
common for a cooperative hunting pack to be made up of both males and 
females. After a kill they may carry bits of a carcass back to a home den, or 
devour it on the spot and regurgitate it later to feed cubs, the nursing 
mother, and nonhunting den mates. Young pups will induce the hunters to 
regurgitate by nipping at their mouths and mobbing them. The mother may 
also feed on regurgitated food. The crucial feature of these cooperative 
390 < The Symbolic Species

hunting arrangements is that there is typically only a single reproducing fe­
male, who is often also the mother of many of the young hunters. Other fe­
males are kept from attaining sexual receptivity by a combination of social 
behaviors and (probably) pheromones from the breeding female. Even in­
fanticide of "illegitimate" pups may be used by dominant females to main­
tain their monopoly on the pack's resources. Only when the mother dies or 
becomes too old to prevent another fully mature female from becoming sex­
ually active will she be replaced. There is also typically only a single repro­
ducing male in a pack.5 He also uses threat of attack, copulatory exclusion 
(copulatory "locking" together of male and female genitals for a period 
after mating to minimize sperm competition from potential rivals), and 
(possibly) pheromonal signals to suppress sexual behaviors of the other less 
dominant males. 
Unlike lions, male wild dogs and wolves play a major role in provision­
ing the young even when they are not the father of any pups. There is prob­
ably reasonable certainty of caring for others' offspring in these 
circumstances. This might appear to be an unstable reproductive strategy 
if looked at only in a single slice of time. However, as the mated pairs age 
and are replaced by younger ones, most individuals will get an opportunity 
to reproduce, and when they do, they will enjoy the benefits that group sup­
port confers by being able to raise litters that are much larger than a single 
female or mated pair alone could raise. Both males and females in these 
species employ a reproductive "strategy" that has one feature in common 
with that employed by males in highly polygynous, "tournament" species. 
Because of the intense male-male competition, males in highly polygynous 
species don't gain access to females except for a very short period late in 
their lives when they have reached their peak fighting ability, but during 
this brief period they may be immensely successful reproducers. This "wait­
ing" strategy can also lead to very prolific reproduction in social carnivores 
that rise in status to become reproducers. 
The sociality of wild dogs and wolves may also gain additional evolu­
tionary support from kin selection, in the form of"helper-at-the-nest" be­
havior. This works best when the provisioning individuals are siblings of the 
infants they provision. If the chances of successful reproduction are slim 
on your own, it pays to contribute to your parents' sure thing. Offspring only 
leave to reproduce on their own when they are mature enough to have the 
possibility of procuring their own breeding territory and social group, when 
the advantages of sticking around are providing diminishing returns, or 
when the chances of inheriting the home territory are slim. 
Wild dogs are far more efficient hunters in large groups, and eventually 
Terrence W. Deacon > 391

as the dominant reproducing males and females age they are replaced by 
younger individuals who at last can reap the benefits of being the core of a 
successful pack. Though they may not have reproduced for many years of 
their adult life, once they are reproducing they can be exceptionally suc­
cessful, producing large litters in which the chance of survival to maturity 
will be quite good, given the support from a whole pack. They can make up 
in a short time for their "patience" earlier. If considerable excess meat were 
being produced, it would be advantageous for individuals to split off from 
the main group and start a separate pack rather than continue to provision 
another's offspring, relative or not. Otherwise, contributing to the repro­
duction of other pack members, biding their time, is the most promising 
route to successful reproduction for nondominant males and females. 
These interesting exceptions to the rule that "male provisioning of young 
is mutually exclusive oflarge group size and social cooperation" serve to clar­
ify the underlying principles of such a relationship. Group living and male 
provisioning can occur together only in instances where reproductive ac­
cess is completely limited and unambiguous, as in the case of social carni­
vores. There can be no stable compromise pattern unless this principle is 
somehow maintained. And even in these cases, we often find that the pro­
visioning comes more consistently from siblings or related females than 
from potential fathers. 
These special adaptations to this problem are critical clues to under­
standing the ancestral human situation because almost all human societies, 
beginning probably with Horrw habilis and Horrw erectus, are exceptions 
to the general rule. Identification of these hominid species with the shift 
from polygyny to mostly pair bonding is supported by evidence that the great 
difference in male and female body sizes among the australopithecines­
sexual dimorphism-seems to reduce to modern proportions by the time 
of Horrw erectus. 6 This also coincides with the first development of stone 
tool technologies and the first increase in relative brain size above ape pro­
portions (see Chapter 11). In the few other mammal species that appear to 
get around this constraint, it is accomplished by virtue of very distinctive 
social arrangements where specialized social communication plays a key 
role. In many of these species, we suspect that a major contributor may also 
be chemical communication-pheromones that may directly regulate the 
hormonal systems of group members. Unfortunately, as primates with 
diminutive smell organs, we humans are not well equipped for smell­
governed social behavior. It should not be surprising, then, to discover that 
these intrinsically unstable reproductive arrangements in human societies 
392 < The Symbolic Species

are stabilized by a unique form of social communication, which can be as 
powerful and reliable as a social hormone. 
A Symbolic Solution 
The evolution of hunting among our distant hominid ancestors must be 
understood in this same social-reproductive context. Other primate species 
are known to eat meat. Both baboons and chimpanzees periodically cap­
ture young ungulates or monkeys and eat them, and chimpanzees have been 
regularly documented engaging in cooperative hunts. These hunts involve 
a group of males who intentionally stalk and surround a hapless monkey, 
cutting off all routes of escape, and then close in until one can grab the an­
imal and kill or immobilize it long enough for others to join in for the grisly 
feast. But chimpanzee hunting behavior is considerably different from that 
of human hunter-gatherers in two major respects. First, all human hunters 
kill their prey and butcher the carcass with the aid of tools. Chimpanzees 
simply use their overpowering strength to immobilize their prey and dis­
member it, and use their longer, sharper canines to mortally wound and 
"butcher" it as they eat. Second, the meat that human hunters take from a 
felled animal is seldom all devoured on the spot, but rather is cut from the 
carcass and carried back to be shared with mothers, their young, and oth­
ers who have not participated directly in the hunt. Chimpanzees engage in 
what might be called "trickle-down" provisioning of meat to females and 
their offspring. Only those females and their young who are in the vicinity 
of the kill site when the meat is being devoured will have a chance of gain­
ing access to it. Typically, a male will allow a familiar female to beg away a 
remnant that is not prized. 
Although we might consider meat as a source of provisioned food for 
chimpanzees, it is essentially a no-cost provisioning from the males' per­
spective, and it is, at best, a sporadic and unreliable resource for females 
and their young. This may be more evident when we consider how chim­
panzees' hunting and sharing of meat differ in different conditions. Hunt­
ing probably increases during times of other food shortages, but the degree 
of sharing may also decrease during these times as well. 
A kind of adventitious hunting and scavenging probably characterized 
the precondition for the evolution of stone-tool-assisted hunting, which ap­
pears to have begun about 2.5 million years ago. The transition to stone tool 
technology is evidence of a major change in the way meat was incorporated 
as a food resource. The manufacture and use of stone tools probably indi-
Terrence W. Deacon > 393

cate that the use of meat took on a much more regular and necessary role 
in the diet of Pleistocene hominids, including a role as a regular food source 
for mothers with infants and young children. 
Stone tools clearly reflect an important anatomical difference between 
early hominids and modem chimpanzees: early hominids did not have large 
canines. This is an unusual adaptation for a primate. Most primates have 
prominent canines that are used for threat displays, fighting, and to some 
extent for predator defense; this is true even for pair-bonding species such 
as gibbons. So why are canines almost completely reduced in all hominid 
ancestors, including australopithecines who appear to have been as sexu­
ally dimorphic as the most highly polygynous and feisty primates alive 
today? There is little agreement on this question. Some have suggested that 
it represents a reduction in male-male competition and fighting, or perhaps 
a shift to the use of hands and fists and wooden weapons. A reduction in 
male-male competition seems unlikely in the light of the extreme differ­
ences in body size of male as compared to female australopithecines, since 
this is an invariable indication of sexual selection on male fighting capacity 
with respect to mate competition. The argument that canines were re­
placed by "better" fighting implements also seems unable to offer a suffi­
cient explanation. Even if we were to pretend that fists and sticks were 
better weapons than flesh-piercing canines, on the basis of being useful at 
a safer distance, it would not select against this formidable last line of de­
fense. What violent man would give up his knife for a club when he could 
have both? Canines didn't just fade away; they must have been actively re­
duced by natural selection. 
It seems likely that the loss of large canines in our australopithecine an­
cestors had more to do with eating than fighting. This is suggested by a look 
at the rest of the dentition in these species. The other atypical feature of 
early hominids' teeth is their incredibly robust and heavily enameled mo­
lars. These large, flat grinding surfaces, supported in relatively massive 
jaws-particularly in the bigger australopithecine species-almost certainly 
reflect an adaptation for chewing fibrous or hard foods that require con­
siderable masticatory preparation before they can be digested. This suggests 
that they were eating things like tubers, grain, or even bark and pith. But 
if these were the dietary mainstay, then maintaining large self-sharpening 
canines, which must be honed against their upper and lower counterparts 
as the jaw is opened and closed, would pose a serious problem. It would 
significantly reduce the lateral mobility of the jaw, which is essential for ef­
fective grinding. Constant chewing would also significantly wear away at 
large canines, and possibly even increase the chances for self-inflicted dam-
394 < The Symbolic Species

age or mouth sores where the canines were repeatedly rubbed. No matter 
how you look at it, big canines and big grinding teeth do not often go to­
gether. The few nonprimate species that are able to manage both large ca­
nines and a grinding-feeding strategy grow their canines outward and 
forward (as in elephants and boars), but this seems not to have been an op­
tion for our ancestors, thank goodness. In summary, canines were reduced 
despite their benefits for aggression and defense. 
Almost certainly, given their upright posture, there was a shift from the 
use of the teeth to a use of the hands and objects in male-male aggression 
and defense during the evolution of australopithecines, but this was likely 
a response to the reduction of canines and not its cause. Nevertheless, an 
increased use of the hands for aggressive displays and physical combat, es­
pecially if it involved objects (something also observed among chimpanzees), 
may have increased the likelihood that eventually some would come to use 
tools for scavenging and hunting, as well as for male-male competition. In 
fact, lacking large canines, australopithecines would have likely been quite 
poor carnivores, even compared to chimpanzees. Stone tools would have 
been the only means by which they could enter a niche where meat was an 
essential food source. 
The early stone tools indicate a shift to a diet that contains more meat, 
whether hunted or partly scavenged (stolen from other predators). But why 
a shift to include more meat? What did it offer? Again, chimpanzee forag­
ing and hunting may provide some hints. As we have noted, there is some 
evidence that chimpanzees' hunting behaviors increase when other foods 
become more scarce. Meat is one alternative food source that can substi­
tute for their preferred food, fruits. It is one component of a complex and 
variable feeding strategy. Chimpanzees are omnivorous: they eat leaves, in­
sects, the new shoots of plants, bark, and even the pith from the centers of 
reedlike plants at various times of the year in different areas. Bark and pith 
are probably lowest on their preference hierarchy and are poor sources of 
nutrition. They :p-e only turned to when all other foods become scarce, and 
they may serve more to provide bulk to stave off hunger than to provide 
nutrients. In fact, it is not clear how calorically expensive it is to extract these 
nutrients, in terms of processing the energy involved in finding, extracting, 
chewing, and digesting plant foods. Almost certainly there are diminishing 
returns if this strategy must be maintained for more than a month or two. 
Chimpanzee hunting behavior also seems to increase during lean sea­
sons, but unlike access to these other low-preference subsistence foods, 
meat is preferentially available to males. As a result, females and their de­
pendent infants are probably the most affected during these periods. From 
Terrence W. Deacon > 395

an evolutionary point of view, intentionally directed provisioning of this now 
limited resource to a particular female and her offspring would carry few 
advantages to males, given their uncertainty of paternity. Nevertheless, in 
chimpanzees, there is some evidence of preferential sharing with certain 
females, and a suggestion that this may increase the chances of future mat­
ings between the sharing male and that female. This could offer some route 
for provisioning, but it would be indirect, irrespective of paternity, and sec­
ondary to the competition among males for female access. Such a selfish 
strategy has costs in terms of infant mortality rates, but the individual ge­
netic/reproductive costs of adopting a nonselfish strategy pose a barrier to 
achieving a more efficient reproductive pattern overall. This equation could 
change, however, if scarcity were more extreme and more costly, or if a way 
could be found to gain more reliable access to a high-value subsistence food 
like meat. 
For chimpanzees, hunting is not a major strategy for maintaining re­
productive efficiency in the face of significant food shortages during sea­
sonal droughts, primarily because it is not equally available to adult males, 
females, juveniles, and infants. Hunting or scavenging for meat can only pro­
vide a viable strategy for surviving seasonal drought if ( 1) success is highly 
predictable and regular, and (2) meat supplements the diets of nursing fe­
males and their young offspring. A supplementary food source that is mostly 
available to adult males or nonreproducing females would offer little or no 
reproductive benefit to its consumers, if it meant that reproducing indi­
viduals suffered an increased mortality rate. 
The acquisition and provisioning of meat clearly would be a better strat­
egy for surviving seasonal shortages of more typical foods than shifting to 
nutrient-poor diets of pith, bark, and poor-quality leaves, as do modem 
chimpanzees. But this is only possible if there is a way to overcome the sex­
ual competition associated with paternity uncertainty. The dilemma can be 
summarized as follows: males must hunt cooperatively to be successful 
hunters; females cannot hunt because of their ongoing reproductive bur­
dens; and yet hunted meat must get to those females least able to gain ac­
cess to it directly (those with young), if it is to be a critical subsistence food. 
It must come from males, but it will not be provided in any reliable way un­
less there is significant assurance that the provisioning is likely to be of re­
productive value to the provider. Females must have some guarantee of 
access to meat for their offspring. For this to evolve, males must maintain 
constant pair-bonded relationships, and yet for this to evolve, males must 
have some guarantee that they are provisioning their own progeny. So the 
socio-ecological problem posed by the transition to a meat-supplemented 
396 < The Symbolic Species

subsistence strategy is that it cannot be utilized without a social structure 
which guarantees unambiguous and exclusive mating and is sufficiently 
egalitarian to sustain cooperation via shared or parallel reproductive inter­
ests. This problem can be solved symbolically. 
We should not underestimate what can be represented by nonsymbolic 
means. Almost any objects or events or even particular qualities of objects 
or events can be signified without symbolic reference, using iconic or in­
dexical means. The more carefully we look at the social behaviors of pri­
mates, the more examples we find of calls and gestures that serve to refer 
to specific types of objects and activities. These include alarm calls that dis­
tinguish between types of predators, food calls that distinguish between 
types of foods, and many less dramatic grunts and gestures that determine 
identity, social spacing, and behavioral intentions. Almost certainly, indi­
viduals who have been long associated with one another in the same social 
group also develop proficiency at interpreting each other's subtle gestures 
and movements or characteristics of vocalization. Reports of the abilities of 
domesticated species to discern their master's emotional states have been 
around for a long time, and are probably only a superficial glimpse into such 
species' abilities to interpret the emotions of their own kind. Though there 
appear to be significant limitations on the numbers of innately prepro­
grammed calls and gestural signals that can evolve, the ability to supplement 
this by learning to anticipate the predispositions of specific individuals, and 
by acquiring certain habits of behavior conditioned by the context of oth­
ers' responses, has the power greatly to amplify this set. Even coordinated 
social behaviors like group hunting appear to be organized quite easily on 
the basis of animals' abilities to learn to anticipate one another's habits of 
behavior. 
But certain things cannot be represented without symbols. Indexical 
communication can only refer to something else by virtue of a concrete part­
whole link with it, even if this has no more basis than just habitual coinci­
dence. Although there is a vast universe of objects and relationships 
susceptible to nonsymbolic representation, indeed, anything that can be pre­
sent to the senses, this does not include abstract or otherwise intangible ob­
jects of reference. This categorical limitation is the link between the 
anomalous form of communication that evolved in humans and the anom­
alous context of human social behavior. 
Ultimately, the stability of human social groups is dependent on reci­
procity. A relationship in which individuals at times sacrifice reproductive 
opportunities to others so long as there is a high probability that others will 
do the same in return at a later date is called "reciprocal altruism." Recip-
Terrence W. Deacon > 397

rocal altruism is found in other species, though it does not appear to be gen­
erally widespread. This is because a number of critical conditions must be 
met for it to persist, all having to do with guaranteeing the reliability of rec­
iprocation. First, animals must be able to recognize individuals and re­
member their past behaviors. Second, they must be able to detect "cheaters" 
who do not reciprocate. Third, they must be able to exert control over the 
cheaters by withholding altruistic acts or ostracizing them. Ideally, there 
should be some means of preventing cheating from occurring in the first 
place. Fourth, the advantages gained by cheating must be significantly out­
weighed by the disadvantageous consequences of being "caught," and the 
costs of detecting and "punishing" cheaters must not be too high. One fea­
ture of social organization that tends to reduce the threshold for the de­
velopment of reciprocal altruism is social familiarity. Individuals that spend 
all their lives in each other's company can come to recognize each other eas­
ily, and develop reliable expectations about each other's future probability 
of altruism on the basis of past experiences. Other features that are con­
ducive to the evolution of regular reciprocal altruism include a high degree 
of relatedness, so that inequities have relatively smaller genetic conse­
quences, and a low cost of helping, so that little is risked at any one time. 
Al in all, these are still rather restrictive conditions, and make reliance on 
reciprocal altruism as a critical reproductive component a rather fragile evo­
lutionary strategy. 
How could these requirements have been met in early hominine social 
groups in order to maintain a reciprocally exclusive pattern of reproductive 
and food-sharing relationships? From what we know of other primate so­
cial patterns, it can be assumed that these groups were long-term, relatively 
stable ones, where individuals could come to identify each other, and that 
their functioning probably depended on the cooperation of either related 
females and! or related males. But what about the identification of who is 
following the rule and who is not? Where food sharing is involved, the re­
lationships are all symmetrical and immediate. Food is either given or not. 
But in the case of sexual relationships it may not be so clear what makes 
one individual available and another unavailable, if it is not simple physical 
availability and receptivity or threat of harm. 
How can there be reciprocal altruistic access to mates? Essentially, each 
individual has to give up potential access to most possible mates so that oth­
ers may have access to them, for a similar sacrifice in return. A reproduc­
tive balance must be struck, so that most males and females have a roughly 
equal probability of access to reproduction or provisioning (respectively), 
over the course of a lifetime, in order for cooperative provisioning to be a 
398 < The Symbolic Species

stable strategy. But if there is no unequivocal marker of allowable and un­
allowable sexual access, or appropriate and inappropriate sharing and pro­
vision of resources, how can anyone tell who is cheating and who is not? 
How does one tell who is obligated to whom? 
The first requirement, then, is that there must be a means for marking 
exclusive sexual relationships in a way that all members of the group rec­
ognize. Sexual access and a corresponding obligation to provide resources 
are not just habits of behavior; they cannot be more or less predictable pat­
terns, or just predictions of probable future behaviors. Sexual access is a pre­
scription for future behaviors. No index or memory of past behaviors can 
represent this. Nor can any index of present social status or reproductive 
state mark it. Even the refusal or avoidance of sexual activity only indicates 
a current state and is not necessarily predictive. Sexual or mating displays 
are incapable of referring to what might be, or should be. This information 
can only be given expression symbolically. The pair-bonding relationship in 
the human lineage is essentially a promise, or rather a set of promises that 
must be made public. These not only determine what behaviors are prob­
able in the future, but more important, they implicitly determine which fu­
ture behaviors are allowed and not allowed; that is, which are defined as 
cheating and may result in retaliation. 
The second problem is how to verify and guarantee the assent of the 
other individuals that could conceivably be involved, both as possible 
cheaters and as support against cheating. For a male to determine he has 
exclusive sexual access, and therefore paternity certainty, requires that other 
males also provide some assurance of their future sexual conduct. Similarly, 
for a female to be able to give up soliciting provisioning from multiple 
males, she needs to be sure that she can rely on at least one individual male 
who is not obligated to other females to the extent that he cannot provide 
her with sufficient resources. Unlike a pair bond in a species where the male 
and female remain isolated from other potential sexual competitors, estab­
lishing an exclusive sexual bond in a social setting is not just a relationship 
between two indiࡆduals. In the case of gibbon pairs in neighboring terri­
tories or pair-bonding birds that nest nearby other pairs, one aspect of 
maintaining the exclusive mating relationship may require that the female 
actively fends off other females and the male actively fends off other males 
that could be sexual competitors. This is only reliable when the mated pair 
tend to remain in the same vicinity. In the hominid case, however, where 
males are engaged in an activity that requires regular separation from fe­
males in order to hunt, mate guarding of this sort is not sufficient. Males 
and females must be able to rely both on the promise of a mate and, prob-
Terrence W. Deacon > 399

ably more importantly, on the support and threats of other males and fe­
males who are party to the social arrangement and have something to lose 
if one individual takes advantage of an uncondoned sexual opportunity. 
In human societies, the breakdown of sexual exclusivity or even the 
threat of it often precipitates violent reprisals. Though this parallels inter­
actions that are common in the social behaviors of other polygynous mam­
mal species, the comparison is incomplete. Sexual jealousy may have the 
same roots in humans and other species, but in humans it involves some­
thing more abstract than just a threatening behavior. Though philandery, 
cuckoldry, and desertion are common consequences of reproductive com­
petition in other species, adultery is more than this. It involves betrayal, and 
there can be no betrayal without prior explicit or tacit agreements. In nearly 
all societies, there are not only personal reprisals associated with sexual in­
fidelity but also consequences imposed by the community. Even when ex­
plicit codes and punishments are not present in a society, those considered 
the victims of sexual infidelity are often allowed leeway to commit violent 
acts that might otherwise be proscribed. 
The prevention of cuckoldry is partially supported by the potential of 
punishment from the entire social group. In no other species is there such 
direct involvement by the larger community in the maintenance of sexual 
exclusivity between individuals.7 The problem is how to organize group be­
havior around something as intangible as a desired future habit of behav­
ior. Each individual must share knowledge of these expectations; but more 
important, each must also be able to rely on the support of other group 
members to prevent violations of these patterns of conduct. 
What I am essentially describing is, of course, the skeleton of what we 
recognize as a marriage agreement. As anthropologists have recognized for 
generations, marriage is not the same as mating, and not the same as a pair 
bond. Unlike what is found in the animal world, it is a symbolic relation­
ship. But it is also not just a reciprocal set of promises between two indi­
viduals regarding sexual access and economics. As the French 
anthropologist Claude Levi-Strauss and many others have emphasized, it 
is also the establishment of alliances: promises and obligations that link a 
reproductive pair to the social groups of which they are a part, and often a 
set of promises and obligations between the kin groups from which they 
arise. Marriage contracts establish both vertical lineal symbolic relationships 
and horizontal affinal symbolic relationships. Marriage, in all its incredible 
variety, is the regulation of reproductive relationships by symbolic means, 
and it is essentially universal in human societies. It is preeminently a sym­
bolic relationship, and owing to the lack of symbolic abilities, it is totally ab-
400 < The Symbolic Species

sent in the rest of the animal kingdom. What I am suggesting here is that a 
related form of regulation of reproductive relationships by symbolic means 
was essential for early hominids to take advantage of a hunting-provisioning 
subsistence strategy. 
Establishing such social-sexual relationships cannot be accomplished by 
indexical communication alone, that is, by systems of animal calls, postures, 
and display behaviors, no matter how sophisticated and complex. And yet, 
even extremely crude symbolic communication can serve this need. Only 
a few types of symbols and only a few classes of combinatorial relationships 
between them are necessary. But without symbols that refer publicly and 
unambiguously to certain abstract social relationships and their future ex­
tension, including reciprocal obligations and prohibitions, hominids could 
not have taken advantage of the critical resource available to habitual 
hunters. The need to mark these reciprocally altruistic (and reciprocally self­
ish) relationships arose as an adaptation to the extreme evolutionary insta­
bility of the combination of group huntinwscavenging and male provisioning 
of mates and offspring. This was the question for which symbolization was 
the only viable answer. Symbolic culture was a response to a reproductive 
problem that only symbols could solve: the imperative of representing a so­
cial contract. 
Ritual Beginnings 
The near synchrony in human prehistory of the first increase in brain size, 
the first appearance of stone tools for hunting and butchery, and a consid­
erable reduction in sexual dimorphism is not a coincidence. These changes 
are interdependent. Al are symptoms of a fundamental restructuring of the 
hominid adaptation, which resulted in a significant change in feeding ecol­
ogy, a radical change in social structure, and an unprecedented (indeed, rev­
olutionary) change in representational abilities. The very first symbols ever 
thought, or acted out, or uttered on the face of the earth grew out of this 
socio-ecologicࡇ dilemma, and so they may not have been very much like 
speech. They also probably required considerable complexity of social or­
ganization to bring the unprepared brains of these apes to comprehend fully 
what they meant. 
The success of Sherman, Austin, and Kanzi at acquiring the ability to use 
symbolic reference in a limited fashion demonstrates that a modem human 
brain is not an essential precondition for symbolic communication. Chim­
panzees who have learned a modicum of symbols in the laboratory have the 
benefit of dedicated researchers who can construct an elaborate training 
Terrence W. Deacon > 401

context. The first hominids to use symbolic communication were entirely 
on their own, with very little in the way of external supports. How, then, 
could they have succeeded with their chimpanzeelike brains in achieving 
this difficult result? How could a social environment have arisen sponta­
neously, which possessed the necessary supports for overcoming the im­
mensely difficult and complicated task of teaching symbolic relationships 
to individuals whose brains were not only unprepared but resistant to learn­
ing them? The transition to nascent symbolic culture probably began in fits 
and starts, with innumerable evolutionary trials and errors, before some 
semblance of stability was achieved. Some intense social evolution must 
have been responsible for creating such a context. But what sort of a con­
text was it? Are the requirements for support of symbol transmission in an 
ape society so unusual that their spontaneous evolution will stretch 
credulity? 
The ape symbol-training experiments provide an indication of what these 
requirements might be. First, they demonstrate that solving the problem 
requires a way of maintaining attention on many related indexical associa­
tions simultaneously, a way to shift attention to token-token relationships, 
and an ability selectively to suppress attention on immediate token-object 
associations. Like the chimps, early hominids were forced to learn a set of 
associations between signs and objects, repeat them over and over, and 
eventually unlearn the concrete association in favor of a more abstract one. 
This process had to be kept up until the complete system of combinatorial 
relationships between the symbols was discovered. What could have possi­
bly provided comparable support for these needs in the first symbol-learning 
societies? 
In a word, the answer is ritual. Indeed, ritual is still a central component 
of symbolic "education" in modem human societies, though we are seldom 
aware of its modem role because of the subtle way it is woven into the fab­
ric of society. The problem for symbol discovery is to shift attention from 
the concrete to the abstract; from separate indexical links between signs and 
objects to an organized set of relations between signs. In order to bring the 
logic of token-token relationships to the fore, a high degree of redundancy 
is important. This was demonstrated in the experiments with the chim­
panzees Sherman and Austin. It was found that getting them to repeat by 
rote a large number of errorless trials in combining lexigrams enabled them 
to make the transition from explicit and concrete sign-object associations 
to implicit sign-sign associations. Repetition of the same set of actions with 
the same set of objects over and over again in a ritual performance is often 
used for a similar purpose in modem human societies. Repetition can ren-
402 < The Symbolic Species

der the individual details of some performance automatic and minimally 
conscious, while at the same time the emotional intensity induced by group 
participation can help focus attention on other aspects of the objects and 
actions involved. In a ritual frenzy, one can be induced to see everyday ac­
tivities and objects in a very different light. 
This aspect of many ritual activities is often explicitly recognized as a 
means to help participants discover the "higher meaning" of the otherwise 
mundane, while at the same time promoting group solidarity. Thus, many 
ritual activities, from repeated prayer to pubertal initiation ceremonies, 
quite explicitly take the form of an ideal symbol discovery process. Of 
course, in all societies of modem humans, most ritual activities are in ser­
vice of complex symbolic ideas and institutions. They are self-consciously 
employed for their ability to help define abstract social relationships and 
inculcate certain habits of thought and action. They are not, in this regard, 
good models of the earliest symbolic rituals. But they demonstrate one of 
the major ways that societies establish some of their most difficult symbolic 
precepts. In general, it is probably fair to conclude that the more difficult 
the social symbolic problem-either because of intrinsic conceptual diffi­
culties or because of the intensity of the countervailing social forces that 
must be mediated-the more likely that highly ritualized means will be re­
quired to establish appropriate symbolic responses. 
One of the most difficult social symbolic relationships to mediate is 
peace. This is not so much because of a conceptual difficulty, but rather be­
cause of the high potential and high cost of deception. The problem of es­
tablishing peace after a period of war also demonstrates the importance of 
the indexical substructure of a symbolic social relationship. Agreements and 
contracts concerning future behaviors and obligations are intrinsically sym­
bolic. Because the referential link between symbols and their objects is in­
direct, the very same features that make symbolic reference the only means 
for definitively representing something that is as abstract and virtual as a 
promise or contraft also open the door to misrepresentation and falsehood. 
The problem lies in determining whether a symbolic gesture for peace is 
made in earnest, particularly when it comes from a former enemy who in 
other circumstances may have employed misrepresentation and misdirec­
tion as a ploy. 
An interesting example of this comes from the Yanomamo Indians of the 
rain forests of Venezuela and northern Brazil,B These slash-and-bum agri­
culturists live in small, lightly fortified villages with nearby gardens. Such 
villages are almost constantly at war with each other, and skirmishes are 
often initiated by surprise attacks. But there are times when it is necessary 
Terrence W. Deacon > 403

to cooperate with one's neighboring villages: for example, when a garden is 
becoming overgrown and unproductive, and it will soon be necessary to 
abandon one village and create a new one. At times like these a Yanomamo 
group might be at high risk of attack. How do you make peace in order to 
gain allies at this crucial time and decrease the chances of attack? Peace­
making is a difficult problem no matter what the conditions. It is a situa­
tion where the major communicative problems are not due to a lack of 
symbolic ability, but rather because no one is sure that others are using the 
symbols honestly. The situation is similar to not having reliable symbolic ref­
erence at all. What is necessary in order to reestablish reference-to ground 
it in the real world so to speak-is a reconstruction of the symbolic rela­
tionship from its component indexical relationships. 
Demonstrating true symbolic reference is analogous to establishing sym­
bolic reference in the first place. Symbols refer to relationships among in­
dices, and are learned by first establishing these indexical associations. 
Regrounding questionable symbolic reference similarly requires a return 
to the indices on which it is based. So the question is: What system of in­
dices does peace represent? Indications that members of the groups are not 
hostile. Indications that they would not engage in violent behavior even if 
the opportunity were to present itself. And possibly indications that they 
are disposed to cooperate with one another. Unlike symbols, indices are part 
of what they refer to, and this makes them reliable in ways that symbols are 
not. 
In the case of the Yanomamo peacemaking process, an elaborate ritual 
provides the indices that are required. It is known as a "Feast." First, the 
hosts who wish to make peace prepare a meal. When their guests are due 
to arrive, dressed as for war and carrying their weapons, the hosts put their 
weapons away and the men recline on their hammocks waiting for the 
guests to enter their village. The guests enter, dancing and chanting, and 
circle around the camp stopping in front of each host. There they ritually 
threaten them, raising an ax or drawing a bow and arrow. The hosts must 
remain unmoved, trying to show no fear and no offense at provocative re­
marks. After this has been repeated for a while (and latent hostilities have 
not erupted in violence), the roles are reversed. The guests recline in ham­
mocks, their weapons hidden away, while the hosts circle around the camp 
dancing and ritually threatening their guests. Finally, when it is clear that 
nothing untoward is likely to happen, they break off and the guests are of­
fered food. Later they may chant together, barter and exchange goods, or 
even arrange a marriage. 
Notice the similarity to the process that helped the chimps Sherman and 
404 < The Symbolic Species

Austin over their own symbolic threshold. In a Feast, the participants es­
tablish the symbolic relationship of "being at peace" by posing the oppor­
tunity of its opposite. Assume the opposite and show that it is not true, or 
discover that it is. Like the trick used to push the chimpanzee to symbol 
discovery, the Feast constructs an abstract symbolic relationship using a sort 
of reductio ad absurdum strategy. Peace and war are negations of one an­
other (not intending to kill and intending to kill); but being unable to trust 
the symbolic invocation of these abstract relationships, it is necessary to re­
constitute the underlying system of negations in a controlled and complete 
manner. Peace is a generalization over each of the symptoms of being in a 
state of war (a sort of induction from them), and is only as firm as the in­
dices that implicitly support it. This is a problem that does not go away with 
better symbolic systems. Establishing peace only gets more complex as so­
cieties get more complex. And the indices that are required to produce it 
only get more difficult to demonstrate fully, as the present state of the 
world amply shows. 
This is an instructive example of how social contracts are implicitly sym­
bolic. As a result, they depend on the same logic of symbol construction that 
is required at all levels of symbol learning. In either case, extra effort is re­
quired to provide the crucial indices in context with each other in such a 
way that the categorical negation relationships between them are explicitly 
juxtaposed. This parallel between symbols that are difficult to believe and 
those that are difficult to grasp also brings us back to ritual. The ritual con­
text allows highly redundant, therefore reliable, associations between the 
markers of these relationships to become established. Because of this, it is 
possible to abandon reliance on the indexical associations themselves and 
come to rely on the symbolic (but virtual) reference to hold. Similarly, sym­
bolic relationships that are difficult to grasp (as in the training of Sherman 
and Austin) require the highly organized and repetitive presentation of rel­
evant patterns of indexical associations in order to help with the process of 
discovering the ip1plicit higher-order logic of which they are instances. Not 
surprisingly, some of the most complex rituals in all societies grow out of 
efforts to convey some of the most intangible and ineffable symbolic no­
tions: the meaning of existence, the nature of God, what it means to be a 
member of a particular ethnic tradition, and so on. They are different faces 
of the very same process, pushed to extremes either by learning difficulties 
or by mistrust of the virtual reference that symbols provide. 
For a hominid species with a fairly typical ape brain, such as the first sym­
bol users must have possessed, any symbolic learning would have been 
conceptually difficult. Moreover, the social dilemma in need of a stable so-
Terrence W. Deacon > 405

lution is the sexual equivalent of warfare. In evolutionary terms, mistrust 
should be built into our sexual emotional responses, as indeed every day­
time television soap opera suggests. Around the world, infidelity or the sus­
picion of cuckoldry is a major cause of violence and homicide. It is what 
comes of living in this otherwise unstable reproductive context. Thus, both 
in cognitive terms and in terms of the stakes involved, the otherwise sim­
ple symbols which establish the reproductive relationships that are at the 
core of human societies demand highly ritualized construction processes. 
Ritualized support is also essential to ensure that all members of a group 
understand the newly established contract and will behave accordingly. As 
in peacemaking, demonstrating that these relationships exist and providing 
some way of marking them for future reference so that they can be invoked 
and enforced demand the explicit presentation of supportive indices, not 
just from reproductive partners but from al significant kin and group mem­
bers. Given both the cognitive and the social difficulties, it wouldn't be sur­
prising to find that the earliest social symbols for establishing reproductive 
roles were created in a ritual reductio ad absurdum. 
Marriage and puberty rituals serve this function in most human societies 
(though modem societies replace many of these concrete social symbolic 
rituals with more abstract religious and legalistic ones). The symbol con­
struction that occurs in these ceremonies is not just a matter of demon­
strating certain symbolic relationships, but actually involves the use of 
individuals and actions as symbol tokens. Social roles are redefined and in­
dividuals are explicitly assigned to them. A wife, a husband, a warrior, a 
father-in-law, an elder-all are symbolic roles, not reproductive roles, and 
as such are defined with respect to a complete system of alternative or com­
plementary symbolic roles. Unlike social status in other species, which is a 
more-or-less relationship in potential flux, symbolic status is categorical. As 
with all symbolic relationships, social roles are defined in the context of a 
logically complete system of potential transformations; and because of this, 
all members of a social group (as well as any potential others from the out­
side) are assigned an implicit symbolic relationship when any one member 
changes status. 
Out of these ritual processes for constructing social symbolic relation­
ships, symptoms of the process itself (exchanged objects, body markings, 
etc.) can be invested with symbolic reference. Tokens that served an in­
dexical purpose within the ritual symbol construction become symbolic be­
cause of it. Rings, ceremonial clothing, and ritual scarring are indices of 
having participated in a symbolic transition, and thereby can become sym­
bols of the same relationship. Given the universality of human marriage and 
406 < The Symbolic Species

its embedding ritual and ceremony, it seems reasonable to imagine that hints 
of the original logical structure of the first symbolic rituals still echo in the 
marriages men and women make today. 
The earliest forms of symbolic communication were therefore likely not 
speechlike or manual sign languages. They almost certainly included vo­
calizations along with conventiona1/ritual gestures, activities, and objects, 
all of which together formed a heterogeneous melange of indices trans­
formed to symbols, each systematically dependent on the other, and defin­
ing a closed set of possible types of relationships. Vocal symbolizing in the 
earliest stages would probably have played a minor role, owing to the lack 
of descending motor control until brain size increased. Probably not until 
Horrw erectus were the equivalents of words available. Since these individ­
uals had brains that begin to approach the modern range, it is almost cer­
tain that they had some degree of vocal skill, and used it symbolically. What 
drove this shift to speech was not just constraints on the ease of use of ob­
jects and performances and manual gestures, but also the reciprocal effect 
of cortical enlargement in response to the demands of symbol learning and 
the consequences for manual and vocal flexibility. Physical object symbols 
are constrained to highly specific uses and contexts-e.g., use as physical 
icons or markers-and tend to keep complex performance symbols confined 
to use in specialized ritual contexts. The manipulation of vocalizations and 
hand gestures would have been far less constrained. The social evolution 
of symbolic communication would have selected against symbol systems that 
required the use of tokens (individual symbol objects or acts) that are dif­
ficult to produce or combine in a wide range of circumstances. Speech is 
by far the least constrained in these ways, and would have come to replace 
other token systems by social evolution alone as the neurological constraints 
loosened. The complicated co-evolution of social selection favoring vocal­
ization, along with manipulative-cognitive demands of tool use and symbol 
learning, would have guaranteed that vocal symbols would not have waited 
to burst on the evolutionary scene late in the process. More likely a con­
tinual drift toward increasingly self-sufficient vocal symbol systems-lan­
guages-has always required using our articulatory abilities to their limits. 
Nevertheless, we should not lose sight of the fact that symbols are still 
extensively tied to ritual-like cultural practices and paraphernalia. Though 
speech is capable of conveying many forms of information independent of 
any objective supports, in practice there are often extensive physical and 
social contextual supports that affect what is communicated. Language ac­
quisition still relies on an extensive gamelike ritualization and regimenta­
tion of the symbol acquisition context, although the child's uniquely human 
Terrence W. Deacon > 407

computational supports enable this process to take place without explicit 
reductio ad absurdum grounding of all symbols and possible combinations 
in the system. 
In conclusion, then, the theory of symbolic origins I have outlined is not 
just a new twist on Rousseau's "social contract" theory. It is not a theory of 
the origins of social behavior, but of the translation of social behavior into 
symbolic form. More important, it is not a scenario for how our intelligence 
triumphed over our reproductive competition, but rather how unique de­
mands of reproductive competition and cooperation created the conditions 
that led to our unique form of intelligence. By answering the evolutionary 
question of how to take advantage of a new foraging trick, our ancestors un­
wittingly turned the tables of natural selection so that social evolution could 
reshape the brain in its own image. We reflect on this from the other end 
of an extensive co-evolutionary process, where the indispensable uses of 
symbolic communication as a social organizing tool were long ago relegated 
to being only one among a multitude of selection pressures mutually con­
verging on making this communication more and more efficient. Two and 
a half million years of sustained selection in an unprecedented socio­
ecological niche, maintained by an unprecedented communicational and 
cognitive trick have taken us far from these beginnings in both the physi­
cal changes in the brain that resulted and in the mental and cultural world 
that co-evolved with them. Figure 12. 1 summarizes the parallel threads of 
adaptation that have ratcheted each other onward in this co-evolutionary 
process. 
This brings us full circle to reconsider the other side of the paradox that 
began this book: the lack of simple languages in animals and humans. 
Human languages are immensely complicated and yet easily learned and 
used. The evolution of language was not the result of simply surmounting 
the symbolic problem. Solving this problem opened up a whole new realm 
of adaptive problems, all dependent on efficient and successful symbolic 
communication. This long co-evolutionary heritage has not just resulted in 
symbolic communication becoming easier and more efficient, but these sim­
plifications of the task have upped the ante so that ever more efficient ac­
quisition and ever more powerful employment of symbolic communication 
were an imperative. Although the problem of language origins cannot be 
answered in terms of a transition from simple to complex, or from less in­
telligent to more, it is clear that what has resulted is both an incredible en­
hancement of intellectual abilities and a competence to use a very complex 
mode of communication. 
The origins of the first symbolic communication have nothing intrinsi-
408 < The Symbolic Species

A us 
Hh 
He 
Hs 
laryngeal descent & 
syntactic complexity 
brain-restructuring 
for speech & symbols 
stone tool making 
& group hunting 
male provisioning 
pair bonding & 
mating contracts 
2.5 
2.0 
1 .5 
1 .0 
0.5 
0 
million years before the present 
Figure 1 2.1 Timelines of the correlates of brain-language co-evolution in hominid 
evolution from Australopithecus through Homo habilis and Homo erectus to Homo 
sapiens. The approximate epochs of each major recent hominid group are indicated 
by diferent gray backgrounds; the width of the bars indicates increasing impor­
tance/development of the respective features. 
cally to do with language per se. Most of the details that characterize mod­
ern languages have other later evolutionary causes. The argument I have 
presented is only an argument for the conditions which required symbolic 
reference in the first place, and which selected for it despite the great dif­
ficulties and costs of collectively producing and maintaining it. Much of the 
story of this intermediate evolutionary history, extending for over 2 million 
years from language origins to the present, has yet to be even imagined in 
any clarity. But putting evolutionary causes and effects in appropriate order 
and precisely identifYing the anatomical correlates of this transition are a 
prerequisite for providing anything beyond "just so" versions of the process. 
The key to this is the co-evolutionary perspective which recognizes that the 
evolution of language took place neither inside nor outside brains, but at 
the interface where cultural evolutionary processes affect biological evolu­
tionary processes. 
The evolution of symbolic communication is special in this regard. It cre­
ated a mode of extrabiological inheritance with a particularly powerful and 
complex character, and with a sort of autonomous life of its own. It is for 
this reason that the co-evolutionary process has played such a major role in 
shaping human brains and minds. It is simply not possible to understand 
Terrence W. Deacon > 409

human anatomy, human neurobiology, or human psychology without rec­
ognizing that they have all been shaped by something that could best be 
described as an idea: the idea of symbolic reference. Though symbolic 
thinking can be entirely personal and private, symbolic reference itself is 
intrinsically social. Not only do we individually gain access to this powerful 
mode of representation through interactions with other members of the so­
ciety into which we are born, but symbols themselves can be traced to a so­
cial origin. Our uniquely human minds are, in a very concrete sense, the 
products of an unusual reproductive challenge that only symbolic reference 
was able to address-a concrete internalization of an ancient and persist­
ing social evolutionary predicament that is uniquely human. 
410 < The Symbolic Species

C 
H 
A 
P 
T 
E 
R 
T 
H 
R 
T 
E 
E 
N 
A Serendipitous Mind 
The real danger is not that computers will begin to think like men, 
but that men will begin to think like computers. 
-sydney J. Harris 
The Fail-Safe Computer 
C 
onsider how remarkable it is that almost no human being fails to ac­
quire at leࡈt some degree of rudimentary symbolic-linguistic ability­
even in the face of considerable perinatal brain damage. Severely 
retarded people sometimes possess only crude grammatical abilities and a 
small vocabulary or exhibit difficulty articulating words and sentences, and 
yet they generally still understand the symbolic content of words and sim­
ple sentences. Contrast this with the near unleamability of symbols by 
other species, even apparently very intelligent species. This book began by 
considering the curious lack of natural symbolic systems in all nonhuman 
species, the limited capacity to gain symbolic understanding in most, and 
the failure of domesticated animals-immersed in the dense web of human 
411

symbolic interactions-to discover more than a few rote associations of 
words and phrases. What are the implications of this species difference and 
its associated neurological basis? 
Evolution has widened the cognitive gap between the human species and 
all others into a yawning chasm. Taken together, the near-universal failure 
of nonhumans and the near-universal success of humans in acquiring sym­
bolic abilities suggest that this shift corresponds to a major reassignment of 
cognitive resources to help overcome natural barriers to symbol learning. 
Other species' failures at symbol learning do not result from the lack of some 
essential structure present only in human brains. As we have seen, chim­
panzees can, under special circumstances, be brought to understand sym­
bolic communication, though at best on a comparatively modest scale. The 
difference between symbolic and nonsymbolic communication may be a cat­
egorical difference in semiotic terms, but the neurological basis of our sym­
bolic advantage is not due to a categorical difference in brain structure, only 
to a quantitative rearrangement of existing parts. Nevertheless, this shift in 
proportions spans a critical learning threshold that stands between indexi­
cal associations and symbolic reference. Although it is possible for other 
species to cross this threshold by learning and unlearning sets of associa­
tions in just the right way, it is incredibly unlikely. Yet in humans, a re­
structuring of the brain has acted like a catalyst, making the immensely 
improbable nearly inevitable. 
In evolutionary terms, it would be accurate to say that the genetic basis 
for symbol-learning abilities has been driven to "fixation." In other words, 
it has become a universal trait of the species. Though there may be varia­
tions in this ability among people, essentially all of this variability is above 
the threshold necessary for acquiring symbols. Whenever most variation of 
a trait is eliminated, we can usually assume that selection for it has been 
and still is intense. There must have been some very significant reproduc­
tive advantages to symbol acquisition, and severe reproductive costs in 
cases of failure to acquire symbols. An individual born into a symbolic cul­
ture with an ape's bias against acquiring symbolic associations would be de­
prived of access to most realms of know-how and social influence, and have 
little chance to reproduce successfully. The ancestral lineages that suc­
ceeded best and left the most progeny were those in which symbolic abil­
ities were able to develop despite a wide range of interfering influences. 
Language acquisition had to become fail-safe. After 2 million years it has 
clearly reached this status. 
The simplest way to make something fail-safe is to design it far beyond 
the basic requirements. To ensure that a physical structure is totally safe, 
412 < The Symbolic Species

for example, it must be designed to handle loads that are far greater than 
those it would normally be called upon to support. It must be built to ex­
ceed the requirements of its one most extreme load, not the average load. 
In a word, it must be overbuilt. I want to suggest that the neuroanatomical 
evidence of massively altered brain proportions and the anthropological and 
clinical evidence for universality of symbol learning across a wide spectrum 
of circumstances indicate that the human brain has been significantly over­
built for learning symbolic associations. Human brain structure is an exag­
gerated reflection-a caricature almost--of the special demands imposed 
by symbol learning. We are not just adapted for symbol learning, but for 
fail-safe symbol learning. 
This symbol-learning insurance policy is provided by a comparatively 
overdeveloped prefrontal cortex, whose connections have gained the upper 
hand in numerous synaptic competitions throughout the brain. The extra­
ordinary extent of this disproportional feature reflects its overdesign. It is 
a not-so-subtle clue to the central learning problems that make symbolic 
associations so hard for other species: the learning of higher-order condi­
tional associations. But overbuilding for this one function has other conse­
quences. The shift in cognitive strategy that underlies the assurance of 
symbol learning surfaces in a wide range of otherwise unrelated learning 
and attentional processes. If this exaggerated adaptation were merely a 
specialized sensory template or innately preprogrammed motor output, its 
effects might have been more domain-specific; instead, this peculiar adap­
tation has a largely supramodal character. It extends its influence into many 
learning realms. Symbolic abilities were recruited to serve other social and 
pragmatic functions than those which selected for their initial appearance. 
These ultimately became parallel "amplifiers" of the symbol-learning adap­
tations of the brain. This also applies to the component neurological biases 
that have made symbol learning fail-safe. Once present, these biases have 
become powerful sources of social evolutionary selection, independently re­
cruited for functipns in novel domains unrelated to language. 
Important insights into the peculiarly human cognitive style have recently 
been provided by studies of the cognitive abilities of captive chimpanzees 
and other primates. Though the more carefully other primates' mental abil­
ities are investigated, the more they seem able to do, some curiously sim­
ple tasks elude them. One characteristic example has recently been 
described by Sally Boysen of Ohio State University.1 She set up a problem 
that chimpanzees could not seem to solve. Given a choice between two 
different-sized piles of a desirable food (like candy), chimpanzees consis­
tently choose the larger pile, just as human children do. Boysen complicated 
Terrence W. Deacon > 413

matters by giving the larger pile not to the chimp who chose it but to a sec­
ond chimp. In effect, one chimp was asked to choose the pile another would 
get, and by default, which would be left for himself. 
When human children are presented with similar choices, most of them 
quickly catch onto the trick and learn to choose the smaller pile to give away 
(though infants under two years also have difficulty with the problem). 
Chimps, however, have extraordinary difficulty discovering the winning 
strategy. They repeatedly choose the larger pile, only to watch in agitated 
dismay as it is given away. Of course, one could argue that the chimps are 
just very unselfish creatures, but their emotional response suggests that gen­
erosity is not what they have in mind. I suspect that the task poses a diffi­
culty, not because the chimps are ambivalent about sharing or cannot assess 
what they want, and probably not because they fail to comprehend the likely 
outcome after repeated trials, but because the presence of such a salient 
reward undermines their ability to use the stimulus information against it­
self. Being completely focused on what they want, they seem unable to stand 
back from the situation, so to speak, and subjugate their desire to the prag­
matic context, which requires them to do the opposite of what they would 
normally do to achieve the same end. This is a very counterintuitive asso­
ciation for chimps to learn, because the indirect solution is overshadowed 
by the very powerful influence of its mutually exclusive and otherwise ob­
vious alternative. The highly rewarding nature of the stimulus also reinforces 
the power of the competing association. 
The chimps in Boysen's study were also trained to associate Arabic nu­
merals with differing quantities, and succeeded in transferring these token­
quantity associations to tests in which they used the tokens to make choices 
between larger or smaller piles of candies. 2 These experiments showed that 
when numerals were used instead of actual piles of candies, the chimps 
could learn to choose the one associated with less, and thus get the larger 
pile. Were the chimps able to use symbolic numeric information to over­
come this cognitive "conflict"? Possibly, but a simpler account is sufficient 
to explain the result. If the chimps learned that the numerals were indices 
associated with perceived differences of quantity, choosing the lowest nu­
meral to get the highest number of candies need no longer be interpreted 
as a "choose the pile you don't want" problem. When this associated stim­
ulus is used in place of the candy, the chimp merely needs to learn which 
numerals correlate with getting the larger reward to succeed. It could thus 
be treated as a transfer learning problem of a particularly difficult form, be­
cause it requires a reversal of the pattern of associations. Irrespective of 
whether a chimp (or child) uses an indexical or a symbolic solution to this 
414 < The Symbolic Species

problem, the experiment clearly demonstrates how the indirectness of in­
dexical and symbolic reference helps to reduce the power of the stimulus 
(icon) to drive behavior. Ascending the representational hierarchy pro­
gressively frees responses from stimulus-driven immediacy, thus creating 
space for the generation and consideration of alternatives. 
Choosing the opposite of what you want has all the hallmarks of tests that 
tend to be sensitive measures of prefrontal cortex damage in humans (sim­
ilar incapacities to resist impulsive choices in patients with prefrontal dam­
age are described by Antonio Damasio in his book Descartes' Error). It 
demonstrates the importance of this brain structure in shifting from a more 
"natural" habitual response to one that is its opposite; but more important, 
it also demonstrates that this requires overcoming the emotional immedi­
acy of powerful reinforcers. The more powerful the past reinforcement and 
the more salient the competing alternatives, the more difficult the shift and 
the greater the need for prefrontal bias. This emphasizes the complex in­
terdependency of the emotional as well as cognitive aspects oflearning, and 
the special role that prefrontal cortex plays in both realms. 
Am I suggesting that chimpanzees are like human patients with brain 
damage? Only in a metaphoric sense. Though healthy chimpanzees have 
well-developed and intact prefrontal lobes, and can solve many similar 
perspective-reversal and response-inhibition problems that other species 
can't, they run into difficulty when the power and salience of the alterna­
tives are great. It is only when the solution to a problem demands domi­
nance of prefrontal activities over very strong alternative tendencies that 
the greater prefrontal dominance in humans becomes evident. Indeed, it 
is in predicaments where the most intense impulses for immediate personal 
reward or self-protection are overcome in service of larger aims that we rec­
ognize some of the most exalted expressions of humanity. A bias may only 
be a matter of degree, but in certain contexts the degree of prefrontal bias 
can make the difference between success and failure. This appears to be 
the case with SyPlbol learning. 
Of course, nothing is entirely fail-safe, and there are certain examples of 
abnormal human mental development where the human prefrontal bias 
seems to have been compromised, with both cognitive and emotional con­
sequences. One such example is autism. Autism was discussed in Chapter 
9 as an example of symbol acquisition difficulties, but correlated with this 
there are often both islands of spared "special" abilities and characteristic 
features of emotional impulsiveness, asociality, and stereotypic ritualized be­
havior. Islands of spared or enhanced ability occur most often in the realms 
of spatial cognition, artistic talents, numerical skills, mnemonic fetishes, and 
Terrence W. Deacon > 415

even music. Such people are so-called idiot savants or autistic savants, like 
the character portrayed in the popular film Rain Man. We see in these cases 
a distorted reflection of what we generally consider to be genius. It is in­
teresting that the most commonly recognized child prodigies tend to be 
those gifted with mathematical, artistic, or musical abilities. What unites all 
of these domains is a formal combinatorial system in which it is possible to 
produce results without interpreting them. Sums can be computed auto­
matically, music can be learned by rote. Interpretation may even get in the 
way. Both mathematical prodigies and idiot-savant "lightning calculators" 
seem to do in their heads what normal people can only do with consider­
able external notational support and much more time. One might charac­
terize the theory I have proposed about language abilities in these terms: 
prefrontal overdevelopment has made us all savants of language and sym­
bolic learning. While stil immature and exhibiting very limited learning abil­
ities in most realms, two- and three-year-old children spontaneously solve 
symbol-learning problems "in their heads" that other species find essentialy 
impossible even with considerable outside human support. 
We humans are all like autistic savants in one other sense. We tend to 
apply our one favored cognitive style to everything. Like the character por­
trayed in Rain Man, who sees the world in terms of numbers of objects, we 
cannot help but see the world in symbolic categorical terms, dividing it up 
according to opposed features, and organizing our lives according to themes 
and narratives. From anthropologists studying the mythologies and kinship 
systems of diverse cultures to developmental psychologists studying young 
children's fascination with negation and use of it to regularize an inconsis­
tent language experience or test social rules, we see not just a receptivity 
to symbolic relationships but a propensity to employ the biases that make 
symbols possible. We find pleasure in manipulating the world so that it fits 
into a symbolic Procrustean bed, and when it does fit and seems to obey 
symbolic rules, we find the result comforting, even beautiful. 
But also like the autistic savant, we find that this global shift in cognitive 
strategy has other serendipitous consequences as well, which extend far be­
yond the realm oflanguage. 
The Sphinx 
Iflanguage evolution correlated with a restructuring of the human brain 
on a global level, then there should be important consequences for a the­
ory of the human mind and human nature. On the one hand, if language 
evolved as the result of the addition to the brain of a modular device whose 
416 < The Symbolic Species

effect on cognition was confined to a specialized domain, such as grammar 
and syntax, then we would be justified in thinking of human nature as ape­
like, except in this one context. We could consider ourselves as chimpanzees­
with-grammar. On the other hand, if the changes in the human brain were 
no more than a consequence of increasing brain size and general intelli­
gence, then we would be justified in considering ourselves genius chim­
panzees and thinking of chimpanzees as though they were dull and inept 
humans. Both of these caricatures of our place in nature have found wide­
spread appeal over the years in popular expositions and even in the scien­
tific literature. But the problem of comprehending where we fit in the 
context of the evolution of mind is considerably more difficult than either 
one suggests. Nonhuman minds are not just human minds with some spe­
cial ability subtracted, nor are they human minds that are just considerably 
more dull and uninformed. Both views minimize the comparison problem. 
The human case is difficult because we can neither rely on the logic of 
language to explain what happened to the brain, nor can we rely on some 
incremental increase in a general feature found in other species. Thus, 
when we use hindsight to analyze our own cognitive evolution-subtract­
ing specific abilities or reducing overall thinking power-the simpler minds 
that we imagine as a result tum out to be both distorted images of ourselves 
and poor images of our ancestors and ape relatives. We end up misrepre­
senting other species' minds and not recognizing the oddities of our own. 
The result is an imaginary chimeric creature like those drawn in medieval 
bestiaries, half human, half animal, with a human head and an animal body 
like the Sphinx of ancient Egypt. 
Because the human brain is organized differently, so is the mind that it 
gives rise to. The ways we think are the result of a new way of using the 
brain's resources. Brain-language co-evolution has significantly restruc­
tured cognition from the top-down, so to speak, when compared to other 
species. The prominent enlargement of prefrontal cortex and the correlated 
shifts in connectjon patterns that occurred during human brain evolution 
introduced strong biases into the learning process and gave human pre­
frontal circuits a greater role in many neural processes unrelated to lan­
guage. Though intense selection was directed toward this one aspect of mind 
and brain, its secondary effects have also ramified to influence the whole 
of human cognition. Human beings approach the world of sensory stimuli 
and motor demands differently from other species, particularly with respect 
to higher-order learning processes, and these differences are evident even 
when our symbolic-linguistic abilities are uninvolved. 
Let's begin with one of the most direct counterparts to language: our non-
Terrence W. Deacon > 417

linguistic vocal communication. With the evolution oflanguage, there would 
inevitably have been changes in selection pressures affecting the hominid 
call repertoire. These changes would probably have included reduced se­
lection for referential specificity, since such functions would have been 
better supported by symbolic communication. There would also be selec­
tion for changes in call and display functions that would be complementary 
to language functions. The effects of these selection pressures would have 
been unique to human evolution. In addition, there were likely incidental 
effects on the hominid vocal repertoire as a result of changes in vocaliza­
tion circuits at the midbrain and brain stem levels. 
Most species of primates have a modest repertoire of innate stereotypic 
calls; estimates range from fifteen to forty by different researchers study­
ing different primate species. Though a small repertoire compared to 
human vocabularies, it seems large when compared to the few innate human 
vocalizations. These include laughing, sobbing, screaming with fright, cry­
ing with pain, groaning, and sighing. It is difficult to think of others. The 
list is embarrassingly small compared to call types cited for other primates. 
Although these primate estimates may be inflated by analytical subdivisions, 
and this human list does not include any variant subtypes, even conserva­
tive estimates of primate calls probably exceed the human repertoire in size. 
Human calls are not just suppressed or replaced by language. And tran­
siently expressed calls are not produced by infants or released in adults as 
a consequence of cortical aphasia, though curses and expletive phrases may 
be. 
Speech prosody is essentially a mode of communication that provides a 
parallel channel to speech. As we noted earlier, there are a number of rea­
sons to suspect that this has been recruited from ancestral call functions. 
Like these systems, prosodic features are primarily produced by the larynx 
and lungs, and not articulated by the mouth and tongue. Though tonal 
shifts can be used as phonemes, the changes in tonality, volume, and phras­
ing that constitute prosodic features are most often produced without con­
scious intention. There are also likely to be many universal patterns of 
prosodic expression, though I am aware of few that have been systemati­
cally investigated. Finally, the communicative content of prosodic signals 
parallels that of other stereotypic vocalizations: they are symptomatic of 
arousal level, emotional states, and attention. But unlike calls of other 
species, prosodic vocal modification is continuous and highly correlated with 
the speech process. It is as though the call circuits are being continuously 
stimulated by vocal output systems. This may literally be the case. Dis­
placement of midbrain axonal connections by cortical efferents likely in-
418 < The Symbolic Species

eludes prefrontal projections to midbrain and brainstem nuclei that also re­
ceive limbic and diencephalic inputs and contribute to stereotypic vocal dis­
plays in other species. Prefrontal output would be particularly likely to 
reflect rapid shifts in arousal and attention because of its role in organizing 
and anticipating the ordering and associative processes in speech produc­
tion. 
Laughter and sobbing are two innate human calls that are quite distinc­
tive from those produced by other species. They are characterized by many 
invariant features in all normal humans. Their motor programs, like those 
of most primate calls, appear to depend on localized midbrain and brain 
stem circuits, and they are principally activated by limbic structures of the 
forebrain. They are the first two social vocalizations that children make, and 
they induce responses in others that are highly predictive of emotional 
states. They are highly contagious in social contexts, whether among adults 
or infants in a nursery. Al of these features suggest that both were shaped 
by significant selection pressures for the social functions they perform. 
As the most elaborated human calls, independent oflanguage functions, 
laughter and sobbing may offer important clues about the context of lan­
guage evolution. Laughter is highly socially contagious, and feigned or 
forced "social" laughter is produced frequently in many social contexts. 
These features suggest that laughter played an important role in the main­
tenance of group cohesion and identity during a major phase of hominid 
evolution. Another important clue is that both crying and laughter play sig­
nificant roles in the social communication of infants with their caretakers 
long before language develops later in childhood. I think that it is particu­
larly informative that these two vocalizations involve inverse breathing pat­
terns: spasmodic breathing on inhalation (sobbing) versus spasmodic 
breathing on exhalation (laughing). This indicates that their sound config­
urations were selected with respect to one another, as a result of disruptive 
selection against intermediate ambiguous forms. These two vocalizations 
must have playe.d very important roles in social communication to have 
turned out so distinctive and so independent of speech systems. Both seem 
to be powerful influences for group cohesion and for promoting shared 
emotional experience. The fact that both are expressed in infancy, long be­
fore any use of language is possible, offers evidence that they may at least 
in part have played crucial roles in bridging the gap in social communica­
tion during the extended period before the brain is able to approach the 
difficult task of symbol acquisition. But their production also persists into 
adulthood, and serves to initiate some of the more intense social-affiliation 
responses humans engage in. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 419

But correlated with the co-evolution of these human calls with language, 
and the changes this produced in the brain, are some unique features. Sob­
bing is a call that has many nonhuman counterparts, particularly in young 
animals separated from their mothers. Its social function and the powerful 
selection pressures that shape it apply equally to both humans and nonhu­
mans. Curiously, however, human sobbing is also commonly associated with 
loss, not just fear and isolation. Sorrow is an emotion that almost certainly 
has been exaggerated and modified by symbolic cognition, due to the power 
of symbolization to aid the mental representation of what-if scenarios. How 
much more painful is the loss of loved ones, because we can imagine what 
life would have been like had they remained? 
The same sort of mix of nonsymbolic and symbolic correlates charac­
terizes laughter. The role oflaughter and smiling as vehicles for social bond­
ing in parent -infant interactions may be important, but the function of their 
ubiquitous inclusion in casual adult conversation is less obvious, though 
probably similar. The role of laughter as a play signal, especialy in mock 
aggression (as in response to tickling), may also offer some hint as to an older 
evolutionary role. But the ability of jokes and other forms of humor to elicit 
this stereotypic call is the most curious feature of all. Rather than a func­
tion under any selection pressure, it too has probably evolved as an inci­
dental correlate of these other social functions and a somewhat 
serendipitous connection to the peculiar symbolic pirouette that constitutes 
humor. 
The enigmatic connection between laughter and humor may be a side 
effect of the adaptation for symbol learning. The hierarchical nature of the 
processes that determine symbolic reference is particularly well exempli­
fied by a joke, because humor provides an additional layer to the hierarchy 
of interpretive processes, beyond the level we generally consider word or 
sentence meaning. This is evident in cases where a person understands the 
meaning of every word and sentence of a joke and yet still fails to "get" the 
joke. The interpretive process involves more than understanding what is 
said. To "get" a joke is to understand the way the logic of the punch line 
both fulfills and undermines some "expected" conclusion. This ability si­
multaneously to entertain inconsistent alternative perspectives extrapo­
lated from the same initial context is something that only we humans have. 
The structure of puns, jokes, and other forms of humor involves conflicts 
of conditional and hierarchic relationships. The shift of representation from 
one system of associations to another parallel but previously unrecognized 
one is common to both interpreting jokes and reconstructing symbolic re­
lationships. Both are discovery processes, or insights, wherein previously ac-
420 < The Symbolic Species

quired information and expectations must be quickly recoded according to 
a previously obscure but implicit logic. It is probably not accidental that such 
discovery processes are associated with positive emotions and a kind of re­
lease of social tensions. 
Consider the intensity with which contemporary humans pursue mys­
teries, scientific discoveries, puzzles, and humor, and the elation that a so­
lution provides. The apocryphal story of Archimedes running naked through 
the street yelling "Eureka!" captures this experience well. The positive 
emotions associated with such insights implicate more than just a cognitive 
act. The reinforcement that is intrinsic to achieving such a recoding of the 
familiar may be an important part of the adaptation that biases our think­
ing to pursue this result. A call that may primarily have been selected for 
its role as a symptom of"recoding" potentially aggressive actions as friendly 
social play seems to have been "captured" by the similar recoding process 
implicit in humor and discovery. In both conditions, insight, surprise, and 
removal of uncertainty are critical components. These features of humor 
again implicate prefrontal functions that enable mutually exclusive associ­
ations to be juxtaposed. Perhaps the "release" of laughter, like the sudden 
disinhibition of a suppressed automatic response, reflects the disengaging 
of prefrontal control. The link between a type of cognitive operation and a 
stereotypic call is curious and probably reflects the increased cortical con­
trol over vocal call production. 
It is often the case that jokes have an aggressive social undercurrent to 
them, and yet they trivialize these tendencies as well. This may be a clue to 
a presymbolic function. Laughter is probably most common not in humor­
ous contexts but in uncomfortable social contexts, where it displays both a 
nonaggressive stance and a kind of group assent. But laughter is not just an 
expression of emotion. It is a public symptom of engaging in a kind of men­
tal conflict resolution. For this reason, whereas continuous crying is taken 
as a symptom of a seriously depressed state, continuous laughter is seldom 
interpreted as a sign of continuous elation, but rather as a symptom of a dis­
turbance of reason, such as confusional or delusional states, and the asso­
ciated conflicted emotions. 
The unusual size of the prefrontal cortex in comparison to other not so 
enlarged brain structures may have costs as well as incidental side effects. 
These may be realized in the form of susceptibilities to disorders centered 
on prefrontal dysfunction. Even in resting attentive states, human pre­
frontal cortex tends to be more metabolically active than most other corti­
cal areas. Human brains may thus be far more sensitive to prefrontal 
disturbances than are other mammal brains. Schizophrenia, manic-
Terrence W. Deacon > 421

depressive disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorders, panic syndromes, 
Parkinsonism, and Alzheimer's disease are al associated with major changes 
in prefrontal cortex metabolism, and by implication, activity in the prefrontal 
cortex. Manic states, panic states, and obsessive-compulsive disorders ap­
pear to be associated with hyperactivity in the prefrontal cortex, whereas 
schizophrenia, depression, Parkinsonism, and Alzheimer's disease appear 
to be associated with hypoactivity of the prefrontal cortex. 
Many of these disorders are associated with neural regulatory systems 
that serve to rev up or slow down certain general neural processes in dif­
ferent regions during different modes of activity. They are in this sense anal­
ogous to hormone systems and autonomic nervous functions in the rest of 
the body, which selectively tune the levels of visceral processes, repair 
mechanisms, and metabolic processes to adapt to certain major modes of 
activity. In the brain, this selective tuning is under the control of a smal 
number of groups of neurons with connections that span many regions of 
the brain. They also employ a related set of neurotransmitters. Three major 
groups use aromatic monoamine neurotransmitters (e.g., dopamine, sero­
tonin, and noradrenaline) and have vast branching arbors of axons that ex­
tend from small midbrain populations of cells and are distributed over vast 
forebrain areas. These neurotransmitters play crucial roles in adjusting the 
gain in the motor system, the experience of reward and pleasure, the reg­
ulation of attention, the process of learning, induction and maintenance of 
sleep, dreaming, and many other global brain processes. They are also the 
major targets for a great many psychotropic drugs, including cocaine and 
LSD, used for their mood- and mind-altering effects; L-DOPA, used for 
Parkinsonism; many antipsychotic agents; and Prozac, which has gained 
wide appeal as an antidepressant. 
It is notable that these populations of neurons are located in the mid­
brain and upper brain stem, and these are regions that remain unexpanded 
in the human brain. Though we do not know yet whether these groups of 
cells have escaped the cell-number-determination processes of the brain re­
gions they are born into, if they do not, then human brains wil possess far 
less of these regulatory cells per regions of the brain to be regulated than 
any other mammal. Moreover, one of the major cortical target zones for 
many of these projections is the prefrontal cortex. This may make this sys­
tem far more sensitive to slight disturbances of regulation, and more easily 
driven to pathological states of operation. 
From studies of these projection systems in animals, it has become clear 
that one way the brain compensates for loss of connections or downregu­
lation of neurotransmitter release, as often occurs with the use of psy-
422 < The Symbolic Species

chotropic drugs, is to upregulate the sensitivity of cells that receive inputs 
from them. Thus during aging, drug sensitization, or pathological degen­
eration of these systems, the brain can extend the limits of control by be­
coming hypersensitive to even low-level inputs from these systems. But 
being close to the edge, so to speak, increases the sensitivity to perturba­
tions and biological mistakes. Because of their brain proportions, humans 
might be predicted to have prefrontal cortex neurons that are relatively hy­
persensitive to changes of monoamine inputs. Since other systems of the 
human brain are also likely to be far more dependent on prefrontal func­
tions than in other species' brains, it probably makes this entire relation­
ship highly vulnerable to radical malfunction in response to lesions, 
metabolic disturbances, or genetic abnormalities. Depending on how it is 
impacted, the effects produce social mood disturbances or disturbed sym­
bolic thought processes. These seem to be part of a spectrum of prefrontally 
associated disturbances of both social and symbolic cognition that can un­
dermine normal function after the development of symbolic abilities, as 
compared to Williams syndrome and to autism, which disturb the initial de­
velopment of social and symbolic abilities. 
No Mind Is an Island 
Because of our symbolic abilities, we humans have access to a novel 
higher-order representation system that not only recodes experiences and 
guides the formation of skills and habits, but also provides a means of rep­
resenting features of a world that no other creature experiences, the world 
of the abstract. We do not just live our lives in the physical world and our 
immediate social group, but also in a world of rules of conduct, beliefs about 
our histories, and hopes and fears about imagined futures. This world is gov­
erned by principles different from any that have selected for neural circuit 
design in the past eons of evolution. We possess no brain regions specially 
adapted for hamling the immense flood of experiences from this world, only 
those adapted for life in a concrete world of percepts and actions. These 
unsuited neural systems have been forced into service, and do the best they 
can to accommodate to an alien world and recode its input in more famil­
iar forms. The consequences are both marvelous and horrendous. 
One of these alien realms is the realm of other minds. Philosophers have 
long struggled with the problem of how we know that we are in a world pop­
ulated with other minds. The problem was brought into precise focus by 
Rene Descartes in a classic meditation on the problem of whether we can 
be certain that other people really exist. Though the question merits no prac-
Terrence W. Deacon > 423

tical consideration, it challenges both our conception of self and mind, and 
is directly relevant to the symboVnonsymbol distinction. Indeed, it is not 
just coincidental that Descartes was convinced that only people have minds. 
Other animals he thought were mere mechanisms, mindless clockworks. 
The dualistic dichotomy between mind and mechanism, subjective experi­
ence and material causation, is implicit in common sense psychology and 
has been the major theoretical subject of scientific psychology since that 
time. 
Descartes was interested in whether we can ever know beyond any doubt 
if the bodies of friends and neighbors we encounter daily also have their 
own subjective experiences. Could it be possible that we are surrounded 
by the illusions of other beings, as in our dreams? When someone tells me 
their thoughts, are the words I hear just sounds produced by a biological 
robot, a mere mechanism? In a serious modem parody of this question, ar­
tificial intelligence researchers have constructed programs that are capable 
of fooling people into thinking that a person rather than a program is com­
municating with them by computer keyboard. This is what was known as a 
Turing test, suggested by a thought experiment proposed by the English 
mathematician Alan Turing as a test of whether a mechanism can be con­
sidered intelligent (though Turing actually had a somewhat less ambitious 
formal problem in mind). Such exercises testify to human ingenuity and 
gullibility alike: many people are fooled. 
The problem with other minds is that the glimpses we get of them are 
all indirect. VVe have a subjective experience of our own thought processes, 
but at best only an imagined representation of what goes on in others' sub­
jective experience. When we speculate about others' "inner" states, the 
only data we have to go on are what they tell us and what we observe of 
their physical states. Like the subject in the Turing test, we are forced to 
make assessments on rather limited and indirect data. We can, it seems, have 
direct knowledge only of ourselves. In philosophy, this argument is aptly 
termed solipsism (from the Latin solus, alone, and ipse, self). 
In the post-psychoanalytic age, we are now painfully aware of a trou­
blesome extension of this problem: we often do not even know ourselves. 
Not only have we forgotten much about our pasts, but Sigmund Freud con­
vinced us that we can often be wrong about our own memories and beliefs 
about ourselves (a view that even non-Freudians hold, though disagreeing 
on the cause or interpretation of the error). The idea that an unconscious 
process might "rewrite" our personal memories to cover up past trauma puts 
us in doubt of even our direct experience of self. In other words, if our men­
tal experiences are mediated by representation al the way down, then there 
424 < The Symbolic Species

is no direct knowledge. In these terms, the problem of representing the sub­
jective experience of another and the problem of representing one's own 
subjective experience both entirely depend on the nature of the represen­
tational processes involved. The problem is not whether some knowledge 
is representation and some is direct and unrepresented. The problem is, 
rather, what sort of representation is involved, and what knowledge this pro­
vides of our minds and the minds of others. 
If thought and experience are information processes, then the problems 
of representing other minds and representing our own minds ultimately be­
come the same problem. Both forms of knowledge depend on a person's or 
animal's interpretive abilities. For this reason, as Descartes saw, the 
human/nonhuman difference in representational abilities inevitably enters 
into the question of knowledge of minds. If symbolic referential abilities are 
essentially confined to humans, there should indeed be important implica­
tions for animal and human minds, beyond communication alone. 
In our everyday dealings with one another, we constantly try to antici­
pate others' behavioral plans or decision-making processes, either just to 
get along with them or else the better to manipulate them. Of course, even 
human social behavior is at least 90 percent social habit, and most of our 
actions are probably performed with no more than a fleeting consideration 
of what "anyone" would tend to do in some situation. Learned social habits 
provide a sort of unanalyzed folk psychology that gets us by. It is usually only 
in circumstances where we are especially surprised by others, or when we 
are intensely motivated by love, anger, fear, or avarice, that we strive to un­
derstand the workings of someone else's thought processes. Our frequent 
poor guesses about what others are thinking or planning attest both to the 
mostly "theoretical" nature of the process and to how complicated minds 
actually are. 
Human social institutions, etiquette, and morality are predicated on the 
assumption that we are capable of such thinking about other minds. Even 
if this is a very fallible exercise, we expect people to engage in such activ­
ity under a variety Zf circumstances and are rightfully indignant or angered 
when they don't. We do not, however, hold other species to these standards. 
When we observe chimpanzees hunting down, capturing, and dismem­
bering colobus monkeys alive as they devour them, we often feel a mixture 
of horror and acceptance. We do not call the chimpanzees cruel, as we 
would a human torturer causing his victim horrific pain. We have the intu­
ition that somehow these otherwise very intelligent creatures fail to em­
pathize with their victims, not out of conscious effort or the intention to 
cause suffering, but because it just doesn't occur to them. Of course, we ex-
Terrence W. Deacon > 425

ercise the same restrained judgment with respect to young children's acts 
of unkindness. The ability to take another's perspective is not inborn. It takes 
time and some degree of enculturation both to develop the ability to think 
in these terms, and to learn under what circumstances others expect you to 
apply it. 
The problem of other minds has recently found its way into studies of 
animal social behaviors--often phrased in terms of a "theory of mind." Ba­
sically, the question is whether animals know that there is someone behind 
their perceptual experience of others. Do animals act socially on the basis 
of what they think others are thinking? To have a "theory of mind," in this 
nonphilosophical sense, is to have a mental representation of the subjec­
tive experience of others. A number of ingenious experiments have at­
tempted to test whether animals tend to behave in response to what they 
infer others know, feel, or desire. Not surprisingly, the results are often hard 
to interpret. 
It is a difficult question to answer experimentally, because it is possible 
for an intelligent and perceptive animal to learn to anticipate another's be­
havior in response to different conditions, irrespective of any model of why 
they are responding the way they do, and so give a false impression of rep­
resenting a mental cause as opposed to merely developing an unanalyzed, 
conditioned response. This experimental difficulty is analogous to the prob­
lem we encountered earlier of determining whether a given referential be­
havior is symbolic or merely indexical. The parallel is not just a superficial 
one. Both are questions about the mode of representation. Is the repre­
sentation of the expected behavior of the other mediated simply by a pair­
ing of past instances of others' responses to similar circumstances, or by 
some additional representations about how these responses are caused by 
(recoded as) the hidden experiences of others? 
Apart from postulating an innate "theory of mind module," how could 
such a mental representation be produced? In other words, what is neces­
sary in order for information from another's behavior to be interpreted as 
representing another mind? The nature of this representation will depend 
on whether the individual is only able to interpret the behavior patterns as 
indices of future tendencies to behave, or is able also to interpret them as 
indices of mental states. The lack of symbolic referential abilities in non­
human species limits them to representation of associations between stim­
uli, including the behaviors of others. These relationships can be quite 
numerous and complex, providing the animal with extensive familiarity 
with the predispositions of others. Probably most of the intimate behavioral 
knowledge we gain about friends and family members is of this type. 
426 < The Symbolic Species

But the additional step to building an independent mental representa­
tion of the subjective experience of another, represented as if one were able 
to trade places, requires a symbolic jump. Since indexical reference grows 
out of repeated experiences of explicit pairing of stimuli or events, there is 
no possibility that pairing with another's mental state could be learned by 
association. It is an abstract attribute, inferred from the systematic patterns 
of the indexical relationships between observed conditions and behaviors, 
and identified with and opposed to one's own experiences. Constructing an­
other point of view requires the ability to maintain awareness of the index­
ical information, and to use this to produce a representation of what it 
would be like to experience it from a different perspective, a complicated 
double-negative referential relationship. This is a cognitive task that almost 
certainly requires prefrontal cortex involvement, and evidence of failure to 
be able to take the other's perspective is a common disability of patients with 
significant prefrontal damage. Some striking examples of related difficul­
ties of taking another "perspective" are described by Antonio Damasio in 
Descartes' Error. In this regard the hypersociality ofWilliams syndrome pa­
tients, and their intense monitoring and solicitation of others' responses in 
social interactions, may also be understood not just as a function of modi­
fied afect but as a shift in cognitive style, in which an exaggerated prefrontal 
bias may lead to an exaggerated reliance on symbolic prediction of others' 
behaviors. This may be particularly important if indexical representation of 
the predispositions of others is impaired. The inverse argument may also 
apply to autistic individuals. Because of a difficulty with perspective shift­
ing, they may only develop knowledge of another's predispositions to be­
have by virtue of attention on physical behaviors as indices. Thus, the ability 
to form a representation of another's mental experience, as opposed to just 
their predispositions, is both mediated by symbols and dependent on many 
of the same mental operations and neural substrates as are critical to sym­
bolic abilities. 
As novelists and poets amply demonstrate, the range of personas and ex­
periences that cYn be conveyed through symbolic media is unbounded. In 
a very real sense, this gives us the ability to share a virtual common mind. 
Because symbolic representation maintains reference irrespective of in­
dexical attachment to any particular experiences, when an idea or a narra­
tive of someone's experience is reconstructed by another, it can be 
regrounded, so to speak, by interpreting it in terms of the iconic and in­
dexical representations that constitute the listener's memory. Symbolic ref­
erence is interpreter-independent, because each interpreter independently 
supplies the nonsymbolic ground for it. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 427

Without symbolic representations at their disposal, it seems unlikely that 
other species could behave according to a theory of others' minds, much 
less share representations of others' experiences. Sharing common inten­
tions, interests, goals, and emotions is the most effective means for coordi­
nating behavior, and being able to imagine and anticipate another's mental 
and emotional responses is a powerful tool for social manipulation. If I am 
correct about the social-reproductive dilemma that served as the initial im­
petus for symbol evolution, then the ability mentally to represent other 
minds is one of the primary functions of symbolization. 
Animal societies are complex, and animals often cooperate and appear 
to share common intentions and emotional states. And many species have 
a well-developed sensitivity to the emotional states of others, even others 
that are different species. Without the ability to represent others' experi­
ences, how is this possible? Is it an error of anthropomorphic attribution 
to see empathy in these cases? The problem of empathy is not necessar­
ily a problem of representing another mind; rather it is a problem of ar­
riving at an emotional state that is the same as, or parallel with, that of 
another. Empathy involves both communication and interpretation, in 
which one individual (animal or human) interprets signs produced by an­
other in a way that induces a corresponding emotional state. Symbols are 
not necessary to this process. The question we must ask is not whether lan­
guage is a good vehicle for conveying and inducing emotions in others, but 
rather whether the ability to produce a symbolic interpretation of signs of 
another's emotional state provides empathic capabilities that are inacces­
sible without it. 
The problem of empathy is a problem of shared emotions, and although 
language may play a role in communicating about one's emotional state, it 
is far less effective as a means of conveying emotion than the numerous non­
verbal forms of communication that evolved for precisely this purpose. 
Tone of voice, posture, facial expression, and such specialized vocalizations 
as laughter and crying are incomparably more powerful conveyers of emo­
tional state. This sort of communication is at least as well developed in other 
species as in ourselves, and as many commentators have observed, we hu­
mans are often less in touch with the emotional states of others than are 
other species such as our own pets. We value the performances of skilled 
actors precisely for bringing to the words of a play the nonverbal signs that 
can release our own emotional engagement. It would therefore seem that 
language evolution could have contributed only modestly to empathic abil­
ity, and may even interfere with it. One might be tempted to argue that the 
development oflanguage abilities goes hand in hand with a decline in emo-
428 < The Symbolic Species

tional sensitivity and empathy. But this only considers language as a medium 
for communicating emotion. What is also relevant is that language, as the 
most sophisticated symbolic system, provides a medium for building com­
plex symbolic representations of emotions. 
Following the representational hierarchy, we can identify three ways in 
which the emotional states of individuals can be brought into concert with 
one another. First, the response can be mediated by spontaneous mimic­
lay (iconic); second, it can be mediated by a reaction to a common extrin­
sic stimulus (indexical); and third, it can be mediated by a representation 
of the state of the other (symbolic). 
As we have seen, two familiar examples of empathy produced through 
spontaneous mimiclay are the contagiousness of laughing and sobbing. 
Even newborns in a nursery exhibit this mechanism for producing empa­
thy. Laughter and sobbing are not just evolved stereotypic indices of emo­
tional state, they are vehicles for coordinating the emotions of a social 
group. Evolution has built in the reference of these innate calls by select­
ing for a stereotypic response that is concordant with the state of the "caller." 
It is a sort of preestablished harmony. Though clearly there are times in 
which the receptive state of the interpreter is not appropriate to produce a 
concordant response, even then the tendency to produce it (overcome by 
conflicting emotions) provides an interpretation. 
To put the communication of emotions in context, we need to realize that 
it is only one facet of a more general process whereby information about 
one animal's state influences another's. Often this is not cooperative. It 
should be remembered that a large fraction of a species' communicative 
repertoire may have evolved for manipulative purposes, and not to solicit 
another to assume the same state. Whether one responds with empathy, 
sympathy, or antipathy depends not on the communication but on the spe­
cific social and evolutionary context in which it is produced. Evolution has 
selected for mechanisms of social signaling that are generally reliable in­
dices or symptoms of the state of arousal and mood of the signaler. In­
eluctable produ࠾tion of a particular vocalization or display when in a given 
state of arousal is the best guarantee of reference, but it does not determine 
the interpretation. 
Alarm calling provides an example of a more complex, indexically me­
diated means for producing concordant arousal and emotion. In addition 
to sharing a concordant emotional response to the same call, the object of 
the call becomes an independent determinant of common response. It is 
significant that in both the iconic aspect of laughter/sobbing and the in­
dexical aspect of alarm calling the representation of a corresponding mental-
Terrence W. Deacon > 429

emotional state is grounded by common physiology and common percep­
tion, and as a result need not be an intentional activity. But symbolic infor­
mation offers no similar guarantee. Listening to other people describe their 
discomfort or reading a third-person account of someone else's hardships 
can induce empathetic or sympathetic responses. Though these responses 
are often spontaneous, they depend both on the sophistication of the sym­
bolic interpretation and the willingness of the listener or reader to carry on 
the interpretation process. Not only does this involve symbolic interpreta­
tion, but a sort of virtual experience in parallel to one's own. 
The ability to interpret a narrative as a sort of simulated experience often 
requires the generation of complex mental imagery. Powerful mental im­
ages can elicit a vicarious emotional charge that makes them capable of out­
competing current sensory stimuli and intrinsic drives for control of 
attention and emotion, resulting in a kind of virtual emotional experience. 
The power of mental images to displace arousal on sensorimotor signals dou­
bly depends on the ability of prefrontal activity to predominate over other 
systems, because of the requirement to maintain linked but opposed 
mnemonic traces. 
This suggests that our most social cognitive capabilities may serendipi­
tously grow out of the learning and attentional biases of the prefrontal bias 
that made symbolization tractable in the first place. So, although symbolic 
production of a state of emotion is far less reliable and predictable, it can 
produce far more profound and complete empathy than any other means. 
Unfortunately, it also has a dark side that other forms of empathy do not. 
Being able to imagine the suffering of another, by extrapolation from one's 
own subjective experience, is also the source of the most despicable and 
heinous of human practices. Though many other species harm and threaten 
one another in service of individual goals, only human beings can conceive 
of torture and the threat of death as means to an end. Indeed, threatening 
to cause suffering to another's loved ones is the most powerful of all forms 
of coercion-a uniquely human collision of the most base with the most 
noble powers of symbolic consciousness. 
The best and worst of what it means to be human arose with the dawn 
of symbolic abilities. The slow evolution of prefrontal predominance prob­
ably correlated with an equally slow growth of the ability to get inside of 
one another's minds. Along with the power to organize reproduction around 
collectively enforced agreements and expectations of reciprocity, these 
other abilities inevitably also contributed to selection for the restructuring 
of the human mind. With increasingly powerful symbolic abilities comes an 
increasingly sophisticated ability to model the world that symbols enable 
430 < The Symbolic Species

us to represent. We do not hold young children and animals responsible for 
their failures to take the feelings of others into account, because we intu­
itively recognize that they are still limited in their ability to perform the men­
tal gymnastics this requires. We also legally recognize the possibility that 
under certain states of psychotic delusion, adults too may be unable to 
model the "other" perspective well enough to make informed moral judg­
ments. 
The ethical stance is not, however, intrinsic in human nature. It cannot 
be innate because ofits reliance on symbolic representation. Nor do I think 
that it is directly rooted in the "simpler" social behaviors of other species. 
Sophisticated predispositions for cooperative behavior or for caring for 
other individuals have evolved in many social species, and need not depend 
on symbolic reflection to anticipate the social consequences of one's actions. 
Social manipulation based upon predictions of others' reactions, and re­
straint of actions that might lead to negative consequences, can be based 
on nonsymbolic learning and mental imagery abilities, and tens of millions 
of years of social evolution have produced a brain whose arousal system is 
highly sensitive to both anticipated and received social signals. Though 
there are likely to be significant species differences in the tuning of the 
social-affect systems which drive attachment, status-seeking, play, aggres­
sive, and appeasement behaviors, it seems unlikely that the human reper­
toire has added or deleted elements from this collection. 
Ethical considerations are something in addition to the complex set of 
social-emotional responses we have inherited. The symbolic constructions 
of others' plausible emotional states, and their likely emotional responses 
to our future actions, are analogous to a whole new sensory modality feed­
ing into our ancient social-emotional response systems. This ability to let 
our emotions be activated by the virtual experiences constructed with the 
aid of symbols probably makes us the only species in which there can be a 
genuine conflict of simultaneous emotional states. No wonder we often 
come off as out of touch with our social surroundings and less perceptive 
of others' arousai state than our own pets, or that we often feel as though 
our lives have become unnatural and envy the simpler state of connection 
to the physical world that we imagine other animals to have. We can easily 
become overloaded and confused by our ability to generate and respond to 
multiple what-if worlds. Perhaps this further explains our susceptibility to 
a range of psychiatric conditions that only superficially correspond to what 
other species can experience. 
The ability to generate models of others' emotional states, and to exer­
cise restraint or determination with respect to them, must be discovered 
Terrence W. Deacon > 431

through the manipulation of symbols. This makes such interpretations con­
ditional on the maturation, experience, and even cognitive capacities of peo­
ple. We intuitively hold the most intelligent, most educated, and most 
experienced people to higher ethical standards, and are more willing to give 
children and even adolescents the benefit of the doubt. This is because we 
recognize that these symbolic insights require some of the most counter­
intuitive shifts of perspective and recoding processes of any symbolic ac­
tivity. When these cognitive difficulties are considered in the context of 
choices that may be in conflict with immediate self-interest, it becomes ob­
vious why ethically guided self-control is both uncommon and fragile. 
432 < The Symbolic Species

C 
H 
A 
P 
T 
E 
R 
F 
0 
U 
R 
T 
E 
E 
N 
Such Stuff as Dreams Are Made On 
Thirty spokes share the wheel's hub, 
but it is the hole in the center that provides its usefulness. 
-Lao Tsu, from the Tao Te Chint 
Ends 
A
s a species, we seem to be preoccupied with ends, in all senses of the 
word. We organize our actions around imagined extrapolations of the 
consequences they will produce. We struggle in vain to comprehend 
the implications of our own impending cessation of life. And we weave mar­
velously elaborate and beautifully obscure stories to fill our need to find pur­
pose in the fabric of the universe. This fills no obvious adaptive need. Our 
evolution never included selection favoring anything like this intense and 
desperate drive. And yet it is so powerful as to be able to overcome some 
of the most irresistible predispositions that evolution has provided. If we 
are language savants compared to other species, then a preoccupation with 
433

ends is the special exaggerated compulsion that complements our unique 
gift. 
Symbolic analysis is the basis for a remarkable new level of self­
determination that human beings alone have stumbled upon. The ability to 
use virtual reference to build up elaborate internal models of possible fu­
tures, and to hold these complex visions in mind with the force of the 
mnemonic glue of symbolic inference and descriptive shorthands, gives us 
unprecedented capacity to generate independent adaptive behaviors. Re­
markable abstraction from indexically bound experiences is further en­
hanced by the ability of symbolic reference to pick out tiny fragments of 
real world processes and arrange them as bouys to chart an inferential 
course that predicts physical and social events. The price we pay for this is 
that our symbolically mediated actions can often be in conflict with moti­
vations to act that arise from more concrete and immediate biological 
sources. Arguments in support of the classic notion of free will frequently 
cite this capacity to use reason (that is, symbolic inference and model build­
ing) to overcome desire and compulsion. One might respond that calling 
some actions "free" and others not oversimplifies what is really only a mat­
ter of the degree of the strengths of competing compulsions to act, some 
compulsions arising from autonomic and hormonal sources and others from 
our imagined satisfaction at reaching a symbolized goal. But there is an im­
portant sense in which these competing compulsions are not equal. 
Those that arise from purely physiological sources, or physiological 
sources mediated by conditioned associations, could be called bottom-up 
processes for producing action. They are much more tied to mechanism and 
thus exhibit few degrees of freedom and limited spontaneous variation. They 
are comparatively predictable, though any organismic process inevitably ex­
hibits tangled paths of causality. But symbolically mediated compulsions to 
act are far more chaotic, in the technical sense of that word, far more sus­
ceptible to the influence of tiny initial differences in starting assumptions 
or ways of dividing up experiences and qualities symbolicaly. This is because 
symbolically mediated models of things-whether theories, stories, or just 
rationally argued predictions-exhibit complicated nonlinearity and recur­
sive structure as well as nearly infinite flexibility and capacity for novelty 
due to their combinatorial nature. It is not so much that our actions arise 
from a totaly unconstrained and compulsion-free center of intentions, but 
that the potential starting point, the intended purpose we have modeled, 
can be drawn from such a vast variety of alternatives with little initial dif­
ference in motive power. 
434 < The Symbolic Species

Final causality, according to Aristotle, is exhibited when processes are dri­
ven not by antecedent physical conditions but by ends. In some ways this 
is like time reversed. In hindsight it is easy to infer that certain past condi­
tions were necessitated by the way things turned out. Deductive inference 
is a lot like this sort of reflective inversion of temporal and physical order. 
The consequence is already implicitly included in the premises. In symbolic 
thinking, this results in what might be called a sort of symbolic compulsion. 
Certain statements compel certain others. Aristotle reserved another term 
for such compulsion-fonnal causality-but I think there is an important 
way that this links to the other, classic conception of cause in terms of the 
ways that symbols work. Little of our reasoning is so precise as to be called 
deductive, and yet the way that certain beliefs compel others can have 
nearly this force. Ideologies, religions, and just good explanations or stories 
thus exert a sort of inferential compulsion on us that is hard to resist be­
cause of their mutually reinforcing deductive and inductive links. Our end­
directed behaviors are in this way often derived from such "compulsions" 
as are implicit in the form that underlies the flow of inferences. So one might 
say that thinking in symbols is a means whereby formal causes can deter­
mine final causes. The abstract nature of this source makes for a top-down 
causality, even if implemented on a bottom-up biological machine. 
Though the evolution of brains has been about systems for modeling and 
predicting events in the world, the evolution of symbolic abilities has not 
just amplified this ability far beyond that in any other species, it has also in­
troduced an insidiously inverted modeling tendency. The symbolic capac­
ity seems to have brought with it a predisposition to project itself into what 
it models. The savant, instead of seeing a field of wildflowers, sees 24 7 flow­
ers. Similarly, we don't just see a world of physical processes, accidents, re­
producing organisms, and biological information processors churning out 
complex plans, desires, and needs. Instead, we see the handiwork of an in­
finite wisdom, the working out of a divine plan, the children of a creator, 
and a conflict between those on the side of good and those on the side of 
evil. We cany a ࠿agging doubt about anything really being accidental. Co­
incidence isn't just coincidence, it's a sign, and bad luck and disease don't 
just happen, perhaps a sorcerer has wished harm on the village. Wherever 
we look, we expect to find purpose. All things can be seen as signs and sym­
bols of an all-knowing consciousness at work, or the marks of mythical 
events that occur in a dreamtime, behind the scenes of the universe. We 
are not just applying symbolic interpretations to human words and events; 
all the universe has become a symbol. 
Terrence W. Deacon > 435

This is the evidence that we have become symbolic savants in the deeper 
sense of that metaphor. We are not just a species that uses symbols. The 
symbolic universe has ensnared us in an inescapable web. Like a "mind 
virus," the symbolic adaptation has infected us, and now by virtue of the ir­
resistible urge it has instilled in us to tum everything we encounter and 
everyone we meet into symbols, we have become the means by which it un­
ceremoniously propagates itself throughout the world. 
It is clear that we feel more comfortable in a world that is meaningful, 
living a life that has meaning. The alternative is somehow too frightening. 
But why? Why should the ability to acquire symbolic abilities and conceive 
of things symbolically also bring with it a powerful urge to see it in every 
conceivable context? It could be seen as part of the predisposition to ac­
quire symbols in the first place, part of the overdesign of the mind to en­
sure that symbols get discovered. But I think it may be a more mundane 
feature of cognitive and sensorimotor biases in general. The autistic savant 
is in this way no different from the kitten that sees every small mobile ob­
ject as a representative prey toy, or the baby who interacts with every hold­
able object as a thing to be put into the mouth-for reasons that probably 
flow ineluctably from the Darwinian-competitive structure of neural in­
formation processing. Brains are spontaneously active biological comput­
ers in which activity patterns incessantly compete for wider expression 
throughout each network. Under these conditions, the dominant operation 
simply runs on its own and assimilates whatever is available. In us, this ap­
pears to be the expression of what I have called front-heavy cognition, dri­
ven by an overactive, busybody prefrontal cortex. It gets expressed as a 
need to recode our experiences, to see everything as a representation, to 
expect there to be a deeper hidden logic. Even when we don't believe in 
it, we find ourselves captivated by the lure of numerology, astrology, or the 
global intrigue of conspiracy theories. This is the characteristic expression 
of a uniquely human cognitive style; the mark of a thoroughly symbolic 
species. 
One of the essentially universal attributes of human culture is what might 
be called the mystical or religious inclination. There is no culture I know 
of that lacks a rich mythical, mystical, and religious tradition. And there is 
no culture that doesn't devote much of this intense interpretive enterprise 
to struggling with the very personal mystery of mortality. Knowledge of 
death, of the inconceivable possibility that the experiences of life will end, 
is a datum that only symbolic representation can impart. Other species may 
experience loss, and the pain of separation, and the difficulty of abandon-
436 < The Symbolic Species

ing a dead companion; yet without the ability to represent this abstract coun­
terfactual (at least for the moment) relationship, there can be no emotional 
connection to one's own future death. But this news, which al children even­
tually discover as they develop their symbolic abilities, provides an unbid­
den opportunity to tum the naturally evolved social instinct of loss and 
separation in on itself to create a foreboding sense of fear, sorrow, and im­
pending loss with respect to our own lives, as if looking back from an im­
possible future. No feature of the limbic system has evolved to handle this 
ubiquitous virtual sense ofloss. Indeed, I wonder if this isn't one of the most 
maladaptive of the serendipitous consequences of the evolution of symbolic 
abilities. What great efforts we exert trying to forget our future fate by sub­
merging the constant angst with innumerable distractions, or trying to con­
vince ourselves that the end isn't really what it seems by weaving marvelous 
alternative interpretations of what will happen in "the undiscovered coun­
try" on the other side of death. 
In many ways this is the source both of what is most noble and most 
pathological in human behaviors. Supported by these interpretations, rea­
son can recruit the strength to face the threat of emptiness in the service 
of shared values and aspirations. But the dark side of religious belief and 
powerful ideology is that they so often provide twisted justifications for ar­
bitrarily sparing or destroying lives. Their symbolic power can trap us in a 
web of oppression, as we try through ritual action and obsessive devotion 
to a cause to maintain a psychic safety net that protects us from our fears 
of purposelessness. The interaction of symbolic cultural evolution and un­
prepared biology has created some of the most influential and virulent sys­
tems of symbols the world has ever known. Few if any societies have ever 
escaped the grip of powerful beliefs that cloak the impenetrable mystery 
of human life and death in a cocoon of symbolism and meaning. The his­
tory of the twentieth century, like all those recorded before it, is sadly writ­
ten in the blood that irreconcilable symbol systems have spilt between 
them. Perhaps this is because the savantlike compulsion to see symbols in 
everything reacheࡀ its most irresistible expression when it comes to the sym­
bolization of our own lives' end. We inevitably imagine ourselves as sym­
bols, as the tokens of a deeper discourse of the world. But symbols are 
subject to being rendered meaningless by contradiction, and this makes al­
ternative models of the world direct threats to existence. 
Almost certainly this is one of the other defining features of the human 
mentality: an ever present virtual experience of our own loss. And yet we 
know so little about what it is that we fear to lose. Perhaps if we understood 
Terrence W. Deacon > 437

this symbolic compulsion, and the consciousness it brings with it, we might 
find this emptiness at the center a bit less disturbing. 
To Be or Not to Be: What Is the Difference? 
Throughout the history of philosophy one question above all others has 
constantly occupied center stage. What is the nature of consciousness? Un­
fortunately, terms like consciousness, mind, thought, and idea have many 
conflicting meanings, and this question is often confounded with a number 
of other related philosophical questions about thought, reason, agency, and 
the existence of an immortal soul. Is consciousness one thing? Is it epiphe­
nomenal? Does consciousness require agency (or free will)? Are nonhuman 
species conscious? Are there different types or levels of consciousness? Is 
self-consciousness an essential ingredient of all consciousness? Is reason an 
essential ingredient in consciousness? Can consciousness only be experi­
enced by living organisms? The absence of answers to such questions at­
tests to the deep confusions that still surround the nature of consciousness. 
Though the subjective perspective from which each of us views the world 
is the mystery we ultimately hope to address by these questions, it seems 
difficult to determine where to begin the i.'westigation because we are not 
even entirely sure what we mean by the questions. 
A number of well-reasoned and elegant arguments about the nature of 
consciousness have recently brought these questions back into the spotlight 
of legitimate scientific and philosophical debate. These efforts to rethink 
this classic mystery are motivated by the growing body of new information 
from the neurosciences and the computing sciences. The more that is 
known about how the brain works, and how this might be similar or dis­
similar to the operation of the information-processing devices we build, the 
closer we feel we are coming to the Rosetta Stone for translating subjec­
tive accounts of experience into empirical accounts of physical causes and 
effects. 
The whole problem of consciousness is far too complicated to consider 
in the closing pages of a book on human brain evolution, nor am I prepared 
to deal with the many incredibly complicated issues it poses. Many of the 
subquestions that need to be answered first will not be approachable until 
we have a better understanding of the global information-handling princi­
ples around which brains are designed. But it is a question that can be ap­
proached in pieces. In contemporary discussions of the relationship between 
brain process and consciousness, three general problems are often treated 
separately. The first is often called "the binding problem" and refers to the 
438 < The Symbolic Species

problem of how the separate activities of millions of brain structures pro­
duce a unified subjective experience of self. The second is less often given 
an explicit name, but is sometimes referred to as "the grounding problem." 
It is the problem of explaining how our thoughts and words are guaranteed 
a correspondence with reality. Much of this book has been concerned with 
explaining this second problem. The third is often confused with the first 
two, but also has its own special difficulties. This is the problem of 
"agency" -explaining the experience we have of originating and controlling 
our own thoughts and behaviors. It is closely related to the more general 
concept of sentience. In older philosophical contexts, agency might have 
been part of the question of whether we have free will. 
Many aspects of each question are beyond the scope of this book and my 
expertise. But the grounding problem is particularly relevant to the language 
origins problem. Indeed, I have approached the origin of language as es­
sentially a comparative and evolutionary version of the grounding problem, 
in the sense that it requires us to provide both a mental and a physical ac­
count of the crossing from more concrete to more abstract forms of repre­
sentation. The approach I have taken to the evolutionary question thus 
suggests a parallel approach to the grounding problem: analyzing the 
grounding of intentional consciousness in terms oflevels of representational 
relationships. 
The distinction that is often made between different levels or types of 
consciousness is closely related to the classic Cartesian claim that animals 
are mere mechanisms, whereas human beings have minds and are capable 
of reason. Few animal behaviorists these days would fully agree with 
Descartes' claim. Chimpanzees, dogs, and many other highly social species 
appear to consider alternative modes of action, anticipate consequences, and 
give the impression of sharing a similar range of emotional experiences. The 
minor differences in brain structure between these animals and human be­
ings-which even backed Descartes into a comer (specifically into the 
pineal gland) in trying to find an essential human difference-provide no 
support for such 'a dichotomous view. And yet few would be willing to say 
that the consciousness of a dog or cat is of the same sort that we ascribe to 
humans. 
Even a very much loosened notion of consciousness as extended to these 
relatively intelligent mammal species runs into trouble when we begin to 
probe more distant branches of the phylogenetic tree. Do mice exhibit the 
same sort of consciousness as apes? Are worms and insects conscious at all? 
Do lobsters suffer when plunged into a pot of boiling watࡁr? Is it more im­
moral to harm a cat than a fish? And so on. Arguments about comparative 
Terrence W. Deacon > 439

intelligence and comparative consciousness appear to overlap in these ques­
tions, and almost certainly the intuition we have about the level of con­
sciousness experienced by other brains has influenced our notions about the 
evolution of intelligence. What we mean by "consciousness" is tied to issues 
of complexity. We intuitively believe that simple information-processing de­
vices could not be as conscious as more complicated ones. 
This brings us back to an argument that has reappeared a number of 
times in this book: to what extent is the evolution of the human mind ade­
quately explained in terms of an increase in the quantity of information pro­
cessing that can be supported? I think that the answer is the same as for 
language. The information-handling capacity of the brain is important, be­
cause there are certain minimal numbers of operations that must be per­
formed and minimal memory requirements for symbolic processing. There 
is, therefore, probably a threshold of neural complexity below which sym­
bolic processes are not possible. It is not, however, clear that our access into 
symbolic communication was just determined by surmounting this thresh­
old, because there are other critical requirements as well, in the form of a 
very specifically structured learning and memory organization. In this book 
I have argued that the restructuring of information processes has been a 
much more critical determinant of the evolution of symbols. Similarly, I 
think that the human difference in consciousness is not merely a quantita­
tive difference. 
The idea that there must be grades of consciousness in the animal world 
suggests that the question of what is consciousness might be subject to a 
separate analysis from the question of whether there can be different ex­
tents or types of consciousness. Many species' brains may be constructed 
in such a way that they produce some limited conscious experience, and sim­
ilarities in the neural architectures of human and nonhuman brains offer 
evidence that this is likely. Those theories of brain evolution that cast in­
telligence in quantitative terms suggest that the difference is not in some 
special consciousness-producing neural architecture, but simply in how 
much of it is present. On this view, it would seem to make better sense to 
forget the philosopher's predisposition to use human experience as the 
starting point, and instead solve the consciousness problem by work with 
frogs, flies, or leeches-whichever brains are deemed simplest but still ca­
pable of some basic level of consciousness. Clearly, the brains of different 
species can support very different amounts of information processing and 
storage. This recognition is paralleled by common sense ideas about how 
much we are conscious of under different circumstances. When asleep, I 
am not conscious of what is happening elsewhere in the room. When I avoid 
440 < The Symbolic Species

reading newspapers or watching television news, I am not conscious of 
what is happening "in the world." When I inadvertently hurt someone's feel­
ings, I am not conscious of their needs or expectations. Though this might 
better be described in terms of"awareness," the two ideas are obviously en­
tangled with one another in our thinking about the problem. Are animals 
which are more aware of their surroundings the species that we would call 
more conscious? Or is awareness only one necessary contributor to con­
sciousness? What a complicated mess! 
The question of human origins inevitably finds its way into discussions 
of the nature of consciousness because of the presumption that there is 
something special about human minds. The classic dichotomy between 
conscious and unconscious has been linked with the dichotomy between 
human and animal minds from the beginning. Religious traditions have his­
torically played a significant role in guiding people's intuitions on the spe­
cial nature of human consciousness. In Judea-Christian tradition, only 
humans are supposed to have immortal souls, which presumably have some­
thing to do with consciousness and "personhood," but in innumerable tribal 
traditions and in many Eastern religious traditions, such as Hinduism, which 
include beliefs about the transmigration of souls, it is imagined that one's 
spirit could inhabit the body of any number of "lesser" creatures. The be­
lief that only humans could have an immortal soul has been a major influ­
ence in the Western scientific and philosophical traditions, which tend to 
draw categorical distinctions between animal and human minds, and has 
therefore contributed to the historic reactions to Cartesian dualism or other 
claims of human mental uniqueness. But these polar responses--either 
that only humans have ("true") consciousness and other species lack it, or 
that al brainy species have consciousness and humans are not qualitatively 
different in this regard-are mostly the result of not carefully separating 
these different dimensions of the consciousness problem. 
But are the alternatives posed by contemporary philosophical categories 
and cognitive science models really able to frame the full range of possi­
bilities, or are we, as Dewey warns, faced with implicit alternatives that don't 
divide the world in a useful way? I think that there is a middle ground, but 
I doubt that any compromise framed in terms of the dichotomous alterna­
tives of mind and mechanism can succeed in discovering it. Without trying 
to address the many larger philosophical issues that lurk behind these phe­
nomena, I think that a reinterpretation of symbolic cognition can at least 
help to reframe one important assumption implicit in all these discussions. 
These arguments are all based on the notion that the different aspects of 
the mind-brain phenomena are distinguished by requiring opposed and mu-
Terrence W. Deacon > 441

tually exclusive forms of explanation. The clue to be drawn from the evo­
lutionary transition to symbols is that it must be understood as a difference 
of levels of representational process. 
This leads me to two proposals. First, I suggest that the oppositional form 
of most mind-brain theories reflects a failure to recognize the intrinsically 
hierarchical and emergent nature of the referential processes that under­
lie mental processes. Second, I suggest that the three contrasts implicit in 
these arguments-mind/body, intentional/mechanical, human/animal-do 
not all address the same categorical difference. Specifically, I think that the 
concepts of mind and intention need to be decomposed with respect to level 
of representation, requiring us separately to consider iconic, indexical, and 
symbolic aspects with respect to their mechanistic correlates. This allows 
us to recognize that the human/animal distinction is different from the oth­
ers, in that it only involves a difference in symbolic ability, and does not ad­
dress mind/body issues at all. Animals can have conscious minds, without 
sharing all the attributes of human consciousness. So, in the end, I do not 
suggest that explaining this transition gets to the heart of the consciousness 
problem, but it may help pare off some related problems that have been 
long confused with it. My point can be illustrated by reexamining some cur­
rent exemplary arguments about the nature of cognition in the context of 
these representational distinctions. 
The dominant alternative to the Cartesian perspective is exemplified by 
the theoretical claim that the mind is like the sort of "computation" that 
takes place in electronic computers. In simpler terms, minds are software 
(programs) run on the hardware (neural circuits) of the brain. The strong 
version of this materialistic reductionism (i.e., that mind is nothing more 
than mechanism) has recently been given its clearest expression in a the­
ory called "eliminative materialism." The claim is that notions such as mind, 
intention, belief, thought, representation, and so on will eventually be elim­
inated in discussions of cognitive processes in favor of more mechanistic syn­
onyms that refer to chemical-electrical signaling processes of the brain. 
Mentalistic terms, it is suggested, are merely glosses for more complex 
brain processes that we at present do not understand. 
An analogy is often made to the relationship between a "high-level" com­
puter programming language like C or Basic and the sets of machine op­
erations that they specify. In the sorts of digital computers that we are most 
familiar with, the words and phrases of these programming languages are 
first translated into strings of machine codes, which bear only a vague re­
semblance to the higher-level language elements, and these are further 
translated into machine "addresses," to which a signal can be sent to acti-
442 < The Symbolic Species

vate a corresponding processor operation, store or retrieve a certain pro­
cessing result, and so on. The languagelike structure of high-level code 
words is merely a convenience, a helpful shorthand. They are completely 
eliminable because they are nothing more than alternative ways of mark­
ing and activating specific machine operations. But is this a good analogy 
to the way "high-level" cognitive processes map onto brain "operations"? 
Cognitive scientists have long argued over whether the ultimate "lan­
guage of thought" is more like a computer algorithm, or more like collec­
tions of images. Our personal experiences of what goes on in the mind 
during our brief "down times," when walking between offices or washing 
dishes, suggest that both are right, that the mind is filled with many sorts 
of mental objects, and moreover that they overlap and blend into one an­
other almost seamlessly. Arguments that pose mental images and symbolic 
"computations" as alternative or complementary "codes" for mental 
processes also miss the point that these are not representational processes 
at the same level. They are simultaneous facets of representational processes 
at different levels that are dependent on one another in specific ways. 
Part of the danger in current computer metaphors comes from our ten­
dency to call typographical characters "symbols," as though their referen­
tial power was intrinsic, and to call the deterministic switching of signals in 
an electronic device a "computation," because it simulates operations we 
might perform to derive an output string of numbers from an input string 
according to the laws of mathematics. We fall into the trap of imagining that 
the sets of electronic tokens (data) that are automaticaly substituted for one 
another in a computer according to patterns specified by other sets of to­
kens (programs or algorithms) are self-sufficient symbols, because of their 
autonomous parallelism to the surface features of corresponding human ac­
tivities. This brackets out of the description the critical fact that the "com­
putation" is only a computation to the extent that someone is able to 
interpret the inputs and outputs as related in this way. As the philosopher 
John Searle has suggested, 1 we might be able to discover a way of mapping 
numerals and operations of some mathematical schema onto the molecu­
lar events occurring in a container of chemicals, and in so doing treat the 
chemical reaction as a minimal computer as well, but this interpretation ap­
plied to what was already disposed to occur in nature would not invest it 
with any additional intentional properties. It is still just a simple chemical 
reaction. Al the representational properties are vested in the interpreter. 
Applying this fundamentally incomplete analogy to brain function yields a 
model of thought as a program, and has suggested to some cognitive sci­
entists that interpretive processes performed by brains are just the results 
Terrence W. Deacon > 443

of running neural programs. Though there is likely some sense in which the 
physical isomorphism between brains and certain kinds of electronic de­
vices holds, this version of a representational isomorphism is empty, because 
it includes no account of the determination of reference in either part of 
the analogy. 
In a now famous thought experiment that John Searle calls the Chinese 
Room experiment, he asks us to imagine a man locked in a room with an 
instruction book containing Chinese character strings in which input strings 
are paired with output strings.2 The man in the room knows no Chinese, 
but through a slot in the wall he is given pieces of paper with Chinese char­
acters written on them, and he is expected to respond by looking up that 
sequence in his book, copying the characters specified for the response onto 
another piece of notepaper, and handing it back out. If the book provides 
an exhaustive pairing of inputs to sensible outputs (and the look-up proce­
dure could be complicated in a number of ways to make it more sophisti­
cated), then to those on the outside, whoever or whatever they imagine to 
be in the box will likely be assumed to be reading, thinking, and respond­
ing in Chinese. In short, communicating symbolically. Searle's point is sim­
ple. We can imagine ourselves in this man's position, and we know that under 
those circumstances we would not be doing the conscious processes that 
are attributed to us. We would just be performing a "mindless" procedure 
that even a machine could do (and indeed we program computers to do sim­
ilar things all the time). This model of cognition as a set of rule-governed 
procedures, an algorithm or program, reduces it to mere mechanism. Such 
a model does not explain cognition or consciousness. It merely simulates 
input-output relationships that could be produced by actually reading and 
understanding the messages, and consciously, intentionally answering. 
A number of philosophers and cognitive scientists, including Daniel 
Dennett, have criticized this argument by pointing out that it does not re­
ally demonstrate that the man could not himself also be something equiv­
alent to a Chinese Room.3 Inside the room, consciousness and intention are 
irrelevant to the token-substitution task. So, can we be sure that we too are 
doing something different when we interpret and respond to similar strings 
of symbols? Are "consciousness" and "intention" just other labels for such 
a process? The man inside could be replaced by a computer running a sim­
ilar kind oflook-up translation program. So, just as Searle suggests that such 
an algorithmic account is insufficient to provide a constructive demonstra­
tion of an intention-based cognitive process--consciousness-it can also 
serve as the basis for computer modelers to retort, "So what! If an algo­
rithmic account can produce language input-output relationships that are 
444 < The Symbolic Species

indistinguishable from those that people produce, what more is necessary? 
Isn't it possible that a similar rule-governed process is all there is to con­
sciousness, irrespective of how we experience it?" Dennett calls the Chi­
nese Room thought experiment an "intuition pump," because it offers 
neither a demonstration nor a proof. It doesn't prove that something is miss­
ing from the algorithmic account of mind, it instead challenges us to figure 
out why it is so unsatisfying. It emphatically begs the question: What's 
wrong with this picture? But does it help us to identify what additional kinds 
of processes underlie the way that we interpret words and sentences? 
I suspect that what is missing and what is present in this analogy do not 
correspond to the difference between mind and mechanism. Minds emerge 
from the actions of mechanisms, and neither side in this contemporary de­
bate is prepared to deny a link between them, nor is either side willing to 
adopt a dualistic interpretation. Instead, without its explicitly being de­
scribed as such, the difference that is being highlighted by this thought ex­
periment is a difference between indexical and symbolic representation 
processes, irrespective of the underlying mechanism. The man in the Chi­
nese Room is working with indexical relationships, inputs that point to out­
puts, but he is oblivious to the fact that to those outside, the tokens he 
shuffles in and out are interpreted symbolically. I want to reinterpret this 
analogy, then, not as directed at the problem of consciousness in a general 
sense, but specifically at the problem of those aspects of human con­
sciousness that have a symbolic basis: rational intention, meaning, belief, 
and so on. 
To see the index/symbol distinction that is implicit in this problem more 
clearly, we can change the story a bit. Instead of following a list of English 
look-up rules by rote, which muddies the distinction, the man in the Chi­
nese Room can be imagined to have learned these patterns of behavior by 
trial and error as a result of receiving a shock for wrong answers and food 
for correct answers. I don't believe this modification changes Searle's in­
tent, but it makes clear just how superficial the algorithmic account of sym­
bolic processing actually is. We do not even need to allow the man in the 
room to have rules or instructions to guide his actions. He could be replaced 
by a bevy of trained pigeons. It is the assumption of the eliminative mate­
rialists that, so long as there are enough pigeons to account for all the pos­
sibilities and they have each learned correctly to complete their operation 
on the Chinese character substitutions, then what they are collectively doing 
is language processing, even though individually no pigeon knows even a 
bit of Chinese. Each pigeon's response characteristics could be precisely 
specified by an algorithm. Indeed, each pigeon could be replaced by a com-
Terrence W. Deacon > 445

puter with the appropriate input and output mechanisms running that al­
gorithm. 
What I find wrong with this metaphor of the mind as an algorithmic 
process is that it confuses the map with the territory, the indexical markers 
of points in a process with the process itself. The tokens and their manip­
ulations are only fragments of the symbolic process. They have been ab­
stracted from their iconic and indexical bases, and these have been 
discarded due to the isolation of the actor in the room. Symbolic reference 
is grounded by the relationships between a system of token-token rela­
tionships and a system of token-object relationships, but the walls of the Chi­
nese Room make symbolic interpretation impossible because they make it 
impossible for the man to discover any relationships between the token­
token system in the book he has access to and the systems of token-object 
and object-object relationships that are unavailable to him. The symbolic 
is reduced to the indexical (this is not unlike an archeologist's pondering an­
cient writing with no clue for translation). The only relationships available 
are the correlations among the typographical stimuli themselves. 
It is important to point out that these minimal relationships would only 
be indexical to a human or animal actor in this thought experiment, because 
the token-token relationships are not in any way intrinsically indexical ei­
ther. If the person's role in this room were instead implemented by some 
bit of software, I would argue that even indexical reference would be ab­
sent. Putting a human being in the room makes the stronger statement that 
even if we grant the representational capacity of a person in this circum­
stance, we can stil see that the resultant capacity cannot be symbolic. Searle 
apparently intends this as a model for the more encompassing con­
scious/nonconscious (or mind/mechanism) distinction, which I would rather 
describe as a difference between referential and nonreferential processes 
in general. Maintaining the distinction between these two problems-the 
symbol problem and the reference problem in general-is important. One 
thing that makes the symbol problem troublesome is the tendency to con­
fuse these two. This is what Descartes does when describing animal be­
havior as mere mechanism. And although I think we may be close to 
explaining the symbol problem, we are further from an answer to the ref­
erence problem and an account of the conscious/nonconscious distinction. 
So, for the moment let's just consider the simpler problem and see if we 
can discover how solving it might add insight to the more fundamental prob­
lem as a result. 
\Vh.at Searle's man in the Chinese Room is denied access to are two other 
levels of systematic indexical relationships that would be necessary to con-
446 < The Symbolic Species

struct the symbolic reference relationships (and abandon the indexical 
ones). He lacks access to the system of indices implicit in the relationships 
between Chinese characters and outside objects and events, and he lacks 
the set of indices that links these outside objects and events to one another. 
The indexical relationships that are implicit in the combinations, sequences, 
and substitutions of characters that he receives and prints out cannot there­
fore be any more than this. A system of symbolic references emerges from 
the recognition of how all three systems of indices are linked, each iconic 
(isomorphic) of the other, each indexical of (correlated with) the other. The 
missing information that would be necessary in order to transform this in­
dexical interpretation process into a symbolic one is between inside and out­
side. This is why the Chinese Room analogy undermines the argument that 
a program or algorithm for making token-token associations is the sufficient 
basis for an understanding of what they mean. Even an algorithmic system 
that completely captures all possible syntactic relationships between tokens 
does not in itself provide any representation-only the potential for inter­
nally circular indexical association. This is why a self-sufficient mental lan­
guage or mentalese is an impossibility. No set of preprogrammed algorithms 
can smuggle symbolic reference into Searle's Chinese Room, because sym­
bolic reference cannot be solely inside. 
Symbolic reference therefore cannot be an intrinsic quality. This is why 
Searle can claim that there can be no "eliminative" strategy that can reduce 
intentional (read "symbolic"') processes to neural programs. The source of 
symbolic reference is not in the brain at all. This is why it is pointless to look 
for the basis for symbolic consciousness in a lower-level essence that is only 
associated with brains, or to invoke special physical laws that undermine the 
deterministic character of neural mechanisms in order to explain intentional 
consciousness. Symbolic reference does not derive from anything particu­
larly special about the brain, but from a special sort of relationship that can 
be constructed by it. 
Though the CQinese Room thought experiment implicitly exemplifies the 
distinction between indexical and symbolic reference, and the differences 
in consciousness associated with each, it is not a model of the animal 
mind/human mind distinction, but rather the computer/human mind dis­
tinction. These are very different. Though it is common to find researchers 
referring to simple brains, such as insect brains, as computers, the repre­
sentational architectures of computers on the one hand and simple brains 
on the other are essentially inverted. The computer and the Chinese Room 
are "windowless monads." The collection of indexical relationships em­
bodied in the program and the set of instructions, respectively, are only in-
Terrence W. Deacon > 447

ternally and circularly referential. Characters point to other characters, 
strings point to other strings. In contrast, an animal mind, even if it is of 
minimal computational capacity, constructs and processes internally gen­
erated indices with respect to an external world to which it is partially 
adapted. Its capacity to generate indexical responses may be limited, but 
the scope of reference is open-ended. Small brains may be capable of only 
a limited scope of iconic and indexical reference, but it is a mode of repre­
sentation none the less. Algorithms that are not adaptive in a deep sense 
have none of this quality. Not al indexical processes are conscious, how­
ever. When reference is circular it too is mere mechanism, because there 
is nothing else for the indices to refer to but themselves. Where there is 
nothing other to represent, there is nothing to be conscious of. A pro­
gram-whether in a computer or in a brain--could be an object of con­
sciousness but not its source. These arguments do not really contribute any 
new explanation of consciousness; they merely illustrate certain minimal 
conditions for symbolic interpretation. But it is significant that this indexi­
caVsymbolic distinction seems central to the problem of consciousness. 
No matter what else various theorists might claim about the nature of 
consciousness, most begin by recognizing that to be conscious of something 
is to experience a representation of it. The subjective experience of con­
sciousness is always a consciousness of something. This is not to suggest that 
consciousness is something separate from the representation process itself 
(a view that Daniel Dennett caricatures as the "Cartesian Theater" per­
spective). 4 It is simply the realization that experiences arise as the brain pro­
gressively transforms neural signals which have been modulated by external 
physical events into correlated patterns of neural activity in other parts of 
the brain, which themselves modulate other patterns of neural activity, and 
so on, each re-presenting some formal aspect of the initial interaction in an 
additional neural context. In very general terms, both the neurophysiolog­
ical and subjective information processes can be described as generating 
representations and interpreting them in terms of others. 
For example, the pattern of electromagnetic waves reflecting off an ob­
ject and entering the retina and the pattern of neural signals ramifying 
through circuits of the visual areas of the brain are both part of the causal 
chain on which the experiences of color are based. The color does not in­
here in the object alone, nor is it merely a mental phantom. Something in­
trinsic to the object is re-presented in the pattern of light waves and again 
re-presented in the pattern of neural signals. But it is also re-presented in 
the subjective experience of color. There is no jump from material stuff to 
mental stuff in this process. The material and cognitive perspectives both 
448 < The Symbolic Species

recount relationships in form between successive and simultaneous points 
in a process, and these formal relationships, I submit, can be either iconic, 
indexical, or symbolic at various stages and levels of the process. 
If consciousness is inevitably representational, then it follows that a 
change in the nature of the way information gets represented inevitably con­
stitutes a change in consciousness. Consciousness of iconic representations 
should differ from consciousness of indexical representations, and this in 
tum should differ from consciousness of symbolic representations. More­
over, since these modes of representation are not alternatives at the same 
level but hierarchically and componentially related to one another, this 
must also be true of these modes of consciousness as well. They form a 
nested hierarchy, where certain conditions in the lower levels of con­
sciousness are prerequisite to the emergence of consciousness at each 
higher level. 
All nervous systems support iconic and indexical representational 
processes, irrespective of their size and complexity. They are the basic in­
gredients for adaptation. To some extent, I suspect that every living nervous 
system exhibits consciousness with respect to the iconic and indexical rep­
resentations it can support. It's just that for some, thi.s is a very limited realm. 
Their interpretive capacity will determine their capacity for consciousness. 
The differences between species in this regard are not qualitative, but 
quantitative. In species with more complex brains, representational states 
will be more numerous, more diverse, have a greater range of arousal am­
plitude, and wil integrate across signals that cover a greater scope in both 
space and time. Statistics oflarge numbers and immense differences in mag­
nitude have a way of making quantitative differences appear to be qualita­
tive differences. It is therefore easy to imagine that the human difference 
is a difference of this kind, a significant quantum increase in the capacity. 
And to some extent it is. It's just not the only or even the major difference. 
To appreciate why human beings are able to experience conscious states 
unprecedented ip evolution, we do not need to have solved the mystery of 
consciousness itself. We do not need to understand the mechanism under­
lying conscious states in order to recognize that since they are based on rep­
resentations, any difference in representational ability between species wil 
translate into a difference in the ability to be conscious of different sorts of 
things. The formal characteristics of the interpretation process, whether 
iconic, indexical, or symbolic, will define the elements of a creature's con­
scious universe. So the development of an unprecedented form of repre­
sentation-symbolic representation-while not the origin of consciousness, 
has produced an unprecedented medium for consciousness. This doesn't 
Terrence W. Deacon > 449

deny generic consciousness to other species; it only denies a particular as­
pect of consciousness that is based on symbolic abilities. Our brains share 
a common design logic with other vertebrate brains, and so we also share 
all those aspects of consciousness that are mediated by the iconic and in­
dexical representation that these other species experience. Since iconic 
and indexical referential relationships are implicit and essential components 
of symbolic reference, the modes of consciousness that other species ex­
perience are an essential ground for consciousness of the symbolic world. 
We live most of our concrete lives in the subjective realm that is also shared 
with other species, but our experience of this world is embedded in the 
vastly more extensive symbolic world. 
The evolution of symbolic communication has not just changed the range 
of possible objects of consciousness, it has also changed the nature of con­
sciousness itself. Common sense psychology suggests that a lot of thinking 
gets done in the form of talking to oneself, editing and re-editing imaginary 
future or reconsidered past conversations, even when this also involves 
writing or typing out these thoughts to see how well the shorthand of imag­
ined monologues translates into a coherent argument. Of course, these 
sorts of internal conversations must be unique to human brains while the 
majority of the other modes of thought are not. And given that our brains 
have only recently been "made over" to aid language processing, it is likely 
that the proportion of neural space and time dedicated to these various men­
tal activities strongly favors the nonlinguistic. This does not necessarily 
imply that other species do not "replay" troubling past experiences over and 
over again, or that they are incapable of actively imagining possible expe­
riences in some immanent future. They simply do not do so with the aid of 
symbolic reference or linguistic mnemonics. It also does not imply that 
imagistic thinking in humans lacks symbolic character and symbolic logic, 
though these forms of cognition are capable of following chains of associa­
tion that are also uninfluenced by language. 
The Russian cognitive psychologist L. S. Vygotsky suggested in the 1930s 
that a significant number of normal human psychological processes could 
be understood as internalized versions of processes that are inherently so­
cial in nature.5 He gave language a central role to play in this because its 
fundamentally social nature provides a mental tool for gaining a kind of sub­
jective distance from the contents of thought, that is, from our own sub­
jective experiences. By importing, as it were, an implicit speaker-listener 
relationship into cognition, we create a tool for self-reflection by a sort of 
virtual social distancing from our own thought process. Thus we can talk to 
ourselves as though talking to others. Vygotsky conceived of mental devel-
450 < The Symbolic Species

opment as a process of condensing and streamlining this internalized social 
process. 
Language functions as a sort of shared code for translating certain es­
sential attributes of memories and images between individuals who other­
wise have entirely idiosyncratic experiences. This is possible because 
symbolic reference strips away any necessary link to the personal experi­
ences and musings that ultimately support it. The dissociation allows indi­
viduals to supply their own indexical and iconic mnemonics in order to 
reground these tokens in new iconic and indexical representations during 
the process of interpretation. My imagistic and emotional experience in re­
sponse to the episodes described in a novel is distinct from that of anyone 
else, though all readers will share a common symbolic understanding of 
them. The "subjective distance" from what is represented confers a repre­
sentational freedom to thought processes that is not afforded by the direct 
recall or imagining of experiences. 
This is crucial for the development of self-consciousness, and for the sort 
of detachment from immediate arousal and compulsion that allows for self­
control. Self-representation, in the context of representations of alternative 
pasts and futures, could not be attained without a means for symbolic rep­
resentation. It is this representation of self that is held accountable in so­
cial agreements, that becomes engaged in the experience of empathy, and 
that is the source for rational, reflective intentions. According to Vygotsky, 
this sense of self emerges slowly as children mature. It becomes progres­
sively more facile in perspective shifting and at the same time consolidates 
greater control over the other aspects of self that derive from nonsocial 
sources, such as the experience of pain and effort, the arousal of basic 
drives, or the physical boundaries of control over events. And, as studies of 
this process in various mentally and socially handicapped children suggest, 
the extent to which it is developed depends both on the extent of exposure 
to relevant social-symbolic experiences and on the symbol-processing ca­
pacity of the individual. 
Unlike the interpretation of icons and indices (a process which is uniquely 
personal and insular within each brain), symbolic representations are in part 
externally interpreted-they are shared. For example, though each of us 
supplies the interpretation of the words and phrases we hear and use, on a 
moment-by-moment basis, the implicit injunctions and constraints that de­
termine each individual interpretation are borrowed from the society of 
users, and the symbolic reference that results is only reliable insofar as each 
interpretation corresponds with those performed by others. Imagine that 
Washington Irving's character, Rip Van Winkle, had remained in his magi-
Terrence W. Deacon > 451

cal slumber for many centuries. Upon awakening, not only would he be out 
of touch culturally, but he would find himself constantly misinterpreting the 
meaning of many still familiar-sounding words and phrases being spoken 
by those around him. As languages evolve and meanings and patterns of use 
drift away from older patterns, reference is maintained by continuity but 
not fidelity to the past. Symbolic reference is at once a function of the whole 
web of referential relationships and of the whole network of users extended 
in space and time. It is as though the symbolic power of words is only on 
loan to its users. If symbols ultimately derive their representational power, 
not from the individual, but from a particular society at a particular time, 
then a person's symbolic experience of consciousness is to some extent 
society-dependent-it is borrowed. Its origin is not within the head. It is 
not implicit in the sum of our concrete experiences. 
Consciousness of self in this way implicitly includes consciousness of 
other selves, and other consciousnesses can only be represented through 
the virtual reference created by symbols. The self that is the source of one's 
experience of intentionality, the self that is judged by itself as well as by oth­
ers for its moral choices, the self that worries about its impending depar­
ture from the world, this self is a symbolic self. It is a final irony that it is 
the virtual, not actual, reference that symbols provide, which gives rise to 
this experience of self. This most undeniably real experience is a virtual re­
ality. 
In a curious way, this recapitulates an unshakable intuition that has been 
ubiquitously expressed throughout the ages. This is the belief in a disem­
bodied spirit or immortal "pilgrim soul" that defines that part of a person 
that is not "of the body" and is not reducible to the stuff of the material 
world. My ability to appreciate symbolic reference is not "reducible" to the 
indexical or iconic reference I use to ground my interpretation, though it 
is dependent on these lower-level modes of reference. Symbolic reference 
is also independent of any particular interpretive process, and retains its ref­
erential invariance despite interpretation by very different iconic and in­
dexical processes in different minds. Its virtual nature notwithstanding, it 
is the symbolic realm of consciousness that we most identifY with and from 
which our sense of agency and self-control originate. This self is indeed not 
bounded \vithin a mind or body, and derives its existence from outside­
from other minds and other times. It is implicitly part of a larger whole, and 
to the extent that it too contributes to the formation of other virtual selves 
and worlds, it is virtually present independent of the existence of the par­
ticular brain and body that support it. This may seem a shallow sort of dis­
embodiment that pales in compared to mystical images of"out of the body 
452 < The Symbolic Species

experience" -it is more similar to the legacy of self composers leave in their 
music or great teachers bequeath to their students-but this symbolic as­
pect of self is nonetheless the source of our internal experience of free will 
and agency. 
Abstract symbolic objects, like the Pythagorean theorem, guide the de­
sign and construction of innumerable human artifacts every day. Imagin­
ing counterfactual conditions, like what I might have done if I were the one 
who had stumbled on a reported accident scene, can cause me to enroll in 
medical first-aid training and perhaps some day aid an accident victim. 
Even imagined worlds-Olympus, Valhalla, Heaven, Hell, the "Other 
Side"-influence people's behavior in this world. Indeed, assumptions about 
the "will" of an ineffable God have been among the most powerful tools for 
shaping historical changes. These abstract representations have physical ef­
ficacy. They can and do change the world. They are as real and concrete as 
the force of gravity or the impact of a projectile. 
On the other hand, the self that persists to influence others and continue 
shaping the world independent of the brain and body that originally ani­
mated it is detached from the specific iconic and indexical experiences that 
once grounded it in a personal subjective experience. This is precisely what 
makes it available for regrounding in the subjective experience of others, 
of becoming part of the self that controls, and feels, and connects with yet 
other selves from the locus of a different body and brain. In this regard, this 
part of personal identity is intersubjective in the most thoroughgoing sense 
of the term, and is capable of true transmigration, though not necessarily 
as a unified whole. 
By this twist of logic, or rather its untangling, we also again return to 
Descartes' elaboration of the religious insight that only humans have a soul, 
and that this core of the self derives from a realm that is of the nature of 
language, pure mathematics, or geometry. Descartes' insight, currently 
maligned as archaic and antiscientific, seems to have more than a passing 
similarity to the 1!-otion I have developed here. But his rationalist assump­
tions-like those represented in theories of innate knowledge of language, 
comput!ltional theories of mind, or claims that human brains have a special 
essence that imbues them with intentional ability-reflected an implicit an­
alytic or top-down perspective on the nature of symbolic reference. By fail­
ing to appreciate the constitutive role of lower forms of reference, iconic 
and indexical reference, this perspective kicks the ladder away after climb­
ing up to the symbolic realm and then imagines that there never was a lad­
der in the first place. This leaves symbolic reference ungrounded and forces 
us to introduce additional top-down causal hypotheses, such as the existence 
Terrence W. Deacon > 453

of an ephemeral soul or the assumption that there can be forms of compu­
tation or mental language (mentalese) that are intrinsically meaningful, in 
order to fill in for this missing causal role in the explanation. 
But unlike the eliminative materialist alternative, the perspective I have 
outlined does not suggest that this top-down experience of self is all epiphe­
nomenal nor that some of the claims about the nature of the mind which 
derive from it are based on mystical notions. The symbolic representation 
of self is solidly grounded in simpler representations of self, derived from 
simpler forms of representation, and yet the arrow of cognitive processes 
points neither from lower to higher nor from higher to lower forms of ref­
erence. As symbolic reference and symbol minds co-evolved from the non­
symbolic, each level of process drawing adaptive novelty from the other, so 
do the levels of self-representation that constitute our experience bring 
themselves into being in a moment-by-moment coevolutionary process. As 
the symbolic process can be the co-author of our unanticipated brains, so 
can the symbolic self be the co-author of the component neural processes 
that support it. We live in a world that is both entirely physical and virtual 
at the same time. Remarkably, this virtual facet of the world came into ex­
istence relatively recently, as evolutionary time is measured, and it has pro­
vided human selves with an unprecedented sort of autonomy or freedom 
to wander from the constraints of concrete reference, and a unique power 
for self-determination that derives from this increasingly indirect linkage 
between symbolic mental representation and its grounds of reference. With 
it has come a more indirect linkage between mind and body, as well. So this 
provides a somewhat different perspective on that curious human intuition 
that our minds are somehow independent of our bodies; an intuition which 
is often translated into beliefs about disembodied spirit and souls that per­
sist beyond death. The experience we have of ourselves as symbols is in at 
least a minimal sense an experience of just this sort of virtual indepen­
dence-it's just not an independence from corporeal embodiment alto­
gether. Though this might seem like a weak consolation in comparison to 
the freely transmigrating homunculus of mythical tradition, we should not 
underestimate the miraculous power of symbols to break down even vast 
barriers of space, time, and idiosyncratic experience that would otherwise 
separate us impenetrably. 
As we have seen, the symbolic threshold is not intrinsic to the 
human-nonhuman difference. It is probably crossable to some extent in 
many different ways by many species. This means that we are not the only 
species that could possess such a "pilgrim soul," to use William Butler Yeats's 
elegantly descriptive phrase. It was a Darwinian accident, or miracle, of na-
454 < The Symbolic Species

ture that this ability arose once and persisted for so long; but it has provided 
each of us with the opportunity to participate in bringing new "souls" into 
the world, not by procreation, but by allowing our own symbolic selves to 
be shared by other human beings, and perhaps by other animals, or per­
haps eventually even by artifacts of our own creation. 
Reinventing the Mind 
Will we someday build devices that understand symbols, that have sym­
bolic consciousness? Yes, I think so. And it probably will happen in the not 
too distant future. Will they look like human brains? No, probably not. Sil­
icon would do. But the logical design, the way they acquire and "compute" 
symbolic relationships will of necessity be the same. This probably will not 
significantly constrain their physical design, however, or whether they are 
built from artificial neurons or transistors. Are present-day computing de­
vices anything like this? No, mostly not. What's missing is not just symbolic 
interpretation, but something that is a prerequisite to all representational 
processes: sentience. I think this property of mental processes is analytically 
separable from the mode of representation that is used to achieve it. Though 
we commonly fail to distinguish sentience from consciousness, I think it 
makes sense to use the term sentience to refer to a more generic property 
of organisms with brains-their spontaneously adaptive, self-versus-nonself 
organization-and to use the term consciousness to refer to the way they 
represent aspects of the world to themselves. 
The computer on my desk that is assimilating these notes as I type them 
in is not sentient, much less capable of comprehending symbolic relation­
ships. It does not comprehend icons or indices either, because its informa­
tional architecture is essentially passive and closed. But this is not because 
of what it is made of. I suspect that even my 80-megaherz, slow electronic 
substitute for paper and pencil could run software able to exhibit some 
inkling of sentie11ce; could generate some modicum of iconic and indexical 
representations, though it may be too simple to run software capable of sym­
bolic processes. The key to this trick is not in the machinery itself but in the 
flow of patterns through it. 
The first requirement in building a device capable of iconic and indexi­
cal processes is that it must be actively and spontaneously adaptive. It must 
continuously evolve new means of fitting with and anticipating its environ­
ment, even if this environment is constrained by whatever very limited 
input (keyboard?) and output (video screen?) devices can assess and respond 
to. And I really mean evolve, not in a genetic or phylogenetic sense, but 
Terrence W. Deacon > 455

through a moment-to-moment natural selection of patterned information. 
It must be capable of generating new patterned information where none 
previously existed. This is very different from the sort of data architecture 
comprising a massive list of templates to which an input is compared and 
matched. The latter is the way most computing is done these days, and many 
people have envisioned brains as doing just this: matching an input to a set 
of models in memory-some learned, some innately prespecified. Indeed, 
there is an approximation to this sort of process going on in most of what 
brains do. Most cognitive processes aim to achieve just this: completely au­
tomated, unconscious, mechanical, input-output matching. It is the goal of 
most cognitive processes to make information processing unconscious and 
automatic-as quick, easy, and efficient as possible-because these sorts of 
processes take comparatively little in the way of neural representation and 
energy to manage, compared to the active adaptational processes we expe­
rience as consciousness. 
Like any evolutionary process, consciousness is messy, anything but 
streamlined and efficient. Vast numbers of alternative patterns, corrupted 
and modified by the incessant noisiness of the molecular processes under­
lying neural activity, must be generated, set into competition with one an­
other for recruiting neural substrates, and mostly culled by selective 
processes due to their lack of correlation with sensory and mnemonic in­
formation. Out of this "bloomin', buzzing confusion," the temporary win­
ners become the recognition processes and responses of each moment. This 
neural microevolution (microgenesis, it is sometimes called) is the genera­
tor of representations: that process to which sensory input patterns are re­
presented and with respect to which they are re-cognized as icons. Such 
iconicity is, as we have seen, the bottom step of the hierarchy of represen­
tational processes in which symbolic representations are a distant possibil­
ity. 
A microevolutionary basis for mind follows inevitably from the way brains 
are constructed in the first place. As we have seen, at every step the design 
logic of brains is a Darwinian logic: overproduction, variation, competition, 
selection. And ultimately, these biological processes are mediated by the in­
formation that flows through the nervous system. Brains are built using their 
own information processing-raised by their own bootstraps, so to speak. 
This design logic is the key to understanding how functional capabilities 
shifted in our own evolution, and also how symbolic and linguistic functions 
distribute themselves in our mature brains. It should not come as a surprise 
that this same logic is also the basis for the normal millisecond-by-
456 < The Symbolic Species

millisecond information processing that continues to adapt neural software 
to the world. 
There have been many recent insightful speculations on this notion of 
mind as a "Darwin machine," as many authors refer to the process. It has 
been around in some form for generations: it was obliquely suggested in 
some of the holistic psychologies of the early twentieth century, and was 
vaguely implicit in Donald Hebb's conception of how synapses become 
strengthened or weakened. However, with the maturation of evolutionary 
theory since the discovery of molecular genetics, and especially after the 
growth of interest in nongenetic evolutionary processes made popular by 
Richard Dawkins's coining of the term meme to refer to units of cultural 
evolution, many have recognized that Darwinian processes could also ac­
count for the evolution of ideas within the brain as well as without. A num­
ber of book-length discussions of Darwinian models of neural/cognitive 
processes are available that demonstrate the range of possibilities. Unfor­
tunately, though it would touch on many of the problems I have addressed 
in this book, a detailed discussion of the Darwinian nature of neural infor­
mation processing would take us too far from the theme of the book-sym­
bolic processes. Rather than review these diverse approaches to what the 
Nobel Prize-winning biologist Gerald Edelman has caled Neural Darwin­
ism, and what others have called Darwin machines, I will focus on two as­
pects of this process that offer particularly useful insights about the 
relationship between Darwinian neural-processing models and the symbol 
acquisition problem. 
The first insight, discussed at some length in chapters 9 and 10, is the 
recognition that different neuronal computations may be in competition 
with one another for representation in the brain both during development 
and within each cognitive activity. But if brains are designed by competi­
tive processes, then the resulting architectures reflect a sort of stable mi­
croevolutionary balance between competing signal processing pathways. 
The differentiࡂtion of functions from one another and the segregation of 
competing computations is never quite complete. They are always in flux 
at some level. This probably results in considerable functional redundancy 
between nearby regions, even in adult brains, and probably also dictates that 
many functions are multiply and fractionally represented in diverse dis­
tributed networks. This should be especially true of computational processes 
that are somewhat abstracted from direct sensorimotor experiences, as 
symbolic processes are. It also predicts that representation of specific sym­
bolic operations will dynamically shift depending on cognitive demand, re-
Terrence W. Deacon > 457

cruiting additional computational support from regions more commonly re­
cruited for other functions. All of these features seem to be reflected by data 
from brain-imaging studies (see Chapter 10). Thus, the cognitive experi­
ence of internal conflicts, interferences, resonances, and ambiguities among 
ideas and mental images has a direct correspondence to underlying patterns 
of neural signal processing. 
But there is a second aspect of the subjective experience of conscious­
ness that is well modeled by the Darwinian model of mind. Unlike the 
mechanistic view of mind that is suggested by digital computer metaphors, 
mind as evolution provides a way of understanding that aspect of our ex­
perience that is least like clockwork: our experience of being the origina­
tors of our own thoughts, perceptions, and actions. We do not experience 
ourselves as merely devices on which prespecifled operations are "run," like 
programs in a computer--of being vehicles of cognition only. Some have 
suggested that these subjective introspections of self-determination and in­
tention are unreliable epiphenomena. But a Darwinian interpretation of 
neural information processing offers two general reasons to suspect that we 
genuinely are self-determining and intentional creatures: one, because the 
operations are not prespecifled; and two, because there is no clear dividing 
line between neural signal processing and neural architecture in a system 
where the circuits are created by patterns of signal processing. Evolution 
is the one kind of process able to produce something out of nothing, or, more 
accurately, able to create adaptive structural information where none pre­
viously existed. And the raw materials are the ubiquitous noise and context 
of the process. So an evolutionary process is an origination process-per­
haps, as Richard Dawkins once remarked, the only known mechanism ca­
pable of being one. Evolution is the author of its spontaneous creations. In 
this regard, we do not need to explain away the subjective experience. We 
are what we experience ourselves to be. Our self-experience of intentions 
and "will" are not epiphenomenal illusions. They are what we should ex­
pect an evolutionlike process to feel like! 
Symbolic representation processes have added a new level to this evo­
lutionlike process. Their power of condensing representational relation­
ships, and supporting extended flights of virtual reference, creates a whole 
new landscape in which the evolutionary process of mind can wander. By 
internalizing much of the physical trial and error, and even internalizing ab­
stract models of physical processes that can be extrapolated to their possi­
ble and impossible extremes, we are capable of what genetic evolution is 
not: forethought. Representational processes are the substrate for "final 
causality," that everyday use of imagined ends to guide the selection of pre-
458 < The Symbolic Species

sent means. Symbolic processes have freed this process from the bounds 
of the immediate present and possible. 
But building a sentient symbolic processing device need not recapitu­
late the tortured path that humans took to this capability. The evolution of 
symbolic abilities in our species was a freak rarity only because of the way 
natural selection had biased brain evolution against its ever occurring. Most 
of what determines the structure of human brains was baggage accumulated 
on this meandering course prior to the evolution of symbolic communica­
tion. In designing an artificial symbolic device, it may be possible to take 
many shortcuts that avoid much of the presymbolic and visceral regulatory 
baggage that human brains carry to this process. Indeed, symbolic pro­
cessing in a very simplified domain-adapting to a limited "environment" 
of potential signals-may not require anywhere near the massive informa­
tion storage and retrieval capacity that human brains utilize. Neither 
mnemonic capacity nor learning rate blocked the evolution of this ability 
in other lineages; indeed, these capacities were to some extent a source of 
impediments. Symbolic capacities might be within the grasp of far less so­
phisticated computing devices than those that even the simplest mammals 
possess, so long as they were strongly biased toward the peculiarities of sym­
bolic analysis and the symbol system was of only modest complexity. 
This sort of mind is something with which we do not yet have any fa­
miliarity: a simple symbol processor. It might seem quite alien and odd. 
However, Williams syndrome may offer a human analogue to this sort of 
shortcut to symbolic abilities. Recall that this genetic abnormality produces 
individuals who are severely mentally handicapped in most ways but are rel­
atively spared in certain language abilities. Their vocabularies are not nearly 
so severely reduced as their low IQ would suggest, and they can produce 
remarkably sophisticated lexical associations and grammatical analyses. But 
their lexical (symbol-token to symbol-token) understanding is supported on 
a very minimalistic iconic and indexical base as demonstrated by a poor abil­
ity to understand the pragmatic correlates of words and sentences. This, in 
a far more exagg'erated form, is what we should expect from a man-made 
device capable of symbolic learning: not highly concrete rote (indexical) as­
sociations between tokens and their referents, as is typical of most animals, 
but in some ways the opposite. Symbolic representation with a minimum 
of iconic and indexical support could be creative, productive, and complex, 
but mostly vacuuous and circularly referential-almost pure language 
games. Nevertheless, there may be many contexts where this might be a 
useful tool. 
How much further do we need to progress in our knowledge of brains 
Terrence W. Deacon > 459

and computing architectures to reach this stage? Probably not as far as one 
might think. In laboratories throughout the world, molecular biologists are 
capable of shuttling selected genes from organism to organism in order to 
study their effects or take advantage of their expression in a novel context. 
They do this with only a basic understanding of the way the complex mol­
ecular machinery of life operates, but ignorance of the global logic of the 
process does not preclude an ability to manipulate some of the details to 
see what happens. In a similar way, "neural network" designers are able to 
copy the organization of isolated bits of neural circuits and simulate their 
logic in software or in electronic circuits without really understanding what 
they are copying. Even if informed by only a dim understanding of the func­
tion of these circuit patterns in living brains, scientists are not precluded 
from studying the pieces to see how they work. Although a simulation must 
simplify many attributes of what it models, it is quite possible that those at­
tributes of neural circuits that are essential to many high-level mental op­
erations do not require any "deep" isomorphism with neural cellular 
properties. The isomorphism necessary for mental-like functions may only 
depend critically on aspects of the overall architecture and basic synaptic 
response properties, and not on the details. Evidence from human evolu­
tion has demonstrated that the achievement of symbolic referential abili­
ties did not spontaneously emerge simply because of a threshold increase 
in computing power. So we should not expect symbolic capabilities simply 
to jump out as bigger, faster, and more sophisticated computing devices are 
built. It is not the size of the network that is crucial to symbolic processes, 
but the special logic of the relationships between learning processes. This 
is a global network feature, not a function of microarchitecture, and the de­
sign strategy may only need attend to rather large-scale network structures 
to succeed. 
I have no doubt that nonbiological devices with nonbiological minds 
can, and probably will, be built. Nature itself produced minds by blind trial 
and error. So we know that a theoretical understanding of the nature of 
minds is not an essential ingredient for producing them. The science of 
"mental" engineering could proceed in a parallel trial-and-error fashion. 
Even without ever sorting out the theoretical issues, we may eventually 
achieve the physical result simply by copying nature. Mind is a physical 
process, and physical processes can be copied whether we understand what 
we are copying or not. 
So, does it matter whether or not we have a complete account of con­
sciousness, if it can be achieved without it? Is there more than an aesthetic 
value, a satisfaction of a deep curiosity, to be derived from pursuing a deep 
460 < The Symbolic Species

theoretical understanding of the relationship between mechanism and 
mind? Finding a way out of the philosophical maze presented by the prob­
lem of mind could, of course, greatly aid in the design and engineering of 
intelligent machines, but I do not believe this is the most pressing reason 
for pursuing the issue. Eventually, we will be forced to make judgments that 
distinguish between a simulation and the real thing-ethical judgments. 
Someday, these may be relevant to objects designed and built in factories. 
Wil we know when we have crossed this line? 
This leads us back once more to the mystery of subjective experience, 
and the extent to which we can know of it in another. The question of 
whether there could be independent, nonsubjective means for determin­
ing the presence of consciousness has long plagued philosophers. As we have 
seen, this mystery led to one of the most troubling doubts that confronted 
Descartes in his skeptical meditations on the nature of mind: how can we 
be sure that there are other minds in the world? A more mundane way to 
put this question is to ask whether we can ever truly share subjective ex­
periences, as opposed to simply imagining that we do. In more recent times, 
the Turing test has addressed the parallel question of whether a machine 
can be determined to have intelligence. The Cartesian version of the Tur­
ing test might be phrased: how would I know if my computer program were 
conscious? Many computer scientists continue to debate this in a frame­
work that is in many ways only a modem rephrasing of Descartes' problem. 
In the Turing test the question is whether a computational system can pro­
duce answers to queries that cannot be distinguished from those a person 
would provide under the same conditions. If a sophisticated questioner with 
extensive resouces can be entirely fooled into mistaking a device for a per­
son, then the test purportedly indicates that the device possesses intelli­
gence analogous to that of a person. In the Cartesian version of the Turing 
test, we might ask the examiner to judge whether or not the respondent is 
conscious and responding intentionally. 
As Turing test competitions for programmers have demonstrated, peo­
ple can be fooled in this regard, though generally they can still outwit most 
programs. This begs Descartes' question. Is it possible for a program to fool 
everyone all the time and still not be either intelligent or conscious? And 
likewise, is a person just a naturally-evolved program suffering from delu­
sions of intentional consciousness in itself and other persons? Because the 
information available to assess this is circumstantial and indirect, in theory 
it should be possible for a program to fool everyone, including itsel£1 The 
simple thought experiment of collating millions and millions of interviews 
between people and implementing them in a supercomputer as a look-up 
Terrence W. Deacon > 461

table of possible questions and relevant responses (as also might be imag­
ined in a Chinese Room set up with access to such a supercomputer data 
base) suggests a trivial answer to the question. In principle, given enough 
data from prior interviews between real people and enough computing 
power to store and search through them, it will always be possible to fool 
even the most sophisticated questioner and yet do so without any semblance 
of consciousness or sentience. This is the gist of Searle's critique. 
If we expand the nature of the "test" a bit, perhaps we can find a way be­
yond this impasse. Searle's test for the "merely algorithmic" is a clue about 
which information handling procedures are insufficient. An understanding 
of the way that symbolic interpretive processes are structured differently 
from this might provide a test for what is sufficient, irrespective of the an­
swers produced (this is important, because human respondents in Turing 
tests can be mistaken for mindless computers!). In daily life, we sidestep 
the Cartesian dilemma simply by recognizing that the people we live among 
are physically just like us, and assuming that this means they have thought 
processes like our own, that they too are persons with conscious, intelligent 
minds. Descartes and Turing have disallowed this shortcut: it is in princi­
ple no more reliable a guide than the information provided in a Turing test. 
The questioner in a Turing test is denied knowledge of whether the answers 
come from a human subject or an electronic gadget, but if we are asking 
whether the output is the result of conscious intelligence it does not mat­
ter. However, I think there is a way that information about the architecture 
of the device (like knowing about sharing a common architecture with an­
other human subject) can be independently informative. 
Ultimately, the structure of the Chinese Room situation was the key to 
assessing the presence or absence of symbolic representation. This is be­
cause symbolic processes have a particular structure that defines and de­
termines them. Similarly, I would argue that sentient processes in general 
have an identifiable structure-a Darwinian structure-the absence of 
which would mean the absence of subjective experience, and the presence 
of which would attest to the presence of at least a minimal form of subjec­
tive experience. If the features of this structure can be discovered by in­
vestigating the logic of underlying signal processing relationships in a device 
or organism, then it should be possible to discover something about the sen­
tience and level of mental representation of that device or organism. In 
other words, an indirect inductive inference-a guess-would not be the 
only way to assess the possible subjective experience of another being or 
mechanism. I think that there can be an empirical basis for making that 
judgement, if one has access to the right information about the underlying 
462 < The Symbolic Species

information-processing architecture. Another way to put this is that, in 
principle, we can hope to determine the nature of the consciousness of an­
other more reliably from bottom-up information than we ever could from 
top-down information, which Descartes and Turing showed can at best 
only provide a plausible guess. The process of symbolic interpretation will 
have distinctive physical attributes as well as produce appropriately inter­
pretable signs. If we know how to recognize its logical architecture, we can 
know if it is there or not. The determination of subjectivity may not be 
merely a subjective matter. 
We don't just need to know this in order to assess whether our comput­
ers are thinking or not. Many contemporary ethical dilemmas are unre­
solvable due to our inability to think clearly about the distinctions between 
mind and non-mind, conscious and nonconscious states, and the boundaries 
of personhood. Abortion and euthanasia, animal rights, the insanity plea in 
criminal justice, and care for the severely mentally retarded are just a few 
of the circumstances that force us to make ethical decisions without suffi­
cient knowledge of this most relevant fact. These cases raise troubling ques­
tions about when a person begins and ends existence, which aspects of 
brain function are essential to personhood, what constitutes human ratio­
nality, and to what extent other animals share the experience of subjective 
consciousness. It is not clear that understanding these distinctions wil make 
any of our choices easier, but at least we will know the consequences. 
Albert Einstein once remarked that what is most miraculous about the 
universe is its understandability. This is also one of the most unsettling 
things about science: its ability to lift the veil of mystery, only to replace what 
was once magical and miraculous with dry, cold clockwork. An under­
standing of the basis of human consciousness will signal the final surrender 
in a long-fought Copernican revolution that has progressively usurped our 
privileged place in the universe. What are the ethical and aesthetic conse­
quences for us, if consciousness and the capacity for the subjective and in­
tersubjective experience of self are features that can be built into machines? 
Would this know-how somehow cheapen the value of our subjective expe­
rience of self? Would it diminish the intrinsic value we ascribe to conscious 
beings to know that they could be produced from silicon and wire? 
On the one hand, like an audience unwilling to hear an explanation of a 
joke that they didn't get, we fear that this prospective fact almost certainly 
will diminish the sense of specialness we feel about our sentience. Some­
thing of the sanctity of personhood may be violated, if we ever succeed in 
explaining how it works and how it came about. However, it should be re­
marked that without this knowledge we currently mass-produce new con-
Terrence W. Deacon > 463

sciousnesses anyway in a free-for-all of out-of-control population growth. 
Our cherished belief in the specialness of human consciousness has not pre­
vented us from thoughtlessly treating people as throw-away tools. On the 
other hand, how much less thought will we give to the mistreatment of con­
scious devices, mass-produced in factories? The question before us is 
whether we will begin to treat people like unconscious computers, or come 
to treat conscious computers like people. 
There is also a possibility that in a more accurate knowledge of the basis 
and nature of consciousness we will discover the cure for the angst that has 
been growing in Western societies ever since we began to doubt the Carte­
sian dichotomy of mind and body. If we conceive of human consciousness 
as an alien addition to an otherwise dead world filled with clockwork mech­
anisms, discovering that we ourselves are mechanisms appears to imply that 
we don't really exist, at least not as the intentional, self-determining per­
sons we thought we were, and that there is no one else out there either. But 
discovering how such mechanisms work may be what is necessary to shat­
ter this persistent belief. Unmasking the source of the subjective experience 
behind human consciousness is less likely to demonstrate how mental 
processes can be eliminated from material explanations than to demonstrate 
how they are implicit in them. And this may help us to recognize that the 
universe isn't, after all, the soulless, blindly spinning clockwork we fear we 
are a part of, but is, instead, nascent heart and mind. 
464 < The Symbolic Species

Notes 
Part One 
C H A P T E R  
1. This cult classic science fiction movie was based on the notion that in the earth's 
future, other apes would evolve upright posture and speech, and would reca­
pitulate a sort of ape version of human societies. 
2. For an excellent recent review of studies of animal communication in the wild, 
see Marc Hauser (1996), The Evolution of Communication. 
3. Some linguists, however, argue that language is so human-specific and depen­
dent on innately built-in language knowledge that translation to and from a truly 
alien language would be impossible. We will return later to the question of how 
radically different symbolic languages could be from one another; probably the 
465

most extreme examples are between spoken and manual signed languages like 
American Sign Language. Though manual languages such as this have to some 
extent evolved with respect to local spoken languages, borrowing some words 
in translated form, most of these are not fragmentary, partial, or parasitic lan­
guages, but complete and unique forms that often differ significantly in struc­
ture from those spoken around them. See Bellugi and Klima (1982). 
4. One recent sophisticated addition to this genre, extrapolating from animal 
behavior to language, is presented in a recent book by Robin Dunbar 
(1997), Grooming, Gossip and the Evolution of Language. See also Dunbar 
( 1992 a, b). 
5. The hopeful monster approach to major evolutionary innovations was champi­
oned by the evolutionary theorist Richard Goldschmidt. See his 1952 review in 
American Scientist. 
6. Moliere's play The Imaginary Invalid (Le Malade Imaginaire) can be found in 
The Misanthrope and Other Plays, translated by John Wood (Baltimore: Pen­
guin Books; 1953). 
C H A P T E R  2 
1. See, for example, Bickerton (1990). 
2. Seyfarth, Cheney, and Marler ( 1980). 
3. For example, a number of different species of birds use similar-sounding alarm 
calls to distinguish between such predators as hawks and owls. Peter Marler 
( 1959) suggested many years ago that the localizability of these calls may have 
been a critical factor shaping their evolution. Calls that are used for "mobbing" 
a raptor need to be localizable, but those for warning of a stealthy, nearby 
predator need to be difficult to localize. Consequently, it is argued that the sound 
structures of alarm calls in different species probably resemble one another due 
to convergent evolution under these influences (and possibly also to the ad­
vantages of being able to recruit support from more than one species). See a 
recent review of other examples in Hauser (1996). 
4. Such a scenario has been explicitly outlined by a number of researchers, in­
cluding the linguist Derek Bickerton, in his book Language and Species ( 1990); 
and with a very different emphasis by the cognitive psychologist Philip Lieber­
man, in his book Uniquely Human (1991). 
5. Cheney and Seyfarth ( 1990). 
6. See Grice ( 1969). I would argue that this is incidental to linguistic com­
munication, though almost ubiquitously present. In the next chapter and again 
in the final chapter, the role of symbolic reference for the development of 
knowledge about other minds and its relevance to intentionality will come up 
again. 
7. Frege (1879). 
8. This example provides an interesting exception that demonstrates a general rule 
about the assignment of word meanings in a language. Seldom do two words in 
466 < Notes

the same language share the same exact scope of reference. This particular ex­
ception snuck past the general tendency in English and in many other languages 
precisely because the common reference is not generally known. So these terms 
appear on the surface to have different references when in reality they do not. 
The debatable question is whether this tendency derives from a predisposition 
to avoid redundant reference or redundant sense. 
9. Most notably these views are argued by the philosophers Saul Kripke (1972) 
and Hilary Putnam ( 1975). 
10. An excellent short selection of Peirce's writings has been edited by Buchler 
(1955), including a number of his semiotics writings. 
11. See Herrnstein, et al. (1980). 
C H A P T E R  3 
1. de Saussure ( 1916). I have simplified this account considerably from what de 
Saussure described. He recognized an orthogonal "plane" to that of reference, 
associated with the combinatorial and diachronic (time-dependent) processes 
of language. 
2. Though I will avoid most of Peirce's complex terminology and only obliquely 
suggest the unique philosophical context in which he embedded his semiotic 
theory, I believe the following analysis will stay close to his original insights, 
which focused on representation as process, not as a static relationship, and rec­
ognized these sign types as hierarchical levels of representation, not as opposed 
categorical alternatives. For a brief set of excerpts of some of Peirce's core writ­
ings on the topic, I recommend Buchler, ed. (1955). Many ofPeirce's major writ­
ings on the semiotic basis oflogic were compiled in the Hartshorne and Weiss, 
eds., collection of Peirce's papers ( 1978), especially Vol. II. 
3. The symbolic nature ofhumor will be discussed in some more detail in Chap­
ter 13. 
4. See Savage-Rumbaugh, et al. ( 1978; 1980); and Savage-Rumbaugh ( 1986). In 
the stripped-down account presented here, I focus only on the two of the four 
chimps who were most successful (Sherman and Austin) and who continued to 
participate in subsequent language experiments. 
5. Described in Savage-Rumbaugh and Lewin (1994). 
6. Rumbaugh ( 1ǡ77). 
7. I have simplified the paradigm a bit by omitting mention of an additional key 
that signaled the start of a trial (sometimes glossed in a sort of tongue-in-cheek 
fashion as "Please") and one to signify its end (sometimes glossed as a period). 
These were essentially irrelevant to the problem except as added distractors, 
since they did not vary from trial to trial, and such glosses could be quite mis­
leading. 
8. Savage-Rumbaugh and Lewin (1994). 
9. Kohler ( 1927). 
10. Piaget (1952). 
Notes > 467

C H A P T E R  4 
1. Chomsky (1972; 1980; 1988). 
2. See an early formalization of this argument by Chomsky and Miller (1963). 
3. Christiansen (in press). The analogy oflanguage to an organism has been used 
as a heuristic principle for understanding language change by comparative lin­
guists since early in the last century. One of the most prominent was the lin­
guist August Schleicher, who in the middle of the nineteenth century proposed 
that languages should be analyzed as organisms with their own family trees, 
which could be traced like phylogenetic trees, using common inherited traits. 
4. Berlin and Kay (1969). 
5. Rosch ( 1978); and see other discussions in the same volume for more details 
and examples. 
6. I have borrowed this term from Nelson Goodman's ( 1955) discussion of a sim­
ilar point about the problems of accurately "projecting" color reference to fu­
ture uses, where he argues that there is insufficient basis in past exemplars to 
guarantee consistency of reference into the future. This is part of a more gen­
eral critique on the nature and weakness of the argument from induction. 
Goodman suggests that only social "entrenchment" (essentially habit) is re­
sponsible for stability of word reference projection to future uses, and that this 
is far too fragile to provide a basis for referential certainty. The co-evolutionary 
argument suggests an alternative source of entrenchment that can provide an 
incredibly robust projectability. Since Goodman's intention was also to question 
the projectability of scientific induction, a similar argument can be made about 
the evolution of scientific terms and theories. 
7. Jackendoff ( 1992; 1994). 
8. See Savage-Rumbaugh and Lewin ( 1994). 
9. Greenfield and Savage-Rumbaugh (1990; 1991). 
10. Gold (1967). 
11. A long history of debate in the philosophy of science has pursued this theoret­
ical problem of projecting general rules from a finite set of instances. There is 
general agreement that rules which we apply to describe natural events (e.g., 
the laws of physics) are inevitably underdetermined by the inductive inferences 
that we use to justify them, and that in general extrinsic constraints or special 
conditions are implicit in general rules that predict real-world regularities. So 
real-world inductions invariably rest on a very infirm foundation of assumptions. 
See also note 6 on Goodman's critique of induction. 
12. Ramsey and Stich ( 1991). 
13. Newport (1990; 1991). 
14. For example, a fragment from the lower-left comer of a hologram of a face 
would need to be viewed obliquely from its lower left, and only a view of the 
face as seen from below and to the left would be possible. Unfortunately, the 
sort of holograms used on credit cards or sold as pictures (known as white light 
468 < Notes

holograms) provide a far more limited range of perspectives than true laser­
illuminated holograms, and can be viewed at only a few angles. In these partial 
holograms, full holographic recording of information must to be sacrificed in 
order for the hologram to be viewable in the mix of frequencies and phases 
found in normal light. 
15. Elman (1991; 1993). See also Elman, et al. (1996), Rethinking Innateness, for 
a more detailed discussion of how neural network models can help explain the 
role of learning biases in language development. 
16. Consequently it would not be expected to avoid grammatically correct nonsense 
sentences, as exemplified by Noam Chomsky's well-known example: "Colorless 
green ideas sleep furiously." However, if the input strings avoided such syntac­
tically correct nonsense, the statistical likelihood of the network predicting it 
would be minimal. This further exemplifies the fact that the network has not 
embodied abstract rules that can be applied arbitrarily and generatively to any 
possible novel input, but rather has internalized the positional statistics of pat­
terns in the input strings. It is a little like having a vast list of possible word com­
binations to choose from, each ranked in order of their statistical likelihood. 
17. A kernel sentence is a completely simplified (i.e., not compound) sentence such 
as "A dog chases the ball," "The dog is playful," "The ball rolls under the chair," 
etc., that can be combined with other tense and phrase markers to form a com­
pound sentence such as "The ball that rolled under the chair was chased by a 
playful dog." 
18. For a more detailed review of these differences between learning problems, the 
tricks used to overcome them, and the relevance this has for all sorts of normal 
biological learning problems, I refer the reader to a recent paper by Clark and 
Thornton (in press). They distinguish two types oflearning problems, designated 
type 1 and type 2, where type-1 problems are solvable directly using statistical 
regularities present in input patterns, but type-2 problems have highly distrib­
uted and therefore marginally presented regularities in any part of the input 
corpus. In general, they demonstrate that type-2 problems cannot be solved by 
any sort of "uninformed" learning paradigm, no matter how powerful, but that 
specific information (as suggested by strong nativism) need not be required if 
there are wars to constrain learning parallel to the ways regularities are "buried" 
in the input. Incremental learning (as in Elman's simulations), and recoding 
strategies, essentially accomplish the same reduction of type-2 problems to 
type-1 problems and render them solvable. 
19. The term refers to "the spandrels of San Marco," a metaphor from Gould and 
Lewontin's (1979) paper on the dangers of pan-selectionist arguments in evo­
lution. Spandrels are the symmetric, triangular arch structures that support the 
upper domed roof of the cathedral of San Marco in Venice, and are elaborately 
decorated in ways that attempt to integrate their number, shape, and symme­
tries into the content of the religious icons decorating the cathedral. The point 
of this example is that the integration of these structures into the artistic design 
Notes > 469

may make them appear as necessary thematic elements, when instead they just 
happened to be unavoidably part of the background and so were incorporated 
into the artwork after the fact. 
20. Bickerton (1981; 1984; 1990). For a summary, see also Bickerton (1983). 
21. For a detailed survey, see Todd (1974). A brief overview of some the major ar­
guments (not completely up-to-date) and numerous examples are also pro­
vided by David Crystal in the Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language (1989). 
Part Two 
C H A P T E R  5 
1. Holloway (1995). 
2. There have been studies which suggest that under supernormal levels of stim­
ulation, often referred to as "enrichment," brain size and other measures of brain 
structure such as cortical thickness can be induced to increase. In general, 
however, this difference has been determined with respect to "control" animals 
that have been housed in stimulus-impoverished environments (typical labo­
ratory cages), and so I think it likely that what has been demonstrated might 
more accurately be interpreted as the effects of sensorimotor deprivation. I 
think it is a good bet that lab animals housed in "enriched" environments are 
also somewhat deprived of stimulation and environmental challenges when 
compared to their feral cousins. 
3. The idea of assessing species intelligence by brain/body ratio rather than total 
brain size was first promoted by the eighteenth-century physiologist Albrecht 
von Haller and his contemporary, the great comparative anatomist Georges Cu­
vier. By the latter half of the nineteenth century, biologists had heated debates 
over the validity of absolute brain size versus brain/body ratio in studies of 
human intelligence differences and the ways they were linked with sexual, eth­
nic, or racial differences. Because different analyses produced differing trends, 
it was nearly always possible to find an analysis that fit one's intuitions (or ide­
ological biases). Stephen Jay Gould provides a cautionary treatment of the ef­
fect of these biases on the brain science of the last two centuries in his book 
The Mismeasure of Man (1996). 
4. It is unclear whether Snell (1891) actually knew about Brandt's (1867) analy­
sis. 
5. Harry Jerison, The Evolution of the Brain and Intelligence (1973). 
6. Related anatomical interpretations had previously been offered in slightly dif­
ferent terms by two of Jenson's famous predecessors in the brain size/intelli­
gence field, E. Dubois ( 1913) and G. von Bonin (1937). 
7. I generally think that the relative metabolic cost of possessing a large brain tends 
to get overemphasized in evolutionary arguments. It has been cited as a major 
cause of heat production and heat dissipation problems in the "radiator" the­
ory of hominid brain size increase (Falk, 1990), as the major constraint affect-
470 < Notes

ing foraging requirements (Allielo and Wheeler, 1995), and as limited in size 
by the amount of energy that a body can supply (Armstrong, 1990). These as­
sumptions are extrapolated from the order of magnitude of greater brain me­
tabolism per mass at rest compared to that of other tissues. But the key phrase 
is "at rest." Resting or basal metabolism may not be the most useful measure 
in evolutionary terms. Just what fraction of the energy of overall metabolism is 
demanded by brains under normal active conditions is difficult to answer, but 
compared to total energy consumption it is periodically dwarfed by what is re­
quired when we are not at rest and need to make extensive use of muscles, even 
in daily activities, such as foraging. Unlike muscles, which can fluctuate from 
minimal metabolism to vastly more than the brain during peak exertion, the 
brain's highs and lows of energy use exhibit a much narrower range from sleep 
to active cognition. It's easy to work up a sweat just climbing a few flights of 
stairs, but few people work up a sweat solving the New York Times crossword 
puzzle. Indeed, neural activity alone is most likely to generate perspiration only 
during times of intense emotional arousal when the fight or flight response trig­
gers the sympathetic nervous system to prepare the body for imminent intense 
physical exertion. Nevertheless, the approximately 10% of resting metabolism 
that is accounted for by the brain's energy demand cannot be ignored in the 
overall metabolic economy of the body, especially when whole life history esti­
mates are considered. 
8. D'Arcy Thompson (1917). 
9. Ewen Macphail (1982). 
10. See Bitterman (1975; 1988) on vertebrate/nonvertebrate comparisons oflearn­
ing. 
11. This work is reviewed by Duane Rumbaugh and colleagues in a 1996 paper in 
Japanese Psychological Research. The theory and experiments behind the work 
are also discussed in Rumbaugh and Pate, 1996. 
C H A P T E R  6 
1. However, see the recent book by Stanley Coren, The Intelligence of Dogs 
(1995), for a lively discussion and some comparative tests of canine IQ. 
2. The slope for brain size/body size scaling within a species is only about 0.1 to 
0.2, in contrast to the 0.6--0.8 slopes observed within whole orders of mammals. 
This was first demonstrated at the beginning of this century by Lapicque (1907a, 
b), in a study of dogs. 
3. Coren (1995). 
4. Kruska (1988). 
5. The first of these genes were discovered by investigating the causes of fruit-fly 
mutations that produced duplicated additional body segments, such as one that 
produces an additional thorax segment with a duplicated set of wings, called 
Ultrabithorax. 
6. It should be noted, however, that this vertebrate/invertebrate comparison is 
Notes > 471

complicated by two curious and still poorly understood differences: the HOM 
genes in flies form a linked group or family and are arranged in serial order along 
the same chromosome. This order corresponds to the front-to-hack order of 
their expression along the body axis. But in vertebrates there appear to be du­
plicate families of corresponding Hox genes (four in mice and humans), and al­
though their expression is segmental, it is also overlapping, whereas in flies it 
is more strictly segmental. 
7. General overviews of the significance of these homeotic genes is provided by 
Holland (1992), and Finkelstein and Boncinelli (1994). Reports ofEmx and Otx 
gene expression in the developing brain are from Boncinelli, et a!. (1993a, b). 
Here I describe the expression of these genes in the embryonic brain, where 
they are most prominent, but some of these genes are also expressed in other 
regions of the body and change their expression patterns over developmental 
time. This is characteristic of many homeotic genes, and demonstrates a kind 
of diverse multifunctionality, which belies any claim that they are like brain blue­
print genes. They are probably better thought of as surveyor genes, whose 
function is to establish borders and property rights that constrain which other 
genes can "settle" where. 
8. These headless Lim1 knockouts actually develop in the womb but die after birth 
apparently due to a failure to breathe normally. See the discussion of Williams 
syndrome in Chapter 9 for discussion of a related human gene "knockout" (of 
the gene Lim1-kinase) that occurs naturally and affects language and cognition. 
9. One continually recurring error is a failure to control for the effect of con­
founding a part with the whole when the part in question is a significant frac­
tion of the whole. Though this is the only way to track what fraction of the whole 
is made up by the part, assessing the scaling relationship in such terms can lead 
to very misleading claims about underlying causes. The figure below graphicaly 
depicts the artifactual consequences of including the part in the whole in allo­
metric analyses. One particularly troublesome example of this artifact involves 
predictions about the scaling of the cerebral cortex with brain size. The cere­
bral cortex comprises as much as 70% of the whole brain in a large primate, 
when considered with underlying white matter. A number of recent analyses 
of primate and nonprimate brains fail to correct for this, however, with the re­
sult that they greatly underestimate the variance among species, underestimate 
the human divergence from the trend, and bias the assessment of the trend to 
appear close to isometry (Deacon, 1990a). This error can be avoided by re­
stricting comparisons to nonoverlapping structures, or else only by comparing 
part-whole relationships where the part is a small fraction of the whole (and 
where the non-independent variables contribute only insignificant biases). The 
graphs I have included in the text, which compare brain structure scaling rela­
tionships, have all been calculated from nonoverlapping measurements. 
10. These problems have been dealt with in more detail, along with other allometric 
difficulties of comparing brains, in Deacon, 1989 and 1990. 
472 < Notes

, 
A 
High correlation, isometric scaling 
• 
• III 
.. 
, 
.. 
, 
, 
.. 
, 
• 
• 
whole 
t: 
"' 
CL 
8 
"' 
Lower correlation, nonisometric 
. .. 
. 
, "' 
. , "' 
. 
... .. 
. .. ... 
"' 
. 
"' -;. 
. 
.. .. . 
remainder 
Figure i. Analytical problem of confusing pari and whole in statistical analyses of 
brain structure sizes. 
A: Pari and whole are confounded, artificially shifting the trend and reducing 
the apparent the variances from it. 
B: Segregating units of analysis avoids this problem and often produces very dif­
ferent results. 
11. In this process, called neurulation, the outer cell layer (ectoderm) is induced 
to fold inward to form a tube, by the signals produced by contact with inducer 
cells from the middle layer (mesoderm). 
12. Work by Balaban, et al., 1988. 
13. Deacon, et al., 1994. 
C H A P T E R  7 
1. Deacon, et al. (1994); Isacson, et al. (1995); Isacson and Deacon (1996). 
2. This view shares many points in common with Gerald Edelman's ( 1987) theory 
of "neural Darwinism," which attempts to frame a global theory of brain func­
tions on a Darwinian-like theory of neuronal group interactions. The Darwin­
ian nature of neural developmental processes plays a critical role in this theory, 
since Edelman hypothesizes that the initial nonspecificity of connections pro­
vides the total initial variety upon which selection processes (in the form of 
learning) can lXter act. Though my approach also models neural function on 
Darwinian-like competitive neural processes during development, I make no 
assumptions about the sources of variation available to the selective processes. 
Specifically, whereas Edelman begins with the assumption that the entire source 
of informational variety available duri_ng cognition derives from the early non­
specificity of axonal and dendritic growth, I suspect that initial nonspecific con­
nectivity accounts for only a small initial fraction of the variety of information 
available to selection/learning processes during mature function. The rest is sup­
plied "on line" by continuous, spontaneous, nonspecific sources, including the 
effects of metabolic noise on random neural activity and continuous axoden-
Notes > 473

dritic growth processes. More important, I argue that the initial connectional 
nonspecificity and axonal competition principally influences cognitive processes 
by introducing global biases in neural computations that result from global pat­
terns of regional parceJiation. Large-scale quantitative relationships determined 
by this developmental DaiWinism thus play a major role in producing species 
differences. 
3. Hebb ( 1949) originaiiy envisioned his theory as a way to explain basic reinforced 
learning processes in the brain: how connections could become altered in their 
relative signal transduction "strength" in response to the patterning of signals 
carried on these connections. Much of his original insight has survived the test 
of time. Many neural net computing paradigms (see the discussion in Chapter 
4) employ Hebbian learning rules and demonstrate their effectiveness as a sub­
strate for learning. The general theory Hebb proposed applies not only to 
processes thought to play a major role in modifying synaptic strengths during 
learning, but also to those that determine which synapses are preserved and 
which are lost as connections are formed during early development. The con­
tinuity of mechanisms at these two levels of information generation in the brain 
lends support for a more global DaiWinian theory of the logic of neural infor­
mation processing, in which early wiring and later learning processes are con­
sidered two ends of the same spectrum. 
4. The neonatal cortical translant experiments reported by Stanfield and O'Leary 
( 1985) offered a powerful demonstration of the absence of any strong connec­
tional predispositions distinguishing the different areas of the neocortex. Many 
related studies have foJiowed and are reviewed in O'Leary (1992). 
5. This developmental displacement approach to brain evolution is presented 
in an extensive review of problems and theories of mammalian brain evolu­
tion in a paper entitled Rethinking Mammalian Brain Evolution (Deacon, 
1990b). 
6. O'Leary (1992). 
7. See the studies by Doron and Wollberg (1994) and Heil, et al. (1991), on the 
connections between the visual and auditory centers of the brain of the blind 
mole rat. Though this is one of the most easily recognizable examples of evo­
lutionary displacement of neural circuits, more subtle variants on this process 
are likely very widespread. Other likely natural examples are offered by Taylor, 
et al. (1995), on frog species in arboreal, aquatic, and subterranean habitats by; 
and by Roth, et al. (1993; 1995), on miniaturization effects on the brain struc­
ture in amphibians. 
8. Among the many reasons for not taking this story too seriously is the fact that 
it would require a number of only partially successful transplant experiments 
to explain the numerous intermediate changes that paleontologists observe in 
hominid brain size evolution. 
9. Holloway ( 1979) showed that human visual areas were disproportionately 
smaller than predictions extrapolated from the trend observed in other primates. 
474 < Notes

This was noted previously by Passingham and Ettlinger (1974), though not em­
phasized as a divergence. The original data were collected by Heinz Stephan 
and his colleagues some years earlier (1969; see also Stephan, et al., 1981, for 
an updated data set, used in the analyses in this book) but had not been sub­
jected to statistical analyses that could specifically discern the divergence of 
human from primate brain structure proportions. Nevertheless, Holloway's in­
sight was largely ignored at the time and was not noticed by me until I again 
independently derived the same result a few years later. 
10. A posterior shift of the lunate sulcus (marking the anterior boundruy of primruy 
visual cortex) in australopithecine endocasts was interpreted by Ralph Holloway 
(see Holloway, 1985, for an extensive review, and Holloway and Shapiro, 1992, 
for recent evidence) to mean that australopithecines had a proportional re­
duction of visual areas, similar to that he had noted in modem human brains 
(see also note above). Thus, he concluded that this species exhibited reorgani­
zation toward a "humanlike" pattern, even prior to evolutionary increases in 
brain size. Another paleoneurologist, Dean Falk (see her review of this same 
controversy in Falk, 1989), has disputed his identification of this feature and 
argues that australopithecine brains retain the morphology characteristic of 
ape brains in this regard. 
Though I believe that Holloway's identification of this endocast feature is 
probably correct, developmental analysis leads me to doubt his interpretation 
of its cause and significance. Since australopithecine brain/body proportions 
were far more typical of modem apes (and they had ape-size eyes), neurode­
velopmental mechanisms should not produce a reduction in the neural pro­
portions of this area. This does not rule out morphological reorganization of the 
brain, however, which I suspect may have been produced by the shift to up­
right posture in australopithecines. Vertical orientation of the skull with respect 
to the spinal cord would have caused the brain stem and cerebellum to become 
oriented more directly below the cerebrum than in living apes. Since the cere­
bellum fills a considerable part of the space below and between the cerebral 
hemispheres posteriorly, a shift of this structure downward and forward in aus­
tralopithecine brains would vacate some of this interhemispheric space and 
alow the posterior cortical areas, mostly visual cortex, to become more folded 
into the posterior midline. The morphological consequence would be a shift of 
the lunate sulcus to a more posterior position. Additionally relevant in this case 
is the fact that most of the debate is based on assessment of the natural endo­
cast from the Taung specimen, which was a young child at the time of death. 
Since the cerebellum is the last major brain structure to complete its growth 
and grows extensively during postnatal development, at this stage it probably 
occupied even less interhemispheric space than in an adult australopithecine 
brain, thus exaggerating the relative posteriorization of the lunate sulcus even 
further. So, I conclude that both antagonists in this debate are half right. The 
morphology of the brain does share posterior features that are humanlike rather 
Notes > 475

than apelike, but the actual neural proportions and internal organization were 
probably more apelike than human (see also Deacon, 1992c). For views of en­
docast data used to discuss the evolution oflanguage, see also Holloway (1983), 
Tobias (1981; 1987), and Falk (1983). 
11. An interesting complication of the evolution of the human motor system is that 
the thalamic motor nuclei (the ventra-anterior and ventro-lateral nuclei) are not 
as reduced (data from Armstrong, 1980b; see also Deacon, 1988b, for a review 
of other data as well). Although these thalamic nuclei provide the principal pro­
jections to the motor and premotor cortical areas, they receive their afferent 
inputs from a number of structures of varying sizes. One major source of in­
puts to this nuclear complex is the cerebellum, one of the most enlarged struc­
tures of the human brain. Thus, the neurons of motor and premotor cortex are 
at the connectional juncture between expanded input projections and reduced 
output targets. Though the expanse of motor cortex appears to be constrained 
by its targets (depicted in Fig. 7.7), it seems likely that the projection fields of 
these thalamic nuclei extend beyond their ancestral motor targets, probably into 
prefrontal and somatic fields on either side. The functional consequences of this 
are not obvious. 
12. Thus, efforts to correlate the size of any given brain structure with some be­
havior run the risk of the anatomical equivalent of quoting something out of 
context. The sizes of brain structures are not independently determined, but 
are competitively parceled by afferent axons with respect to other brain areas 
during development. Ignoring the systemic interdependence of the sizes of 
these many brain structures creates the false impression that there has been in­
dependent size determination of this one brain region to subserve some highly 
modular localized function. 
13. Not al quantitative analyses of human prefrontal proportions have concluded 
that they are disproportionately enlarged above typical primate proportions on 
the basis of MRI reconstructions, and mammal trends. For example, Se­
mendeferi, et al. (1997), have suggested that frontal cortex is of equal propor­
tions in ape and human brains, and Uylings, et al. (1990), suggests that its 
proportion changes little from rats to humans. However, the identification of a 
disproportion is entirely dependent on (a) how the analysis controls for species 
variance (unless the nonhuman species included in the analysis contained con­
siderably more varaince than between the human and the average nonhuman 
value, including the human value would strongly bias the assessment); (b) the 
identification of homology of architectonic boundaries across diverse species (it 
is not clear, for example, that the relevant architectonic distinctions are actually 
homologous in primates and rodents and the analysis by Semendeferi, et al., 
lumped motor, premotor, and prefrontal areas because ofMRI limitations); and 
(c) whether the confounding effects of part/whole errors are controlled for (the 
prefrontal area is roughly 25% of the cortical surface in large apes). When these 
476 < Notes

sources of analytical artifact are controlled for, these data sets do not produce 
conflicting results and human prefrontal cortex is found to be divergent from 
nonhuman trends. 
My own assessments (see also Deacon, 1984; 1988) are based on primate 
data sets collected decades ago by careful architectonic neuroanatomists (see 
Brodmann, 1912; Blinkov and Glezer, 1968). Data sets were analyzed sepa­
rately, controlling for part/whole and extrapolation effects (trend lines are pro­
duced separately, including and excluding the human data to test for a bias 
effect). Both analyses converge on a value that is roughly two times greater than 
predicted by nonhuman primate trends. An assessment of the degree of gyri­
fication in human and other primate brains by Armstrong, Zilles, and col­
leagues (1989, 1995a, 1995b) also found that the prefrontal region in the human 
brain is a significant outlier with respect to primate trends, because of its in­
creased folding. This would be expected from the typical allometry of increas­
ing cortical folding with brain size. Finally, these findings are in agreement with 
many qualitative assessments of neuroanatomists for over a century, and are 
consistent with the predictions of developmental parcellation processes dis­
cussed above. So I believe that a twofold increase above the trend is a reliable 
estimate. Nevertheless, a more current and complete data set would be valu­
able for settling lingering questions and also could provide a more detailed as­
sessment of the differences between primate and nonprimate prefrontal areas. 
14. The fibers in question are called mossy fibers and they extend from a structure 
called the dentate gyrus to the part of the hippocampus called the CA fields. 
Some of these learning trade-offs are described in Schenk, et al. (1995), and in 
terms of strain differences in learning in Lipp, et al. (1995). 
C H A P T E R  8 
1. For reviews, see Jurgens (1979), Ploog (1981), and see Deacon (1992) for a the­
oretical discussion of the relationships of midbrain call systems to language. Ju­
rgens and Pratt ( 1979) provided some of the most detailed evidence for central 
gray vocalization control. 
2. For example, Newman and MacLean (1982) showed that lesions of the tegmen­
tal regions adjacent to the central gray area could modify the form of certain 
cals. 
' 
3. Balaban, et al. (1988), used transplants of midbrain from very young quail em­
bryos to chick embryos whose midbrain regions had been previously removed 
(also discussed in Chapter 6). The quail-chick chimeras produced a number of 
typically quail fixed-action patterns after hatching, including quail vocaliza­
tions. Not only does this demonstrate a localized representation of these motor 
programs, but also that the remainder of the brain, even from another species, 
can interact with it as a sort of module-a feature that is unlikely to be true of 
brain regions supporting language (see discussion in Chapter 10). 
Notes > 477

4. Studies of circuits controlling tongue and facial musculature are from Sokoloff 
and Deacon (1989; 1990; 1992). Related information from a broad compara­
tive study of corticospinal connections is provided by Nudo, et al. (1995). 
5. For detailed examples, see Jane Goodall's book The Chimpanzees of Combe: 
Patterns of Behavior ( 1986). 
6. Jurgens and Pratt (1979). 
7. Jurgens, et al. (1982). 
8. Much of this work on the psychology and physiology of laughter comes from 
the research of Robert Provine, University of Maryland. See his 1996 review of 
this work. 
C H A P T E R  9 
l .  Goldman-Rakic (1987). 
2. Barbas and Mesulam (1981). 
3. Barbas and Mesulam (1981); Pandya and Barnes (1987); Deacon (1992). 
4. For in-depth reviews of prefrontal deficits and theories about prefrontal func­
tion, see Fuster (1980); Perecman (1987); Stuss and Benson (1986). 
5. Jacobsen (1936). 
6. This is very similar to the hidden object problems demonstrated in young chil­
dren by Jean Piaget (1952). 
7. Passingham (1985). 
8. Reviews in Luria (1980); Kolb and Whishaw (1990); Stuss and Benson (1986); 
and Perecman (1987). Particularly relevant studies are reported by Grossman 
(1980; 1982), who demonstrates human Broca's area defects in hierarchical and 
reversal-learning problems, and by Petrides ( 1982; 1985; 1986), who reports lo­
calized primate prefrontal lesion defects on a number of conditional learning 
paradigms that involve dependent combinatorial analysis. 
9. See Guilford (1967). 
10. An explanation of some of these techniques and more detailed examples are 
provided later in this chapter and in Posner and Raichle's book The Illuminated 
Brain (1994). 
11. Ojemann (1979). 
12. The case for a neuroanatomical dichotomy was most clearly articulated by 
Myers ( 1976), and a more detailed description of how these systems are anatom­
ically linked in language function is provided in Deacon (1992d). 
13. Hydrocephaly can result from an occlusion of the canal linking the forebrain 
ventricles with their outlet to the brain stem and spinal cord. This blocks 
cerebrospinal fluid drainage, which can cause the ventricles to expand and 
compress the temporal and parietal cortex (hydrocephaly). The condition has 
been associated with a number of cases ofhyperlexia with relatively poor com­
prehension. 
14. The LIM l  kinase gene deletion in Williams syndrome is reported in 
Frangiskakis, et al. ( 1996). 
478 < Notes

15. There are many excellent books discussing autism, including autobiographical 
texts by Temple Grandin (1986, 1995). See also Frith (1989, 1991) for detailed 
accounts, and Trefert (1989) for an excellent nontechnical description. 
16. Prefrontal abnormalities associated with schizophrenia, depression, and ob­
sessive compulsive disorders are reviewed in Kolb and Whishaw (1990); Pos­
ner and Raichle (1994); Stuss and Bensen (1986). For an insightful account of 
frontal lobe disturbances of emotion, emotional assessment, and social cogni­
tion, see Antonio Damasio's book Descartes' Error {1994). 
17. Cerebellar contributions to nonmotor cognitive processes have been demon­
strated by PET studies of word retrieval (Petersen, et al., 1988) and in response 
to cerebellar damage (Leiner, et al., 1989 and 1993; Barinaga, 1996; also see 
discussion in the next chapter). 
C H A P T E R  1 0  
1. The classic studies for which these aphasic syndromes are named are Paul 
Broca's Sur la faculte du langage articule ( 1865) and Carl Wernicke's Der apha­
sische Symptomencomplex. (1874). An excellent historical review of aphasia re­
search is provided in Lecours, et al. (1983). 
2. For the original discussion of Broca's aphasia agrammatism, see Goodglass (1968; 
1972; 1973), and for alternative explanations see Kean (1977); for current in vivo 
imaging of Broca's aphasic brain impairment, see Tramo, et al. (1988). 
3. Regional cerebral blood flow studies are from Larsen, et al. (1978); Lassen, et 
al. (1979; 1980); and Roland (1985). PET studies use a radioactively labeled glu­
cose analogue, 2-deoxy-glucose, which is taken up by cells but does not get read­
ily broken down in the normal metabolic machinery of the cell. As a result, it 
accumulates in metabolically active tissues. Though all tissues take it up, more 
highly active tissues take up more of it over time (usually activity is assessed over 
many minutes), and this allows researchers to measure relative metabolism re­
flected in differences in radioactive output (original studies reported by Pos­
ner, et al., 1988, and Petersen, et al., 1988; reviewed with additional examples 
and explanations in Posner and Raichle, 1994). 
4. Wilder Penfield first demonstrated that stimulating the supplementary motor 
area could interrupt speech. He provides a summary of his research in his 
book, with L. Roberts, Speech and Brain Mechanisms {1959). 
5. Broca's original demarcation of the frontal language region included the entire 
inferior third of the frontal and prefrontal cortex on the left side; but over 
the years researchers have progressively restricted the designation of the ef­
fective site to include only the premotor region, just in front of the motor 
mouth region. 
6. As does functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which is also based on 
blood flow changes but allows data to be collected during much shorter inter­
vals, thus making it possible to avoid repetitive tasks necessary for cumulative 
effects in other techniques. The general agreement with rCBF and PET data 
Notes > 479

is quite good and so these will not be described separately. See the brief com­
parative description of methodology in Posner and Raichle (1994). 
7. These are summary schematizations of data that are a bit more complex. 
8. This brief account simplifies and summarizes neuroanatomical studies by the 
author (Deacon, 1984; 1992). 
9. The syntagmatic/paradigmatic distinction was introduced to linguistics by the 
theories of Roman Jakobson (1956), who also predicted that frontal and pre­
frontal brain damage should disturb the former and posterior brain damage 
should disturb the latter. Numerous brain damage studies have shown that at 
least in general terms, this dichotomy is accurate. 
10. Recent reviews of research on lateralization of language can be found 
in Corballis (1992), MacNeilage (1995), and see Kolb and Whishaw (1990) 
for a review of evidence of the role of cerebral asymmetries. Gainotti (1972) 
and Heilman, et al. (1983), provide reviews of asymmetric affective functions. 
See also Kinsbourne (1978) for an evolutionary perspective on the origins of 
the crossed pattern of connections. 
11. For an interesting example of right hemisphere language comprehension, see 
Gardner, et al. (1983); also see Larsen, et al. (1978; 1980), for evidence of right 
hemispheric functions contributing to speech. 
12. See Fabbro ( 1992) for a review of this bilingual brain research. 
Part Three 
C H A P T E R  1
1
 
1. Baldwin (1895; 1896a-d; 1902). See also the excellent historical account of 
Baldwin's work in Robert Richards's ( 1987) book on late nineteenth-century the­
ories of the evolution of mind. 
2. Durham (1994). 
3. Many are also discussed by Durham (1994). 
4. Pinker (1994). See also his short (1990) summary. 
5. These adaptations for speech are discussed in more detail below. 
6. Casts of the inner surface of the skull show it to be subtly shaped by the pres­
sures of the developing brain. Bumps and depressions on the bone record the 
slight differential in pressure of underlying gyri and sulci (bumps and fissures, 
respectively). Fossil skulls retain this impression, though their interpretation is 
often not without ambiguity. 
7. See Philip Tobias's (1981) and Dean Falk's (1983) assessment of the gyral and 
sulcal landmarks on endocasts in the position of the modern Broca's area. 
8. The most suggestive evidence was provided by a fossil designated KMNER 1470, 
one of the exemplar specimens of Horw habilis (though recent proposals sug­
gest placing this individual in a separate species designated Homo rodolfensis 
480 < Notes

because of its many other australopithecinelike features), who had a brain size 
of approximately 750 cc. 
9. Though many have tried to draw the debate into posing these as opposed al­
ternatives, I leave it to paleontologists to quibble over the number and size of 
the "increments." 
10. Baldwinian evolutionary processes are also involved in the process of language 
evolution discussed in Chapter 4 (though I focused on change without a Bald­
winian effect) and so have also played a role in the evolution of children's learn­
ing biases as well. 
11. For example, the archeologist Nick Toth taught Kanzi (the bonobo chimpanzee 
who spontaneously learned lexigram communication) to make and use stone 
flake tools in order to cut a rope and open a box hiding food. 
12. A wonderful compendium of such examples is provided by the historian James 
Burke in his television series and book, Connections (1978). 
13. Gould and Vrba (1982). 
14. Philip Lieberman (1984; 1991). 
15. See the excellent historical review by Gordon Hewes in Rumbaugh (1977). A 
recent version of the hypothesis that gestural language preceded vocal lan­
guage is outlined by Corbalis ( 1992). 
16. An excellent survey of the evolution of the larynx is provided by Wind (1970). 
17. Initial strong claims about Neanderthal's inability to speak were presented by 
Lieberman and Crelin ( 1971). Later, more cautious claims about the correla­
tion with speech evolution can be found in Lieberman (1984; 1991), and evi­
dence for incremental changes in this morphology throughout the last 2 million 
years of hominine evolution is presented by Laitman, et al. (1992). 
18. See Liberman, et al. (1967), Liberman and Mattingly (1985; 1989), and Liber­
man ( 1984) for extensive examples. (Note: Liberman and Lieberman are not 
the same.) 
19. See Lisker and Abramson (1971). 
20. Chinchillas were the first animals to show a voice-onset time categorical per­
ception like that shown for humans (Kuhl and Miller, 1975). 
21. This follows for the same reason that a number encoded in binary notation (i.e., 
using only the numerals 0 and 1), used for computer memory addresses, is on 
average composed of many more digits than its representation as a decimal (i.e., 
base 10) or hexadecimal (i.e., base 16 code, also used for computing and made 
up of the numerals, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F) number. For ex­
ample, 11,111,110 in binary = 254 in decimal = FE in hexadecimal. 
22. See the insightful and critical reflection on assuptions influencing paleonto­
logical theories of human origins by Misia Landau (1991). 
23. Hublin, et al. (1996), recently verified that these complex cultural artifacts 
from the late middle Paleolithic were associated with Neanderthal skeletal 
materials. This is one more piece of evidence which undermines the tradi-
Notes > 481

tional view that Neanderthal culture was lacking in tool variety and artistic 
expression. It does not support the view that Neanderthal cultural communi­
cation was distinctly inferior to that of contemporary anatomically modem pop­
ulations. 
24. See also Holloway (1981; 1983). 
25. Arensberg and Tillier (1991) review the evolutionary significance of the dis­
covery of a Neanderthal hyoid bone that demonstrates modem anatomical 
structure (first described in Arens berg, et a!., 1989), and specifically conclude 
that Neanderthals would not have exhibited any significant difficulties pro­
ducing speech. 
C H A P T E R  1 2  
1. Jones (1993) and Caird (1994). 
2. Statistically speaking, most human marriage relationships are monogamous, 
even though most societies allow or encourage polygynous marriages. Even 
within a highly polygynous society, most relationships are monogamous for the 
simple reason that polygyny requires significant accumulation of resources and 
power by particular males at the expense of many others, leaving the rest with 
insufficient resources to become polygynous. Introductory summaries of these 
patterns can be found in Daly and Wilson (1978) and Durham (1994). 
3. The special status of prostitution and the rarity of polyandry in human societies 
are two exceptions that prove the rule. In the few societies where polyandry is 
practiced, husbands of the same wife are often close relatives, such as brothers 
(for details, see Durham, 1994). 
4. This is evident in the special case of large rookeries, where hundreds of pair­
bonded bird "couples" are forced to roost together because of limited nest 
sites. Despite the absolutely critical need for biparental care, the degree of cuck­
oldry increases as group size increases; in addition, infanticide of neighbors' 
chicks, nest destruction, and nest site stealing are common noncooperative be­
haviors in these conditions. 
5. Some social carnivore species with large litters can produce littermates from 
multiple fathers. In these cases, the pattern is more complicated. So long as the 
dominant male is able to sire more of the offspring than his genetic competi­
tors, the cooperative social arrangement is evolutionarily stable. 
6. High degrees of sexual dimorphism (difference in male versus female body size) 
are highly correlated with degree of polygyny in a species. This is favored by 
sexual selection mediated by threat and fighting behaviors, where being larger 
confers an advantage for gaining access to mates. 
7. Unfortunately, such negative consequences are seldom applied equitably to men 
and women or to rich and poor. 
8. A Yanomamo Feast and the warfare context in which this method of peace­
making occurs is decribed in Chagnon ( 1983). 
482 < Notes

C H A P T E R  1 3  
1. This experiment is reported in Boysen, et al. (1995 and 1996), and was part of 
a study investigating numerical abilities in chimps. See also Boysen, et al. (1993), 
for the first report of ordinality and transitivity learning by chimps. 
2. A parallel study by Hauser, et al., 1995, showed ordinality learning ability in wild 
rhesus monkeys. The ability to learn transitive associations has also been demon­
strated in rats (Eichenbaum, et al., 1996) in an ABC paradigm where choosing 
A over B and B over C can yield knowledge that A over C is also correct. This 
can be expanded to a series of at least 5 ordered stimuli (ABCDE), and rats can 
still generalize to the novel choice of BC on probe trials (Eichenbaum, personal 
communication). Though ordinality and transitivity can each be acquired as in­
dexical associations, they are (respectively) the token-object and token-token 
associative components of numerical symbols, and so can under the right con­
ditions serve as the basis for generating the concept of number. Whether any 
of these or the chimp experiments accomplish this step is uncertain, but it could 
be demonstrated if the animals could generalize from known ordinal associa­
tions to novel transitive relationships. However, not only has this not been 
shown, as far as I know, but all experimental results to date seem to approach 
a ceiling in abilities when quantity exceeds about 5. This suggests to me that 
there is no symbolic generalization in these cases and we should not too quickly 
jump to the conclusion that ordinal discrimination of quantity necessary implies 
symbol ration. 
C H A P T E R  1 4  
1. Searle (1980) notes that computational interpretations could be mapped onto 
manipulations of many objects, for example, manipulations of collections of bot­
ties and cans, and yet such a mapping would not demonstrate this to be a cog­
nitive process. A mapping of symbolic representations onto semiconductor 
currents and potentials in a computer is no different from this and therefore is 
not intrinsically more mindlike. I believe the logic of my example is essentially 
parallel. In fact, many chemical reactions can occur at thresholds of relative con­
centration, heat, or time, and so can produce essentially digital responses to ini­
tial conditions, analogous to those in a computer. Indeed, a number of molecular 
biology labs are currently experimenting with the use of biological macromol­
ecular systems as simple computing elements for exactly these reasons. 
2. The Chinese Room analogy proposed by John Searle in a 1980 paper has been 
argued and reargued many times by philosophers and cognitive scientists. Searle 
provides a retrospective interpretation in his more recent (1992) book. 
3. Dennett (1991). 
4. Dennett (1991). 
5. Vygotsky (1978). 
Notes > 483


Addiuona/ Readings 
C H A P T E R  1 . For some recent alternative scenarios for language origins, see: Lan­
guage and Species (1990) and Language and Human Behavior (1995) by Derek 
Bickerton; The Lopsided Ape (1991) by Michael Corbalis; Origins of the Modem 
Mind (1991) by Merlin Donald; Gossip, and the Evolution of Language (1997) by 
Robin Dunbar; The Biology and Evolution of Language (1984) and Uniquely 
Human (1991) by Philip Lieberman; Grooming, The Ape That Spoke (1991) by John 
McCrone; and The Language Instinct (1994) by Steven Pinker. Also, see a marvelous 
historical survey oflanguage origins theories by Gordon Hewes in Language Learn­
ing by a Chimpanzee: The Lana Project (1974), edited by Duane Rumbaugh. 
C H A P T E R  2 .  For an extensive and up-to-date survey of animal communication 
research that takes a quite different approach to human language evolution, see The 
485

Evolution of Communication ( 1996) by Marc Hauser; and for an introduction to 
topics in animal cognition, see The Animal Mind (1994) by James Gould and Carol 
Grant Gould. For background and historical discussions about the nature of word 
reference and language function in general, I recommend The Cambridge Ency­
clopedia of Language ( 1992) edited by David Crystal and The Science of Words 
( 1991) by George Miller. 
C H A P T E R  3 .  Besides a major influence from C. S. Peirce, I owe some of my 
thoughts about the hierarchy of communicative processes to some now classic ideas 
presented in Steps to an Ecology of Mind (1972) and Mind and Nature (1979) by 
Gregory Bateson. Recalling his analogy of play communication in animals to a re­
ductio ad absurdum proof helped me rethink the chimpanzee symbol-learning 
problem. I have also been influenced by a classic text on Symbol Formation by Heinz 
Werner and Bernard Kaplan ( 1963). Finally, I recommend reading Helen Keller's 
incredible personal recollection of first discovering the symbolic nature of finger 
spelling in The Story of My Life (1903). For books by some of the researchers in­
volved in ape language-training experiments, see: Koko's Story (1987) by Francine 
Patterson; The Mind of an Ape ( 1983) by David Premack and A. Premack; Cava­
gail Or the Future History of the Animal Language Controversy ( 1986) by David 
Premack; Language Learning by a Chimpanzee: The Lana Project (1974), edited 
by Duane Rumbaugh; Ape Language: From Conditioned Response to Symbol 
( 1986) by Sue Savage-Rumbaugh; Kanzi: The Ape at the Brink of the Human Mind 
(1994) by Sue Savage-Rumbaugh and Roger Lewin; and Nim: A Chimpanzee Who 
Learned Sign Language (1979) by Herbert Terrace. 
C H A P T E R  4 .  For discussions of modular theories of mind, see: The Adapted 
Mind (1992), edited by J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby; Modular Ap­
proaches to the Study of the Mind (1984) by Noam Chomsky; and The Modularity 
of Mind (1983) by Jerry Fodor. For critiques of modularity theories, see: Rethink­
ing Innateness (1996) by Jeff Elman, Elizabeth Bates, and colleagues, and Beyond 
Modularity (1992) by Annette Karmiloff-Smith. Besides Richard Dawkins's intro­
duction of the concept of meme in The Selfish Gene (1980), there are some inter­
esting recent treatments presented in Virus of the Mind (1996) by Richard Brodie 
and Dan.vin's Dangerous Idea ( 1995) by Daniel Dennett. 
C H A P T E R  5 .  For the view that the evolution of relative brain size produced in­
creased intelligence, see The Evolution of Intelligence (1973) by Harry Jerison and 
The Runaway Brain ( 1993) by Christopher Wills. And for some cautionary views, 
see The Mismeasure of Man ( 1996) by Stephen J. Gould; Frames of Mind (1983) 
by Howard Gardner; and Brain and Intelligence in Vertebrates ( 1982) by Euan 
Macphail. 
486 < Additional Readings

C H A P  T E R 6 .  On growth and allometry, see: Ontogeny and Phylogeny ( 1977) by 
Stephen J. Gould; Heterochrony: The Evolution of Ontogeny (1991) by Michael 
McKinney and K. J. MacNamara; The Human Primate (1982) by Richard Passing­
ham; Scaling: Why Is Animal Size So Important? (1984) by Knut Schmidt-Nielsen; 
and On Growth and Form (1917) by D'Arcy Thompson. On recent developmen­
tal genetics and evolution, see The Shape of Life: Genes, Development, and the Evo­
lution of Animal Form (1996) by Rudolph Raff. 
C H A P T E R  7 . On the DaiWinian nature of brain development, see: Neural Dar­
winism (1987) by Gerald Edelman; Body and Brain (1988) by Dale Purves; and 
Neuronal Man (1985) by J. Changeaux. 
C H A P T E R 8 . For a review of research on the control of bird and mammal vo­
calizations, see The Evolution of Communication (1996) by Marc Hauser; for a more 
detailed treatment of comparative neuroanatomy, including vocal systems, see 
Comparative Vertebrate Neuroanatomy (1996) by A. B. Butler and W. Hodos. 
C H A P T E R  9 .  On prefrontal cortical functions, see: Descartes' Error (1996) by 
Antonio Damasio; The Prefrontal Cortex (1980) by Joachin Fuster; The Frontal 
Lobes Revisited (1987), edited by Ellen Perecman; and The Frontal Lobes (1986) 
by D. Stuss and D. Benson. 
C H A P T E R  1 0 .  For general background, see Fundamentals of Human Neu­
ropsychology (1996) by Brian Kolb and Ian Whishaw; Higher Cortical Functions 
in Man (1980) by A. R. Luria; Images of Mind (1994) by M. I. Posner and M. E. 
Raichle. One of the most complete historical reviews of aphasia literature up to the 
last decade can be found in Aphasiology (1983) by Andre-Roch Lecours, F. Lher­
mitte, and B. Bryans. 
C H A P T E R  1 1  
. For summaries of topics in hominid evolution, see The Cambridge 
Encyclopedia of Human Evolution (1992) edited by Stephen Jones, D. Pilbeam, and 
R. Martin. For summaries of dual inheritance theories of social and genetic evolu­
tion, see Darwin, Sex, and Status (1989) by Jerome Barkow, and Coevolution (1991) 
by William Durliam. For historical review of co-evolutionary theories (especially 
for James Mark Baldwin), see Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary Theo­
ries of Mind (1987) by Robert Richards. 
C H A P T E R  1 2 . For scenarios of human socioecological evolution, see: The 
Biology of Moral Systems (1987) by Richard Alexander; Dan.vin, Sex, and 
Status (1989) by Jerome Barkow; Primate Social Systems (1988) by Robin Dun­
bar; The Sex Contract (1982) by Helen Fisher; and Demonic Males (1996) by 
Richard Wrangham. 
Additional Readings > 487

C H A P  T E R 1 3 .  On autism and savant syndromes, see: An Anthropologist on 
Mars (1995) by Oliver Sachs, and Extraordinary People: Understanding Savant Syn­
drome (1989) by Darold Treffert. 
C H A P T E R 1 4 .  To sample a few recent contributions to the consciousness de­
bate, try: The Conscious Mind (1996) by David Chalmers; Neurophilosophy: To­
ward a Unified Science of the Mind-Brain (1986) by Patricia Churchland; The 
Astonishing Hypothesis (1994) by Francis Crick; Consciousness Explained (1991) 
by Daniel Dennett; The Emperor's New Mind (1989) by Roger Penrose; and The 
Rediscovery of the Mind (1992) by John Searle. For recent discussion of Darwin­
ian models of consciousness, see: The Cerebral Code ( 1996) by Wiliam Calvin; Dar­
wins Dangerous Idea (1991) by Daniel Dennett; Bright Air, Brilliant Fire (1994) 
by Gerald Edelman; Darwin Machines and the Nature of Knowledge (1994) by 
Henry Plotkin; and from a somewhat different approach, Mind, Brain and Con­
sciousness (1977) by Jason Brown. 
488 < Additional Readings

BibliographJ 
Aiello, Leslie, and P. Wheeler (1995) The expensive tissue hypothesis. Current An­
thropology ē6, 199-221. 
Alexander, Richard (1987) The Biology of Moral Systems. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine 
de Gruyter. 
Alleva, Enrico, Aldo Fasolo, Hans-Peter Lipp, Lynn Nadel, and Laura Ricceri, eds. 
( 1995) Behavioral Brain Research in Naturalistic and Semi-Naturalistic Settings. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Arensberg, Baruch, and A. M .  Tillier (1991) Speech and the Neanderthals. En­
deavour 15, 26-28. 
Arensberg, Baruch, et al. (1989) A middle Paleolithic hyoid bone. Nature 338, 
758-760. 
489

Armstrong, Este ( 1980a) A quantitative comparison of the hominoid thalamus: II. 
Limbic nuclei anterior principalis and lateralis dorsalis. American Journal of 
Physical Anthropology 52, 43-54. 
-- (1980b) A quantitative comparison of the hominoid thalamus: III. A motor 
substrate-The ventrolateral complex. American Journal of Physical Anthro­
pology 52, 40͑19. 
-- (1990) Brains, bodies and metabolism. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 36, 
166--176. 
-- (1995) Expansion and Stasis in Human Brain Evolution: Analyses of the Lim­
bic System, Cortex and Brain Shape. 65th James Arthur Lecture on the Evolu­
tion of the Human Brain, New York: American Museum of Natural History. 
--, M. R. Clarke, and E. M. Hill (1987) Relative size of the anterior thalamic nu­
clei differentiates anthropoids by social system. Brain and Behavioral Science 
30, 263-271. 
Armstrong, Este, and Dean Falk, eds. ( 1982) Primate Brain Evolution: Methods and 
Concepts. New York: Plenum Press. 
Armstrong, Este, A. Schleicher, and K. Zilles {1995) Cortical folding and the evo­
lution of the human brain. Journal of Human Evolution 25, 387-392. 
Armstrong, Este, A. Schleicher, H. Omran, M. Curtis, and K. Zilles ( 1995) The on­
togeny of human gyrification. Cerebral Cortex 5, 56--63. 
Balaban, Evan, M. A. Teillet, and N. Le Douarin (1988) Application of the quail­
chick chimera system to the study of brain development and behavior. Science 
241, 1339-1342. 
Baldwin, James Mark (1895) Consciousness and evolution. Science 2, 219-223. 
-- ( 1896a) Consciousness and evolution. Psychological Review 3, 300--308. 
-- {1896b) Heredity and instinct (I). Science 3, 438-441. 
-- (1896c) Heredity and instinct (II). Science 3, 558--561. 
-- {1896d) On criticisms of organic selection. Science 4, 727. 
-- (1902) Development and Evolution. New York: Macmillan. 
Barbas, Helen, and M.-M. Mesulam (1981) Organization of afferent input to sub­
divisions of area 8 of the rhesus monkey. Journal of Comparative Neurology 200, 
407-431. 
Barinaga, Marcia {1996) The cerebellum: Movement coordinator or much more? 
Science 272, 482-483. 
Barkow, Jerome {1989) Darwin, Sex, and Status. Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press. 
Barkow, J. H., L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, eds. (1992) The Adapted Mind: Evolu­
tionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. New York: Oxford Univer­
sity Press. 
Bates, Elizabeth (1992) Language development. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
2, 180-185. 
490 < Bibliography

Bates, Elizabeth, and B. Wulfeck (1989) Comparative aphasiology: A cross-linguistic 
approach to language breakdown. Aphasiology 3, 111-142. 
Bates, Elizabeth, and B. MacWhinney (1991b) Crosslinguistic research in aphasia: 
An overview. Brain and Language (special issue on crosslinguistic aphasia) 41, 
123-148. 
Bates, Elizabeth, D. Thai, and V. Marchman (1991c) Symbols and syntax: A Dar­
winian approach to language development. In N. Krasnegor, D. Rumbaugh, et 
al., eds., Biological and Behavioral Determinants of Language Development. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Bates, Elizabeth, D. Thai, D. Aram, J. Eisele, R. Nass, and D. Trauner (1994) From 
first words to grammar in children with focal brain injury. In D. Thai and J. Reilly, 
eds., Special Issues on Origins of Communication Disorders, Developmental 
Neuropsychology (in press). [data summarized in Elman, Bates, et al., 1996, pp. 
306-307]. 
Bateson, Gregory (1972) Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: Ballantine Books. 
-- (1979) Mind and Nature. New York: E. P. Dutton. 
Bechara, A., A. R. Damasio, H. Damasio, and S. Anderson (1994) Insensitivity to 
future consequences following damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition 
50, 7-12. 
Bellugi, Ursula, and Edward S. Klima (1982) From gesture to sign: Deixis in a vi­
sual gestural language. In R. J. J arvella and W. Klein, eds., Speech, Place and Ac­
tion: Studies of Language in Context. New York: John Wiley, 297--313. 
Bellugi, Ursula, A. Bihrle, H. Neville, T. L. Jernigan, and S. Doherty (1991) Lan­
guage, cognition and brain organization in a neurodevelopmental disorder. In 
M. Gunnar and C. Nelson, eds., Developmental Behavioral Neuroscience. Hills­
dale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 201-232. 
Bellugi, Ursula, P. P. Wang, and T. L. Jernigan (1994) Williams syndrome: An un­
usual neuropsychological profile. In S. Broman and J. Grafman, eds., Atypical 
Cognitive Deficits in Developmental Disorders: Implications for Brain Function. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 23-56. 
Bellugi, Ursula, A. Bihrle, T. L. Jernigan, D. Trauner, and S. Doherty (1991) Neu­
ropsychological, neurological, and neuroanatomical profile of Williams Syn­
drome. American Journal of Medical Genetics Supplement 6, 115-125. 
Berlin, Brent, and Paul Kay (1969) Basic Color Terms: Their Universality and Evo-
lution. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Bickerton, Derek (1981) The Roots of Language. Ann Arbor, MI: Karoma. 
-- (1983) Pidgin and creole languages, Scientific American 249, 116-122. 
-- (1984) The language bioprogram hypothesis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
7, 173-221. 
-- (1990) Language and Species. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
-- (1995) Language and Human Behavior: Seattle: University of Washington 
Press. 
Bibliography > 491

Bitterman, M. E. (1975) The comparative analysis ofleaming. Science 188, 699--709. 
-- (1988) Vertebrate-invertebrate comparisons. In H. Jerison and I. Jerison, ed., 
Intelligence and Evolutionary Biology. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 251-276. 
Blinkov, S., and I. Glezer (1968) The Human Brain in Figures and Tables. New York: 
Plenum Press. 
Bogen, J., and G. M. Bogen (1976). Wernicke's region: Where is it? Annals of the 
New York Academy of Science 280, 834-843. 
Boncinelli, E., M. Gulisano, and V. Broccoli ( 1993a) Emx and Otx homeobox genes 
in the developing mouse brain. Journal ofNeurobiology 24, 135͒1366. 
Boncinelli, E., M. Gulisano, and M. Pannese (1993b) Conserved homeobox genes 
in the developing brain. Comptes Rendus de l 'Academie des Sciences-Sene III, 
Sciences de la Vie. 316, 972-984. 
Boncinelli, E., and A. Mallamaci ( 1995) Homeobox genes in vertebrate gastrula­
tion. Current Opinion in Genetics and Development 5, 619-627. 
Bonin, Gerhard von (1937) Brain-weight and body-weight in mammals. Journal of 
General Psychology 16, 379-389. 
Boysen, Sally, G. Bemston, T. Shreyer, and K. Quigley (1993) Processing of ordi­
nality and transitivity by chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Journal of Compara­
tive Psychology 107, 208-215. 
Boysen, Sally, and G. Bemston ( 1995) Responses to quantity: perceptual versus cog­
nitive mechanisms in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Journal of Experimental 
Psychology and Animal Behavior Processes 21, 82-86. 
Boysen, Sally, G. Bemston, M. Hannan, and J. Cacioppo (1996) Quantity-based in­
ference and symbolic representation in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Journal 
of Experimental Psychology and Animal Behavior Processes 22, 7͓6. 
Brandt, A. ( 1867) Sur le rapport du poids du cerveau a celui du corps chez differents 
animaux. Bull. Soc. impe r. Naturalistes, Moscou 40, 525-543. 
Broca, Paul (1865) Sur Ia faculte du langage articule. Bulletin de la Societe d'An­
thropologie, Paris 6, 337-393. 
Brodie, Richard (1996) Virus of the Mind. Seattle. Integral Press. 
Brodmann, K. ( 1912) Neue Ergebnisse uber die Vergleichende histologische Lo­
calisation der Grosshimrinde mit besonderer Berucksichtigung des Stirnhims. 
Anatomischer Anzeiger, Suppl. 41, 157-216. 
Brown, Jason ( 1977) Mind, Brain and Consciousness. New York: Academic 
Press. 
Buchler, J., ed. ( 1955) The Philosophical Writings of Peirce. New York: Dover 
Books. 
Burke, James (1978) Connections. Boston: Little, Brown. 
Burling, R. (1986) The selective advantage of complex language. Ethology and So­
ciobiology 7, 1-16. 
Butler, A. B., and W. Hodos ( 1996) Comparative Vertebrate Neuroanatomy: Evo­
lution and Adaptation. New York: Wiley-Liss. 
492 < Bibliography

Caird, Rod (1994) Ape Man: The Story of Human Evolution. Edited by Robert 
Foley. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Calvin, William (1996) The Cerebral Code. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Chagnon, Napolean (1983) Yanomam6: The Fierce People. New York: Holt, Rhine­
hart & Winston. 
Chalmers, David ( 1996) The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Changeaux, J. (1985) Neuronal Man. New York: Pantheon Books. 
Cheney, Dorothy, and Robert Seyfarth (1990) How Monkeys See the World. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
-- (1992) Meaning, reference, and intentionality in the natural vocalizations of 
monkeys. In T. Nishida, W. C., McGrew, P. Marler, M. Pickford, and F. de Waal, 
eds., Topics in Primatology. Vol. 1. Human Origins. Tokyo: Tokyo University 
Press. 
Chomsky, Noam (1972) Language and Mind. New York: Harcourt Brace Jo-
vanovich. 
-- (1975) Reflections on Language. New York: Pantheon. 
-- (1980) Rules and Representations. New York: Columbia University Press. 
-- (1988) Language and Problems of Knowledge: The Managua Lectures. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press. 
-- (1984) Modular Approaches to the Study of the Mind. San Diego: San Diego 
State University Press. 
Chomsky, Noam, and G. Miller (1963) Introduction to the formal analysis of nat­
ural language. In Handbook of Mathematical Psychology, Vol. 2, edited by R. D. 
Luce, R. Bush, and E. Galanter. New York: John Wiley. 
Christiansen, Morton (in press). Language as an organism-Implications for the 
evolution and acquisition of language. Cognition. 
Churchland, Patricia (1986) Neurophilosophy: Toward a Unified Science of the 
Mind-Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Clark, A., and C. Thornton (in press) Trading spaces: Computation, representation 
and the limits of uninformed learning. Brain and Behavioral Sciences. 
Corballis, Michael C. (1992) On the evolution of language and generativity. Cog-
nition 44, 197-126. 
-- ( 1991) The Lopsided Ape. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Coren, Stanley (1995) The Intelligence of Dogs. New York: Bantam Books. 
Count, Earl W. ( 1947) Brain and body weight in man: Their antecedents in 
growth and evolution. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 46, 
993-1122. 
Cowan, W. M., J. W. Fawcett, D. D. M. O'Leary, and B. B. Stanfield (1984) Re­
gressive events in neurogenesis. Science 255, 1258-1265. 
Crick, Francis (1994) The Astonishing Hypothesis: The Scientific Search for the Soul. 
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 
Bibliography > 493

Crick, Francis, and C. Koch (1990) Towards a neurobiological theory of con­
sciousness. Seminars in the Neurosciences 2, 263-275. 
Crystal, David, ed., (1989) Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 334-339. 
Daly, Martin, and Margo Wilson (1978) Sex, Evolution and Behavior: North Scit­
uate, MA: Duxbury. 
Damasio, Antonio R. (1989) The brain binds entities and events by multiregional 
activation from convergence zones. Neural Computation 1, 123-132. 
-- (1989) Time-locked multiregional retroactivation: A systems level proposal for 
the neural substrates of recal and recognition. Cognition 33, 25-62. 
-- (1990) Category related recognition defects as a clue to the neural substrates 
of language. Trends in Neuroscience 13, 95-98. 
-- (1994) Cortical systems for retrieval of concrete knowledge: The convergence 
zone framework. In C. Koch, ed., Large-Scale Neuronal Theories of the Brain. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
-- (1994) Descartes' Error: New York: Grosset/Putnam. 
Damasio, H., T. J. Grabowski, D. Tranel, R. D. Hichwa, and A. R. Damasio (1996) 
A neural basis for lexical retrieval. Nature 380, 499-505. 
Darwin, Charles (1871) The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex. 2d 
ed., revised and augmented. New York: Appleton. 
Deacon, Terrence W. (1984) Connections of the Inferior Periarcuate Area in the 
Brain ofMacaca Fascicularis. An Experimental and Comparative Investigation 
of Language Circuitry and Its Evolution. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Harvard 
University. 
-- (1988) Human brain evolution: I. Evolution of human language circuits. In 
H. Jerison and I. Jerison, eds., Intelligence and Evolutionary Biology. New York: 
Springer-Verlag. 
-- (1988) Human brain evolution: II. Embl)'Ology and brain alometry. In H. Jeri­
son, and I. Jerison eds., Intelligence and Evolutionary Biology. Berlin: Springer­
Verlag, 383-415. 
-- ( 1990a) Fallacies of progression in theories of brain size evolution. Interna­
tional Journal of Primatology. 
-- (1990b) Rethinking mammalian brain evolution. American Zoologist 30, 
629-705. 
-- (1992a) Brain-language co-evolution. In J. Hawkins and M. Gel-Man, eds., 
The Evolution of Human Languages. Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley, 49-83. 
-- (1992b) Cortical connections of the inferior arcuate sulcus cortex in the 
macaque brain. Brain Research 573, 8-26. 
-- (1992c) Impressions of ancestral brains. In S. Jones, R. Martin, and D. Pil­
beam, eds., Cambridge Encyclopedia of Human Evolution. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 117-118. 
-- (1992d) The neural circuitry underlying primate calls and human language. 
494 < Bibliography

In J. Wind, B. Chiarelli, B. Bichakjian, and A Nocentini, eds., Language Origin: 
A Multidisciplinary Approach. Proceedings of NATO Advanced Institute, Cor­
tona, Italy, 1988; Amsterdam: Kluwer, 1992, 121-162. 
Deacon, Terrence, P. Pakzaban, L. Burns, J. Dinsmore, and 0. Isacson (1994) Cyto­
architectonic development, axon-glia relationships and long distance axon growth 
of porcine striatal xenografts in rats. Experimental Neurology 130, 151-167. 
De Valois, R., and K. De Valois (1975) Neural coding of color. In E. Charterette 
and M. Friedman, eds., Handbook of Perception, Vol. V: Seeing. New York: Aca­
demic Press. 
Dehaene, S. {1992) Varieties of numerical abilities. Cognition 44, 1-42. 
Demb, J., J. Desmond, A. Wagner, C. Vaidya, G. Glover and J. Gabrieli (1995) Se­
mantic encoding and retrieval in the left inferior prefrontal cortex: A functional 
MRI study of task difficulty and process specificity. Journal of Neuroscience 
15(9), 5870-5878. 
Dennett, Daniel (1991) Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little, Brown. 
-- (1995) Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Descartes, Rene (1637) The Philosophical Works of Descartes, rendered into Eng­
lish by Elizabeth S. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross (1970). New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
D'Esposito, M., J. Detre, D. Alsop, R. Shin, S. Atlas, and M. Grossman (1995) The 
neural basis of the central executive system of working memory. Nature 378, 
279--281. 
Donald, Merlin (1991) Origins of the Modem Mind. Cambridge, MA; Harvard Uni­
versity Press. 
Doron, N., and Z. Wollberg (1994) Cross-modal neuroplasticity in the blind 
mole rat Spalax Ehrenbergi: A WGA-HRP tracing study. NeuroReport 5, 
2697-2701. 
Dubois, E. ( 1913) On the relation between the quantity of brain and the size of the 
body in vertebrates. Verhandlungen des Knninklijke Academie voor Weten­
schappen Amsterdam 16, 641. 
Dunbar, Robin (1988) Primate Social Systems. London: Goom Helen. 
-- (1992a) Co-evolution of neocortex size, group size and language in humans. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 
-- (1992b) Neocortex size as a constraint on group size in primates. Journal of 
Human Evolution 20, 469--493. 
-- {1997) Grooming, Gossip and the Evolution of Language. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Durham, William (1994) Coevolution: Genes, Culture and Human Diversity. Stan­
ford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
Edelman, Gerald {1987) Neural Darwinism: The Theory of Neuronal Group Se­
lection. New York: Basic Books. 
-- (1994) Bright Air, Brilliant Fire. New York: Basic Books. 
Bibliography > 495

Elman, Jeffrey (1991) Incremental learning, or the importance of starting small. In 
13th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum, 443-448. 
-- ( 1993) Learning and development in neural networks: The importance of start­
ing small. Cognition 48, 71-99. 
Elman, Jefferey, E. Bates, M. Johnson, A. Karmiloff-Smith, D. Parisi, and K. Plun­
kett (1996) Rethinking Innateness: A Connectionist Perspective on Develop­
ment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Fabbro, Franco (1992) Cerebral lateralization of human languages: clinical and ex­
perimental data. In J. Wind, B. Chiarelli, B. Bichakjian, and A. Nocentini, eds. 
(1988), Language Origin: A multidisciplinary approach. Proceedings of NATO 
Advanced Institute, Cortona, Italy. Amsterdam: Kluwer, 195-224. 
Falk, Dean (1983) Cerebral cortices of East African early hominids. Science 221, 
1072-1074. 
-- (1989) Ape-like endocast of "ape-man" Taung. American Journal of Physical 
Anthropology 80, 335-339. 
-- (1990) Brain evolution in Homo: The "radiator" theory. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences 13, 333-381. 
Felleman, D. J. and D. C. Van Essen (1991) Distributed hierarchical processing in 
the primate cerebral cortex. Cerebral Cortex 1, 1-47. 
Fessler, Daniel M. T. (1996) Towards an Understanding of the Universality of Sec­
ond Order Emotions (in press). 
Finkelstein, R., and E. Boncinelli (1994) From fly head to mammalian forebrain: 
The story of otd and Otx. Trends in Genetics 10, 310-315. 
Finlay, B. L., and R. B. Darlington (1995) Linked regularities in the development 
and evolution of mammalian brains. Science 268, 1578-1584. 
Fodor, J. A. (1983) The Modularity of Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford 
Books. 
Frangiskakis, J. M., et al. (1996) LIM-kinase1 hemizygosity implicated in impaired 
visuospatial constructive cognition. Cell 86, 59--69. 
Franzen, E. A., and R. E. Myers (1973) Neural control of social behavior: Prefrontal 
and anterior temporal cortex. Neuropsychologia 11, 141-157. 
Frege, Gottlob (1879) Begriffsschrift, a Formula Language Modeled on That of 
Arithemetic, for Pure Thought. English translation in J. van Heijenoort, ed. 
(1970), Frege and Godel: Two Fundamantal Texts in Mathematical Logic. Cam­
bridge, MA: HaJVard University Press, 1-82. 
Friedman, G., and D. O'Leary (1996) Retroviral misexpression of engrailed genes 
in the chick optic tectum perturbs the topographic targeting of retinal axons. 
Journal of Neuroscience 16, 5490e-5509. 
Frisch, Karl von (1967) The Dance Language and Orientation of Bees. Cambridge, 
MA: HaJVard University Press. 
496 < Bibliography

Frith, Uta (1989) Autism: Explaining the Enigma. New York: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press. 
--, ed. (1991) Autism and Ansperger Syndrome. New York: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press. 
Frost, D. 0., and C. Metin (1985) Induction of functional retinal projections to the 
somatosensory system. Nature 31 7, 162. 
Fuster, J. (1980) The Prefrontal Cortex: Anatomy, Physiology and Neuropsychol­
ogy of the Frontal Lobe. New York: Raven Press. 
Gainotti, G. ( 1972) Emotional behavior and hemispheric side of the lesion. Cortex 
8, 41-55. 
Galaburda, A. M., P. P. Wang, U. Bellugi, and M. Rosen (1994) Cytoarchitectonic 
anomalies in a genetically based disorder: Williams syndrome. NeuroReport 5, 
753-757. 
Gardner, Howard (1983) Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences. New 
York: Basic Books. 
Gardner, Howard, H. Brownell, W. Wapner, and D. Michelow (1983) Missing the 
point: The role of the right hemisphere in processing of complex linguistic ma­
terials. In E. Perecman, ed., Cognitive Processes and the Right Hemisphere. New 
York: Academic Press. 
Gallup, G. G. ( 1982) Self-awareness and the emergence of mind in primates. Amer­
ican Journal of Primatology 2, 237-248. 
Georgopoulos, A. P., A. Ashe, N. Smymis, and M. Taira (1992) The motor cortex 
and the coding of force. Science 256, 1692-1695. 
Gibson, K. R. and T. Ingold, eds. (1993) Tools, Language and Cognition in Human 
Evolution. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Gold, E. ( 1967) Language identification in the limit. Information and Control 16, 
447-474. 
Goldman-Rakic, Patricia R. ( 1987) Circuitry of the primate prefrontal cortex and 
regulation of behavior by representational m.emory. Handbook of Physiology, 
373-418. 
-- ( 1992) Working memory and the mind. Scientific American 267, 110-117. 
Goldschmidt, Richard (1952) Evolution, as viewed by one geneticist. American Sci­
entist 40, 84-135. 
Goodall, Jane ( 1986) The Chimpanzees of Combe: Patterns of Behavior: Cam­
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Goodglass, H. (1968) Studies on the grammar of aphasics. In S. Rosenberg and J. 
Kaplan, eds., Developments in Applied Psycholinguistics Research. New York: 
Macmillan. 
-- ( 1973) Studies on the grammar of aphasics. In H. Goodglass and S.E. Blum­
stein, eds., Psycholinguistics and Aphasia. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press. 
Bibliography > 497

Goodglass, H., J. B. Gleason, N. A. Bemholtz, and M. R. Hyde (1972) Some lin­
guistic structures in the speech of a Broca's aphasic. Cortex 8, 191-212. 
Goodman, Nelson (1955) Fact, Fiction, and Forecast. London: University of 
London. 
Gould, J. L., and C. G. Gould (1994) The Animal Mind. New York: Scientific Amer­
ican Library. 
Gould, Stephen Jay (1981) The Mismeasure of Man. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Gould, Stephen Jay, and R. C. Lewontin ( 1979) The spandrels of of San Marco and 
the Panglossian program: A critique of the adaptationist program. Proceedings 
of the Royal Society of London 205, 281-288. 
Gould, Stephen Jay, and Vrba, E. (1982) Exaptation: A missing term in evolution­
ary theory. Paleobiology 8, 4-15. 
Grandin, Temple ( 1995) Thinking in Pictures and Other Reports from My Life with 
Autism. New York: Doubleday. 
Grandin, Temple, and Margaret M. Scariano (1986) Emergence: Labeled Autistic. 
Novato, CA: Arena Press. 
Greenfield, Patricia, and E. Sue Savage-Rumbaugh (1990) Grammatical combina­
tion in Pan paniscus: Processes of learning and invention in the evolution and 
development oflanguage. In S. Parker and K. Gibson, eds., 'Language' and In­
telligence in Monkeys and Apes: Comparative Developmental Perspectives. Cam­
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
-- (1991) Imitation, grammatical development, and the invention of pro­
togrammar by an ape. In N. Krasnegor, D. M. Rumbaugh, M. Studdert-Kennedy, 
and D. Scheifelbusch, eds., Biobehavioral Foundations of Language Develop­
ment. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 235-258. 
Grice, H. P. (1969) Utterers' meaning and intentions. Philosophical Review 78, 
147-177. 
Grossman, M. ( 1980) A central processor for hierarchically structured material: Ev­
idence from Broca's aphasia. Neuropsychologia 18, 299-308. 
--( 1982) Reversal operations after brain damage. Brain and Cognition 1, 25&-265. 
Guilford, J. (1967) The Nature of Human Intelligence. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Hartshorne, C., and P. Weiss, eds. (1978) Collected Papers: Charles Sanders Peirce. 
Vols. I-VIII. Cambridge, MA: Belknap. 
Hauser, Marc D. (1996) The Evolution of Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 
Hauser, Marc D., P. MacNeilage, and M. Ware (1996) Numerical represenatations 
in primates. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 93, 
1514-1517. 
Hebb, Donald (1949) The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological The­
ory. New York: John Wiley. 
Heil, P., G. Bronchti, and H. Scheik (1991) Invasion of visual cortex by the audi­
tory system in the naturally blind mole rat. NeuroReport 2, 735-738. 
498 < Bibliography

Heilman, K., R. T. Watson, and D. Bowers (1983) Affective disorders associated 
with hemispheric disease. In K. Heilman and P. Satz, eds., Neuropsychology of 
Human Emotion. New York: The Guilford Press. 
Hermstein, Richard (1980) Symbolic communication between two pigeons 
(Columba domestica). Science 210. 
Hockett, C. F., and R. Ascher (1964) The human revolution. Current Anthropol­
ogy 5, 135-168. 
Holland, P., P. Ingham, and S. Krauss (1992) Development and evolution. Mice and 
flies head to head. Nature 358, 627-628. 
Holloway, Ralph ( 1968). The evolution of the primate brain: Some aspects of quan­
titative relations. Brain Research 7, 121-172. 
-- (1979) Brain size, allometry, and reorganization: toward a synthesis. In M. 
Hahn, C. Jensen, and B. Dudek, eds., Development and Evolution of Brain Size. 
New York: Academic Press. 
-- (1980) Within-species brain-body weight variability: A reexamination of the 
Danish data and other primate species. American Journal of Physical Anthro­
pology 53, 109-121. 
-- (1981) Volumetric and asymmetry determinations on recent hominid endo­
casts: Spy I and II, Djebel Ihroud I, and the Sale Homo erectus specimens, with 
some notes on Neanderthal brain size. American Journal of Physical Anthro­
pology 55, 385-393. 
-- (1983) Human paleontological evidence relevant to language behavior. Human 
Neurobiology 2, 105-114. 
-- ( 1985) The past, present, and future significance of the lunate sulcus in early 
hominid evolution. In P. Tobias, ed., Hominid Evolution: Past, Present and Fu­
ture. New York: Alan R. Liss. 
-- (1995) [Commentary to Aiello and Wheeler (1995)] Current Anthropology 
36, 213-214. 
Holt, A. B., D. B. Cheek, E. D. Mellits, and D. E. Hill (1975) Brain size and the 
relation of the primate to the nonprimate. In Cheek, D. B., ed., Fetal and 
Postnatal Cellular Growth: Hormones and Nutrition, New York: John Wiley. 
Hublin, J.-J., F. Spoor, M. Braun, F. Zonneveld, and S. Condemi (1996) A late 
Neanderthal associated with upper Paleolithic artefacts. Nature 381, 224-226. 
Huttenlocher: P. R. (1990) Morphometric study of human cerebral cortex devel­
opment. Neuropsychologia 28, 517-527. 
Isacson, 0., T. Deacon, P. Pakzaban, W. Galpem, J. Dinsmore, and L. Bums, (1995) 
Transplanted xenogeneic neural cells in neurodegenerative disease models ex­
hibit remarkable axonal target specificity and distinct growth patterns of glial and 
axonal fibres. Nature Medicine 1, 1189-1194. 
Isacson, 0., and T. Deacon, (1996) Specific axon guidance factors persist in the adult 
brain as demonstrated by pig neuroblasts transplanted to the rat. Neuroscience 
75, 827-837. 
Bibliography > 499

Jackendoff, Ray (1992) Languages of the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
-- (1994) Patterns in the Mind: Language and Human Nature. New York: Basic 
Books. 
Jacobsen, C. (1936) Studies of cerebral function in primates. Comparative Psy­
chology Monographs 13, 1--68. 
Jakobson R. (1956) Two aspects oflanguage and two types of aphasic disturbances. 
In R. Jakobson and M. Halle, eds., Fundamentals ofLan{!}lage. The Hague: Mou­
ton. 
Jerison, Harry ( 1973) The Evolution of the Brain and Intelligence. New York: Aca­
demic Press. 
Jones, Stephen, D. Pilbeam, and R. Martin, eds. (1993) Cambridge Encyclopedia 
of Human Evolution. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Jurgens, Uwe (1976a) Projections from cortical larynx area in the squirrel monkey. 
Experimental Brain Research 25, 401-411. 
-- ( 1976b) Reinforcing concomitants of electrically elicited vocalization. Exper­
imental Brain Research 26, 203--214. 
-- (1979a) Neural control of vocalization in non-human primates. In H. D. Stek­
lis and M. J. Raleigh, eds., Neurobiology of Social Communication in Primates. 
New York: Academic Press. 
-- (1979b) Vocalization as an emotional indicator. A neuroethological study in 
the squirrel monkey. Behaviour 69, 88-117. 
Jurgens, Uwe, and R. Pratt (1979a) Cingular vocalization pathway: Squirrel mon­
key. Experimental Brain Research 34, 499-510. 
-- (1979b) The role of the peri-aqueductal grey in vocal expression of emotion. 
Brain Research 167, 367--378. 
Jurgens, Uwe, A. Kirzinger, and D. von Cramon (1982) The effects of deep-reaching 
lesions in the cortical face area on phonation. A combined case report and ex­
perimental monkey study. Cortex 18, 125-139. 
Karmiloff-Smith, Annette ( 1992) Beyond Modularity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Kato, N., D. Price, J. M. R. Ferrer, and C. Blakemore ( 1993) Plasticity of an aber­
rant geniculocortical pathway in neonatally lesioned cats. NeuroReport 4, 
915-918. 
Katz, J. M., and R. J. Lasek (1983) Evolution of the nervous system: Role of onto­
genetic mechanisms in the evolution of matching populations. Proceedings of 
the National Acadamy of Science USA 75, 1349-1352. 
Kean, Mary-Louise (1977) The linguistic interpretation of aphasic syndromes: 
Agrammatism in Broca's aphasia, an example. Cognition 5, 9-46. 
Keller, Helen (1903) The Story of My Life. New York: Doubleday. 
Killackey, Herbert P., N. L. Chiaia, C. A. Bennett-Clarke, M. Eck, and R. W. 
Rhoades (1994) Peripheral influences on the size and organization of somato­
topic representations in the fetal rat cortex. Journal of Neuroscience 14, 
1496--1506. 
500 < Bibliography

Kim, S.-C., K. Ugurbil, and P. L. Strick (1994) Activation of cerebellar output nu­
cleus during cognitive processing. Science 265, 949-951. 
Kinsboume, Marcel ( 1978) Evolution of language in relation to lateral action. In 
M. Kinsboume, ed., Asymmetrical Function of the Brain. New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Klima, Edward, and Ursula Bellugi (1979) The Signs of Language. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Kohler, Wolfgang (1927) The Mentality of Apes. New York: Harcourt, Brace. 
Kolb, Brian, and Ian Whishaw (1990) Fundamentals of Human Neuropsychology. 
3d ed. New York: W. H. Freeman & Co. 
Krassnegor, N. A., D. Rumbaugh, R. Schiefelbusch, and M. Studdert-Kennedy, eds. 
(1991) Biological and Behavioral Determinants of Language Development. Hills­
dale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Kripke, Saul ( 1972) Naming and necessity. In G. Harmon and D. Davidson, eds., 
The Semantics of Natural Language. Dordrecht: Riedl, 254-355, 763-769. 
Kruska, Dieter (1988) Mammalian domestication and its effect on brain structure 
and behavior. In H. Jerison and I. Jerison, eds., Intelligence and Evolutionary 
Biology. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 211-250. 
Kuhl, P., and J. D. Miller ( 1975) Speech perception by the chinchila. Science 190, 
69-72. 
Landau, Misia (1991) Narratives of Human Evolution. New Haven, CT: Yale Uni­
versity Press. 
Lapicque, L. (1907a) Tableau du poids somatique et ence phalique dans les especes 
animales. Bulletin de la Societe d'Anthropologie Paris 8, 248-262. 
-- ( 1907b) Le poids ence phalique en fonction du poids corporal entre 
individus d'une meme espece. Bulletin de la Societe d'Anthropologie Paris 8, 
313. 
Larsen, B., E. Skinhoj, and N. A. Lassen (1978) Variations in regional cortical blood 
flow in the right and left hemispheres during automatic speech. Brain 101, 
193-209. 
Lassen, N. A., D. H. Ingvar, and E. Skinhoj (1978) Brain function and blood flow. 
Scientific American 239, 62-71. 
. 
Lassen, N. A., and B. Larsen (1980) Cortical activity in the left and right hemi-
spheres during language-related brain functions. Phonetica 37, 27-37. 
Law, M., and M. Constantine-Paton (1981) Anatomy and physiology of experi­
mentally induced striped tecta. Journal of Neuroscience 1, 741-759. 
Le Douarin, N. (1993) Embryonic neural chimeras in the study of brain develop­
ment. Trends in Neuroscience 16, 64-72. 
Lecours, Andre-Roch, F. Lhermitte, and B. Bryans (1983) Aphasiology. London: 
Bailliere Tindall.Leiner, H. C., A. L. Leiner, and R. S. Dow ( 1989) Reapprais­
ing the cerebellum: What does the hindbrain contribute to the forebrain? Be­
havioral Neuroscience 103, 998-1008. 
Bibliography > 501

-- (1993) Cognitive and language functions of the human cerebellum. Trends in 
Neurosciences 16, 444-447. 
Lennenberg, Eric H. (1967) Biological Foundations of Language. New York: John 
Wiley. 
Liberman, A., F. Cooper, D. Shankweiler, and M. Studdert-Kennedy (1967) Per­
ception of the speech code. Psychological Review 74, 431-461. 
Liberman, A., and I. Mattingly (1989) A specialization for speech perception. Sci­
ence 243, 489-494. 
Lieberman, Philip (1984) The Biology and Evolution of Language. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
-- ( 1991) Uniquely Human: The Evolution of Speech, Thought and Selfless Be­
havior: Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Lieberman, Philip, and E. S. Crelin (1971). On the speech of Neanderthal man. 
Linguistic Inquiry 2, 203-222. 
Linden, R. (1990) Control of neuronal survival by anomalous targets in the devel­
oping brain. Journal of Comparative Neurology 294, 594-606. 
Lisker, L., and A. S. Abramson (1971) Distinctive features and laryngeal control. 
Language 47, 767-785. 
Lipp, Hans-Peter, and D. P. Wolfer (1995) New paths towards old dreams: Mi­
crophrenology. In E. Alleva, et al., eds. Behavioral Brain Research in Natural­
istic and Semi-Naturalistic Settings. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
3-46. 
Luria, A. R. (1980) Higher Cortical Functions in Man (2nd edn., English transla­
tion). New York: Basic Books (original Russian text published by Moscow Uni­
versity Press, 1962). 
MacDonald, M. C. (1989) Priming effects from gaps to antecendents. Language 
and Cognitive Processes 4, 1-72. 
MacNeilage, Peter (1991) The "postural" origins of primate neurobiological asym­
metries. In Krassnegor, N. A., D. Rumbaugh, R. Schiefelbusch, and M. Studdert­
Kennedy, eds. Biological and Behavioral Determinants of Language 
Development. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Macphail, Euan M. (1982) Brain and Intelligence in Vertebrates. Oxford: Claren­
don Press. 
Marcus, G. F. (1993) Negative evidence in language acquisition. Cognition 46, 
53-85. 
Marler, Peter (1959) Developments in the study of animal communication. In P. 
R. Bell, ed., Darwin's Biological Work. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, 150-206. 
Mattingly, 1., and M. Studdert-Kennedy, eds. (1991) Modularity and the Motor The­
ory of Speech Perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
McCrone, John ( 1991) The Ape That Spoke. New York: William Morrow. 
502 < Bibliography

McGinnis, W, and M. Kuziora ( 1994) The molecular architects of body design. Sci­
entific American 270, 58-66. 
McKinney, Michael, and K. J. MacNamara (1991) Heterochrony: The Evolution of 
Ontogeny. New York: Plenum Press. 
Middleton, Frank A., and Peter L. Strick (1994) Anatomical evidence for cerebel­
lar and basal ganglia involvement in higher cognitive function. Science 266, 
458-461. 
Miller, George ( 1991) The Science ofWords. New York: Scientific American Library. 
Mishkin, M., and F. Manning {1978) Nonspatial memory after selective prefrontal 
lesions in monkeys. Brain Research 143, 313--323. 
Moliere (1953) The Imaginary Invalid (Le Malade Imaginaire). In Moliere: The Mis­
anthrope and Other Plays (translated by John Wood). Baltimore: Penguin Books. 
Molnar, Z., and C. Blakemore ( 1991) Lack of regional specificity for connections 
formed between thalamus and cortex in coculture. Nature 351, 475-477. 
Morgan, J. L., and L. L. Travis (1989) Limits on negative information in language 
learning. Journal of Child Language 16, 531-552. 
Mueller, R.-A.(1996) Innateness, autonomy, universality? Neurobiological ap­
proaches to language. Behavioral and Brain Research (in press). 
Myers, R. E. {1976) Comparative neurology of vocalization and speech: Proof of a 
dichotomy. In S. R. Hamad, H. D. Steklis, and J. Lancaster, eds., Origins and 
Evolution of Language and Speech, Annals of the New York Acadamy of Science 
280, 745-757. 
Newman, John D., and Paul D. MacLean ( 1982) Effects of tegmental lesions on 
the isolation call of squirrel monkeys. Brain Research 232, 317-329. 
Newmeyer, F. J. (1991) Functional explanation in linguistics and the origin of lan­
guage. Language and Communication 11, 1-28. 
Newport, Elissa L. {1990) Maturational constraints on language learning. Cogni­
tive Science 14, 1 1-28. 
-- ( 1991) Contrasting conceptions of the critical period for language. In S. Carey 
and R. Gelman, eds., Epigenesis of Mind: Essays on Biology and Cognition. Hills­
dale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Nichelli, P., J. prafman, et al. (1995) Where the brain appreciates the moral of a 
story. NeuroReport 6, 2309-2313. 
Nobre, A., T. Allison, and G. McCarthy {1994) Word recognition in the human in­
ferior temporal lobe. Nature 372, 260-263. 
Nottebohm, F., D. B. Kelly, and J. A. Paton (1982) Connections of vocal control 
nuclei in the canary telencephalon. Journal of Comparative Neurology 207, 
344-357. 
Nottebohm, F., and M. E. Nottebohm ( 1976) Left hypoglossal dominance in the 
control of canary and white-crowned sparrow song. Journal of Comparative 
Physiology 108, 171-192. 
Bibliography > 503

Nowicki, S., M. Westneat, and W. Roese (1992) Birdsong: Motor function and the 
evolution of communication. Seminars in the Neurosciences 4, 385-390. 
Nudo, R. J., D. P. Sutherland, and R. B. Masterton (1995) Variation and evolution 
of mammalian corticospinal somata with special reference to primates. Journal 
of Comparative Neurology 358, 181-205. 
Ojemann, George A. ( 1979) Individual variability in cortical localization oflanguage. 
Journal of Neurosurgery 50, 164-169. 
-- ( 1983) Brain organization for language from the perspective of electrical stim­
ulation mapping. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 2, 189-230. 
-- (1991) Cortical organization of language. Journal of Neuroscience 11, 
2281-2287. 
Ojemann, George A., and C. Catherine Mateer (1979) Human language cortex: Lo­
calization of memory, syntax, and sequential motor-phoneme indentification 
systems. Science 205, 1401-1403. 
O'Leary, Dennis D. M. (1989) Do cortical areas emerge from a protocortex? Trends 
in Neuroscience 12, 40͏06. 
-- (1992) Development of connectional diversity and specificity in the mam­
malian brain by the pruning of collateral projections. Current Opinions in Neu­
robiology 2, 70-77. 
O'Leary, Dennis D. M., and S. E. Koester (1993) Development of projection neu­
ron types, axon pathways, and patterned connections of the mammalian cere­
bral cortex. Neuron 10, 991-1006. 
O'Leary, Dennis D. M., and B. Stanfield (1989) Selective elimination of axons ex­
tended by developing cortical neurons is dependent on regional locale experi­
ments utilizing fetal cortical transplants. Journal of Neuroscience 9, 2230-2246. 
Ornstein, Robert (1973) The Nature of Human Consciousness. San Francisco: 
W. H. Freeman. 
Pandya, Deepak, and C. Barnes ( 1987) Architecture and connections of the frontal 
lobe. In E. Perecman, ed., The Frontal Lobes Revisited. New York: IRBN Press, 
41-72. 
Pandya, Deepak, and E. H. Yeterian (1990) Prefrontal cortex in relation to other 
cortical areas in rhesus monkey: architecture and connections. In H. B. M. 
Uylings, ed., The Prefrontal Cortex: Its Structure, Function and Pathology. Am­
sterdam: Elsevier, 63-94. 
Passingham, Richard E. ( 1973) Anatomical differences between the neocortex of 
man and other primates. Brain Behavior and Evolution 7, 337-359. 
-- (1975) Changes in the size and organisation of the brain in man and his an­
cestors. Brain Behavior and Evolution 11, 73-90. 
-- (1979) Brain size and intelligence in man. Brain Behavior and Evolution 16, 
253-270. 
504 < Bibliography

-- (1981) Broca's area and the origins of human vocal skill. Philosophical Trans­
actions of the Royal Society of London, B 292, 167-175. 
-- (1982) The Human Primate. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman. 
-- (1985) Memory of monkeys (Macaca mulatta) with lesions in prefrontal cor-
tex. Behavioral Neuroscience 99, 3-21. 
-- (1985) Rates of brain development in mammals including man. Brain, Be­
havior and Evolution 26, 167-175. 
Passingham, Richard E., and G. Ettlinger ( 197 4). A comparison of cortical function 
in man and other primates. International Review of Neurobiology 16, 233-299. 
Peirce, Charles Sanders (1897, 1903) Logic as semiotic: The theory of signs. In J. 
Buchler, ed., The Philosophical Writings of Peirce (1955). New York: Dover 
Books, 98-119. 
-- (1978) Collected Papers. Vol. II. Elements of Logic. C. Hartshorne and P. 
Weiss, eds., Cambridge, MA: Belknap. 
Penfield, W., and L. Roberts (1959) Speech and Brain Mechanisms. London: Ox­
ford University Press. 
Penrose, Roger (1989) The Emperor's New Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Pepperberg, Irene M. (1987) Acquisition of the same/different concept by an 
African grey parrot Psittacus erithacus. Animal Learning and Behavior 15, 
423-432. 
Perecman, Ellen, ed. ( 1987) The Frontal Lobes Revisited. New York: IRBN 
Press. 
Petersen, S. E., P. T. Fox, et al. (1988) Positron emission tomographic studies of 
the cortical anatomy of single-word processing. Nature 331, 585-589. 
Petrides, Michael (1982) Motor conditional associative learning after selective pre­
frontal lesions in the monkey. Behavioral and Brain Research 5, 407-413. 
-- ( 1985) Deficits in nonspatial conditional associative learning after periarcu­
ate lesions in monkey. Behavioral and Brain Research 16, 95-101. 
-- (1986) The effect of periarcuate lesions in the monkey on the performance 
of symmetrically and asymmetrically reinforced visual and auditory go, no-go 
tasks. Journal of Neuroscience 6, 2054-2063. 
Petrides, Michael, and B. Milner (1982) Deficits on subject-ordered tasks after 
frontal and temporal lobe lesions in man. Neuropsychologia 20, 249-262. 
Piaget, Jean ( 195͐) The Origins of Intelligence in Children. New York: International 
Universities Press. 
Piattelli-Palmarini, M. (1989) Evolution, selection, and cognition: From "learning" 
to parameter setting in biology and the study of language. Cognition 31, 1-44. 
Pinker, Steven (1991) Rules of language. Science 253, 530-535. 
-- ( 1994) The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language. New York: 
William Morrow. 
Pinker, Steven, and P. Bloom (1990) Natural language and natural selection. Be­
havioral and Brain Sciences 13, 707-784. 
Bibliography > 505

Posner, M. 1., S. E. Petersen, P. T. Fox, and M. E. Raichle ( 1988) Localization of 
cognitive operations in the human brain. Science 240, 1627-1631. 
Posner and M. E. Raichle (1994) Images of Mind. New York: Scientific American 
Library. 
Premack, David (1986) Gavagai! Or the Future History of the Animal Language 
Controversy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 
Premack, David, and A. Premack (1983) The Mindofan Ape. New York: W W Nor­
ton. 
Provine, Robert (1996) Laughter. American Scientist 84, 38-47. 
Purves, Dale (1988) Body and Brain. A Trophic Theory of Neural Connections. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Purves, Dale, and J. Lichtman (1980) Elimination of synapses in the developing ner­
vous system. Science 210, 153-157. 
-- (1985) Principles of Neural Development. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associ­
ates Inc. 
Putnam, Hilary (1975) Mind, Language and Reality. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Quine, W V 0. (1960) Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Raff, Rudolph (1996) The Shape of Life: Genes, Development, and the Evolution 
of Animal Form. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Rakic, P. (1988) Specification of cerebral cortical areas. Science 241, 170-176. 
Ramsey, W ,  and S. Stich ( 1991) Connectionism and three levels of nativism. In W 
Ramsey, S. Stich, and D. Rummelhart, eds., Philosophy and Connectionist The­
ory. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Richards, Robert (1987) Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary Theories of 
Mind and Behavior: Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Ridley, Mark (1993) The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature. New 
York: Macmillan. 
Ringo, J. L. (1991) Neuronal interconnection as a function of brain size. Brain, Be­
havior and Evolution 38, 1-6. 
Roland, P. E. ( 1985) Cortical organization of voluntary behavior in man. Human 
Neurobiology 4, 155-167. 
Romaine, Susan (1988) Pidgin and Creole Languages. London: Longman Group. 
Rosch, Elenor (1978) Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch and B. Lloyds, eds., 
Cognition and Categorization. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Roth, G., J. Blanke, and M. Ohle (1995) Brain size and morphology in miniatur­
ized plethodontid salamanders. Brain Behavior and Evolution 45, 84-95. 
Roth, G., K. C. Nishikawa, C. Naujoks-Manteuffel, A. Schmidt, and D. B. Wake 
(1993) Paedomorphosis and simplification in the nervous system of salamanders. 
Brain, Behavior and Evolution 42, 137-170. 
506 < Bibliography

Rubenstein, John, S. Martinez, K. Shinmamura, and L. Puelles (1994) The em­
bryonic vertebrate forebrain: The prosomeric model. Science 266, 578-580. 
Rumbaugh, Duane, ed. ( 1977) Language Learning by a Chimpanzee: The Lana Pro­
ject. New York: Academic Press. 
Rumbaugh, Duane, E. Sue Savage-Rumbaugh, and David A. Wahbum (1996) To­
ward a new outlook on primate learning and behavior: Complex learning and 
emergent processes in comparative perspective. Japanese Psychological Re­
search 38, 113-125. 
Rumbaugh, D. M., and Pate, J. L. (1984) The evolution of cognition in primates. 
A comparative perspective. In H. L. Roitblat, T. G. Bever, and H. S. Terrace, 
eds., Animal Cognition. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 403-20. 
Salvatore, Aglioti, and Franco Fabro (1993) Paradoxical selective recovery in a 
bilingual aphasic following subcortical lesions. NeuroReport 4, 1359-1362. 
Saussure, Ferdinand de (1916) Cours de linguistique generale. Paris: Payot. See also 
the 1969 translation by Wade Baskin: Course in General Linguistics. New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 
Schmidt-Nielsen, Knut (1984) Scaling: Why Is Animal Size So Important? Cam­
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Seyfarth, Robert, Dorothy Cheney, and Peter Marler (1980) Monkey responses to 
three different alarm calls: Evidence of predator classification and semantic 
communication. Science 210, 801-803. 
Savage-Rumbaugh, E. Sue (1986) Ape Language: From Conditioned Response to 
Symbol. New York: Columbia University Press. 
Savage-Rumbaugh, E. Sue, and Roger Lewin (1994) Kanzi: The Ape at the Brink 
of the Human Mind. New York: John Wiley. 
Savage-Rumbaugh, E. Sue, D. M. Rumbaugh, and S. Boysen (1978) Symbolization, 
language and chimpanzees: A theoretical reevaluation based on initial language 
acquisition processes in four young Pan troglodytes. Brain and Language 6, 265. 
Savage-Rumbaugh, E. Sue, D. M. Rumbaugh, S. T. Smith, and J. Lawson (1980) 
Reference: The linguistic essential. Science 210, 922-925. 
Searle, John (1980) Minds, brains, and programs. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
3, 417-458. 
-- ( 1992) The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Semendeferi, K., H. Damasio, G. Van Hoesen, and R. Frank (1997) The evolution 
of the frontal lobes: A volumetric analysis based on three-dimensional recon­
structions of magnetic resonance scans of human and ape brains. journal of 
Human Evolution (in press). 
Smith, John Maynard (1978) Evolutionarily Stable Strategies (ESSs). Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Snell, Otto (1891) Das Gewicht des Gehims und des Himmantels der Saugetiere 
in Beziehung zu deren geistigen Fahigkeiten. Sit;:,. Ges. Morph. Physiol. 
(Munchen) 7, 90-94. 
Bibliography > 507

-- ( 1892) Die Abhangigkeit des Himgewichtes von dem Korpergewicht und den 
geistigen Flihigkeiten. Arch. Psychiat. Nervenkrank 23, 436-446. 
Sokoloff, Alan, and Terrence W. Deacon {1989) Direct projections from the face 
area of primary motor cortex to the facial nucleus in the cynomolgus monkey 
(Macacafascicularis). American Zoologist 29, abstract. 
-- {1990) Direct projections from the face area of primary motor cortex to the 
facial nucleus in the cynomolgus monkey but not in the cat or rat. American Jour­
nal or Physical Anthropology 81, 298. 
-- ( 1992) Musculotopic organization of intrinsic tongue musculature in the 
Cynomolgus monkey, Macaca fascicularis. Journal of Comparative Neurology 
324, 81-93. 
Stanfield, B., and D. D. M. O'Leary (1985) Fetal occipital cortical neurons trans­
planted to the rostral cortex can extend and maintain a pyramidal tract axon. Na­
ture 313, 135-137. 
Stephan, Heinz ( 1969) Quantitative investigations on visual structures in primate 
brains. In Proceedings of the Second International Congress on Primates 3, 
Basel: Karger, 34-42. 
Stephan, Heinz, H. Frahm, and G. Baron (1981) New and revised data on vol­
umes of brain structures in insectivores and primates. Folia Primatologica 35, 
1-29. 
Stuss, D., and D. Benson ( 1986) The Frontal Lobes. New York: Raven Press. 
Sur, M., P. Garraghty, and A. Roe ( 1988) Experimentally induced \isual projections 
into auditory thalamus and cortex. Science 242, 1437-1441. 
Taylor, G. M., E. Nol, and D. Boire ( 1995) Brain regions and encephalization in 
anurans: Adaptation or stability? Brain, Behavior and Evolution 45, 96-109. 
Terrace, Herbert {1979) Nim: A Chimpanzee Who Learned Sign Language. New 
York: Knopf. 
--, L. Petitto, R. Sanders, and T. Bever (1979) Can an ape create a sentence? 
Science 206, 891-902. 
Thompson, W. D'Arcy ( 1917) On Growth and Form. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Tobias, Philip V. ( 1981) The emergence of man in Africa and beyond. Philosophi­
cal Transactions of the Royal Society of London, B, Biological Sciences 292, 
43--56. 
-- ( 1987) The brain of Homo habilis: A new level of organisation in cerebral evo­
lution. Journal of Human Evolution 16, 741-761. 
Todd, L. (1974) Pidgins and Creoles. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Tramo, M. J., K. Baynes, and B. T. Volpe {1988) Impaired syntactic comprehension 
and production in Broca's aphasia: CT lesion localization and recovery patterns. 
Neurology 38, 95-98. 
Treffert, Darold A. (1989) Extraordinary People: Understanding Savant Syndrome. 
New York: Ballantine Books. 
508 < Bibliography

Uylings, H. B. M., ed. (1990) The Prefrontal Cortex: Its Structure, Function and 
Pathology. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 63-94. 
Vandenberghe, R., C. Price, R. Wise, 0. Josephs, and R. S. J. Frackowiak (1996) 
Functional anatomy of a common semantic system for words and pictures. Na­
ture 383, 254-256. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978) Mind in Society. Initially translated by A. R. Luria and edited 
by M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, and E. Souberman. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Waddington, Conrad H. (1957) The Strategy of the Genes. London: Alen & Unwin. 
Walker, Alan ( 1996) The Wisdom ofBones: In Search ofHuman Origins. New York: 
Alfred Knopf. 
Wallesch, C. W., H. H. Kornhuber, et al. (1983) Language and cognitive deficits re­
sulting from medial and dorsolateral frontal lobe lesions. Arch Psychiatr Ner­
venkr: 233, 279-296. 
Warrington, E. K., and R. McCarthy (1987) Categories of knowledge: Further frac­
tionation and an attempted integration. Brain 106, 1273-1296. 
Watanabe, Masataka ( 1996) Reward expectancy in primate prefrontal neurons. Na­
ture 382, 629-632. 
Welker, E., and Van der Loos, H. (1986) Is areal extent in sensory cerebral cortex 
determined by peripheral innervation density? Experim£ntal Brain Research 63, 
650-654. 
Werner, Heinz, and Bernard Kaplan ( 1963) Symbol Formation. New York: John 
Wiley & Sons. 
Wernicke, Carl ( 1874) Der aphasische Symptom£ncomplex. Breslau: Cohn & 
Weigert. 
Widdowson, E. M. (1981) Growth of creatures great and small. Symposium of the 
Zoological Society of London 46, 5--17. 
Wilczynski, W. ( 1984) Central neural systems subserving a homoplasous periphery. 
Am£rican Zoologist 24, 755--763. 
Willis, C. (1993) The Runaway Brain: The Evolution of Human Uniqueness. New 
York: Basic Books. 
Wind, Jan ( 1ǡ70) On the Phylogeny and Ontogeny of the Human Larynx. Gronin­
gen: Wolters-Noordhoff Publishing. 
Wrangham, Richard, and Dale Peterson ( 1996) Demonic Males: Apes and the Ori­
gins of Human Violence. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
Wulfeck, B., E. Bates, and R. Capasso (1991) A cross-linguistic study of grammat­
icality judgements in Broca's aphasia. Brain and Language 41, 311--336. 
Yamamoto, N ., K. Yamada, T. Kurotani, and K. Toyama ( 1992) Laminar specificity 
of extrinsic cortical connections studied in coculture preparations. Neuron 9, 
217-288. 
Bibliography > 509

Yamamoto, K. Toyama (1995) Repulsive and attractive mechanisms for the forma­
tion of corticofugal projections. NeuroReport 6, 1517-1520. 
Yuasa, J., S. Hirano, M. Yamagata, and M. Noda (1996) Visual projection map spec­
ified by topographic expression of transcription factors in the retina. Nature 382, 
632-635. 
Zilbovicius, M., B. Garreau, Y. Samson, P. Rey, C. Barthelemy, A. Syrota, and G. 
Lelord (1995) Delayed maturation of the frontal cortex in childhood autism. 
American Journal of Psychiatry 152, 248-252. 
Zilles, Karl, E. Armstrong, K. H. Moser, A. Schleicher, and H. Stephan (1989) Gyri­
fication in the cerebral cortex of primates. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 34, 
143-150. 
510 < Bibliography

Page numbers in italics refer to figures. 
abstraction: 
human capacity for, 423-32 
see also symbolic reference 
adaptation, 47-48 
in behavior, 344-49 
exaptation and, 350-51 
in H. erectus, 368-70 
language and, 334-40, 349-50 
parallel threads of, 408, 408 
prefrontalization as, 351--52, 353, 413-16 
see also displacement; evolution 
adultery, 400 
afferent connections, 207, 216, 256--57 
Africa: 
modem humans in, 373 
Pygmy societies of, 367 
sickle cell anemia in, 325-26 
agency (free will), 438, 439, 452--53 
aggression: 
in jokes, 421 
between males, 381--82, 394--95 
agrammatism, 283-85 
acquired, 306--8 
agriculture, 325--26 
Index 
alarm calls, 54-59, 55, 330--31, 338, 429 
algorithmic model of mind, 443-48 
511

Alice Through the Looking Glass (Carroll), 69 
alien life forms, 28-29 
alien model of brain evolution, 214-20 
allocentric tasks, 263-64 
altruism, reciprocal, 397-401 
Alzheimer's disease, 422 
American Sign Language (ASL), 72, 355, 362 
amphibians, 159 
amygdala, 231, 232 
anaphors, 305 
angular gyrus, 282 
animal communication, 12, 24 
evolution of, 30-31 
human language compared with, 31-34 
mislabeling of, 33-34 
role of reference in, 54--59 
animal husbandry, 323-24, 325 
animals: 
brain/body growth curve in, 183 
brain damage in, 50 
cognitive abilities of, human cognition vs., 
423-32 
consciousness of, 439-40, 447-48 
difficulty in teaching language to, 41-43 
dwarf, 17 4-75 
evolution of, see evolution 
iconic training of, 81-82 
intelligence of, 41-42 
learning abilities of, 39-42, 48-50, 147 
puberty in, 226, 227 
size and, 154-55, 159--60, 1 61, 187 
theory of mind for, 426-28, 447-48 
xenotransplantation in, 191, 199 
see also mammals; primates; specific 
animals 
animal trainers, 108 
antennapodia, 176 
anterior cingulate, 231, 244, 281 , 295, 297, 
304 
antbropocentrism, 28-29, 384, 417 
in communication discussion, 52-53 
in philosophy, 440 
primate encephalization and, 170 
anthropology, 366 
Ape Man, 377 
apes, see primates 
aphasias, 255-56, 280--85 
agrammatism, 283--85 
brain metabolism and, 293-94 
Brocas, 246, 281, 284-85, 294, 297, 307, 
362, 363 
transcortical, 281-82 
Wernicke's, 281, 303, 307 
Apple Computer, 105-6 
aprosody, 365 
Arabic numerals, chimpanzees and; 414-15 
arbitrarity, 65, 66, 67 
archeology, 365-75 
Archimedes, 421 
archistriatum, 245 
Aristotle, 435 
aromatic monoamine neurotransmitters, 
422 
arousal states, 232, 234, 235-36, 243 
art: 
iconic, 77 
representational, 368, 370, 374-75 
articulation, see speaking, speech 
artifacts, prehistoric: 
of H. erectus, 368-69, 375 
information to be decoded from, 365-68 
language abilities extrapolated from, 368 
of Neanderthals, 370-75 
speech abilities extrapolated from, 368-74 
stone tools, 366, 368-69, 370-72; see also 
stone tool use 
artificial intelligence, 424, 457-64 
artificial selection, 166 
artificial symbolic devices, 459 
association areas of cortex, 211, 291 
associations, 88-89, 91-92, 95-98 
language and, 27 
learned, 67--68 
prefrontal cortex and, 262-64 
relationships of, 70, 73 
see also icons, iconicity; indexes, indices; 
symbolic reference; symbols 
assumptions: 
in brain research, 146-48 
scientific questions and, 13-15 
auditory cortex, 282 
auditory perception, 359-62 
Austin (chimp), 84-92, 91, 95-96, 98-100, 
103, 124, 125, 401, 402, 404-5 
australopithecines, 340, 342, 343, 344, 347, 
348, 349. 355 
sexual dimorphism in, 392, 394 
vocal structures of, 356-58, 356 
autism, 268, 270, 273-75, 415-16, 423, 427, 
436 
autonomic nervous system, 230-32 
axons, 162, 163, 189, 194-95, 196, 421 
competition of, 195-97, 196, 201, 202-3, 
203 
connectional logic of, 292 
cortical, 247-48, 248, 252, 418 
displacement of, 207-14, 418-19 
fetal, 197 
specialization of, 204-5 
in xenotransplantation, 191, 199 
512 < Index

babbling of human infants, 251 
bacteria, 30 
Baldwin, James Mark, 322-23 
Baldwinian selection, 322-34, 323, 350 
behaor and, 322-26, 323 
brain evolution and, 328-31 
grammatical functioning as susceptible to, 
332-34 
learning and, 322-23, 323, 337-39 
phoneme recognition and, 360--61 
speech adaptations and, 336, 359--62 
subject-predicate structure and, 337 
basal ganglia, 178, 184, 256, 257 
Basic, 442 
bats, 159 
behaor: 
adaptations in, 345-49 
Baldwinian selection and, 322-26, 323 
conflicts in, 244 
natural selection and, 322-27, 323 
preprogrammed vs. learned, 159-62, 161 
representation of, 424-26 
sexual selection and, 380--81 
vocalization and, 235-36 
Bellugi, Ursula, 268 
Berlin, Brent, 117-20, 118 
Betz cells, 216, 218 
biases: 
anthropocentric, see anthropocentrism 
in color terms, 117-21 
creolization and, 139-40 
Eurocentrism, 366 
neural network studies and, 129-32, 130 
toward progress, 368--69 
against suboptimal solutions, 133 
Bible, 321 
Bickerton, Derek, 138, 139 
"binding problem," 438-39 
biplanar theory of semantics, 61 
birds: 
brains of, 245-46 
nest-building behaors of, 327 
sexual selection in, 380 
vocalizations of, 30-31, 124, 227, 228-29, 
236-47 
birdsong, dialects in, 123, 227 
blastula, 187, 188 
"blind" mole rat, 210-11, 210, 248 
blood flow studies, 291, 293-94, 296 
blow hole muscles, 240 
blow holes, 241 
body surface, brain size and, 155 
Bohr, Niels, 193 
bone mass, natural selection and, 152 
bones, see fossils; hominid fossils 
bonobo chimpanzees, 92, 124, 125 
Boston Aquarium, 225-30 
Boysen, Sally, 413-14 
brain: 
as adapting to body, 194-207 
body musculature compared with, 149-51 
cortical projections in, 247-48, 248, 252 
damage to, 220, 221-22, 237-38, 24-46, 
410 
different regional functions of, 54, 237-38; 
see also specific regions 
across dog breeds, 165-72 
electrical actity in, 280, 288-90, 290 
embryonic development of, 176--77, 178, 
181, 185, 186 
hominid, 24, 147-48, 172-73 
immature, 136-37, 148 
language and, 23, 24-26, 162-64 
left hemisphere bias in, 315-17 
measurement of, 182-83 
neural density in, 154, 162-63 
nonlinear functioning of, 157--58 
organization of, 159 
prefrontal cortex of, 21 7, 218-20, 219 
ratio of body size to size of, 154-55, 156; 
see also encephalization 
relationship of information-processing to, 
153-59 
sensorimotor specializations in, 210 
in small vs. large species, 160--62, 160 
usage of, 153 
vocalization and, 230-36, 231 
Wernicke's study of, 281--83 
xenotransplantation in, 191, 199-200 
brain, evolution of, 11-12, 44-45, 156-57, 
168, 409 
anthropocentric bias and, 170 
computers and, 455-57 
connection patterns and, 207 
cortical control over vocalization and, 
247--53 
Darwinian selection and, 193-97, 199 
as dependent on brain's adaptation to body, 
194-207 
displacement in, 207-14 
evolution of speech and, 251--52 
human mind and, 416--17 
language evolution and, 44, 328, 329 
lateralization and, 317-18 
levels of consciousness and, 440-41 
overbuilding in, 412-16 
representational processes and, 457-58 
size and, 343-44, 344 
somatization and, 172-73, 1 73 
speculations about, 340-49 
Index > 513

brain, evolution of (continued) 
symbolic systems and, 339--40 
symbol-making species and, 341-49 
words and, 321-22 
brain, human: 
autism and, 270, 273-75 
axonal displacement in, 211-13, 223-24 
biases of, in learning, 141 
blood flow in, 275, 280, 290, 293-94, 296 
/body growth curves, 1 71, 1 73, 183-84, 
213-14 
color and, 117-19, 118 
cortical control of vocalization in, 24 7 -53; 
see also cerebral cortex 
damage to, 53, 220, 221-22, 244-45, 
255-56, 289-90, 303, 411, 412, 415 
as fail-safe computer, 411-16 
fornix in, 209-10 
functioning of, 147-49, 223 
Gigantopithecus brain compared with, 
214-16, 219 
grammatical capabilities of, 35-39, 102-5 
gross vs. net function of, 150-51, 222-23 
of idiot savants, 140-41 
"language organ" of, 35-37 
lateralization of, 309-18, 316 
loss of language ability and, 279-88, 282 
maturation of, 189-92 
Neanderthal brain vs.,-371-72 
parallel processing in, 292, 293, 299-300 
peculiarity of, 45-46 
predictability of growth in, 183-84 
ratio of body size to size of, 154-55, 155; 
see also encephalization 
search for symbolic location in, 300-309 
size of, 146--64 
symbol-learning ability of, 135-42, 145-46, 
219-20 
theories of global functions of, 24 
ofWS cases, 268-69, 270 
brain function, language function vs., 
285-88 
brain stem, 176, 178, 184, 203, 230, 231, 
234-35, 239, 245, 247, 248, 248-49, 256, 
274, 419 
brain stem reticular, 231 
branchia-motor column, 234 
Brandt, Alexander, 154, 156 
breathing, 233-34 
flying and, in birds, 241 
sound production and, 250-51 
spasmodic, 419 
Broca, Paul, 281 
Broca's aphasia, 246, 281, 284-85, 294, 297, 
307, 362, 363 
Broca's area (ventral premotor and prefrontal 
cortices), 256, 281, 282, 287-88, 291, 
294, 304, 305, 314 
damage to, 284, 285, 307 
in H. habilis brains, 342 
role of, in word analysis, 295, 303 
"b" sound, 360 
C, 442 
call reference, 54-59, 66 
Cambridge Encyclopedia of Human 
Evolution, 377 
camouflage, 76-77 
"canalization," 324 
canine teeth, 394-95 
Carlyle, Thomas, 225 
carnivores, pair-bonding of, 389-93 
Caroll, Lewis, 69 
Cartesian dualism, 441, 464 
categorical (logical) generalization, 88 
cave paintings, 366, 368, 374 
cell division, 187 
cells: 
communication between, 194-95 
Darwinian selection of, 195-97, 196, 202-4 
nerve, see neurons 
central (periaqueductal) gray area of 
midbrain, 230-32, 231, 234-35 
cerebellar cortex, 256 
cerebellum, 176, 184, 185, 186, 237, 295, 296 
in autistic patients, 27 4-75 
displacement of, 276-77 
ofWS children, 269, 270 
cerebral cortex, 178, 184, 203, 204, 210, 237, 
281 
axons in, 247-48, 248, 249, 252 
cerebellar links to, 276-77 
"convergence" zones in, 301 
damage to, 255-56 
displacement in, 21Ú11 
larynx controlled by, 249-50 
motor functions taken over by, 247-53 
occipital, 21 7 
prefrontal, see prefrontal cerebral cortex 
timing of information-processing and, 292 
visual cortices in, 21Ú11. 210, 215-16, 
294-95 
vocalization control in, 24-46 
cetaceans, 170 
vocalization abilities of, 228, 237, 240, 
241-42 
Chatelperronian period, 372 
cheating, 397 
Cheney, Dorothy, 54 
chewing, 234 
514 < Index

chick embryos, 189, 190, 235 
chihuahuas, 166, 168-69, 171 
axonal displacement in humans compared 
with, 213, 223 
children: 
autistic, 273-75 
brain damage in, 267-78 
chimpanzees compared with, 84, 126, 413 
cognitive development of, 95, 413 
creolization of language and, 139 
evolution of language and, 109-10, 111 
feral, 123 
formative years of, 122--23 
language capacity of, 35-36, 37, 42 
learning abilities of, 128-29 
as predisposed to language, 102--10 
references and, 7 4 
threshold effects in, 98 
unkindness in, 426 
WS in, 268-73 
chimpanzees, 29, 30, 73 
brain/body growth curve of, 1 73 
cognitive limitations of, 413-14 
communication of, 65-6 
human children compared with, 84, 126, 
413 
hunting by, 393, 395-96, 425 
hypothetical Gigantopithecus brain 
transplantation with, 214--16, 219 
insight learning and, 93 
language training of, 124--27 
laughter of, 250 
prefrontal cortex of, 219 
sound production of, 244, 247, 355 
symbol use study of, 84--92, 91, 94-96, 
401-2 
Chinese language, 242 
Chinese Room thought experiment, 44-47, 
462 
Chomsky, Noam, 27, 35, 38, 103-10, 122, 127, 
327, 330, 334 
Christiansen, Morton, 112 
cingulate cortex, 232, 267, 277, 295 
clicks as speech soJlnds, 242 
cocaine, 422 
co-evolution, 54, 277-78, 321-464, 409 
Baldwinian selection and, 328-29 
cognitive restructuring by, 417 
confluence of factors involved in, 401 
decoding symbolic reference and, 135--38 
demise of Neanderthals and, 372--73 
in H. erectus, 369-70 
human groups and, 384--93 
lateralization and, 365 
ritualized symbolic reference and, 401-10 
symbolidnonsymbolic reference in, 453-54 
vocal tract evolution and, 356-58, 356, 357 
cognition: 
biases in, 1 19-21 
brain and, 25, 154, 157, 255 
brain-language co-evolution and, 417 
children's development of, 95, 413 
chimpanzees' limitations of, 413-15 
difficulties in, 39-40 
human vs. nonhuman, 423-32 
language-learnability problem and, 
128--29 
prefrontal damage and, 255-56, 259-64 
prefrontal role in, 265--67 
pre-maladaptation in, 48 
social, autism and, 273-74 
see also mind, theory of 
cognitive interference, 141 
colliculi, superior and inferior, 258 
color: 
subjective experience of, 448 
terms, ll6-20 
combination: 
children's biases and, 140 
symbols in, 84-88, 89-90, 94-95, 99-100 
communication: 
animal, see animal communication 
gestural, 354, 355 
human brain discontinuity and, 13, 34-39 
human vs. nonhuman, 12, 24, 30--32 
language as analogue for discussions on, 
52--53 
nonlinguistic, 33-34 
philosophy of, 69-71 
ritualized, 380 
symbolic, 352--54; see also symbolic 
reference; symbols 
symbolic ability and shift in strategy of, 
379-93 
symbolic representation as form of, 22 
see also language; speech, speaking; 
vocalization 
c:ompetition, 96 
axonal, 195-97, 19Ƹ 202--3, 201, 203 
cellular, 195, 203-4 
among males, 381-82, 394-95 
regional, 221 
computers, 455-57 
as analogue for human mind, 442--48 
as analogue for language, 105-7 
Cartesian version of Turing test for, 461-82 
damage to, 131-32 
sentience lacking in, 455 
conditional relationships, 261-82, 264 
cones, 118 
Index > 515

connectivity, 197, 200-204, 205--6 
Darwinian nature of, 223 
displacement and, 207, 208, 418-19 
prefrontal takeover of, 247--53, 255, 417, 
419 
Conquistadores, 372 
consciousness, see mind, theory of 
consciousness expansion, 29 
consonants, 358, 360, 362 
"convergence" zones, 302 
corpus callosum, 282 
corticospinal tract, 231 
counterintuitive solutions, 49 
brain development as, 195 
chimpanzees' cognitive limitations and, 
413-15 
to language-in-animals problem, 50 
for language-leamability problem, 128-29, 
135, 148 
in learning symbolic systems, 376 
crashes, computer, 131 
Crelin, Ed, 357 
creole languages, 138-40 
Cro-Magnon man, 371 
crying, see sobbing 
cuckoldry, 383, 387, 388, 400 
Culhane, T. H., 227 
cytoplasm, 188 
dachshunds, 169 
Damasio, Antonio, 415 
Darwinian (natural) selection, 49, 152-53 
Baldwinian selection vs., 322-23, 323; see 
also Baldwinian selection; genetic 
assimilation 
brain evolution and, 193-94, 199, 212, 221 
at cellular level, 19&-97, 196, 202-4 
lactose tolerance and, 323-34 
see also evolution; selection pressures; 
sexual selection 
Darwin machines, 457 
Dawkins, Richard, ll5, 457, 458 
dendrites, 163, 189, 194, 203, 247 
Dennett, Daniel, 444, 448 
dependency relationships, 262 
depression, 421, 422 
Descartes, Remƹ. 423, 424, 425, 439, 441, 442, 
453, 461, 462, 463 
Descartes' Error (Damasio), 415 
De Valois, R. and K., 118 
developmental clock, 187-92, 190, 191 
Dewey, John, ll, 12, 15, 441 
dialects: 
in birdsong, 123, 227 
pidgin and creole languages, 139-40 
diaphragm, 232 
diencephalon, 176, 184, 185, 209, 419 
dimorphism, sexual, 392, 394 
dinosaurs, 154 
Discourse on Inequality (Rousseau), 376 
disease, genocide and, 373 
displacement (of neural connections), 207-14, 
208, 418-19 
brain functioning and, 265 
in cave-dwelling and subterranean species, 
210-ll, 210 
from cerebellum, 276-77 
in human brains, 2ll-13, 21 7, 223-24 
from noncortical structures by cortical 
connections, 249-51, 418-19 
parcellation and, 221-22 
disruptive selection, 56 
distress calls, 245 
divergent thinking, 264 
DNA, 45, 175, 188 
dogs, 159-60 
brains of, 213, 223 
encephalization of, 165-69, 167, 213 
learning capabilities of, 49-50, 52 
wild, 390-92 
dolphins, 57, 108, 156, 228, 240, 241-42 
dopamine, 422 
dorsal tegmentum, 231, 232, 257 
Down's syndrome, 268 
drugs, psychotropic, 422 
dwarves, human, 168-69, 171, 172 
echoing behaviors, 58 
echolocation, 30 
efferent connections, 207, 216 
egocentric tasks, 263-64 
Einstein, Albert, 463 
electrical stimulation studies, 288-90, 290, 
292, 297 
elephants, 154, 159, 170, 210 
eliminative materialism, 442 
Elman, Jeff, 130, 132-34, 135 
embryonic development, 176-92, 1 78, 197-99 
developmental clock of, 187-92 
of frogs, 179--80, 181 
of fruit flies, 174, 176-79, 1 78 
of mice, 176-79, 1 78 
emotional states, see arousal states 
emotions, animal perception of, 428-29, 431 
empathy, 428-29, 431 
Ernx genes, 177, 1 78, 180, 185, 186 
encephalitis, 226 
encephalization, 157, 161, 167-74, 167 
in dogs, 167--69, 167, 213 
in primates, 169-70, 212-14 
516 < Index

English language, 306, 307 
epiglottis, 233, 239, 356 
ethics: 
of creating sentient devices, 461-64 
as learned system, 431--32 
Eurocentric bias, 366 
Europe, modem human migration to, 373 
evolution: 
adaptation and, 30 
anthropocentrism and, 28-29 
Baldwinian, see Baldwinian selection 
of brain, see brain, evolution of 
Darwinian theories on, 49, 152-53; see also 
Darwinian selection 
empirical tests for sentience and, 
462-63 
of feathers, 351 
genetic assimilation and, 324-25 
gross vs. net strength in, 151-52 
of language, see language, evolution of 
laryngeal anatomy in, 356-58, 356, 409 
nonexplanations for, 37--39 
sexual selection and, see sexual selection 
of teeth, 394--95 
evolutionary overdetermination, 317 
exaptation, 350-52 
extension, 614i2 
extinction, 96, 97 
eyes: 
animal size and size of, 211 
displacement and, 210-1 1, 210 
human, 216 
principalis regional control of, 258 
facial expressions, 31, 33, 34 
facial motor, 231 
facial muscles, 231, 241, 247, 249 
Falk, Dean, 342 
feathers, evolution of, 351 
females, 380-93 
group living and, 388-89 
information-gathering needs of, 381-S2 
meat required b)', 3997 
in pair-bonding species, 382, 397-401 
in social carnivore species, 390-92 
see also women 
ferrets, 208-9 
fighting behavior, 380-81 
final causality, 435, 458-59 
fire, H. erectus's use of, 369 
fish, 159 
fleas, 1594i0 
flying, 241 
IMRI (functional magnetic resonance 
imaging), 293, 303, 304 
foraging societies, 38ƀ90 
meat's role in, 388-89 
pair-bonding in, 388 
forebrain, 176, 177, 1 78, 181, 184, 185, 190, 
422 
ventricles of, 230 
vocalization and, 235 
forethought, 458 
formal causality, 435 
formant ranges, 357 
fornix, 210 
fossils, 23, 24, 147-48, 172-73, 214, 252, 371 
free will, 438, 439, 452-53 
Frege, Gottlob, 61 
Freud, Sigmund, 284, 424 
fricatives, 242 
fright calls, 245 
frogs, 179-SO, 188 
frontal cortex, 290-91 
frontal (motor) eye field, 258 
frontal lobes, WS and, 269 
fruit flies, 174, 1779, 1 78 
functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(IMRI), 293, 303, 304 
Gage, Phineas, 271 
Gall, Franz Josef, 220 
Gardner, Alan and Beatrice, 355 
generalization: 
logical (categorical), 88 
stimulus, see stimulus generalization 
genes: 
cell differentiation and, 187-S8 
duplication of, 180 
homeotic, 174-76, 177-S0, 1 78, 185-S7, 
188 
f.lox, 1777, 1 78, 180, 181 
LIM 1 ,  179 
WS and, 272-73 
genetic assimilation, 324-25, 326 
associative learning as similar to, 331--32 
see also Baldwinian selection 
geniohyoid muscles, 239, 240 
genocide, 372-73 
genomes, 188, 197 
German language, 306, 337 
gestures, 33, 34, 354, 355-56, 362 
articulatory, speech as, 3594i0 
ritual and, 407 
Gigantopithecus, 214-16, 219 
glia, 185 
glucose, 293 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 144, 175 
Gold, E., 128, 133 
Goldman-Rakic, Patricia, 258 
Index > 517

Gold's theorem, 127. 133 
Goodall, Jane, 244 
Gould, Stephen J., 351 
grammar, 25, 27, 98, 100-101, 102-l lO, 299 
biases and, 121-22 
Elman's neural networks and, 130, 132-34 
human brain's capabilities for, 35-39, 102-5 
inductive derivation of, 127-28 
innatist theories on, see innatist theories of 
grammatical knowledge 
interpretive processes and, 64-65 
invariant neural processes and, 332-34 
Kanzi's demonstrated ability in, 124--27 
loss of ability in decoding of, 283-85, 307, 
308 
"universal," see Universal Grammar 
universals in, 115-16, 329-30 
great danes, 169 
Grice, H. P., 58 
gross strength, net strength vs., 150 
"grounding problem," 439--55 
"grue," l l9 
Guilford, J .. 264 
Gulliver's Travels (Swift), 165 
handedness, lateralization and, 317-18 
harbor seals, 226-30 
Harris, Sydney J., 4 l l  
Haskins Lab, 359 
Head, Henry, 284 
hearing, aphasias of, 281 
Hebb, Donald, 202, 457 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 70 
Heimlich maneuver, 234 
hemoglobin, 180, 325 
Herrnstein, Richard, 65-66 
Hewes, Gordon, 355 
hidden unit nodes, 130, 131 
higher-order regularity, 89-90 
hippocampus, 209, 222, 231, 232 
Hogben, Lancelot, 321 
Holloway, Ralph, 147-48, 215 
holograms, 132 
holophrastic utterances, 56 
homeobox, 175, 176, 177, 182, 185 
homeotic genes, 174-76, 179-80, 185--87, 
186, 189 
hominid fossils: 
thoracic spinal cord enlargement in, 252-53 
vocal tracts in, 355-58, 356 
hominids: 
adaptations in behavior of, 344-49 
brains oƁ 24, 147-48, 172-74, 214, 341-49 
Neanderthal, vs. modern man, 370-72 
Pleistocene, 394 
Horrw erectus, 252-53, 343-4, 344, 346, 356, 
358, 361, 368-70, 375, 392, 407 
Honw habilis, 251--52, 342, 343, 344, 345, 
348, 358, 392 
Horrw sapiens, see humans 
Horrw symholicus, 340-49 
honeybees, 55, 163-64 
Hoover (harbor seal), 225-30, 241, 243, 253 
"hopeful monster" theory of evolution, 35-39, 
376 
horses, 159 
Hox genes, 176-77, 1 78, 180, 181 
human groups, 384--93 
breakdown of sexual exclusivity in, 400-401 
meat's role in, 388-89 
pair-bonding in, 388 
ritual in, 402-10 
sexual selection in, 384-87 
symbolic reference as requirement of, 
376-78, 397-401 
human nature, theory of, 416-17 
humans (Horrw sapiens), 21, 343-4, 344, 
355, 358, 368, 369 
ancestors of, 340-49; see also 
australopithecines; Horrw erectus; Horrw 
habilis; Neanderthals; primates 
brain of, see brain, human 
brain/body growth curves of, 1 71, 1 73, 
183-84, 213-14 
children, see children 
cognitive abilities of, nonhuman cognition 
vs., 423-32 
correlations between animals and, 34-35 
embryonic development of, 180-82 
as evolutionary anomaly, 21-28 
infants, 53, 251, 419 
lactose tolerance in, 323-24 
larynx of, 233-34, 242-43, 409 
microorganisms in digestive system of, 
l l2-13 
parallel lives of, 431 
prehistoric, see artifacts, prehistoric; 
specific species 
reproductive patterns of, 385 
as resembling fetal apes, 189-90 
sexual selection in, 383-92 
speaking ability of, 220, 246-47 
stereotypic calls of, 418-20 
symbolic standards of, 425-26 
vocalization abilities of birds and cetaceans 
compared with, 242-43 
vocal tracts of, 356-58, 356, 357 
word meaning and reference abilities of, 
43-4 
Hume, David, 70 
518 < Index

humor, 73, 312, 420-21 
humpback whale songs, 31, 55, 243 
hunting, 368, 369, 386-90 
by chimpanzees, 393, 395-96 
in groups, 390-92, 409 
Huxley, Thomas, 49 
hydrocephaly, 272 
hyoglossal muscles, 239 
hyoid bone, 239, 240, 356, 372 
hyperlexia, 272, 273 
hypoglossal nerve, 231, 239 
hypoglossal nucleus, 239, 240, 248 
hypothalamus, 178, 184, 231, 232, 235, 236 
icons, iconicity, 60, 456 
brain mapping and, 300-301 
indices and, 77-78, 79 
interpretation of, 74-77, 450-51 
mimicry as process of, 429 
in reference hierarchy, 70, 71, 72, 774, 75 
idiot savants, 140, 416 
Imaginary Invalid, The (Moliere), 37 
immaturity: 
as important condition for learning 
languages, 134, 136 
of Kanzi, 124-27, 135, 137 
imprinting, 123 
incest, 385 
index, indices, 60, 270-71, 299, 456 
brain mapping and, 300, 301 
chimpanzee symbol use study and, 84-92, 
91, 94-96, 414-15 
Chinese Room thought experiment and, 
44-48 
icons and, 77-78, 79 
immature brains and, 136 
interpretation of, 77-78, 429, 451 
in reference hierarchy, 70, 71-72, 73, 75 
representing other's experiences and, 427 
in sentence analysis, 299 
symbolic reference vs., 79-83, 87, 95-100 
unlearning and, 92--95 
in Yanomamo peacemaking process, 404-5 
indication, meaniĲg vs., 61 
inductive leanting, 104-5, 127-28 
infanticide, 389 
infants, human, 53, 251, 419 
inferior colliculus, 258 
inflection, word-order vs., 306-8 
innatist theories of grammatical knowledge, 
2G 35-39, 42, 102-10, 121-22, 125-26, 
327-28 
Chomsky's observations and, 1ĳ 
computer software models of, 332-33 
distribution of brain functions and, 297-99 
intelligence evolution theories vs., 27, 39 
WS children and, 268-69 
input nodes, 130-31, 130 
instinct, 327-28 
insular cortex, 295 
intelligence, 28-29, 144-64 
of animals, 42, 155-57 
assessment of, 149 
brain size and, 146-64 
breeding for, 167-68 
in dogs, 166 
encephalization and, 165-69 
evolution of, 27, 38-39 
of H. erectus, 368-70 
insight learning and, 994 
as language component, 25, 26 
of Neanderthals, 371-72 
of primates, 28 
ratio of body size to brain size and, 155-56; 
see also encephalization 
theory of, innate language organ theory vs., 
39 
see also learning 
intension, 61-Q2 
intercostal muscles, 232, 252 
interpretants, 6Ĵ. 74 
interpretation, Peirce's theory of, 70-73 
isocortex, 177 
Italian language, 306, 308 
ivory sculpture, 368, 374-75 
Jacobsen, C., 259, 260 
Jakobson, Roman, 304-5, 306 
jaw muscles, 231 
Jerison, Harry, 156-57 
jokes, 312, 420 
Jurgens, Uwe, 249 
kangaroos, 151-52 
Kant, Immanuel, 70 
Kanzi (chimpanzee), 92, 124-27, 135, 137, 
254-55, 401 
Kay, Paul, 1 17-20, 118 
Kebara cave, 371 
Kierkegaard, S!lren, 21 
Kohler, Wolfgang, 94 
koniocortex, 211 
!Kung San Bushmen, 242 
L., Mr. (aphasic patient), 279 
lactose ĵolerance, 3Ķ24 
LAD (language acquisition device) ,  124, 126, 
350 
Laitman, Jeff, 357 
Lamarck, Jean-Baptiste, 152, 322, 326, 331 
Index > 519

Lana (chimp), 84, 90-92, 91, 96, 124 
Landau, Misia, 371 
language, 21-164 
abstract theories of, 100 
acquisition of, 122 
adaptation, 334-40, 349-50 
as analogue for discussing communication, 
52-53 
of animals, 12-13, 24 
attempts to map, 33-34 
vs. autistic bias, 416 
biases in learning of, 129-30, 134-35 
biological characteristics of, 113-14 
brain and, 23, 24-26, 162-64 
brain-damaged adults and, 280-85 
brain metabolism and, 293-94, 296 
cerebellar role in, 274-77, 295-96 
cerebral cortical areas associated with, 
282 
children's competence in, 102-5, 107 
children's dependence on, 109-10, 1 1 1  
co-evolution of, see co-evolution 
color terms in, 117-20 
complexity of, 39-46 
computer as analogue for, 105-7 
as counterintuitive, 50-51 
as driver of Baldwinian selection, 335 
early (prehistoric), 362 
electrical stimulation in brain and, 288-90, 
290, 292, 297 
emotional arousal states in, 243 
as evolutionary anomaly, 21-28 
immaturity as important condition for 
learning of, 124-27, 136 
lateralization and, 309-12 
nature vs. nurture and, 26-28 
nonhuman, 31-32, 41-42 
nonverbal, 354 
orthogonal dimensions of, 280-81 
overbuilt brain structures and, 412-16 
parasite as analogue for, 1 1 1-15 
pidgin and creole, 138-39 
prefrontal cortex and, 264-78, 413 
recognizable characteristics of, 32-33 
redundancy in, 363-64 
right hemisphere function and, 31 1-15 
selection pressures for, 349-65, 353 
as set of rules and signs, 39 
simple, see simple languages 
simultaneous translators of, 314-15 
as society-dependent, 451-52 
spoken, see speaking, speech 
structures of, 23-24, 329-30 
as symbolic representation, 22 
theory of mind and, 450-51 
vervet monkey alarm calls as analogous to, 
56-59 
word-order vs. inflection in, 306-8 
writing and, 54 
in WS children, 268-69 
see also communication; symbolic reference 
language, evolution of, 22, 28-39 
biases in, 1 19-22 
biases in study of, 34-35 
brain evolution and, 44-45, 228, 329 
convergence in, 116-22 
grammar and, 332-34 
"hopeful monster" theory of, 35-39 
human mind and, 415-16 
human study of, 32-33 
organismal model of, 1 1 1-15 
rate of, 328-29 
selection pressures on, 108-1 1, 111, 378-79 
from simple to complex, 44-46 
as social process, 121-22 
"throwing-the-game" idea and, 109 
vocal tract evolution and, 356-59, 356, 357 
language ability loss, 278-88, 282 
language acquisition device (LAD), 124, 126, 
350 
Language Instinct, The (Pinker), 27, 38, 327 
"language organ," 36-37 
language origins theories, 14, 25-28, 27 
dominant framing paradigms of, 39 
"hopeful monster," 35-39 
innatist, see innatist theories of grammatical 
knowledge 
selection pressures in, 350 
signing and, 355-56, 362 
vocal limitations and, 354-55 
Lao Tsu, 433 
laryngeal muscles, 231 , 240, 242 
larynx, 233 
of birds, 238, 240 
cross-species comparisons of, 357-58, 356 
human, 233-34, 242-43, 409 
mammalian, 238-41, 240 
muteness and, 249 
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of thalamus, 
118, 210, 2 1 1 ,  216 
lateralization, 309-18, 316, 365 
as adaptation to language, 310-15 
evolution and, 317-18 
hemispheric competition and, 31 1-15 
left hemisphere bias in, 315-17 
simultaneous translators and, 314-15 
Latin language, 306, 308 
laughter, 57-59, 73, 236, 244, 246, 250, 
419-20, 421, 428, 429 
L-DOPA, 422 
520 < Index

learning: 
ability, of animals, 39-42, 48--50 
associative, 331-32, 336 
assumptions about, 140-42 
Baldwinian selection and, 322-23, 323, 
337-39 
by chimpanzees, 84-92 
creolization and, 139-40 
difficulties in, 39-43 
of grammar, 102-10 
indexical, 271 
indexical and symbolic references and, 80, 
86, 88, 94-100 
as inductive process, 104-5, 127-28 
"insight," 93-94 
local vs. global patterns in, 133-34 
neural nets as analogue for, 130-31 
prefrontal damage and, 267..£8 
preprogrammed behavior vs., 160..£2, 
161 
processes involved in, 49 
reference hierarchy and, 69-78, 80 
rote, ''understanding" vs., 67..£8 
shaping and, 108-9 
across species, 163..£4 
symbolic, selection for, 353 
unlearning and, 83; see also unlearning 
of words, 81-83 
learning set, 80, 81 
left hemisphere, right hemisphere vs., 
309-18, 316 
less-is-more concepts of learning, 128-29 
leucotomy, prefrontal, 272 
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 400 
lexigrams, 84-92, 94--95, 124-27, 402 
LGN (lateral geniculate nucleus) of thalamus, 
118, 210, 211, 216 
Liberman, AI, 359 
Lieberman, Philip, 354, 357 
light frequency, human brain and, 117-19, 
118 
limbic cortex, 244, 256, 257, 419 
limbic system, 17Ji, 231, 235, 236, 245 
LIM 1  kinase (gene), 273 
linguistics, 23--24 
child language competence and, 102-3 
Chomsky's theories and, 27, 35-36, 38, 
102-10 
on pidgin and creole languages, 138-39 
social gestures in service of, 363..£4 
lions, 159, 390 
lizards, 159 
lobotomy, prefrontal, 272 
Locke, John, 70 
logical (categorical) generalization, 88 
logical induction, 104-5, 127-28 
long-term potentiation, 163 
Lorenz, Konrad, 123 
LSD, 422 
macaques, 1 71, 1 73, 234 
Macintosh computers, 105..£, 108-9 
MacPhail, Euan, 163 
macrocognition, 287 
malaria, 325-26 
males, 380-92, 409 
aggression of, 381-82, 394-95 
cuckoldry and, 385, 387, 388 
group living and, 388-89 
information-gathering needs of, 381-82 
meat and, 388-89, 396-97 
in pair-bonding species, 383, 397-401 
in social carnivore species, 390-93 
see also men 
mammals, 156, 170, 228 
aquatic, 253; see also cetaceans; dolphins; 
whales 
brains of, see brain 
fetal growth in, 170 
laymxes of, 238-41, 240 
poor vocal learning ability of, 228 
sexual selection in, 380-82, 387 
vocal anatomy of, 236-47, 240 
see also specific animals 
manic-depressive disorders, 421-22 
Manning, F., 260 
Marie, Pierre, 284 
marriage: 
agreements, 399-400, 409 
mating vs., 384--85 
rituals of, 405..£ 
Maslow, Abraham, 48 
Matata (chimp), 125 
materialistic reductionism, 442 
meaning: 
indication vs., 62 
of words, see word meaning 
meat: 
chimpanzee hunting of, 393, 396-97 
hunting for, 368, 388-90 
social roles of, 388-90, 396-97 
stone tool use and, 369, 386, 393-94, 
395 
medial frontal cortex, 24-45 
medial geniculate body (MGB), 210, 2 1 1  
"melon," i n  dolphins, 241 
memes, 1 15, 457 
memory: 
short-term, 260..£1, 335, 363 
working, 262..£3, 264 
Index > 521

men: 
marriage and, 384-85 
scavenging abilities of, 386 
see also males 
"mentalese," 26, 27, 454 
mental images, word meaning 
correspondences with, 26, 27 
mesencephalon, 176 
Mestre!, George de, 351 
metabolism, brain size and, 155 
metaphors, 305, 306 
metonymy, 306 
MGB (medial geniculate body), 210, 2 1 1  
mice, 154-55, 159 
embryonic development of, 176-79, 1 78 
microcognition, 287 
microevolution (microgenesis), 456-58 
microorganisms, 1 1 1-13 
midbrain, 176, 111, 1 78, 181, 184, 1 98, 256, 
313, 422 
communication pathway through, 230-32, 
231 
emotional and arousal states and, 232, 234, 
235--36, 419 
middle temporal multimodal cortex, see 
Wernicke's area 
midline, 281, 295 
mimickry: 
human capacity for, 277, 278, 337 
rarity of, 228-29 
mind, theory of, 416-17, 423-51 
animals and, 426, 428 
Cartesian, 439, 441, 442 
Chinese Room thought experiment and, 
444-47 
computer analogue of, 442-48 
general problems of, 438-39 
hierarchy of information and, 449 
human, 23, 424-25 
levels of consciousness and, 438-41 
physical processes and, 460 
religious traditions and, 441 
misdirection, learning and, 49 
Mishkin, M., 260 
misplaced correctness, 286 
"mitochondrial Eve," 36 
mitosis, 187-88 
mockingbirds, 228-29 
mole rats, 210, 210, 248 
moles, 159 
Moliere (Jean-Baptiste Poquelin), 37 
monoamine transmitters, 422 
monogamy, 385, 388 
morphemes, 250 
morphogenesis, 194 
"motherese," 363 
moths, camouflage and, 75-76 
motor and premotor cortex, 216-18, 231 , 
237-38, 247-48, 294, 304 
motor neurons, 196, 216, 232-33, 235, 239 
mouth, 358 
muscles: 
brain compared with, 149-51 
facial, 231, 241 
flight, 241 
geniohyoid, 239, 240 
hyoglossal, 239 
jaw, 231 
laryngeal, 231, 240, 242, 250 
neurons and, 197, 216-18 
syringeal, 239-40, 240 
tongue, 231, 238, 249 
muteness, 249 
myelin, myelination, 162, 251 
narrative interpretation, 430 
nasopharynx, 356 
natural selection, see Baldwinian selection; 
evolution; genetic assimilation; selection 
pressure; sexual selection 
Neanderthals, 36, 355 
demise of, 370-73 
stone tool use and, 370-72 
vocal abilities of, 370, 372 
negative information, 263-64 
neocortex, 198, 244 
nervous system, 194-96, 449 
autonomic, 230-32 
see also axons; brain; brain, evolution of; 
brain, human; spinal cord 
net strength, gross strength vs., 150 
Neural Darwinism, 457 
neural nets (neural networks), 129-34, 130, 460 
neural stem cells, 185 
neural tube, 176, 177, 1 78, 184, 189 
neuroanatomy, 45, 230-36 
see also specifiC parts of brain and nerous 
system 
neurons: 
in brain stem, 234 
color recognition and, l18 
connecti ty and, 197-98, 198 
cortical, 203-7, 203 
density of, 154, 162--63 
motor, 1 96, 216, 231, 232-33, 235, 239 
nonspecific connecti ty of, 199-200, 203-6 
premotor, 232, 24 7 
programmed death of, 195-97, 196 
structure of, 1.94-95 
see also axons; dendrites 
522 < Index

neurotransmission, 196, 202, 422 
newborns, 236 
Newport, Elissa, 128-29, 135, 137 
nodes, 130-31, 130 
noo-species designation, 341 
noradrenaline, 422 
"nose brain," 231 
notochord, 177 
nouns, 329, 334 
nucleus ambiguus, 231, 232, 247, 248 
object-object relationships, 88 
object-oriented computer interfaces, 106-7 
obsessive-compulsive disorders, 422 
occipital cortex, 21 7 
Ojemann, George, 289, 290 
O'Leary, Dennis, 204, 209 
olfactory bulbs, 231 
opaque meaning relationships, 61 
opponent processing, 118 
oral cavity, volume of, 357 
oral tract, 232-33, 246 
orangutans, 30 
organisms: 
as analogue for language, 1 1 1-15 
design of, 159--60 
Orwell, George, 105 
"Otx" genes, 177, 1 78, 179-80, 181, 185, 186, 
188 
output nodes, 130, 131 
Owen, Richard, 175 
pair bonding, 383-84, 397-401, 409 
of carnivores, 389-93 
in human groups, 388 
symbolic reference and, 399-401 
in wild dogs and wolves, 391 
see also marriage 
Paleolithic period, 374 
pallidum, 184 
panic syndromes, 422 
paradigmatic operations of word association, 
304-6 
. 
paralinguistics, 364-65 
parallel distributed processing (PDP), 132 
parallelism, 292, 293, 299-300 
paralysis, 237 
parasites, 1 1 1-13 
parcellation, 183, 189, 203, 208, 221-22 
parietal lobes, 289, 290, 291, 302 
Parkinsonism, 422 
parrots, 60-61, 254 
Passingham, Richard, 260, 261 
PDP (parallel distributed processing), 132 
peace, mediation of, 403-5 
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 63, 70-73 
Penfield, Wilder, 288-89, 290 
perception, difficulties in, 40 
periaqueductal (central) gray area of 
midbrain, 230-32, 231, 234-35 
peripheral nervous system, 207-9, 216-18 
personal experience, indirect knowledge of, 
424-25 
PET (positron emission tomography), 275, 
293, 294, 296, 303, 304, 305 
Petrides, Michael, 260 
pharynx, enlargement of, 356, 357-58, 357 
pheromones, 391, 392 
philosophy, 23, 71, 438 
of other minds, 423-32 
of reference, 70-83 
see alo mind, theory of 
phlogiston, 37 
phonation, 246, 247 
phonemes, 124, 127, 242, 250, 291, 297, 300, 
306, 314, 360 
phrenology, 220-21 
phylogeny, 28-29 
Piaget, Jean, 95 
pidgin languages, 138-39 
pigeons, 48, 67 
pigs, 1 71, 189, 191, 199, 200 
"pilgrim soul," 452-55 
Pinker, Steven, 27, 38, 141, 327, 328 
Planet of the Apes (film), 28 
Pleistocene period, 394 
Ploog, Detlev, 249 
plosives, 242 
polygyny, 381, 385, 387, 388, 391 
pons, 176, 203 
pontine reticular, 231 
positron emission tomography (PET), 275, 
293, 294, 296, 303, 304, 305 
predation, alarm calls and, 54-56, 58-59 
prefrontal cerebral cortex, 21 7, 218-20, 219, 
255-78, 302 
adaptation of, 351-52, 353, 413-17 
cingulate cortex in, 267 
cognitive demands and, 255-56, 257 
connections overtaken by, 247-53, 255, 
417, 418-19 
cortical outputs from, 256-57, 256 
damage to, 259-64, 260, 266, 267-69, 415, 
427 
disorders of, 421-23 
functioning of, 259 
hominid fossil endocasts and, 342-43 
humor and, 421 
inhibiting role of, 264-65 
language and, 264-78 
Index > 523

prefrontal cerebral cortex (continued) 
regions of, 257-59, 261--62, 272 
role of, in symbolic reference, 265--68 
ventral frontal cortex in, 267 
in WS children, 269-71 
see also Broca's area; cerebral cortex; 
Wernicke's area 
prehistoric artifacts, see artifacts, prehistoric; 
speciftc hominids 
"pre-maladaptation," 48, 50-51 
premotor neurons, 232, 247 
preprogrammed behavior, 160, 161 
primates: 
axonal displacement and, 21 1-14, 223-24 
carnivorous, 393--95, 395-96 
communication abilities of, 26, 28, 30-31, 
65-66, 313-14, 418 
cortical projections in, 247-53, 248 
embryonic development of, 181--82 
encephalization in, 169-70, 21 1-14 
fetal, 189-90 
Gigantopithecus, 214-16, 219 
prefrontal cortical damage in, 259-64, 260 
processing logic in brains of, 298 
ratio of body size to brain size in, 156 
role of reference in communication of, 
54-59, 55 
sexual selection in, 383-84 
somatization in, 170-72 
vocal structures of, 355-58, 356 
see also brain, human; chimpanzees; 
evolution; humans; specific hominids 
principalis region of prefrontal cortex, 258 
proliferation, 183, 186, 188 
pronouns, 305 
"proper mass," 220 
prosencephalon, 181 
prosodĜ 313-14, 364, 418-19 
Prozac, 422 
"p" sound, 360 
puberty, 226, 227 
puberty rituals, 406 
punishment, 398 
Puzo, Mario, 254 
pygmy (bonobo) chimpanzees, 92, 124, 125 
Pygmy societies, 367 
pyramidal cells, 247 
Qafzeh, 371 
quail embryos, 189, 190, 235 
radio telescopes, 33 
Rain Man (film), 416 
Ramsey, William, 127 
rats, 189, 191, 199, 200, 204 
rCBF (regional cerebral blood flow), 293, 294 
reciprocal altruism, 397-401 
recoding of information, 88-92, 95 
recognition, 77, 301 
of higher-order regularity, 89-90 
unlearning and, 93 
recurrent nets, 132-33 
red nucleus, 203 
redundancy, 363-64 
reference, 54-59 
arbitrarity and, 67 
call, 56-59, 66 
different forms of, 60 
hierarchic character of, 62, 69-78 
iconic, see icons, iconicity 
indexical, see index, indices 
interpretants vs., 63--65 
interpretive processes of, 64-65 
Peirce's theories on, 70-71 
Saussure on, 69 
sense vs., 61--62, 83 
symbolic, see symbolic reference 
of terms, sense of terms vs., 61--62 
words and, 81--83 
regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF), 293, 294 
representation: 
abstract, 453-54 
art of, 368, 369, 374-75 
of experience, 424-25 
iconic, indexical and symbolic, 449-50 
of self, 451 
see also symbolic reference 
reproduction, see sexual selection 
respiratory tract, 232-33 
reticular formation, 230 
retina, l l8, 211, 216 
rhesus monkeys, 204 
rhinencephalon, 231 
right hemisphere, left hemisphere vs., 
309-18, 316 
ritual, 379--80, 401-410 
language acquisition and, 407-10 
in peacemaking process, 403-5 
and sexual competition, 406-7 
rodents, 210-1 1 , 210 
Rosch, Elenor, 1 17 
rote behavior, 66--67, 97 
Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 376, 408 
Rumbaugh, Duane, 84, 124 
Sabir, 139 
salamanders, 188 
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 70 
Savage-Rumbaugh, Sue, 84, 91, 124, 125, 126 
scale, organk structural, 159--60 
524 < Index

scavenging, 368, 386 
schizophrenia, 272, 422 
scientific questioning, 12-13 
assumptions and, 13-15, 26-28 
of evolution, 28-30 
about language, see language, evolution of 
sea cows, 155 
Searle, John, 443-47, 462 
selection pressures, 322, 335, 345 
on call repertoire, 418 
for language, 349-65, 353, 376--77 
for learning ability, 378-79 
nonverbal language and, 354 
sexual, see sexual selection 
on sound analysis, 359--62 
for symbolic communication, 376--78 
selective elimination, 202 
self -consciousness, 451--53 
semantics, 60, 304-5 
neuropsychological theories of, 303 
semiology, 70, 71 
sense of terms, reference of terms vs., 61-62, 
83 
sensory recoding, 94 
sentence analysis, 298-99 
sentience, 455, 459-64 
septum, 231 
serotonin, 422 
sexual dimorphism, 392, 394 
sexual selection, 379-93, 409-10 
in dual-parenting species, 382-83 
human, 384-93 
infidelity and, 400-401 
in polygynous mammals, 381-82 
reciprocal altruism and, 397-401 
Seyfarth, Robert, 54 
Sherman (chimp), 84-92, 91, 95-96, 98-100, 
103, 124, 125, 401, 402, 404-5 
Shipman, Pat, 252 
Short Circuit (film), 35 
short-term memory, 260-61, 335, 363 
Siamese twins, 189 
sickle cell anemia, Đ25-26 
signified objects, 59, 61, 69 
signifiers, 59, 61, 69 
signing, 355, 362 
similarity, 70, 71 
simple languages, 40-42 
absence of, 12-13, 408-9 
simultaneous translators, 314-15 
singing, 242 
by birds, 123. 227, 245-46 
skeletal motor column, 234, 240, 241, 243, 
246-47 
Skinner, B. F., 27, 65 
Skinner boxes, 80 
Snell, Otto, 155, 157 
sobbing, 236, 246, 251, 419, 420, 428, 429 
social contracts, symbolic nature of, 400-401, 
405 
social evolution, 1 14-15 
sociality ofWS patients, 268, 271-72, 273 
Societe Linguistique de Paris, 14 
soft palate, 356 
Sokoloff, Alan, 239 
solipsism, 424 
somatic sensory cortex, 282 
somatization, 1 6đ 170-72 
songbirds, 123, 227 
sorting tasks, 91-92, 91 
sound-breath patterning, 234 
Spalax ("blind" mole rat), 210-1 1, 210, 248 
"spandrel," 137 
speaking, speech, 220, 246 
analysis of, 298-99 
aphasias of, 281, 307 
breathing and, 250--51 
cerebellar role in, 275 
cortical axonal invasion and, 249--51 
language vs., 12-13; see also language 
nasality of, 356, 357 
prosody in, 313-14, 364, 418-19 
as susceptible to Baldwinian selection, 336, 
359--63 
symbolic communication's dependence on, 
352-54, 353 
vocal tract evolution and, 356-59, 356, 357 
see also vocalizations 
spinal canal, 230 
spinal cord, 1 78, 181, 184, 196, 197, 198, 203, 
209, 216, 232, 248-49, 276 
Spunheim (Gall's student), 220 
squirrels, 234 
Stich, Stephen, 127 
stimulus generalization, 80-81, 88, 90, 97, 
131, 133 
Stone Age, 370 
stone tool use, 317, 318, 345-49, 365-67, 409 
of Horw erectus, 368-69 
meat and, 369, 386, 393-94, 395 
of Neanderthals, 370-71 
stories, 312 
strength, gross vs. net, 150 
striatum, 184, 186, 295 
stroke, 278-79 
styloid processes, 238 
subjectivity, 424, 448, 453, 461-64 
subject-predicate distinction, 333-34 
subsong, 227 
substantia nigra, 231 
Index > 525

superior colliculus, 258 
superior temporal auditory cortex, see 
Wernicke's area 
supplementary motor cortex, 231, 282, 295 
swallowing, 233-34 
Swift, Jonathan, 165 
syllables, 250 
Sylvian Fissure, 282, 291, 342 
symbolic reference, 43-44, 46 
assumptions about animals' capacities for, 
52-59 
call reference vs., 56--59 
Chinese Room thought experiment and, 
444-47 
creolization and, 139-40 
dark side of, 430-31 
decoding of, 135-38 
emotional states represented through, 
429-30 
evolutionary capabilities of, 458-59 
iconic and indexical reference vs., 71-73 
indexical reference vs., 79-83, 87, 
95-100 
jokes and, 420 
as medium of consciousness, 449-50 
prefrontal cortex's role in, 265-68 
quickness of, 302 
representing others' experiences and, 
424-28 
ritualized discovery of, 401-410 
sharing of, 451-53 
as social requirement in foraging societies, 
397-401 
systemic nature of, 99-101 
unlearning and, 92-101 
vocalization and, 255 
Yanomamo peacemaking process and, 
403-5 
symbolic thought, 22 
symbols, 60, 70, 71-72, 73 
brain and, 300-309 
chimpanzees' use of, 84-92, 91, 93-96, 
414-15 
lateralization and, 312, 313 
learning of, 135-38 
in reference hierarchy, 70, 71-72, 73, 74, 
76 
relationships between, 83, 87, 92-93, 94, 
96, 98, 99 
synapses, 162, 163, 195, 203, 221, 257 
synchrony: 
in information processing, 299-300 
in neurotransmission, 202-3 
syntagmatic operations of word association, 
304-{) 
syntax, 359, 408 
chimpanzee symbol use study and, 84-92 
as combinatorial organization system, 
100-101 
of computer programming, 106--7 
threshold effects and, 98 
universals in, 1 15-16 
syrinx, 238, 239-40, 240 
Tao Te Ching (Lao Tsu), 433 
tectum, 203, 257 
teeth, evolution and, 394-95 
telencephalon, 176, 177, 1 78, 184, 185 
temporal lobes, 289, 290, 302, 303, 305 
termites, 1 12-13 
thalamus, 176, 184, 198, 209, 219, 256, 276 
anterior nuclei of, 256-57 
cortical regional competition and, 203-5 
lateral geniculate nucleus of, 118, 210, 211, 
216 
medial dorsal nucleus of, 256-57 
Thompson, D'Arcy, 159 
Tobias, Philip, 342 
token-object relationships, 84-88, 87, 90, 402, 
446 
see also index, indices 
token-token relationships, 84-92, 87, 93, 94, 
96, 98, 99-100, 135-36, 270, 402, 446-47 
see also symbolic reference 
tongue, 240 
muscles, 231, 238, 249 
pharyngeal and oral cavity shape and, 356, 
357 
translators, simultaneous, 314-15 
transparent meaning relationships, 60 
trigeminal motor, 231, 248 
Turing, AJan, 424, 462, 463 
Turing test, 424, 461-62 
Universal Grammar, 35, 37, 38, 42, 104-10, 
122, 128, 327, 339 
Gold's theorem and, 127, 133 
unlearning, 83, 92-101 
indexical reference and, 92-95 
pace of, 93 
recoding and, 94-96 
selection pressure for, 335-36 
Upper Paleolithic period, 370 
ventral motor cortex, 282 
ventral premotor and prefrontal cortices, see 
Broca's area 
verbs, 329, 334 
vervet monkeys, 54-59, 55, 81, 330-31, 338 
Vicki (chimp), 355 
526 < Index

viruses, 1 12 
visceral motor column, 234 
visceral muscle systems, 232, 233, 234, 237, 
238, 240, 243-44, 246-47 
vision, see eyes 
vocabulary: 
of simple languages, 40-42 
threshold effects in, 98 
ofWS children, 268--69 
vocallzations, 30-33, 220 
cortical control of, 244-45 
of Hoover, 225-30, 243, 253 
of human infants, 251 
limitations in, 354-5 
of mammals vs. birds, 236-47, 240 
motor control of, 247-53 
of Neanderthals, 370-71, 372 
nonlln©stic, 417-18 
physiology of, 228, 230-36, 231 
ritual and, 407 
symbollc abillty and, 255 
see also laughter; sobbing; speaking, speech 
vocal tract, evolution of, 356-58, 356 
voluntary motor control, see skeletal motor 
column 
vowel ranges, 357-58, 357 
vowels, 361 
Vrba, E., 351 
Vygotsky, L. S., 450, 451 
Waddington, Conrad, 324 
Walker, Alan, 252 
Washoe (chimp), 355 
Wernicke, Carl, 280, 281-83 
Wernicke's aphasia, 281, 303, 307 
Wernicke's area, 256, 280, 281, 282, 284, 285, 
287-88, 291, 294, 304, 314 
whales, 154, 228, 240, 241-42 
Whitehead, Alfred North, 285 
Wharf, Benjamin Lee, 121 
wild dogs, 390-92 
Wilde, Oscar, 102 
Williams syndrome (WS), 268-74, 270, 423, 
427, 459 
brain structure in, 269-72, 270 
genetics of, 272-73 
language abillties in, 268--69 
Wind, Jan, 357 
wolves, 390-91 
women: 
mating vs. marriage and, 384-85 
meat required by, 388-89, 396-97 
scavenging abilities of, 386 
see also females 
word meaning, 26-28, 27, 42-44, 79-80, 
97-98 
call reference vs., 56-59 
as counterintuitive to animals, 51-59 
as difficult for animals to apprehend, 
42-46 
mediation of, 64-65 
rote learning of, 66-67 
word-order, inflection vs., 306-8 
words: 
autonomous power of, 321-22 
brain's processing of, 293, 297-98 
Broca's area and analysis of, 297, 303 
closed-class vs. open-class, 284 
reference and, 81-83 
syntagmatic and paradigmatic dimensions 
of, 304-6 
working memory, 262-63, 264 
writing, 54-55 
xenotransplantation, 189-92, 190, 191, 
199-200 
hypothetical Gigantopithecus-chimpanzee, 
214-16, 219 
X-Otx2 gene, 179-80, 181 
Yanomamo Indians, 403-5 
Yeats, William Butler, 454 
zygote, 188 
Index > 527

(conti 11 uedji·omftrm/)1'1'1 
Informing all these insights is a new understand­
ing, based on the author's own research and the latest 
findings in the neurosciences and genetics, of how 
Darwinian processes underlie the brain's d veloprnent 
and function as well as its evolution. On the road to 
explaining how this works, Deacon introduces us to 
Hoover, the world's one and only talking seal; Sherman 
and Austin, two chimpanzees struggling with the 
counter-intuitive nature of symbols; and Kanzi, another 
chimpanzee, who easily acquired advanced language 
abilities as he observed his mother's failure to learn sym­
bols. 
In contrast to much contemporary neuroscience 
that treats the brain as no more or less than a computer, 
Deacon leads us on a carefully grounded neurobiological 
expedition into a view of mind that does not reduce to 
soulless, clockwork mechanism, but is instead an emer­
gent feature of a universe that is "nascent heart and 
mind." His book not only provides a new clarity of vision 
into the mechanism of mind. It injects a renewed sense 
of adventure into the experience of being human. 
Terrence W. Deacon is a world-renowned researcher in 
neuroscience and evolutionary anthropology. He con­
ducts research in laboratories at Boston University, 
wher he is associate professor of biological anthropolo­
gy, and at McLean Hospital at Harvard Medical School. 
In addition to his research in brain evolution and devel­
opment, he has played a significant role in the innova­
tion of neural transplantation techniques for the treat­
ment of human brain disorders. He lives with his wife 
and two children in Concord, Massachusetts. 
Jackel. art by t.hr author: 
kull of 1 hl' fossil hominid SJ><)cics llomo 
habilis (sprcinwn KMN8R I 13) with a sPrl ion or lhP cranium 
rPrnnvcrlln show supcrimpns<)ri PET scans or hrain metaholism dur­
ing a word-association lask. I'E:T scan images redrawn from Posrwr 
and Rairhle (1994). 
Prilllc•d in the Unit.t•d Stall'S of Aml'rira 
4-!Ji 


