Textbook of Audiological Medicine

  

Textbook of Audiological Medicine
Clinical Aspects of Hearing and Balance
Edited by
Linda M Luxon BSc(Hons) MB BS(Hons) FRCP
Professor of Audiological Medicine, University College London (Institute of
Child Health), University of London; and 
Consultant Physician in Neuro-otology, National Hospital for 
Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London, UK
Co-edited by 
Joseph M Furman MD PhD
Professor, Departments of Otolaryngology, Neurology, 
Bioengineering and Physical Therapy 
University of Pittsburg, Eye and Ear Institute Building, Pittsburg PA, USA
Alessandro Martini MD
Professor of Audiology, Chairman of Otolaryngology £t Audiology Department
Ferrara University, Ferrara, Italy
Dafydd Stephens FRCP
Consultant in Audiological Medicine 
Welsh Hearing Institute, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, Wales
informa
healthcare
New York London
  

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2003 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20130415
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4822-1144-3 (eBook - PDF)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. While all reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable 
data and information, neither the author[s] nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility or liability for any errors or omissions that may be made. 
The publishers wish to make clear that any views or opinions expressed in this book by individual editors, authors or contributors are personal to them 
and do not necessarily reflect the views/opinions of the publishers. The information or guidance contained in this book is intended for use by medical, 
scientific or health-care professionals and is provided strictly as a supplement to the medical or other professional’s own judgement, their knowledge of 
the patient’s medical history, relevant manufacturer’s instructions and the appropriate best practice guidelines. Because of the rapid advances in medi-
cal science, any information or advice on dosages, procedures or diagnoses should be independently verified. The reader is strongly urged to consult the 
drug companies’ printed instructions, and their websites, before administering any of the drugs recommended in this book. This book does not indicate 
whether a particular treatment is appropriate or suitable for a particular individual. Ultimately it is the sole responsibility of the medical professional to 
make his or her own professional judgements, so as to advise and treat patients appropriately. The authors and publishers have also attempted to trace 
the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been 
obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact 
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides 
licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment 
has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation 
without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com
  

Contents
List of contributors
Foreword
Preface
SECTION I: FUNDAMENTALS OF AUDIOLOGICAL AND VESTIBULAR MEDICINE
1. Anatomy of peripheral auditory and vestibular systems 
Paul Avan, Pierre Bonfils
2. Ageing in the auditory and vestibular systems 
Ulf Rosenhall
3. Pathology of the ear 
Leslie Michaels
4. Genetics of auditory and vestibular disorders 
Guy Van Camp, Andrew P Read
5. Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders
TaPjune Yoo, Yoshior Yazawa
6. The epidemiology of hearing and balance disorders 
Adrian C Davis, Padma Moorjani
7. Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
Jan W Casselman
8. Ethics, law and related matters 
Ronald Hinchcliffe
SECTION II: AUDIOLOGY____________________________________________
9. Development and plasticity of the human auditory system 
Remy Pujol, Mirielle Lavigne-Rebillard
10. Physiology of the auditory system 
Edward F Evans
11. Central auditory anatomy and function
Frank E M usiek, Victoria B Oxholm
12. Acoustics, measurement of sound and calibration 
John Stevens
13. The threshold of hearing
Ronald Hinchcliffe
14. Psychoacoustic auditory tests
Joseph W Hall
15. Otoacoustic emissions 
Borka Ceranic
ix
xv
xvii
3
13
25
47
61
89
101
131
147
157
179
201
213
249
259
  

vi 
Textbook of Audiological Medicine
16. Human auditory electrophysiology 
Hillel Pratt
111
17. Measurements of inner ear fluid pressure and clinical applications
Robert Marchbanks
289
18. The auditory processing of speech 
Andrew Faulkner
309
19. Speech and language development in normally hearing and hearing-impaired children
Emily A Tobey, Beth Morchower Douek
323
SECTION III: AUDITORY DISORDERS AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
20. Screening programs for hearing loss 
Karl R White
339
21. Clinical and audiometric assessment of hearing
Rosalyn A Davies
349
22. Assessment of hearing-impaired children
Agnete Parving
373
23. Otitis media with effusion in children (Glue ear)
Ewa Raglan
381
24. Disorders of the inner ear in children
Valerie Newton
393
25. Management of the hearing-impaired child
Cliodna OM ahoney
407
26. Cochlear implants for adults and children
Graeme M Clark
417
27. Disorders of the inner ear in adults
Alessandro Martini, Silvano Prosser
451
28. Noise-induced hearing loss
llmari Pyykko, Jukka Starck, Esko Toppila, Matts Ulfendahl
477
29. Central auditory disorders 
Jane A Baran, Frank E Musiek
495
30. Audiological rehabilitation
Daffydd Stephens
513
31. Auditory amplification in adults
Stuart Gatehouse
533
32. The pathophysiology and assessment of tinnitus
Kajsa'Mia Holgers, Marie'Louise Barrenas
555
33. Management of the tinnitus patient
Richard S Tyler, Soly Erlandsson
571
34. Aspects of the paracuses 
Ronald Hinchcliffe
579
  

Contents 
vii
35. Psychological aspects of hearing impairment and tinnitus 
593
Laurence McKenna, Gerhard Andersson
36. Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
603 
Paul van de Heyning, Jos Claes, Jan Brokx, Frank Declau, An Boudewyns, Evert Hamans,
Erwin Koekelkoren, Dirk De Ridder
SECTION IV: VESTIBULAR SCIENCE
37. The pathology of the vestibular system 
Francesco Scaravilli
641
38. Function and dysfunction of the vestibular system 
Herman Kingma
665
39. Effects of aging on control of stability 
Brian E Maki, William E Mcllroy
671
40. Vestibular influences on cardiovascular control during movement 
Bill J Yates, Michael J Holmes, Brian J Jian, Ilan A Kerman
691
41. The physiology of the vestibulo-ocular reflex
Bernard Cohen, Martin Gizzi
701
42. Instrumentation and principles of vestibular testing 
Floris L Wuyts, Joseph M Furman, Paul Van de Heyning
717
43. Clinical application of vestibular laboratory testing 
Joseph M Furman, Floris L Wuyts
735
44. Posturography
Adolfo M Bronstein
747
45. Emerging technologies 
Joseph M Furman, Izumi Koizuka
759
SECTION V: VESTIBULAR DISORDERS AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
46. Normal and abnormal balance 
Robert W Baloh
773
47. Normal and abnormal eye movements 
Christopher Kennard
781
48. Peripheral vestibular disorders and diseases in adults 
G Michael Halmagyi, Phillip D Cremer, Ian S Curthoys
797
49. Neurological causes of balance disorders 
Thomas Brandt
819
50. Falls
Joanna Doumton
831
51. General medical causes of disequilibrium
Tim Petterson, Rose Anne Kenny
841
52. Balance disorders in children
861
Claes Moller
  

viii 
Contents
53. Psychiatric consequences of vestibular dysfunction 
869
Rolf G Jacob, Joseph M Furman, Stephen P Cass
54- Medical management of balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
839
DoriS'Eva Bamiou, Linda M Luxon
55. The role of surgery in the management of the dizzy patient 
917
Harold Ludman
Index 
929
  

Contributors
Qerhard Andersson
Department of Psychology and 
Department of Audiology 
Uppsala University,
Box 12 25, SE-751 42 Uppsab, Sweden
Paul Avan
Laboratory of Sensory Biophysics (EA 2667) 
School of Medicine 
POBox 38
63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France
Robert W Baloh
UCLA Neurology 
Reed Neurological Research Center 
710 Westwood Plaza, Rm C-246A 
Los Angeles
CA 90095-1769, USA
Doris-Eva Bamiou
Neuro-otology Department
National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery
Queen Square
London WC1N3BG
UK
Jane A Baran
Department of Communication Disorders 
6 Arnold House
School of Public Health and Health Sciences 
University of Massachusetts 
715 North Pleasant Street 
Amherst MA 01003-9304, USA
Marie-Louise Barrends
The Sahlgrenska Akademy at Goteborg University
Institute for the Health of Women and Children
Goteborg Pediatric Growth Research Center
Department of Pediatrics
The Queen Silvia Children's Hospital
SE-416 85 Goteborg
Sweden
Pierre Bonfils
ENT Department and UMR CNRS 7060 
European Hospital G . Pompidou 
75015 Paris, France
An Boudewyns
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and 
Head and Neck Surgery 
University Hospital Antwerp 
Wilrijkstraat 10 
2650 Wilrijk (Antwerp)
Belgium
Thomas Brandt
Neurological University Clinic 
Grossharden Clinic 
Marchioninistrasse 15 
81377 Munich, Germany
Jan Brokx
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and 
Head and Neck Surgery 
University Hospital Antwerp 
Wilrijkstraat 10 
2650 Wilrijk (Antwerp)
Belgium
and University Hospital Maastricht, The Netherlands
Adolfo M Bronstein
Department of Neuro-otology
Division of Neuroscience and Psychological Medicine
Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College
Charing Cross Hospital
Fulham Palace Road,
London W6 8RF, UK
Stephen P Cass
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center 
4200 E Ninth Avenue 
Denver CO 80262, USA
Jan W Casselman
Department of Medical Imaging—MRI 
A.Z. ST. Jan Brugge A.V.
Brugge, Belgium
Borka Ceranic
Department of Neuro-otology
The National Hospital for Neurology & Neurosurgery
Queen Square
London WC1N 3BG, UK
Jos Claes
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and 
Head and Neck Surgery 
University Hospital Antwerp 
Wilrijkstraat 10 
2650 Wilrijk (Antwerp)
Belgium
Qraeme M Clark
The Human Communication Research Centre 
and Department Of Otolaryngology 
384-388 Albert Street 
East Melbourne 
VIC 3002, Australia
  

x 
Contributors
Bernard Cohen
Department of Neurology, Box 1135 
Mount Sinai School of Medicine 
1 East 100th Street 
New York NY 10029-6574, USA
Phillip D Cremer
Neurology Department 
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,
Camperdoum, NSW 2050 
Sydney, Australia
Ian S Curthoys
School of Psychology 
University of Sydney, NSW 2006 
Sydney, Australia
Rosalyn A Davies
Department of Neuro-otology
The National Hospital for Neurology & Neurosurgery
Queen Square
London WC1N 3BG, UK
Adrian C Davis
MRC Institute of Hearing Research 
University Park 
Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK
Frank Declau
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and 
Head and Neck Surgery 
University Hospital Antwerp 
Wilrijkstraat 10 
2650 Wilrijk (Antwerp)
Belgium
Dirk De Ridder
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and 
Head and Neck Surgery 
University Hospital Antwerp 
Wilrijkstraat 10 
2650 Wilrijk (Antwerp)
Belgium
Joanna Downton
St Thomas's Hospital 
Shaw Heath
Stockport SK3 8BL, UK
Soly Erlandsson
Department of Audiology 
Sahlgrenska Academy 
University,
SE 405 30 Goteborg, Sweden
Edward F Evans
MacKay Institute of Communication and Neuroscience 
Keele University
Keek ST5 5BG, Staffordshire UK
Andrew Faulkner
Department Phonetics and Linguistics 
UCL (University College London)
Gower Street,
London WC1E 6BT, UK
Joseph M Furman
Eye and Ear Institute Building 
Suite 500 
203 Lothrop Street 
Pittsburgh PA 15213, USA
Stuart Qatehouse
MRC Institute of Hearing Research 
Royal Infirmary 
16 Alexandra Parade 
Glasgow G31 2ER, UK
Martin Qizzi
New Jersey Neuroscience Institute 
Seton Hall University 
65 James Street 
Edison, NJ 08818, USA
Joseph W Hall
Division of Otolaryngology
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill NC 27599., USA
Q Michael Halmagyi
Neurology Department 
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,
Camperdoum, NSW 2050 
Sydney, Australia
Erwin Hamans
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and 
Head and Neck Surgery 
University Hospital Antwerp 
Wilrijkstraat 10 
2650 Wilrijk (Antwerp)
Belgium
Ronald Hinchcliffe
Institute of Laryngology and Otology 
330 Grays Inn Road 
London WC1X 8EE, UK
  

Contributors 
xi
Kajsd'Mia Holgers
Tinnitus Team
Department of Audiology
Sahlgrenska University Hospital/Sahlgrenska
SE-413 45 Goteborg
Sweden
Michael J Holmes
Lycoming College 
Department of Psychology 
700 College Place 
Campus Box 1
Williamsport, PA 17701, USA 
Rolf Q Jacob
Department of Psychiatry
Thomas Detre Hall of the Western Psychiatric Institute 
and Clinic
University of Pittsburgh 
3811 O'Hara Street 
Pittsburgh PA 15213, USA
Brian J Jian
University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine 
Department of Otolaryngology 
Eye & Ear Institute Building 
203 Lothrop Street, Room 113 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
Christopher Kennard
Division of Neuroscience & Psychological Medicine 
Charing Cross Campus 
Faculty of Medicine
Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine 
Fulham Palace Road, London W6 8RF 
London, UK
Rose Anne Kenny
Department of Geriatric Medicine 
Royal Victoria Infirmary 
Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 4LP, UK
Ilan A Kerman
University of Michigan 
Mental Health Research Institute 
Department of Psychiatry 
205 Zina Pitcher Place 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
Herman Kingma
Maastricht Research Institute Brain and Behaviour
and Department of ORL and Head and Neck Surgery
University Hospital Maastricht
P. Debyelaan 25
6229 HX Maastricht
POBox 5800
6202 AZ Maastricht, The Netherlands
Erwin Koekelkoren
Department of Neurosurgery 
University Hospital Antwerp 
Wilrijkstraat 10 
2650 Wilrijk (Antwerp)
Belgium
Izumi Koizuka
Department of Otolaryngology 
St Marianna University School of Medicine 
Kanagawa, Japan
Mireille Lavigne-Rebillard
INSERM
University Montpellier 1 
71, rue de Navacelles 
34090 Montpellier, France
Harold Ludman
Neuro-otology,
National Hospital for Neurology & Neurosurgery
Queen Square
London WC1N 3BG, UK
Linda M Laxon
Audiology 
Old Building
Great Ormond Street Hospital 
London WC1N 3JH, UK
Brian Maki
University of Toronto
and Sunnybrook and Women's College
Health Sciences Centre
Centre for Studies in Aging
2075 Bayview Avenue
Toronto, Ontario
CANADA M4N3M5
Robert Marchbanks
N IP A Unit 
Mail Point 29
Medical Physics Department 
Southampton General Hospital 
Tremona Road
Southampton SO 16 6YD, UK
  

xii 
Contributors
Alessandro Martini
Clinical Institute ORL 
Faculty of Medicine and Surgery 
University of Ferrara 
Corso Giovecca 203 
44100 Ferrara, Italy
William E Mcllroy
Department of Physical Therapy 
University of Toronto 
256 McCaul Street
Toronto ON M5T 1W5, Ontario, Canada
Laurence McKenna
Audiology Centre
Royal National Throat Nose and Ear Hospital 
330 Grays Inn Road 
London WC1X 8DA, UK
Leslie Michaels
Department of Histopathology 
Royal Free and UCL Medical School 
University Street 
London W C lE6JJf UK
Claes Moiler
Department of Audiology 
Sahlgrenska University Hospital 
41345 Goteborg, Sweden
Beth Morchower Douek
Programme of Communication Sciences and Disorders 
Collier Center for Communication Disorders 
University of Texas at Dallas 
1966 Inwood Road 
Dallas TX 75235, USA
Padma Moorjani
MRC Institute of Hearing Research 
University Park 
Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK
Frank E Musiek
Department of Communications Sciences 
University of Connecticut 
Connecticut, Storrs CT 06269, USA
Valerie Newton
Human Communication and Deafness,
Humanities Building 
 
Oxford Road
Manchester M13 9PL, UK
Cliodna OMahoney
Northern Area Health Board 
Community Care Area 7 
161 Richmond Road 
Dublin 3, Eire
Victoria B Oxholm
Section of Otolaryngology and Audiology 
Dartmouth'Hitchcock Medical Center 
One Medical Center Drive 
Lebanon NH 03756-0001, USA
Agnete Parving
Department of Audiology 
H:S. Bispebjerg Hospital 
Bispebjerg Bakke 23 
2400 CPH.NV.
Denmark
Tim Petterson
Department of Geriatric Medicine 
Royal Victoria Infirmary 
Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 4LP, UK
Hillel Pratt
Evoked Potentials Laboratory 
Behavioral Biology
Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Israel
Silvano Prosser
Clinical Institute ORL 
Faculty of Medicine and Surgery 
University of Ferrara 
Corso Giovecca 203 
44100 Ferrara, Italy
Remy Pujol
1NSERM
University Montpellier 1 
71, rue de Navacelles 
34090 Montpellier, France
Ilmari Pyykko
Tampere University Hospital 
P.O. Box 2000 
33521 Tampere 
Finland
Ewa Raglan
Audiology Department 
Old Building
Great Ormond Street Hospital 
London WC1N3JH
  

Contributors 
xiii
Andrew P Read
Department of Medical Genetics 
St Mary's Hospital 
Hathersage Road 
Manchester M l3 OJH
Ulf Rosenhall
Horselkliniken 
Karolinska sjukhuset 
171 76 Stockholm, Sweden
Francesco Scaravilli
Department of Neuropathology 
Institute of Neurology 
The National Hospital 
Queen Square 
London, UK
Jukka Starck
Department of Physics
Finnish Institute of Occupational Health
Topeliuksenkatu 41
00250 Helsinki
Finland
Dafydd Stephens
Welsh Hearing Institute 
University Hospital of Wales 
Cardiff CF14 4XW 
Wales
John Stevens
Departments of Medical Physics and Clinical Engineering 
and North Trent Medical Audiology 
Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, Sheffield, UK
Emily A Tobey
Advanced Hearing Research Center 
Callier Center for Communication Disorders 
University of Texas at Dallas 
1966 Inwood Road 
Dallas TX 75235, USA
Esko Toppila
Department of Physics
Finnish Institute of Occupationa Health
Topeliuksenkatu 41
00250 Helsinki
Finland
Richard S Tyler
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics
Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery
21256 PFP
200 Hawkins Drive
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
Mats Ulfendahl
Laboratory Bldg M l—ENT 
Karolinska Hospital 
SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden
Quy Van Camp
Department of Medical Genetics 
University of Antwerp 
Universiteitsplein 1 
2610 Antwerp, Belgium
Paul Van de Heyning
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and 
Head and Neck Surgery 
University Hospital Antwerp 
Wilrijkstraat 10 
2650 Wilrijk (Antwerp)
Belgium
Karl R White
2810 Old Main Hill 
Utah State University 
Logan, UT 84322, USA
Floris L Wuyts
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and 
Head and Neck Surgery 
University Hospital Antwerp 
Wilrijkstraat 10 
2650 Wilrijk (Antwerp)
Belgium
Bill Yates
University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine 
Department of Otolaryngology 
Eye & Ear Institute Building 
203 Lothrop Street, Room 106 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
Yoshior Yazawa
Department of Otolaryngolgy and Head and Neck Surgery 
Shiga Medical University, 520-2192 / Seta Tsukinowa-cho 
Otsu City, Shiga, Japan
Tai'June Yoo
Molecular Sciences and Neurosciences Program 
Allergy and Immunobgy Division 
University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, 37996 TN, USA
  

  

Foreword
It is a joy for academic and personal reasons to support the 
publication of Textbook of Audiological Medicine. The con­
temporary avalanche of medical information is extending 
the boundaries in every area of medical specialization, not 
least in audiological medicine. Sophisticated new methods 
have enabled the acquisition of important basic and clinical 
information that provides us with the extended capacity for 
understanding the pathophysiology of auditory and vestibu­
lar disorders. Often, though, the diversity of sources and the 
time required to obtain these extensive new data limit the 
access of the practitioner to new treatments.
This book is a courageous attempt to define what is 
valuable and necessary in these areas for the diagnosis and 
management of a variety of audiological and vestibular 
disorders. Textbook of Audiological Medicine will fill a critical 
need for information about recent discoveries that can sig­
nificantly improve the management of patients. Given the 
fragmentation in the sources of knowledge, the book should 
be welcomed by scientists and clinicians alike since it will 
contribute to a more integrated exposition of these medical 
problems. In addition, the material in it reinforces the need 
to proceed in the search of newer horizons in the alleviation 
of the suffering associated with inner ear disorders.
From a personal point of view and with a sense, perhaps 
undeserved, of personal pride for the limited but memorable 
interaction I had with them, first as students and now as col­
leagues, I wish to wholeheartedly congratulate the editors 
for their efforts.
Vicente Honrubia
UCLA School of Medicine 
USA
  

Acknowledgments
My deepest thanks are due to Professor Ronald Hinchcliffe 
who first raised the need for a textbook in the specialty of 
audiological medicine and has been fundamental in provid­
ing the enthusiasm, support and guidance throughout the 
production of this book. My thanks are also due to Dr Ewa 
Raglan, my longstanding consultant colleague, who has 
repeatedly and unstintingly provided academic and practi- 
cal support, enabling me to devote myself more fully to the 
editing of the textbook.
I should also like to thank in particular Professor S 
Dafydd G Stephens, Dr Robert W Baloh and Dr Vicente 
Honrubia, who unknowingly engendered my enthusiasm 
and interest in auditory and vestibular disorders, resulting in 
the motivation to undertake this task. Many others have 
read and advised on parts of the text, and I am most grate­
ful to them. They include Joe Furman and Alessandro
Martini, who have been excellent co-editors, bringing a bal­
anced and different perspective in a number of areas. 
Finally, Abi Griffin, Senior Production Editor at Martin 
Dunitz Ltd, who has provided unfailing support and good­
will over the last year of production; and the final result 
would not have been achieved without the constant support 
of my secretary, Lesley Gibson.
Much of my free time has been devoted to the editing 
of the book, and I particularly thank my children, Rupert, 
Cordelia, Clementine and Christianna for their continual 
patience, encouragement and love.
I would finally like to dedicate my effort to my dear par­
ents and brother for their unending support.
Linda Luxon
Editor
  

Preface
Audiological medicine is a relatively new specialty spanning 
the investigation, diagnosis and medical management of 
hearing and balance disorders. In some centres, communica­
tion disorders, particularly in children, are also included 
within the clinical framework. Medical science is expanding 
at an ever-increasing rate, and it becomes increasingly diffi­
cult to produce a comprehensive overview of even a single 
subject, let alone two quite disparate clinical disciplines, 
such as hearing and balance, albeit linked by similarities of 
anatomy and physiology and inter-related pathologically. 
Moreover, the practice of audiological medicine depends not 
only upon a clear understanding of the basic sciences rele­
vant to auditory and vestibular function, but also upon expe­
rience and knowledge in a wide range of clinical disciplines 
relevant to hearing and balance disorders, including genet­
ics, immunology, paediatrics, geriatrics, neurology, otolaryn­
gology, ophthalmology, psychiatry and general internal 
medicine. Thus, far from being a narrow topic as might be 
assumed by those unfamiliar with the subject, audiological 
medicine is a specialty spanning the depth and breadth of 
medicine.
Hearing impairment is reported by the WHO as the 
commonest sensory disability worldwide, yet tragically 
much of the resultant disablement could be prevented by 
vaccination programmes in the Third World, noise pre­
vention measures and regulation of the prescription of oto­
toxic drugs. Equally, balance disorders have a significant 
economic and social morbidity. In the UK, one in four of 
the population of working age reports dizziness, causing 
some limitation in function, and it is well recognized as the 
second commonest symptom preventing attendance at 
work. Moreover, between one third and one half of the 
entire population have experienced some symptoms of dise­
quilibrium by the age of 60 years.
The growth of audiological medicine as a separate 
medical discipline has been prompted, in part, by neces­
sity based on these epidemiological data and in part by 
other factors: the decline in middle ear surgery, associated 
with improved public health in the developed world; 
developments in pathophysiology and pharmacology, lead­
ing to the possibility of medical intervention for sen­
sorineural hearing loss; the explosion of genetics and the 
possibility of gene therapy; technological developments, 
e.g. otoacoustic emissions leading to universal neonatal 
screening and the earlier identification of hearing impair­
ment and cochlear implantation, requiring sophisticated, 
multidisciplinary rehabilitation programmes. In the con­
text of vestibular diseases, the understanding of the inter­
action of autonomic and psychological factors in both the 
development and the treatment of balance disorders and 
the lack of good evidence to support the value of surgical 
intervention in the majority of balance disorders and the 
efficacy of vestibular rehabilitation programmes have lent 
support to specialist care.
Fundamental to the need for this book has been the 
longstanding and widespread, cursory and dismissive 
approach to hearing and balance disorders both by the pub­
lic and the professions. Frequently, hearing impairment has 
been felt to require no more than the provision of a hearing 
aid, with little understanding of the need for thorough aeti- 
ological investigation to ensure prevention and remediation 
where possible and dedicated, structured rehabilitation pro­
grammes, if the devastating personal and social conse­
quences of hearing impairment are to be avoided. In 
addition, dizzy patients are frequently considered as ‘heart 
sink* problems and passed backwards and forwards between 
specialists, with no clear diagnosis, no rational management 
and a gloomy prognosis.
This volume aims to integrate the science and medi­
cine of auditory and vestibular disorders, providing the first 
comprehensive Textbook of Audiological Medicine. This title 
has been written by authors from a wide range of disci­
plines, but each is authoritative in his/her field. The chap­
ters have been scrutinized, modified and integrated by the 
editors, in order to produce a volume which, it is hoped, 
will be of value to the expert in the field, but which can be 
negotiated by the novice to provide the necessary scientific 
background, while emphasizing the relevant clinical 
aspects of each subject. There are five main sections, the 
first dealing with areas of common knowledge to both the 
auditory and vestibular systems, and then each system is 
considered in terms of the relevant basic sciences and 
clinical disorders.
Thus, the raison d'etre for this textbook is to provide 
clinicians with the armamentarium necessary to improve 
the quality of care for these large groups of patients with 
personally distressing symptoms. We hope that the new 
and expanding band of physicians and paediatricians prac­
tising audiological medicine will find this book of value, 
not only during their training, but also in their professional
  

xviii 
Preface
careers, as a text to dip into for information related to all 
aspects of the subject. Equally we hope that the text pro­
vides a comprehensive introduction to auditory and 
vestibular disorders that will be of value to both doctors
and scientists in many differing disciplines, who work with 
and for hearing and balance disordered patients.
Linda Luxon
Editor
Joseph Furman, Alessandro Martini 
and Dafydd Stephens
Co-Editors
  

Section I
Fundamentals of 
audiological and 
vestibular medicine

Anatomy of peripheral 
auditory and vestibular 
systems
Paul Avan, Pierre Bonfils
The temporal bone is made of three portions of different embry- 
ological origins, namely the squamous, tympanic and petrous 
portions. This last portion is of particular interest in this chap­
ter, since it contains the cochleovestibular sensory organs. The 
petrous bone is a part of the base of the skull, made of compact 
bone, with a pyramidal or roughly triangular external shape. It 
is hollowed out by several cavities, facial and carotid canals, 
petrous pneumatic cells, and cochleovestibular cavities. The 
cochlea corresponds to the anterior part of these cavities, and it 
is devoted to the auditory perception of sound at frequencies 
ranging from 20-20 000 Hz in humans. The vestibule, situated 
posterior to the cochlea, responds to the effects of acceleration, 
either in static (gravity) or dynamic conditions (movement at 
varying linear or angular velocity). In this chapter, the anatomy 
of the cochlea and vestibule will be presented in two separate 
parts.
Auditory system
The peripheral auditory system consists of a complex arrange­
ment of many different structures ensuring the conduction of 
acoustical vibrations from the external air to the liquids of the 
inner ear, and to the sensory cells, and then the transduction of 
sound into electrical messages. These messages are transmitted 
as action potentials by the auditory nerve fibres towards more 
central parts of the brain. The first stages of sound processing 
provide for impedance adaptation and pressure gain through 
the passive transformer system of the middle ear. Another key 
stage takes place in the cochlea before the occurrence of trans­
duction processes: following the physicist Gold1 and his theo­
retical suggestions, Davis2 coined the term ‘cochlear amplifier’ 
to describe the effect resulting from the mechanical feedback of 
the active, electromotile outer hair cells (OHCs) on the 
cochlear partition. The cochlear feedback loop not only
enables a high sensitivity to be obtained, but also results in an 
exquisite filtering of incoming stimuli. The macroscopic and 
microscopic (i.e. cellular, subcellular and molecular) structures 
involved in these complex processes have been more and more 
thoroughly identified, and the relationships between structure, 
function and physiopathology can no longer be dissociated. 
Thus this chapter will endeavour to emphasize the most signif­
icant functional consequences of the anatomy of the peripheral 
auditory system.
The description of the peripheral auditory system is classi­
cally divided into three parts, external, middle and inner ear, 
the first two corresponding to structures devoted to transmitting 
vibrations from a low-impedance gaseous medium to a high- 
impedance liquid one. Direct coupling between air and inner 
ear fluids would allow only 1/1000 of the incoming acoustical 
energy to be transmitted. Actually, sound transmission through 
a normal middle ear allows about half of this energy to reach the 
inner ear liquids.
External ear
The external ear consists of the pinna and external auditory 
meatus, up to the external border of the tympanic membrane. 
The human pinna is composed of cartilage. The external audi­
tory meatus forms a canal about 25 mm deep; at its external 
orifice, its diameter is about 8-10 mm, decreases to 5-6 mm in 
the deeper portions, and enlarges again when reaching the 
tympanic membrane. The outer third of the canal has a carti­
laginous wall, which is prolonged by a bony portion leading to 
the tympanic membrane. The cartilaginous portion contains 
numerous cerumen glands and hair follicles with a cleaning 
role, although an excessive accumulation may lead to a 
conductive hearing loss.
The role of the external ear is limited in humans, because 
the pinna is motionless, its muscles being largely ineffective.

4 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
However, the frequency spectrum of sounds reaching the tym­
panic membrane is significantly influenced by the combined 
transfer functions of the pinna and external ear canal. As a 
whole, this system presents a resonance peak of about 10-15 dB 
around 3 kHz. This resonance is partly responsible for the 
frequency-dependent sensitivity of the inner ear to noise- 
induced hearing loss. It also has to be taken into account when 
fitting a hearing aid.
The external auditory canal is S-shaped, initially running 
in an anterior direction, with its medial part running in a pos­
terior direction. For otoscopy to be carried out properly, the 
bend of the canal has to be straightened as much as possible by 
gently pulling the pinna upwards and backwards. This manoeu­
vre allows the observer to see the part of the tympanic mem­
brane at the bottom of the external auditory canal (Figure 1.1).
Tympanic membrane
The tympanic membrane is a translucent membrane, about 0.6 
mm thick. It forms an angle of about 45° with the axis of the 
ear canal and its overall shape is conical, with the deepest point 
or umbo being attached to the tip of the manubrium of the 
malleus (Figure 1.1). The fibrocartilaginous peripheral ring of 
the tympanic membrane, inserted into the temporal bone, is 
roughly circular in shape (diameter 8-10mm). The tympanic 
membrane is composed of three layers, namely an outer layer of 
keratinized epithelium prolonging that of the ear canal, an
inner layer prolonging the middle ear mucosa, and a fibrous 
intermediate layer called the lamina propria. The lamina pro­
pria is made up of a complex arrangement of circular fibres, and 
radial fibres attached to the manubrium of the malleus.
The peripheral ring has a defect in its superior part, so that 
the tympanic membrane tends to fold at this level and extends 
toward the short process of the malleus (Figures 1.1 and 1.2). 
The part of the tympanic membrane above this limit is called 
the pars flaccida, whereas the largest, inferior part is called the 
pars tensa. The area of the pars tensa is about 30 times that of 
the pars flaccida in humans. The two names refer in an obvious 
manner to the respective stiffnesses of the membrane. The rigid 
lamina propria being absent in the pars flaccida, it can more 
easily bulge inside the tympanic cavity whenever the pressure 
in this cavity is not properly regulated as a result of auditory 
tube dysfunction (Figure 1.2). It is thought that such a mecha­
nism is relevant to cholesteatoma generation.
Middle ear
The middle ear includes the tympanic cavity, connected to the 
mastoid air cells, and to the pharyngeal spaces by the auditory 
(Eustachian) tube. The sporadic openings of the auditory tube, 
either occurring spontaneously or triggered by muscular activ­
ity, e.g. due to swallowing, enable the static air pressure in the 
cavity to be kept close to atmospheric pressure. The tympanic 
cavity contains the ossicular chain (malleus, incus and stapes,
Figure 1.1 Normal tympanic membrane as seen by otoscopy. The malleus is 
visible through the translucent membrane. The pars flaccida corresponds to the 
upper part of the membrane. The bright triangle in the anteroinferior part of 
the tympanic membrane, starting from the umbo, is due to reflection of light 
on the pars tensa.
Figure 1.2 As a sequela of otitis media, the whole tympanic membrane has 
become retracted, so that the ossicles are moulded and clearly visible.
  

Anatomy of peripheral auditory and vestibular systems 
5
suspended by supporting ligaments), allowing the vibrations of 
the tympanic membrane to be transmitted to the inner ear 
fluids (Figure 1.3).
The tympanic cavity presents six faces around a central 
cavity in front of the tympanic membrane, the mesotympa- 
num. This central cavity is prolonged in its superior part by the 
attic or epitympanum, containing the heads of two ossicles, the 
malleus and incus. The attic also has a close relationship with 
the pars flaccida of the tympanic membrane and is the usual 
starting place for cholesteatoma development. The floor of the 
tympanic cavity corresponds to the jugular bulb and the carotid 
artery, its anterior wall to the opening of the auditory tube, its 
posterior wall to the mastoid cell system, and its outer wall to 
the tympanic membrane. On the inner, labyrinthine wall sepa­
rating the middle from the inner ear, several features can be 
identified, namely the promontory corresponding to the bulk of 
the first cochlear turn, the canals of the facial nerve and tensor 
tympani muscle, together with the round and oval windows. 
Finally, it must be borne in mind that the superior and posterior 
walls of the tympanic cavity have close relationships with sev­
eral brain structures such as the posterior fossa and cerebellum, 
so that any defect in these walls due to prolonged middle ear 
infection can have dangerous consequences.
The three ossicles are articulated so as to make possible the 
transmission of sound from the tympanic membrane to the oval 
window. The malleus consists of a manubrium and a head. The 
tip of the manubrium corresponds to the umbo, and the 
manubrium is attached to the tympanic membrane along its 
length. The head of the malleus is suspended in the epitympa­
num by ligaments. The tensor tympani muscle is inserted on the 
manubrium just below the neck corresponding to the boundary 
between manubrium and head. The head of the malleus articu­
lates with the incus in its posterior part. A short and a long
Figure 1.3 Ossicular chain (M, malleus; I, incus; S, stapes), muscles (arrow. TT, 
tensor tympani muscle; SM, stapedius muscle) and ligaments.
process emerge from the body of the incus. The short process is 
oriented posteriorly toward the aditus ad antrum at the 
entrance of the mastoid air cells, while the long process is 
oriented downwards, then bends inwards at right angle and 
terminates in the lenticular process. The lenticular process 
articulates with the head of the stapes. The overall shape of the 
stapes resembles a stirrup, with two branches forming an osseous 
arch and a footplate inserted in the oval or vestibular window. 
The stapedius muscle attaches to the head of the stapes, and 
the annular ligament closes the footplate insertion in the oval 
window.
The middle ear acts as a transformer between the low- 
impedance air and the high-impedance fluid-filled cochlea. A 
simple physical model allowing for the surface ratio of the tym­
panic membrane to the stapes footplate, and the lever effect due 
to the difference in length of the manubrium of the malleus and 
the long process of the incus, predicts a flat pressure gain of 
25-30 dB. Actually, the combined effects of the acoustical 
properties of the head and external and middle ear have to be 
taken into account to determine more accurately the input 
pressure level in the cochlea, from a given free-field stimulus 
level. The real transfer function is a little more complex than 
that predicted from the simple transformer model and is flat 
only in the mid-frequency range.3 This issue is important, 
because it is thought that the external + middle ear transfer 
function fully accounts for the frequency range of human 
hearing, whereas the cochlear response would be basically 
frequency-independent.
Two striated muscles are located in the middle ear. The ten­
sor tympani attaches to the malleus, and is innervated by a 
branch of the trigeminal nerve. The stapedius muscle attaches 
to the head of the stapes and is innervated by a branch of the 
facial nerve. In spite of their very small size, they have a sur­
prisingly rich innervation, e.g. about 1000 nerve fibres for the 
stapedius.4 The physiological role of these muscles is not fully 
understood. Their reflex contractions obviously lead to an 
increased stiffness of the ossicular chain, which tends to 
decrease the sound energy transmitted to the inner ear at low 
frequencies. In most natural situations of sound-induced con­
tractions, only the stapedius muscle is active in humans and the 
resulting attenuation is only a few decibels; furthermore, its 
onset has a delay and it is ineffective at frequencies above 
1 kHz. Vocalization seems to induce stronger contractions of 
both muscles. Middle ear muscle activity might contribute to 
some protection of the inner ear against excessive stimulation, 
a decrease of low-frequency masking, and an enhancement of 
signal-to-noise ratio for speech-like sounds.5 Alternatively, it 
has been suggested quite recently that, as middle ear muscle 
contractions induce sharp intermittent movements of the 
stapes, they might thereby contribute to the long-term regula­
tion of inner ear fluid pressure by forcing endolymph to flow to 
or from the endolymphatic sac.6
  

6 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
Cochlea
The cochlea is a bony tube, coiled around a central axis, the 
modiolus, thereby forming a spiral of two and a half turns in 
humans. The bony cochlea is connected to the vestibule 
through a wide orifice, and then leaves the vestibule to form the 
basal turn. The tube has a total length of about 30 mm. Its inter- 
nal diameter tapers from 2 mm at the window level, to about 
1 mm at the apical end. The overall size of the coiled cochlea 
also decreases from the basal turn (about 10 mm in diameter) to 
the apical one.
The cochlea is divided by the anterior membranous 
labyrinth into three compartments or scalae, the scala vestibuli, 
scala tympani and scala media (Figure 1.4). The scala media is 
bounded by the osseous spiral lamina projecting from the modi­
olus and prolonged externally by the basilar membrane, by 
Reissner’s membrane and by the lateral wall. Its cross-section is 
thus approximately triangular. The basilar membrane, extend­
ing from the spiral lamina to the spiral ligament, supports the 
organ of Corti (Figure 1.4) containing the sensory cells. The 
lateral wall is lined by the spiral ligament and the heavily vas­
cularized stria vascularis.
The scala vestibuli is above the scala media, bounded by 
Reissner’s membrane. The oval window, closed by the stapes 
footplate and annular ligament, opens into the vestibule, con­
nected to the scala vestibuli by the fenestra vestibuli. There­
fore, stapes movements directly result in pressure variations in 
scala vestibuli.
The scala tympani is below the scala media, bounded by the 
basilar membrane. The round window opens into the scala tym­
pani at the beginning of the basal turn. It is separated from the 
gaseous middle ear cavity by the round window membrane. On 
the apical side of the cochlea, since the scala media is shorter
Figure 1.4 Transverse section of the organ of Corti of a guinea pig (optical 
microscopy). OSL, osseous spiral lamina; BM, basilar membrane; TM, tectorial 
membrane; HS, Hensen's stria; RM, Reissner's membrane; IS, inner sulcus; IHC, 
inner hair cell; OHC, outer hair cells; S, stereocilia; RL, reticular lamina; VIII, 
cochlear nerve fibres; TC, tunnel of Corti; PC, pillar cells; DC, Deiter’s cells; ST, 
scala tympani; SM, scala media; SV, scala vestibuli; V, spiral vessels; HP, habe- 
nula perforata. (Courtesy of Dr Marc Lenoir, INSERM 254, Montpellier, France.)
than the cochlear tube, a small opening called the helicotrema 
connects the scala vestibuli and tympani.
The scala media is filled with a few microlitres of 
endolymph, which has a high K+ concentration of about 
150 mM, and a low Na+ concentration (ImM). Owing to the 
function of the stria vascularis, a large positive DC endo- 
cochlear potential can be measured in the cochlea: 80-90 mV. 
The scalae vestibuli and tympani contain perilymph, an 
extracellular-like fluid with a low K+ concentration and a high 
Na+ concentration (respectively about 4 and 140 mM). As 
these two scalae are connected through the helicotrema, there 
is little difference between their ionic contents. The DC resting 
potential in perilymph is 0 mV.
The organ of Corti, first described thoroughly by Alfonso 
Corti in 1851, rests on the basilar membrane and osseous spiral 
lamina (Figure 1.4). The basilar membrane is made up of fibres 
embedded in extracellular amorphous substance. Two zones are 
separated, the pars tecta or arcuate zone extending from the spi­
ral lamina, and the pars pectinata or pectinate zone reaching 
the spiral ligament. The structure of the basilar membrane is 
responsible for the passive resonant properties of the cochlea,
i.e. of the residual post-mortem frequency tuning first described 
by von Bekesy. The mechanical properties of the basilar mem­
brane, and particularly its stiffness, vary gradually from base to 
apex and, as a result, its resonance frequency decreases while 
the distance from the round window increases (with a rate of 
about one octave every 3 mm). This progressive decrease is 
mainly due to two geometrical factors: in a basoapical direction, 
the width of the membrane from the osseous spiral lamina to 
the spiral ligament increases from about 0.12 mm at the base to 
about 0.5 mm at the apex, while its thickness decreases by a 
similar amount.
The major components of the organ of Corti are the inner 
and outer hair cells (Figures 1.4 and 1.5), resting on the basilar 
membrane, surrounded by supporting cells (particularly pillar 
cells, Deiter’s cells, Flensen cells and Claudius cells). The tops 
of sensory cells bathe in endolymph and are covered by a flap of 
gelatinous substance called the tectorial membrane. The apical 
parts of the inner and outer hair cells and the supporting cells 
form the reticular lamina (Figure 1.6). Its cell junctions are tight, 
and thus, the reticular lamina acts as an ionic barrier between 
the endolymph and the perilymph. Conversely, perilymph can 
diffuse through the basilar membrane. Thus a perilymph-like 
fluid bathes the cell bodies of sensory and support cells.
Aligned with the length of the cochlea from base to apex, 
one row of inner hair cells (IHCs) and about three parallel rows 
of OHCs can be found. Close to the apex, the rows of OHCs are 
less strictly aligned and supernumerary cells or additional rows 
are often found, especially in primates. The overall number of 
IHCs is around 3500 in humans, whereas about 12000 OHCs 
are found. Both types of cells have apical ‘stereocilia’ bundles 
(Figures 1.6 and 1.7). Rather than being true cilia made of 
tubulin, the stereocilia are microvilli, made of actin filaments 
inserted into the cuticular plate. They vary in height, particu­
larly those of OHCs, as a function of distance to the oval window.
  

Anatomy of peripheral auditory and vestibular systems 
7
Figure 1.5 Organ of Corti of a guinea pig cochlea, seen from above with scan­
ning electron microscopy. The tectorial membrane, attached to the top of sup­
porting cells, has been removed, thereby uncovering the reticular lamina and 
the rows of outer and inner hair cells. (Courtesy of Dr Marc Lenoir, INSERM 254, 
Montpellier, France.)
Figure 1.6 Section of the OHC region of the organ of Corti in transmission 
electron microscopy. Three cylindrical-shaped OHCs are visible, surrounded by 
Nuel spaces and supported by Deiters cells. The cuticular plate of OHCs and the 
apical part of supporting cells contribute to the reticular lamina. Hair-like 
extensions stem from the cuticular plates, forming the stereocilia bathing in the 
endolymph compartment. The tectorial membrane that normally tops OHC 
stereocilia has been retracted and elevated by the fixation process and is no 
longer present. On the modiolar, left side, one inner pillar cell is visible 
(Courtesy of Dr Marc Lenoir, INSERM 254, Montpellier, France).
Tip and lateral links connect neighbouring stereocilia. They are 
aligned in about four V- or W-shaped rows, with the tallest 
stereocilia being on the outer, lateral-wall side of the cells 
(Figure 1.7). In mammals, the tallest stereocilia of the OHCs 
are strongly embedded in the tectorial membrane, whereas the
Figure 1.7 Close-up view of the stereocilia bundle of hair cells in a guinea pig 
cochlea (scanning electron micrograph) (modiolar side: bottom of figure). A few 
tip links are visible in the IHC bundles. (Courtesy of Dr Marc Lenoir, INSERM 
254, Montpellier, France.)
stereocilia of IHCs do not seem to touch the tectorial membrane. 
Instead, their tips are very close to Hensen’s stria, forming a 
groove along the lower surface of the tectorial membrane.
Owing to the piston-like action of the stapes footplate in 
the oval window, a differential pressure occurs between the 
scala vestibuli and the tympani. It is thought that Reissner’s 
membrane fully transmits pressure waves from the scala 
vestibuli to the scala media, and thus the differential pressure is 
actually applied on the two sides of the basilar membrane and 
induces vibrations at the level of the organ of Corti. Stereocilia 
bundles are deflected by two different mechanisms: shearing for 
the OHCs due to the movement of the tectorial membrane rel­
ative to the reticular lamina, and the movements of subtector- 
ial endolymph acting on IHC stereocilia through viscous forces. 
Deflection of stereocilia by sound waves alternately opens and 
closes ion channels, presumably at or near the tip links (Figure 
1.7). These tip links are therefore believed to be of great func­
tional importance.7 As a result of the strong electrochemical 
gradient existing between endolymph (+  80 mV) and intracellu­
lar space (—40 to — 70 mV), K+ ions flow into the sensory cells 
and induce a decrease in the membrane potential. This depo­
larization acts in dramatically different ways on IHCs and 
OHCs. IHCs release their neurotransmitter (glutamate) in the
  

8 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
synaptic spaces and subsequently activate the afferent nerve 
fibres. OHCs exhibit electromotility, i.e. they respond by length 
and stiffness changes to changes in membrane potential, 
thereby contributing to shaping the mechanical excitation of 
IHCs. Electromotility is a unique type of mechanical response 
in that it does not require metabolic energy other than that 
needed to generate membrane potential changes. Its bandpass 
seems very high: in vitro, responses have been found up to more 
than 30 kHz. Although not yet fully delineated, its molecular 
origin seems to arise from specific ion-exchanging protein 
motors, such as prestin, identified by Dallos’s team.
Another conspicuous difference between IHCs and OHCs, 
in line with their totally different response to depolarization, 
stems from the study of their innervation.8 The spiral ganglion 
contains the cell bodies of afferent auditory nerve fibres. About 
25 000 such fibres are found in mammals. Their dendrites come 
from the base of the hair cells, through small holes distributed 
along the osseous spiral lamina. About 95% come from IHCs 
and are called type I neurones. These neurones have a large 
diameter and are covered with a myelin sheath, enabling fast 
conduction of action potentials towards the first relay, in the 
cochlear nucleus. The pattern of innervation of IHCs is a con­
verging one (Figure 1.8); about 10 type I fibres, or more, con­
nect to one IHC. The remaining 5% of nerve fibres innervate 
OHCs. In contrast to type I fibres, they are unmyelinated. A 
type II fibre has to travel basally, by about 0.6 mm, before send­
ing dendrites to about 10 OHCs, the ramifying innervation of 
OHCs by a single neurone is divergent (Figure 1.8). Its role is 
completely unknown to date. The auditory nerve also contains 
about 2000 efferent fibres, originating from the superior olivary 
complexes on both sides of the brainstem. Two neural bundles 
reach the cochlear area, one from the medial superior olive 
synapses with the base of OHCs, whereas another comes from 
the lateral olivary complex and projects on the afferent den-
Figure 1.8 Diagram of the innervation of hair cells in the organ of Corti. The 
type I neurones connected to the external part of the IHCs have a larger diameter 
and higher spontaneous discharge rate than the fibres connected to the internal, 
modiolar side. Type II neurones are unmyelinated and contact OHCs. Medial olivo­
cochlear efferents contact the basal part of the OHC (arrowhead), whereas lateral 
olivocochlear efferents (arrow) synapse on the dendrites of type I neurones. (SG, 
spiral ganglions.)
drites coming from IHCs. The medial olivocochlear neurones 
have large, mostly cholinergic, synapses with the OHCs, and 
presumably modulate their motility. The lateral olivocochlear 
neurones involve more complex neurotransmission. They prob­
ably regulate the function of type I afferent neurones and may 
also play a role when these neurones are damaged, e.g. swollen 
after overstimulation.
Anatomical changes due to ageing
The cochlea and the sensorineural structures it contains are mor­
phologically fully mature at birth in humans. The performance 
of these structures tends to decline with ageing, and even soon 
after birth. Although usually very slow, this decline, sometimes 
referred to as presbyacusis, eventually concerns most subjects 
over 60 years of age. It is partly a direct consequence of ageing, 
although ageing alone does not necessarily result in significant 
audiometric losses. It is thought accordingly that ‘presbyacusis’ 
also involves external causes such as prolonged exposure to occu­
pational or recreational noise, or other potentially damaging fac­
tors, in addition to possible genetic factors. Presbyacusis is 
associated with anatomical alterations, such as an atrophy of the 
lower basal turn, concerning a few millimetres from the basal end 
of the organ of Corti. Schuknecht10 described four basic features 
of sensorineural changes associated with ageing, which he 
observed isolated or in association, namely loss in the sensory 
cell populations, metabolic changes in relation to atrophy of the 
stria vascularis, mechanical changes, perhaps due to basilar 
membrane stiffening and resulting in a sort of conductive 
cochlear hearing loss, and neuronal degeneration. The first and 
last types are the most commonly observed, or at least those most 
easily ascertained using audiological tests.
Scant detailed data are available from human temporal 
bones and most of them were published by a joint-study 
group11 combining different microscopy techniques. While the 
normal number of IHCs is around 100/mm, it is found to 
decrease to about 30/mm after 70 years, at a distance from the 
basal end of about 10% of the overall cochlear length. This 
corresponds to a rate of decrease of IHC density of about
0.7%/year. The IHC loss is closer to 0.3% elsewhere along the 
cochlea. As for OHCs, they amount to about 400/mm of 
cochlear length, and seem to undergo a larger decrease, i.e. 
about 1 %/year at the basal end and 0.5% elsewhere. The rate 
of ganglion cell loss is less than 1 %/year for neurones of the 
lower basal part, whereas it is about 0.5%/year in the middle 
coil. The functional consequences of such losses are easy to 
predict as a predominantly high-frequency hearing loss, the 
boundary frequency between near-normal and pathological 
areas tending to get lower with age.
Vestibular anatomy
The bony labyrinth, containing the balance organs, is located 
posterior to the cochlea. It is made of two main compartments, 
the vestibule, containing the utricle and saccule, and the
  

Anatomy of peripheral auditory and vestibular systems 
9
semicircular canals. As with the cochlea, the membranous 
labyrinth, filled with endolymph, is completely surrounded by 
the bony labyrinth. The space between osseous and membra" 
nous labyrinths is full of perilymph.
The vestibule (Figure 1.9) is just medial to the tympanic 
cavity, separated from it by the oval window. It is divided in two 
recesses containing the two otolith organs, the saccule and utri­
cle. The saccule is a spherical vesicle resting on the floor of the 
vestibule. The ductus reuniens, starting from the inferior pole of 
the saccule, connects it to the cochlea, whereas the utriculo­
saccular duct leads to the utricle. The sensory organ of the 
saccule or macula rests on the medial face of the saccule, and its 
plane forms an angle of 30° with the vertical. The utricle is 
elliptical, and its macula is located on the anterior part of the 
floor. Its plane is about 30° off the horizontal plane of the head. 
Thus, the planes of the two otolith organs lie approximately at 
right angles to each other.
The semicircular canals are posterior and superior to the 
vestibule. They consist of three ducts called the horizontal, 
posterior and superior canals (Figure 1.9). Their two ends open 
into the vestibule, through only five orifices, because the posterior 
part of the superior canal meets the superior part of the posterior 
canal, forming the common crus prior to entering the utricular 
recess. Each semicircular canal forms about two-thirds of a planar 
torus, and the three canals are aligned so that their planes are 
approximately perpendicular. The horizontal canals form an 
angle of about 30° with the axial plane. The posterior and superior 
canals lie in a vertical plane, at about 45° from the sagittal plane, 
so that the posterior canal on one side is parallel to the superior 
canal on the opposite side. Each semicircular canal contains a 
membranous duct occupying only a quarter of its diameter. One 
end of each canal is dilated very near its entrance to the utricle. 
The sensory cells lie in this dilated portion, called the ampulla. 
The medial part of the ampullae present a sort of fold or ridge 
covered with sensory epithelium: this thickening of the basal 
membrane is termed the ampullary crest or crista ampullaris.
Figure 1.9 Lateral view of cochlea, vestibule and semicircular canals. ASC, 
anterior semicircular canal; LSC, lateral semicircular canal; PSC, posterior semi­
circular canal; ES, endolymphatic sac.
Although the ionic contents of vestibular perilymph and 
endolymph do not differ much from those of the cochlea, the 
endolymphatic potential is close to zero in the vestibular 
organs. The sensory hair cells of the vestibular system are 
roughly similar to those in the cochlea. They lie in the maculae 
and ampullae, corresponding to highly differentiated epithelial 
areas made of one layer of sensory cells surrounded by support­
ing cells. Stereocilia and a kinocilium extend from the body of 
the sensory cells. In contrast to the cochlea, the kinocilium of 
vestibular cells persists in mature cells. It is a true cilium with 
nine pairs of microtubules. A group of stereocilia is found on 
one side of the kinocilium, and, as in the cochlea, these stereo­
cilia are made of thin extensions of the cell membrane. They 
are always shorter than the kinocilium, and their height 
decreases as the distance from it increases. The whole group of 
hairs is considered to be oriented as determined by the direction 
of the kinocilium. The kinocilium and stereocilia of all vestibu­
lar sensory cells are covered with a gelatinous flap, called the 
cupula in the semicircular canals. In the maculae only, this gel 
also contains embedded calcium carbonate crystals termed oto­
conia, forming the otolith membrane. The density of otoconia 
with respect to endolymph is about 3, so their presence results 
in an increase of the mass weighting the hair bundles and makes 
them sensitive to gravity. Deflection of hairs in the appropriate 
direction, i.e. from the stereocilia to the kinocilium, opens ion 
channels. This results in a depolarization of the cell membrane, 
leading to neurotranmitter release. Movement of hairs in the 
opposite direction is inhibitory. The structures responsible for 
transducing the mechanical stimulus into an electrical response 
of the cell membrane are probably the stereocilia, since the 
kinocilium can be removed without altering the responses to 
stimulation.
Two types of sensory cells are found in the maculae of the 
utricle and saccule, and in the ampullae of the semicircular 
canals: chalice cells (type I) and cylindrical cells (type II). They 
differ in morphology, innervation and location. The piriform 
body of type I cells (Figure 1.10) is completely surrounded by 
one afferent nerve calyx, giving at least 10 synaptic contacts. 
The columnar type II cells (Figure 1.10) are supplied at their 
basal end by several afferent and efferent nerve endings. Type I 
cells are most abundant along the striolae and on top of the 
cristae ampullaris, and type II cells are denser in the periphery 
of the sensory areas. The arrangement of sensory cells depends 
on the organ under consideration. In the maculae, the polari­
ties of hair cells vary in a systematic manner. The shapes of the 
two maculae are different, comma-shape for the saccular mac­
ula (Figure 1.11) and more rounded for the utricular one, but 
both are separated into two halves by a curved boundary called 
the striola, corresponding either to an excess (for the utricle) or 
defect (for the saccule) of otoconia. All the kinocilia point 
away from the striola in the saccule, and towards the striola in 
the utricle. Unlike the macular cells, the ampullar hair cells 
(Figure 1.12) are all polarized in the same direction, namely 
towards the utricle for the horizontal canal, and away from the 
utricle for the other two canals.
  

10 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
Figure 1.10 Type I and type II cells in vestibular epithelium of guinea pig 
(transmission electron microscopy). (Courtesy of Dr D. Dememes, INSERM 432, 
Montpellier, France.)
The fragile sensory structures of the hearing and balance 
organs are bathed in liquids contained in a rigid bony struc­
ture. Sudden pressure changes or steady volume changes of 
perilymph or endolymph would be detrimental if the 
cochleovestibular cavities were not properly connected to the 
outside world through various channels. The cochlear aque­
duct connects the termination of the scala tympani, close to 
the round window, to the subarachnoid space, after running
Blood supply of the 
cochleovestibular system
The whole membranous labyrinth receives its terminal arterial 
supply from the labyrinthine or internal auditory artery, aris­
ing either from the anterior inferior cerebellar artery, or some­
times directly from the basilar artery. The vasculature of the 
bony labyrinth is completely independent. The labyrinthine 
artery travels within the internal auditory canal, on the surface 
of the neural bundles. It is divided into three branches, the 
anterior vestibular, vestibulocochlear and cochlear arteries. The 
cochlear artery enters the modiolus and ramifies into spiral 
arteries (see Figure 1.4), supplying most of the cochlea. The 
basal quarter of the cochlear duct receives its supply from the 
vestibulocochlear artery. The anterior vestibular artery irrigates 
the posterior sides of the saccule and utricle, as well as the ante­
rior and lateral semicircular canals. The posterior vestibulo­
cochlear branch supplies the inferior parts of the saccule and 
utricle, and the posterior semicircular canal.
Perilymph and endolymph 
connections to external spaces
Figure 1.11 Rat saccule seen with scanning electron microscopy. (Courtesy of 
Dr Claude J. Dechesne, INSERM 432, Montpellier, France.)
The maculae send afferent fibres through the utricular and 
saccular branches of the vestibular nerve. Efferent fibres origi­
nate in the vestibular nuclear complex. They synapse not only 
directly on type II cells, but also on the primary afferent fibres 
surrounding type I cells.
Figure 1.12 Lateral ampullary crest in a human fetus, by scanning electron 
microscopy. (Courtesy of Dr Claude J. Dechesne, INSERM 432, Montpellier, France.)
  

Anatomy of peripheral auditory and vestibular systems 
11
inferior to the internal auditory canal. Though it probably 
does not allow the perilymph to flow through it in general, it 
enables the perilymphatic pressure to equalize with that of the 
cerebrospinal fluid. The vestibular aqueduct also connects the 
vestibular perilymph to the subarachnoid spaces.
The endolymphatic duct is formed by the reunion of two 
small canals coming from the saccule and utricle. It first pre­
sents an enlarged intravestibular section, then tapers, pene­
trates the vestibular aqueduct and ends intracranially in the 
10-mm-wide endolymphatic sac. The endolymphatic sac can 
absorb the excess endolymph together with cellular and otoco- 
nial debris. Recent data6 suggest that the endolymph flow 
through the endolymphatic duct can be bidirectional in various 
physiological conditions, thereby contributing to buffering 
pressure or volume changes.
References
1. Gold T. Hearing II. The physical basis of the action of the cochlea.
Proc R Soc Lond B 1948; 135: 492-8.
2. Davis H. An active process in cochlear mechanics. Hear Res 1983;
9: 79-90.
3. Rosowski JJ. Models of external- and middle-ear function. In: 
Hawkins HL, McMullen TA, Popper AN, Fay RR, eds. Auditory 
Computation. New York: Springer, 1996: 15-61.
4. Vacher SR, Guinan JJ Jr, Kobler JB. Intracellularly labeled 
stapedius motoneuron cell bodies in the cat are spatially organized 
according to their physiologic responses. J Comp Neurol 1989; 
289: 401-15.
5. Borg E, Counter SA, Rosier G. Theories of middle ear muscle 
function. In: Silman S, ed. The Acoustic Reflex. Orlando: Acade­
mic Press, 1984: 63-99.
6. Salt AN, DeMott JE. Longitudinal endolymph movements 
induced by perilymphatic injections. Hear Res 1998; 123: 137-47.
7. Pickles JO, Comis SD, Osborne MP. Cross-links between stere­
ocilia in the guinea pig organ of Corti and their possible relation 
to sensory transduction. Hear Res 1984; 49: 103-12.
8. Spoendlin HH. Innervation pattern of the organ of Corti of the 
cat. Acta Otolarygol (Stockh) 1969; 67: 239-54.
9. Puel JL. Chemical synaptic transmission in the cochlea. Prog Neu- 
robiol 1995; 47: 449-76.
10. Schuknecht HF. Presbyacusis. Laryngoscope 1955; 65: 402.
11. Wright A, Davis A, Bredberg G et al. Hair cell distribution in the 
normal human cochlea. A report of a European working group. 
Acta Otolaryngol Suppl 1987; 436: 15-24.
  

Ageing in the auditory 
and vestibular systems
Ulf Rosenhall
Introduction
A gradual demographic change is apparent, especially in the 
developed countries, resulting in a considerable increase in the 
number of elderly persons. The proportion of elderly people in 
the total population in a typical European country was about 
10% fifty years ago, is about 17% today, and is expected to reach 
approximately 20% during the first 25 years of the new millen- 
nium. The largest relative increase is expected to occur in the 
group of very old persons, over 80 years of age. This group is not 
extremely large, but the demands on the society and on rela- 
tives in terms of health care and social care are considerable. In 
Sweden, the total population has grown by 25% during the last 
35 years, and the increase is expected to continue during the 
coming decades, such that the total number of those older than 
90 years will not be very large, but the relative increase is very 
pronounced. In these older age groups, the number of women is 
considerably greater than the number of men.
The ageing processes interfere with all bodily and mental 
functions, including the sensory systems. The influences of ageing 
on both the auditory and the vestibular systems are pronounced. 
Age-related hearing loss, previously called presbyacusis, is a 
very common type of auditory dysfunction. Age-related hearing 
loss is one of the three most frequently reported chronic health 
problems in old age, and is also the most prevalent cause of 
hearing loss. Quality of life depends greatly on communi­
cation with other people, and the auditory system is the most 
important link in communication. Presbyacusis often has a 
devastating effect on the social life of many elderly people.
Audiometric characteristics of age- 
related hearing loss
In age-related hearing loss, the pure tone audiogram shows a 
high frequency, symmetrical, sensorineural hearing loss in a vast 
majority of the cases. The configuration is either gently sloping 
(Figure 2.1), or steeply sloping (Figure 2.2). In one audiometric
variety the pure tone loss is relatively flat over the entire fre­
quency range (Figure 2.3). For comparison, the audiometric 
pattern of a typical case with noise induced hearing loss is shown 
in Figure 2.4. There is a marked gender effect, high-frequency
AUDIOMETRIC PATTERNS OF PRESBYACUSIS
Gently or steeply sloping sensorineural
high-
frequency hearing loss
Sensorineural flat hearing loss might occur
Men have poorer high-frequency hearing
than
women
Women have somewhat poorer low-frequency hear­
ing than men
dB HL
Figure 2.1 Pure tone audiogram from an 80-year-old woman. The 
configuration of the hearing loss gently slopes towards the high-frequency area, 
but hearing at the low frequencies is also impaired.

14 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
dB HL 
0 
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Figure 2.2 Presbyacusis pattern from a 77-year-old man. The hearing is normal 
Figure 2.3 A flat audiometric pattern in an 89-year-old woman, 
in the low-frequency area. The high-frequency hearing is poor, and there is a 
gradual increase of the hearing impairment with increasing frequency
hearing being significantly poorer in men than in women. For 
the low frequencies, there is a tendency in the opposite direc- 
tion, women having poorer hearing function than men in this 
frequency range.1
Speech perception in old age has been discussed over the 
years. In the earlier literature, it was suggested that speech dis­
crimination of the elderly is worse than would be expected from 
their ability to hear pure tones. However, speech perception in 
quiet is often well preserved in old age. There are three basic 
hypotheses explaining difficulties with the understanding of 
speech in old age: peripheral hearing loss, central auditory dys­
function and cognitive problems.2 Speech perception is gener­
ally fairly well preserved in the elderly, peripheral hearing loss 
being the single most influential factor.3 Speech recognition in 
quiet, as well as in noise, is influenced by peripheral dysfunc­
tion, as in younger age groups, but there is also evidence of 
central auditory dysfunction in elderly subjects.4
Aetiology of age-related hearing loss
According to one definition, presbyacusis is the physiological 
change in hearing that occurs with age per se: primary or pure 
presbyacusis. Pure presbyacusis is to some degree only a theo­
retical construction, probably with little relevance in a modem 
industrialized society. In studies of pure presbyacusis, partici­
pants with hearing loss caused by factors other than age have 
been excluded. In other studies, the hearing capacity of isolated 
populations relatively uncontaminated with possible noxious 
factors, typical for Western societies, has been investigated.
Figure 2.4 For comparison with the presbyacusis audiograms, noise-induced 
hearing loss affecting a 54-year-old man is shown. The audiogram sharply 
slopes above 1.5 kHz, and the maximal hearing loss is seen at 3-4 kHz.
Pure presbyacusis is by definition the hearing loss caused by 
biological, ageing processes and the term is nowadays often 
replaced with presbyacusis only.
Genetic mechanisms are important for the development 
of hearing with increasing age. Some persons have excellent 
hearing in advanced age, while others get presbyacusis when 
they are middle-aged. Genetic factors are apparent in familial
  

Ageing in the auditory and vestibular systems 
15
presbyacusis, an entity with relatively early onset of hearing 
loss, and affecting many members of the same family. The exis­
tence of familial presbyacusis has been verified in an epidemio­
logical investigation.6 Based on a temporal bone material, a 
mitochondrial genetic model of presbyacusis has been proposed.7
With the industrialization of societies throughout the world, 
the adverse effects of noise on hearing have become obvious. 
Exposure to noise is one extraneous noxious factor causing hear­
ing loss, and increased after the industrial revolution and the 
migration from the country to the cities. Although the levels of 
environmental noise are not often directly harmful to hearing, 
the effects of such noise in the long term are not known. The 
increased exposure to vocational and non-occupational noise 
could result in generation effects concerning age-related hearing 
loss. These effects are difficult to predict, since increased expo­
sure to occupational noise could be neutralized by a successful 
hearing conservation programme. The influence of noise on age- 
related hearing loss is not known in detail. Glorig and Nixon8 
coined the term sociocusis, emphasizing their opinion that age- 
related hearing loss, to a great extent, has extraneous causes 
other than occupational noise exposure. In the classical study of 
the hearing of the Mabaan tribe in southern Sudan, which is iso­
lated from the noise of the industrialized society, Rosen et al9 
concluded that sociocusis is caused by wear and tear of the ear 
during many decades of life, with exposure to noise being the 
most important factor. However, the noise-free environment is 
only one possible explanation for the stability of hearing capac­
ity in an isolated population, another factor could be a marked 
population homogeneity. In earlier investigations it has been 
shown that the deterioration of hearing related to ageing is 
reduced within the noise frequencies in noise-damaged ears. 
Gates and collagues reported an intriguing finding.10 They con­
firmed the reduced age-related hearing deterioration within the 
noise frequencies (3-6 kHz region) in elderly men with noise- 
induced hearing loss as well as presbyacusis, but an accelerated 
hearing loss in frequency areas adjacent to the noise-damaged 
frequencies, especially 2 kHz. Their findings suggest that a noise- 
damaged ear does not ‘age’ at the same rate as an ear not exposed 
to noise, and that the increased loss at 2 kHz suggests that the 
effects of noise damage may continue even after the noise 
exposure.
The term nosocusis has been used to describe hearing loss 
in elderly people due to ototraumatic events other than noise.11 
Such factors include influence from ototoxic agents and envi­
ronmental ototoxic insults, smoking, head trauma, and alcohol 
abuse.12 Health factors, e.g. otological diseases and cardiovascular 
disorders, have been related to the presence of presbyacusis.13
Different factors related to age-related hearing loss have 
been studied by Stephens14 and Lim and Stephens,15 who stud­
ied elderly patients with hearing problems attending a rehabil­
itation clinic. About 17-19% of these patients were considered 
to have presbyacusis only. One-third had a history of vascular 
disease, 14-33% had chronic otitis media, 12-15% had noise- 
induced or traumatic hearing loss, 6-9% had familial/genetic 
background factors, and 3-5% had possible metabolic influ-
AETIOLOGY OF AGE-RELATED HEARING LOSS
Intrinsic factors
Biological ageing 
Genetic
Endocrinological-metabolic 
Extrinsic factors
Noise exposure 
Ototoxic agents 
Middle ear disease 
Trauma
Socio-economic 
Health factors
General health 
Cardiovascular disease 
Endocrinological disease
ence. The studies showed that hearing loss in old age often had 
an origin earlier in life. There was a greater risk of having vas­
cular or biochemical abnormalities in those with hearing loss 
than in members of an age-matched control group.
Histopathology of age-related 
hearing loss
The morphological correlate to presbyacusis has been studied in 
inner ears from humans as well as research animals. Two strains 
of mice have been used extensively for this purpose. One is the 
C57 strain, consisting of mice which show severe age-related 
changes. The other is the CBA strain, which is resistant to age- 
related changes of hearing function (reviewed in reference 15). 
The high-frequency hearing loss seen in presbyacusis is corre­
lated with degenerative processes within the apical and basal 
regions of the cochlea (Figures 2.5, 2.6).
The most pronounced degeneration of the two types of 
cochlear hair cells is found in the basal coil.17 The outer hair 
cells (OHCs) show patchy degeneration most pronounced in 
the apical and basal coils.18 The degeneration of inner hair cells 
(IHCs), and also the nerve fibres, is predominantly confined to 
the basal coil. Over the age of 50 the degeneration of OHCs is 
more severe than the degeneration of IHCs.18 Atrophy of the 
spiral ganglion and the nerves in the osseous spiral lamina is 
another finding.
Presbyacusis is related to dysfunction on a cellular level. 
Derangement of the hair bundles and formation of giant cilia are 
findings often seen in aged human inner ears. Lipofuscin, also 
called the pigment of ageing, is assumed to be the waste product 
of lysosomal activity. The presence of these inclusions is a sign of 
exhaustion of enzymatic activity leading to decreased function 
and cell death. Lipofuscin inclusions and other osmiophilic 
structures have been reported to be among the most prominent 
intracellular alterations in the ageing cells of the cochlea.19
  

16 
Fundamentals o f audiological and vestibular medicine
Figure 2.5 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) photomicrograph showing a 
short section of a human cochlea from an old individual. One outer hair cell (OHC, 
black arrow) is missing, indicating the presence of discrete degeneration. Some of 
the inner hair cells (IHC, white arrows) (in the background) have derangement of 
the hair bundles, and two giant cilia are present. (Courtesy of Berit Engstrom.)
Figure 2.6 SEM photomicrograph from a human cochlea from an elderly 
person. Many of the OHCs are missing and the third row is disrupted, indicating 
age-related degeneration. Degenerative changes also affect the IHCs (upper 
row) with alterations of the hair bundles. (Courtesy of Berit Engstrom.)
Earlier histopathological studies also demonstrated degener- 
ative changes in the central auditory nervous system. Loss of 
neurones has been found in the cochlear nuclei20 and in the cen­
tral auditory pathway21 with increasing age. This concept has,
HISTOPATHOLOGY OF AGE-RELATED 
HEARING LOSS
Cochlear
OCH degeneration in basal and apical coil 
IHC degeneration in basal coil 
Alterations and derangement of hair bundles 
Intracellular inclusions 
Strial degeneration 
First order neurone
Spiral ganglion degeneration 
Cochlear nerve degeneration 
Central auditory system degeneration
however, been challenged, and presbyacusis-related histopatho- 
logical alterations have been focused in the inner ear.16
Schuknecht22 proposed four types of presbyacusis, based on 
morphological findings, in some occasions correlated with 
audiometric measurements. He called the first type sensory 
presbyacusis, with a loss of sensory cells as well as supporting 
and neuronal cells, mostly in the basal coil of the cochlea. The 
hearing impairment in this type of presbyacusis is a high fre­
quency loss with relatively normal speech perception. The sec­
ond type, called neural presbyacusis, is characterized by a loss 
of neurones more than sensory cells. This neuronal loss is seen 
in the entire spiral ganglion but is more severe in the basal turn. 
Audiometrically, speech recognition is reduced in relation to 
the pure tone audiogram. The rarity of the condition23 and the 
possibility that its background could be a central auditory dis­
order rather than a peripheral one are reasons for hesitation. 
Schuknecht called the third type strial presbyacusis. The stria 
vascularis shows a patchy atrophy seen in the entire cochlea but 
most pronounced in the middle and apical turns. The audio­
metric pattern is a flat hearing loss. The progression of the hear­
ing loss is slow, and the speech recognition ability good. The 
fourth type, cochlear conductive presbyacusis, could be caused 
by a disturbance of the mechanics of the spiral ligament, but 
no morphological changes have been demonstrated, and the 
validity of this proposed entity has been challenged.
Correlations between hearing impairment and histopath- 
ological changes in the cochlea have been studied in humans, 
but the results are contradictory. One extreme is represented 
by Suga and Lindsay,24 who found no correlations with the 
lesions in the sensory, neural or vascular elements of the 
cochlea and audiometry. Some degree of pathology, up to 20% 
hair cell loss, does not necessarily correlate with any significant 
hearing loss. Loss of OHCs in the apical coil can also be con­
sistent with normal hearing. A massive loss of basal OHCs 
(>50%) correlates with audiometrically verified hearing loss. 
Bredberg18 found that the number of OHCs correlated rather 
well with the audiogram while the number of IHCs did not.
Since presbyacusis and noise induced hearing loss are 
closely connected, it is of interest to compare the histopathol­
ogy of the two entities.25 The most pronounced degenerations
  

Ageing in the auditory and vestibular systems 
17
in the ageing ear are seen in the peripheral third row of the 
OHCs, while the most noise-susceptible sensory cells in the 
organ of Corti are, in decreasing order: OHCs of the first, sec­
ond and third row and IHCs. The degeneration in the ageing 
ear is patchy and is present in all coils of the cochlea, but is 
most pronounced in the basal and apical regions. Two patterns 
of degeneration have been described in ears exposed to intense 
noise. One involves the lower basal turn in a sharply demar­
cated area and is associated with the 4'kHz dip in the audio­
gram. The second pattern consists of a more widespread 
pathology of the basal part of the cochlea and is associated 
with a sloping audiogram.
Epidemiology of age-related hearing 
loss
The extent of presbyacusis, its progress with increasing age, its 
distribution within different populations and calculations of 
rehabilitative needs can be studied using epidemiological meth­
ods. The overall state of hearing can be studied using 
unscreened populations. Such studies include all subjects in the 
study populations, even participants with hearing loss not 
related to ageing. The intention is to study hearing among 
elderly persons, regardless of the cause of any hearing impair­
ments present. Other studies have used screened or selected 
populations to identify pure presbyacusis and avoid extraneous 
factors that could have negative influences on the hearing. Sub­
jects with noise exposure or any kind of otological disease have 
been excluded from these studies.
In a cross-sectional study, the hearing of the subjects is mea­
sured in age bands during one limited period of time. In a longitu­
dinal study, the same subjects are tested on different occasions, 
covering a time span of up to decades, which makes it time- 
consuming. The longitudinal design, in contrast to the cross- 
sectional design, controls different variables such as the genetic 
composition of the population, cultural background, level of 
education, and variation of noise exposure. Generation effects 
can be studied by comparing different cohorts of similar age on 
different occasions (time-lag studies). Variations between differ­
ent publications could be the result of differences in selection 
criteria of the test populations, in study design, in generation 
effects, in methodology used, and in how the results are presented.
A number of epidemiological studies, covering various ages, 
have been published. In some reports, results from such studies 
have been compiled.26 The ISO 199927 database A comprises 
age-related hearing threshold levels of otologically normal pop­
ulations (highly screened regarding exposure to noise and oto­
logical diseases) from industrialized societies, and database B 
comprises unscreened populations.
A large-scale and very comprehensive epidemiological 
study with a cross-sectional design is the MRC National Study 
of Hearing.28,29 The study population, living in four major cities 
in Great Britain, was unselected with regard to otological dis­
order. The prevalence of hearing impairment at ages 71-80 in 
the better ear was calculated. If subjects with minor hearing 
impairments were included, the prevalence of hearing impair­
ment was 60%. If moderately impaired persons were included, 
the figure was 18%. Four per cent of the included subjects were 
severely impaired.
The Edinburgh study30 was a longitudinal study with a time 
span of up to 17 years. The authors reported increases in hearing 
loss in the entire frequency range with advancing age. The dete­
rioration rate of age-related hearing loss was more pronounced 
for the higher frequencies and continued steadily into the ninth 
decade.
In the Gerontological and Geriatric Population Study of 
Goteborg, Sweden, four age cohorts of elderly persons were inves­
tigated, with both longitudinal and cross-sectional designs.31,32 
From 70 to 81 years, deterioration of hearing was apparent in the 
entire frequency range and was about 1-2 dB/year. From 80 to 90 
years of age a levelling of the deterioration was noticed, indicat­
ing a slowing down of presbyacusis. The Copenhagen male 
study and the Valby study33-34 had longitudinal and cross- 
sectional designs, describing, among other things, gender differ­
ences. The studies also included various aspects of rehabilitation 
of elderly subjects. The Framingham study was conducted in 
Massachusetts.23,36,37 Two age cohorts, with a time-lag of 5 years, 
were investigated longitudinally and cross-sectionally. Consid­
erable differences were reported between the two cohorts, the 
participants of the second cohort having better hearing in old age 
than those of the first cohort. In the first cohort, a slowing-up of 
the deterioration was discernible in advanced age, but this was 
not seen in the second cohort. The Baltimore Longitudinal 
Study of Aging38,39 was a longitudinal study. The subjects were 
not selected with regard to noise exposure or otological disease, 
but the participants predominantly had high education and 
socio-economic status. Changes in hearing thresholds occurred 
in all age groups during the follow-up period. The rate of change 
was faster in the speech frequencies than in the higher frequen­
cies. The men’s hearing declined faster than that of the women. 
Other important epidemiological contributions have been 
reported from Italy 
and Finland. 
In the Finnish study, the 
prevalence of hearing loss in a 55-75-year-old population was 
calculated. Mild hearing impairment was demonstrated in 
10-30%, moderate in 4-8%, and severe in 0.2-1.1% of the 
participants, according to two classification systems.
The results of the cited investigations coincide reasonably 
well. The unscreened studies are fairly similar, but a difference 
of up to 10 dB or more at some octaves exists. The selected 
studies also coincide rather well, with some variability. The 
unscreened populations have 5-15-dB poorer threshold values 
than the screened populations, this being especially pro­
nounced in the high frequencies.
The noise factor has been shown to be important in many 
studies, in which populations screened for noise exposure have 
been compared with populations that have not been screened. 
One example is the Baltimore Longitudinal study of Aging.39 
The hearing function is reported to be better in this screened
  

18 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
study compared to the results of other investigations of 
unscreened populations. However, the situation is not unequiv­
ocal, since the difference between screened and unscreened 
populations in the MRC study from the UK is not very striking.29
A compilation of five epidemiological investigations of 
unscreened populations is presented in Figures 2.7 and 2.8 for 
the age groups 70-80 and 80+, respectively.29,32,35,37,43
The annual decline of hearing varies considerably. From 
ages 70-80, the mean deterioration rate is about 1 dB per year, 
except in the high frequencies where the decline can reach 2-3 
dB/year. Two patterns can be discerned: one with a markedly 
greater deterioration rate in the high frequencies than in the 
low ones,27,33 and another with deterioration involving the 
entire frequency range.31,32,37 Hearing impairment is an 
especially common problem for the oldest people.42
Gender differences have been reported in many studies. 
Elderly women have generally better hearing than men of the 
same age. Women have better threshold values at 2-8 kHz than 
men, with a difference of up to 20 dB at 4 kHz.23,26,31,32,36 The 
gender difference is marked in unselected cases, where the 
difference is 15-25 dB at 4 kHz at age 70. In the low-frequency 
area, there is a tendency for women to present with somewhat 
poorer thresholds than men. The difference between genders is 
as apparent at age 80 as at age 70. A complication of six epi­
demiological studies regarding gender differences at ages 70-80 
years and 80-90 years is presented in Figure 2.9. Extrinsic oto- 
traumatic factors, above all exposure to noise, differ between 
genders and are likely to be responsible for at least part of the 
difference.11 However, results regarding gender differences have
been somewhat contradictory. Cruickshanks et al43 reported 
that the male excess of hearing loss remained statistically sig­
nificant after adjusting for age, education, noise exposure, and 
occupation. No significant gender difference has been found in 
animal studies.44 The controversy over how much noise- 
induced hearing loss accounts for the development of presbya­
cusis and for the development of presbyacusis and for the 
gender difference remains to be resolved.
Reported hearing disability and 
handicap
Pure tone audiometry gives only limited information regarding 
hearing disability and handicap. Listening involves many non- 
auditory factors, such as visual clues and mental alertness. Peo­
ple with an active, extrovert lifestyle place greater demands on 
auditory function than those with few social contacts. Other 
aspects of presbyacusis than measured hearing have been 
investigated by using instruments designed to screen hearing 
problems. Weinstein and Ventry45 constructed an instrument 
especially designed to study the effects of presbyacusis, the 
Hearing Handicap Inventory for the Elderly (HHIE). This 
instrument has been used extensively both in the original form 
and in a screening version (HHIE-S). Pure tone audiometry 
explained less than half the variance of hearing handicap. The 
consequences of hearing loss are difficult to predict from the 
audiogram, especially if the impairment is mild, and it was
dB HL 
10
dB HL 
10
i> 
Gates et al 1990’17 
-4—  Davis 199529 
o 
Jonsson and Rosenhall 19883? 
-X—  Cruikshanks et al 199843
Women, Left Ear 
l 
> 
i 
t 
i 
0.25 
0.5
Men, Left Ear
Figure 2.7. A compilation of the results of 70-80-year-old women and men, unscreened populations.29,32,37,43 Median pure tone thresholds in dB HL at 0.25-8 kHz 
are presented.
  

Ageing in the auditory and vestibular systems 
19
dB HL
dB HL
Gates et aM990J7 
— 4—  Parving et al35 
Q 
Jonsson and Rosenhall 1988i2 
— X —  Cruikshanks et al 19984i
- Women, Left Ear
- I____ I____ I____ I____ L_-----1-------1------ 1------ 1____ I____ t 
. J____ I____ I____ I____ I__ I
0.25 
0.5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
6 
8 kHz
Men. Left Ear
Figure 2.8. A compilation of the results of four epidemiological investigationsof 80-90-year-old persons, unscreened populations.32,35,37,43
> 
Gates etal 1990 
& 
Pearson et al 199539 
H
-  Davis 199529 
o  
Jonsson and Rosenhall 1988J
Cruikshanks et a I 1998
.43
> 
Gates et aM99Q37 
Pearson et at 199539 
H I—  Parving etal 199735 
o 
Jonsson and Rosenhall 1988J‘ 
- K —  Cruikshanks etal 199843
80-90 years
80-90 years 
_i____i___ i____i—
70-80 years
■ 
> 
* 
t____i____i_
Figure 2.9. Gender differences in dB (male threshold values minus female values) for the frequencies 0.25-8 kHz. Results of six epidemiological investigations.29,32,35,
37,39,43
suggested that self-reports would be more appropriate than 
measured hearing to estimate the effects of presbyacusis.45 It 
has been shown that higher HHIE-S scores are related to age 
and measured hearing loss.46 After adjusting for hearing loss,
elderly persons tend to rate their problems as less pronounced 
than younger ones, especially if the hearing impairment is 
mild.4 ~*9 Jerger and Chmiel50 reported that perceived hearing 
handicap emerged as a separate factor, not strongly related to
  

20 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
either audibility, speech perception or central auditory 
processing.
In the MRC National Study of Hearing, the cross-sectional 
study of adults in Great Britain, a questionnaire was sent to a 
large population of adults.28,29,51 The prevalence of persons with­
out hearing complaints was 65%. Great difficulty in hearing in 
noise was reported by 44-60%, depending on the age.51 When 
participants were asked about hearing difficulty in quiet, slight 
difficulty was reported by 14% (71-80 years) and 18% (>80 
years). Moderate difficulty was reported by 7% (71-80 years) 
and 10% (>80 years). Pronounced difficulty was reported by 4% 
(71-80 years) and 9% (>80 years).
In the study of Danish men with a mean age of 60 years, 
64% had no complaints about their hearing capacity.52 In the 
Goteborg study,531-2% of the women and about 8% of the men 
complained of serious hearing problems at age 70. The number 
of participants with subjective problems increased with age. 
However, at age 79, a majority of the respondents (86%) had no 
or only slight to moderate problems.
Aural rehabilitation in old age
Since presbyacusis is a sensorineural impairment, aural rehabili­
tation is the important remedy available. The basis of this reha­
bilitation is amplification, using hearing aids and other technical 
devices. Hearing aid prescription follows general principles inde­
pendent of age,54 but there are some specific comments regarding 
amplification in old age. Pensioners are by far the largest single 
recipient group of hearing aids in the developed countries. The 
indications for hearing aid amplification in old age can be 
unclear. Old persons often need extensive training to be able to 
appreciate a hearing aid. Since presbyacusis develops very grad­
ually, there is a risk of development of a maladaptive coping 
process, dominated by avoidance of demanding communicative 
situations. The resulting limitations of social contacts and isola­
tion can be avoided by a rehabilitation programme, but this is 
not always obvious for the hearing impaired. The ‘younger’ olds 
often have only mild hearing loss with marginal need for reha­
bilitation. However, when they become older and the hearing 
has deteriorated, many of them are debilitated by age and dis­
ease, which renders the rehabilitation difficult or even impossi­
ble. Starting a training programme relatively early pays off later 
on, but increases the efforts and the costs. Binaural amplification 
is most often superior to monaural, but for practical and eco-
HEARING REHABILITATION OF THE ELDERLY
Hearing aid amplification 
Assistive hearing devices 
Counselling 
Training courses 
Tinnitus rehabilitation
nomical reasons, only one hearing aid is often prescribed for 
elderly persons. It should, however, be noticed that pensioners 
also benefit from the better soundscape effects and the increased 
speech perception in noise obtained by binaural amplification. 
Assistive devices can often be recommended for the elderly. For 
a mildly impaired person, a simple assistive listening device 
might provide the necessary training up to the time when a hear­
ing aid is needed. Signal amplifiers are examples of other unso­
phisticated but valuable devices.
Hearing aid fitting includes counselling in order to ensure 
that the device is handled properly. People with hearing impair­
ment can be offered more extensive training programmes. Such 
programmes are designed very differently in different countries, 
e.g. as individual counselling or group training courses. The 
goals are to provide information about hearing impairment and 
the impact on activities and participation in society, to teach 
about hearing aids and their management, and to provide com­
munication abilities.
Tinnitus
Tinnitus occurs in all age groups, and in most studies it 
increases, like hearing loss, with age. However, this increase 
with age is not as pronounced as the hearing decline caused by 
presbyacusis, and, according to Davis,29 no or only little 
increase occurred in the total prevalence with increasing age. 
The total prevalence of tinnitus, both continuous and variable, 
has been reported as less than 20% to more than 40% in elderly 
people.29,55 According to Davis,29 no increase occurred in the 
total prevalence of tinnitus with increasing age. Severely 
annoying tinnitus was reported in 3-4%. The prevalence of tin­
nitus was similar between men and women in the studies cited. 
Tinnitus in old age is considered to have a similar aetiological 
background as that in younger age. A peripheral hearing loss is 
most often present, in old age presbyacusis, or some other type 
of hearing loss achieved earlier in life. A significant correlation 
between tinnitus and previous exposure to occupational noise 
has been reported by Rosenhall and Karlsson.56
Balance and ageing
Balance disorders are very common, and complaints of this 
kind increase with age.57 Disequilibrium of ageing, sometimes 
called presbybalance, is a major problem in geriatric care. 
Dizziness/vertigo in the elderly often results in inactivity, 
and is also an important factor for fall accidents. Balance 
problems and falls are a common cause of morbidity and 
mortality in old age.58 Prevalence figures of disequilibrium in 
elderly persons vary considerably. 
Sixt 
and 
Landahl59 
reported prevalence figures of dizziness for 75-year-olds of 
30% (men), and 40% (women). Hobeika60 found that 65% 
of individuals older than 60 years of age experience dizziness 
or loss of balance.
  

Ageing in the auditory and vestibular systems 
21
The equilibrium is regulated by the postural system, which 
gets information from three sensory systems: the vestibular, the 
visual and the proprioceptive. The sensory input is conveyed to 
different central nervous system (CNS) centres, and is inte­
grated and stored in a memory bank. The efferent part of the 
postural system is mediated by the motor system to peripheral 
muscles for maintenance of gait and for locomotion. The 
vestibular apparatus consists of the semicircular system, in 
which cristae ampullares register angular acceleration, and the 
otolithic organs, which register linear acceleration, above all 
gravity. The vestibular input is brought via the vestibular nerve 
to the vestibular nuclei in the brainstem, which are in contact 
with different CNS centres involved in the balance system.
The morphological background of balance disorders in old 
age is, at least partly, similar to what has been reported in the 
cochlea in presbyacusis. Histopathological studies from humans 
and research animals have shown reductions of both vestibular 
hair cell populations and neurones in the vestibular nerve with 
age.61,62 In the vestibular sensory epithelia, the degenerative 
changes are pronounced in the semicircular cristae, and, to a 
lesser degree, in the vestibular maculae. The vestibular hair
MORPHOLOGICAL CHANGES IN 
PRESBYBALANCE
Pronounced degeneration of cristae ampullares 
Slight to moderate degeneration of maculae 
Hair cell alterations 
Otoconia I changes 
Vestibular nerve degeneration 
Degeneration of the central vestibular system
cells show morphological changes, such as the presence of intra­
cellular inclusions and alterations of the hair bundles.60-62 
Changes involving the otoconia have also been reported.63 
Accordingly, peripheral vestibular dysfunction is one factor 
responsible for disequilibrium of ageing.
Physiological methods, measuring the peripheral vestibular 
function, have demonstrated declining responses with increas­
ing age. According to Paige,65 such age-related changes in 
response characteristics are similar to reported morphological 
deterioration of the vestibular apparatus with ageing. However, 
the results of peripheral vestibular tests are ambiguous: poor 
correlation with anatomical changes has also been reported, 
possibly suggesting that adaptive mechanisms in the CNS are 
equally important.66
The postural control system is very complex, and age-related 
changes also affect CNS functions responsible for balance regu­
lation. One result is that central integration of postural infor­
mation becomes less efficient with age.67 The musculoskeletal 
system is also affected, including decreases in muscle strength 
and delayed motor commands, problems which result in balance 
impairments.68 Numerous studies, utilizing posturographic
AETIOLOGY OF PRESBYBALANCE
Peripheral vestibular dysfunction 
Decline of central postural integration 
Central vestibular dysfunction 
Impaired motor control 
Overconsumption of pharmaceutical drugs
methods, have demonstrated increased body sway in old age, 
especially in older subjects who complain of imbalance.69
Balance problems in old age have, accordingly, a complex, 
often multifactorial background. One factor is the ageing 
process, but the resulting symptoms and signs are often vague 
and elusive. Peripheral vestibular disorders, e.g. BPPV (benign 
paroxysmal positional vertigo) and vestibular neuritis, show 
increasing incidence in old age. It is important to diagnose such 
conditions, which can be easy to treat. Central vestibular disor­
ders must be considered, since posterior fossa stroke must be 
identified. In addition to decreased peripheral and central bal­
ance function in old age, ailing health and declining vision 
contribute to problems with the equilibrium. Overconsumption 
of pharmaceutical drugs is one factor that should be noted. 
Sedation by psychoactive drugs reduces alertness and reaction 
time, and increases the risk of fall accidents. Removal of unnec­
essary medication is therefore important. Training programmes 
aimed at improving the balance in old age have been devised. 
Postural exercises, including balance training, physical exercise, 
and muscular strengthening, have been demonstrated to 
decrease body sway and can therefore be a valuable contribu­
tion to the treatment of age-related dizziness and the preven­
tion of fall accidents.70
Concluding remarks
Poor hearing and balance in old age are common problems. 
Age-related hearing loss is a multifactorial phenomenon and 
includes a variety of aetiological factors. Due to its indistinct­
ness and the problem of defining it, age-related hearing loss can 
be an alternative expression. The situation is similar with pres- 
bybalance. Both conditions have often profound effects on the 
quality of life in old age, but in very different ways. The 
demands on society in terms of care are considerable. Since the 
number of elderly persons is increasing, the incidence of both 
presbyacusis and presbybalance is expected to increase in the 
future.
The most common audiometric configuration of age- 
related hearing loss is a gently sloping audiogram, above all 
affecting the high frequencies. Other types of auditory dysfunc­
tions, such as noise-induced hearing loss and ototoxic hearing 
loss, have similar audiometric configurations. Therefore, the 
differentiation between presbyacusis and other lesions based on 
the audiogram is difficult or impossible to accomplish. Efforts to 
improve the auditory communication in old age are important
  

22 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
and can be expected to result in better quality of life for elderly 
persons and to more efficient public expenditure. The alleviation 
of age-related hearing handicap includes aural rehabilitation 
with hearing aid fitting and training programmes. Procedures 
and devices especially designed for the elderly are needed. 
Accessibility is important. Close co-operation with general prac­
titioners and special counsellors is important.
Hearing loss is often combined with other handicaps, such 
as dementia, immobility and poor vision. The synergistic effects 
of multiple handicaps can be pronounced. It has been reported 
in some studies that elderly persons in institutions have poorer 
hearing than those who live at home. Is this a result of ailing 
health, or the probability that the elderly with hearing loss 
develop pseudodementia, or both?
Balance disorders in old age are very often severely debili­
tating, and they too often result in inactivity and fall accidents, 
and represent thus a severe threat to health and life. It is prob­
lematic that diagnostic and treatment programmes are still so 
imperfect, and the demand for further research is obvious.
Prevention is an issue which is both challenging and prob­
lematic. Obviously, for hearing, the most important prevention 
involves noise reduction. Prevention must start early in life and 
not shortly before retirement. It is, however, not an easy task to 
change attitudes early in life for a gain decades later. Is it possi­
ble to convince young people in their twenties to avoid expo­
sure to excessive sound, which they may not even regard as 
noise? Are there other preventive measures that can be of 
importance in the future? Diet, food additives, reduction of car­
diovascular disease, and changes of life style, e.g. smoking, are 
possible factors. We know very little about this, and more 
research is needed. The possible benefits are, however, great, 
both in personal and economic terms.
References
1. Jerger J, Chmiel R, Stach B, Spretnjak M. Gender affects audio­
metric shape in presbycusis. J Am A cad Audiol 1993; 4: 42-9.
2. Humes LE. Speech understanding in the elderly. J Am Acad Audiol 
1996; 7: 161-7.
3. Humes LE, Watson BU, Christensen LA, Cokely CG, Hailing 
DC, Lee L. Factors associated with individual differences in clini­
cal measures of speech recognition among the elderly. J Speech 
Hear Res 1994; 37: 465-74.
4. Frisina DR, Frisina RD. Speech recognition in noise and presbya­
cusis; relations to possible neural mechanisms. Hear Res 1997; 
106: 95-104.
5. Gilad O, Glorig A. Presbyacusis: the aging ear. Part 1. J Am Aud 
Soc 1979; 4: 195-206.
6. Gates GA, Couropmitree NN, Myers RH. Genetic association in 
age-related hearing thresholds. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1999; 125: 654-9.
7. Bai U, Seidman MD, Hinojosa R, Quirk WS. Mitochondrial 
DNA deletions associated with aging and possible presbyacusis: a 
human archival temporal bone study. Am] Otol 1997; 18: 449-53.
8. Glorig A, Nixon J. Distribution of hearing loss in various popula­
tions. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1960; 69: 497-516.
9. Rosen S, Bergman M, Plester D, El-Mofty A, Satty M. Presbycusis 
study of a relatively noise-free population in the Sudan. Ann Otol 
Rhinol Laryngol 1962; 71: 727-42.
10. Gates GA, Schmid P, Kujawa SG et al. Longitudinal threshold 
changes in older men with audiometric notches. Hear Res 2000; 
141: 220-8.
11. Kryter KD. Presbycusis, sociocusis and nosocusis. J Acoust Soc Am 
1983; 73:1897-916.
12. Rosenhall U, Sixt E, Sundh V, Svanborg A. Correlations between 
presbyacusis and extrinsic noxious factors. Audiology 1993; 32: 
234-43
13. Gates GA, Cobb JL, D’Agostino RB, Wolf PA. The relation of 
hearing in the elderly to the presence of cardiovascular disease and 
cardiovascular risk factors. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993; 
119: 156-61.
14. Stephens SDG. What is acquired hearing loss in the elderly? In: 
Glennerding F, ed. Acquired Hearing Loss and Elderly People. Stoke 
on Trent, Beth Johnson Foundation Publications; 1982: pp. 9-26.
15. Lim DP, Stephens SDG. Clinical investigation of hearing loss in 
the elderly. Clin Otolaryngol 1991; 16: 288-93.
16. Willott JF. Anatomic and physiologic aging: a behavioural neuro­
science perspective. J Am A cad Audiol 1996; 7: 141-51.
17. Soucek S, Michaels L, Frohlich A. Pathological changes in the 
organ of Corti in presbycusis as revealed by microslicing and stain­
ing. Acta Otolaryngol 1987; Suppl 436: 93-102.
18. Bredberg G. Cellular pattern and nerve supply of the human organ 
of Corti. Acta Otolaryngol 1968; Suppl 236: 1-135.
19. Engstrom B, Hillerdal M, Laurell G. Selected pathological findings 
in the human cochlea. Acta Otolaryngol 1987, Suppl 436: 110-16.
20. Amesen AR. Presbycusis loss of neurons in the human cochlear 
nuclei. J Laryngol Otol 1982; 96: 503-11.
21. Kirikae I, Sato T, Shitara T. A study of hearing in advanced age. 
Laryngoscope 1964; 74: 205-20.
22. Schuknecht H. Pathology of the Ear. Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
Harvard University Press, 1995.
23. Gates GA, Cooper JC. Incidence of hearing decline in the elderly. 
Acta Otolaryngol 1991; 111: 240-8.
24. Suga F, Lindsay JR. Histopathological observations of presbycusis. 
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1976; 85: 169-84.
25. Willott JF. Aging and the Auditory System. Anatomy, Physiology, and 
Psychophysics. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, 1991.
26. Robinson D. Threshold of hearing as a function of age and sex for 
the typical unscreened population. BrJ Audiol 1988; 22: 5-20.
27. International Standards Organisation. Acoustics - Determination of 
Occupational Noise Exposure and Estimation of Noise-induced Hear­
ing Impairment 2nd edition, Geneva, ISO, 1990.
28. Coles R, Davis A, Haggard M. Population study of hearing disor­
ders in adults: preliminary communication. J R Soc Med 1981; 74: 
819-27.
29. Davis AC. Hearing in Adults. The Prevalence and Distribution of 
Hearing Impairment and Reported Hearing Disability in the MRC 
Institute of Hearing Research's National Study of Hearing. London: 
Whurr Publishers, 1995.
  

Ageing in the auditory and vestibular systems 
23
30. Keay D, Murray J. Hearing loss in the elderly: a 17-year longitudi­
nal study. Clin Otolaryngol 1988; 13: 31-5.
31. Pedersen KE, Rosenhall U, M0ller MB. Changes in pure-tone 
thresholds in individuals aged 70-81: results from a longitudinal 
study. Audiology 1989; 28: 194-204.
32. Jonsson R, Rosenhall U. Hearing in advanced age. A study of pres­
byacusis in 85-, 88- and 90-year-old people. Audiology 1998; 37: 
207-18.
33. Ostri B, Parving A. A longitudinal study of hearing impairment in 
male subjects — an 8-year follow-up. Br J Audiol 1991: 25: 41-8.
34. Bech B, Christensen, Parving A. The Valby project: a survey of 
the hearing in the elderly >80 years of age provided with hearing 
aids. Scand Audiol 1996; 25: 247-52.
35. Parving A, Biering-Sorensen M, Bech B, Christiansen B, 
Sorensen MS. Hearing in the elderly >80 years of age. Prevalence 
and sensitivity. Scand Audiol 1997: 26; 99-106.
36. Moscicki E, Elkins E, Baum H, McNamara P. Hearing loss in the 
elderly: an epidemiologic study of the Framingham Heart Study 
Cohort. Ear Hear 1985; 6: 184-90.
37. Gates GA, Cooper JC, Kannel WB, Miller N. Hearing in the 
elderly: the Framingham cohort, 1983-1985. Part 1. Basic audio­
metric test results. Ear Hear 1990; 11: 247-56.
38. Brant LJ, Fozard JL. Age changes in pure-tone hearing thresholds 
in a longitudinal study of normal human hearing. J Acoust Soc Am 
1990; 88: 831-20.
39. Pearson J, Morrell CH, Gordon-Salant S et al. Gender differences 
in a longitudinal study of age-associated hearing loss. J Acous Soc 
Am 1995; 97: 1196-205.
40. Quaranta A, Assennato G, Sallustio V. Epidemiology of hearing 
problems among adults in Italy. Scand Audiol 1996; Suppl. 42:9-13.
41. Uimonen S, Maki-Torkko E, Jounio-Ervasti K, Sorri M. Hearing 
in 55 to 75 year old people in northern Finland — a comparison 
of two classifications of hearing impairment. Acta Otolaryngol 
1997, Suppl 529: 69-70.
42. Rosenhall U, Jonsson R, Davis A, Parving A. Hearing in the ‘old­
est old’ — a cross-sectional collaborative study from three Euro­
pean countries. J Audiol Med.
43. Cruickshanks KJ, Wiley TL, Tweed TS et al. Prevalence of hear­
ing loss in older adults in Beaver Dam, Wisconsin. The epidemi­
ology of hearing loss. Am J Epidemiol 1988; 148: 879-86.
44. Hunter KP, Willott JF. Aging and and the auditory brainstem 
response in mice with severe or minimal presbycusis. Hear Res 
1987; 30: 207-18.
45. Weinstein BE, Ventry IM. Audiometric correlates of the Hearing 
Handicap Inventory for the Elderly. J Speech Hear Disord 1983; 48: 
379-84.
46. Wiley TL, Cruickshanks KJ, Nondahl DM, Tweed TS. Self- 
reported hearing handicap and audiometric measures in older 
adults. J Am Audiol 2000; 11: 67-75.
47. Lutman ME. Hearing disability in the elderly. Acta Otolaryngol 
1990; Suppl 476: 239-48.
48. Gatehouse S. Determinants of self-reported disability in older sub­
jects. Ear Hear 1990; 11: 578-658.
49. Chmiel R, Jerger J. Some factors affecting assessment of hearing 
handicap in the elderly. J Am Acad Audiol 1993; 4: 249-57.
50. Jerger J, Chmiel R. Factor analytic structure of auditory impair­
ment in elderly persons. J Am Acad Audiol 1997; 8: 269-76.
51. Davis AC. The prevalence of hearing impairment and reported 
hearing disability among adults in Great Britain. Int J Epidemiol 
1989; 18:911-17.
52. Parving A, Ostri B, Katholm J. Parbo J: On prediction of hearing 
disability. Audiology 1986; 25: 129-35.
53. Rosenhall U, Pedersen K, M0ller MB. Self-assessment of hearing 
problems in an elderly population. A longitudinal study. Scand 
Audiol 1987; 16: 211-17.
54. Valente M (ed.). Hearing Aids: Standards, Options and Limita­
tions. New York: Georg Thieme Verlag, 1996.
55. Axelsson A, Ringdahl A. Tinnitus — a study of its prevalence and 
characteristics. BrJ Audiol 1989; 23: 53-62.
56. Rosenhall U, Karlsson A-K. Tinnitus in old age. Scand Audiol 
1991; 20: 165-71.
57. Tibblin G, Bengtsson C, Furunes B, Lapidus L. Symptoms by age 
and sex. The population studies of men and women in Gothen­
burg, Sweden. Scand J Prim Health Care 1990; 8: 9-17.
58. Luxon LM. Disturbance of balance in the elderly. Br J Hosp Med 
1991; 45: 22-6.
59. Sixt E, Landahl S. Postural disturbances in a 75-year-old popula­
tion: I. Prevalence and functional consequences. Age Ageing 1987; 
16: 393-8.
60. Hobeika CP. Equilibrium and balance in the elderly. Ear Nose 
Throat J 1999; 78: 558-62.
61. Engstrom H, Bergstrom B, Rosenhall U. The vestibular sensory 
epithelia. Arch Otolaryngol 1974; 100: 411-18.
62. Park JC, Hubei SB, Woods AD. Morphometric analysis and fine 
structure of the vestibular epithelium of aged C57BL/6NNia mice. 
Hear Res 1987; 28: 87-96.
63. Nakayama M, Helfert RH, Konrad HR, Caspary DM. Scanning 
electron microscopic evaluation of age-related changes in the rat 
vestibular epithelium. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994; 111: 
799-806.
64. Igarashi M, Saito R, Mizukoshi K, Alford BR. Otoconia in young 
and elderly persons: a temporal bone study. Acta Otolaryngol 1993; 
Suppl 504: 26-9.
65. Paige GD. Senescence of human visual-vestibular interactions. 1. 
Vestibulo-ocular reflex and adaptive plasticity with aging. J Vestib 
Res 1992; 2: 133-51.
66. Peterka RJ, Black FO, Schoenhoff MB. Age-related changes in 
human vestibulo-ocular reflexes: sinusoidal rotation and caloric 
tests. J Vestib Res 1990; 1: 49-59.
67. Perrin PP, Jeandel C, Perrin CA, Bene MC. Influence of visual 
control, conduction, and central integration on static and dynamic 
balance in healthy older adults. Gerontology 1997; 43: 223-31.
68. Konrad HR, Girardi M, Helfert R. Balance and aging. Laryngo­
scope 1999; 109: 1454-60.
69. Baloh RW, Spain S, Sochotch TM, Jacobson KM, Bell T. Postur­
ography and balance problems in older people. J Am Geriatr Soc 
1995; 43: 638-44.
70. Hamman R, Longridge NS, Mekjavic I, Dickinson J. Effect of age 
and training schedules on balance improvement exercises using 
visual biofeedback. J Otolaryngol 1995; 24: 221-9.
  

3 Pathology of the ear
Leslie Michaels
The ear is affected by a wide range of pathological conditions. 
Considerations of space require that the pathology of condi­
tions dealt with by medical audiologists should be emphasized 
in this chapter at the expense of purely surgical ones.
Otitis media
Otitis media is one of the most common of all diseases, partic­
ularly in young children. The clinical forms of the acute and 
chronic conditions correspond to the pathological changes, but 
intermediate or mixed states are frequent. Perforation of the 
tympanic membrane may occur at any phase of otitis media, but 
an effusion is often present behind an intact tympanic mem­
brane (see below). It is important that an advanced degree of 
otitis media may exist, but may remain undetected clinically 
and even be undetectable.
Microbiology
In the acute phase, Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus 
influenzae 
are 
the 
most common causative organisms. 
Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes are also 
causative in a lesser number. Epidemiological studies have indi­
cated that the respiratory viruses, influenza viruses A and B, 
enterovirus, rhinovirus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, and 
respiratory syncytial virus, may be agents in the early phases of 
the illness. In the chronic phase, Gram-negative organisms, 
particularly Proteus and Pseudomonas, are found, although 
Staphylococcus pyogenes and p-haemolytic streptococci are some­
times isolated from the discharging pus of chronically inflamed 
ears. Anaerobes may sometimes be isolated, including anaero­
bic Gram-positive cocci, Bacteroides spp., and Clostridium spp.
Although much less frequent than the above organisms, 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis may be the causative agent of 
chronic inflammation of the middle ear. In such cases, the 
inflammatory reaction is quite distinct, with giant cells, epithe­
lioid cells and caseation.
General pathological changes
Not only is the acute phase of otitis media characterized by 
severe congestion of the mucosa of the middle ear and the tym­
panic membrane, but a similar change is also present in chronic 
otitis media (Table 3.1). The exudation of blood products may 
leave a deposit of fibrin in the tissues or in the tympanic and 
mastoid air cell cavities. A fluid or gelatinous exudate in the 
middle ear cavity is frequently a prominent component of the 
inflammatory reaction, giving rise to a specific form of the dis­
ease known as otitis media with effusion (serous otitis media or 
glue ear). In these cases, mucus may be secreted by newly 
formed glands in the middle ear mucosa and contribute to the 
fluid ‘exudate’.
In acute inflammation, neutrophils are prevalent. It is 
likely that the immigration of these cells is mediated by the 
local 
production 
of cytokines, 
such 
as 
interleukin-1, 
interleukin-2, or tumor necrosis factor. In chronic inflamma­
tion, histiocytes, lymphocytes and plasma cells form the char­
acteristic infiltrate. There is evidence that cytokine production 
is also present in the chronic phase of otitis media.
PATHOLOGICAL CHANGES IN CHRONIC 
OTITIS MEDIA
Congestion of mucosa of middle ear 
Histiocytic, lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration 
of mucosa
Haemorrhage leading to cholesterol granuloma 
Necrosis leading to perforation of the tympanic 
membrane 
Erosion of ossicles and bony wall 
Glandular metaplasia 
Fibrosis: adhesive otitis 
Fibrosis: tympanosclerosis 
Cholesteatoma

26 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
Tabic 3.1 Pathological processes in chronic otitis media
Process
Cell or tissue
Congestion 
Blood vessels
Exudation
Proliferation
Necrosis
Plasma
Histiocytes, 
lymphocytes, 
plasma celts
Red cells
Columnar
epithelium
Squamous cell 
epithelium
Blood vessels, 
fibroblasts, 
mononuclear cells
Fibroblasts,
collagen
Bone
Tympanic
membrane
Bone
Pathological
change
Serous otitis media 
Chronic inflammation
Haemorrhage 
Cholesterol granuloma
Glandular metaplasia 
with mucus secretion
Cholesteatoma
Granulation tissue
Adhesive otitis 
Tympanosclerosis 
Woven and 
lamellar bone 
formation
Perforation
Rarefying
osteitis
Figure 3.1 Cholesterol granuloma of the middle ear. Sheaves of elongated 
empty spaces are produced by crystals of cholesterol and its esters which have 
been dissolved in the processing of the specimen. The crystals are surrounded by 
foreign body giant cells.
In newborn infants, an inflammatory reaction may be the 
result of the contamination of the middle ear by inhaled amni- 
otic squames. In these cases, the histiocytes reacting to the for- 
eign material fuse to form giant cells.
Haemorrhage is a common result of the congestion of otitis 
media. It may lead to cholesterol granuloma (Figure 3.1).
Local tissue cells frequently react to the inflammatory 
process by dissolution or proliferation. Necrosis may occur, as is 
characteristic of perforation of the tympanic membrane or rare­
fying osteitis of the ossicles. Several factors may produce the 
necrosis. It is likely that rupture of the tympanic membrane 
takes place as a result of ischaemic necrosis caused by pressure 
at a focal point. Ossicular loss may, on the other hand, be 
caused by cytokine substances such as tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha.
At the same time as the process of necrosis, proliferative 
activity of middle ear tissue occurs and may represent an impor­
tant part of the pathological picture. The columnar epithelium 
of the middle ear has, in the presence of inflammation, the 
remarkable property of invaginating itself to produce glands, 
which often develop luminal secretion (Figure 3.2). The glan­
dular transformation (metaplasia) of the middle ear mucosa
Figure 3.2 Glandular metaplasia of middle ear epithelium.
may be seen in any part of the cleft, including the mastoid ear 
cells. The secretion of the glands contributes to the exudate in 
otitis media with effusion. Fibrous tissue proliferation may also 
occur in combination with glandular transformation—a process 
which, in the advanced state, has been called ‘fibrocystic scle­
rosis’. Squamous cell epithelium may likewise proliferate in the 
middle ear—a process known as cholesteatoma (see below). A 
specific form of reparative reaction following inflammation is 
the development of granulation tissue. In this process, the 
endothelium of blood vessels and fibroblasts are the newly 
formed cells. Mononuclear inflammatory cells usually accom­
pany the latter. Fibroblasts and collagen are abundant in the 
terminal phase of the reparative stage. A normal degree of cel- 
lularity in the fibrous reaction is seen in adhesive otitis. A pecu­
liar form of scar tissue production occurs in the middle ear, in 
which the collagen is poorly cellular and hyalinized. This con­
dition, known as tympanosclerosis (Figure 3.3), is characterized 
also by deposition of calcium salts in the hyaline fibrous tissue. 
The bony walls of the middle ear frequently react to the inflam-
  

Pathology of the ear 
27
3
Figure 3.3 Tympanosclerosis of the middle ear. This deposit consists of collagen 
which is poorly cellular and hyalinized with darker areas produced by calcification. 
There is an area of woven bone (stained red in the original) on the left.
matory process by new formation of bone. This is woven in the 
early stages and lamellar later.
Cholesteatoma
Cholesteatoma is an important concomitant of many cases of 
chronic otitis media. It is a mass of keratin produced by a layer 
of stratified squamous epithelium within the middle ear cavity 
(Figure 3.4).
in which there is a perforation of the tympanic membrane. The 
term congenital cholesteatoma is also applied to a squamous 
epithelial cyst arising at the petrous apex of the temporal bone, 
which causes damage by erosion of the skull. This is quite a dif­
ferent entity from the middle ear cholesteatoma (see below).
Both acquired and congenital cholesteatoma may take one 
or other of two forms: (1) a closed, keratinous cyst; or (2) an 
open lesion comprising multiple layers of dead keratinous 
squames, which is carpeted by the living epidermoid epithelium 
(matrix) that covers part of the middle ear surface. In most 
cases of acquired cholesteatoma the lesion is open. Most cases 
of congenital cholesteatoma, on the other hand, are described 
as being in the first category, presenting as a simple closed cyst.
Acquired cholesteatoma
Gross appearances
The cholesteatoma appears as a pearly grey or pale yellow cyst­
like structure in the middle ear cavity. The wall of the cyst may 
often be seen as a thin membrane.
The cholesteatoma is usually situated in the upper posterior 
part of the middle ear cleft and discharges usually through a per­
foration of the pars flaccida of the tympanic membrane, some­
times through a perforation located at the edge of the tympanic 
membrane near the annulus. The cholesteatoma may extend 
through the aditus into the mastoid antrum and mastoid air 
cells. Frequently, the outline of the cholesteatomatous sac is 
adapted to that of normal structures such as ossicles. Chronic 
inflammatory changes are always present. In most cases, at least 
one ossicle is seriously damaged, so interrupting the continuity 
of the ossicular chain. The scutum, the upper part of the bony 
ring of the tympanic opening, is eroded in most cholesteatomas.
FORMS OF CHOLESTEATOMA
Acquired—open or closed 
Congenital—open or closed
It has now become apparent that there exists a congenital 
or primary form of cholesteatoma, present behind an intact 
tympanic membrane, which is distinct from an acquired form,
Figure 3.4 Cholesteatoma of middle ear, composed of benign stratified 
squamous epithelium with keratin (stained red in the original) on the surface.
Microscopic appearances
Under the microscope, the pearly material of the cholesteatoma 
consists of dead, fully differentiated anucleate keratin squames. 
This is the comeal layer of the squamous cell epithelium. Some­
times, biopsy material shows only squames when the so-called 
capsule has not been excised. This capsule, often called the 
matrix, is composed of fully differentiated squamous epithelium 
similar to the epidermis of skin, and resting on connective tis­
sue. As in any normal stratified epithelium, there are one to 
three basal layers of cells, above which is a prickle (malpighian 
or spinous) layer composed of five or six rows of cells with inter­
cellular bridges. The deeper layers of the epithelium of the 
cholesteatoma matrix frequently show evidence of activity in 
the form of downgrowths into the underlying connective tissue. 
These often separate the cholesteatoma into lobules. A thin 
granular layer lies between the malpighian layer and the exten­
sive comeal layer.
The eroded ossicles may be invested by the squamous 
epithelial wall of the sac. There is always, even in these circum­
stances, a layer of granulation tissue in contact with the bone, 
and it seems likely that it is the chronic inflammatory covering, 
not the squamous epithelium, that produces the erosion.
  

28 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
Pathogenesis
PATHOGENESIS OF ACQUIRED 
CHOLESTEATOMA
Invasion of canal and tympanic membrane epidermis 
into the middle ear
Invagination of tympanic membrane as retraction 
pocket
Trauma such as blast injury or insertion of ventilation 
tubes into eardrum
Four concepts of the pathogenesis of acquired cholesteatoma 
have been put forward. It has been suggested that it may arise:
1. From invasion of canal and tympanic membrane epithelium 
into the middle ear.
2. From invagination of tympanic membrane in the form of a 
retraction pocket.
3. From metaplasia of the epithelia of the middle ear.
4. From trauma such as blast injury or insertion of ventilation 
tubes into the eardrum.
There is evidence to favour (1), (2) and (4), and it is likely that 
cholesteatoma may arise as a result of any of these three differ­
ent mechanisms under different circumstances.
presentation is 4.6 years. Many patients present with a lesion in 
the anterosuperior part of the middle ear. In one-quarter of 
patients, the cholesteatoma occupies much of the tympanic 
cavity. In 3% of patients, the congenital cholesteatoma is bilat­
eral. Possible reasons for the much greater recent frequency of 
this entity, which was formerly considered extremely rare, are: 
(1) the use of the operating microscope in diagnosis; (2) the 
improved lighting of otoscopes by the use of the halogen bulb;
(3) the screening of tympanic membranes of normal young chil­
dren by paediatricians; and (4) the possibility that many cases 
of congenital cholesteatoma which formerly underwent ‘spon­
taneous abortion’ following acute otitis media may now survive 
with the cure of the otitis with antibiotics.1
Pathogenesis
Cell rests of epidermoid tissue have been suggested from time to 
time as the origin of the primary form of cholesteatoma. The 
discovery of a cell rest in the anterior superior part of the mid­
dle ear in 19362 was forgotten, but it was described again in 
1986, and called the epidermoid formation (EF)3 and confirmed 
in 19874 (Figure 3.6). It is now generally accepted that the EF 
is the source of congenital cholesteatoma by continuing to grow 
instead of disappearing, as it normally does in late development 
or in infancy.
Congenital cholesteatoma
In contrast to acquired cholesteatoma, which has been estab­
lished as a clinicopathological entity for more than a century, 
congenital cholesteatoma has been recognized only recently 
(Figure 3.5). Although not common, it is seen now with some 
regularity in some parts of North America, although still 
described as rare in other parts of the world. The mean age of
Figure 3.5 Otoscopic photograph showing tympanic membrane behind which 
is a congenital cholesteatoma that is situated in the anterior superior region of 
the middle ear.
Figure 3.6 Epidermoid formation, showing a focus of stratified squamous 
epithelium and keratin at the junction of the columnar epithelium of the 
Eustachian tube (left) with that of the middle ear (right). This is found in all 
older fetuses and some young children.
  

Pathology of the ear 
29
Otitis media with effusion (OME)
Synonyms commonly in use for OME are: secretory otitis 
media, serous otitis media, catarrhal otitis media, tubotympani­
tis and glue ear. It is a very common cause of hearing loss in 
children characterized by an effusion behind a non-perforated 
eardrum in the absence of frank symptoms of acute infection. 
Few biopsy or temporal bone pathological studies have been 
described. All the features of chronic otitis may be present, 
including cholesterol granuloma, chronic inflammatory granu­
lation tissue, ossicular destruction and tympanosclerosis. The 
most prominent feature of the histopathology in childhood 
OME seems to be new formation of glands in the middle ear 
mucosa.
OME also occurs in adults, often in association with neo­
plasms of the nasopharynx, probably as a result of occlusion of 
the distal orifice of the Eustachian tube. It is important to 
exclude a nasopharyngeal tumour in any adult patient present­
ing with OME. Histopathological examination of the middle 
ear mucosa in adult OME at autopsy in one study also showed 
such glandular metaplasia accompanying the secretion, but 
with more inflammatory infiltrate than in the childhood cases 
of OME.
Complications of otitis media
The inflammatory process may extend from the middle ear to 
involve adjacent structures. Inflammation of the labyrinth may 
occur as a result of extension of the infection through the round 
or oval windows. The petrous bone may become involved by 
spread of the inflammation through the bone marrow or air cells 
(see Chapter 5). Adjacent intracranial and cranial nerve struc­
tures may become inflamed by spread of the infection outside 
the temporal bone. Meningitis, sinus thrombophlebitis, 
extradural abscess or brain abscess are important possible seque­
lae of otitis media.
Neoplasms and similar lesions of the 
middle ear
The middle ear is only occasionally the site of a new growth. 
Because of its deep-seated position, primary malignant tumours 
of the middle ear do not usually manifest themselves until they 
are well advanced. Table 3.2 lists the developmental tumour­
like anomalies and neoplasms which have been located there.
Table 3.2 Neoplasms and similar lesions of the middle ear
Developmental tumour-like anomalies 
Salivary choristoma 
Glial deposit 
Sebaceous choristoma
Neoplasms
Primary
Adenoma
Papillary adenocarcinoma
Meningioma
Paraganglioma:
Jugular vein region origin 
Tympanic cavity origin 
Squamous cell carcinoma 
Secondary 
Metastatic neoplasms
Malformations of the middle and 
inner ear
Middle ear
Most of the clinically important malformations affecting the ear 
involve the inner ear. For convenience, a short section here 
describes the malformations of the middle ear. The ossicles and 
skeletal structure of the middle ear are formed by a complex 
association of the first and second branchial arches with the 
skull bones. The malleus is more often malformed than the 
stapes and incus. It may be fused with the body of the incus, or 
fixed to the epitympanum by bone. The incus may also be fixed 
to the medial wall of the epitympanum. Its long process can be 
short and placed in an abnormal position in the middle ear 
cleft. The stapes may be congenitally fixed, or the crura dis­
torted. The stapes may show a variety of other anomalies, 
including complete absence. In one lesion, the anterior crus of 
the stapes is markedly bowed, so that the whole of it appears to 
be curved forwards over the promontory. Congenital dehis­
cence of the bony facial canal in the region of the oval window 
occurs frequently. Persistence of the stapedial artery and total 
absence of the round window are rare conditions. The whole 
middle ear cavity may be incompletely developed, retaining 
primitive mesenchyme. Anomalies of the internal and external 
ear are usually present in conjunction with this lesion.
Syndromes involving the middle ear
A number of congenital syndromes are seen in which middle 
ear lesions are combined with abnormalities elsewhere.
Treacher Collins syndrome (mandibulofacial dysostosis)
Treacher Collins syndrome is a hereditary malformation, pre­
dominantly due to abnormal development of the first branchial 
arch. The ossicles may be small, deformed or absent, producing
  

30 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
mainly conductive deafness. Other anomalies of this syndrome 
include notching of the lower eyelids, diminished frontonasal 
angle, flatness of the cheeks, receding mandible, anomalies of 
the teeth, and deformity of the auricle. The defect is usually 
bilateral but may be unilateral.
Crouzon’s syndrome (craniofacial dysostosis)
Crouzon’s syndrome is characterized by hypertelorism, exoph- 
thalmus, optic atrophy, underdeveloped maxillae and cranio- 
synostosis. 
Convulsions and dementia can also occur. 
Conductive deafness is due to fixation of the stapes footplate 
and deformed crura. The malleus and incus may also be fixed.
Hunter-Hurler syndrome (gargoylism, mucopolysaccharidosis type
II)
Hunter-Hurler syndrome, an X-linked disorder, is one of the 
mucopolysaccharidoses, characterized by a deficiency of the 
lysosomal enzyme iduronate sulphatase. It produces skeletal 
deformity, blindness, deafness, low-set ears, mental deficiency 
and hepatosplenomegaly. The changes are due to the deposition 
of glycosaminoglycans in many tissues, particularly of the head 
and neck. Deafness is conductive and sensorineural. The mid­
dle ear mucosa and vestibular and spiral ganglia of the inner ear 
may be filled with foamy histiocytes containing one of the 
abnormally metabolized mucopolysaccharides in their cyto­
plasm (‘gargoyle cells’)* This material stains red by the periodic 
acid-Schiff reaction. An association with childhood otosclero­
sis has been claimed.
Klippel-Feil syndrome
Klippel-Feil syndrome consists of congenital fusion of the cer­
vical vertebrae, causing shortening of the neck, low hair-line 
posteriorly and deafness. The conductive component in the 
deafness is due to deformed and ankylosed ossicles, and the sen­
sorineural to a rudimentary cochlea and labyrinth.
Inner ear
Classifications
Eponymous
A classification of inner ear malformations widely used until 
recently was that of Ormerod5. Although eponymous the system 
was approximately based on the normal developmental processes 
of the inner ear. Four broad types of lesion were delineated.
MALFORMATION OF INNER EAR
Morphogenetic— can be recognized by MRI and CT 
scan, e.g. Mondini deformity, X-linked hearing 
loss deformity, common cavity deformity, dilated 
vestibular aqueduct 
Mon-morphogenetic(>80% )—-cannot be recognized 
by imaging methods, e.g, Scheibe’s deformity
1. Michel type: complete lack of development.
2. Mondini-Alexander, more usually known as the Mondini, 
type: development of only a single curved tube representing 
the cochlea and the presence of similar immaturity of the 
vestibule and canals.
3. Bing-Siebenmann type: underdevelopment of the membra­
nous labyrinth, particularly its sense organ, with a well- 
formed otic capsule.
4. Scheibe type: malformation restricted to organ of Corti and 
saccular neuroepithelium.
There are many defects not included within this classification.
A new system of malformations of the inner ear has arisen 
as a result of the remarkable access to inner ear structure in the 
living that has been provided by modem imaging techniques. 
The structural studies performed by meticulous use of the radi­
ological techniques of polytomography and thin-slice high- 
resolution computed technology have allowed some inner ear 
alterations to be discerned. The availability of computerized 
scanning and magnetic imaging resonance scanning techniques 
has more recently resulted in the further description of struc­
tural anomalies. A practical approach has arisen from these now 
widespread facilities, whereby two broad groups of malforma­
tion are recognized6:
m 
Morphogenetic—those that can be recognized by modern 
imaging methods 
■ 
Non-morphogenetic— those that cannot be recognized by 
modem imaging methods
Extensive advances in our knowledge of malformations of 
the temporal bone have taken place in recent years. These have 
resulted not only from the use of computed tomography and 
magnetic nuclear resonance in the living patient, but also from 
the massive growth in molecular genetics that provides the 
blueprints for the development of most of these malformations 
(see below).
The classification of the morphogenetic malformations 
brought to light by imaging is still in a state of flux, and it must 
be said that knowledge is incomplete, because some of the 
structural changes described by imaging have not yet been con­
firmed or clarified by histopathological studies.
Morphogenetic malformations involve the wide range of 
structural abnormalities. Three of them— diminished cochlear 
coiling, large endolymphatic duct and sac and modiolar defi­
ciency— have been extensively investigated by imaging meth­
ods; the observation of a ‘gusher’ of perilymph or a 
perilymphatic fistula has also been frequently found in morpho­
genetic malformations.
Diminished coiling of the cochlea is often detected only by 
the absence of the interscalar septum between the middle and 
apical coil, so that the upper part of the cochlea lacks a bony 
framework. It is associated with the classical Mondini malfor­
mation (Figure 3.7). More severe forms may be found in which 
the cochlea comprises a single chamber only. The severity of 
hearing loss in these conditions seems to reflect the severity of 
defective cochlear coiling.
  

Pathology of the ear 
31
Figure 3.7 Mondini malformation of cochlea showing diminished coiling of 
cochlea, which normally has Tk coils.
A dilated endolymphatic duct and sac is present in some 
conditions. The relationship of this change to hearing loss or 
vestibular symptoms is not yet understood. The classical Mon­
dini malformation comprised both the diminution of cochlear 
coiling and the dilated endolymphatic duct.
Deficiency of the modiolus is an important aspect of the 
structural change in some malformations, because it seems to 
enable a direct communication between the cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF)-containing subarachnoid space in the internal auditory 
canal and the perilymph-containing space of the scala vestibuli, 
which in turn communicates with the perilymph-containing 
space of the vestibular cavity. Thus the latter will take on the 
higher pressure of the CSF. When surgical entry into the 
vestibule from the middle ear is effected, as in the removal of an 
ankylosed stapes footplate or the insertion of a cochlear 
implant, a ‘gusher’ will result. This is the forcible ejection of 
perilymph/CSF through the opening as a result of the greater 
pressure of CSF in the vestibule. Another possible result of the 
deficiency of modiolus and the rise in perilymph pressure that 
this causes is the erosion of the footplate of the stapes, with the 
eventual production of a perilymphatic fistula from the 
vestibule into the middle ear through the footplate defect. 
Since this allows direct communication between the poten­
tially infected middle ear space and the subarachnoid space, 
attacks of meningitis are likely. Treatment of this lesion to pre­
vent further attacks of meningitis is by removal of the footplate, 
filling up the vestibule with muscle, and inserting a prosthesis 
to the incus as in otosclerosis.
Aetiology
A great deal of genetic work has been carried out to unravel the 
basis of malformations of the inner ear. Many of them are part 
of a ‘disease’ or ‘syndrome’ usually associated with other defects.
Many families of genetic non-syndromic hearing losses 
have also been studied and several genes located. Three reces­
sive genes have been identified, one on chromosome llq, one 
on chromosome 13q, and one on chromosome 17p. In addi­
tion, two genes causing dominant hearing impairment have
been located, one on chromosome lp and another on chro­
mosome 5q.
The number of known genes causing hearing impairment is 
growing, and it is likely that many more will be unravelled in 
the future. The new knowledge is certain to impact on the diag­
nosis of disorders of hearing impairment by molecular tech­
niques. It is probable also that this basic genetic information 
about hearing impairment will lead to a better understanding of 
the pathogenesis of malformations.
Trauma; haemorrhage; ototoxicity
Trauma
Fractures
The temporal bone is affected in the majority of fractures of the 
base of the skull. Although such lesions are frequent at autopsy, 
there has hardly been any study of fractures of the temporal 
bone in pathological material, and what knowledge there is has 
largely been derived from clinical and radiological observations.
It has been found that fractures of the petrous portion of 
the temporal bone fall within two anatomical groups: longitu­
dinal and transverse. The effects on the cochlea of these two 
types of lesion are quite different. Longitudinal fractures arise 
as a result of direct blows to the temporal and parietal areas of 
the head. The fracture line starts in the squamous portion of the 
temporal bone, usually involves the external auditory canal, the 
tympanic membrane and one or more of the ossicles of the mid­
dle ear, and ends in the region of the foramen lacerum near the 
apex of the petrous temporal bone. The cochlea is spared. 
Transverse fractures are caused by blows to the front or back of 
the skull, producing a sideways tearing effect. The fracture line 
in these cases passes from the dural membrane on the postero­
medial aspect of the petrous temporal, often through the inter­
nal auditory meatus to involve the seventh and eighth cranial 
nerves, and then into the cochlea in the region of the basal turn 
at its posterolateral side. The adjacent vestibule and round and 
oval windows are also frequently damaged. Thus, in the case of 
a longitudinal fracture, the hearing loss is usually mild or mod­
erate and of the conductive type, which may be helped by 
surgery. By contrast, a transverse fracture, involving as it does 
both the sensory organ and the afferent nerve derived from it, 
produces severe sensorineural deafness in which little improve­
ment is to be expected. A further serious side-effect of trans­
verse 
fractures 
is 
the 
result 
of their 
establishing 
a 
communication between the meninges and the middle ear, so 
that there may be a leak of CSF which invariably leads to infec­
tion spreading to the meninges. This may cause death if not 
controlled by antibiotic therapy. Another form of fluid leakage 
in transverse fractures, that of perilymph, may be associated 
with symptoms like those of Meniere’s disease. The pathologi­
cal changes in these cases come about from the lowering of 
perilymph pressure with secondary endolymphatic hydrops.
  

32 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
Reissner’s membrane is seen to be grossly distended throughout 
the cochlear duct, and the saccule may be dilated.
In the temporal bone, callus does not form; the union of the 
two fractured portions is by fibrous tissue, not bone. This type 
of fracture healing seems to be general in skull fractures and 
may be related to the immobility of these affected bones.
Small fractures, which may or may not be united by fibrous 
tissue, are often found in sections of temporal bone at post­
mortem in cases with no history of trauma and no symptoms 
related to the bone damage, which is usually insignificant. 
These fractures are found most frequently between the vestibule 
or cochlea and the middle ear. Their pathogenesis is uncertain, 
but it is likely that they are produced at autopsy during removal 
of the temporal bone.
Microscopic cochlear damage in head injury
After a head injury, a sensorineural type of deafness may 
develop without any detectable macroscopic damage to the 
cochlea. The hearing loss is in the higher frequency ranges from 
3000 to 8000 Hz. Experimental studies have revealed micro­
scopic cochlear damage following direct head injury. A con­
stant change was found to be a loss of outer hair cells in the 
upper basal coil region. In some animals, damage was more 
marked, and in a few there was a complete disappearance of 
internal and external hair cells in some areas. Nerve fibres and 
ganglion cells were correspondingly reduced in these areas.
Blast and gunshot injury
Peripheral damage to the ear, particularly rupture of the tym­
panic membrane, is the most striking result of explosive blast 
and gunshot injury; however, permanent damage to the inter­
nal ear and its hearing mechanism is also a likely sequel. The 
effects of blast and gunshot injury fall initially on the outer hair 
cells of the basal coil. When this type of trauma is particularly 
severe, outer hair cells in long stretches of the cochlea may be 
destroyed, and the supporting cells in these areas may become 
disrupted.
Sound-wave injury
Sound waves of high intensity damage the cochlea. Again, on 
pathological examination there is destruction of hair cells. The 
earliest changes affect isolated outer hair cells. As the intensity 
of the sound is increased, large groups of outer hair cells perish, 
and their supporting cells are lost with them. The basal coil is 
once more the main centre for outer hair cell loss. These find­
ings have been obtained mainly in animal experiments, but 
there is a little material from human pathology replicating the 
same pattern of injury.
‘Stimulation deafness’
The changes in the inner ear following the trauma of direct 
blows to the head, of explosive blasts and of high-intensity 
sound waves, which together produce a condition that may be 
designated as ‘stimulation’ deafness, all seem to be directed par­
ticularly to the outer hair cells of the basal coil. Inner hair cells
and higher cochlear coils may be affected by greater degrees of 
these insults to the inner ear. Although there have been a num­
ber of studies of stimulation deafness to determine its patho­
genesis, the mechanism of hair cell damage is not understood.
Haemorrhage
Haemorrhage into the cochlea may occur from trauma to the 
temporal bone, as a result of a blood dyscrasia, or blood may 
enter the cochlea or vestibule from haemorrhage into a neigh­
bouring structure. There is experimental evidence that blood 
may enter the scala tympani from haemorrhage in the sub­
arachnoid space through the cochlear aqueduct. There seems 
indeed to be a flow of this blood from the scala tympani of the 
basal coil upwards to the apex, following which it may move 
into the scala vestibuli.7 Following intracranial operations or 
other causes of intracranial haemorrhage, such as ruptured 
aneurysm of the circle of Willis or intracerebral haemorrhage 
caused by blood dyscrasias such as thrombocytopenic purpura, 
blood can spread into the perilymphatic spaces of the inner ear 
through the cochlear aqueduct by that mechanism.
Fibrosis of the blood remaining in the cochlear or vestibu­
lar spaces after haemorrhage has been observed after surgery for 
vestibular schwannoma or craniotomy and following haemor­
rhage caused by leukaemia. The fibrosis may be seen as a fine 
web of fibroblasts across the cavity of the scala tympani or the 
perilymph space of a semicircular canal. Residua of the haem­
orrhage in the form of red blood cells may be seen in the fibrous 
web (Figure 3.8).
Haemorrhage in the inner ear in very low birthweight 
infants
Attention has been drawn to the possibility that haemorrhage 
into the cochlea around the time of birth may be a cause of 
deafness. The haemorrhage in these cases is probably the result 
of anoxia, like the frequently concomitant intracranial haem­
orrhage of the newborn, especially if premature. Thus haemor­
rhage into the inner ear is common in very low birthweight
Figure 3.8 Fibrosis of the lateral semicircular canal following haemorrhage.
  

Pathology of the ear 
33
infants, but evidence is still lacking that this may have any con­
nection with the sensorineural hearing loss that these infants 
suffer.
Sensorineural hearing loss in very low birthweight 
infants
Very low birthweight infants are known to be at an increased 
risk of sensorineural hearing loss. There have been few post­
mortem studies on those infants who do not survive to ascertain 
the possible pathological basis for the hearing loss. In cases of 
neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia, it is well known that the 
cochlear nucleus may be damaged by the toxic effect of uncon­
jugated bilirubin. The use of anti-D prophylaxis has greatly 
reduced the incidence of this complication, however.
There is growing evidence of the existence of a form of hair 
cell damage in preterm infants characterized by inner hair cell 
loss unaccompanied by outer hair cell loss.8 This would give rise 
to a form of hearing loss which would not be associated with 
loss of otoacoustical emissions, although brainstem-evoked 
responses would be absent. Accordingly, newborn infants 
affected by this condition would not be detected by those forms 
of screening for congenital hearing loss which rely on oto­
acoustical emissions only in the first instance.
Ototoxic damage to the inner ear
Ototoxic injury to the inner ear has been observed with a vari­
ety of drugs. There are five classes of substances the ototoxicity 
of which has been carefully investigated clinically and experi­
mentally, because they are so frequently used in practice: (1) 
aminoglycoside antibiotics; (2) loop diuretics; (3) salicylates;
(4) quinine; and (5) cytotoxic drugs used in the treatment of 
malignant disease.
LABYRINTHINE PATHOLOGY IN OTOTOXIC 
DAMAGE TO THE INNER EAR
Aminoglycoside antibiotics— cochlear and vestibu­
lar hair cell damage 
Loop diuretics— damage to stria vascularis followed 
by hair cell damage in cochlea and vestibule 
Salicylates— unkn own
Quinine— degeneration of the organ of Corti, partic­
ularly in the basal coil, of cochlear nerves and of 
stria vascularis 
Cisplatin used in the treatment of malignant dis­
ease— degenerative changes in cochlear hair cells, 
maculae and cristae, and stria vascularis, and 
decrease in spiral ganglion cells of upper coils
Aminoglycoside antibiotics
Aminoglycoside antibiotics are in common clinical use in the 
treatment of a variety of infections. The following members of 
this group have all been found to be associated with ototoxic 
effects on the inner ear: streptomycin, kanamycin, gentamycin, 
tobramycin, viomycin and amikacin.
The aminoglycosides produce toxic effects on the renal 
tubules as well as the inner ear. Excretion is mainly by glomeru­
lar filtration. Disturbance of renal function may lead to 
impaired excretion of the drug. The raised blood levels so pro­
duced will increase the tendency for the drug to cause ototoxi­
city. It would seem from numerous animal studies that the 
ototoxicity of aminoglycosides is the result of a direct effect of 
the drug on the sensory cells of the cochlea and vestibule. To 
reach these cells, it is likely that there is passage from the blood­
stream into the endolymph via the stria vascularis or spiral lam­
ina. High levels of streptomycin in the subarachnoid space were 
noted during the early days of therapy for tuberculous meningi­
tis to be particularly likely to result in ototoxicity. This suggests 
that there is transport of the substance to the perilymph via the 
cochlear aqueduct in such cases.
Clinical investigations and postmortem studies indicate 
that aminoglycosides do damage hair cells, particularly the 
outer hair cells of the basal coil of the cochlea and also those of 
some vestibular structures. It is also possible that the ganglion 
cell loss is a late manifestation of ototoxic change.
Loop diuretics
Ethacrynic acid, a loop diuretic, has been associated with oto­
toxicity. In laboratory animals the first sign of cochlear damage 
is in the stria vascularis. Later the hair cells of cochlea and 
vestibular structures are affected. In humans the clinical effects 
of ototoxicity of ethacrynic acid, like those of aminoglycosides, 
are both hearing loss and vestibular disturbance. Vestibular 
pathological changes are reported as well as cochlear hair cell 
damage.
Salicylates
The ototoxic effect of salicylates is well known in clinical prac­
tice, but no morphological changes have been noted in experi­
mental animals in cochlear or vestibular structures after 
salicylate overdose.
Quinine
Sensorineural hearing loss of temporary duration with smaller 
doses, but permanent with heavier doses, is an important com­
plication of treatment with quinine, the first and oldest drug 
known to cause deafness. In experimental animals, severe 
degeneration of the organ of Corti, particularly in the basal coil, 
of cochlear nerves and of the stria vascularis has been observed.
Cytotoxic drugs
Cisplatin (ds-platinum; cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum) is a 
cytotoxic drug which is frequently used in the treatment of 
advanced malignant disease. Ototoxicity is an established
  

34 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
side-effect of the use of this drug, and the hearing of the patient 
is tested routinely to monitor its dosage. Degenerative changes 
in cochlear hair cells, severe degeneration of the maculae and 
cristae, degeneration of the stria vascularis and a significant 
decrease in spiral ganglion cells predominantly in the upper 
turns have been reported.
Infections of the inner ear
Infection of the inner ear may be produced by viruses, bacteria, 
treponemes or fungi.
Viral infections
Four viral infections which infect the labyrinth are thought to 
reach it by the bloodstream: cytomegalovirus infection, 
measles, mumps and rubella. Another infecting virus, that of 
herpes zoster oticus (the varicella zoster virus), enters the inner 
ear along the seventh and eighth cranial nerves.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection
Cytomegaloviruses are DNA-containing members of the 
herpesvirus group. General infection is frequent, an intra­
uterine source often being incriminated.
The developing human ear has been thought to be particu­
larly susceptible to CMV infection, and the virus has been 
incriminated on clinical and virological grounds as the most 
common cause of congenital hearing loss.9 CMV inclusion- 
bearing cells are present in the endolabyrinth (Figure 3.9). All 
cases have generalized cytomegalic inclusion disease.
CMV infection is commonly seen in patients with AIDS. 
Thirty-nine per cent of patients with AIDS are found to have a 
hearing loss of the sensorineural type. At autopsy, inclusions are 
found in the vestibular nerve in the internal canal, in the stria 
and in the saccule, utricle and lateral semicircular duct. It is
Figure 3.9 Cytomegalic inclusion disease of the cochlear region of the 
membranous labyrinth. Cells infected with the virus are seen with a darkly 
staining inclusion of the nucleus surrounded by a pale-staining halo.
likely, therefore, that the hearing loss in patients with AIDS is 
due to cochlear CMV infection.10
Rubella
Maternal rubella is an important factor in the genesis of con­
genital sensorineural hearing loss. The virus is of the RNA type. 
There is partial collapse of Reissner’s membrane, with adher­
ence to the stria vascularis and organ of Corti. The tectorial 
membrane is rolled up. The stria vascularis is usually atrophic, 
often with cystic areas, and there may be inflammatory collec­
tions at the upper end, near the junction with Reissner’s mem­
brane and adherent to it.
Herpes zoster
In herpes zoster auris (Ramsay Hunt syndrome), the virus (the 
DNA herpes varicella virus) enters the inner ear along the sev­
enth and eighth cranial nerves, presumably from nerve ganglia, 
where it lies dormant until a change in the immunological sta­
tus of the patient. There are extensive lymphocytic infiltrates in 
the nerves, modiolus and skin of the external auditory meatus. 
Herpes varicella-zoster viral DNA has been identified, using the 
polymerase chain reaction, in archival celloidin-embedded 
temporal bone sections from two patients who clinically had 
Ramsay Hunt syndrome (herpes zoster oticus).11
Bell’s palsy
A condition possibly due to viral infection in the inner ear is 
that of Bell’s palsy, which is manifested clinically as a peripheral 
facial paralysis. There is pathological support for the suggestion 
that this condition is the result of infection with herpes simplex 
virus, type l.12 Histological findings are those of a geniculate 
ganglionitis. The genu region there shows constriction of the 
facial nerve by inflammatory tissue, which forms a sheath 
around it and encroaches on its interior. The adjacent bone 
shows foci of resorption with abundant osteoclasts. The genic­
ulate ganglion is infiltrated by lymphocytes. The descending 
part of the facial nerve presents swelling and vacuolation of 
myelin sheaths, with some loss of axis cylinders.
Bacterial infections 
Petrositis
Bacterial infections of the inner ear may involve both the 
petrous bone itself and the labyrinthine structures within it. 
Bacterial infection of the petrous bone is frequently derived by 
extension from middle ear infection. There are four possible 
routes by which infection may extend from the middle ear into 
the petrous bone:
1. Via air cells. Mastoid air cells frequently extend in the tem­
poral bone as far as the apical region. It is possible, there­
fore, that infection to the petrous apex may extend from the 
middle ear by the medium of infection of air cells.
2. As direct spread of the inflammatory process by bone necro­
sis (osteitis).
  

Pathology of the ear 
35
3. By extension through the bone marrow of the petrous bone 
(osteomyelitis).
4. Along vessels and nerves.
In addition to inflammatory infiltration, the pathological 
process of petrositis comprises three main changes in the bone 
tissue, all of which may be seen simultaneously: (1) bone necro­
sis; (2) bone erosion; and (3) new bone formation. It should be 
noted that these three processes are frequently seen in the bony 
wall of the middle ear in many cases of otitis media in which 
extensive petrositis has not taken place. The inflammatory 
changes which accompany the bony ones may be ‘acute’, i.e. 
with an exudate largely of neutrophils, or ‘chronic’, i.e. with 
lymphocytes, plasma cells, histiocytes and fibroblasts forming 
fibrous tissue. These two forms of inflammatory infiltrate are 
often found in the same ear in the very variegated pathological 
picture of otitis media when the whole temporal bone is exam­
ined in sections.
Petrositis is of great importance, because involvement of 
the labyrinth, nerves, artery, veins, meninges and cerebral tissue 
embedded in and surrounding the petrous bone may each cause 
serious symptoms, and perhaps death:
« 
Extension to the labyrinth may lead to labyrinthitis with 
destruction of the organs of hearing and balance. 
m 
Important nerves may be damaged. The facial nerve is at 
risk early. Involvement of the trigeminal ganglion and the 
sixth cranial nerve leads to ‘Gradenigo’s syndrome’. Exten­
sion to the jugular foramen region by the inflammatory 
process may cause palsy of the ninth, tenth and eleventh 
cranial nerves (‘jugular foramen syndrome’). 
b 
The wall of the internal carotid artery may become 
inflamed, and this may lead to thrombosis of the vessel.
<k 
Similarly, the lateral sinus may become thrombosed, and 
this and/or extension of the thrombus to the superior 
sagittal sinus may be associated with the somewhat arcane 
syndrome of otitic hydrocephalus. 
m 
Spread of the infection to the immediately adjacent cranial 
structures will lead to meningitis and cerebral abscess.
It should be pointed out that patients with diabetes mellitus are 
especially prone to develop an extension of otitis media as out­
lined above. A concept of ‘malignant otitis externa’ has devel­
oped with regard to diabetics in whom, because of the presence 
of external otitis which frequently coexists with otitis media, it 
is postulated that the infection (usually by Pseudomonas aerugi­
nosa) spreads from the ear canal to the petrous apex under the 
temporal bone. It is likely that spread of infection in these cases 
is from severe otitis media with osteomyelitis of the adjacent 
bone.
Labyrinthitis
Infection of the membranous labyrinth may result from otitis 
media or from meningitis.
ORIGINS OF LABYRINTHITIS
Otitic— spread of bacteria by penetration of the oval 
or round window, rupture of infected air cells into 
the labyrinthine system, or development of a fistula 
between the middle ear and the labyrinth (usually 
in the lateral semicircular canal by cholesteatoma) 
Meningitic— spread of bacteria from the infected 
meninges through both the cochlear modiolus and 
cochlear aqueduct
Otitic
The source of labyrinthitis is, in many instances, otitis media, 
as with petrositis. Infection may enter the labyrinth by pene­
trating the oval or the round window. An infected air cell may 
rupture into the labyrinthine system at some point of its com­
plex periphery. Occasionally, damage to bone by the inflamma­
tion may produce a fistula between the middle ear and the 
labyrinth, usually in the lateral semicircular canal, because this 
is the nearest vulnerable point to the middle ear. The latter 
complication takes place in most cases when a cholesteatoma is 
present, which has the effect of stimulating the inflammatory 
process.
Meningitic
There is another possible source of infection of the labyrinth— 
the meninges— and the two ducts that join them, the cochlear 
aqueduct and the internal auditory meatus, may convey infec­
tion from meningitic lesions into the labyrinth. Sensorineural 
hearing loss is an important sequel of acute bacterial meningi­
tis. It seems likely that the origin of the hearing loss is 
labyrinthitis produced by the spread of bacteria from the 
infected meninges through both the cochlear modiolus and 
cochlear aqueduct.13 Spiral ganglion cells may be severely 
degenerated, suggesting that subsequent cochlear implantation 
may not be successful in this type of labyrinthitis.
In suppurative labyrinthitis, the perilymph spaces usually dis­
play a massive exudate of neutrophils. If the process extends to 
the endolymphatic spaces, there is concomitant destruction of 
membranous structures and irreparable damage to sensory 
epithelia.
Healing is at first by fibrosis, but later, osseous repair is fre­
quent, leading to a condition of ‘labyrinthitis ossificans’. In this 
condition, the spaces of the bony labyrinth are filled in by 
newly formed bone, which appears in striking contrast to the 
normal bone surrounding the bony labyrinth.
Syphilis
Syphilis has not been fully eradicated by penicillin treatment. 
Sensorineural hearing loss is common in all forms of acquired 
syphilis. In secondary syphilis, the pathological changes of the 
labyrinth seem to be part of lymphocytic meningitis. In tertiary
  

36 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
syphilis, the pathological changes are similar to those of late 
congenital syphilis described below. Hearing loss is also an 
important feature of congenital syphilis, forming one of the 
constituents of Hutchinson’s triad (interstitial keratitis, 
deformed incisor teeth and deafness). More than one-third of 
patients with congenital syphilis develop deafness. In infantile 
congenital syphilis, the labyrinthine symptoms represent an 
insignificant aspect of a widespread and often fatal illness.
Late congenital syphilis
The lesions of congenital syphilis assume two forms: (1) gum­
matous involvement of bone marrow and periosteum; and (2) 
diffuse periostitis. Fibrosis is a prominent component of the 
lesion. Also, new bone formation, both lamellar and woven, 
contributes to the complex appearances of the pathology of 
syphilitic osteitis.
There is frequently a process of hydrops identical in appear­
ance to that seen in Meniere’s disease.
Mycotic infections
Fungal infections of the inner ear are rare. Cryptococcosis is a 
fungal infection which usually infects the meninges, but pro­
gression to the labyrinth may complicate the meningitis, par­
ticularly in cases of AIDS.
Meniere’s disease: hydrops and its 
causes
LABYRINTHINE HYDROPS
Causes: inflammatory or neoplastic involvement of 
the perilymphatic spaces.
Unknown— Meniere’s disease
Pathology 
Bulging of Reissner’s membrane 
Swelling of saccule
Rupture of Reissner’s and other membranes 
Fibrosis in scala vestibuli and in vestibule 
Obstruction of endolymphatic duct by fibrosis etc, 
in some cases 
Changes in sensory epithelia—late
Meniere’s disease is an affection of both the hearing and bal­
ance organs of the inner ear, characterized by episodes of ver­
tigo, hearing loss and tinnitus. Its pathological basis is ‘hydrops’
i.e. distension of the endolymphatic spaces of the labyrinth by 
fluid. The cause of the hydrops in Meniere’s disease is unknown 
(Figure 3.10). There are, however, other diseases of known aeti­
ology in which hydrops may be present as a complication. The
Figure 3.10 Hydrops involving the cochlea. Reissner's membrane is distended to 
such a degree that it reaches the top of the scala vestibuli.
common feature of these conditions is the presence of inflam­
matory or neoplastic involvement of the perilymphatic spaces. 
Thus otitis media complicated by perilymphatic labyrinthitis, 
syphilitic involvement of the labyrinth, leukaemic deposits in 
the perilymph spaces or vestibular schwannoma may be associ­
ated with hydrops.
Idiopathic endolymphatic hydrops may be present in 
patients who do not have the clinical symptoms of Meniere’s 
disease.14,15 The patients who have Meniere’s symptoms seem to 
show a more severe degree of hydrops and a greater number of 
membrane ruptures than those without.
Pathological appearances
The hydrops of Meniere’s disease may affect one or both inner 
ears. In most cases, the cochlear duct and saccule are involved, 
but the utricle and semicircular ducts are usually not. In some 
cases, the cochlear duct alone is hydropic. A rare and debatable 
form of Meniere’s disease is thought to affect the vestibule, but 
not the cochlea. Symptoms are those of vertigo, but not hear­
ing loss. Another rare syndrome—Lermoyez’s syndrome—in 
which tinnitus and hearing loss precede an attack of vertigo has 
been associated with endolymphatic hydrops limited to the 
basal turn of the cochlea and the saccule.16 In the hydropic 
cochlear duct, Reissner’s membrane, which is elastic, shows a 
variable degree of bulging. In the most severe cases, the mem­
brane reaches the top of the scala vestibuli and may be in con­
tact with a wide area of the cochlear wall. In the apical region, 
it may bulge to such an extent that it fills the helicotrema. In 
this way, the distended scala media may even enter the scala 
tympani. The saccule swells up from its position on the medial 
wall of the vestibule and frequently touches the vestibular sur­
face of the footplate of the stapes. The utricle may be com­
pressed in the process. In some cases, the swollen saccule may 
herniate from the vestibule into the semicircular canals. Less 
frequently, the utricle may be distended, sometimes with small 
infoldings producing a scalloped appearance.
  

Pathology of the ear 
37
Changes in the walls of the membranous 
labyrinth
Changes may be seen in the thin distended membranes of the 
hydropic endolymphatic spaces. Ruptures may be present, par- 
ticularly in Reissner’s membrane, and the terminal end of the 
ruptured membrane may be curled up. Such ruptures have been 
incriminated as possible pathological bases of the fluctuations 
in pure tone thresholds which patients with Meniere’s disease 
may suffer. It has been suggested that the flooding of the peri­
lymph with endolymph with its high potassium level may 
inhibit the bioelectric activity of the cochlea. It is likely, how­
ever, that many of these ruptures are artefactual. Fibrous tissue 
may be present in cases of Meniere’s hydrops external to the 
endolymphatic space in the scala vestibuli and in the vestibule 
deep to the footplate of the stapes. It is possible that the foci of 
connective tissue in these two situations are reactions to the 
irritation produced by repeated distension and subsidence of the 
adjacent cochlear duct and saccule respectively.
Changes in vestibular aqueduct and 
endolymphatic duct
While hydrops involving the scala media and saccule is 
accepted by all as a basic feature of the pathology of Meniere’s 
disease, there is no such unanimity with regard to the alter­
ations in the endolymphatic duct and its surrounding vestibular 
aqueduct. There have been many descriptions of obstructive or 
potentially obstructive lesions of these structures associated 
with Meniere’s disease, whereby restriction of the flow of 
endolymph may have caused the hydrops. The most frequent of 
such lesions is fibrosis. In contrast to these observations, it must 
be pointed out that some careful studies of Meniere’s hydropic 
temporal bones have shown no changes whatever in the 
endolymphatic duct or vestibular aqueduct.
Changes in the sensory epithelia of the 
labyrinth
Alterations of the sensory cells of the organ of Corti have been 
described in Meniere’s disease, but it is still not clear whether 
these changes actually exist in the living patient or whether 
they are the result of postmortem autolysis or even the effects of 
acid used in decalcification of the temporal bone. The possibil­
ity that some of the changes may be artefactual has been 
ignored in some reports. Changes in the hair cells, particularly 
in the apical region, have been described and associated with 
low-frequency hearing loss. Atrophy of the macula of the sac­
cule may also be found, and does not appear to be artefactual.
Relationship of symptoms to pathological 
changes
Image analysis of the areas in histological section of the 
cochlear duct (corresponding to volume in the whole structure) 
has been carried out in two studies and related to the hearing
loss. In one study,17 the area of the cochlear duct was signifi­
cantly increased in relation to the degree of hearing loss. Losses 
of over 70 dB showed a particularly high degree of hydropic 
expansion. In another study,18 a similar relationship was found 
between cochlear duct size and the total average hearing loss. 
There was also a correlation of those dimensions with the dura­
tion of the disease: the longer the history of symptoms, the 
more pronounced the cochlear duct dilatation. A relationship 
also seemed to be present between (1) the amount of dilatation 
of vestibular structures, and (2) the response to caloric tests and 
the presence of positional nystagmus, but this was less definite 
than the cochlear duct-hearing loss association.
Pathology of the vestibular system
Malformations
A wide variety of malformations may affect the vestibular struc­
tures and semicircular canals (see above).
Ageing changes
Changes comparable to those in the cochlea in presbyacusis 
(see below) have been described for the vestibular structures. 
With advancing age there is degeneration of the saccular mac­
ula and, to a lesser degree, of the utricular macula. Type 1 cells 
are more prone to disappear than type 2 cells. These changes 
are accompanied by a loss of otoconia.19 Epithelial cysts have 
also been seen in the sensory epithelium of the posterior and 
superior ampullary cristae in advanced old age. There does not 
appear to be a reduction of vestibular ganglion cell numbers in 
old age comparable to that seen in the spiral ganglion.
Trauma
Fractures may involve the vestibular system. Surgical opera­
tions may be complicated by accidental penetration of the 
vestibule or semicircular canals. The production of a fistula 
from the lateral semicircular canal, by design, into the middle 
ear was part of the now-abandoned operation of fenestration for 
otosclerosis. This procedure was replaced by stapedectomy; a fis­
tula may occur from the vestibule into the middle ear as a com­
plication of this operation.
Ototoxicity
Part of the damage produced by aminoglycoside antibiotics such 
as gentamicin may be to the sensory epithelium of the cristae 
and maculae.
Virus infection
In measles, rubella and cytomegalovirus infection changes have 
been observed in the utricle and saccule.
  

38 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
Bacterial infection
Bacterial infection may involve the vestibular system as part of 
labyrinthitis. In most bacterial infections, spread occurs from 
the middle ear via the oval window. A direct fistula resulting 
from the bone erosion of otitis media may take place, leading 
into the lateral semicircular canal, particularly in the presence 
of cholesteatoma.
Syphilis
The diffuse periostitic form of syphilis has a special tendency to 
involve the semicircular canals, and the lumina of the canals 
may be completely obliterated by bone and fibrous tissue.
Bone diseases
Paget’s disease frequently involves the bony vestibule and semi­
circular canals to a severe degree, and as a result clinical symp­
toms referable to this system are likely to occur. Otosclerosis, 
although frequently present in relation to the bony wall of the 
vestibule, rarely involves the membranous structures of the 
vestibular system, so that vestibular symptoms are rare in this 
condition.
Hydrops
Hydrops of the saccule, which sometimes extends to the utricle, 
is the major pathological feature of Meniere’s disease (see 
above). Saccular hydrops may also be a manifestation of 
syphilitic and bacterial inflammation involving the labyrinth.
Atelectasis
A process of collapse of the walls of the ampullae and utricle 
termed Vestibular atelectasis’ has been described, but not yet 
confirmed.20
Positional vertigo
Positional vertigo is a condition in which vertigo is induced in 
the patient by alteration in the position of the head. Since nys­
tagmus is used clinically as an objective test of this condition, 
the term ‘positional nystagmus’ is often preferred. It has been 
suggested that the deposition of a basophilically stained homo­
geneous deposit on the cupula of the posterior semicircular 
canal (the lowest region of the labyrinthine sensory epithelium) 
derived by gravitational descent from the otoconia of the utri­
cle, a process known as cupulolithiasis, may explain the symp­
tomatology of this condition.21
Neoplasms
The most important neoplasm of the vestibular system is 
schwannoma of the vestibular division of the eighth cranial 
nerve (acoustic neuroma; see below).
Presbyacusis
The late Harold Schuknecht and his coworkers detected mor­
phological and audiological evidence of involvement of four 
regions of the cochlea in four different forms of presbyacusis. In 
addition, a fifth form of presbyacusis associated with hypotheti­
cally dimished qualities of the cochlear duct, and a sixth com­
prising a mixture of the other five, have been added.22 Thus the 
six types of presbyacusis presented by Schuknecht and accepted 
by many as a valid summary of the pathological basis of presby­
acusis, are:
*  
sensory, loss of organ of Corti hair cells
*  
neural, loss of spiral ganglion cells and nerve fibres 
m 
strial, loss of stria vascularis cells
m 
cochlear conductive, diminution of conductivity of basilar 
membrane
m 
cochlear duct, alterations in the physical characteristics of 
the cochlear duct
*  
mixed, any mixture of the other five.
Pure tone audiometry has been the usual means of testing 
the hearing in presbyacusis. However, Soucek et al found in a 
study of extratympanic electrocochleograms in geriatric 
patients that the cochlear nerves were functioning adequately 
in all cases, in spite of hearing loss in all of them. These find­
ings suggested that, contrary to the elaborate schema presented 
above, it was in the hair cells that the primary deficit of the 
hearing loss of the elderly people was to be sought.23
Pathological appearances
Investigations by histological section
In most investigations of the pathological basis of presbyacusis, 
histological sections were used. In some of these investigations, 
hair cells were incriminated as showing pathological changes. 
Statements about the appearances of these cells in histological 
section must be regarded with caution, however, since they are 
very liable to undergo postmortem autolysis. Moreover, repre­
sentation of the functionally most important part of the hair
PATHOLOGY OF PRESBYACUSIS IN 
RELATION TO CLINICAL FEATURES
Atrophy of the outer hair cells— moderate hearing 
loss across all frequencies 
Giant stereociliary degeneration of outer hair cells in 
middle and apical coils— a precursor of outer hair 
cell loss in these regions 
Complete necrosis of outer and inner hair cells in a 
variable length of terminal basal coil— severe high- 
frequency hearing loss
  

Pathology of the ear 
39
cells—the stereocilia—in a histological section is very small, 
even when adequately fixed. Clear-cut losses in the spiral gan­
glion cells and the nerve fibres derived from them are, however, 
well documented. Careful analysis of the cochlear nuclear cells 
in the brainstem has also shown some loss in presbyacusis. It is 
difficult to accept nerve cell atrophy as the basis of a universal 
defect, and it seems more likely that there is some more funda­
mental disturbance giving rise to it. Vascular thickening in the 
cochlea has been incriminated by some, but its importance has 
been difficult to assess.
Surface preparation appearances
The use of surface preparations in human cochlear autopsy 
material (Figures 3.11 and 3.12) has indicated two major patho­
logical changes:23-25
1. atrophy of the outer hair cells
2. giant stereociliary degeneration in some of those outer hair 
cells which survived.
Figure 3.11 Surface preparation of outer hair cell region of the basal coil of 
the cochlea from patient with presbyacusis. There is a marked loss of outer hair 
cells. (Stained with Alcian blue-osmic acid.)
Figure 3.12 Surface preparation of outer hair cell region of the middle coil of 
the cochlea, showing giant stereociliary change. (Stained with Alcian 
blue-osmic acid.)
A severe degree of loss of outer hair cells is present in all 
coils of all cochleas from elderly patients. Approximate esti­
mates of hair cell losses show that the inner hair cells sustain lit­
tle loss, the first row of outer hair cells have a greater loss, the 
second row loss is even greater, and in the third row hair cells 
are very scanty or absent. In addition, there is a complete loss 
of all hair cells of all rows, inner and outer, at the extreme lower 
end of the basal coil in every elderly cochlea.
The other change is the presence of enormously length­
ened and thickened stereocilia emanating from some surviving 
hair cells. These giant structures measure as much as 60 jum in 
length and are thickened due to adhesion of hairs to each other 
longitudinally. Giant stereocilia are found only in the outer hair 
cells of middle and apical coils, not in the outer hair cells of the 
basal coil.
Relationship of surface preparation changes to 
functional findings
The loss of outer hair cells throughout the cochlea may be the 
cause of the general hearing disability shown by Soucek et al23 
to be present at all frequencies. The exacerbation of hearing 
loss in the higher tones found by these and other workers using 
audiometry is explained by the short segment at the lower end 
of the basal coil with complete atrophy of both inner and outer 
hair cells.
Pathogenesis
It is possible that giant stereociliary degeneration is a stage in 
the dissolution of the outer hair cells in the apical and middle 
coils. In the basal coil, the stereocilia are normally different, in 
being shorter than in the other two coils. Perhaps giant stereo­
ciliary degeneration is an alteration that is slowly taking place 
throughout life, resulting eventually in presbyacusis, for it is not 
until the later years have been reached that hair cells will have 
been lost to a sufficient extent to produce significant deafness.
Molecular biology of presbyacusis
Mitochondria in the cytoplasm contain a set of genes which 
contribute to the phenotype of the individual. It is the mother 
only whose genotype is inherited. The membrane hypothesis of 
ageing proposes an association between reactive oxygen 
metabolites and the ageing process, the former leading to dam­
age to mitochondrial DNA, resulting in cellular dysfunction 
and eventually death.26 A form of mitochondrial DNA damage, 
that of deletion of mtDNA 4977 bp, has been discovered which 
accumulates in human tissues, especially those of neural and 
muscular type, with increasing age. Using the polymerase chain 
reaction on celloidin-embedded archival sections of human 
cochleas to determine deletion of the mtDNA 4977 bp in that 
structure, it has been found that 14 of 17 patients with sen­
sorineural hearing loss, mainly associated with ageing, exhib­
ited such deletion, while only 8 of 17 patients with normal
  

40 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
hearing exhibited the same deletion.27 Thus this 4977-bp mito­
chondrial deletion may cause presbyacusis.
Bony abnormalities
Paget’s disease
Paget’s disease (osteitis deformans) is a common condition 
affecting particularly the skull, pelvis, vertebral column and 
femur in people over 40 years of age. The cause is not yet cer­
tain, but the presence in many cases of paramyxovirus-like 
structures seen within osteoclasts has prompted the suggestion 
that Paget’s disease may be of viral aetiology and the measles 
virus and canine distemper viruses have been under scrutiny as 
candidates. The pathological change is one of active bone for­
mation proceeding alongside active bone destruction. The 
affected bones are enlarged, porous and deformed (Figure 3.13).
Microscopically, bone formation is seen in trabeculae of 
bone with a lining of numerous osteoblasts. A mosaic appear­
ance is formed by the frequent successive deposition of bone, 
cessation of deposition resulting in thin, blue ‘cement lines’, 
followed again by resumption of deposition and its cessation, 
and so production of further cement lines. Bone destruction is 
shown by the presence of numerous, large osteoclastic giant 
cells with Howship’s lacunae. Areas of chronic inflammatory 
exudate intermixed with the bone are common.
The pathology of involvement of the temporal bone by 
Paget’s disease has been well studied. The petrous apex, the 
mastoid and the bony part of the Eustachian tube are most fre­
quently affected. The periosteal part of the bony labyrinth is the 
first to undergo pagetoid changes. The endochondral layer is 
also affected in many cases, but the endosteal layer and modio­
lus infrequently. The internal auditory meatus may show pro-
Figure 3.13 Paget's disease involving bony cochlea. The paler bone (left) is 
residual normal bony cochlea, containing globuli ossei. The darker bone on the 
right (red-staining in the original) is pagetoid bone, showing closely packed 
osteoid layers and prominent osteoblasts and osteoclasts.
truberances of pagetoid tissue into its lumen. In a few cases, the 
stapes may be tethered by pagetoid change of its footplate. Cal­
cification of the annulus fibrosis is cited as another cause of such 
fixation. Involvement of other ossicles is unusual. An alterna­
tive means of ossicular fixation may be involvement of the 
malleus by pagetoid tissue in the epitympanum. Fissure frac­
tures, occurring during life, are more frequent in the temporal 
bone of patients with Paget’s disease. The round window niche 
may be narrowed by the bony overgrowth. The sensorineural 
hearing loss which Paget’s disease patients may experience is 
probably caused by encroachment on the membranous cochlea.
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Osteogenesis imperfecta is a general bone disease with a triad of 
clinical features: multiple fractures, blue sclerae and conductive 
hearing loss. There is a congenital recessive form which is often 
rapidly fatal, and a tardive one in adults that is inherited as a 
mendelian dominant and is more benign. Mutations of type I 
collagen genes have been established as the underlying cause, 
leading to a general disturbance in the development of colla­
gen; hence the thin (blue) sclerae as well as poorly formed bone 
tissue.
The pathology is well seen in the long bones, where resorp­
tion of cartilage in the development of bone is normal, but the 
bony trabeculae themselves are poorly formed. In the temporal 
bone, the bony labyrinth is sometimes deficient in bone. The 
ossicles in the tardive form are very thin and subject to frac­
tures. The stapes footplate is also frequently fixed. The distur­
bance in lamellar bone formation can lead to extreme thinness, 
dehiscence, and non-union of the stapedial superstructure with 
the footplate or thickening with fixation of the footplate. The 
nature of the bony tissue causing fixation is problematical. It 
has been suggested that osteogenesis imperfecta can be associ­
ated with otosclerosis, so that the fixation is indeed otoscle- 
rotic. Otosclerosis, like osteogenesis imperfecta, may indeed be 
part of a general connective tissue disturbance. Indeed, some 
cases of clinical otosclerosis may be related to mutations within 
the COL1A1 gene that are similar to those found in mild forms 
of osteogenesis imperfecta.
Osteopetrosis
Osteopetrosis (often known as marble bone disease) is a rare 
disease of bone, in which there is a failure to absorb calcified 
cartilage and primitive bone due to deficient activity of osteo­
clasts. A relatively benign form, inherited in a dominant fash­
ion, presents in adults, and a malignant one, inherited in a 
recessive fashion, in infants and young children. The patients 
with the benign form often survive to old age and present 
prominent otological symptoms. The intermediate, endochon­
dral portion of the otic capsule is swollen and appears as an 
exaggerated, thickened form of the normal state. Globuli ossei 
composed of groups of calcified cartilage cells are normally pre­
sent in this region, and in osteopetrosis they are greatly
  

Pathology of the ear 
41
increased in number and are arranged into a markedly thick­
ened zone. The periosteal bone is normal. The organ of Corti is 
usually normal, but in a few cases has been said to be atrophied. 
The ossicles are of fetal shape and filled with unabsorbed, calci­
fied cartilage. The canals for the seventh and eighth cranial 
nerves are greatly narrowed by the expanded cartilaginous and 
bony tissue, and these changes are probably responsible for 
the characteristic symptoms of facial palsy and hearing loss 
respectively.
Otosclerosis
Gross appearances
Otosclerosis usually affects both ears symmetrically. The disease 
process is probably confined to the temporal bone. In cases with 
prominent otosclerotic involvement of the otic capsule, the 
lesion may be seen as a smooth prominence of the promontory. 
The stapes is sometimes fixed. The pink swelling of the oto­
sclerotic focus may sometimes even be detected clinically 
through a particularly transparent tympanic membrane. In tem­
poral bone specimens, the focus appears well demarcated and 
pink (Figure 3.14). Blood vessels are prominent and evenly dis­
tributed. X-rays of temporal bone specimens show the well- 
defined lesion as a patch of mottled translucency.
Prevalence
Otosclerosis is a common focal lesion of the otic capsule, and is 
found principally in relation to the cochlea and footplate of the 
stapes. ‘Histological otosclerosis’ refers to a disease process with­
out clinical symptoms or manifestations that only can be dis­
covered by routine sectioning of the temporal bone at autopsy. 
‘Clinical otosclerosis’ concerns the presence of otosclerosis at a 
site where it causes conductive hearing loss, usually by interfer­
ing with the motion of the stapes. The mean prevalence of his­
tological otosclerosis has been estimated from temporal bone 
studies at 8.3%.28 According to Guild,2915% of temporal bones 
with histological otosclerosis demonstrate ankylosis of the 
stapediovestibular articulation: hence 8.3x15/100=1.2%  of 
all temporal bones studied could, by such extrapolation, be con­
sidered as having clinical otosclerosis. The figure derived from 
actual clinical studies of large populations is 0.3%.30 It is likely 
that the temporal bones studied by Guild and others are biased 
towards greater numbers of cases of otosclerosis by the fact that 
a large proportion of the patients had been investigated during 
life for otological conditions. In a study that was not so biased, 
consisting of unselected consecutive autopsied patients in one 
hospital, 
2.5% of 236 temporal bones showed otosclerosis, 
with an extrapolated figure for clinical otosclerosis of 0.37%. 
This correlates well with the clinically derived figure of 0.3%.30
Microscopic appearances
The histological characteristic of otosclerosis is the presence of 
trabeculae of new bone, mostly of the woven type. This con­
trasts with the well-developed bone under the outer perios­
teum, the endochondral middle layer and the endosteal layer of 
the otic capsule, a sharply demarcated edge between normal 
otosclerotic bone being a prominent feature. The pathological
Figure 3.14 Otosclerotic focus in a slice of temporal bone showing a pink 
deposit between the footplate of the stapes and the cochlea.
Aetiology
Otosclerosis seems to have some features of a hereditary disease, 
but its genetics still remain incompletely elucidated. There is a 
histological similarity between otosclerosis and Paget’s disease 
of bone. Because of the finding of measles-like virus particles in 
Paget’s disease of bone osteoclasts (see above), a search for a 
similar connection has been made in otosclerosis. Ultrastruc- 
tural and immunohistochemical evidence has indeed been 
found for measles virus in otosclerotic tissue. Using a method 
for isolation and identification of both DNA and RNA 
sequences in archival human temporal bone specimens with the 
polymerase chain reaction technique, a 115-bp sequence of the 
measles nucleocapsid gene has been identified in otosclerosis.31 
It thus seems likely that otosclerosis is associated with the 
measles virus, possibly through the intermediary of an immune 
reaction.
PATHOLOGY AND CLINICAL RELATIONS OF 
OTOSCLEROSIS
Aetiology: strong genetic aspects; measle virus 
relationship
Commences in bone anterior to footplate of stapes; 
then spreads
Gross: pinkish well-defined area in region of bone 
anterior to footplate
Microscopic: woven bone, very vascular; very cellular
Conductive hearing loss related to stapes footplate 
fixation
Sensorineural hearing loss related to involvement of 
cochlear perilymph spaces
  

42 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
bony tissue has a variable appearance, with areas of differing 
cellularity. In most places osteoblasts are very abundant within 
the woven bone- Osteoclasts may be present and are accompa­
nied by evidence of bone resorption. Marrow spaces contain 
prominent blood vessels and connective tissue (Figure 3.15).
The commonest site for the formation of otosclerotic foci is 
the bone anterior to the oval window. The fissula ante fenes- 
tram, a normally appearing slit connecting middle ear with 
vestibule, is present in the same region, but the significance of 
this relationship is still not understood. Cartilaginous rests are 
also normal in this area and may be seen nearby. Otosclerotic 
foci may also be seen in the bone near the round window mem­
brane (Figure 3.16), in the inferior part of the cochlear capsule 
or in the bone around the semicircular canals.
Otosclerotic involvement of the stapes footplate leading to 
functional fixation of the stapes may occur in two ways:
1. There may be actual participation by the stapes footplate in 
the formation of otosclerotic bone so that the otic capsular 
focus of pathological bone is continuous with the former, 
the annulus fibrosis being obliterated. Involvement of the
Figure 3.15 Otosclerotic bone shows an increase of cellularity of bone 
trabeculae and of vascularity of the marrow spaces.
oval window takes place at any point of its circumference, 
or indeed around most of it. The process may also occa­
sionally be associated with similar alterations in the lower 
parts of the stapedial crura
2. Frequently the footplate is not affected by the otosclerotic 
process, but the bone surrounding it proliferates to such an 
extent that the oval window is distorted and narrowed. 
Fibrous thickening of the annulus fibrosis may be promi­
nent. The otosclerotic focus may also encroach on the 
round window, narrowing it in the same fashion.
Otosclerotic bone frequently reaches the endosteum of the 
cochlear capsule. In some cases, it may lead to a fibrous reaction 
deep to the spiral ligament. Overgrowth of otosclerotic bone 
may, rarely, cause distortion of the cochlear contours and even 
affect the modiolus and lead to spontaneous fractures of the 
modiolar septa.32
An entity of ‘otospongiosis’ is often referred to by radiolo­
gists, implying a more vascular and less bony lesion. In histo­
logical sections, ‘otospongiotic’ and ‘otosclerotic’ lesions are 
found side by side in both active and inactive lesions,33 so that 
whether the lesion is ‘otospongiotic’ or ‘otosclerotic’ appears to 
have no relation to the activity of the condition.
Hearing loss in relation to otosclerotic foci
By far the commonest form of hearing loss in otosclerosis can be 
accounted for by oval window fixation, as described above, and 
is conductive in type. Depression of sound waves derived from 
air conduction also occurs following obstruction of the round 
window by otosclerosis. It is likely that otosclerotic involve­
ment of the cochlea may lead to sensorineural hearing loss— 
‘cochlear otosclerosis’.
Neoplasms of the inner ear
The cellular constituents of the inner ear, apart from bone, are, 
for the most part, fully differentiated non-mitotic structures— 
nerve cells and sensory epithelia— so that neoplasms would be 
expected to be of unusual occurrence in them. Primary neo­
plasms are indeed rare, except for vestibular schwannoma.
Internal auditory canal and cerebellopontine 
angle tumours
Tumours occurring in the internal auditory canal are the soli­
tary vestibular schwannoma, and the bilateral vestibular 
schwannoma (neurofibromatosis 2), the latter usually accompa­
nied in this situation by neoplasm-like masses of meningioma 
and neurofibroma. Primary meningiomas and lipomas are also 
seen in this region. Tumours of the internal auditory canal, on 
enlargement, extend into the cranial cavity, filling the cerebel­
lopontine angle.
Figure 3.16 Otosclerosis involving both anterior and posterior crura of stapes.
  

Pathology of the ear 
43
Vestibular schwannoma (acoustic neuroma)
PATHOLOGY OF VESTIBULAR 
SCHWANNOMA
Solitary form (not familial) slowly growing. Bilateral 
form (neurofibromatosis 2-familial) more aggressive 
Arises on the vestibular branch of the eighth nerve in 
the internal auditory canal 
Gross: spherical tumour at first, but adopts a mush­
room shape when it leaves the canal and expands in 
the cerebellopontine angle. The cochlear branch is 
stretched over the surface of the tumour. With 
growth, 
it 
produces 
a 
funnel-shaped 
canal 
{expanded centrally)
Microscopic appearances of neoplasm: Antoni A 
appearances— palisading of nuclei. Antoni 
B 
appearances— loose foamy cells 
Labyrinth contains proteinaceous fluid, probably 
due to compression of labyrinthine veins in the 
canal
This neoplasm may cause characteristic symptoms of hearing 
loss or vertigo, or it may grow slowly for years without causing 
symptoms and may be first diagnosed only at postmortem, 
where it can be expected in about 1 in 220 consecutive adults. 
It is stated to arise most commonly at the glial-neurilemmal 
junction of the eighth nerve, which is usually within the inter­
nal auditory meatus. When seen at surgery or autopsy, however, 
vestibular schwannoma in most cases is found to occupy a much 
greater part of the nerve. Usually, it is the vestibular division of 
the nerve which is affected; in a few cases, the cochlear division 
is the source of the neoplasm. Growth takes place from the ori­
gin, both centrally onto the cerebellopontine angle, and distally 
along the canal. Vestibular schwannoma is usually unilateral, 
but may be bilateral (see below). In a large series, 129 cases were 
unilateral and 11 bilateral.34
Gross appearance
The neoplasm is of variable size and of round or oval shape. 
Small tumours either do not widen the canal at all or produce 
only a small indentation in the bone. The larger tumours often 
have a mushroom shape, with two components: the stalk— an 
elongated part in the canal; and an expanded part in the region 
of the cerebellopontine angle. The bone of the internal audi­
tory canal is widened funnelwise as the neoplasm grows (see 
Figure 3.17). The tumour surface is smooth and lobulated. The 
cut surface is yellowish, often with areas of haemorrhage and 
cysts. The vestibular division of the eighth nerve may be iden­
tified on the surface of the tumour.
Figure 3.17 Vestibular schwannoma causing marked widening of the bone 
surrounding the internal auditory meatus. The tumour had been surgically 
excised during life, producing haemorrhage over part of the cut surface 
externally. Note the pale-staining eosinophilic deposit in the cochlear and 
vestibular cavities.
Histological findings
Vestibular schwannoma has the features of a neoplasm of 
schwann cells showing Antoni A and Antoni B types. Antoni 
A areas display spindle cells closely packed together with pal­
isading of nuclei (Figures 3.18 and 3.19). Verocay bodies, which 
may be present in the Antoni A areas, are whorled formations 
of palisaded tumour cells resembling tactile corpuscles. The 
spindle cells of the tumour may lack palisading and Verocay 
bodies, however. The degree of cellularity of the neoplasm can 
be high or low. The spindle cells are frequently moderately 
pleomorphic, but mitotic figures are rare. The presence of pleo- 
morphism does not denote a malignant tendency. Antoni B 
areas, probably a degenerated form of the Antoni A pattern, 
show a loose reticular pattern, sometimes with histiocytic pro­
liferation. Thrombosis and necrosis may be present in some 
parts of the neoplasm. A mild degree of invasion of the modio­
lus or vestibule along cochlear or vestibular nerve branches may
Figure 3.18 Antoni A area of vestibular schwannoma, showing palisading of 
nuclei.
  

44 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
Figure 3.19 Antoni B area of vestibular schwannoma, showing a looser 
pattern.
be present even in solitary vestibular schwannomas. Granular 
or homogeneous fluid exudate is usually present in the perilym­
phatic spaces of the cochlea and vestibule. This may arise as a 
result of pressure by the neoplasm on veins draining the cochlea 
and vestibule in the internal auditory meatus. Hydrops of the 
endolymphatic system may occur, and in larger tumours there is 
atrophy of spiral ganglion cells and nerve fibres in the basilar 
membrane.
Neurofibromatosis 2 (bilateral vestibular schwannoma)
Bilateral vestibular schwannoma acoustic neuroma (neurofibro­
matosis 2, NF2), unlike neurofibromatosis 1 (von Reckling­
hausen's disease), is not associated with large numbers of 
cutaneous neurofibromas and cafe-au-lait spots, but the tempo­
ral bone locality of the neural tumour and its bilaterality are 
inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. This condition has 
been related to a gene localized near the centre of the long arm 
of chromosome 22. At autopsy of cases of neurofibromatosis 2, 
neural neoplasms are present in both eighth nerves and other 
central nerves. There are often many small schwannomas and 
collections of cells of neurofibromatous and meningiomatous 
appearance growing on cranial nerves and on the meninges in 
the vicinity of the vestibular schwannomas and sometimes even 
intermixed with them. The NF2 tumours are histologically sim­
ilar to the single tumours, except that the former have more 
Verocay bodies and more foci of high cellularity. The NF2 
tumours are more invasive, however, tending to infiltrate the 
cochlea and vestibule more deeply.
Apex of petrous temporal bone and 
cerebellopontine angle tumours
A variety of neoplasms and tumour-like lesions may present at 
the apex of the petrous temporal bone. These include the fol­
lowing: jugular paraganglioma, jugular foramen schwannoma 
arising usually from the vagus nerve, low-grade adenocarcinoma 
of probable endolymphatic sac origin, and the tumour-like enti­
ties of cholesteatoma (epidermoid cyst) and cholesterol granu­
loma. Such lesions, on enlargement, may extend into the cere­
bellopontine angle.
Low-grade adenocarcinoma of probable endolymphatic 
sac
There is evidence of the existence of a rare epithelial neoplasm 
of the endolymphatic system, mainly in the endolymphatic sac. 
Although of benign glandular histological appearance and of 
slow growth, the neoplasm seems to have considerable invasive 
capacity, and therefore the term ‘low-grade adenocarcinoma of 
probable endolymphatic sac origin' has been applied.36 Some 
cases have presented bilateral neoplasms of the same type and 
some have also been associated with von Hippel-Lindau dis­
ease.36 The course of the tumour’s growth may extend over 
many years. Tinnitus or vertigo, similar or identical to the 
symptoms of Meniere’s disease, is present in about one-third of 
patients. It is presumed that early obstruction of the endolym­
phatic sac leads to hydrops of the endolymphatic system of the 
labyrinth and so to the Meniere’s symptoms. Imaging reveals a 
lytic temporal bone lesion, appearing to originate from the 
region between the internal auditory canal and sigmoid sinus 
(which is the approximate position of the endolymphatic sac). 
There is usually prominent extension into the posterior cranial 
cavity and invasion of the middle ear.
In most cases, the tumour has a papillary-glandular appear­
ance, the papillary proliferation being lined by a single row of 
low cuboidal cells. The vascular nature of the papillae in some 
cases has given the tumour a histological resemblance to 
choroid plexus papilloma. In some cases, the tumour also shows 
areas of dilated glands containing secretion which has some 
resemblance to colloid and, under these circumstances, the 
lesion may resemble papillary adenocarcinoma of the thyroid. 
Such thyroid-like areas may even dominate the histological 
pattern. A few cases show a clear cell predominance resembling 
carcinoma of the kidney.
Tumour-like lesions
Cholesteatoma (epidermoid cyst)
This lesion usually presents with symptoms relating to its 
involvement of the seventh and eighth cranial nerves in the 
cerebellopontine angle. The histological appearance is similar 
to that of middle ear cholesteatoma. It is probably of congeni­
tal origin, but no cell rest has been discovered from which it 
might arise.
Cholesterol granuloma
A lesion of the petrous apex with the typical features of choles­
terol granuloma as seen in the middle ear and mastoid in 
chronic otitis media has been revealed by MRI scan with 
increasing frequency. At operation it appears cystic, the con­
tents being altered blood and cholesterol clefts with a foreign 
body giant cell reaction.
Microscopic examination shows non-specific granulation 
tissue and haemosiderin deposits in its wall. It is believed to
  

Pathology of the ear 
45
result from an inflammatory response to an obstruction of the 
pneumatized air cells at the apex of the temporal bone. Haem­
orrhage into the air cells breaks down to hemosiderin and cho­
lesterol, with a foreign body reaction and progressive granuloma 
formation. As the process develops, bone is eroded by this 
expansile lesion, often involving the petrous apex, the cerebel­
lopontine angle and the middle ear.
Leukaemia
Leukaemia may involve the inner ear in several ways. The most 
important is haemorrhage into the membranous spaces, to 
which leukaemic patients are particularly prone. The haemor­
rhage may be into the perilymphatic spaces alone or into both 
perilymphatic and endolymphatic spaces. If the patient survives 
a massive intracochlear leukaemic haemorrhage for several 
months, the organ of Corti and spiral ganglion will become 
severely degenerated, and connective tissue and new bone will 
grow into the scalae. Another type of involvement may occur 
in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, in the form of severe 
leukaemic infiltration of the perilymphatic spaces of the 
cochlea. The leukaemic cells are probably conveyed from the 
cerebrospinal fluid via the cochlear aqueduct.
References
1. Friedberg J. Congenital cholesteatoma. Laryngoscope (suppl) 1994; 
104: 1-24.
2. Teed, RW. Cholesteatoma verum tympani. Its relationship to the 
first epibranchial placode, Arch Otolaryngol 1936; 24: 455-74.
3. Michaels L. An epidermoid formation in the developing middle 
ear; possible source of cholesteatoma. ] Otolaryngol 1986; 15: 
169-74.
4. Wang R-G., Hawke M, Kwok P. The epidermoid formation 
(Michaels’ structure) in the developing middle ear. J Otolaryngol 
1987; 16: 327-33.
5. Ormerod F. The pathology of congenital deafness. J Laryngol Otol 
1960; 74: 919-50.
6. Michaels L, Hellquist H. Ear, Nose and Throat Histopathology, 2nd 
edn. London: Springer, 2001.
7. Walsted A, Garbarsch C, Michaels L. Effect of craniotomy and 
cerebrospinal fluid loss on the inner ear. An experimental study. 
Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1994; 114: 626-31.
8. Amatuzzi MG, Northrop C, Liberman MC, Thornton A, Halpin 
C, Herrmann B, Pinto LE, Saenz A, Carranza A, Eavey RD. 
Selective inner hair cell loss in premature infants and cochlea 
pathology patterns from neonatal intensive care unit autopsies. 
Arch Otolarygol Head Neck Surg 2001; 127: 629-36.
9. Hanshaw JP. School failure and deafness after ‘silent’ congenital 
cytomegalovirus infection. N EnglJ Med 1976: 295: 468-70.
10. Soucek S, Michaels L. The ear in the acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome. II. Clinical and audiologic investigation. Am J Otol 
1996; 17: 35-9.
11. Wackym PA. Molecular temporal bone pathology: II. Ramsay Hunt 
syndrome (herpes zoster oticus). Laryngoscope 1997; 107: 1165-75.
12. Burgess RC, Michaels L, Bale JF, Smith RJ. Polymerase chain reac­
tion amplification of Herpes simplex viral DNA from the genicu­
late ganglion of a patient with Bell’s palsy. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1994; 103: 775-9.
13. Merchant SN, Gopen Q. A human temporal bone study of acute 
bacterial meningogenic labyrinthitis. Am J Otol 1996; 17: 375-85.
14. Rauch SN, Merchant SN, Thedinger BA. Meniere’s syndrome 
and endolymphatic hydrops. Double-blind temporal bone study. 
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1989; 98: 873-83.
15. Sperling NM, 
Paparella MM, Yoon TH, 
Zelterman 
D. 
Symptomatic versus asymptomatic endolymphatic hydrops: a his­
tologic comparison. Laryngoscope 1993; 103: 277-85.
16. Xenellis JE, Linthicum FH, Galey FR. Lermoyez’s syndrome: 
histopathologic report of a case. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1990; 
99: 307-9.
17. Antoli-Candela F Jr. The histopathology of Meniere’s disease. 
A eta Otolaryngol Suppl (Stockh) 1976; 340: 5-42.
18. Fraysse BG, Alonso A, House WF. Meniere’s disease and endolym­
phatic hydrops. Clinicopathological correlations. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1980; 8 (suppl 76): 2-22.
19. Gleeson M, Felix H. A comparative study of the effect of age on 
the human cochlear and vestibular neuroepithelia. Acta Orolaryn- 
gol (Stockh) Suppl 1987; 436: 103-9.
20. Merchant SN, Schuknecht HF. Vestibular atelectasis. Ann Otol 
Rhinol Laryngol 1988; 97: 565-76.
21. Schuknecht HF. Cupolithiasis. Arch Otolaryngol 1969; 90: 
765-78.
22. Schuknecht HF, Gacek MR. Cochlear pathology in presbycusis. 
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1993; 102: 1-16.
23. Soucek S, Michaels L, Frohlich A. Evidence for hair cell degener­
ation as the primary lesion in hearing loss of the elderly. J 
Otolaryngol 1986; 15: 175-83.
24. Bredberg G. Cellular patterns and nerve supply of the human 
organ of Corti. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl (Stockh) 1965; 236: 1-135.
25. Johnsson LG, Hawkins JE. Sensory and neural degeneration with 
aging, as seen in microdissection of the human inner ear. Ann Otol 
Rhinol Laryngol 1972; 81: 1-15.
26. Seidman MD, Bai U, Khan MJ, Quirk WS. Mitochondrial DNA 
deletions associated with aging and presbycusis. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1997; 123: 1039-45.
27. Bai U, Seidman MD, Hinojosa R, Quirk WS. Mitochondrial 
DNA deletions associated with aging and possibly presbycusis: a 
human archival temporal bone study. Am J Otol 1997; 18: 449-53.
28. Declau F, Van Spaendonck M, Timmermans JP, Michaels L, Liang 
J, Qiu JP, Van de Heyning P. Prevalence of otosclerosis in an uns­
elected series of temporal bones.Otol Neurotol 2001; 22: 596-602.
29. Guild SR. Histologic otosclerosis. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1944; 
53: 246-67.
30. Causse JR, Causse JB. Otospongiosis as a genetic disease. Early 
detection, medical management and prevention. Am J Otol 1984; 
5: 211-23.
31. McKenna MJ, Kristiansen AG, Haines J. Polymerase chain reac­
tion amplification of a measles virus sequence from human tem­
poral bone sections with active otosclerosis. Am J Otol 1996; 17: 
827-30.
  

46 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
32. Nager GT. Sensorineural deafness and otosclerosis. Ann Otol 
Rhinol Laryngol 1966; 75: 481-511.
33. Parahy C, Linthicum FH Jr. Otosclerosis and otospongiosis: clini­
cal and histological comparisons. Laryngoscope 1984; 94: 508-12.
34. EricksonLS, SorensonGD, McGavranMH. A review of 140 acoustic 
neurinomas (neurilemmoma). Laryngoscope 1965; 75:601-27.
35. Sidek D, Michaels L, Wright A. Changes in the inner ear in 
vestibular schwannoma. In: Iurato S, Veldman JE, eds. Progress in
Human Auditory and Vestibular Histopathology. Amsterdam: Kugler 
Publications, 1996: 95-101.
36. Heffner DK. Low-grade adenocarcinoma of probable endolym­
phatic sac origin. A clinicopathologic study of 20 cases. Cancer 
1989; 64: 2292-302.
37. Poe DE, Tarlov EC, Thomas CB, Kveton JF. Aggressive papillary 
tumors of temporal bone. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993; 108: 
80-6.
  

4
Genetics of auditory 
and vestibular 
disorders
Guy Van Camp, Andrew P Read
Identifying disease genes
Unravelling the genetics of any human disorder normally 
follows the three stages shown in Table 4.1. As indicated, at 
each stage there are clinical and scientific benefits.
Defining a genetic condition
The simplest genetic conditions are Mendelian, i.e. they are 
caused by the segregation of mutant alleles at a single gene. 
Single-gene (monogenic) conditions give rise to recognizable 
pedigree patterns (Figure 4.1). The patterns reflect the behav­
iour of chromosomes during the meiotic cell divisions that 
produce sperm and eggs. Mitochondrial inheritance is a spe-
Tabfe 4.1 Three stages in the investigation of a genetic 
disease.
Stage 
Benefits
cial case, but important in hearing loss. Mitochondria have 
their own small genome, mutations of which cause various 
clinical problems, including hearing loss. Since all of a per­
son’s mitochondria come from the egg, and none from the 
sperm, the inheritance pattern of mitochondrial diseases is 
matrilineal. All known human single-gene characters are 
listed in McKusick’s Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 
(OMlM)y which is freely accessible as an Internet resource at 
http://www3.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim. A specialized database of 
genetic hearing problems is maintained at http://dnalab- 
www.uia.ac.be/dnalab/hhh/. Given the small size of most human 
families, the variability of many genetic conditions and the fre­
quent occurrence of new mutations in some conditions, 
patients seen in the clinic very seldom show the unambiguous 
pedigree patterns of Figure 4.1. Some syndromic forms of hear­
ing loss are recognizable clinically, but for non-syndromic 
forms, genetic causation is usually suspected only when no 
other explanation seems attractive. The mode of inheritance 
for a particular patient is rarely more than a hypothesis.
1. Define a genetic condition
2. Map the gene to a particular 
chromosomal location
3. Identify the gene
Allows counselling based on 
monogenic risks (e.g. a 
5 0%  recurrence risk for 
autosomal dominant 
disease)
Allows DNA diagnostics for 
large linked families, but 
not yet for small families 
and for individual patients
Allows precise genetic 
diagnosis, also for 
individual patients
Possibility of novel 
treatments
THE HEREDITARY HEARING LOSS HOMEPAGE
http://dnalab-www.uia.ac.be/dnalab/hhh
This welvsite contains continuously updated tables with 
information for all known loci for non-syndromic 
hearing impairment and for many of the best-known 
syndromic forms. The information includes chromosomal 
locations, genetic markers, identified genes, reserved and 
withdrawn symbols, and potential mouse models. Many 
references for gene localizations and identifications are 
given, and direct links to abstracts of these publications 
are provided.

48 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
Recessive inheritance is suspected when an affected child has 
unaffected parents, especially if there is an affected sib or 
parental consanguinity. As discussed below, recessive hearing 
loss is most often prelingual and profound, while dominant loss 
is more often milder, of later onset and progressive.
Many conditions show some familial tendency without 
giving clear monogenic pedigree patterns. The reason for this 
can lie in the fact that more than one gene is involved. In 
addition, since humans give their children both their genes and 
their environment, conditions can run in families due to envi- 
ronmental factors, without being genetic. Diseases that are 
caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors 
are called complex, and analysing such complex conditions is a 
major challenge, which geneticists are only beginning to 
address. As inherited genetic susceptibility is believed to play a 
part in the causation of many common diseases, including pres­
byacusis, otosclerosis and Meniere’s disease, the identification 
of the genetic risk factors could lead to improved diagnostics 
and therapy.
Mapping a disease gene to a chromosomal 
location
For mitochondrial and X-linked conditions, the pedigree pat­
tern tells the geneticist where to look for the gene. For autoso­
mal dominant and autosomal recessive diseases, the gene can 
be located on each of the chromosomes, except for the sex 
chromosomes, and the mitochondrial DNA. The gene must 
somehow be localized to a particular chromosome and sub- 
chromosomal region. To do this, we require families where a 
parent could have passed on either the disease gene or its 
normal version (allele) to each of several children, and where 
we know which allele was in fact passed on. The trick is to 
check each chromosome with genetic markers until one is 
found that segregates in exactly the same pattern as the disease. 
If this happens too often to be coincidence, that chromosome 
must carry the disease gene.
In practice, of course, it is not quite so simple.
it 
A parent such as individual II-1 in Figure 4.2 (the first per­
son along in the second generation down) does not simply 
pass on to each child an intact copy of each chromosome as 
inherited from the grandparents in generation I. During 
meiosis, chromosomes pair up and swap segments (crossing 
over). On average, there are about 60 crossovers in male 
meiosis and about 90 in female. Thus every chromosome 
pair crosses over several times, more or less at random, and 
each chromosome transmitted to a child is a patchwork of 
the grandpatemal and grandmaternal chromosomes. There­
fore, rather than simply checking each chromosome once 
for co-segregation with the disease, we need to check about 
10-15 segements for an average chromosome, or 200-350 
for the whole genome. 
m 
We cannot distinguish between grandpatemal and grand- 
maternal segments simply by looking down the microscope.
(a) 
0 ~ T
*
jf-[—o  
jk
k  
0- ^
6-r-o d -t-4  4  ib-rO Or6 
Dt6 6 d 
I 
ll I □
6
l i i
 i
6
(b) 
OyO 
Cl-y-O 
6 i  i  i-r-6 o  6 
i  i  1 i
(c) 
0  
0f > 
0 
e5oDt<5
-----0
fyO D-rO 
O-r-O
i n  G o  d *  0 n-rO 
1 
<5~5 iX *
(d)
D —i— •
i j O
□ | 1
- o
- o
i  
■^- r °  
□~T~^
r
n
 m
Figure 4.1 Pedigree patterns, (a) Autosomal dominant, (b) Autosomal recessive, 
(c) X-linked recessive, (d) Mitochondrial inheritance. Squares represent males, 
and circles females. Blacked-in characters are affected. Without further evi­
dence, it would not be possible to recognize the pedigree in (b) as showing a 
genetically determined hearing loss.
Instead, minor non-pathogenic variants in the DNA (DNA 
markers) are used. Fortunately, innumerable such variants 
exist. The most widely used, called microsatellites, are small 
runs of di- or tri-nucleotide repeats, typically (CA)n, in 
non-coding parts of the DNA where they are harmless. At 
a given chromosomal location, everybody will have a CA 
repeat, but different people will have different sizes of 
(CA)n run. Standard molecular biology techniques (PCR 
and gel electrophoresis1 can be used to see the repeats as 
bands on a gel (Figure 4.2). During the last 10 years, about 
10000 such markers have been defined and placed on 
accurate maps covering the whole of every chromosome.
In Figure 4.2 it is easy to see that marker A segregates in a way 
that has no relation to the disease, but for marker B the band
  

Genetics of auditory and vestibular disorders 
49
Figure 4.2 Linkage analysis. Symbols as in Figure 4.1. The pedigree shows a 
family with autosomal dominant hearing loss. The boxes show the bands that 
each person's DNA gave when tested with two microsatellite markers from dif­
ferent chromosomes. The two bands in the left half of each box are for marker 
A, from chromosome 6. Each band is inherited from one parent, but there is no 
relation between which band a person inherits and whether or not they inherit 
the disease. The two bands in the right-hand half of each box are for marker B, 
from chromosome 15. With one exception, anybody who inherits the disease 
from a parent also inherits the band marked with an arrow from that parent, 
and anybody who does not inherit the disease from an affected parent does not 
inherit the band. Thus marker B is tending to track with the disease, suggesting 
that the disease gene may be located on chromosome 15, near to marker A. The 
one exception is the sixth person in the bottom generation. This person is a 
recombinant (see text).
indicated with an arrow tracks with the disease perfectly in 
every case except for individual 111-6, who inherited the band 
but not the disease. This particular pedigree is relatively small, 
and the co-segregation might be coincidental However, if such 
co-segregation is seen in a big enough family (or in a big enough 
collection of smaller families), the result may be statistically sig­
nificant. The statistic used for linkage analysis is called the lod 
score, and is the logarithm of the odds favouring linkage over 
non-linkage. Lod scores are calculated by computer. The 
thresholds of significance are +3.0 (significant evidence for 
linkage) and —2.0 (significant evidence against linkage). Indi­
vidual III-6 in Figure 4.2 inherited the coloured band but not 
the disease. She is a recombinant. When the egg that gave rise 
to her was being made, a crossover must have separated the 
disease gene from the associated marker allele. The probability 
of this happening is a measure of how far apart the disease gene 
and the marker are. Thus the percentage recombination 
(measured in units called centiMorgans) is a measure of the 
genetic distance between two loci. If the rest of the pedigree 
shows sufficient evidence of linkage, each recombinant pro­
vides a means to move closer to the disease gene. Other adja­
cent markers, chosen on the basis of the established genetic 
map of markers, are tested until one is found that gives no 
recombinants. This then marks the best localization of the 
disease gene.
How closely a disease gene can be thus localized depends on 
the number of meioses that can be tested. Thus genetic map­
ping relies on unusually large families. For autosomal recessive 
conditions this is a big problem, because most European fami­
lies consist simply of unaffected parents and one, or at most two 
or three, affected children. This problem was solved by going to 
countries where inbreeding is common, producing large 
extended kindreds with multiple affected sibships.
Once a disease has been mapped, it may become apparent 
that a supposedly unitary condition is actually a collection of dif­
ferent diseases (as happened with Usher syndrome). Conversely, 
two supposedly different conditions can map to precisely the 
same location, implying that they are probably caused by muta­
tions in the same gene (as happened with the dominant DFNA3 
and recessive DFNBJ forms of non-syndromic deafness).
Identifying the disease gene
Figure 4.3 summarizes the many possible routes to identifying a 
disease gene. In all cases, the strategy has two stages: define a 
candidate gene, and then seek mutations in that gene in 
affected people. Maybe if we knew enough about how hearing 
works, we could use that knowledge to suggest candidate genes 
for each disorder in the absence of the chromosomal location. 
For a very limited number of diseases, such an educated guess 
about the responsible gene has a chance of success, and this 
procedure is called the candidate gene approach (shortcut 1 in 
Figure 4.3). However, we know very little about how hearing 
works, and in fact one of the main reasons for researching 
genetic deafness is to find the genes responsible for normal 
hearing. Fortunately, as the Human Genome Project moves 
forward, a rapidly growing proportion of all human genes are 
already at least partially cloned, and limited information about 
the DNA sequence, chromosomal location and expression 
pattern (by tissue and by stage of development) of many genes 
is now available in public databases.
Thus once a gene affecting hearing has been mapped, the 
next step is to search the databases for genes located within the 
candidate region. If a gene is expressed especially in the inner 
ear, or if its sequence resembles the sequence of another gene 
known to be involved in hearing loss, that gene is a good can­
didate for the disease gene. This procedure is called the posi­
tional candidate approach (shortcut 2 in Figure 4.3) and was 
successful in identifying the DFNA8 gene. In several families, 
autosomal dominant hearing impairment mapped to a rather 
poorly defined location on the long arm of chromosome 11. 
This locus was called DFNA8 or DFNA12 (the two later turned 
out to be identical). The gene for a-tectorin was known to map 
within this candidate region. a-Tectorin is a structural protein 
that is an important component of the tectorial membrane in 
the inner ear. This provided an obvious candidate gene, and 
when it was examined in affected family members, changes 
were identified. Animal models are also invaluable -  mice in 
particular have almost exactly the same genes as humans, and 
the many mapped mouse mutants can suggest candidates for 
human disease. The PAX3 and MITF genes that go wrong 
in Waardenburg syndrome types 1 and 2 respectively were
  

50 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
Figure 4.3 Identification of a gene for a monogenic disease.
identified as candidates through comparison with the Splotch 
and microphthalmia mouse mutants.
If no obvious candidate gene can be identified, there are 
two options -  test other known genes, even though they have 
no features making them obvious candidates, or try to isolate 
novel genes from the candidate region. In our present state of 
knowledge, predicting which of several genes is the best candi­
date for a disease is very largely guesswork, so every known gene 
within the candidate region will probably be examined at least 
briefly. If none seems promising, then novel genes must be 
sought. It is important to get some idea of the magnitude of this 
task. The human genome contains 3 X 109base pairs of DNA. 
An average chromosome contains over 100 million base pairs 
(100Mb). The best linkage data will not define an interval of 
less than 1 MB, and 2-10 Mb is more usual. Humans probably 
have about 80 000 genes, so the average density is about 20-30 
genes per Mb. Only a few per cent of any stretch of DNA actu­
ally code for protein. Worse, genes in all higher organisms are 
split into sections (exons) scattered, often quite thinly, among 
non-coding DNA (introns). When a messenger RNA is made
from the gene, all the introns are cut out and degraded, and the 
exons spliced together. Some genes have over 100 exons. It 
seems a very strange way for organisms to function, and it cer­
tainly makes life hard for gene cloners. They have somehow to 
identify exons scattered thinly and apparently randomly across 
a sea of irrelevant DNA, usually with no clue as to the nature 
of the exons. Until recently, positional cloning (finding 
unknown genes from a given chromosomal region) was a truly 
formidable undertaking, involving many years of hard work, 
often by large collaborations between several laboratories. 
Nowadays, the Human Genome Project has provided tools to 
make the task rather easier, in the form of ready-made cloned 
DNA fragments covering each chromosomal region. There are 
many ways of searching such cloned DNA fragments for 
unknown genes. The most obvious is to sequence the clone and 
use a computer to look for gene-like sequences. This approach 
identified the EYAl gene that underlies the branchio-oto-renal 
syndrome. An alternative is cDNA library screening: checking 
the clone for matches to the messenger RNA extracted from a 
suitable tissue (ideally, the organ of Corti for hearing loss). A 
third option is exon trapping, which uses special cloning 
systems to try to mimic the way in which living organisms are 
able to pick out the thinly scattered exons from large stretches 
of DNA. None of these approaches is perfect or guaranteed to 
succeed, and laboratories usually try a combination of methods.
Once a candidate gene has been identified by any of these 
methods, mutations must be sought in a panel of affected 
patients. Again, a variety of methods are available, none perfect 
or guaranteed to succeed. If necessary, all such changes could be 
identified by sequencing, but sequencing a 10-kb gene in 20 
patients can be a lot of work, especially if it is only one of 10 
equally good (or poor) candidate genes. Quicker methods are 
available that detect a reasonable proportion of all changes in a
THE HUMAN GENOME PROJECT
This 15-year project, which started in 1990, aims to 
determine the complete sequence of the human genome. 
Before the actual sequencing could start, detailed genetic 
and physical maps of the human genome needed to be 
constructed. The genetic map currently includes more 
than 20 000 genetic markers, many of them ordered in 
high-resolution genetic maps. The physical map consists 
of overlapping pieces of DNA (contigs), cloned in yeast 
(yeast artificial chromosomes or YACs) and bacteria 
(bacterial artificial chromosomes or BACs). The com­
plete human genome is covered with YAC contigs, and a 
significant fraction is cloned in BACs that are actually 
being sequenced. A first draft of the sequence with many 
inaccuracies and gaps was finished in February 2001. The 
researchers hope to have the complete 3 billion 
nucleotides sequenced 2 years ahead of schedule, by 
2003.
  

Genetics of auditory and vestibular disorders 
51
panel of samples, and these allow rapid but imperfect screening 
of a candidate gene.
Having found a change, one needs to know whether it is a 
pathogenic mutation or just a harmless variant. Some changes 
can be predicted to destroy all functions of the protein product, 
and these would be convincing candidates for pathogenic muta­
tions. Other changes simply replace one amino acid in the 
protein by another. It is much harder to assess the impact of 
such a change. If several different affected families have several 
different such changes, and if these changes cannot be found on 
screening a good-sized panel of unaffected people, then proba­
bly the changes are pathogenic, and the right gene has been 
identified. The final proof can only come from some sort of 
functional test on the protein product of the gene—but in 
many cases those experiments are not currently possible.
Genetics of auditory disorders
Epidemiology
Approximately 1/1000 children are diagnosed as deaf or hard of 
hearing in early childhood. In developed countries, more than 
50% of these cases are caused by mutations in single genes.2,3 
The mode of inheritance of childhood hearing impairment is 
autosomal recessive in approximately 80%, autosomal domi­
nant in 15% and X-linked in 2-3%.2,4
Hearing impairment with postlingual onset is very fre­
quent: 15-20% of the population is affected with a hearing 
impairment of more than 25 dB.2 A majority of cases is found in 
the elderly population, but genetic factors have also been 
proven to be important in presbyacusis.5 Monogenic forms of
postlingual hearing impairment also exist, but there are no good 
estimates for the prevalence. Nearly all published families with 
monogenic postlingual hearing impairment have an autosomal 
dominant inheritance pattern.
Syndromic hearing impairment
From a clinical genetic point of view, hereditary hearing impair­
ment is subdivided in syndromic forms, associated with addi­
tional clinical abnormalities, and non-syndromic forms. 
Although less than one-third of all cases of hereditary hearing 
impairment are syndromic, several hundred different syndromes 
in which hearing impairment is a symptom have been described. 
In some of these, hearing impairment is only a minor symtom, or 
is a secondary effect of another defect (for example, patients with 
neurofibromatosis type II develop hearing impairment after the 
formation of a tumour on the acoustical nerve). In other syn­
dromes, however, hearing impairment is a major hallmark, and 
the responsible gene most likely has an important function in the 
inner ear, as well as in one or more other tissues that are affected 
by the syndrome. For a number of syndromic forms of deafness, 
the responsible gene has been identified. In Table 4.3, the 
major characteristics of some of the best-known syndromic 
forms of hearing impairment are given. Certain clinical abnor­
malities occur frequently in combination with hearing impair­
ment. Examples are pigmentary disturbances, the hallmark of 
Waardenburg syndrome, and retinitis pigmentosa, a characteris­
tic of Usher syndrome. Waardenburg as well as Usher syndrome 
are subcategorized further on the basis of additional clinical 
abnormalities, and different genes are responsible for the dif­
ferent subcategories. Both syndromes are genetically hetero­
geneous: five different genes are known to be responsible for
Table 4.2 Loci for hearing impairment, classified according to affected frequencies and inheritance pattern,
Inheritance
Low frequencies
Mid-frequencies/AII frequencies
High frequencies
Autosomal
DFNA1
DFNA4
DFNA2
dominant3
DFNA6
DFNA8/12
DFNA3
DFNA14
DFNA 10
DFNA5
DFNA)5
DFNA 11
DFNA7
DFNA 13
DFNA9
DFNA 16
DFNA 17
Autosomal
None
DFNB1-B18
None
recessive5
X-linkedl
None
DFN2
DFN6
DFN3
DFN4
aThe patients from all the families linked to autosomal dominant [DFNA) loci have progressive hearing impairment with postlingual onset, with the exception of 
DFNA3and DFNA8/12, for which the families have prelingual and stable hearing impairment.
h'he patients from all recessive [DFNB) families have a hearing loss affecting all frequencies, which is prelingual and stable for all loci, except DFNB3 and 
DFNB13, where the hearing loss is progressive.
cX-linked loci DFN1 and DFN5 are not mentioned in this table: DFN1 refers to a syndromic form of deafness, and DFN5 has been withdrawn.
  

52 
Fundamentals o f audiological and vestibular medicine
Table 4,3 Syndromic forms of hearing impairment.
Syndrome
Major additional symptoms
Protein name
Protein class and/or gene 
function
Referen
Alport
Nephritis
Collagen type IV 
(different chains)
Extracellular matrix molecule for 
basement membranes
61,62
Branchio-oto-renal
Branchial anomalies, renal 
manifestations
EYA1
Transcriptional co-activator
63
Jervell and Lange 
Nielsen
Cardiac arrhythmia, syncopal 
episodes
KCNQ1
(KVLQT1)
MinK (also called 
IsK)
Potassium channel subunits
27,64,6
Norrie
Blindness, mental retardation
Norrin
Putative growth factor
66,67
Rend red
Thyroid goitre
Pendrin
Iodide transporter
24
Stickler
Myopia, vitreoretinal 
degeneration, joint 
degeneration
Collagen type II 
(a1 chain)
Extracellular matrix molecule for 
cartilage
68-70
Treacher Collins
Abnormal craniofacial 
development
Treacle
Putative nucleolar phosphoprotein
71
Usher (different types]
Retinitis pigmentosa
Myosin Vila (type 
IB)
USH2A (type 2A)
Myosin Vila: motor molecule 
LISH2A: extracellular matrix 
molecule
19r72
Waardenburg 
(different types)
Pigmentary abnormalities of 
hair, iris and skin, dystopia 
canthorum (type 1), upper 
limb abnormalities (type III), 
aganglionic megacolon 
(type IV)
PAX3 (types 1 and 
III)
MITF (type II] 
Endothelin 3 
Endothelin B 
receptor 
S0X10
PAX3, MITF and S0X10: 
transcription factor with role in 
migration of neural crest cells 
during embryonic development 
Endothelin 3 and endothelin B 
receptor: vasoactive peptide and 
receptor that play a role in the
73-78
development of neural crest- 
derived enteric neurones
different types of Waardenburg syndrome, and nine different 
genes have been localized for Usher syndrome, only two of 
which have been identified.
Gene localizations for non-syndromic hearing 
impairment
Non-syndromic congenital deafness is inherited autosomal 
recessively in a large majority of cases (Table 4.4). When two 
deaf parents have normally hearing children, a different gene 
must be responsible for deafness in these parents. Therefore, 
decades ago, it was deduced from the statistical analysis of 
deaf-deaf matings that many different genes are responsible for 
autosomal recessive deafness. This genetic heterogeneity makes 
it impossible to pool the information from different families, 
and linkage analysis of the responsible genes must be carried out 
in separate families. However, most families from the Western 
world contain only a single affected individual with unrelated 
parents, which is useless for linkage analysis. For these reasons,
it was only in 1994 that the first genes for non-syndromic deaf­
ness were localized, when many genes for other frequent auto­
somal recessive (genetically homogeneous) diseases had already 
been localized. At this moment, more than 20 genes for non- 
syndromic recessive deafness have been localized. With a few 
exceptions, the patients in all these families have profound con­
genital deafness. Gene localizations for non-syndromic hearing 
impairment are numbered in the order of discovery, and are 
given a prefix to denote the inheritance pattern. Loci for auto­
somal recessive loci for hereditary hearing loss are given the 
prefix DFNB. All the DFNB localizations have been carried out 
on the basis of consanguineous families, originating from ethni­
cally isolated regions, or regions with high consanguinity. The 
information content of consanguineous families can be very 
high. For example, a family where the parents are first cousins, 
and in which there are three affected children, has enough 
power to find linkage.
An autosomal dominant family with about 10 affected 
family members is about the minimal size to prove linkage, and
  

Genetics of auditory and vestibular disorders 
53
Table 4.4 Genes responsible for non-syndromic hearing impairment
Protein name
Protein class and/or gene function
Non-syndromic
locus
(eventual syndrome)
Reference
Diaphanous 1
Regulation of actin polymerization
DFNA I
79
Connexin 31
Gap junction protein, forms channels between adjacent 
cells
DFNA2
32
Connexin 26
Gap junction protein, forms channels between adjacent 
cells
DFNB I  DFNA3
30,31
DFNA5
Unknown
DFNA5
80
a-Tectorin
Extracellular matrix protein, major structural 
component of the tectorial membrane
DFNA8/12
13
COCH
Putative extracellular matrix protein, specific for 
cochlea and vestibular apparatus
DFNA9
52
Myosin VIIA
Molecular motor protein, moves different 
macromolecular structures relative to the cytoskeleton 
of the cell
DFNB2, DFN A ll 
(Usher syndrome)
20-22
PGU4F3
Transcription factor with role in embryogenesis
DFNA15
81
P0U3F4
Transcription factor with role in embryogenesis
DFN3
18
Myosin XV
Molecular motor protein, moves different 
macromolecular structures relative to the cytoskeleton 
of the cell
DFNB3
82
Pendrin
Iodide transporter
DFNB4
(Rendred syndrome)
24
KCNQ4
K+ ion channel
DFNA2
29
Otoferlin
Membrane vesicle trafficking protein
DFNB9
83
such families with hearing impairment have been reported in 
the literature since the 1960s. It is therefore somewhat surpris­
ing that the first gene for autosomal dominant hearing impair­
ment was not localized earlier than 1992.6 As no data about 
genetic heterogeneity for autosomal dominantly inherited hear­
ing impairment were available from epidemiological studies, it 
was only through linkage analysis in many additional families 
that it became clear that dominant hearing impairment is 
equally genetically heterogeneous as recessive deafness. After 
the first localization for dominant hearing impairment, more 
than 20 additional loci have been assigned to different chro­
mosome bands. Dominant loci for non-syndromic hearing 
impairment are given the prefix DFNA.
Non-syndromic hearing impairment: 
phenotypic characteristics
The patients from all recessive (DFNB) families have a hearing 
loss affecting all frequencies, that is prelingual and stable, 
except for DFNB37 and DFNB 13,8 where the hearing loss is 
progressive. The hearing impairment in families with autosomal
dominant inheritance patterns is very different from that in the 
recessive families. In most cases it is progressive, with onset 
ranging from the first up to the fifth decade. In the beginning, 
the hearing impairment is limited, and often only certain fre­
quencies are affected (Table 4.2). In some families, the high 
frequencies are affected first, sometimes progressing to a pro­
found hearing impairment across all frequencies (e.g. some 
families linked to DFNA29), while in other families the low 
frequencies are spared (e.g. a large Dutch family linked to 
DFNA510). Conversely, the hearing impairment starts in the 
low frequencies in other families, leading to profound deafness 
in some (e.g. a large Costa Rican family linked to DFNA I6), or 
sparing the high frequencies (families linked to DFNA611 and 
DFNAJ412). A few families with autosomal dominant congeni­
tal non-progressive hearing impairment have been reported 
(families linked to DFNA8 and DFNA12), but here the hear­
ing impairment is only moderate to severe.13
Although only four different loci for X-linked hearing 
impairment have been reported, eight different loci have been 
given a DFN prefix denoting X-linked inheritance. The reason 
for this lies in the fact that one DFN locus turned out to be
  

54 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
syndromic after more careful clinical analysis (DFNl),14 two 
localizations have been withdrawn, and three putative localiza­
tions have remained unpublished. The phenotype of the X- 
linked families is variable. Some families have profound 
congenital hearing impairment (DFN215 and DFN416), while 
others have progressive postlingual hearing impairment 
(DFN617). Families linked to DFN3 are characterized by struc­
tural abnormalities of the middle and inner ear, including an 
abnormal communication between cerebrospinal fluid and peri­
lymph.18 These patients also have fixation of the stapes, giving 
rise to a conductive hearing impairment in addition to a sen­
sorineural component. When the oval window is penetrated 
during surgery, a so-called perilymphatic gusher occurs, result­
ing in complete loss of hearing.
Gene identifications for hereditary hearing 
impairment
When the currently identified genes for syndromic and non- 
syndromic hereditary hearing impairment (Tables 4.3 and 4.4) 
are compared, it is striking that certain categories of genes are 
present several times. These categories include transcription 
factors, generally involved in embryonic development, extra­
cellular matrix proteins, unconventional myosins and ion 
channel/transporter proteins. It is also remarkable that nearly 
all of these genes are expressed in multiple tissues, but that 
functional impairment leads to hearing loss as the only pheno­
type. Possibly, these proteins have several functions, with spe­
cific and irreplaceable functions in the inner ear, and redundant 
functions in other tissues. (Figure 4.4)
One gene can cause syndromic as well as non- 
syndromic hearing impairment
Two genes, myosin VIIA and pendrin, have been implicated in 
syndromic as well as non-syndromic hearing impairment. 
Different mutations in myosin VIIA are responsible for the 
autosomal recessively inherited Usher syndrome (type IB),19 as 
well as both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive non- 
syndromic hearing impairment.20-22 Myosin VIIA is expressed 
in the sensory hair cells of the cochlea, as well as the photo­
receptor cells in the retina,23 but it is currently unclear why 
certain mutations affect both types of cells, while others only 
affect the hair cells.
Pendred syndrome, a combination of deafness and thyroid 
abnormalities, is caused by mutations affecting the pendrin 
protein,24 which is a chloride-iodide transport molecule.25 
Although this function intuitively associates well with a thy­
roid defect, the mechanisms leading to hearing impairment are 
less clear. However, the majority of Pendred patients have been 
reported to have congenital inner ear malformations, including 
a Mondini malformation of the cochlea, and enlarged vestibu­
lar aqueducts. Enlarged vestibular aqueducts have also been 
found in the non-syndromic patients with mutations in the 
Pendred gene. In addition, the thyroid goitre in Pendred
patients often develops later in life, and in some Pendred fami­
lies the same mutation is present in patients with and without 
goitre, and with and without Mondini malformation. It is now 
becoming clear that mutations in the gene coding for pendrin 
are responsible for a wide spectrum of overlapping phenotypes, 
ranging from non-syndromic hearing impairment with enlarged 
vestibular aqueducts to classical Pendred syndrome patients 
with Mondini cochlear malformations and goitre.26 Most likely, 
the phenotypic expression of mutations in pendrin is influenced 
by other as yet unidentified factors, genetic or environmental.
K channels in hearing impairment
The endolymph in the inner ear has a very high K+ concentra­
tion. When the stereocilia of the hair cells in the cochlea are 
deflected by acoustical vibrations, K+ enters the hair cells. 
These ions are recycled to the stria vascularis, where they are 
actively pumped back into the endolymph. These K+ ion fluxes 
play a crucial role in the inner ear, and it is therefore not sur­
prising that many of the genes for hearing impairment encode 
channels and gap junctions involved in ion transport.
Several mutations in K+ channels have been implicated in 
hereditary hearing loss. Homozygotes for mutations in KCNQ1 
or KCNE1 cause Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome,27 a syn­
dromic form of deafness including cardiac arrhythmia. Het­
erozygotes usually only have the cardiac symptoms, known as 
long QT syndrome. 
Mutations in a novel member of the 
KCNQ K+ channel family (KCNQ4) cause autosomal non- 
syndromic dominant hearing loss (DFNA2).29 KCNQ1 is 
expressed in the stria vascularis, where it passes K+ ions into 
the endolymph. KCNQ4 is expressed in the outer hair cells 
and may be responsible for letting K+ out of the outer hair cell 
after stimulation. Another class of molecules that are impor­
tant in regulating ion fluxes are connexins. Connexins form 
gap junctions between adjacent cells, through which small 
molecules can be exchanged. Mutations in connexin 26 are 
very frequent causes of recessive deafness, and also seem to be 
a relatively infrequent cause of autosomal dominant hearing 
impairment.30,31 Connexin 31 mutations have been found in a 
few dominant families (DFNA2),32 but whether this gene is a 
frequent cause of hearing impairment remains to be deter­
mined. Both Cx26 and Cx31 are expressed in the supporting 
cells surrounding the hair cells and in the fibrocytes of the 
spiral ligament around the stria vascularis.33 This suggests a 
role of these gap junctions in the diffusion of K+ ions from 
the hair cells to the stria vascularis, completing the circle of 
K+ recycling.
Mitochondrial hearing impairment
Mitochondria are important cellular organelles, responsible for 
energy production. Mitochondria contain a small amount of 
DNA (16 569 nucleotides in humans) that codes for 36 genes in 
total. Mutations in mitochondrial genes are usually associated 
with syndromic disorders, and sensorineural hearing impairment
  

Genetics of auditory and vestibular disorders 
55
vascularis
Spiral
prominence
epithelium
Tectorial
membrane
Interdental cells
Spiral timbus
Supporting cells
Auditory canal
Cochlea
Tympanic 
^  
_________ membrane
Middle ear
GENES
TECTA and C0L11A2 
MY07A, P0U4F3, and KCNQ4 
ATP681 
RDS
KVLQT1 and KCNE1 
OTOF and KCNQ4 
] GJB2 and GJB3
Mesenchymal cells
Semicircular canals
Marginal cells
Figure 4.4 Cross-sectional view of the basal turn of the cochlea to illustrate the site of expression of some the genes identified as causing hearing impairment. 
(From Tekin et al. Lancet 2001; 358: 1082-90 with permission from Elsevier Science Ltd.)
is an accompanying symptom in many of them. Mitochondrial 
syndromes that include hearing loss are MEL AS (mitochondrial 
encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, stroke-like symptoms),34 
MERFF (myoclonus epilepsy with ragged-red fibres), ’ 
PEO 
(progressive external opthalmoplegia)37 and Keams-Sayre syn­
drome.37 Also, a combination of diabetes type II and hearing loss 
has been associated with a mitochondrial mutation.38 Three 
mutations give rise to hearing loss as the sole symptom in many 
patients (Table 4.5). The reason why only the auditory system is 
affected by these mutations remains unknown.
The first mutation (1555A-K3) is found in many pedigrees 
with non-syndromic deafness and in patients and families with
aminoglycoside-induced ototoxic hearing impairment.39 Appar­
ently this mutation makes individuals susceptible to hearing 
impairment after treatment with aminoglycosides at concentra­
tions that normally do not affect hearing. Even without exposure 
to aminoglycosides, many patients with this mutation develop 
hearing impairment, but it is currently unknown which other 
factors are involved in the aetiology. Apparently, this mutation 
is rather frequent in certain regions, such as Spain40 and Japan.41
The two other non-syndromic mitochondrial mutations 
(7445A->G) and 7472insC) are in some patients associated 
with palmoplantar keratoderma42^4 and neurological symp-
45,46 
. 
i
toms 
respectively.
  

56 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
Table 4.5 Mitochondrial mutations leading to hearing impairment as the sole or predominant symptom.
Mitochondrial mutation 
Gene 
Additional clinical hallmarks 
References
1555A-K] 
12SrRNA 
Susceptibility to aminoglycoside ototoxicity 
39,41,84
7445A-+G 
tRNA-ser(UCN) 
Palmoplantar keratoderma (thickening of 
42-44
horny layer of the skin of palms and soles)
7472insC 
tRNA-ser(UCN) 
Various neurological symptoms 
45,46
Otosclerosis
Otosclerosis is a common cause of conductive or mixed hearing 
impairment, affecting up to 1% of the Caucasian population. 
The disease has an onset between 10 and 50 years of age, and is 
characterized by abnormal resorption and redeposition of bone 
in certain areas of the labyrinthine capsule. These otosclerotic 
foci invade the oval window and interfere with free motion of 
the stapes, leading to conductive hearing loss. It is thought that 
otosclerotic foci can also damage the cochlear endosteum, lead­
ing to sensorineural hearing loss. Although the aetiology of 
otosclerosis is poorly understood and controversial, the finding 
of many familial cases has indicated that genetic factors are 
important. Epidemiological studies indicate autosomal domi­
nant inheritance with incomplete penetrance.47,48 However, 
large families suitable for genetic linkage analysis seem to be 
rare, and only a single family that is large enough has been 
reported. On the basis of this multigenerational family with 16 
affected individuals, linkage was found on chromosome 15.49 
Other families were found not to be linked to this locus, 
suggesting genetic heterogeneity for otosclerosis, but no other 
locus has been found up to now (G. Van Camp and R. J. H. 
Smith, unpublished observation).
Vestibular dysfunction
The sensory epithelia of the cochlea, the semicircular canals 
and the otolith organs are very similar, and it seems logical that 
a considerable number of inner ear-specific genes exists, with 
functions in the cochlea as well as in the vestibular system. 
Mutations in such genes are expected to lead to both hearing 
and vestibular problems. It is known that vestibular testing is 
abnormal in 40-80% of deaf individuals.50,51 However, vestibu­
lar testing is seldom reported in genetic papers describing local­
izations or identifications of deafness genes, and surprisingly 
little is known about vestibular involvement in most of the cur­
rently identified deafness genes. Among the loci for autosomal 
dominant hearing impairment, the DFNA9 locus (COCH 
gene) is the only one involving vestibular problems in addition 
to non-syndromic deafness. Mutations in the COCH gene 
cause a progressive perceptive hearing impairment accompa­
nied by progressive imbalance and positional vertigo.52-54 A 
single mutation in the COCH gene (P51S) has been found in 
more than 130 patients from 10 independent DFNA9 families
from Belgium and The Netherlands, and may be a relatively fre­
quent cause of vestibular dysfunction (G. Van Camp, unpub­
lished observation). It is remarkable that many patients with 
COCH mutations reported vertigo attacks with accompanying 
hearing loss, tinnitus and/or aural fullness, symptoms character­
istic of Meniere’s disease. In addition, histopathologically con­
firmed hydrops labyrinthi, considered to be proof of Meniere’s 
disease, has been found in patients who were later found to 
have a COCH mutation.52,55,56
Molecular diagnostics for hereditary hearing 
impairment
Molecular diagnostics can be helpful in genetic counselling of 
patients with hearing impairment. In some cases, DNA diag­
nostics could be used to determine whether the cause of deaf­
ness in a child with normally hearing parents is hereditary or 
environmental. A parent coming from a family in which a form 
of adult-onset progressive hearing impairment segregates may 
request presymptomatic diagnosis for a child. DNA diagnostics 
in large families can be performed by linkage analysis, even in 
the absence of knowledge of the disease-causing mutation. 
Genetic markers can be analysed to determine whether an indi­
vidual has inherited a certain chromosomal region from his 
parents, and this can be the basis for a genetic diagnosis. How­
ever, a large majority of patients do not come from a large 
family where linkage analysis is possible. In these cases, DNA 
diagnostics can only be performed by the analysis of the disease- 
causing mutation. Many genes responsible for syndromic forms 
of hearing impairment have been identified. In a patient with a 
diagnosis of a certain form of syndromic deafness, mutation 
analysis can be performed in the responsible gene. However, 
many patients have different mutations, and in most cases 
mutation analysis of the complete gene has to be carried out to 
find the responsible mutation. Although molecular diagnostics 
is in principle possible for many syndromic forms of hearing 
impairment, it remains expensive.
Molecular diagnostics for non-syndromic hearing impair­
ment is even more difficult. Because of the genetic heterogene­
ity, the disease-causing mutation could reside in any of a large 
number of different genes, of which only a small fraction have 
been identified. For this reason, DNA diagnostics for non- 
syndromic deafness remained impossible for most patients until 
recently.
  

Genetics of auditory and vestibular disorders 
57
Connexin 26
Mutations in the gene encoding the gap junction protein con- 
nexin-26 were shown to cause DFNB1. DNFBl is estimated to 
represent up to 50% of all autosomal recessive deafness.57,58 
Subsequent studies have shown that a single mutation, 35delG, 
accounts for up to 70% of mutant alleles in different ethnic 
groups.31,59,60 As the 35delG mutation is easy to detect in the 
laboratory, this genetic test represents the first genetic test for 
hereditary deafness that is likely to find widespread use in 
genetic counselling for the deaf. Despite the enormous genetic 
heterogeneity of hereditary deafness, the high prevalence of 
this mutation among the congenitally deaf makes it a test that 
is useful in individuals from the majority of recessive families in 
which only a single patient is present.
The future
The sensory epithelia of the inner ear play an important role in 
hearing and balance by converting stimuli elicited by sound and 
accelerations into signals to the brain. The understanding of 
the underlying molecular processes is currently very limited. 
The identification of the first genes with an important function 
in the inner ear is contributing a lot to this understanding. 
These findings are leading to new diagnostic possibilities for 
hereditary deafness. It is to be expected that a large number of 
additional genes will be identified over the next decade, and 
that these findings will further contribute to better insights into 
the process of hearing. These insights will hopefully lead to 
future therapies to prevent or even cure certain forms of hear­
ing impairment.
References
1. Strachan T, Read AP. Human Molecular Genetics 2nd edn. Oxford: 
Bios Scientific Publishers, New York: John Wiley, 1999.
2. Morton NE. Genetic epidemiology of hearing impairment. Ann 
NY Acad Sci 1991; 630: 16-31.
3. Cohen M, Gorlin R. Epidemiology, etiology, and genetic patterns. 
In: Gorlin R, Toriello H, Cohen M, eds. Hereditary Hearing Loss 
and its Syndromes. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995: 9-21.
4. Newton VE. Aetiology of bilateral sensorineural hearing loss in 
young children. J Laryngol Otol (Suppl) 1985; 10: 1-57.
5. Myers RH, Couropmitree NN, Gates GA. Heritability estimates 
for age-related hearing loss. Am ] Hum Genet 1998; 63S: A217 
(abstract).
6. Leon PE, Raventos H, Lynch E, Morrow ], King MC. The gene for 
an inherited form of deafness maps to chromosome 5q31. Proc Nad 
Acad Sci USA 1992; 89: 5181-2.
7. Friedman TB, Liang Y, Weber JL et al. A gene for congenital, 
recessive deafness DFNB3 maps to the pericentromeric region of 
chromosome 17. Nat Genet 1995; 9: 86-91.
8. Mustapha M, Salem N, Weil D, El-Zir E, Loiselet ], Petit C. Iden­
tification of a locus on chromosome 7q31, DFNB14, responsible 
for prelingual sensorineural non-syndromic deafness. Eur J Hum
Genet 1998; 6: 548-51.
9. Van Camp G, Coucke PJ, Kunst H et al. Linkage analysis of pro­
gressive hearing loss in five extended families maps the DFN A2 gene 
to a 1.25-Mb region of chromosome lp. Genomics 1997; 41: 70-4.
10. Van Camp G, Coucke P, Balemans W et al. Localization of a gene 
for non-syndromic hearing loss (DFNA5) to chromosome 7pl5. 
Hum Mol Genet 1995; 4: 2159-63.
11. Lesperance MM, Hall JW, Bess FH et al. A gene for autosomal 
dominant nonsyndromic hereditary hearing impairment maps to 
4pl6.3. Hum Mol Genet 1995; 4: 1967-72.
12. Van Camp G, Kunst H, Flothmann K et al. A gene for autosomal 
dominant hearing impairment (DFNA14) maps to a region on 
chromosome 4pl6.3 that does not overlap the DFNA6 locus. J 
Med Genet 1999; 36: 532-6.
13. Verhoeven K, Van Laer L, Kirschhofer K et al. Mutations in the 
human tectorin gene cause autosomal dominant non-syndromic 
hearing impairment. Nat Genet 1998; 19: 60-2.
14. Tranebjaerg L, Schwartz C, Eriksen H et al. A new X linked reces­
sive deafness syndrome with blindness, dystonia, fractures, and 
mental deficiency is linked to Xq22.JMed Genet 1995; 32: 257-63.
15. Tyson J, Bellman S, Newton V et al. Mapping of DFN2 to Xq22. 
Hum Mol Genet 1996; 5: 2055-60.
16. Lalwani AK, Brister JR, Fex J et al. A new nonsyndromic X-linked 
sensorineural hearing impairment linked to Xp21.2. Am J Hum 
Genet 1994; 55: 685-94.
17. del Castillo I, Villamar M, Sarduy M et al. A novel locus for non­
syndromic sensorineural deafness (DFN6) maps to chromosome 
Xp22. Hum Mol Genet 1996; 5: 1383-7.
18. de Kok YJ, van der Maarel SM, Bitner-Glindzicz M et al. Associ­
ation between X-linked mixed deafness and mutations in the 
POU domain gene POU3F4. Science 1995; 267: 685-8.
19. Weil D, Blanchard S, Kaplan J et al. Defective myosin VIIA gene 
responsible for Usher syndrome type IB. Nature 1995; 374: 60-1.
20. Weil D, Kussel P, Blanchard S et al. The autosomal recessive iso­
lated deafness, DFNB2, and the Usher IB syndrome are allelic 
defects of the myosin-VIIA gene. Nat Genet 1997; 16: 191-3.
21. Liu XZ, Walsh ], Mburu P et al. Mutations in the myosin VIIA 
gene cause non-syndromic deafness. Nat Genet 1997; 16: 188-90.
22. Liu XZ, Walsh J, Tamagawa Y et al. Autosomal dominant non­
syndromic deafness caused by a mutation in the myosin VIIA 
gene. Nat Genet 1997; 17: 268-9.
23. Hasson T, Heintzelmann MB, Santos-Sacchi J, Corey DP, 
Mooseker MS. Expression in cochlea and retina of myosin Vila, 
the gene product defective in Usher syndrome type IB. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 1995; 92: 9815-19.
24. Everett LA, Glazer B, Beck JC et al. Pendred syndrome is caused 
by mutations in a putative sulphate transporter gene (PDS). Nat 
Genet 1997; 17:411-22.
25. Scott DA, Wang R, Kreman TM, Sheffield VC, Kamishki LP. The 
Pendred syndrome gene encodes a chloride-iodide transport pro­
tein. Nat Genet 1999; 21: 440-3.
26. Usami S, Abe S, Weston MD, Shinkawa H, Van CG, Kimberling 
WJ. Non-syndromic hearing loss associated with enlarged vestibu­
lar aqueduct is caused by PDS mutations. Hum Genet 1999; 104: 
188-92.
  

58 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
27. Neyroud N, Tesson F, Denjoy I et al. A novel mutation in the potas- 
sium channel gene KVLQT1 causes the Jervell and Lange-Nielsen 
cardioauditory syndrome. Nat Genet 1997; 15: 186-9.
28. Wang Q, Curran ME, Splawski I et al. Positional cloning of a 
novel potassium channel gene: KVLQT1 mutations cause cardiac 
arrhythmias. Nat Genet 1996; 12: 17-23.
29. Kubisch C, Schroeder BC, Friedrich T et al. KCNQ4, a novel 
potassium channel expressed in sensory outer hair cells, is mutated 
in dominant deafness. Cell 1999; 96: 437-46.
30. Kelsell DP, Dunlop J, Stevens HP et al. Connexin 26 mutations in 
hereditary non-syndromic sensorineural deafness. Nature 1997; 
387: 80-3.
31. Denoyelle F, Weil D, Maw MA et al. Prelingual deafness: high 
prevalence of a 30delG mutation in the connexin 26 gene. Hum 
Mol Genet 1997; 6:2173-7.
32. Xia JH, Liu CY, Tang BS et al. Mutations in the gene encoding 
gap junction protein beta-3 associated with autosomal dominant 
hearing impairment. Nat Genet 1998; 20: 370-3.
33. Kikuchi T, Kimura RS, Paul DL, Adams JC. Gap junctions in the 
rat cochlea: immunohistochemical and ultrastructural analysis. 
AnatEmbryol (Berl) 1995; 191: 101-18.
34. Goto Y, Nonaka I, Horai S. A mutation in the tRNA(Leu)(UUR) 
gene associated with the MELAS subgroup of mitochondrial 
encephalomyopathies. Nature 1990; 348: 651-3.
35. Shoffner JM, Lott MT, Lezza AM, Seibel P, Ballinger SW, Wallace 
DC. Myoclonic epilepsy and ragged-red fiber disease (MERRF) is 
associated with a mitochondrial DNA tRNA(Lys) mutation. Cell 
1990;61:931-7.
36. Zeviani M, Muntoni F, Savarese N et al. A MERRF/MELAS 
overlap syndrome associated with a new point mutation in the 
mitochondrial DNA tRNA(Lys) gene. Eur J Hum Genet 1993; 1: 
80-7.
37. Moraes CT, DiMauro S, Zeviani M et al. Mitochondrial DNA 
deletions 
in 
progressive 
external 
ophthalmoplegia 
and 
Keams-Sayre syndrome. N EnglJ Med 1989; 320: 1293-9.
38. van den Ouweland JM, Lemkes HH, Ruitenbeek W et al. Muta­
tion in mitochondrial tRNA(Leu)(UUR) gene in a large pedigree 
with maternally transmitted type II diabetes mellitus and deafness. 
Nat Genet 1992; 1: 368-71.
39. Prezant TR, Agapian JV, Bohlman MC et al. Mitochondrial ribo- 
somal RNA mutation associated with both antibiotic-induced and 
non-syndromic deafness. Nat Genet 1993; 4: 289-94.
40. Estivill X, Govea N, Barcelo E et al. Familial progressive sen­
sorineural deafness is mainly due to the mtDNA A1555G muta­
tion and is enhanced by treatment of aminoglycosides. Am J Hum 
Genet 1998; 62: 27-35.
41. Usami S, Abe S, Kasai M et al. Genetic and clinical features of 
sensorineural hearing loss associated with the 1555 mitochondrial 
mutation. Laryngoscope 1997; 107: 483-90.
42. Reid FM, Vemham GA, Jacobs HT. A novel mitochondrial point 
mutation in a maternal pedigree with sensorineural deafness. Hum
Mutat 1994; 3: 243-7.
43. Fischel-Ghodsian N, Prezant TR, Fournier P, Stewart I A, Maw M. 
Mitochondrial mutation associated with nonsyndromic deafness. 
Am] Otolaryngol 1995; 16: 403-8.
44. Sevior KB, Hatamochi A, Stewart IA et al. Mitochondrial 
A7445G mutation in two pedigrees with palmoplantar kerato- 
derma and deafness. Am j Med Genet 1998; 75: 179-85.
45. Tiranti V, Chariot P, Carella F et al. Maternally inherited hearing 
loss, ataxia and myoclonus associated with a novel point mutation 
in mitochondrial tRNASer(UCN) gene. Hum Mol Genet 1995; 4: 
1421-7.
46. Verhoeven K, Ensink RJH, Tiranti V et al. Hearing impairment 
and neurological dysfunction associated with a mutation in the 
mitochondrial tRNASer(UCN) gene. Eur J Hum Genet 1999; 7: 
45-51.
47. Causse JR, Causse JB, Otospongiosis as a genetic disease. Early 
detection, medical management, and prevention. Am] Otol 1984; 
5:211-23.
48. Ben Arab S, Bonaiti-Pellie C, Belkahia A. A genetic study of oto­
sclerosis in a population living in the north of Tunisia. Ann Genet 
1993; 36: 111-16.
49. Tomek MS, Brown MR, Mani SR et al. Localization of a gene for 
otosclerosis to chromosome 15q25-q26. Hum Mol Genet 1998; 7: 
285-90.
50. Amvig J. Vestibular function in deafness and severe hard of hear­
ing. Acta Otolaryngol 1955; 45: 283-8.
51. Sandberg L, Terkildsen K. Caloric tests in deaf children. Arch Oto­
laryngol 1965; 81: 352-4.
52. Robertson NG, Lu L, Heller S et al. Mutations in a novel cochlear 
gene cause DFNA9, a human nonsyndromic deafness with 
vestibular dysfunction. Nature Genet 1998; 20: 299-303.
53. de Kok YJ, Bom SJ, Brunt TM et al. A Pro51Ser mutation in the 
COCH gene is associated with late onset autosomal dominant 
progressive sensorineural hearing loss with vestibular defects. Hum 
Mol Genet 1999; 8: 361-6.
54. Fransen E, Verstreken M, Verhagen WIM et al. High prevalence 
of symptoms of Meniere’s disease in three families with a mutation 
in the COCH gene. Hum Mol Genet 1999; 8: 1425-9.
55. Khetarpal U, Schuknecht HF, Gacek RR, Holmes LB. Autosomal 
dominant sensorineural hearing loss. Pedigrees, audiologic find­
ings, and temporal bone findings in two kindreds. Arch Otolaryn­
gol Head Neck Surg 1991; 117: 1032-42.
56. Khetarpal U. Autosomal dominant sensorineural hearing loss. 
Further temporal bone findings. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1993; 119: 106-8.
57. Maw MA, Allen-Powell DR, Goodey RJ et al. The contribution 
of the DFNB1 locus to neurosensory deafness in a Caucasian pop­
ulation. Am] Hum Genet 1995; 57: 629-35.
58. Gasparini P, Estivill X, Volpini V et al. Linkage of DFNB1 to 
non-syndromic neurosensory autosomal-recessive deafness in 
Mediterranean families. Eur] Hum Genet 1997; 5: 83-8.
59. Estivill X, Fortina P, Surrey S et al. Connexin-26 mutations in spo­
radic and inherited sensorineural deafness. Lancet 1998; 351:394-8.
60. Kelley PM, Harris DJ, Comer BC et al. Novel mutations in the 
connexin 26 gene (GJB2) that cause autosomal recessive 
(DFNB1) hearing loss. Am] Hum Genet 1998; 62: 792-9.
61. Barker DF, Hostikka SL, Zhou J et al. Identification of mutations 
in the COL4A5 collagen gene in Alport syndrome. Science 1990; 
248: 1224-7.
  

Genetics of auditory and vestibular disorders 
59
62. Mochizuki T, Lemmink HH, Mariyama M et al. Identification of 
mutations in the alpha 3(IV) and alpha 4 (IV) collagen genes in 
autosomal recessive Alport syndrome. Nat Genet 1994; 8: 77-81.
63. Abdelhak S, Kalatzis V, Heilig R et al. A human homologue of the 
Drosophila eyes absent gene underlies branchio-oto-renal (BOR) 
syndrome and identifies a novel gene family. Nat Genet 1997; 15: 
157-64.
64. Tyson ], Tranebjaerg L, Bellman S et al. IsK and KvLQTl: muta­
tion in either of the two subunits of the slow component of the 
delayed rectifier potassium channel can cause Jervell and 
Lange-Nielsen syndrome. Hum Mol Genet 1997; 6: 2179-85.
65. Schulze-Bahr E, Wang Q, Wedekind H et al. KCNE1 mutations 
cause Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome. Nat Genet 1997; 17: 
267-8.
66. Berger W, Meindl A, van de Pol TJ et al. Isolation of a candidate gene 
forNorriediseasebypositionalcloning.NatGenetl992; 1:199-203.
67. Chen ZY, Hendriks RW, Jobling MA et al. Isolation and charac­
terization of a candidate gene for Norrie disease. Nat Genet 1992; 
1: 204-8.
68. Vikkula M, Mariman ECM, Lui VCH et al. Autosomal dominant 
and 
recessive 
osteochondrodysplasias 
associated 
with 
the 
COL11A2 locus. Cell 1995; 80: 431-7.
69. Williams CJ, Ganguly A, Considine E et al. A-2->G transition at 
the 3'acceptor splice site of IVS17 characterizes the COL2A1 
gene mutation in the original Stickler syndrome kindred. Am J 
Med Genet 1996; 63: 461-7.
70. Richards AJ, Yates JR, Williams R et al. A family with Stickler 
syndrome type 2 has a mutation in the COL11A1 gene resulting 
in the substitution of glycine 97 by valine in alpha 1 (XI) colla­
gen. Hum Mol Genet 1996; 5: 1339-43.
71. The Treacher Collins Syndrome Collaborative Group. Nat Genet 
1996; 12: 130-6.
72. Eudy JD, Weston MD, Yao S et al. Mutation of a gene encoding a 
protein with extracellular matrix motifs in Usher syndrome type 
Ha. Science 1998; 280: 1753-7.
73. Tassabehji M, Read AP, Newton VE et al. Waardenburg’s syn­
drome patients have mutations in the human homologue of the 
Pax-3 paired box gene. Nature 1992; 355: 635-6.
74. Tassabehji M, Newton VE, Read AP. Waardenburg syndrome type 
2 caused by mutations in the human microphthalmia (MITF) 
gene. Nat Genet 1994; 8: 251-5.
75. Hoth CF, Milunsky A, Kipsky N, Sheffer R, Clarren SK, Baldwin 
CT. Mutations in the paired domain of the human PAX3 
gene cause Klein-Waardenburg syndrome (WS-III) as well as 
Waardenburg syndrome type I (WS-I). Am J Hum Genet 1993; 52: 
455-62.
76. Attie T, Till M, Pelet A et al. Mutation of the endothelin-recep- 
tor B gene in Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease. Hum Mol Genet 
1995; 4: 2407-9.
77. Edery P, Attie T, Amiel J et al. Mutation of the endothelin-3 gene 
in the Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease (Shah-Waardenburg 
syndrome). Nat Genet 1996; 12: 442-4.
78. Pingault V, Bondurand N, Kuhlbrodt K et al. SOXIO mutations in 
patients with Waardenburg-Hirschprung disease. Nat Genet 1998; 
18: 171-3.
79. Lynch ED, Lee MK, Morrow JE, Welcsh PL, Leon PE, King MC. 
Nonsyndromic deafness DFNA1 associated with mutation of a 
human homolog of the Drosophila gene diaphanous. Science 1997; 
278: 1315-18.
80. Van Laer L, Huizing EH, Verstreken M et al. Nonsyndromic hear­
ing impairment is associated with a mutation in DFNA5. Nat 
Genet 1998; 20: 194-7.
81. Vahava O, Morell R, Lynch ED et al. Mutation in transcription 
factor POU4F3 associated with inherited progressive hearing loss 
in humans. Science 1998; 279: 1950-4.
82. Wang A, Liang Y, Fridell RA et al. Association of unconventional 
myosin MY015 mutations with human nonsyndromic deafness 
DFNB3. Science 1998; 280: 1447-51.
83. Yasunaga S, Grati M, Cohen-Salmon M et al. A mutation in 
OTOF, encoding otoferlin, a FER-l-like protein, causes DFNB9, 
a nonsyndromic form of deafness. Nat Genet 1999; 21: 
363-9.
84. El-Schahawi M, Lopez DM, Sarrazin AM et al. Two large Spanish 
pedigrees with nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness and the 
mtDNA mutation at nt 1555 in the 12s rRNA gene: evidence of 
heteroplasmy. Neurology 1997; 48: 453-6.
  

Immunology of 
cochlear and vestibular 
disorders
Tai-June Yoo, Yoshior Yazawa
Introduction
In the past century of medicine, probably one of the most strik- 
ing and significant advances has been in the field of immunology. 
The study and understanding of the immune system responses 
goes to the very heart of disease production. Intact immunity is 
fundamental for survival. The immune system distinguishes self 
from non-self and thereby enables us to survive in a hostile envi­
ronment. The human immune system has evolved with sophisti­
cated biological capacity through the process of clonal 
expansion. The ability to distinguish even subtle differences 
from self and many myriad of antigens is made possible by the 
rearrangement of genes that encode immunogolulins and T-cell 
receptors,1 as well as by the requirement for T cells to recognize 
antigens in context of the presentation by major histocompati­
bility complex (MHC) molecules.2 Modulation of function ini­
tiated by antigenic stimulation and cell interaction is facilitated 
by soluble mediators such as cytokines. The understanding of the 
immune system provides a framework for understanding physio­
logical immune responses as well as the pathogenesis of immuno­
logical disorders (Figure 5.1). Through such understanding, 
potential targets can be identified for therapeutic modulation of 
the immune system. The inability to react to self is known as 
tolerance. The tolerance implies that host lymphocytes are not 
activated by interaction with host self-tissues. Accordingly, 
autoimmunity defines a state in which tolerance to self is lost.3 If 
such activation by self occurs with sufficient magnitude and for 
sufficient duration, host tissue damage occurs. The pathogenesis 
of autoimmunity involves various genetic, immunological and 
viral factors interacting through complicated mechanisms that 
are still poorly understood.
Recent evidence suggests that at least immunological distur­
bances are associated with many causes of auditory dysfunction. 
There are many autoimmune disorders that could affect hear­
ing. Several diseases are associated with hearing loss, including
Figure 5.1 Differentiation of TH1 and TH2 lymphocytes. Interleukin-12 (IL-12) 
and interferon gamma (IFN-y) induce the differentiation of TH1 cells, and IFN-y 
antagonizes the differentiation of TH2 cells. IL-4 induces the differentiation of 
Th2 cells and antagonizes the differentiation of TH1 cells. The TH1 cells induce 
cell-mediated imflammation, and TH2 cells induce humoral-mediated allergic 
inflammation. TNF, indicates tumor necrosis factor.
Meniere’s disease, otosclerosis, autoimmune hearing loss and 
other forms of sudden hearing loss. These diseases have some 
immunological manifestations. Several animal models of 
autoimmune cochlear diseases have been developed. The crite­
ria shown in Table 5.1 determine the relationship of immuno­
logical phenomena to disease etiology following the Koch 
postulate.
An autoimmune response must be regularly associated with 
disease, a replica of the disease must be inducible in laboratory 
animals, immunopathological manifestations in the natural and 
experimental diseases should parallel each other, and immuno­
logical illness should be inducible by transfer of serum with

62 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
Table 5*1 Criteria for immunological etiology
Autoimmune response associated with disease 
Animal model
Immunopathologieal manifestations uniform in patient and 
animal model
Lymphocytic transfer of disease from patient to normal individual
Table 5.2 The clinical criteria for an autoimmune disease238
Hyper gammaglobulinemia (1.5 g/dl)
Autoantibody
Immunoglobulin, complement, immune complex etc. in the lesion 
Cell infiltration into the lesion
Table 5.4 Autoimmune diseases affecting hearing
Relapsing polychondritis 
Systemic lupus erythematosus 
Disseminated vasculitis 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
Sjogren's syndrome 
Systemic sclerosis 
Myasthenia gravis 
Hashimoto's thyroiditis 
Goodpasture's syndrome 
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome 
Cogan's syndrome 
Behcet's disease 
Sarcoidosis
lymphocytes from a diseased individual to a normal recipient. 
Table 5.2 shows clinical criteria for an autoimmune disease, and 
Tables 5.3 and 5.4 show a list of ear diseases with possible 
immunological features and autoimmune diseases affecting 
hearing.
Response to eortieosteroid 
Wegener's granulomatosis
Combination with other autoimmune diseases
Table 5.3 Ear diseases with immunological features
External ear
Tympanic membrane 
Eustachian 
Middle ear
Inner ear
Retrocochlear
Auricular chondritis 
Relapsing polychondritis
Tympanosclerosis
Autoimmune salpingitis
Otosclerosis 
Secretory otitis media 
Necrotizing otitis media 
Cholesteatoma
Autoimmune sensorineural 
hearing loss 
Meniere's disease 
Otosclerosis 
Cochlear vasculitis 
Sudden hearing loss
Autoimmune central nervous 
system disease
Historical perspectives
The immune systems was originally implicated as having a role 
in some idiopathic sensorineural lesions in 1931.4 Lowenthal5 
has, however, argued that the concept was introduced in 1920.6
Cogan’s syndrome, interstitial keratitis with audio vestibu­
lar disorder progressing to profound hearing loss, was well 
described in 1945.7 In 1960, Cody and Williams emphasized 
that Cogan’s syndrome should probably be thought of as part of 
a systemic disease, not just a disease confined to the eye and cra­
nial nerve.8 Cody made a clear distinction between the pathol­
ogy of vascular insufficiencies and that related to vasculitis, 
implying that Cogan’s syndrome was a collagen disease. Treat­
ment included high-dose corticosteroid, and they pointed out 
that improvement of hearing produced by this drug was lost 
when the dose was reduced. This pattern came to be seen in 
many of the other disorders that were referred to as Vasculitis’. 
Even at this early stage, the implication was that vasculitis was 
related to immunological disease and that steroid treatment was 
indicated.
Lehnardt in 1958 reported cases of bilateral sudden hearing 
loss, and proposed an etiological hypothesis that the degenerat­
ing organ of Corti could induce anticochlear antibody that
  

Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders 
63
would react with another intact organ of Corti.9 Kikuchi10 
reported several cases of hearing loss as ‘sympathetic otitis’ in 
which hearing in one ear had been markedly influenced by 
surgery on the opposite ear. Beickert11 was the first to publish 
experimental data concerning autoimmune reactions in the 
cochlea. He injected anti-guinea pig cochlear antibody, pro­
duced in the duck, into the guinea pig. Terayama and Sasaki12 
produced experimental allergic labyrnthitis in the guinea pig by 
immunization of guinea pig cochlea, emulsified with Freund’s 
adjuvant. They found degenerative changes in the spiral gan­
glia and stria vascularis, hemorrhages in the scala tympani and 
disintegration of the organ of Corti. They noted acoustical 
threshold shifts, although they could not demonstrate any 
anticochlear antibody. More recently, Schiff and Brown13 dis­
cussed sudden hearing loss as potentially being a result of vas­
culitis and implied that immune disease was involved. 
Treatment was instituted with heparin and adrenocorticotropic 
hormone. Similar investigations were done by Quick,14 Arnold 
et al15 and Weidauer et al.16
Credit for the current interest should be directed to 
McCabe’s report on autoimmune sensorineural hearing loss in 
1979.17 He first described a pattern of bilateral SNHL charac­
terized by rapid progression over weeks to months. Hearing loss 
typically involves both ears, either synchronously or sequen­
tially. Vestibular symptoms were minor or absent. Based on lab­
oratory tests, clinical manifestations, positive immunological 
tests, and a beneficial treatment response, a clinical entity of 
autoimmune SNHL was proposed. His reports stimulated clini­
cal research into immune-mediated deafness. Since then, 
autoimmune activity in patients with idiopathic SNHL has 
been assessed by the migration inhibition test,17 enzyme-linked 
immuno-sorbent test (ELISA),18 lymphocyte transformation 
test,19-21 immunofluorescence microscopy,21’22 and Western blot­
ting.23-25 Experimental models of autoimmune SNHL have been 
developed in a variety of animals by a number of researchers, 
using type II collagen,26’27 crude inner tissue extract,28-31 purified 
protein Po32 or tubulin33 as antigens. Over time, researchers have 
accumulated considerable evidence indicating the involvement 
of immune mechanisms in human inner ear disease.
The immune system of the inner ear
Guild reported that the endolymph flows from the cochlear 
duct to the endolymphatic sac (ES), where it is absorbed and 
distributed to the numerous perisaccular blood vessels.34 He 
defined 22 cell types in the lumen of the ES. This included lym­
phocytes, whose presence prompted Lim and Silver’s35 proposal 
that the ES sac acts as a defensive organ in the inner ear. Rask- 
Andersen and Stahle found immune cells, including lympho­
cytes and macrophages, in the ES and adjacent tissue of guinea 
pigs.36 They also found these in the ES of human Meniere’s dis­
ease patients. A vigorous interaction between lymphocytes and 
macrophages, similar to that observed in antigen-activated and 
lymphoid tissue, may occur. This reaction is surrounded by a
rich network of lymphatic capillaries and blood vessels. This 
finding indicates that an immune system is present in the inner 
ear. Since then, evidence has been accumulating that the inner 
ear is an immunoreactive organ and is capable of mounting a 
local immune response.37,38 The presence and mobilization of 
macrophages, B cells and T cells in the ES and in the perisac­
cular space have been reported in a number of species, such as 
humans,39 guinea pigs40 and mice.41 The study of the distribu­
tion and anatomical localization of immunocompetent cells in 
normal mouse ES, by an immunohistochemical method, 
showed CD4 cells in the epithelial perisaccular region, whereas 
CD8 cells were rarely present. Macrophages were present 
primarily in the lumen of the distal portion of the ES. 
IgM-bearing cells were seen in the subepithelial lesion. 
Immunoglobulin-positive cells were occasionally detected in 
the lumen, and only a few IgA-positive cells were present in the 
perisaccular region. The EM study of Wackym found that the 
lumen of ES contained freely floating macrophages with abun­
dant cytoplasmic lysosomes, vacuoles, and phagolysosomes. 
The lymphocytes are located intraepithelially and within the 
subepithelial space. In patients with acoustical neuroma, how­
ever, a predominance of T-helper cells vis-a-vis helper T cells, 
occasional microphages and granulocytes were observed. 
Another immunohistochemical study of the extraosseous part 
of the ES from an autopsy revealed that T-helper cells (CD4 
cells) predominate in the ES. CD8 cells are present in small 
numbers, but B cells as well as macrophages are detected in the 
lumen and perisaccular region. Langerhans B-cells are present 
in the lumen and the stroma of the ES and IgA or IgG con­
taining cells in the stroma only, so it seems that the presence of 
neuroma inverts the relationship between T-helper CD4 and 
CD8 cells due to chronic antigen stimulation.42 In histological 
and immunohistochemical studies of the human inner ear, 
Arnold et al showed that immunologically active structures 
were exclusively present in different regions. They found that 
lymphocytes were situated periepithelially, in some cases 
arranged in groups, while the epithelium of the ES was infil­
trated by lymphocytes, and mast cells and macrophages were 
found in perisaccular tissue.21’43
It was demonstrated that the ES was not originally 
equipped to possess immunocompetent cells and mount an 
immune response. Immunocompetent cells distributed in the 
normal ES might mobilize from the systemic circulation or 
subsequently develop in the ES in response to antigenic stimuli. 
Once it has been activated with the inner ear antigenic stimuli, 
the ES can be the active site of the local immune response of 
the inner ear.44
Ichimiya et al45 investigated the ES of mice in three differ­
ent conditions: germ-free(GF), specific pathogenic free (SPF), 
and conventional (CV). In the ES of GF mice, no immuno­
competent cells were found. In the ES of SPF and CV mice, 
cells positive for IgG, IgA, IgM CD4 cells are present in a much 
smaller number than in the nasal mucus.45 Cells positive to Lyt- 
2 are not seen in the ES of any mice. In the ES of rats that 
underwent an antigenic challenge in the perilymphatic space
  

64 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
after the systemic presensitization B-lymphocyte subsets (posi- 
tive for IgG, IgA and IgM) were observed in increased numbers, 
and T-cell subsets were also found 1 week after the perilym­
phatic challenge.
A number of studies indicate that the inner ear is not an 
immunoprivileged site,46 and the ES plays an important role in 
the immunodefense of the inner ear.21,36,38,47
There is considerable evidence supporting the presence of 
immunoglobulins in the perilymph of humans,48-50 as well as in 
experimental animals. ’ 
The immunoglobulins in perilymph 
have been determined, and they are predominantly IgG, with 
lesser amounts of IgM and IgA.43,52,53 There are also secretory 
pieces found,54 and IgG2 in the perilymph of the guinea pig, 
which should be similar to lgGx found in humans.55-57
As for the origin of immunoglobulins of the inner ear, the 
source of the perilymph remains controversial, and the origin of 
immunoglobulin in the perilymph has not yet been deter­
mined. ’ However, it was proposed that the protein in the peri 
lymph, including albumin and immunoglobulin, might come 
largely from perilymphatic blood vessels rather than from the 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), based on experimental data.52 There 
are three probable origins of perilymph immunoglobulins under 
normal conditions: (1) the filtrate from blood vessels surround­
ing the perilymphatic space; (2) local production in the inner 
ear; and (3) from CSF through the cochlear aqueduct and the 
modiolar space.
It was found that: (1) immune processing occurred within 
the inner ear, due to a resident population of immunocompe­
tent cells or due to the immunocompetent cells migrating into 
the inner ear from the systemic circulation; (2) secondary 
immune response animals developed much higher antibody 
levels than primary animals; and (3) these responses were inde­
pendent of the serum or CSF.37,46 The accumulation of inflam­
matory cells in the inner ear is seen in reponses such as 
infection, antigen challenge, or trauma. In eperimental ani­
mals, it is found that cells accumulate around and within the 
spiral modiolar vein (SMV), adjacent to the scala tympani as 
early as 6h post-stimulation, and then cells began to stream 
into the scala tympani along the bony canaliculi containing the 
collecting venules, finally resulting in fibrosis or osteoneogene- 
sis.60 The blood vessels of the SMV are the initial site through 
which lymphocytes enter the inner ear.61 Interleukin-2 (IL-2) is 
not present in the perilymph in the resting state, but is a com­
ponent in the inner ear immune responses. The peak rise of IL-
2 in the perilymph was at 18h following antigen stimulation, 
and declined over a 5-day period. This corresponds well with 
the accumulation of helper T cells and macrophages within the 
inner ear.62 Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-p) has also 
been identified as a mediator in the inner ear immune response. 
TGF-P is known to be a chemoattractant for monocytes, T 
cells, and neutrophils, while also increasing levels of IL-1, IL-6, 
and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF).63 It was also 
demonstrated that there was a weak presence of intercellular 
adhesion molecule (ICAM-1) on the epithelium of the SMV 
and collecting venules (cvs) as early as 6h following inocula­
tion of antigen into the scala tympani of animals systemically 
sensitized to it, reaching a maximum by day 2 and then gradu­
ally fading away. The maximum influx of immunocompetent 
cells into the cochlea was seen between days 3 and 7. By day 28, 
the inner ear had developed endolymphatic hydrops, but no sig­
nificant staining with anti-ICAM-1 was observed at that time.64 
Yeo et al65 found that antigen in the scala tympani could gain 
access to the lumen of the ES through the perilymph and the 
perisaccular tissue. In the ES, the antigen may be presented by 
macrophages to the systemic immune system. In summary, 
evidence has shown that the inner ear is capable of mounting 
local immune responses. These could be either normal or 
autoimmune responses.
Autoimmune inner ear disease
The etiology of many inner ear diseases is unknown. However, 
some of them, including Meniere’s disease, otosclerosis, pro­
gressive sensorineural hearing loss (PSHL) and sudden deaf­
ness, may be of autoimmune origin. In the last two decades, 
much evidence has been accumulated. These data indicate that 
the autoantibodies and sensitized lymphocytes in some inner 
ear diseases may have a key role in the origin or continuation of 
the diseases.
Clinical features of autoimmune sensorineural 
hearing loss
McCabe17 described 18 cases of sensorineural deafness having 
clinical and laboratory features suggestive of an autoimmune 
etiology. This condition was characterized by a prolonged 
period of progressive deafness over weeks or months, rather 
than hours, days or years. It is usually bilateral or asymmetrical, 
and the cochlea is always involved. Other features of this disor­
der are facial paralysis and vestibular dysfunction. Tissue 
destruction of the tympanic membrane, middle ear, and mastoid 
may also occur. These patients responded well to high-dose 
steroid therapy and cyclophosphamide. In total, 42 cases of this 
disorder were diagnosed in McCabe’s series as of January 1982. 
Two-thirds of the patients had low-grade vestibular symptoms 
without spells, and the reduction in caloric responses paralleled 
the hearing loss.
Nine patients subsequently developed other autoimmune 
disease, e.g. Cogan’s syndrome, chronic ulcerative colitis, 
rheumatoid arthritis, and carotidynia. None of the patients had 
lupus erythematosus, although nine patients had a positive anti- 
nuclear antibody (ANA) titer. Many patients were shown to 
have an elevated sedimentation rate, and 11 patients demon­
strated positive leukocyte migration inhibition assays. Two 
patients had visible tissue changes and vasculoneogenesis, and 
one patient had vasculitis. Since then, other reports have 
described a case of SNHL with positive anti-smooth muscle anti­
body,66 two cases of inner ear disease with Cogan’s syndrome,13 
and other clinical and immunological observations.18,67-70
  

Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders 
65
Meniere’s disease (MD) as an autoimmune 
disease'
It has been speculated that MD might be an immune-mediated 
or even autoimmune disease. Experimental evidence to support 
this hypothesis is as follows: (1) the site of the ES is the site of 
the immune response of the inner ear and at the same time it is 
also the site of injury; (2) experimental hydrops can be induced 
by injection of antigens; (3) the presence of antibodies to inner 
ear antigens, e.g. type II collagens, 30-kDa protein, c-raf, P- 
tubulin, 68 kDa protein, presence of lymphocyte blastogenesis, 
CIC (circulating immune complex) and antiviral antibodies;267
(4) association of certain D-related (DR) loci with this illness;
(5) the temporal bone changes are associated with immunolog­
ical changes; (6) responses to steroids. These facts suggest that 
immune processes are involved in the development of 
Meniere’s disease (Tables 5.5 and 5.6).
Collagen and autoimmune inner ear disease
Collagens constitute a family of related extracellular matrix 
proteins assembled in a variety of supramolecular structures to 
accomplish diverse functions.74 Nineteen distinct types of col­
lagens have been discovered.75-77 Type II collagen has been 
found to be present in the inner ear of various animal species, 
such as rodents (guinea pig),78’79 chickens80 and monkeys81 
(Figure 5.5). It has also been shown by in situ hybridization 
(ISH) that type I and type II collagen transcripts are coex­
pressed in almost all cells within the normal otic capsule and 
membranous cochlea of 16-23-week-old human fetuses.82-54 
Type IV collagen, which is believed to be involved in the 
pathogenesis of Alport syndrome with progressive renal insuffi­
ciency and SNHL,85 was found to be densely localized around 
the nerve cells, and the capillary blood vessels of the stria vas­
cularis, and beneath the epithelial cells of the ES in the 
human86 and guinea pig inner ear.87 Type IX collagen is less 
abundant and is located within the labyrinthine membranes, 
and within the dense fibers of the tectorial membrane.88,89
Collagen has been postulated to be one of the important 
antigens involved in the pathogenesis of the autoimmune inner 
ear.18 Yoo et al were the first to show a raised level of serum anti­
bodies to bovine type II collagen in 5 of 12 patients with oto­
sclerosis.18 In subsequent studies, the association of antibodies 
with type II collagen and several inner ear diseases, including 
Meniere’s disease, otosclerosis, idiopathic PSNHL and sudden 
deafness, has been demonstrated by other investigators.90,91
Table 5.5 Indirect immunofluorescence test to normal inner ear tissue
Authors
Year
Patients
Inner ear
Positive results (%)
Reference
Elies and Ptester
1987
MD [n = 13)
Rat and hamster
46
239
Lejeune and Charachon
1991
MD (a = 12) +  SNHL (rc= 11)
Human
30
240
Gong
1992
MD [n =  30)
Guinea pig
60
241
Salomon et al
1993
MD (a =  6) +  SNHL [n =  20)
Hamster
19
242
Soliman
1996
MD (n =  50)
Guinea pig ES
40
243
Alleman et al
1997
MD (rt =  30)
Human ES
10
244
Soliman
1997
MD (n =  18) +  SNHL [n =  28) +  IED (n =  54)
Guinea pig
18
245
MD, Meniere's disease; SNHL, sensorineural hearing loss; IED, inner ear disease other than SNHL 
ES, endolymphatic sac.
Table 5.6 Immunofluorescent study of the endolymphatic sacs
Authors
Year
Patients
Positive results
Reference
Futaki et al
1988
m ( n =  16]
IgG (40%), IgM (20%), IgA (20%), C3 (33%)
246
Yazawa and Kitahara
1989
MD (n — 21)
IgG (19%), IgM (10%), IgA (19%)
247
Tomoda et al
1993
MD (n= 15)
IgG (50%), IgM (25%), IgA (31%), C3 (39%)
91
Dornhoffer et al
1993
MD [n =  23)
IgG (43%)
248
MD, Meniere's disease.
  

66 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Joliat et al92 found that anti-type II collagen antibodies were 
present in 12 of 21 (57%) patients, while 13 of 21 (62%) had 
anti-type IX antibodies detected by Western blot (Table 5.7).
Animal studies strongly suggest that collagen-specific anti­
bodies play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of some inner ear 
diseases. Yoo et al26,27,93’94 reported that type II collagen-induced 
autoimmune ear disease in animals has histopathological and 
immunological similarity to human autoimmune ear disease. 
These animals had spiral ganglion cell degeneration, atrophy of 
the organ of Corti, arteritis of the cochlea and stria vascularis, 
and endolymphatic hydrops, with atrophy of the surface epithe­
lium of the endolymphatic duct. In addition, some animals 
showed otospongiosis-like changes of the bone of the external 
meatus and otic capsule. Hearing loss and vestibular dysfunc­
tion were found in some of these animals as well. Several simi­
lar experiments were carried out by other groups to develop
SNHL and vestibular dysfunction in various species96-98 (Table 
5.8; Figure 5.2).
Direct infusion of monoclonal antibody against CB11 pep­
tide in the cochlea also produced endolymphatic hydrops. The 
results support the idea that the appearance of endolymphatic 
hydrops is due to immunological reactions induced by CB11 
antibodies in the cochlea. They also suggested that direct injury 
to the inner ear by CB11 monoclonal antibodies causes 
increased hearing thresholds. Therefore, the results of this study 
suggest that type II collagen autoimmunity is responsible for the 
production of hearing loss associated with endolymphatic 
hydrops. Matsuoka et al were succesful in producing ear lesions 
in more than 80% of animal studies (Figure 5.3).99
The transfer of the collagen type II-induced autoimmune 
inner ear disease from the immunized rats to normal recipients 
through the transfer of serum was demonstrated by Yoo et al.100
Table 5.7 Antibody titers against various collagens
Rate of positive serum antibodies [%)
Authors
Year
Patients
Anti-type II
Anti-type V
Anti-type IX
Anti-laminin
Reference
Yoo et al
1982
M D (/?-50)
41.7
18
Klein et al
1989
MD (rt =  12)
14
123
Helfgott et al
1991
MD (n =  12)
8.3
90
Joliat et al
1992
MD (n =  6) + IED [n =  15)
57
62
92
Tomoda et al
1993
MD (n= 18)
28
91
Herdman et al
1993
MD (rr = 37)
5.4-8.1
266
Fattori et a!
1994
MD (rt =  45)
15.5
6,6
11,1
119
Yoshino
1994
MD [n =  29)
38
257
MD, Meniere's disease; IED, inner ear disease other than SNHL
Figure 5.2 (a) Cochlear arteries and veins from normal rats, (b) Inflamed cochlear artery in autoimmune SNHL in rat Vessel walls are thickened and fibrotic. H&E, 
X240; micrograph X3840.
  

Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders 
67
Figure 5.3 (a) Spiral ganglion from normal rat. (b) Degenerated spiral ganglion in ear with autoimmune SNHL Neurones show vacuolate degeneration in which cell 
bodies are swollen, cytoplasm is clear, and nuclei are pyknotic and displaced towards two axonal poles of cells. Nerve fibers show a slight decrease in number. X2304
Table 5.8 Collagen-induced ear diseases
Sensorineural hearing loss 
Vestibular dysfunction 
Spiral ganglion degeneration 
Atrophy of organ of Corti 
Cochlear vasculitis 
Salpingitis and chondritis 
Otospongiosis-like lesion 
Endolymphatic hydrops
In addition, the effects of anti-inflammatory drugs, Solumedrol 
(methyl prednisolene, steroid) and Arthrocin (non-steroid), 
on collagen-induced autoimmune inner ear disease were also 
studied. Sudo and Yoo101 found, by examining the histopatho- 
logical changes and levels of circulating antibody, that the 
therapy was beneficial to animals whether the drugs were 
administered alone or in combination. Fewer lesions were 
observed in animals given either drug alone, although animals 
treated with steroid alone showed the least amount of inner ear 
damage. The involvement of ear structures in autoimmune 
responses to collagen type II has been investigated in several 
related rodent models. Collagen type II-induced ear lesions in 
Lewis rats and guinea pigs were first reported by Yoo et al.26 
However, Harris et al102 did not observe these phenomena. The 
immune response depends on MHC restriction. Thus the expla­
nation of the negative data of Harris et al must be related to 
proper strains and species, state of health of the experimental 
animal, MHC restrictions, and the intensity and duration of the 
immune response used to produce ear lesions. Harris used a dif­
ferent strain of experimental animal. Soliman re-examined 
these controversial results in 1990 and demonstrated impaired 
hearing thresholds and morphological changes, including
endolymphatic hydrops, slight vasculitis of the cochlear artery, 
and slight degeneration of the spiral ganglion cells, in the 
guinea pig. These findings support the original observation of 
Yoo.94 Huang et al95 reproduced collagen type II-induced bone 
resorption in the temporal bone and salpingitis in rats, which 
also supported Yoo’s findings, in contrast to the negative report 
by Bretlau et al.103 Bretlau’s group used type II collagen as an 
immunizing antigen in powder form instead of solution. Cruz et 
al98 also reproduced spiral ganglion degeneration in guinea pigs 
with collagen type II immunization. These animals had an 
increase of latency in wave one. Tomoda et al104,105 reproduced 
the collagen type II-induced autoimmune ear disease in the 
guinea pig in separate experiments.
The arguments against collagen autoimmunity in the inner 
ear were solely based on the above two experiments. However, 
this model has been repeatedly produced by other investiga­
tors in a number of different species, including rats, mice253 
(Figure 5.4), guinea pigs and non-human primates.
Non'human primate model
Macaca fascicularis and Macaca mulatto, were injected with puri­
fied bovine type II collagen. The injected monkeys developed 
ear disease, polyarthritis and imbalance. Electrocochleography 
and brainstem-evoked potential studies showed some shift of 
the action potential threshold and a decrease in the amplitude, 
which indicate hearing loss. Histological examination of the 
inner ear showed vacuolated degeneration of the spiral gan­
glion, degeneration of the organ of Corti, crista ampullare, and 
cochlear vasculitis. Histological examination of the involved 
joints showed a thickening of the synovial membrane with infil­
tration by a large number of mononuclear cells and giant cells. 
These results show that type II collagen autoimmunity could 
induce hearing loss and imbalance in non-human primates.106
  

68 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
Figure 5.4 Comparison of auditory brainstem evoked response (ABR) records between control, chicken type II collagen (Clln)-immunized and cyanogen bromide 
peptide 11 (CB-11)-immunized mice (4-month follow-up). Control animals showed good response at the intensity of acoustical stimuli or 60dBSPL Note the 
elevation of threshold and the decrease of ABRs in the immunized mice. The latencies of ABR in immunized mice were slightly delayed (X100). (Adapted from 
Takeda et al. AmJOtol 1996; 17: 69-75.253)
f
t
Figure 5.5 Immunofluorescence micrograph shows the presence of type II 
collagen in the semi-circular canal and labyrinth membrane of rat.78,79
Autoantibodies in sera of patients with inner 
ear disease
Numerous studies have attempted to identify disease-specific 
circulating antibodies that bind to the inner ear or to purified 
inner ear antigens. Harris and Sharp23 used the extracts from 
the bovine inner ear to study the serum of 54 patients with 
PSNHL and 14 normal controls by immunoblotting. Nineteen 
of the patient group (34%) showed a single or double band 
migrating at 68kDa, compared with 7% in the controls. In sub­
sequent publications, several similar results were reported.106-108 
Moreover, the 68 kDa protein was found to be ubiquitously pre­
sent in other bovine organs, especially kidney.109,110
The 68-kDa antigens identified by PSNHL sera and by 
anti-heat shock protein 70 monoclonal antibodies (mAb) co- 
purify on ion exchange and adenosine triphosphate affinity chro­
matography, and comigrate on one- and two-dimensional (2D) 
gel electrophoresis. Billings et al111 have recently provided some 
tentative evidence linking the 68-kDa protein with the 70-kDa 
heat shock protein. This is intriguing, since antibodies against 
heat shock proteins have been associated with a number of
autoimmune diseases.112,113 Antibodies to this particular heat 
shock protein, hsp 70, have only been found in Lyme disease 
and ulcerative colitis.114 However, whether the antibodies 
against hsp 70 play a primary etiological role in autoimmune 
inner ear disease or occur as a secondary epiphenomenon, is not 
yet clear. The exact relationship between hsp 70 and autoim­
mune inner ear disease remains to be clarified.
A number of other proteins in the extract of bovine inner 
ear tissue were also reported to have some reactivity with sera 
from patients with inner ear disease.107,108,115 These inner ear 
proteins included non-organ-specific antigens with molecular 
masses of 62, 55, 50 and 47 kDa and inner ear-specific antigens 
with molecular masses of 220, 60, 58, 35, 33, and 32 kDa. The 
200-, 60- and 58-kDa proteins were also found in the bovine 
kidney. However, the clinical significance of these proteins 
remains unknown. Some of them could not distinguish between 
patients with inner ear disease and controls110 (Tables 5.9 and 
5.10).
30-kDa protein and type IX collagens
Joliat et al92 used sera fronm 21 patients with inner ear disease 
to probe Western blots of purified human collagens II and IX 
and cochlear protein extract. Anti-type II collagen antibodies 
were detected in 57% of patients, anti-type IX antibodies in 
62% of patients. A 30-kDa protein band was found by sodium 
dodecylsulfate 
(SDS)-polyacrylamide 
gel 
electrophoresis 
(PAGE) of human cochlear tissue extract. In their series of 
patients, only three patients with Meniere’s disease had an anti­
body binding to this protein on Western blot. They did not 
draw any conclusion regarding the character of the 30-kDa pro­
tein or its role in Meniere’s disease.
Swine ear antigen
1116
Using swine inner ear Western blot, Veldman et al ~ investi­
gated sera from 76 patients with rapidly progressive PSNHL 
(n = 15) and sudden deafness (n =31), and with other etiolo­
  

Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders 
69
Table 5.9 Results of Western blot immunoassay reported by investigators
Authors
Year
Patients
Inner ear extract
Molecular mass [kDa) of proteins 
and positive rate
Reference
Harris and Sharp
1990
SNHL ( n - 54)
Bovine inner ear
68 (35%)
23
Joliat et al
1992
MD (n = 6) + IED ln= 15)
Human inner ear
30 ( 62°/o)
92
Veldman et al
1993
SNHL + IED (/? = 76)
Swine temporal bone
27, 45, 50, 68 (73%)
116
Yamanobe and Harris
1993
SNHL-h IED [17-13)
Bovine inner ear
32, 33-35, 58, 60, 220
107
Moscicki et al
1994
SNHL [r? = 72)
Bovine inner ear
68 (58%)
110
Gottschlich et al
1995
MD (r? = 50)
Bovine inner ear
33-35 (18%), 68 (30%)
249
Cao et al
1995
IED (n = 82)
Guinea pig inner ear
30, 58 (39%)
25
Rauch et al
1995
MD (r? = 30}
Bovine inner ear
hsp 70 (47%)
250
Billings et al
1995
SNHL
Bovine kidney
68 = hsp 70
111
Shin et al
1997
MD (n = 60)
Bovine kidney
68, hsp 70 (22%)
251
Suzuki et al
1997
MD + IED (n = 45)
Guinea pig inner ear
28 (20%), 30 (40/o)
141
Atlas et al
1998
MD (n = 36)
Bovine temporal bone
42-45 (22%), 68 (56%)
252
MD, Meniere's disease; SNHL, sensorineural hearing loss, IED, inner ear disease other than SNHL
gies of hearing loss (n =30). Seventy-three per cent of the 
patients with rapidly progressive PSNHL had antibodies to 27-, 
45-, 50- and 68-kDa protein. Sixty-five per cent had antibod­
ies to 27-, 45-, 50- and 80-kDa protein. All the antigenic 
epitopes detected on Western blots were not specific to the 
cochlea. The antigenic epitopes were also found in other 
organs, including cranial nerves, kidney and brain.
Correlation between antibody and steroid 
treatment response
In prospective studies examining the effectiveness of pred­
nisone in patients with idiopathic PSNHL, patients who had 
antibodies against the 68-kDa bovine inner ear protein or type 
II collagen responded more frequently than those who did not 
have these antibodies.90,110
Veldman et al116 analyzed the correlation between antibod­
ies to swine to inner ear protein and the outcome of immuno­
suppressive treatment in 46 patients with PSNHL and sudden 
deafness. A positive treatment response was not only observed 
in patients with a positive, but also in patients with a negative 
Western blot profile. The overall response to therapy was effec­
tive in only 50% of the cases. In patients with sudden deafness, 
steroid therapy was more effective than no treatment, regardless 
of the Western blot results. Spontaneous recovery occurred in 
50% of the cases, but only in those with a positive test.
Non-specific autoantibodies
A non-specific autoantibody screening was performed in 59 
patients with Meniere’s disease.117 Twenty-seven (45.8%) of 59 
patients with Meniere’s disease had at least one serum auto­
antibody, compared with eight (27.6%) of the 29 controls (p <
0.02); 23.7% of the patients had two or more autoantibodies, 
compared with 6.9% of the controls (f><0.1). The most com­
mon autoantibodies found were antinuclear antibody in 17 
patients, antithyroglobulin antibody in 9 patients, and anti­
smooth muscle antibody in 9 patients. Evans et al118 reported 
that 73 (48.7%) of 150 patients with Meniere’s disease had one 
autoantibody, and 9.3% of patients had two or more autoanti­
bodies. The commonest autoantibody was antinuclear antibody 
(23.3%); thyroid microsomal antibody occurred in 17%, and 
smooth muscle antibody in 13%, but no matched data of nor­
mal controls were available from their study. In another series 
of 45 patients with Meniere’s disease, antinuclear antibodies 
were not detectable.119 In patients with PSNHL, the incidence 
of antinuclear (24%) and antithyroid (41%) antibodies was 
high, compared with controls. These autoantibodies were 
nearly absent in patients with sudden deafness120 (Table 5.11).
Viral antibodies
Antibodies to herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) protein were 
tested in patients with Meniere’s disease by ELISA and 
immunoblotting.121 Twenty of 21 patients had antibodies to 
HSV-1. The authors concluded that there was viral reactivation 
in these patients (Table 5.12).
  

70 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
Table 5.10 Summary of the sources and applications of inner
Authors
Date
Source of 
antigens
Terayama and Sasaki
1964
Guinea pig
McCabe
1979
Human
Yoo et al
1983/84
Bovine/chicken
Harada et a!
1984
Rabbit
Hughes et al
1984
Human
Arnold et al
1985
Human
Harris
1987
Cow
Soliman
1989
Guinea pig
Zanetti et al
1989
Laminin
Harris and Sharp
1990
Cow
Orozco et al
1990
Chick, guinea 
pig
Joliat et al
1992
Human
Joliat et al
1992
Type II collagen
Veldman et al
1993
Swine
Yamanobe and Harris
1993
Cow
Cao et al
1994
Guinea pig
Moscicki et aJ
1994
Cow
Takeda et al
1996
CEM1 peptide
Carey et al
1998
Guinea pig 68 kDa
Tanaka et al
1999
Tubulin
(bovine)
Cheng et al
1999
C-raf
Du and Tau
1999
Tubulin
(bovine)
Matsuoka et al
1999
PO (bovine)
Al, animal immunization for experimental autoimmune inner ear disease; E, ELISA; 
immunoblotting; R, recombinant.
Laminin antibodies
The sera of 413 patients with inner ear disease were examined 
for ELISA binding to mouse laminin. Anti-laminin antibody 
reaction was detected in patients with SNHL (68%), tinnitus 
(60%), sudden deafness (46%), and Meniere’s disease (14%), 
and in normal individuals (8%).122,123 In patients with chronic 
infectious disease, anti-laminin reactions were observed with 
almost the same frequency as in patients with SNHL. Immuno­
Inner ear tissues
Application
used
of antigens
Reference
Total
Al
12
Total
ITT, MIT
17
Pure form
E/AI
18,27
Lateral wall
Al
28
Total
LTT, MIT
163
Total
LTT
21
Total
Al
29
Total
Al
30
Pure form
E
122
Total
IB
23
Total
Al
31
Total
IB
92
Pure form
IB
92
Total
IB
116
Total and various
IB
107
parts
Total and various
IB
24
parts
Total
IB
110
Al
253
IB
125
Pure form
E
142
Recombinant
E
136
Pure form
Al
254
Pure form
Al
32
LTT, lymphocyte transformation test; MIT, migration inhibition test; IB,
chemical studies showed that antibody reactivity with laminin 
results from the Gal alpha 1-3 Gal epitope present in N-linked 
oligosaccharides of mouse laminin.123 Although laminin is 
extensively distributed throughout the inner ear, e.g. in the 
areas surrounding the spiral ganglion cells and nerve fibers, the 
capillary vessels in the stria vascularis, and an area beneath the 
epithelium of the ES,87 no reaction was observed in the patients 
with human laminin, which lacks this epitope.123 These findings
  

Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders 
71
Table 5.11 Results of non-specific laboratory tests
Positive rate (%)
Authors
Year
Patients
IgG
IgA
IgM
Clq
C3
CH50
0KT4/0KT8
Anti-DNA Anti-nuclear References
Xeneflis et al
1986
MD (n =  52)
21
2
38
54
17
192
Brookes
1986 MD (n =  36)
44.4
2.8
86.1
117
Williams et a!
1987
MD(n =  25)
12
24
48
255
Evans et al
1988
MD(n =  110)
11
23
17
T
118
Fattori et al
1991
MD(n =  40)
15
10
2.5
0
256
Tomoda et al
1993
MD(n =  26)
35
4
27
38
91
Yoshino
1994 MD(rc= 29)
38
24
3.4
257
Gutierrez et al
1994 MD (n = 40)
T
T
i
258
Yazawa and Susuki
1996 bil-MD (n =  36)
14
11
11
0
61
63
0 
17
259
MD, Meniere’s disease; bil-MD, bilateral MD; Clq and C3, complements; CH50, hemolytic complement level; 0KT4/0KT8, ratio of subpopulations of T4 and T8 
lymphocytes; T, increase; I, decrease.
Table 5.12 Serum antibody titer against various viruses reported by investigators
Authors 
Year 
Patients 
Positive results
Reference
Williams et al 
Bergstrom et al 
Tomoda et al 
Calenoff et at
1987 
MD [n =  25) 
HSV-1 (60%), VZV (68%), CMV (56%), mumps(24%), rubella (48%), rubeola (32%) 255
1992 
MD (n =  21) 
HSV-1 (95%) 
121
1993 
MD (n =  18) 
HSV (22%), CMV (11%) 
91 
1995 
MD [n = 10) 
HSV-1 (70%), HSV-2 (70%), CMV (80%), EBV (60%) 
260
Perilymph HSV 
261
Arnold and Niedermeyer 
1997 
MD (rr =  7)
MD, Meniere's disease; SNHL, sensorineural hearing loss; HSV, herpes simplex virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; VZV, varicella zoster virus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus.
suggest that antibodies against the carbohydrate structures 
might be stimulated by a persisting infectious process, and cer­
tain of inner ear diseases might have a chronic infectious 
etiology.123
68-kDa protein, a 70 hsp and KHRI-3 
protein as autoantigens
This 68-kDa protein was later identified as a 70-kDa heat shock 
protein (hsp 70),124 although the 68-kDa inner ear antigen from 
Carey’s group is not hsp 70.125 The 68-kDa protein binds sup­
porting cells in the organ of Corti, while 70 hsp antibody does 
not bind any site in the inner ear.126 Patient’s sera still bound
68-kDa bovine inner ear antigen after sera was extensively 
absorbed with bovine hsp 70 (J. P. Harris, personal communica­
tion). We were unable to show recombinant human hsp 70 
binding autoimmune inner ear disease sera when we used com­
mercial recombinant hsp 70 (T. J. Yoo, unpublished observa­
tion). Trune et al were not able to induce hearing loss with hsp 
70 in experimental animals,127 and nor did the Harris group 
when they immunized the guinea pig with hsp 70 (R. D. Rauch, 
personal communication). Rauch was not able to induce hear­
ing loss in rats by hsp 70 immunization, though he identified 
the hsp 70 epitope for Meniere’s disease.128
It has been shown that hsp 70 is not the target of KHRI-3, 
an antibody which binds 68-kDa protein from guinea pig inner 
ear membrane, because when proteins were precipitated from 
inner ear extract by KHRI-3 and western blotted, nothing in 
the immunoprecipitate reacted with anti-hsp 70 antibodies.
Using guinea pig inner ear tissue as the antigenic substrate 
and either Western blot or immunofluorescence (IF) or both, 
sera from 73 patients suspected of having autoimmune hearing 
loss from inner ear antibodies were tested. Thirty-seven of 73 
(51%) had antibody to a 68-70-kDa protein by Western blot. 
Sera positive by IF stained supporting cells with a staining 
pattern like that previously observed with the KHRI-3
  

72 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
monoclonal antibody. 
There 
was concordance 
between 
Western blot and IF assays. Of 36 patients tested by both assays, 
29 of 31 (94%) who were positive in Western blot were also 
positive by IF, three were negative by both tests and two each 
were positive by one assay but negative by the other. Absorp­
tion of patient sera with human inner ear tissue removed anti­
body reactivity to the guinea pig supporting cell staining, 
indicating that the antigen detected by the autoantibody is also 
present in the human inner ear. Sera from three patients posi­
tive in both assays also stained a 68-70-kDa inner ear protein 
immunoprecipitated by the KHRI-3 monoclonal antibody, 
indicating that the monoclonal and human antibodies recog­
nize the same antigen. The results support the hypothesis that 
patients with autoimmune SNHL produce autoantibodies to an 
inner ear supporting cell antigen that is phylogenetically con­
served and defined by the murine monoclonal antibody KHRI- 
3. Since KHRI-3 can induce hearing loss after infusion into the 
inner ear it is likely that autoantibodies with the same antigenic 
target are also pathogenic in humans. The serum levels of anti­
body against hsp 70 in both normal controls and patients with 
SNHL are identical in the two groups.125,126
Thus the role of hsp 70 in Meniere’s disease is not yet clear 
because of the consistently low or no binding activity with 
human heat shock proteins to Meniere’s disease patients’ sera.
PO protein as autoantigen
Cao et al have shown that patients with SNHL or Meniere’s 
disease have antibodies againt a 30-kDa protein extract from 
the inner ear of guinea pigs.24,25 They have identified this 30-kDa 
protein as myelin protein PO derived from the acoustical nerve 
and spiral ganglion. Myelin protein PO is expressed in Schwann 
cells of the peripheral nervous system (PNS), but not in the 
mammalian central nervous system (CNS).129 Myelin protein 
PO accounts for 50-60% of the peripheral myelin proteins and 
plays an important role in the compaction of myelin by means 
of homophilic interaction.130-132 This protein is a cell adhesion 
molecule of the immunoglobulin supergene family.129 Few inter­
species amino acid variations were seen among the PO 
sequences from several kinds of species. Mutation of the PO pro­
tein gene, located on chromosome lq21-23, may lead to 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
disease 
type 
lB .133Charcot-Marie- 
Tooth disease has been reported to be associated with hearing
i 
134,135
A 30-kDa protein from human inner ear extracted proteins 
has been defined as reacting with sera from Meniere’s patients.92 
It is not clear whether this 30-kDa protein reported is the same 
as the PO protein or not.
In order to study autoimmune hearing loss, an animal 
model of hearing loss was developed by immunizing mice with 
PO protein. The brainstem auditory-evoked potential (BAEP) 
studies were done on PO-sensitized mice. Two PO-sensitized 
mice showed haunched posture, poor coat, loss of body weight, 
and abnormal walking with a waddling gait. About 25% of the 
PO-sensitized mice developed hearing loss. In the BAEP study,
peak latencies of waves I, III and V and the interpeak latency 
I—III were prolonged in the PO-sensitized hearing loss group of 
mice. Hearing thresholds were elevated in this group of mice in 
comparison with the control mice. Inflammatory cell infiltra­
tion was observed in the cochlear nerve region, and a reduced 
number of spiral ganglion cells was also detected. The results 
suggest that PO-sensitized mice are useful models for studying 
autoimmune inflammation of the peripheral portion of the 
auditory system32 (Figure 5.6).
Raf'l protein as an autoantigen in Meniere’s 
disease
Sera from Meniere’s disease patients contain antibody against 
proteins from guinea pig inner ear extracted protein. It has 
been found that a 28-kDa protein from the guinea pig inner ear 
membrane fraction strongly reacts with the sera from Meniere’s 
disease patients.136 This 28-kDa protein appeared in the mem­
branous fraction (containing basement membrane, organ of 
Corti, stria vascularis, spiral ligament, and vestibular epithe­
lium), but not in the neural part (containing the spiral ganglion 
and cochlear nerve in the modiolus and the vestibular nerve in 
the temporal bone) of the inner ear. It was purified and identi­
fied as the Raf-1 protein.136
The extracted proteins from the membranous fraction of 
the inner ear were electrophoresed on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel 
and transferred immediately to polyvinylidene difluoride 
(PVDF) membrane. The N-terminal sequencing was deter­
mined by classical automated Edman degradation. Nineteen 
amino acids were obtained (IVQQFGFQRRASDDGKLTQ). A 
protein data bank search showed that this sequence corresponds 
to residues 42-59 of human Raf-1 protein. Raf-1 protein is a 
serine-threonine-specific protein kinase (PK) which functions 
in a signal transduction pathway(s) between cell membrane and 
nucleus.137 In our 113 patients with Meniere’s disease, we found 
that 46% were positive to the antigens. However, only 2 of 26
c
f t y
 V
v
» ' ■ * ;  ' I  
. / j f c  
l  t
I  
V  
i * 
m 
\ j
T
 < 1 -  
< / .  
,
• * 
* 4 .
i *
i -
Figure 5.6 Cellular infiltration in cochlear nerve of PO immunized mice. 
Mononuclear cell infiltration was observed in the cochlear nerve region in the 
PO protein immunized mouse.
  

Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders 
73
PSNHL patients showed positive reactivity to recombinant glu- 
tathione-S-transferase (GST) Raf-1 protein. These results sug­
gest that Raf antibodies have a much higher rate of expression 
in Meniere’s disease than in the PSNHL. It is also possible that 
this 28-kDa protein is a new protein which is highly similar to 
Raf-1 protein.
C-raf immunization of mice produced systemic autoim­
mune diseases. Three of seven mice which were immunized sub- 
cutaneously at the base of the tail, with 100 (ag of c-Raf in 
complete Freund’s adjuvant (CFA) with 300 ng of pertussis vac­
cine with one booster injection 7 days after first immunization 
developed a hunched posture, loss of body weight, severe skin 
lesion, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, (10 times that of 
control), and hyperimmunoglobulinemia. When blood from 
40 systemic lupus erythematosis (SLE) patients was tested, 
about 26% of patients with SLE also showed antibody against 
c-Raf, thus suggesting the role of c-Raf in autoimmune diseases.
The Raf-1 protein belongs to the Raf protein family. Three 
members have been described: Raf-1, A-Raf and B-Raf. Raf is a 
tissue non-specific protein and plays a key role in a kinase cas­
cade that regulates cell proliferation, differentiation, and devel­
opment. 
’ 
This phosphorylated map kinase kinase (MEK) 
activates mytogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase and leads to 
gene expression and DNA synthesis.139
Raf-1 protein is highly conserved in mouse, rat, chicken, 
Xenopus laevis, Drosophila melanogaster, and Caenorhabditis 
elegans. The Raf-1 protein is a 74'kDa protein including three 
conserved regions (CR). CR1 (approximately 53-200 amino 
acids) and CR-2 (a short sequence in the N-terminal half) are 
considered to be critical for regulating Raf-1 activity. The 
mutation of these regions activates the oncogenic potential of 
Raf-1.140
An important convergence point involved in the signal 
transduction pathways of many different growth factors, hor­
mones, and cytokines is a family of 41-44'kDa serine/threonine 
kinases collectively called either MAPKs (for mitogen- 
activated protein kinases) or ERKs (for extracellular regulated 
kinases). MAPK is activated by sequential phosphorylation 
on both tyrosine and threonine residues by either the dual 
serine/threonine kinases MEK (MAPK kinase) alone or by 
MEK in conjunction with an as yet undescribed kinase. The 
serine/threonine kinases Raf and Mekk (MAPK kinases) phos- 
phorylate and activate MEK, in turn, during intracellular sig­
naling. Activation of MAPK is directly regulated by a specific 
MAPK phosphatase and is indirectly regulated by protein 
kinase A activation, which results in inhibition of Raf activity 
in mammalian cells. Raf-1 is required for activation of c-Jun via 
phosphorylation in the transactivation domain.139
In our study, we observed that the sera from the inner ear 
disease patients have antibodies which reacted with 25-kDa 
and 46-kDa, 52-kDa, 67-kDa, and 79-kDa protein.141 The 
results in that study suggested that 52-kDa and 67-kDa proteins 
are not tissue-specific proteins. This 67-kDa protein does not 
correspond to the hsp 70 protein.
These results, from our observation and from other labora­
tories, suggest that multiple antigens are involved in the 
immunopathology of autoimmune inner ear disease. All three 
of the study proteins (hsp 70, myelin P0, and Raf-1 proteins) 
are non-tissue-specific proteins, and are therefore not specific to 
inner ear tissue. It is of interest to investigate how these non- 
tissue-specific proteins are involved in autoimmune inner ear 
disease. Several questions need to be addressed. If this 28-kDa 
protein is a degraded Raf-1 protein, what is its biological func­
tion? Why is this 28-kDa protein observed only in the mem­
branous part of the inner ear tissue, given the fact that Raf-1 is 
a non-specific protein? How does this immune mechanism tar­
get the 28-kDa protein? Does the mutation of this protein break 
down tolerance or does the immune response to a virus then 
induce a loss of tolerance to this protein? Clearly, more studies 
are required to answer these questions (Figure 5.7)
P'Tubulin as an autoantigen for autoimmune 
inner ear disease
A 52-kDa protein was extracted from the guinea pig inner ear 
membranous and neural fraction and was identified as (3-tubulin 
in microsequence. It was also identified as the (3-tubulin DNA 
sequence when the cDNA library screening was carried out 
using a guinea pig cDNA library and the sera of patients with 
Meniere’s disease.142 The antibody to tubulin is elevated in 
Meniere’s disease. Sixty-seven of 113 (59%) of Meniere’s 
disease patients’ sera recognized anti-tubulin antibody using the
Figure 5.7 T-lymphoeyte subpopulations (0KT4, 0KT8, 0KT4/0KT8) in 19 
patients with bilateral Meniere's disease indicating a significant raise of the 
ratio (63%).
  

74 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
ELISA method. In addition, it is elevated in the sera of patients 
with chronic demyelinating polyneuropathy syndrome.143
P-Tubulin is a major intracellular protein involved in the 
microtubules, prominent structures in the sensory and support­
ing cells of the organ of Corti in the inner ear. Based on studies 
of other cell types, it is thought that the functions of micro­
tubules include movement of subcellular organelles,144 estab­
lishment of cell polarity,145 maintaining cell shape146 and 
providing structural support.147 The determination of cell polar­
ity and shape and the permanence of structures containing 
microtubules are related to their dynamic properties.148 
Dynamic properties may be determined by the biochemical 
composition of tubulin.149,150 Furthermore, immunohistological 
studies of guinea pig organ of Corti using monoclonal anti­
tubulin antibody showed that it is stained in the hair cells, sup­
porting cells, spiral limb, neural pathways of cochlear nerve, 
and spiral ganglions.
Circulating immune complexes and 
complement in autoimmune inner ear disease
Circulating immune complexes (CICs) are believed to be 
involved in the pathogenetic mechanisms in autoimmune inner 
ear disease. In 1984 Veldman et al reported a 14-year-old girl 
with SNHL and raised values of CIC.151 In this case, they 
believed that the inner ear was involved as one of the target 
organs in autoimmune disease. Brookes described significantly 
raised levels of CIC in 26 patients with PSNHL or sudden deaf­
ness.117 He speculated that CICs formed by bacterial antibodies 
or antibodies to human tissues reached the stria vascularis and 
reacted with complement in the development of inflammation 
or cochlear ischemia in the inner ear, resulting in inner ear dis­
ease. In 1986, he demonstrated a raised CIC level in 36 
(54.5%) of 66 patients with Meniere’s disease by the polyethy­
lene glycol (PEG) precipitation test.117 Hsu et al152 and 
Derebery et al153 also reported a raised CIC level in patients 
with Meniere’s disease. Plasma exchange to reduce the levels 
of CIC has been shown to improve auditory thresholds in some
cases of SNHL154 (Table 5.13). Brookes117 reported that C3c 
and C lq levels in Meniere’s disease were significantly raised 
when compared with the same parameters in controls. Signifi­
cantly raised IgM complexes and C lq component have also 
been described in patients with Meniere’s disease.118
The small fragments, C3a and C5a, released during the 
activation of the complement are sometimes called anaphyla- 
toxin (AT).155 The pathology of inner ear damage caused by AT 
was investigated in Hartley strain and C4-deficient guinea 
pigs.156 The biological activity of C3a and C5a was found to be 
strong but of short duration. The resulting ear damage might be 
reversible, while the damage caused by continuously activated 
C4a, including atrophy of the stria vascularis, degeneration and 
sloughing of the cochlear neurones, and stretching of Reissner’s 
membrane, is thought to be irreversible.
Lymphocyte trafficking in the inner ear
Lymphocyte trafficking in the inner ear has been well reviewed 
with respect to the processes of extravasation, homing of lym­
phocytes and lymphocyte recruitment signals to the inner 
ear.157 The inner ear system follows the general mechanism of 
the process of extravasation: rolling, tight adherence to a single 
location on the vessel wall, flattening of cells against the 
endothelium, and penetration of the vessel wall through 
intraepithelial cell junctions. At each step, these processes are 
mediated by cytokines and cytokine receptors as well as cell sur­
face molecules and specific receptors for the ligands: inter­
leukins, chemokines, selectins and adhesion molecules.
T-cell epitope specificity and T-cell receptor usage were 
investigated in a type II collagen-induced autoimmune ear dis­
ease model. An immune response directed against type II colla­
gen (ClI) had been reported in several autoimmune ear diseases 
including the animal models of collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA) and collagen-induced autoimmune ear disease (CIAED). 
We found that T cells from CH-immunized DBA/1-lac mice 
could transfer auricular chondritis to naive mice. The T cells 
from CH-immunized H-2r and H-2q mice recognized different
Table 5.13 Circulating immune complex in Meniere's disease.
Authors
Year
Patients
Positive rate (%)
Reference
Brookes
1986
MD (n = 66]
55
117
Evans et al
1988
MD (n = 110)
t  (p < 0.001)
118
Hsu et al
1990
MD (n = 59)
32
152
Derebery et a I
1991
MD In = 30)
96
153
Tomoda et al
1993
MD (n - 10)
40
91
Yoshino
1994
MD (n = 29)
21
257
Gutierrez et al
1994
MD (n = 40)
t  (p< 0.001)
258
MD, Meniere's disease.
  

Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders 
75
epitopes from the CB11 peptide of CII. The CH-specific T cells 
from H-2q background mice recognize peptide residues 
pl21—147 (PI) but do not respond to residues p211—247 (P2). 
The T cells of H-2r mice immunized with CII respond better to 
P2 than to PI. By altering certain amino acids within these epi­
topes, the response of CH-specific TCR (T-cell receptor) to 
antigen has been increased or abolished. Our results suggest 
that the lysine residues at positions 129, 141 and 147 in PI, and 
the argine residue at position 227 and the glutamic acid at posi­
tion 230 in P2, might play an important role in the trimolecu- 
lar interaction. Ten clonally distinct T-cell hybridomas specific 
for CII have been established from H-2r B10.RIII mice, and the 
P chains of their TCR have been analyzed. Three subfamilies, 
Vpl, Vp6, and Vp8, were utilized with dominant expression of 
Vp8 (60%). This is quite similar to the pattern found in CII- 
induced arthritis in H-2q mice. This preferential use of Vp8 in 
CIAED implies that immunotherapy may make it possible to 
control this autoimmune disease, even in an MHC-diverse
• 
. 
158
situation.
Lymphocyte subsets in autoimmune inner ear 
disease
The analysis of peripheral lymphocyte subsets was used to assess 
immune status in a variety of diseases. In 1985, Yoo et al 
demonstrated that 50% of patients with SNHL had an elevated 
CD4/CD8 ratio.159 In another study, Mayot et al found a severe 
depletion in CD3+ and CD4+ peripheral lymphocytes in 
patients with sudden deafness, and a marked decrease of CD8+ 
lymphocytes in patients with sudden deafness and PSNHL.120 
CD57+ cells were significantly increased, while LFA1+ cells 
were decreased, in both groups. The data showed that different
immunological abnormalities appear to be involved in the 
development of sudden deafness and PSNHL.120 (Figure 5.8).
Kanzaki et al160 reported that abnormalities in one or more 
lymphocyte markers were found in 7 of the 14 patients with 
‘steroid-responsive SNHL, including 6 of the 11 (54.5%) 
patients with ‘steroid-responsive SNHL’ and 1 of the 3 (33%) 
patients with bilateral idiopathic PSNHL. The CD4/CD8 ratio 
was less than 0.5 in one patient (7%) and greater than 2 in 6 
patients (43%). Suppressor T cells inhibit helper T cells, cyto­
toxic T cells, and B cells, and play an important role in the 
adjustment of antibody production and cellular immunity. 
Some types of suppressor T cells are believed to maintain self­
tolerance by inhibiting the immune response to autoantibodies. 
Therefore, a decrease in suppressor T cells may be related to the 
production of autoantibodies. However, elevated levels of sup­
pressor T cells are probably due to viral infection resulting in a 
decrease in immune function.160,161 In Meniere’s disease, 
Tomoda et al91 showed a significant elevation of the CD4/CD8 
ratio and a decrease of CD8 cells in 7 of 18 patients (38%), 
whereas Fattori et al119 reported that the total number of lym­
phocytes, and CD4+ and CD8+ cells, and the CD4+/CD8+ 
ratio, were in the normal range in a series of 45 patients with 
Meniere’s disease.
CelKmediated immune response assays
Antigen-specific cellular immune tests used in autoimmune 
inner ear disease include the migration inhibition test 
(MIT)17,162 
and 
the 
lymphocyte 
transformation 
test 
(LTT).19'163’164 McCabe was the first to use the MIT in auto­
immune inner ear disease.17 Although he found the MIT to be 
useful, and it was a standard test for cell-mediated immunity
Figure 5.8 A course of hearing threshold of a patient with bilateral Meniere's disease having 28-kDa protein. His hearing responded to steroid with 60dB in his 
right ear and 70dB in his left.
  

76 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
(CMI) in the past, it has not been widely applied because of its 
inherent technical difficulty. Nonetheless, we have used it for 
several years and found it to be very useful. Hughes et al first 
reported the preliminary results of LTT in patients with idio­
pathic PSNHL,19 and they have since employed the LTT to 
diagnose autoimmune inner ear disease. The LTT is based on 
the interaction of the receptors of specifically sensitized T lym­
phocytes with inner ear antigens and the initiation of cellular 
activation of the reactive cells in vitro. This response can be 
detected by measuring proliferation of the T cells. Inner ear tis­
sue, collected from patients during labyrinthine surgery, was 
used as antigen. It was found that approximately 19% of 
patients with suspected autoimmune inner ear disease gave pos­
itive results.165 Nevertheless, Harris and Sharp compared the 
results of LTT in 26 patients with inner ear disease and 19 con­
trols. They found no significant difference between the patient 
and control groups23 (Table 5.14). Berger et al described results 
of LTT using type II collagen as the antigen in 68 patients with 
PSNHL and 68 healthy volunteers. Thirty-four patients showed 
a strong stimulation in the LTT, in contrast to only four volun­
teers in the control group, two of whom had a history of 
rheumatoid arthritis.166
Inner ear involvement in autoimmune inner 
ear disease
Inner ear involvement in association with other autoimmune 
diseases has been reported in cases of Cogan’s syndrome,167-169 
giant cell vasculitis polyarteritis nodosa,170-172 relapsing poly­
chondritis,173’174 
systemic 
lupus 
erythematosus,175 
Vogt- 
Koyanagi-Harada 
syndrome,176 
Sjogren’s 
syndrome,177 
Wegener’s disease,178’179 sarcoidosis,180’181 hypersensitivity vas­
culitis182 and Behcet’s disease.183-187 In some cases, where 
immune complexes have been strongly implicated, the injury or 
dysfunction of the inner ear may be merely the result of coinci­
dental injury. Inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis, 
myasthenia gravis and acute disseminated vasculitis are also 
associated with hearing loss (Table 5.15).
The audiovestibular involvement in these autoimmune dis­
eases manifests a wide spectrum of symptoms with the variety 
of: (1) unilaterality or bilaterality; (2) characteristics of onset;
Table 5,14 Lymphocyte transformation test (LTT).
Authors
Year
Patients
Hughes et al
1983
MD (/?= 10)
Hughes et al
1985
MD ( n - 12) + IED ( n - 16)
Lejenne et al
1992
MD (rj = 4) + SNHL ( n - 12)
Salomon et al
1993
MD + SNHL (/?- 14)
(3) ratio of auditory versus vestibular involvement; (4) rate of 
progress; and (5) response to therapy.188
HLA antigens in autoimmune inner 
ear disease
The MHC, a well-defined system in humans known as human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA), is a set of loci on the short arm of 
chromosome 6. The human MHC is very large (about 3500 kb) 
and is organized as follows: (1) class II genes (HLA-DP, HLA- 
DQ, HLA-DR); (2) complement genes (class III); (3) heat 
shock protein and cytokine (TNF, LT, and LT-P) genes, and 
class I genes (HLA-B, HLA-C, and HLA-A)189 (Table 5.16). 
While the external and middle ear can be involved, as in relaps­
ing polychondritis and Wegener’s granulomatosis, more severe 
inner ear disease can also occur, most often in the systemic dis­
eases of polyarteritis nodosa and Cogan’s syndrome. Less com­
monly, hearing loss due to inner ear disease can occur in 
relapsing polychondritis, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, 
giant cell arteritis, Takasayu’s disease, hypersensitivity vasculitis 
involving small vessels, sarcoidosis, SLE and endolymphatic 
hydrops. The findings are not constant, but the sensory organs 
are degenerated.
HLA plays an important role in the control of cellular inter­
actions responsible for immune responses. MHC-encoded class I 
and class II molecules bind foreign protein antigens and form 
complexes that are recognized by antigen-specific T lympho­
cytes. Class I-associated antigens are recognized by CD8 
cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTLs), whereas class Il-associated 
antigens are recognized by CD4 helper T cells. Therefore, it is 
conceivable that the susceptibility to many supposedly autoim­
mune diseases is influenced by the inheritance of the HLA genes. 
In an extensive review, Tiwari and Terasaki190,191 reported that 
more than 3000 diseases are associated with the HLA system.
It is believed that autoimmunity is associated with the 
pathogenesis of some of the previously ill-defined inner ear dis­
eases, including PSNHL, sudden deafness, Meniere’s disease 
and otosclerosis. By the HLA serological typing method, using 
panels of antibodies to identify different alleles, several
Positive results: number of patients (%) 
Reference
1 (10) 
19
24 (86) 
262
MD (0), SNHL (25) 
263
3 (21) 
242
MD, Meniere's disease; SNHL; sensorineural hearing loss, IED, inner ear disease other than SNHL
  

Table 5.15 Rate of other complicated autoimmune diseases.
Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders 
77
o<
o
o
E
CU
or
<QC
^  E
a ?
5  I
8 .#
£oJd 
■4—'
3<
CD 
LO 
CN 
*—
<— 
CD 
CD 
LO
CO
CO
ro
ro
to
lo
oi
i n
ro
ro
ro
CD
CD
ro
ro
co q j 
o  o  ro 
ora 
O 
ro
I—  
*_  
CM 
'i—  
’—
ro
co
uo+
CD
ro
O 
O 
II
ro 
ro 
c: 
II 
II 
II 
' T
S  3  3  §
3  
Q 
Q 
_L
OJ
CO
cn
ro 
cd 
0 ) 0 ) 0 1  
cj 
cf> 
o
03
4^ 
OJ >>
\A 
0j
CD
"P, 
°
!7l 
l  
F
5  X  
.o
CO
CO5CO 3
IS) 
y
ro 3
>- uo
■g
‘o
LO
cT
attempts have been made to correlate HLA phenotypes and 
inner ear diseases.192-194 These studies have shown that inner ear 
disease susceptibility is associated with the MHC, although the 
exact nature of the association remains controversial.
In 1986, HLA-A, -B, and -C typing was carried out sero­
logically in 41 patients with Meniere’s disease by Xenellis et 
al.192 Seventy-five per cent of the patients were found to have 
HLA-Cw7. The association remained significant after correc­
tion was made for the number of antigens (p = 0.035). The fre­
quencies of HLA-A1 and B8 were also increased but were not 
significant after corrections. Bowman and Nelson193 also 
reported that a significant increase of Cw7 occurred in 51% of 
patients with autoimmune SNHL compared to 21% of 627 
matched controls (RR = 3.95). The possibility of weaker associ­
ations with the presence of Cw4 and B35 and the absence of 
DR4, was demonstrated. However, in another study, HLA-DR4 
was distinctly 
increased 
in patients with hearing loss 
(RR = 2.8), Meniere’s disease (RR = 3.64) and neuronitis 
vestibularis (RR = 3.12).195
Bernstein et al studied the HLA phenotype of 111 patients 
with inner ear disease.194 These individuals included 32 patients 
with Meniere’s disease, 49 patients with otosclerosis, 14 
patients with strial presbyacusis, and 16 patients with SNHL. 
An increased frequency of Cw7 was not observed in these 
patients. DR2 may be significantly decreased in patients with 
SNHL and is present at very low levels in patients with 
Meniere’s disease. There was a significant increase in the 
B8/DR3 and particularly the A1/B8/DR3 haplotypes in these 
patients. This is intriguing, since a number of autoimmune dis­
eases, including Addison’s disease, Sjogren’s syndrome, myas­
thenia gravis, insulin-dependent diabetes, coeliac disease and 
SLE, are associated with the haplotype B8/DR3.196-199 Bernstein 
et al also investigated the autoantibodies to bovine or chick 
type II collagen in a small sample of patients with (n = 11) and 
without (n = ll)  the B8/DR3 haplotype.194 The number of 
patients with antibodies to type II collagen was significantly 
greater among patients with B8/DR3 than among patients with­
out this haplotype.
In a Japanese population, Matsuki et al200 investigated sero­
logically the frequencies of HLA-A, -B, -C, -DR and -DQ in 40 
patients with severe unilateral SNHL in childhood. Only HLA- 
Bw54 showed a significant increase after the correction of the P 
value (RR = 3.62).
HLA class III complement phenotypes were determined in 
39 families with at least one child suffering from moderate or 
severe bilateral SNHL by serological methods. Steuer et al201 
found that there was a significant difference between the 
patients and healthy German individuals in the frequencies of 
the following HLA class III alleles: duplicated C4A (C4"DA"), 
silent C4A (C4A*Q0), C4B*3, duplicated heavy C4 P chain 
(C4P"DHH"), and silent C4 p chain (C4P*Q0).
HLA class I, II and III phenotypes were investigated in 
patients with inner ear disease in different populations by sero­
logical typing. Certain HLA class I, II and III alleles were found 
to be associated with inner ear disease.
  

78 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Table 5.16 Results of HLA in various inner ear diseases.
Authors
Year
Patients
Positive results
Reference
Xenellis et al.
1986
MD (n = 41)
HLA-CW7 [75%)
192
Bowman and Nelson
1987
IED
HLA-DR4 i
193
Bernstein et al
1992
SNHL
HLA-A1/B8/DR3 T
194
Koyama et a I
1993
MD (/? = 20)
DRBH602 subtype of HLA-DR2 T
265
Cao et a I
1996
SNHL (n = 34)
DRBI'0301, T DRB3*0101 T
203
DQB1*0201,T DPBT0401 T
MD, Meniere's disease; SNHL, sensorineural hearing loss; IED, inner ear disease other than SNHL
In a Korean population, Jung et al202 undertook genotyping 
for HLA-DR by PCR-re verse dot hybridization and SSCP (sin- 
gle strand conformation polymorphism) analysis in 40 patients 
with Meniere’s disease and in 201 healthy controls. Also, to 
evaluate immunological abnormalities, antibody to CII was 
measured by the ELISA method. The level of anti-CII in serum 
of Meniere’s disease patients was elevated significantly com­
pared with control serum (0.05). There was no significantly 
elevated HLA-DR antigen in Meniere’s disease patients. Only 
DR 13 was significantly decreased in the Meniere’s disease 
group. (p = 0.05). However, in cases seropositive to the CII 
group, the frequency of HLA-DR4 was significantly elevated 
(p = 0.05) and that of HLA-DR 7 and -14 was decreased com­
pared with control group. The results were comparable to those 
of the study of rheumatoid arthritis in Korea, suggesting a simi­
lar pathogenesis. In summary it can be suggested that specific 
HLA class II gene products are responsible for the susceptibility 
to Meniere’s disease and also for an ethnic variation in the 
pathogenesis of Meniere’s disease.
Cao et al found the following on the relevant HLA-DR 
alleles in patients with idiopathic PSNHL in the Belgian 
population:203 
DR 
B1*0301 
(increased), 
DR 
B3*0101 
(increased), DQ Bl*0201 (increased), DB1*0301 (decreased), 
and DP Bl*0401 (increased).
Animal models for otoimmunological study
In 1961, Beickert carried out the first study on animals to exam­
ine the possibility of autoimmunity with regard to the inner 
ear.11 He demonstrated lesions within the cochlea of guinea pigs 
immunized with inner ear antigen. Terayama and Sasaki immu­
nized guinea pigs with isologous cochlear tissue in Freund’s 
adjuvant, and were also able to produce lesions within the 
cochlea and alterations in Preye’s reflex.12 However, such obser­
vations were essentially ignored at that time. In 1983, Yoo et al 
reported the development of an animal model of CII-induced 
autoimmune hearing loss and vestibular dysfunction in rats26 
and guinea pigs.27 Since then, a large number of animal models 
have been developed by immunization with a variety of
antigens. The animal model of autoimmune inner ear disease 
induced by CII has already been mentioned above.
To investigate an immunological basis for Meniere’s dis­
ease, Harada et al immunized two groups of guinea pigs with 
rabbit stria vascularis homogenate. 
Histological lesions were 
not observed in the inner ear of guines pigs with a genetic 
deficit of complement C4, while some normal guinea pigs 
developed cochlear hydrops. This study suggests the necessity of 
the integrity of the complement system for obtaining immune- 
mediated lesions in the inner ear. Harris developed an animal 
model of autoimmune inner ear dysfunction in guinea pigs 
immunized with fresh bovine cochlear antigen in Freund’s adju­
vant.29 In the experimental group, anticochlear antibodies were 
detected in the sera, and 32% of the ears tested showed signifi­
cant hearing loss. Histological injury was characterized by spiral 
ganglion cell degeneration, perivascular infiltration by plasma 
cells, edema, and hemorrhage. In 1989, Soliman used a crude 
inner ear antigen from pigmented guinea pig and developed an 
animal model of autoimmune inner ear disease in Hartley 
guinea pigs.30 The animals demonstrated endolymphatic 
hydrops, vasculitis, mild cellular infiltration of the ES and occa­
sional spiral ganglion degeneration. Threshold shift was seen in 
20% of the tested ears. Subsequent similar studies were reported
i 
i 
204,205
by others.
In another study eight guinea pigs and four mice were 
immunized with chick and guinea pig cochlear tissue.31 Hearing 
loss of 20 dB or greater occurred in eight animals. ELISA 
demonstrated antibodies to cochlear antigens in the sera of all 
test animals. Immunocytochemistry revealed immunostaining 
of hair cells, stereocilia in Corti’s organ and saccule. Endolym­
phatic hydrops, and degeneration of Corti’s organ, were 
observed in these animals.
Tubulin-immunized mice also showed hearing loss and 
degeneration of the spiral ganglion. The inner ear undergoes 
apoptosis.33 Gloddek et al investigated the capacity of sensi­
tized lymphocytes to transfer an adoptive labyrinthitis in naive 
animals without antigenic stimulation.207 They demonstrated 
that lymphocytes of donor animals with labyrinthitis, induced 
by immunization with keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH),
  

Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders 
79
were capable of transferring this organ-specific disease to naive 
recipient animals. Most of the labeled cells were observed in the 
apical turn of the cochlea in the experimental groups. The dele­
terious effects of these lymphocytes were shown morphologi­
cally by the loss of outer hair cells, and physiologically by the 
inability to record otoacoustical emissions and the decreased 
average level of the emissions after cell transfer. The authors 
proposed that, in humans, lymphocytes become sensitized as a 
result of exposure to sequestered protein during infection, 
trauma or operation on the inner ear. These cells recirculate as 
‘memory’ lymphocytes, reach the intact contralateral cochlea, 
and give rise to an immune response.
Pathology of the inner ear in a systematic 
autoimmune strain of mice
Inner ear involvement has been investigated in autoimmune 
strains of mice, such as C3H/lpr,208,209 MRL-lpr/lpr,210,211 and 
NZB/kl212,213 mice. The inner ears of C3H/pr mice before and 
after the onset of autoimmune disease were examined. The stria 
vascularis from older C3H/lpr mice after systemic autoimmune 
disease onset showed considerable intercellular edema around 
the strial capillaris and thickening of the capillary basement 
membrane, compared to controls. Immunoreactivity for IgG 
was seen in the vessels of the cochlea, particularly in the stria 
vascularis and bony capsule. These observations suggest that 
the perivascular abnormalities may result in the stria dysfunc­
tion and hearing loss seen in autoimmune disease in
i 
208,209,214
human.
Kusakari et al210 reported that the auditory brainstem 
response (ABR) threshold of 20-week-old MPL/lpr mice was 
significantly higher than that of BALB/c mice at the same age 
(p = 0.01). The inner ears of 20-week-old MRL/lpr mice 
showed degeneration of intermediate cells, widened intercellu­
lar spaces, and IgG deposition on the basement membrane of 
the stria vascularis, as well as the basal infolding of strial mar­
ginal cells. Ruchenstein et al211 found significant pathology of 
the basal and middle turns of the cochlea in MRL/lpr mice at 
early stages of systemic disease. Outer and inner hair cell degen­
eration, strial edema degeneration, and cellular infiltrate in the 
tunnel of Corti were also seen.
In NZB/kl mice, spontaneous elevation of the ABR thresh­
old with age was discovered. Pathological changes in the inner 
ears of NZB/kl mice with a high ABR threshold are confined to 
the stria vascularis, including marked thickening of the capil­
lary basement membrane and vacuolar degeneration of the 
intermediate cells. Circular or granular IgM deposits and some 
IgG deposits were found in the stria vascularis. Deposits of 
immune complexes (mainly IgM) may cause strial damage and 
result in the ABR threshold elevation.212,213,215
Immunotherapy for autoimmune inner ear 
disease
The mainstay of treatment for autoimmune inner ear disease is 
anti-inflammatory drugs, particularly corticosteroids. Treatment 
with corticosteroids diminishes the production of inflammatory 
mediators and dampens cellular reactions involved in immune 
responses. The anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive 
properties of corticosteroids are related to at least four major 
effects: (1) a profound influence on the distribution and traf­
ficking of leukocytes; (2) alteration of the functional properties 
of individual cells of the immune system, e.g. inhibition of T- 
cell proliferation; (3) an influence on the synthesis and secre­
tion of soluble mediators that serve as signals between immune 
cells; and (4) an effect on microvascular permeability. The effi­
cacy of corticosteroids has been shown in many clinical stud­
ies.17,90,93,110,116,216 McCabe recommended that treatment should 
combine high-dose steroids and cyclophosphamide.17,268 Ini­
tially, intravenous cyclophosphamide 5 mg/kg per day is given 
for 2 weeks, followed by a rest period of 2 weeks, and then a 
final 2 weeks of infusions. Dexamethasone 16mg/day is given 
orally for 2 months, followed by tapering to 2-4 mg over 2 
months. Steroids are continued for 6-24 months, depending on 
symptoms. Hughes et al recommended high-dose, short-term 
steroids (prednisone, lmg/kg/day).216 If possible, 1 month of 
therapy should be followed by a 3-week tapering dosage. In 
selected cases, many months of low-dose therapy are necessary. 
Cytotoxic drugs such as cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and 
nitrogen mustard are recommended, if there is no response to 
steroids within 6-8 weeks.
Plasmapheresis has been used to reduce circulating levels of 
antibodies or immune complexes in patients with myasthenia 
gravis, Eaton-Lambert syndrome, Goodpasture’s syndrome, 
hyperviscosity and Guillain-Barre syndrome.217-219 Blood taken 
from the patients is centrifuged, the cells are saved, and the 
plasma is removed. Cells are resuspended in albumin, fresh nor­
mal plasma, or albumin in saline, and returned to the patients. 
The ill-effects of autoantibodies may be reduced by 65% by 
removing approximately 2500 ml of plasma. Luetje used plasma­
pheresis to treat patients with autoimmune inner ear disease.220 
Improved auditory function occurred in six of the eight 
patients. Three of the six no longer required immunosuppres­
sant medication.
In some autoimmune diseases, antagonists against proin- 
flammatory cytokines, such as IL-1 and TNF, and agents that 
block leukocyte emigration into tissue, are being tested for anti­
inflammatory effects. Immunosuppressive drugs like cyclosporin 
A and FK 506 are also used to block T-cell activation. 
’
On the other hand, many experimental therapies are being 
attempted. Monoclonal antibodies against surface antigens (e.g. 
CD3) or the T-cell receptor can be used to deplete or modulate 
lymphocytes 
in 
experimental 
autoimmune 
diseases.223,224 
Immunoconjugates of IL-2 and toxins may bind to activated T 
cells that express high-affinity IL-2 receptors and kill these 
cells.225,226 Induction of immune tolerance, e.g. by oral
  

80 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
administration of antigens that cause autoimmunity or peptide 
competition, may be an effective way to prevent autoimmune 
disease.227 Their application to clinical disease remains to be 
further investigated.
Future prospects
Some of the events involved in the autoimmune response to 
the inner ear and the reasons for their occurrence have been 
presented. This is the beginning of understanding that an 
autoimmune response in the auditory system does indeed exist. 
The knowledge in this field is very limited and brings together 
research in immunology, audiology, pathology, molecular biol­
ogy and neuroscience. The rational approach to the problems of 
autoimmune ear diseases would be the development of better 
diagnostic tools and therapeutic measures. The development of 
specific laboratory tests requires the understanding of the 
etiopathogenesis of disorders and, specifically, further charac­
terizing the autoantigens involved. At present, the medical 
treatment for these disorders is mostly non-specific and has 
many undesirable side-effects. Further understanding of the 
autoimmunity of the auditory system is an essential element for 
developing specific treatment modalities for better manage­
ment of patients with this problem. One of the feasible 
approaches is oral tolerance.
Oral tolerization to antigen has long been recognized as an 
effective method to induce tolerance. The following sequence 
of events occurs in oral tolerance: entry of protein into the 
intestinal tract; passage of protein or peptides through gut 
epithelium; induction of regulatory T cells; transit of the regu­
latory T cells into the bloodstream and lymphatic system; and 
eventual repositioning of reactive cells at the site of autoim­
mune reaction or within the mucosal epithelium (e.g. inner ear 
tissue in Meniere’s disease).227
This method has been successfully applied in autoimmune 
diseases such as experimental allergic encephalomyelitis 
(EAE),228-232 collagen-induced arthritis (CIA),233-235 uveitis, 
and type 1 diabetes mellitus.66,206 It has been suspected that oral 
tolerance induces IL-4, IL-10 and TGF-p (these are cytokines 
involved in immune responses) and simultaneously suppresses 
or inhibits the TH1 (a T-helper cell) cellular response in these 
autoimmune diseases.227 This shifting balance of TH1 response 
to TH2 response reduces the autoimmunity. A trial of TGF-p 
treatment alone did not totally reverse autoimmune diseases. 
These results suggest that TGF-P is not the only factor involved 
in tolerance in these diseases. Although the detailed immune 
mechanism in oral tolerance is not clear, this treatment has 
been applied to autoimmune disease patients. Both active sup­
pression and clonal anergy or clonal deletion have been sug­
gested as mechanisms of oral tolerance.227
While low-dose antigen treatment induces an active sup­
pression mechanism, high-dose antigen selects clonal anergy. 
The complexity of treating autoimmune disease might be
increasing, and there seems to be some potential to obtain 
results different from those predicted from animals or in vitro. 
Obviously, in addition to TGF-P, other factor(s) play(s) a piv­
otal role in tolerance.236 In humans, bovine myelin basic pro­
tein (MBP) was given orally in a blinded study that included 30 
patients with multiple sclerosis.237 The oral MBP reduced the 
number of T cells reactive to MBP and was not associated with 
measurable toxicity.68 The pilot study suggested some improve­
ment in multiple sclerosis, but clinical efficacy could not be 
established, due to the small sample size.68,237 Type II collagens 
were also used in rheumatoid arthritis, and many other antigens 
are used in clinical trials. Thus, identifying the autoantigens in 
autoimmune hearing loss is the first step towards this rational 
therapy. Recently, delivering protein molecules that could 
inhibit local inflammation in the ear tissues is being attempted 
using T cell mediated gene therapy.269
References
1. Davis MM. T cell receptor gene diversity and selection. Annu Rev 
Biochem 1990; 59: 475-96.
2. Germain RN. MHC-dependent antigen processing and peptide 
presentation: providing ligands for T lymphocyte activation. Cell 
1994; 76: 286-99.
3. Steinman L. Autoimmune disease. Sci Am 1993; 269: 106-14.
4. Masugi M, Tomizuka Y. Uber die speizifisch zytotoxischen 
Veranderungen der Niere und ser Leber durch das spezifische 
Antiserum (Nephrotoxin und Hepatoxin:). Trans Jap Pathol Soc 
1931:21: 329-41.
5. Lowental Z. Djordje Joannovic, Forerunner of the idea of autoag­
gression in the pathogenesis of disease. Proc 21st Int Congr Hist 
Med, Siena 1968: 1455-62.
6. Joannovic D. Zur Wirkung fermentativ gewonnener spaltungs- 
produkte aus Geweben und Bakterien. Wein Klin Wschr 1920; 70: 
1410-11.
7. Cogan DG. Syndrome of nonsyphilitic interstitial keratitis and 
vestibuloauditory symptoms. Arch Ophthalmol 1945; 33: 144.
8. Cody DT, Williams HL. Cogan’s syndrome. Laryngoscope 1960; 
70: 447-78.
9. Lehnhardt E. Plotzliche horstorungen aufbeiden seiten gleich- 
zeitig oder nacheinander, aufgetreten. Z Laryngol Rhinol Otol 1958; 
37: 1.
10. Kikuchi M. On the ‘sympathetic otitis’. Zibi Rinsyo Kyoto 1959; 
52: 600.
11. Beickert VP. Zur Frage der empfindungs Schwerhorigkeit under 
Autoallergie. Z Laryngol Rhinol Otol 1961; 40: 837-42.
12. Terayama Y, Sasaki U. Studies on experimental allergic (isoim­
mune) labyrinthitis in guinea pigs. Acta Oto-laryngol 1964; 58: 
49-64.
13. Schiff M, Brown B. Hormones and sudden deafness. Laryngoscope 
1974; 84: 1959-81.
14. Quick CA. Antigenic cause of hearing loss. Otolaryngol Clin North 
Am 1975; 8: 385.
  

Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders 
81
15. Arnold W, Weidauer H, Seelig HR Experimentellerbeweis einer 
gemeinsamen Anti-genizitat zwischen Innenohr und Niere. Arch 
Otorhinolaryngol 1976; 212: 99.
16. Weidauer HM, Arnold W, Seelig HP. Nachweis von Bassal- 
membranantikorpem in Inner-ohr bei experimenteller Masugi- 
nephritis. Z Laryngol Rhinol Otol 1977; 56: 500.
17. McCabe BE Autoimmune sensorineural hearing loss. Ann 
Otorhinolaryngol 1979; 88: 585-9.
18. Yoo T], Kang AH, Stuart JM, Tomoda K, Townes AS, Dixit S. 
Type II collagen autoimmunity in otosclerosis and Meniere’s dis­
ease. Science 1982; 217: 1153-5.
19. Hughes GB, Kinney SE, Bama BP, Calabrese LH, Hamid M. 
Autoimmune reactivity in Meniere’s disease: preliminary report. 
Laryngoscope 1983; 43: 410-17.
20. Hughes GB, Bama BP, Kinney SE, Calabrese LH, Nalepa NL. 
Predictive value of laboratory test in ‘autoimmune’ inner ear dis­
ease: preliminary report. Laryngoscope 1986; 96: 502-5.
21. Arnold W, Pfatz R, Altermatt H-J. Evidence of serum antibodies 
against inner ear tissue in the blood of patients with certain 
sensorineural hearing disorder. A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1985; 99: 
437-44.
22. Plester D, Soliman AM. Autoimmune hearing loss. Am J Otol 
1989; 10: 188-92.
23. Harris JP, Sharp PA. Inner ear autoantibodies in patients with 
rapidly progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Laryngoscope 1990;
100: 516-24.
24. Cao MY, Tomasi J-P, Gersdorff M, Deggouj N. Detection of guinea 
pig inner ear antigens by sera from patients with inner ear disease. 
In: Mogi G, Veldman JE, Kawauchi H, eds. Immunobiology in 
Otology, Rhinology and Laryngology. Amsterdam/New York: Kluger 
Publications, 1994: 263-8.
25. Cao MY, Gersdorff M, Deggouj N, Wamy M, Tomasi J-P. 
Detection of inner ear disease autoantibodies by immunoblotting. 
Mol Cell Biochem 1995; 146: 157-63.
26. Yoo TJ, Tomoda K, Stuart JM, Cremer MA,Townes AS, Kang 
AH. Type II collagen induced autoimmune sensorineural hearing 
loss and vestibular dysfunction in rats. Ann Otorhinolaryngol 1983; 
92: 267-71.
27. Yoo TJ, Yazawa Y, Tomoda K, Floyd R. Type II collagen-induced 
autoimmune endolymphatic hydrops in guinea pig. Science 1983; 
222: 65-7.
28. Harada T, Matsunaga T, Hong K, Inoue K. Endolymphatic 
hydrops and III type allergic reaction. A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 
1984; 97: 450-9.
29. Harris JP. Experimental autoimmune sensorineural hearing loss. 
Laryngoscope 1987; 97: 63-76.
30. Soliman AM. Experimental autoimmune inner ear disease. 
Laryngoscope 1989; 99: 188-93.
31. Orozco CR, Niparko JK, Richardson BC, Dolan DF, Ptok MU, 
Altschuler RAN. Experimental model of immune-mediated hear­
ing loss using cross-species immunization. Laryngoscope 1990; 100: 
941-7.
32. Matsuoka M, Cheng KC, Yoo TJ. Autoimmune hearing loss in 
mice induced by myelin P0 protein, Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1999; 8: 255-64.
33. Du X, Mora R, Barbiera M, Yoo TJ. Tunnel-positive staining in 
the mouse inner ear caused by tubulin immunization is not 
apoptosis. Oto'RhinO'Laryngol (accepted for publication)
34. Guild SR. Observations upon the structure and normal contents 
of the ductus and saccus endolymphatic in the guinea pig (Cavia 
cobaya). Am J Anat 1927; 39: 1-4.
35. Lim D, Silver P. The endolymphatic duct system. A light and elec­
tron microscopic investigation. In: Pulec J, ed. Bar any Society 
Meeting, Los Angeles, 1974: 390.
36. Rask-Andersen H, Stahle J. Immunodefence of the inner ear 
lymphocyte-macrophage interaction in the endolymphatic sac. 
A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1980; 89: 283-94.
37. Harris JP. Immunology of the inner ear: evidence of local antibody 
production. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1984; 93: 157-62.
38. Tomiyama S, Harris JP. The endolymphatic sac: its importance in 
inner ear immune responses. Laryngoscope 1986; 96: 685-91.
39. Wackym PA, Friberg U, Linthicum FH Jr. Bui HT, Rask-Andersen
H. Human endolymphatic sac: morphologic evidence of immuno­
logic function. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1987; 96: 276-81.
40. Yamane H, Nakai Y, Sugiyama M, Konishi K, Takahashi K. The 
occurrence of IgG in the endolymphatic sac of the guinea pig. 
Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1987; 243: 370-3.
41. Takahashi M, Harris JP. Anatomic distribution and localization of 
immunocompetent cells in normal mouse endolymphatic sac. 
Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1988; 106: 409-16.
42. Altematt HJ, Gebbers Jo, Muller C, Arnold W, Laissue JA. 
Human endolymphatic sac: evidence for a role in inner ear 
defense. ORLJ Otolaryngol Relat Spec 1990; 52: 143-8.
43. Arnold W. Immunohistochemical investigation of the human 
inner ear: limitation and prospects. A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 
1998; 105: 392-7.
44. Kawauchi H, Ichimiya I, Kaneda N, Mogi G. Distribution of 
immunocompetent cells in the endolymphatic sac. Ann Otol 
Rhinol Laryngol 1992; 101(suppl 157): 39-47.
45. Ichimiya I, Kawauchi H, Fujiyoshi T, Tanaka T, Mogi G. 
Distribution of immunocompetent cells in normal mucosa: com­
parisons among germ-free, specific-pathogen-free, and conven­
tional mice. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1991; 100: 638-42.
46. Harris JP. Immunology of the inner ear: response of the inner ear 
to antigen challenge. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1983; 91: 17-23.
47. Tomiyama S, Harris JP. The role of the endolymphatic sac in the 
inner ear immunology. A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1987; 103: 
182-8.
48. Chevance LG, Galli A, Jeanmarie MJ. Immuno-electrophoretic 
study of the human perilymph. A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1960; 
52: 41-6.
49. Fritsch JH, Jolliff CR. Protein components of human perilymph: I. 
Preliminary study. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1966; 75: 1070-6.
50. Palva T, Raunio V. Disc electrophoretic studies of human peri­
lymph. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1967; 76: 23-36.
51. Suzuki Y. Immunological studies on inner ear fluid under the influ­
ence of acute middle ear inflammation, JpnJ Otol 1977; 80: 52-60.
52. Mogi G, Lim D, Watanabe N. Immunologic study on the inner 
ear: immunoglobulins in perilymph. Arch Otolaryngol 1982; 108: 
270-5.
  

82 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
53. Arnold W, Altermatt H-J, Arnold R, Gebbers IO, Laissue J. 
Somatostatin(-like) immunoreactive cells in the human inner ear 
and endolymphatic sac. Arch Otolaryngol 1986; 112: 934-7.
54. Arnold W, Altermatt H-J, Gebbers IO, Laissue J. Secretory 
immunoglobulins A in the human endolymphatic sac. An 
immunohistochemical study. ORL 1984; 46: 286-8.
55. Davis BJ. Disk electrophoresis: II. Method and application to 
human serum protein. Ann NY Acad Sci 1964; 121: 404-27.
56. Vaerman JP, Heremans JF. IgA system of the guinea pig. J Immunol 
1972; 108: 637-48.
57. Goodman JW, Wang AC. Immunoglobulin. Structure and diver- 
sity. In: Fudenberg HH, Stites DP, Caldwell JL et al eds. Basic and 
Clinical Immunology, 2nd edn. Altos, Ca: Los Lange Medical 
Publication, 1978: 23-8.
58. Altmann F, Waltner JG. The circulation of the labyrinthine fluids. 
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1974; 56: 684-708.
59. Kellerhals B. Perilymph production and cochlear blood flow. Acta 
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1979; 87: 370-4.
60. Harris JP, Fukuda S, Keithly EM. Spiral modiolar vein: its impor­
tance in inner ear inflammation. Acta Otolaryngol 1990; 110: 
357-65.
61. Gloddek B, Ryan AF, Harris JP. Homing of lymphocytes to the 
inner ear. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1991; 111: 1051-9.
62. Gloddek B, Harris JP. Role of lymphokines in the immune response 
of the inner ear. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1989; 108: 68-75.
63. Yeo SW, Ryan AF. Transformation growth factor-beta (TGF-P) 
mRNA expression in the rat cochlea during experimental immune 
labyrinthitis. In: Mogi G, Veldman J, Harris J, eds. Immunobiology 
in Otorhinolaryngology. Am-stelveen: Kluger, 1994: 181-8.
64. Suzuki M, Harris JP. Expression of intercellular adhesion mole- 
cule-1 during inner ear inflammation. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1995; 104: 69-75.
65. Yeo SW, Gottschlich S, Harris JP, Keithley EM. Antigen diffusion 
from the perilymphatic space of the cochlea. Laryngoscope 1995; 
105: 623-8.
66. Wilson RLK, Stewart IA. Autoimmune sensorineural deafness: 
case report. NZ MedJ 1981; 697: 414-15.
67. Arnold W, Phfaltz CR, Altermatt HJ. Evidence of serum antibod­
ies against inner ear tissue in the blood of patients with certain 
sensorineural hearing disorders. Acta Otolaryngol 1985; 99: 
437-44.
68. Edstrom S, Vahine A. Immunological findings in a case of Cogan’s 
syndrome. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1976; 82: 212.
69. Elies W. Immunolgische Befimde bei cochleovestibularen Strorun- 
gen. Allergobgie 1983; 6: 357.
70. Hughes GB, Kinney SE, Bama BP, Calabrese LH. Practical versus 
theoretical management of autoimmune inner ear disease. 
Laryngoscope 1984; 94: 758-66.
71. Veldman JE, Roard JJ, O’Conner AF, Shea JJ. Autoimmunity and 
inner ear disorders: an immune-complex mediated sensorineural 
hearing loss. Laryngoscope 1984; 94: 501-7.
72. Yoo TJ, Floyd R, Ishibe T, Shea JJ, Bowman C. Immunologic test­
ing of certain ear disease. A m ] Otol 1985; 6: 96-100.
73. Yoo TJ. Etiopathogenesis of Meniere’s disease: a hypothesis. Ann 
Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1984; 93(suppl 113): 6-12.
74. Vuorio E, de Crombrugghe B. The family of collagen genes. Annu 
Rev Biochem 1990; 59: 837-72.
75. Kucharz EJ. The Collagens: Biochemistry and Pathophysiology. 
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1992: 233-43.
76. Rehn M, Hintikka E, Pihlajaniemi T. Primary structure of the al 
chain of mouse type XVIII collagen, partial structure of the corre­
sponding gene, and comparison of the al (XVIII) chain with its 
homologue, the al (XV) collagen chain. J Biol Chem 1994; 269: 
13929-35.
77. Myers JC, Yang HY, D’Ippolito JA, Presente A, Miller MK, 
Dion AS. The triple-helical region of human type XIX collagen 
consists of multiple collagenous subdomains and exhibits lim­
ited sequence homology to al (XVI). ] Biol Chem 1994; 269: 
18549-57.
78. Yoo TJ, Tomoda K. Type II collagen distribution in rodents. 
Laryngoscope 1988; 88: 1255-60.
79. Ishibe T, Cremer MA, Yoo TJ. Type II collagen distribution in the 
ear of the guinea pig foetus. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1989; 95: 
176-80.
80. Ishibe T, Choe IS, Yoo TJ. Type II collagen distribution in the ear 
of developing chick embryo. Laryngoscope 1989; 99: 547-53.
81. Ishibe T, Yoo TJ. Type II collagen distribution in the monkey ear. 
Am J Otol 1990; 11:33-8.
82. Khetarpal U, Morton CC. COL1A2 and COL2A1 expression in 
temporal bone of lethal osteogenesis imperfecta. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1993; 119: 1305-14.
83. Khetarpal U, Robertson NG, Yoo TJ, Morton CC. Expression and 
localization of COL2A1 mRNA and type II collagen in human 
fetal cochlea. Hear Res 1994; 79: 59-73.
84. Robertson NG, Khetarpal U, Gutierrez-Espeleta GA, Bieber FR, 
Morton CC. Isolation of novel and known genes from a human 
fetal cochlear cDNA library using subtractive hybridization and 
differential screening. Genomics 1994; 23: 42-50.
85. Van den Heuvel LP, Savage CO, Wong M et al. The glomerular 
basement membrane defect in Alport-type hereditary nephritis: 
absence of cationic antigenic components. Nephrol Dial Transplant 
1989; 4: 770-5.
86. Kleppel MM, Santi PA, Cameron JD, Wieslander J, Michael AF. 
Human tissue distribution of novel basement membrane collagen. 
Am J Pathol 1989; 134: 813-25.
87. Takahashi M, Hokunan K. Localization of type IV and laminin in 
the guinea pig inner ear. Ann Otol Rhino Laryngol 1992; 101 ( suppl 
157): 58-62.
88. Ye XJ, Terato K, Nakatani H, Cremer M, Yoo TJ. Monoclonal 
antibodies against bovine type IX collagen (LMW fragment): pro­
duction, characterization and use for immunohistochemical local­
ization studies. J Histochem Cytochem 1991; 39: 265-71.
89. Slepecky NB, Cefarratri LK, Yoo TJ. Type II and type IX collagen 
form heterotypic fibers in the tectorial membrane of the inner ear. 
Matrix 1992; 11: 80-6.
90. Helfgot SM, Mosciscki RA, San Martin J et al. Correlation 
between antibodies to type II collagen and treatment outcome in 
bilateral progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Lancet 1991; 337: 
387-9.
91. Tomoda K, Suzuka Y, Iwai H, Yamashita T, Kumazawa T.
  

Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders 
83
Meniere’s disease and autoimmunity: clinical study and survey.
A eta Otolaryngol Suppl 1993; 500: 31-4.
92. Joliat T, Seyer J, Berstein J et al. Antibodies against a 30 kilodal 
ton cochlear protein and type II and IX collagens in the serum of 
patients with inner ear disease. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1992; 
101: 1000- 6.
93. Yoo TJ, Yazawa Y, Floyd R, Tomoda K. Antibody activity in peri­
lymph from rats with type II collagen-induced autoimmune inner 
ear disease. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1984; 93(suppl 113): 1-2.
94. Yoo TJ, Tomoda K, Hernandez AD. Type II collagen-induced 
autoimmune inner ear lesions in guinea pigs. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1984; 94 (suppl 113): 3-5.
95. Huang CC, Yi ZX, Abramson M. Type II collagen-induced oto- 
spongiosis-like lesion in rats. Am J Otolaryngol 1986; 7: 258-66.
96. Ohashi T, Tomoda K, Yoshie N. Electrocochlographic changes in 
endolymphatic hydrops induced by type II collagen immuniza­
tion through the styloid foramen. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1989; 
98:556-662.
97. Soliman AM. Type II collagen induced inner ear disease: critical 
evaluation of the guinea pig model. Am J Otol 1990; 11: 27-32.
98. Cruz OL, Miniti A, Cossermelli W, Oliveira RM. Autoimmune 
sensorineural hearing loss; a preliminary experimental study. Am 
J Otol 1990; 11:342-6.
99. Matsuoka H, Kwon SS, Yazawa Y, Yoo TJ. Production of 
endolymphatic hydrops induced by directly infusion monoclonal 
antibody against type II collagen CB11 peptide. Proc 4th Interna- 
tional Symposium on Meniere s Disease, Paris, France, April 11-14, 
1999. The Hague: Kugler, 2000: 205-14.
100. Yoo TJ, Floyd RA, Kitano H. Animal model of autoimmune ear 
disease. In: Bernstein JM, Ogra PL, eds. Immunology of the Ear. 
New York: Raven Press, 1987: 463-80.
101. Sudo N, Yoo TJ. Effect of anti-inflammatory drugs on collagen 
induced autoimmune inner ear disease. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1988; 97: 153-8.
102. Harris JP, Woolf NK, Ryan AF. A reexamination of experimental 
type II collagen autoimmunity: middle and inner ear morphology 
and function. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1986; 95: 176-80.
103. Bretlau P, Balle V, Causse JB, Horstev-Petersen K, Sorensen CH, 
Solvsteen M. Is otosclerosis an autoimmune disease? In: Veldman 
JE Histophysiology and Tumor Immunology in Otolaryngology 
Amsterdam: Kugler, 1987: 201-6.
104. Tomoda K, Maeda N, Yamawaki T, Yamashita T, Kumazawa T, 
Ohashi T. Immunologically induced experimental hydrops: its 
mechanisms and pathology. In: Nadal JB, ed. 2nd International 
Symposium on Meniere's Disease, Amsterdam/Berkley/Milan: 
Kluger 1989: 165-72.
105. Tomoda K, Yamawaki T, Yamashita T, Kimazawa T. Inner ear 
immunology and the changes of charge barrier. Ear Res (Jpn) 
1989; 21: 275-76.
106. Yoo TJ, Stuart JM, Takeda T et al. Induction of type II collagen 
autoimmune arthritis and ear disease in monkeys. NY A cad Sci 
1985; 475: 341-2.
107. Yamanobe S, Harris JP. Inner ear-specific autoantibodies. 
Laryngoscope 1993; 103: 319-25.
108. Kosaka K, Yamanobe S, Tomiyama S, Yagi T. Inner ear autoanti­
bodies in patients with sensorineural hearing loss. Acta 
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1995; 519(suppl): 176-7.
109. Yamanobe S, Harris JP. Extractions of inner ear antigens for stud­
ies in inner ear autoimmunity. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1993; 
102: 22- 7.
110. Moscicki RA, Martin JES, Uuintero CH, Rauch SD, Nadol JB Jr, 
Bloch KJ. Serum antibody to inner ear proteins in patients with 
progressive hearing loss, correlation with disease activity and 
response to corticosteroid treatment. JAMA 1994; 272: 611-16.
111. Billings PB, Keithley EM, Harris JP. Evidence linking the 68 
Kilodalton antigen identified in progressive sensorineural hear­
ing loss patient sera with heat shock protein 70. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1995; 104: 181-8.
112. Winfield JB, Jarjour W. Stress proteins, autoimmunity, and autoim­
mune disease. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1991; 167:161-89.
113. Winfield JB, Jarjour W. Do stress proteins play a role in arthritis 
and autoimmunity? Immunol Rev 1991; 121: 193-220.
114. Jarjour WN, Jeffries BD, Davis JS 4th, Welch WJ, Mimura T, 
Winfield JB. Autoantibodies to human stress proteins: a survey of 
various rheumatic and other inflammatory diseases. Arthritis 
Rheum 1991; 34: 1133-8.
115. Rauch SD, Sanmartin J, Moscicki RA. Bovine temporal bones as 
a source of inner ear antigen. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1992; 
101: 688-90.
116. Veldman JE, Hanada T, Meeuwsen F. Diagnostic and therapeutic 
dilemmas in rapidly progressive sensorineural hearing loss and 
sudden deafness. Acta Otolaryngol 1993; 113: 303-6.
117. Brookes GB. Circulating immune complexes in Meniere’s dis­
ease. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1986; 112: 536-40.
118. Evans KL, Baldwin DL, Bainbridge D, Morrison AW. Immune 
status in patients with Meniere’s disease. Arch Otorhinolaryngol 
1988; 245: 287-92.
119. Fattori B, Ghilardi P, Casani A, Migliorini P, Riente L. Meniere’s 
disease: role of antibodies against basement membrane antigens. 
Laryngoscope 1994; 104: 1290-4.
120. Mayot D, Bene MC, Dron K, Perrin C, Faure GC. Immunologic 
alterations in patients with sensorineural hearing disorders. Clin 
Immunol Immunopathol 1993; 68: 41-5.
121. Bergstrom T, Edsteom S, Tjellstrom A, Vahlne A. Meniere’s dis­
ease and antibody reactivity to herpes simplex virus type 1 
polypeptides. Am J Otolaryngol 1992; 13: 295-300.
122. Zanetti FR, Plester D, Klein R, Bursa-Zanetti Z, Berg PA. Anti- 
laminin antibodies in inner ear disease: a potential marker for 
infection and post infection processes. Arch Otorhinolaryngol 
1989; 246: 100-4.
123. Klein R, Timpl R, Zanetti FR, Plester D, Berg PA. High antibody 
levels against mouse laminin with specificity for galactosyl-(alpha 
1-3) galactose in patients with inner ear diseases. Ann Otol 
Rhinol Laryngol 1989; 98: 537-42.
124. Billings PB, Keithley EM, Harris JP. Evidence linking the 68 kilo­
dalton antigen identified in progressive sensorineural hearing loss 
patient sera with heat shock protein 70. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1995; 104: 181-8.
125. Michael D, Ramakrishnan A, Nair TS 
et al. 
Human 
autoantibodies and monoclonal antibody KHRI-3 bind to a
  

84 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
phylogenetically conserved inner-ear supporting cell antigen. 
Ann NY Acad Sci 1998; 830: 253-65.
126. Ramakrishnam A, Arts HA, Telian S, Carey TE. Assessing 
human sera for antibodies to the KHRI-3 inner ear antigen and 
HSP-70 protein. ARO abstract 637.
127. Trune DR, Kempton RB, Mitchell CR, Hefeneiden SH. Failure 
of elevated heat shock protein 70 antibodies to alter cochlear 
function in mice. Hear Res 1998; 116: 65-70.
128. Bloch DB, Gutierrez JE, Guerriero V, Rauch SD. Antibodies in 
idiopathic, progressive, bilateral sensorineural hearing loss (IPB- 
SNHL) recognize an epitope in the carboxy region of bovine 
HSP 70. ARO Abstract 774.
129. Hayasaka K, Nanao K, Tahara M et al. Isolation and sequence 
determination of cDNA encoding the major structural protein of 
human peripheral myelin. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1991; 
180: 515-18.
130. Greenfield S, Brostoff S, Eylar EH, Morell P. Protein composition 
of myelin of the peripheral nervous system. J Neurochem 1973; 
20: 1207-16.
131. Lemke G, Axel R. Isolation and sequence of a cDN A encoding the 
major structural protein of peripheral myelin. Cell 1985; 40:501-8.
132. You KH, Hsieh CL, Hayes C, Stahl N, Francke U, Popko B. 
DNA sequence, genomic organization, and chromosomal local- 
ization of the mouse peripheral myelin protein zero gene: identi­
fication of polymorphic alleles. Genomics 1991; 9: 751-7.
133. Kulkens T, Bolhuis PA, Wolterman RA et al. Deletion of the ser­
ine 34 codon from the major peripheral myelin protein P0 gene 
in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type IB. Nature Genet 1993; 
5(1): 35-9.
134. Satya-Murti S, Cacace AT, Hanson PA. Abnormal auditory 
evoked potentials in hereditary motor-sensory neuropathy. Ann 
Neurol 1979; 5: 445-8.
135. Gadith N, Gordon CR, Bleich N, Pratt H. Three modality 
evoked potentials in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (HMSN-1). 
Brain Dev 1991; 13: 91-4.
136. Cheng KC, Lee KM, Kwon SS et al. Proto-oncogene Raf-1 as an 
autoantigen in Meniere’s disease. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 2000; 
109: 1093-8.
137. le Guelle R, le Guelle K, Paris J, Phillipe M. Nucleotide 
sequences of Xenopus C-Raf coding region. Nucleic Acids Res 
1988; 16: 10357.
138. Egan SE, Weinberg RA. The pathway to signal achievement. 
Nature (Lond) 1993; 365: 781-3.
139. Blenis J. Signal transduction via the MAP kinases: proceed at 
your own RSK. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993; 90: 5889-92.
140. Stanton VP Jr, Nickils DW, Laudano AP, Cooper GM. Definition 
of the human raf amino-terminal regulatory region by deletion 
mutagenesis. MoJ Cell Biol 1989; 9: 639-47.
141. Suzuki M, Krug MS, Cheng KC, Yazawa Y, Bernstein J, Yoo TJ. 
Antibodies against inner ear protein in the sera of patients with 
inner ear disease. ORL 1997; 59: 10-17.
142. Tanaka H, Kwon SS, Krug M, Suzuki M, Yazawa Y, Shea J. The 
P-tubulin as an autoantigen for Meniere’s disease. In: Meniere’s 
Disease Symposium, Paris, France, April 11-14, 1999. The Hague: 
Kugler, 2000.
143. Connolly AM, Keeling RM, Mehta S et al. Serum IgM 
monoclonal antibody binding to the 301 to 304 amino acid 
epitope of beta tubulin: clinical association with slowly pro­
gressive demyelinating polyneuropathy. Neurology 1997; 48: 
243-8.
144. Araki 
N, 
Ohono J, 
Lee T, 
Takashima Y, 
Ogawa K. 
Nematolysosomes (elongated lysosomes) in rat hepatocytes: their 
distribution, microtubule dependence, and role in endocytic 
transport pathways. Exp Cell Res 1993; 204: 181-91.
145. Hyde GJ, Hardman AR. Microtubules regulate the generation of 
polarity in zoospores of Phytophthora cunnamomi. Eur J Cell Biol 
1993; 62: 75-85.
146. Bulinski JC, Gundersen GG. Stabilization and posttranslation 
modification of microtubules during cellular morphogenesis. 
BioEssays 1991; 13: 285-93.
147. Deanin GG, Preston SF, Gordon MW. Carboxyl terminal tyro­
sine metabolism of alpha-tubulin and changes in cell shape: 
Chinese hamster ovary cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1981; 
100: 1642-50.
148. Schukze E, Kirschner M. Dynamic and stable microtubule popu­
lation in cells. J Cell Biol 1987; 4: 277-90.
149. Tannenbaum J, Slepecky NB. Localization of microtubules 
containing posttranslationally modified tubulin in cochlear 
epithelial cells during development of cell motility and the 
cytoskeleton. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 1997; 38: 146-62.
150. Gunderson GG, Khawaja S, Bulinski JC. Postpolymerization 
detyrosination of alpha-tubulin. A mechanism of subcellular 
differentiation 
of microtubules. ] Cell 
Biol 
1987; 
105: 
251-64.
151. Veldman JE, Roord JJ, O’Conner AF, Shea JJ. Autoimmunity and 
inner ear disorder: an immune-complex mediated sensorineural 
hearing loss. Laryngoscope 1984; 94: 501-7.
152. Hsu L, Zhu XN, Zhao XN. Immunoglobulin E and circulating 
immune complexes in endolymphatic hydrops. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1990; 99: 535-8.
153. Derebery MJ, Rao VS, Siglock TJ, Linthicum FH, Nelson RA. 
Meniere’s 
disease: 
an 
immune 
complex-mediated 
illness? 
Laryngoscope 1991; 101: 225-9.
154. Brooks GB, Newland AC. Plasma exchange in the treatment of 
immune complex-associated sensorineural deafness. J Laryngol 
Otol 1986; 100: 25-33.
155. Brostoff J, Scadding GK, Male D, Roitt IM. Introduction to 
immune responses. In: Brostoff J, Scadding GK, Male D, Roitt 
IM, 
eds. 
Clinical 
Immunology. 
London: 
Gower 
Medical 
Publishing, 1991: 1.1-1.8.
156. Harada T, Sano M, Matsunaga T. The effect of anaphylatoxin 
component on inner ear damage. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1992; 
112: 265-71.
157. Ryan AF, Gloddek B, Harris JP. Lymphocyte trafficking to the 
inner ear. Ann NY Acad Sci 1997; 830: 253-65.
158. Yoo TJ, Lee MK, Min YS et al. Epitope specificity and T-cell 
receptor usage in type II collagen induced autoimmune ear dis­
ease. Cell Immunol 1994; 157: 249-62.
159. Yoo TJ, Floyd RA, Ishibe T, Shea JJ, Bowmn C. Immunologic 
testing of certain ear disease. Am J Otol 1985; 6: 96-100.
  

Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders 
85
160. Kanzaki J, Inoue Y, O-Uchi T. Immunological findings of sero- 
logical test in steroid-responsive sensorineural hearing loss. A eta 
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1994; Suppl 514: 66-9.
161. Ikeda K, Kobayashi T, Takasaka T, Itoh Z, Suzuki H, Kusakari ], 
Takasaka T. Immunological abnormality of the serological tests 
in bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol 
Relat 1989; 51: 268-75.
162. McCabe BF, McCormick KJ. Test for autoimmune disease in 
otology. A m ] Otol 1984; 5: 447-9.
163. Hughes GB, Kinney SE, Bama BP, Calabrese LH. Practical ver­
sus theoretical management of autoimmune inner ear disease. 
Laryngoscope 1984; 94: 758-67.
164. Hughes GB, Bama BP. Autoimmune inner ear disease: fact or 
fantasy? Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1991; 46: 82-91.
165. Hughes GB, Fairchild RL, Bama BP. Laboratory diagnosis of 
immune inner ear disease. In: Mogi G, Veldman JE, Kawauchi H, 
eds. Immunobiology in Otolaryngology-Progress of a Decade. 
Amsterdam: Kluger Publications, 1994: 231-5.
166. Berger P, Hillman M, Tabak M, Vollrath M. The lymphocyte 
transformation test with type II collagen as a diagnostic tool of 
autoimmune sensorineural hearing loss. Laryngoscope 1991; 101: 
895-9.
167. Smith JL. Cogan’s syndrome. Laryngoscope 1970; 80: 121-32.
168. McDonald TJ, Vollertssen RS, Young BR. Cogan’s syndrome: 
audiovestibular involvement and prognosis in 18 patients. 
Laryngoscope 1985; 95: 650-4.
169. Schuknecht HF, Nadol JB Jr. Temporal bone pathology in a case 
of Cogan’s syndrome. Laryngoscope 1994; 104: 1135-42.
170. Peitersen E, Carlsen BH. Hearing impairment as the initial sign 
of polyarteritis nodosa. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1966; 61: 
189-95.
171. Gussen R. Polyarteritis nodosa and deafness. A human temporal 
bone study. Arch Otolaryngol 1977; 217: 263-71.
172. Wolf M, Kronenberg J, Engelberg S, Leventon G. Rapidly pro­
gressive hearing loss as a symptom of polyarteritis nodosa. Am J 
Otolaryngol 1987; 8: 105-8.
173. Cody DTR, Sone DA. Relapsing polychondritis: audiovestibular 
manifestation. Laryngoscope 1971; 81: 1208-22.
174. Damiani JM, Levine HL. Relapsing polychondritis: report of ten 
cases. Laryngoscope 1979; 89: 929-46.
175. Caldarelli DD, Rejowski JE, Corey JP. Sensorineural hearing loss 
in lupus erythematosus. Am J Otol 1986; 7: 210-13.
176. Stephens SDG, Luxon L, Hinchcliffe R. Immunological disorders 
and auditory lesions. Audiol 1982; 21: 128-48.
177. Doig JA, Whaley K, Dick WC, Nuki G, Williamson J, Buchanan 
WW. Otolaryngological aspects of Sjogren’s syndrome. BMJ 
1971; 4: 460-3.
178. MacCaffrey TV, MacDonald TJ, Facer GW, Deremee R. Otologic 
manifestation of Wegener’s granulomatosis. Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1980; 88: 586-93.
179. Okamura H, Ohtani I, Anzai T. The hearing loss in Wegener’s 
granulomatosis: relationship between hearing loss and serum 
ANCA. Auris Nasus Laeynx 1992; 19: 1-6.
180. Kane K. Deafness in sarcoidosis. J Laryngol Otol 1976; 90: 
531-7.
181. Babin RW, Liu C, Aschenbrener C. Histopathology of neurosen- 
sory deafness in sarcoidosis. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1984; 93: 
389-93.
182. Campbell SM, Montanaro A, Bardana EJ. Head and neck mani­
festation of autoimmune disease. Am J Otolaryngol 1983; 4: 
187-216.
183. Brama I, Fainaru M. Inner ear involvement in Behcet’s disease. 
Arch Otolaryngol 1980; 106: 215-17.
184. Gemignani G, Berrettini S, Bruschini P et al. Hearing and 
vestibular disturbances in Beh9et’s syndrome. Ann Otol Rhino 
Laryngol 1991; 100: 459-63.
185. Elidan J, Levi H, Cohen E, Ben Ezra D. Effect of cyclosporine A 
on the hearing loss in Behcet’s disease. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1991; 100: 464-8.
186. Igarashi Y, Watanabe Y, Aso S. A case of Behcet’s disease with 
otologic symptoms. ORL] Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec 1994; 56: 
295-8.
187. Soylu L, Aydogan B, Soylu M, Ozsahinoglu C. Hearing loss in 
Bel^et’s disease. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1995; 104: 864-7.
188. Schuknecht HF. The inner ear in autoimmune disease. In: 
McCabe BF, Veldman JE, Mogi G, eds, Immunobiology in Otology, 
Rhinology and Laryngology. Amsterdam: Kluger Publications, 1992:
95-9.
189. Abbas AK, Lichtman AH, Pober, JS. Cellular and Molecular 
Immunology, 2nd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1994:
96-114.
190. Tiwari JT, Terasaki PI. HLA and Disease Association. New York: 
Springer-Verlag, 1985.
191. Tiwari JL, Terasaki PI. The data and statistical analysis. In: HLA 
and Disease Association. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1985: 19-27.
192. Xenellis MD, Morrison AW, MacClowskey D, Festenstein H. 
HLA antigens in the pathogenesis of Meniere’s disease. ] Laryngol 
Otol 1986; 110: 21-4.
193. Bowman CA, Nelson RA. Human leukocytic antigens in autoim­
mune sensorineural hearing loss. Laryngoscope 1987; 97: 7-9.
194. Bernstein JM, Shanahan T, Yoo TJ, Ye XJ. HLA antigens and 
inner ear disease. In: McCabe BF, Veldman JE, Mogi E, eds. 
Immunobiology in Otology, Rhinology and Laryngology. Kugler 
New York: Publications, 1992: 3-11.
195. Bumm P, Muller EC, Grim-Muller U, Schlimok G. T-lymphocyte 
subpopulation and HLA-DR antigens in hearing loss of vestibu­
lar 
neuropathy, 
Meniere’s 
disease 
and 
Bell’s 
paralysis. 
Laryngorhinotologie 1991; 70: 260-6.
196. Lawley TJ, Hall RP, Fauci AS, Katz S, Hamburger MI, Frank 
MM. Defective Fc-receptor functions associated with the HLA- 
B8/DRW3 haplotype. N Engl] Med 1981; 304: 185-92.
197. Miyakawa Y, Yamada A, Kosaka K. Defective immune adherence 
(C3b) receptor on erythrocytes from patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus. Lancet 1981; 2: 493-7.
198. Roitt I. Autoimmunity and autoimmune disease. In: Roitt I, 
Brostoff J, Male D, eds. Immunology, 3rd edn. London: Mosby, 
1993: 24.1-24.12.
199. Hansen TH, Carreno BM, Sachs DH. The major histocompati­
bility complex. In: Paul WE, ed. Fundamental Immunology, 3rd 
edn. New York: Raven Press, 1993: 577-628.
  

86 
Fundamentals of audiological and vestibular medicine
200. Matsuki K, Harada T, Juji T, Kanzaku ], Koga K, Toriyama M. 
Human leukocyte antigen in childhood unilateral deafness. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1989; 115: 46-7.
201. Steuer MK, Gross M, Matthias R, Mauff G. Early onset of 
sensorineural hearing loss: association studies with major histo­
compatibility class III (complement) markers. Am J Otol 1990; 
11:326-9.
202. Jung HW, Oh SH, Koo JW et al. A variable association of HLA 
DR in Korean Meniere’s patients. ARO 2000; Abstract 920, page
265, St. Petersburg Beach, Florida.
203. Cao MY, Thonnard J, Deggouj N et al. HLA class II associated 
genetic susceptibility in idiopathic progressive sensorineural 
hearing loss. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1996; 105: 1-7.
204. Gong S, Wang J. Experimental research of autoimmune inner 
ear disease. Chung Hua Erh Pi Yen Hou Ko Tsa Chih 1995; 30: 
9-12.
205. Liu Y, Guo M, Zhao P. An experimental study on autoimmune 
sensorineural hearing loss. Chung Hua Erh Pi Yen Hou Ko Tsa 
Chih 1995; 30: 24-6.
206. Zhang ZJ, Davidson L, Eisenbarth G, Weiner HL. Suppression of 
diabetes in nonobese diabetic mice by oral administration of 
porcine insulin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991; 88: 1025-56.
207. Gloddek B, Gloddek ], Arnold W. Induction of an inner-ear- 
specific autoreactive T-cell line for the diagnostic evaluation of 
an autoimmune disease of the inner ear. In: Bernstein J, Faden 
HS, Henderson D, Ryan AF, Barbara M, Quaranta A, eds. 
Immunologic Diseases of the Inner Ear. Vol. 830. New York: New 
York Academy of Sciences, 1997: 266-76.
208. Wong ML, Young JS, Nilaver G, Morton JL, Trune DR. 
Cochlear IgG in C3H/lpr autoimmune strain mouse. Hear Res 
1992; 59: 93-100.
209. McMmenomey SO, Russel NJ, Morton JL, Trune DR. Stria vas­
cularis ultrastructural pathology in the C3H/lpr autoimmune 
strain mouse: a potential mechanism for immune related hearing 
loss. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992; 106: 288-95.
210. Kusakari C, Hozawa K, Koike S, Kyogoku M, Takasaka T. 
MRL/MP-lpr/lpr mouse as a model of immune-induced sen­
sorineural hearing loss. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1992; 101 (suppl 
157): 82-6.
211. Ruchenstein MJ, Mount RJ, Harrison RV. The MRL-lpr/lpr 
mouse: a potential model of autoimmune inner ear disease. Acta 
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1993; 113: 160-5.
212. Nariuchi H, Sone M, Tago C, Kurata T, Saito K. Mechanisms of 
hearing disturbance in an autoimmune model mouse NZB/KL 
Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1994; Suppl 514: 127-313.
213. Sone M, Nariuchi H, Saito K, Yanagita N. A substrain of NZB 
mouse as an animal model of autoimmune inner ear disease. Hear 
Res 1995; 83: 26-36.
214. Trune DR, Craven JP, Morton JI, Mitchell C. Autoimmune dis­
ease and cochlear pathology in the C3H/lpr strain mouse. Hear 
Res 1989; 38: 57-66.
215. Tago C, Yanagita N. Cochlear and renal pathology in the 
autoimmune strain mouse. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1992; 
101(Suppl 157): 87-91.
216. Hughes GB, Bama BP, Kinney SE, Calabrese LH, Koo A, Nalepa
NJ. Immune inner ear disease: 1990 report. Trans Am Otol Soc 
78: 86-91.
217. Hartung H-P, Reiners K, Toyka KV, Pollard JD. Guillain-Barre 
syndrome and CIDP. In: Hohlfeld R, ed. Immunology of 
Neuromuscular Disease. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
1994: 33-104.
218. Hamblin TJ. Plasmapheresis. In: Brostoff J, Scadding GK, Male 
D, Roitt IM, eds. Clinical Immunology. London: Gower Medical 
Publishing, 1991: 29.1-29.11.
219. Hamblin TJ, Muft GJ. Severe deafness in systemic lupus erythe- 
matosis: its immediate relief by plasma exchange. BMJ 1982; 
284: 1374.
220. Luetje CM. Theoretical and practical implication for plasma­
pheresis in autoimmune inner ear disease. Laryngoscope 1989; 99: 
1137-46.
221. Tomason AW. FK-506 enters the clinic (new). Immunol Today 
1990; 11:35-6.
222. Wekerle H, Hohlfeld R. Principles of therapeutic approaches to 
autoimmunity. In: Rose NR, Mackay IR, eds. The Autoimmune 
Disease II. San Diego: Academic Press Inc, 1992: 387-430.
223. Hohlfeld R, Toyka KV. Strategies for the modulation of neu- 
roimmunological disease at the level of autoreactive T- 
lymphocytes. J Neuroimmunol 1985; 9: 193-204.
224. Wraith DC, McDevitt HQ, Steinman L, Acha-Orbea H. T cell 
recognition as the target for immune intervention in autoim­
mune disease. Cell 1989; 57: 709-15.
225. Vitetta ES, Fulton RJ, May RD, Till M, Uhr JW. Redesigning 
nature’s poisons to create anti-tumor reagents. Science 1987; 238: 
1098-104.
226. Olsnes S, Sandvig K, Petersen OW, Van Deurs B. Immunotoxin- 
entry into cells and mechanism of action. Immunol Today 1989; 
10: 291-5.
227. Weiner HL, Mayer L. Oral tolerance. Ann NY Acad Sci 1996; 778.
228. Higgins PJ, Weiner HL. Suppression of experimental autoim­
mune encephalomyelitis by oral administration of myelin basic 
protein and its fragments. J Immunol 1998; 140: 440.
229. Bitar DM, Whitacre CC. Suppression of experimental autoim­
mune encephalomyelitis by oral administration of myelin basic 
protein. Cell Immunol 1988; 112: 364.
230. Whitacre CC, Fuller KA, Gienapp IE. Oral tolerance in experi­
mental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE): evidence for 
clonal anergy. FASEBJ 1991; 5: A1678.
231. Brod SA, Al-Sabbagh A, Sobel A, Hafter RA, Weiner HL. 
Suppression of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by 
oral administration of myelin antigens IV. Suppression of chronic 
relapsing disease in the Lewis rat and strain 13 guinea pig. Ann 
Neurol 1991; 29: 615.
232. Lider OL, Santos MB, Weiner HL. Suppression of experimental 
autoimmune encephalomyelitis by oral administration of myelin 
basic protein; II suppression of disease and in vitro immune 
response is mediated by antigen-specific CD8+ T lymphocytes. J 
Immunol 1991; 142: 748.
233. Thompson HSG, Stains NA. Gastric administration of type II 
collagen delays the onset and severity of collagen-induced arthri­
tis in rats. Clin Exp Immunol 1985; 64: 581.
  

Immunology of cochlear and vestibular disorders 
87
234. Nagler-Anderson C, Bober LA, Robinson ME, Siskind GW, 
Thorbecke GJ. Suppression of type II collagen-induced arthritis 
by intragastric administration of soluble type II collagen. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 1986; 83: 7443.
235. Zhang Z, Lee CS, Lider O, Wiener HL. Suppression of adjuvant 
arthritis in Lewis rats by oral administration of type II collagen. J 
Immunol 1990; 145 : 2489-93.
236. Friedman A, Weiner HL. Induction of anergy and/or active sup­
pression in oral tolerance is determined by frequency of feeding 
and antigen dosage. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994; 91: 6688-92.
237. Weiner HL, Mackin GA, Matsui M et al. Double-blind pilot trial 
of oral tolerization with myelin antigens in multiple sclerosis. 
Science 1993; 259: 1321-4.
238. Mackay IR, Burnet FM. Autoimmune Disease. Springfield: Charles 
C Thomas Publications, 1963.
239. Elies W, Plester D. Immunological findings in various sen­
sorineural hearing disorders. In: Veldman JE, McCabe BF, eds. 
Otoimmunology. Amsterdam: Kluger Publications, 1987: 157-61.
240. Lejeune JM, Charachon R. Value of immunobiological tests in 
Meniere’s disease and in rapidly progressive sensorineural deaf­
ness. Rev Laryngol Otol Rhinol Bord 1991; 112: 127-31.
241. Gong S. Establishment of immunofluorescence for testing serum 
antibodies against inner ear tissues and its clinical application. 
Chung Hua Erh Pi Yen Hou Ko Tsa Chih 1992; 27: 138-40.
242. Salomon P, Charachon R, Lejeune JM. Indirect immunofluores­
cence in the investigation of rapidly progressive sensorineural 
hearing loss and Meniere’s disease. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 
1993; 113:318-20.
243. Soliman AM. A subpopulation of Meniere’s patients produce 
antibodies that bind to endolymphatic sac antigens. Am J Otol 
1996; 17: 76-80.
244. Alleman AM, Domhoffer JL, Arenberg IK, Walker PD. 
Demonstration of autoantibodies to the endolymphatic sac in 
Meniere’s disease. Laryngoscope 1997; 107: 211-15.
245. Soliman AM, Autoantibodies in inner ear disease. Acta 
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1997; 117: 501-4.
246. Futaki T, Nagao Y, Kikuchi S. Immunohistochemical analysis of 
the lateral wall of the endolymphatic sac in Meniere’s patients. 
Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1988; 42: 129-34.
247. Yazawa Y, Kitahara M. Immunofluorescent study of the endolym­
phatic sac in Meniere’s disease. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) Suppl 
1989; 468: 71-6.
248. Domhoffer JL, 
Waner 
M, 
Arenberg 
IK, 
Montague 
D. 
Immunoperoxidase study of the endolymphatic sac in Meniere’s 
disease. Laryngoscope 1993; 103: 1027-34.
249. Gottschlich S, Billings PB, Keithley EM, Weisman MH, Harris 
JP. Assessment of serum antibodies in patients with rapidly pro­
gressive sensorineural hearing loss and Meniere’s disease. 
Laryngoscope 1995; 105: 1347-52.
250. Rauch SD, San Martin JE, Moscicki RA, Bloch KJ. Serum anti­
bodies against heat shock protein 70 in Meniere’s disease. Am ] 
Otol 1995; 16: 648-52.
251. Shin SO, Billings PB, Keithley EM, Harris JP. Comparison of 
anti-heat shock protein 70 (anti-hsp 70) and anti-68-kDa inner
ear protein in the sera of patients with Meniere’s disease. 
Laryngoscope 1997; 107: 222-7.
252. Atlas MD, Chai F, Boscato L. Meniere’s disease. Evidence of an 
immune process. A m ] Otol 1998; 19: 628-31.
253. Takeda T, Sudo N, Kitano H, Yoo TJ, Type II collagen induced 
autoimmune ear disease in mice. Am J Otol 1996; 17: 69-75.
254. Du X, Yoo TJ. Mouse hearing loss and pathologic changes in 
inner ear induced by tubulin. ARO Abstract 928, page 267, St. 
Petersburg Beach, Florida.
255. Williams LL, Lowery HW, Shannon BT. Evidence of persistent 
viral infection in Meniere’s disease. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 1987; 113: 397-400.
256. Fattori B, Ghilardi PL, Casani A. Immunological aspects of 
Meniere’s disease. Rev Laryngol Otol Rhinol Bord 1991; 112: 
117-19.
257. Yoshino K. Serum antibodies to type II collagen and immune 
complex in cases of Meniere’s disease. Nippon Jibiinkoka Gakkai 
Kaiho 1994; 97: 887-97.
258. Gutierrez F, Moreno PM, Sainz M. Relationship between 
immune complex and total hemolytic complement in endolym­
phatic hydrops. Laryngoscope 1994; 104: 1495-8.
259. Yazawa Y, Suzuki M. Immunological findings in bilateral 
Meniere’s disease. Otoljpn 1996; 6: 157-62.
260. Calenoff E, Zhao JC, Derlacki EL et al. Patients with Meniere’s 
disease possess IgE reacting with herpes family viruses. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995; 121: 861-4.
261. Arnold W, Niedermeyer HP. Herpes simplex virus antibodies in 
the perilymph of patients with Meniere’s disease. Arch Otolaryn­
gol Head Neck Surg 1997; 123: 53-6.
262. Hughes GB, Kinney SE, Hamid MA, Bama BP, Calabrese LH. 
Autoimmune 
vestibular 
dysfunction: 
preliminary 
report. 
Laryngoscope 1985; 95: 893-7.
263. Lejeune JM, Charachon R. New immunobiological tests in the 
investigation of Meniere’s disease and sensorineural hearing loss. 
Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1992; 11: 174-9.
264. Hughes GB, Kinney SE, Bama BP, Calabrese LH. Autoimmune 
inner ear disease. Laboratory tests and audio-vestibular treatment 
responses. In: Veldman JE, McCabe BF, eds. Otoimmunology. 
Amsterdam: Kluger Publications, 1987: 149-55.
265. Koyama S, Mitsuishi Y, Bibee K, Watanabe I, Terasaki PI. HLA 
associations with Meniere’s disease. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 
1993; 113: 575-8.
266. Herdman R, Morgan K, Holt PL, Ramsden RT. Type II collagen 
autoimmunity and Meniere’s disease. J Larygol Otol 1993; 107: 
994-8.
267. Yoo TJ, Sener O, Kwon SS et al. Presence of autoantibodies in 
the sera of Meniere’s disease. Ann Otol Rhinol Larygol 2001; 110: 
425-9.
268. McCabe BF. Autoimmune inner ear disease: Therapy. Am J Otol 
1989; 10: 196-7.
269. Conference Programme abstract: Yoo TJ. Molecular basis of 
immunity of cochlea. Presented at Autoimmunity of Cochlea 
2002 Update: Biology of Hearing and Hearing Loss in Auto­
immune Disease, 1-2 November 2002, Genoa, Italy.
  

6 The epidemiology of 
hearing and balance 
disorders
Adrian Davis, Padma Moorjani
Scope
Epidemiology is defined as ‘the study of how often diseases 
occur in different groups of people and why’. The epidemiology 
of hearing and balance disorders is important for at least three 
reasons: (1) it shows the scale of need in terms of the preva­
lence of hearing impairment imbalance, disability and handi­
cap; (2) it shows those factors that are responsible for the 
deterioration of hearing and balance; and (3) it shows how 
effective services (health and other public services) are at meet- 
ing the need. In the current healthcare system, both purchases 
and providers need to use epidemiological studies in order to pro­
vide optimal services to the current client groups, and to fore­
cast the trends in distribution in order to plan future provision.
The major aim of this chapter is to show that hearing dis­
orders constitute a major disability and handicap, and have 
been under-reported, underestimated in terms of their burden 
on society, and traditionally under-supplied with appropriate 
health services to ameliorate that burden through improving 
quality of life. This will be discussed first for the adult popula­
tion and then for children.
Introduction
Deafness is the most frequent sensory impairment in humans, 
with significant social and psychological implications. It is 
estimated that approximately 20% of those over 18 suffer 
from some form of hearing impairment,1 and about 840 chil­
dren per year are bom in the UK with a significant perma­
nent hearing impairment likely to affect their own and their
family’s quality of life. There are three major disorders that 
arise from auditory- or labyrinthine-based pathology: hearing 
impairment, tinnitus, and vestibular dysfunction. While the 
first of these has been documented by some systematic popu­
lation studies1-4 and also by investigation of the elderly in 
nursing-home or residential settings,5”8 tinnitus has been rela­
tively under-documented,9 and vestibular dysfunction rarely 
documented.10 The consequence of our lack of knowledge 
concerning the extent of those who could benefit from reha­
bilitation for their disorder is a lack of prioritization of ser­
vices for these people at a primary and secondary level of 
healthcare. Hearing impairment and tinnitus are not visible 
to society, and their effects are therefore under-recognized. 
However, the effects are there and suffered by those relatives 
and carers who try to communicate with the hearing- 
impaired or tinnitus sufferer on a regular basis. In addition to 
this chronic breakdown in communication facility, when 
there is an exacerbation of the disorders by an accompanied 
vestibular dysfunction or lack of orientation, the effects may 
indirectly manifest in a greater number of accidents requiring 
emergency treatment or surgery and hospitalization.11 The 
impact of hearing impairment in children and their families 
is also considerable and wide-ranging, and changes over time 
through its impact on the child’s development. The greatest 
impact of hearing impairment on the child is on the acquisi­
tion of language and development of communication, which 
in turn can lead to poor literacy skills.12
The data that are presented are taken from studies that the 
MRC Institute of Hearing Research has undertaken.1,2,13-16 The 
studies that are reported here have been informed by investiga­
tions done at other centres and these will be referred to.

90 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Terminology, definitions and 
methodology
The terminology and definitions used here are taken from the 
Audiologieal, Epidemiological and Genetic Definitions agreed 
by the European Union study group on the genetics of hearing 
impairment.17 There is a major conceptual distinction between 
the prevalence of hearing disorders and the incidence of hear­
ing disorders. This requires emphasis.
The prevalence of hearing impairment is the total 
number of instances of a specified degree and type of 
hearing impairment, e.g. an average air conduction 
hearing threshold in the better ear (over the frequencies 
0*5, 1, 2 and 4 kHz) that is equal to or greater than 25 
dBHL, in a given population at a specific time.
Prevalence is often used to denote prevalence rate, i.e. the 
percentage (or proportion) of the given population who have 
the defined characteristic.
Hie incidence of the defined degree of hearing impair­
ment is the number of new cases of the defined condi­
tion occurring in the given population (it is not the 
number of new cases consulting), per unit time period, 
e.g. a year. Too often, the term incidence is used when 
prevalence is meant!
A second emphasis here is the need for population studies 
of hearing disorders. A population study is the study of a whole 
collection of units from which a sample may be drawn. Usu­
ally, the population is a collection of individual people, but it 
could also be households, hearing aid clinics or hospitals. For 
instance, if we study a random sample of 1000 adults taken 
from the populations of adults aged 70-80 years, and we deter­
mine that 603 of this sample reach our criterion for hearing 
impairment (e.g. as stated above), then the prevalence (or 
prevalence rate) would be 60.3%. We would try to quantify 
the accuracy of that prevalence rate by calculating the confi­
dence interval18 for the given sample. For the sample used in 
Davis,1 the 95% confidence interval for the estimated preva­
lence rate of 60.3% was 52.9-67.3%, using a stratified random 
sample of 272 people aged 71-80. This means that in 100 
replications of the work conducted on this population, with 
the same sample size and sampling method, we would expect 
95 of the replications to have a prevalence estimate falling in 
the range 52.9-67.3%.
It is useful to distinguish between the concepts of pathol­
ogy, impairment, disability and handicap.19-21
Pathology should be considered to be an abnormality of 
structure, e.g. the middle ear, the cochlea, or the stria 
vascularis.
An impairment is a defect or abnormality of function 
of the auditory system which is normally measured by 
psychoacoustic a I or physiological function, e.g. pure tone 
hearing threshold, otoacoustical emission, or brainstem 
response threshold to clicks.
Disability is often a consequence of impairment and 
is the problem(s) that a person experiences and/or reports 
in basic tasks, e.g. difficulty communicating in a noisy 
environment, or knowing who is speaking in a group 
conversation. Handicap arises from the disadvantage 
resulting from an impairment or disability that limits or 
even prevents a person from fulfilling a ‘normal* role for 
that person, e.g. social isolation, or extra effort in 
communicating.
An indicator of handicap may be obtained by using a ques­
tionnaire to measure an individual’s quality of life.
In talking and writing about hearing disorders it is often 
useful to distinguish between two types of hearing impairment, 
sensorineural and conductive. The majority of permanent 
impairments are sensorineural, i.e. they are related to disease/ 
deformity of the cochlea or cochlear nerve. In these individu­
als, there is no ‘air-bone gap’ (over the average thresholds for 
the frequencies 0.5, 1 and 2 kHz). It is suggested that if the dif­
ference between the air conduction and the bone conduction 
average thresholds is less than 15 dB, and the average hearing 
impairment on the ear is 25dBHL or greater (over the fre­
quencies 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 kHz), then an individual can be 
presumed to have a sensorineural pathology, whereas if the 
air-bone gap is 15 dB or greater, the individual has a significant 
conductive pathology contributing to the impairment. This is a 
working definition rather than a prescriptive one, because the 
extent to which the middle ear might be involved in any 
impairment depends on a number of factors, of which the 
air-bone gap is only one. Of course, the pathology is important, 
because conductive impairments may be more amenable to sur­
gical intervention to ameliorate the pathology and reduce the 
impairment. On the other hand, sensorineural impairments of 
a mild-to-severe type are not amenable to surgical intervention, 
and the intervention of choice is rehabilitation centred around 
the use of a personal hearing aid, which aims to reduce the 
disability (and hopefully handicap) and increase the quality of 
life. Profound or total hearing impairment may be amenable to 
intervention using cochlear implants.22
In considering healthcare provision (e.g. interventions 
through which patients or their families benefit) as well as the 
concepts given above, there is a need to distinguish three fur­
ther concepts, those of need, demand for services and supply 
of services. Furthermore, we should not accept that everyone
  

The epidemiology of hearing and balance disorders 
91
HEALTHCARE PROVISIONS
■ 
Need.
Demand for services.
Supply of services.
Unil3teral>24 dB HL 
Bilateral>24 dB HL 
>34 dB HL 
>44 dBHL
Problems in noise 
Slight problem in quiet
Prolonged spontaneous 
tinnitus
Z D 15
10
10 
15 
20 
25 
%  prevalence
30
35
who demands a service actually needs it, or that all services 
that are provided actually benefit those in need!10 A pragmatic 
definition of need23 used here is the ability of groups in the 
population to benefit from intervention (usually health, social 
or educational). Thus those with a substantial conductive 
impairment may have a need for surgery to improve the mid­
dle ear’s conduction of sound, those with annoying tinnitus 
may have a need for tinnitus counselling, those with a sen­
sorineural hearing impairment may have a need for rehabilita­
tive training using a personal hearing aid, and the whole 
population may have a need to be screened around birth for 
sensorineural hearing impairment; the list could be extended 
very easily. Providers of healthcare have to enter into dialogue 
with society (usually through those who purchase health care) 
to decide the priority given to the hearing health care needs of 
the population. The major input into these priority decisions 
should be the epidemiology (i.e. distribution and determi­
nants) of hearing disorders, which will be modified by the 
national and local realities, such as the configuration of pre­
sent services and the cost-effectiveness of the different services 
provided. The rest of this chapter concentrates on the general 
epidemiological data.1,16
Prevalence of hearing disorders in 
adults
Figure 6.1 shows the broad extent of hearing impairment and 
reported hearing disability in the adult population (aged 18 and 
over) in the UK. From this, we see that almost one in three of 
UK adults has at least a mild hearing impairment in one ear, 
with one in five showing a bilateral hearing impairment. One in 
four people report that they have great difficulty hearing what 
is said in a background of noise, with 1 in 10 reporting that they 
have prolonged spontaneous tinnitus.24 At a moderate degree of 
hearing impairment, in the better ear, about 7% of the adult 
population are impaired.1 This represents a substantial number 
of people in the UK who may have a need for some associated 
services, i.e. who may benefit from the provision of hearing ser­
vices. Supplying those services is a substantial public health 
problem, serious enough to warrant considerable debate. This is 
discussed by several authors,25-27 and revolves around the crite­
ria for whether the population could benefit from intervention 
and the criteria by which any benefit is cost-effective. Obvi­
ously, hearing disability and handicap are the major targets of 
rehabilitation, both present and future. However, the extent of 
hearing impairment is the best predictor of need that can be
Figure 6.1 The prevalence of hearing impairment at different degrees of 
severity of hearing disability as shown by finding it 'very difficult' to hear what 
someone says if there is a background of noise and also by having at least a 
slight difficulty hearing in quiet. The prevalence of tinnitus that is not only 
after loud sounds and which lasts for 5min or more (PST, prolonged 
spontaneous tinnitus) is also shown.
assessed quantitatively. Both aspects will be presented in this 
chapter. Some authors26,27 think that the low threshold for pro­
vision of a hearing aid should be set at about 25 dB HL, in the 
better ear, measured as an average over the frequencies 0.5, 1, 2 
and 4 kHz. Other authors25 consider more complex schemes, 
and higher thresholds, but the differences are actually quite 
small operationally and relate mainly to the degree of impair­
ment in the better ear.
Using the lower threshold definition, the prevalence in the 
adult population (age 18 and over) of a hearing impairment in 
the better ear of 25 dB HL or greater is 20%. Taking more severe 
criteria, 12% and 7% are the prevalences for impairments of 35 
dB HL or greater and 45 dB HL or greater. The pattern of hear­
ing impairment does change with age,10 with the higher fre­
quencies being more susceptible to ageing (and noise).
Figure 6.2 shows the prevalence of hearing impairment as a 
function of age group (see Davis1 for the confidence intervals 
and a more detailed description). The data are derived from the 
National Study of Hearing in the 18-80 age group and from a 
number of studies for the over 80s.26,28,29 These do not disagree 
too much with the estimates made by Soucek and Michaels30 
and by Tolson et al.8 The estimates up to the 71-80 age group 
are reasonably accurate in terms of their relatively bias-free 
derivation. Those for the over-80s have been derived from 862 
people using a variety of testing procedures, and are thus more 
open to criticism. Gatehouse and Davis31 suggest that at least 
some of the prevalence in the elderly may be due to central 
response-based processes rather than peripheral perceptual pro­
cessing (i.e. it takes a stronger signal for an elderly person to 
give a response). For public health purposes, this makes very lit­
tle difference until differential rehabilitation is considered. In 
any case, it is unlikely that a response bias would make over 10 
dB of difference to the hearing thresholds in the over-80s.
  

92 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Figure 6.2 The prevalence (°/o) of different degrees of hearing impairment as a 
function of age in the Great Britain population.
The major effects on the prevalence of hearing impairment 
are shown in Davis.2 By far the most important was age group, 
with occupational group and occupational noise exposure 
having major effects throughout the severity range. In terms of 
gender, at mild-moderate impairments, men have a higher 
prevalence at 25dBHL (odds ratio 1.4:1). The effect of age 
group, as seen in Figure 6.2, is very large and dominates any 
other factor. Thus, almost one in five people aged 51-60 have a 
hearing impairment in the better ear, and one in five of the 
over-80s has a severe hearing impairment which will render 
speech almost inaudible without amplification. At least 80% of 
the over-80s would benefit from a hearing aid, if they could use 
one, and 40% of the population aged 71-80 would benefit like­
wise. The problem of hearing impairment in the elderly is thus 
a major issue in terms of the numbers of people involved. The 
UK National Study of Disability estimated that hearing disabil­
ity was the third most prevalent disability, and the figures from 
the National Study of Hearing show that it is in fact the most 
prevalent disability in the aged (see Davis2 for a discussion of 
this difference) and should be given a greater priority than at 
present. While there is no doubt that hearing impairment and 
disability are major chronic problems for the population at pre­
sent,1 with probably 8.759 million people in the UK with a 
hearing impairment as described above, the situation may dete­
riorate due to demographic changes in the population.10,32 Fig­
ure 6.3 shows an extract of the predictions for the number of 
people with hearing impairment in the UK, USA, developed 
countries and developing countries in 1995 and 2015.
Figure 6.3 is derived from the National Study of Hearing in 
Great Britain by convolving the age and sex distribution of dif­
ferent countries (in 5-year bands) with the prevalence of hear­
ing impairment. The increase seen in the overall prevalence is 
therefore due to the structure of the population alone and 
assumes no change in aetiology or risk factors over the time 
period. However, as most of the people who will be contribut­
ing to the statistics are already in middle age, they have had 
their most dangerous time for noxious exposure. There will
probably be a more rapid growth in those with hearing problems 
in the less developed countries as life-expectancy increases over 
the next 20 years. However, it is noticeable that the proportion 
of people who have hearing problems is greater in the more 
developed countries, where life-expectancy is already high. 
Another key factor for health/hearing services planning is that 
the expected number of hearing-impaired people in the UK will 
rise by over 20% in the next 20 years. Using the data for Great 
Britain, of 8.580 million hearing-impaired people in 1994, 
2.131 million were aged 18-60, 4-486 million were aged 61-80 
years and 1.963 million were aged over 80. At > 4 5 dBHL, 
there were 0.471 million, 1.132 million and 1.337 million, and 
at > 6 5 dBHL, there were 0.136 million, 0.294 million and 
0.469 million respectively for the 18-60, 61-80 and over-80 age 
groups.1 Thus, as the severity criterion increases, there is a 
larger proportion of the very elderly in the hearing-impaired 
group. Figure 6.4 shows the prevalence of reported hearing dis­
ability in the population1 in the 1980s. The question ‘How well 
can you hear someone talking to you when that person is sitting 
on your left/right hand side in a quiet room’ was used, with 
responses ‘No, slight, moderate and great difficulty’ and an
(a)
350 
325 
300 
« 
275 
2  £ 250 
~ |  225 
l  '£ 200 
&E 175 
150 
125 
100 
75 
50 
25 
0
crv
S p
cl E
4— . —
o  ro
. 
Q. 
£
H 25 dBHL 
H 35 dBHL
□ 45dB HL
□ 65 dBHL
UK 
USA
Country
(b)
CL 
^ £
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1995
L l
m 25 dB HL 
H 35 dBHL
□ 45 dBHL
□ 65 dBHL
Less 
More 
Less 
More
developed 
developed 
developed 
developed 
Country
Figure 6.3 Predictions for the number of people with hearing impairment as a 
function of country and severity of hearing impairment using the 1994 revision 
of the UN projected world populations in 1995 and 2015. (a) USA and UK; (b) 
Less and more developed countries.
  

The epidemiology of hearing and balance disorders 
93
option for ‘Cannot hear at all*. A response of slight difficulty 
in an ear relates to a median hearing impairment of about 
35 dBHL, moderate and worse to 50 dB HL, and great and worse 
to 75dBHL (averaged over 0.5, 1, 2 and 4kHz). Figure 6.4
(a)
(b)
o
Age group (years)
Age group (years)
Figure 6.4 Prevalence (%) of different degrees of (a) reported hearing disability, 
tinnitus and (b) hearing aid possession as a function of age in the Great Britain 
population.
shows that, at all degrees of reported hearing disability, there is 
an increase with age. Thus, at 61-70 years, about 15% report 
difficulty with the better ear, about 25% at 71-80, and 40% for 
the over-80s. Comparing the reported hearing disability with 
the measured hearing impairment, it is noticeable that far fewer 
people have a reported better-ear hearing disability compared to 
a measured hearing impairment. Furthermore, the ratio of 
reported problem to measured impairment is not constant 
across age, showing fair correspondence up to 50 years and then 
progressive discrepancies. Thus older people are far less likely to 
report a hearing disability for a given level of hearing impair­
ment. However, it could be argued that they are less likely to 
benefit from rehabilitation unless they recognize that problem.
Figure 6.4 also reports the prevalence of tinnitus that lasts 
for 5min or more and not only after loud sounds, adjusted for 
the proportion of the sample who did not complete all three 
parts of the question (this was particularly so in the elderly). It 
is noticeable that the prevalence of tinnitus increases with age 
until 60 years, when it reaches a peak of one in five people. The 
factors that influence tinnitus report are systematically explored 
in Davis et al.26 Davis and Roberts11 explore the quality of life 
implications for those with prolonged spontaneous tinnitus 
and/or a reported hearing disability. They examined the scores 
on the SF-36 and showed that both reported hearing disability 
and tinnitus affect the scores on the SF-36 in a differential way, 
with severe tinnitus giving the largest deficits, particularly in 
terms of vitality, social function and mental health. Using the 
1990s sample, the largest effect of reported hearing disability 
was concerned with the social function score (Figure 6.5).
The terms ‘hearing difficulty’ and ‘disability/handicap’ were 
obtained from the subject and situation specific hearing ques­
tionnaire devised by Gatehouse31 and the factor effect shown 
here is for a shift in 10% of the scores on this questionnaire that 
only uses items that are relevant to individual patients/hearing 
aid users. Figure 6.5 shows that the effect of a slight reported 
hearing disability is a deficit in 6 points of the social function 
score (range 0-100%), and that a moderate reported disability 
gives a deficit of 14% with about 30 points for a great disability 
(using the question in Figure 6.4). However, those who use
40 r
? 
20
-20
-40
-60 L
Age
55-69
Slight
Hearing 
difficulty %
Aid use 
some of 
the time
*
 
t
Age 70+
#
Great
Total
Moderate__
Disability 
handicap %
Factor affecting social function score
e time
*—* 
AiH
Aid use 
most of 
the time
Figure 6.5 The effect (with confidence interval) of age, hearing disability, difficulty handicap and hearing aid use on the social function score of the SF-36 using a 
general linear model to estimate the effects.
  

94 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
their hearing aids most or all of the time do get this deficit from 
the hearing disability offset by up to 12%. Those who only use 
the hearing aid some of the time do not get a significant bene­
fit. This may be for a number of reasons including the fact that 
there needs to be a reasonable amount of time to adapt to the 
input from the aid (cognitive plasticity). Also there were sig­
nificant beneficial effects of ‘using a hearing aid most or all of 
the time’ for body pain and mental health scores.
Vestibular dysfunction
Balance disorders include complaints of disequilibrium, vertigo, 
dizziness, unsteadiness, light-headedness and a wide variety of 
more unusual symptoms, such as ‘difficulty with the legs’, ‘muzzy- 
headedness’ and feeling ‘spaced out’. Moreover, dysfunction in 
almost any organ can give rise to symptoms of dysequilibrium 
because of the complex system of balance in Man, which relies 
upon vision, labyrinthine activity and proprioceptive input. 
Thus, patients with similar symptoms may present to a range of 
different medical departments. Thus, frequency and prevelance 
data for balance disorders are difficult to define and there is a 
paucity of such data in the medical literature.
Nonetheless, each year, five out of every thousand patients 
consult their general practitioner, because of symptoms that are 
classified as vertigo, and a further 10 in a thousand are seen for 
dizziness or giddiness.33 One in four patients in a community 
study of working age adults reported disabling dizziness,34 and 
by late middle age this figure begins to increase.35 By the age of 
65 years, 30 per cent of people have experienced episodes of 
dizziness36 and by 80 years, two thirds of women and one third 
of men have suffered episodes of vertigo.37 Hobson and 
Pemberton38 reported that the incidence of vertigo rises with 
advancing age, and runs roughly parallel with deafness. In 
younger age groups, few population studies are available, but 
there are reports of the frequency of various specific conditions, 
but these are open to criticism in that they usually reflect the 
referral pattern of the unit reporting the condition, rather than 
true population-based figures.
Notwithstanding the limitations, the available data may 
provide some information on the frequency of specific disorders 
across the broad spectrum of balance disorders.
m 
Vestibular neuronitis is one of the most frequent causes of 
vertigo, with an occurrence rate of 4:100,000 population in 
Japan,39 and five per cent of patients in a dedicated dizziness
. 
40
unit.
* 
Between one and two children per thousand are bom 
annually, in the UK, with a sensorineural hearing loss. It is 
now well recognized that vestibular abnormalities are more 
common than previously appreciated in congenital hear­
ing loss.41 Moreover, specific syndromes such as Usher 
syndrome,42,43 Pendred syndrome44 and the CHARGE 
syndrome have all been associated with vestibular failure.
■ 
Migraine-associated vertigo is now well recognized, and a
large carefully designed epidemiological study by Stewart 
and co-workers45 identified that nearly 18 per cent of 
females and 16 per cent of males aged between 12 and 80 
years, in the United States, met the case definition for 
migraine headache. Interestingly, it was noted that preva­
lence varied inversely with household income, so that more 
than 40% of women aged between 35 and 40 years, who 
lived in households with an annual income of less than 
$10,000 had migrainous headaches, whereas the prevalence 
was closer to 25% if the income was greater than $30,000. 
Vertigo has been reported to be present in 42 per cent of 
patients experiencing migraine headaches with aura,46 and 
in the seminal work on this subject,47 26.5 per cent of 200 
unselected migraine patients experienced vertigo, in associ­
ation with their migraine, compared with no patients in the 
tension headache group. 
m 
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo is the most common 
cause of vertigo seen in otology departments, and may be 
associated with many different labyrinthine pathologies, 
although, most commonly, it is idiopathic. Females out­
number males by a ratio of 1.6 to 1, combining all diagnostic 
categories of the condition, but the ratio rises to 2 to 1 if 
only idiopathic and miscellaneous groups are considered.48 
m 
Head injuries are a hazard of everyday life in the developed 
world, with sports and bicycle accidents in the young, 
industrial and traffic accidents during middle age, and falls 
in the elderly. The incidence of dizziness has been reported 
to be as low as 14 per cent in non-hospitalized patients,49 
but in another large series, an incidence of 25-90 per cent 
has been reported.50,51 The significance of these figures lies 
in the annual incidence of minor head injury of between 
131 and 511 per 100,000 population in civilised countries.52
The economic pressure on health resources, the economic 
impact on absenteeism from work, and the social impact of 
imbalance, 
with 
accompanying psychological 
symptoms, 
emphasize the need for further work on the epidemiology of 
vestibular disorders.
In this context, a recent UK survey (personal communica­
tion) of the prevalence of ear, nose and throat (ENT) symptoms 
was conducted in 1998 as the first strand of the Health Tech­
nology Assessment Project, entitled ‘Acceptability, Benefit & 
Costs of Early Screening for Hearing Disability’, the broad aim 
of which is to investigate screening of people aged 55-74 in 
order to predict the potential ability to benefit from a hearing 
aid. A postal questionnaire was sent to 26100 randomly 
selected households in targeted areas of England, Scotland and 
Wales. Everybody over the age of 14 was asked to give details 
of the occurrence of hearing, balance, throat and nose problems 
and the disabling effects of these problems. Questionnaires were 
returned from 34362 individuals (a response rate of 60.5%). 
Three questions were asked about the experience of vestibular 
problems: attacks of dizziness in which things seem to spin 
around you; unsteadiness, lightheadedness or feeling faint; and 
attacks of dizziness in which you seem to move.
  

The epidemiology of hearing and balance disorders 
95
Overall, 22.2% of responders reported attacks of dizziness 
in which things spun around them (and 6.9% of respon­
ders reported symptoms within the last year)(Table 6.1); 
30.2% reported unsteadiness, lightheadedness or feeling faint 
(6.7% reported experiencing symptoms in the last year) (Table 
6.2); and 14.8% of people who responded reported attacks of 
dizziness in which they seemed to move (3.3% of responders 
reported symptoms within the last year)(Table 6.3).
The prevalence of all three vestibular problems increased 
with age, and women reported more symptoms than men.
People were also asked whether they had been to their gen­
eral practitioner (GP) or had been referred to a hospital about 
any vestibular problems. Consultations for balance and dizzi­
ness increased with age, particularly for respondents aged 81 
and over visiting their GP about dizziness problems. The gen-
Table 6.1 The prevalence of self-reported dizziness as a func­
tion of age (n = 31 085), gender (n = 31 643) and occupational 
group (/? = 31 409): attacks of dizziness in which things spin
around you.
Age group 
(years)
Prevalence
Gender/
Occupational group
Prevalence
(%)
14-30
17,6
Male
16.4
31-40
19.9
Female
27.7
41-50
23.1
51-60
24.8
61-70
25.4
Non-manual
21.7
71-80
27.2
Manual
20.4
81 +
32.2
Other*
24.4
* Other = housewife/student/unemployed.
Table 6.2 The prevalence of self-reported dizziness as a func­
tion of age (n = 31 023), gender (n=3^ 570) and occupational 
group (n = 31 343): unsteadiness, lightheadedness or feeling
faint.
Age group 
(years)
Prevalence
(°/o)
Gender/
Occupational group
Prevalence
(%)
14-30
27.9
Male
22.4
31-40
31.0
Female
37.5
41-50
31.6
51-60
31.1
Non-manua!
31.3
61-70
29.6
Manual
26.0
71 “ 80
30.5
Other
32.4
81 +
39.2
eral consultation pattern for vestibular problems by reported 
hearing difficulty was an increase with worsening hearing in the 
better ear, particularly for hospital referrals. The patterns for 
reported tinnitus were similar (Table 6.6).
Prevalence of hearing impairment in 
children
This section is concerned only with permanent childhood hear­
ing impairment (PCHI) and not with fluctuating impairments 
due to otitis media with effusion (OME or glue ear; for a descrip­
tion of the epidemiology of OME see Haggard and Hughes53). A 
major study of PCHI was conducted in the Trent Region of the 
UK. This region has about 4.8 million people and a typical dis­
tribution of ethnic minorities as well as occupational groups. 
Fortnum et al16 report the prevalence of hearing impairment 
shown in Table 6.4, which presents data on the prevalence rate 
per 100000 live births for all impairments > 4 0 dBHL (i.e. 
including acquired, progressive and late-onset losses) and for 
congenital losses alone (i.e. equivalent to incidence) for four 
degrees of severity of impairment, ^ 4 0 dBHL, 40-69dBHL 
(moderate), 70-94dBHL (severe) and > 9 5 dBHL (profound). 
The confidence intervals have been calculated according to the 
logistic distribution model, because of the very low values of the 
prevalences.
The prevalence of all PCHI > 4 0 dBHL is 133 per 100000, 
and for congenital impairments only is 112 per 100000. The 
prevalence of profound impairments that are congenital is of 
the order of 1 in 4 000 births.
For congenital impairments, the incidence is equivalent to 
the prevalence. However, there are a number of children, 21 per 
100000, who have either a progressive or an acquired hearing 
impairment. By the age of about 5 years, the proportion of
Table 6.3 The prevalence of self-reported dizziness as a func­
tion of age (r?= 30 944), gender (n = 31 492) and occupational 
group (rc = 31 266): attacks of dizziness in which you seem to
move.
Age group 
(years)
Prevalence
(%)
Gender/
Occupational group
Prevalence
(%)
14-30
12.3
Male
11.1
31-40
14.7
Female
18.5
o
LO
1
16 0
51-60
15.9
Non-manual
14,0
61-70
15.9
Manual
14.4
71-80
15*6
Other
16.3
81 +
20.4
  

96 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Table 6.4 Prevalence per 100 000 live births of permanent 
hearing impairment ^4 0  dBHL, for birth cohorts from 1985 
to 1990, for all impairments, for congenital impairments only, 
for three degrees of severity of congenital impairment (mod­
erate, 4 0-69dBHL; severe, 71-95dBHL; and profound, ^9 5  
dBHL), and for congenital sensorineural impairments.
Impairment type 
and severity
All
=40dBHL
Congenital
>40dBHL
40-69 dBHL
70-94 dBHL
>95dBHL
Prevalence 
per 100000
133
112
64
23
24
95% confidence 
interval
122-146
101-123
56-73
19-28
20-30
profoundly hearing impaired who have acquired impairments, 
mostly through meningitis, is about 20%. The proportion of 
children with a progressive hearing impairment is not known 
very accurately, and may be up to 15-25% of those who have a 
PCHI at the age of 5 years;54 however, the present study finds 
only about 10% of PCHI to be progressive.
Aetiology of childhood hearing 
impairments and major risk factors
The major aspect concerning the aetiology of congenital PCHI 
is that there are a considerable number of cases with no ascribed 
aetiology (43%). The major proportion of children who do 
have an aetiology comprises the approximately 39% who have 
been given a genetic aetiology. Of those with a genetic aetiol­
ogy, the dominant genetic inheritance is only about 6%, and 
children with a stated syndrome comprise about 30%.
There were three major risk factors associated with the 
hearing impairments. The first and most important was the his­
tory of staying in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) 
(26%). The second was a family history of hearing impairment 
(after excluding those who had an NICU history) (23%), and 
the third the presence of a craniofacial abnormality noticeable 
at birth (after excluding those with an NICU or a family his­
tory) (4%). Altogether, just over 50% of those with PCHI had 
a risk factor that might be used as the basis of a targeted screen. 
Others have found a higher proportion,13’15,55 so this may be 
something that varies over districts/regions/countries.14
Service indicators for PCHI
Very few studies have looked at the overall benefit derived from 
finding children with congenital hearing impairments and
undertaking a programme of habilitation. The major focus over 
the last 20 years has been on reducing the age of identification 
and hearing aid fitting. The National Deaf Children’s Society 
(NDCS) quality standard guidelines56 apply to children with 
bilateral ^ 5 0 dBHL average hearing impairment (0.5, 1, 2 and
4 kHz) and suggest that 40% of the children with PCHI should 
be identified by 6 months of age and 80% by 12 months of age.56 
In the current study, only 14% (95% confidence interval 
8-18%) were identified by the age of 6 months and only 42% 
by the age of 12 months.
Table 6.5 shows the distribution of ages for significant 
events in the rehabilitative chain: referral, confirmation of the 
hearing impairment and age at hearing aid fitting. For overall 
severities, the age at referral was 10 months at the median, with 
30% having an age at referral of less than 8 months and 10% 
having an age at referral of 2 months. It can be seen that the 
severe and profound impairments are referred earlier and ‘diag­
nosed’ earlier than moderate impairments, where the median 
age at referral is 18 months, and age at hearing aid fitting is 43 
months. The data are reasonably encouraging, but regarding the 
higher percentiles, there are still 30% of children with hearing 
impairments who have not been referred before about 23 
months, and a similar number who are almost 4 years of age 
before they are fitted with a hearing aid. The delays between 
referral and fitting are indicative of the long time it takes for 
some children to be ‘diagnosed’. Some of these delays are 
inevitable. However, many children are kept without amplifica­
tion while a conductive impairment is ruled out, and inevitably 
this leads to considerable delays that could be reduced substan­
tially by having a hearing aid while waiting for the operation.16 
The age at referral reflects the service realities that during 
1985-90 the targeted neonatal screening services in the region 
were starting up and that the mainstay for identifying children 
with permanent childhood hearing impairment was the health 
visitor distraction test (HVDT). The performance of these tests 
is discussed elsewhere,57,58 with the yield coming from the 
HVDT being much lower than expected and the sensitivity 
being very dependent on the severity of the hearing impair­
ment.16 The more systematic use of neonatal hearing screening 
may substantially improve the age at referral, ‘diagnosis’ and fit­
ting of hearing aids to those with congenital PCHI. Children 
with other substantial risk factors, e.g. parental anxiety con­
cerning language development or meningitis, should seek a 
diagnostic appointment at the first opportunity.59
Summary and implications for 
service provision
The public health priority of hearing impairments and tinnitus 
in adults should be substantially higher than at present, because 
hearing disorders comprise the most prevalent chronic impair­
ment in the population, with over 8 million people in the 
UK (i.e. about 20%) having an impairment. The major factor
  

The epidemiology of hearing and balance disorders 
97
Table 6.5 The mean and selected percentiles of the distribution of the age (months) of referral, confirmation of hearing impair­
ment ("diagnosis') and hearing aid fitting, as a function of severity of the hearing impairment for birth cohorts between 1985 and 
1990 who have a congenital hearing impairment.16
Percentiles
Age at key points
Severity
Mean
in identification
group
10
30
Median
70
90
and rehabilitation
Age at referral
Overall
19
2
8
10
23
47
Age at 'diagnosis'
Overall
26
5
11
17
37
59
Age at aid fitting
Overall
32
9
16
27
44
63
Age at referral
40-69 dBHL
25
3
9
18
39
55
Age at referral
70-94 dBHL
13
3
7
9
12
34
Age at referral
95+ dBHL
9
1
5
8
10
19
Age at 'diagnosis’
40-69 dBHL
35
9
16
35
46
65
Age at 'diagnosis’
70-94 dBHL
17
3
8
11
19
42
Age at 'diagnosis'
9 5 + dBHL
11
3
7
10
13
21
Age at aid fitting
40-69 dBHL
42
14
29
43
51
70
Age at aid fitting
70-94 dBHL
24
8
14
18
29
50
Age at aid fitting
95+ dBHL
14
6
9
12
17
24
associated with this high prevalence is age, with noise being the 
major preventable factor, especially in young people. Because 
age is the major factor, the whole population prevalence of 
hearing impairments will increase over the next 20 years by up 
to 20%, due to the demographics of the population.23
Early identification of chronic, but progressive, impair- 
ment is not currently being achieved, even for those with sub­
stantial impairments, by the mainly reactive hearing services, 
and hence provision of services substantially lags behind need.
Furthermore, the service is not inspiring people to use their 
hearing aids as only about 40-50% are used for most of the 
time.
The implications of this global epidemiology are that in the 
UK, and almost certainly in every developed country, there is a 
substantial underprovision of services for hearing-disabled peo­
ple. This could be met by the use of a proactive screening ser­
vice.13,28,60 People with hearing disability and tinnitus have a 
significantly worse quality of life, which can be ameliorated by
Table 6.6 Consultations concerning dizziness problems as a function of age-group 
31,044), hearing ability (n=31,404), 
tinnitus report (r?=31,578) and gender (n=31,598)
Age 
Age group (years)
14-30
31-40 
41-50
51-60
61-70
71-80 
81 +
Visit GP (6,7%)
4.3
5.7 
6.1
12
8.6
10.8 
17 9
Referred to hospital (1.4%)
0.8
0.9 
1,2
18
1.8
2.1 
3.2
Reported hearing difficulty
Better ear reported hearing difficulty in quiet
None
Slight
Moderate
Great
Cannot
hear
Visit GP (6.7%)
5.8
12.8
17.4
19.5
11.5
Referred to hospital (1.4%)
1.1
3.2
4.7
6.0
6.6
Tinnitus
Tinnitus for over 5 minutes
None
Some of the time
Most of the time
Visit GP (6J°/o)
4,9
15.2
14.8
Referred to hospital (1.4%)
0.9
3.0
5.7
Gender
Male
Female
Visit GP (6.7%)
4,5
8.9
Referred to hospital (1.4%)
1.3
1.5
  

98 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
the appropriate use of rehabilitation such as the use of a hear- 
ing aid for most of the time.61
For children, the public health priority stems, on the one 
hand, from the high burden that the condition confers on a rel­
atively small number of the population (about 700-800 chil­
dren per year in England), with a prevalence of 112 per 100 000 
births for the congenital hearing impaired with average thresh­
olds of 40 dB HL or greater, and on the other, from the very high 
cost of interventions, e.g. cochlear implants and educational 
training for the profoundly impaired, who comprise 24 per 
100000 births.
We are still considerably in the dark with respect to the full 
story of the aetiology of hearing impairments in children; how­
ever three risk factors (NICU history, family history of child­
hood deafness and craniofacial abnormalities) cover over 50% 
of the population of congenitally hearing-impaired children. 
There are very few children with rubella as an aetiology (<5% ), 
and so the main scope for prevention may be in understanding 
why children with an NICU history develop hearing impair­
ment. The understanding of genetic impairments should also be 
a major priority.
In terms of service development, the wider use of neonatal 
screening to identify and habilitate hearing-impaired children 
with the least delay should be given urgent public health 
attention.
While both adult and child epidemiology support system­
atic screening of the population for congenital and then later 
acquired hearing impairment, the precondition for this screen­
ing to be successful is that an appropriately staffed and cost- 
effective service is available for those who do not pass the 
screen.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Vicki Owen for help with the statistics.
References
1. Davis AC. Hearing Impairment in Adults. London: Whurr, 1995.
2. Davis AC. The prevalence of hearing impairment and reported 
hearing disability among adults in Great Britain. Int J Epidemiol 
1989; 18: 911-17.
3. Salomon G. Hearing problems and the elderly. Dan Med Bull 
1986; 33(suppl): 1-22.
4. Brooks D. Adult Auditory Rehabilitation. London: Chapman & 
Hall, 1989.
5. Alpiner JG Audiologieal problems of the aged. Geriatrics 1963; 
18: 19-27.
6. Martin D, Peckford B. Hearing impairment in homes for the 
elderly. Social Work Service 1978; 17: 52-62.
7. Schow RL, Norbonne MA. Introduction to Aural Rehabilitation, 2nd 
edn. Pro. Ed., 1989. Texas.
8. Tolson D, McIntosh J, Swan IRC. Hearing impairment in elderly 
hospital residents. Br ] Nursing 1992; 1(14): 705-10.
9. Reich GE, Vernon JA (eds). Proceedings of the Fifth International 
Tinnitus Seminar. Portland: American Tinnitus Association, 1995.
10. Davis AC. Epidemiology. In: Stephens SDG, ed. Scott-Brown’s 
Otolaryngology 6th edn, Vol. 2, Ch. 5, Adult Audiology. Oxford: 
Butterworth-Heineman, 1997, pp. 4-38.
11. Davis AC, Roberts H. Tinnitus and health status: SF-36 profile 
and accident prevalence. In: Reich GE, Vernon JA (eds) Proceed­
ings of the Fifth International Tinnitus Seminar. Portland: American 
Tinnitus Association, 1996, pp. 257-65.
12. Bench R Bamford J. The Spoken Language of Hearing Impaired 
Children. London: Academic Press, 1979.
13. Davis AC, Wood S. The epidemiology of childhood hearing 
impairment: factors relevant to planning of services. Br J Audiol 
1992; 26(2): 77-91.
14. Davis AC, Parving A. Towards appropriate epidemiological data 
on childhood hearing disability: a comparative European study of 
birth cohorts 1982-88. J Audiol Med 1994; 3: 35-47.
15. Davis A, Wood S, Rowe S, Webb H, Healey R. Risk factors for 
hearing disorders: epidemiological evidence of change over time 
in the UK. J Am Acad Audiol 1995; 6: 365-70.
16. Fortnum HM, Davis A, Butler A, Stevens J. Health Service Implica­
tions of Changes in Aetiology and Referral Patterns of Hearing-impaired 
Children in Trent 1985-93. Report for Research and Development 
Trent RHA. MRC Institute of Hearing Research, 1996.
17. Stephens D, Davis A, Read A. Audiologieal, Epidemiological and 
Genetic Definitions. In: Martini A, Mazzoli M, Stephens D, Read A 
(eds). Definitions, Protocols & Guidelines in Genetic Hearing Impair­
ment. London: Whurr, 2001.
18. Gardner M], Altman DG. Statistics with Confidence. London: 
British Medical Journal, 1989.
19. World Health Organisation. World Health Organisation Interna­
tional Classification of Impairments, Disabilities and Handicap. WHO: 
Geneva, 1980.
20. Davis AC. Hearing disorders in the population: first phase findings 
of the MRC national study of hearing. In: Lutman ME, Haggard MP 
(eds). Hearing Science and Hearing Disorders. London: Academic 
Press, 1983.
21. Stephens D, Hetu R. Impairment, disability and handicap in audi­
ology: towards a consensus. Audiology 1991; 30: 185-200.
22. Summerfield AQ, Marshall DH. Cochlear Implantation in the UK 
1990-1994: A Report by the MRC Institute of Hearing Research of 
the Evaluation of the National Cochlear Implant Programme. London: 
HMSO, 1995.
23. Doyal L, Gough I. A Theory of Human Need. Basingstoke: 
MacMillan Education, 1991.
24- Coles RRA, Smith P, Davis AC. The relationship between noise 
induced hearing loss and tinnitus and its management. In: 
Berglund B and Lundvall T (eds). Noise as a Public Health Problem. 
Stockholm: Swedish Council for Building Research, 1990, pp. 
87-112.
25. Haggard MP, Gatehouse SG. Candidature for hearing aids: justifi­
cation for the concept and a two-part audiometric criterion. Br J 
Audiol 1993; 27: 303-18.
  

The epidemiology of hearing and balance disorders 
99
26. Davis A, Stephens D, Rayment A, Thomas K. Hearing impair- 
ments in middle age: the acceptability, benefit and cost detection 
(ABCD). B r] Audiol 1992; 26: 1-14.
27. Stephens SDG, Callaghan DE, Hogan S, Meredith R, Rayment A, 
Davis AC. Hearing disability in people 50-65: effectiveness and 
acceptability of early rehabilitative intervention. BMJ 1990; 300: 
508-11.
28. Davis AC, Thornton ARD. The impact of age on hearing impair­
ment: some epidemiological evidence. In: Jenson JH, ed. Proceed- 
ings of 14 th Danavox Symposium. Presbyacusis and Other Age-related 
Aspects. Copenhagen: Danavox Jubilee Foundation, 1990, pp.
69-89.
29. Hart FS. The Hearing of Residents in Homes for the Elderly— South 
Glamorgan (Report). University of Wales, Cardiff, 1980.
30. Soucek S, Michaels L. Hearing Loss in the Elderly. London: 
Springer-Verlag, 1987.
31. Gatehouse SG, Davis AC. Clinical pure-tone vs three-inferred 
forced choice thresholds: effects of hearing level and age. 
Audiology 1992; 31: 30-44.
32. Davis AC. Epidemiological profile of hearing impairments: the 
scale and nature of the problem with special reference to the 
elderly. A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) Suppl 1991: 476: 23-31.
33. Royal College of General Practitioners and Office of Population 
Census and Surveys [RCGP/OPCS] Morbidity Statistics from 
General Practice. London: HMSO, 1986.
34. Yardley L, Owen N. Nazareth I et al. Prevalence and presentation 
of dizziness in a general practice community sample of working 
age. BrJ Gen Pract 1998; 148: 1131-5.
35. Sixt E, Landahl S. Postural disturbances in a 75-year-old popula­
tion: I. Prevalence and functional consequences. Age Ageing 1987; 
16: 393-8.
36. Roydhouse N. Vertigo and its treatment. Drugs 1974; 7: 
297-309.
37. Sheldon JH. The Social Medicine of Old Age. London: Oxford 
University Press, 1948.
38. Hobson W and Pemberton J. The Health of the Elderly at Home. 
London: Butterworths, 1955.
39. Sekitani T, Imate Y, Noguchi T et al. Vestibular neuronitis: epi­
demiological survey by questionnaire in Japan. A eta Otolaryngol 
1993; Suppl 503: 9-12.
40. Brandt T. Vertigo. London: Springer-Verlag, 1999.
41. Huygen PLM, Verhagen WIM. 
Peripheral vestibular and 
vestibulo-cochlear dysfunction in hereditary disorders. J Vestibular
Research 1994; 4: 81-104.
42. Smith RJH et al. Localization of two genes of an Usher syndrome 
type I to chromosome 11. Genomics 1992; 14: 995-1002.
43. Smith RJH et al (1995) Clinical and genetic heterogeneity within 
the Acadian Usher population. Am J Med Genet 1995; 43: 964-9.
44. Luxon LM, Cohen M, Coffey R, Trembath R, Reardon W. Neuro- 
otological findings in Pendred Syndrome. Int] Audiology 2002 (in 
press).
45. Stewart WF, Lipton RB et al. Prevalence of migraine headache in 
the United States: relation to age, income, race, and other 
sociodemographic factors. JAMA 1992; 267: 64-9.
46. Kuritzky A, Ziegler DK, Hassanein R. Vertigo, motion sickness 
and migraine. Headache 1981; 21: 227-31.
47. Kayan A, Hood JD. Neuro-otological manifestations of migraine. 
Brain 1984; 107: 1123-42.
48. Baloh RW. Benign positional vertigo. In: RW Baloh and GM 
Halmagyi, eds. Disorders of the Vestibular System. New York/Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1996; Chapter 26.
49. Coonley-Hoganson R, Sachs N, Desai BT, Whitman S. Sequelae 
associated with head injuries in patients who were not hospitalized: 
a follow-up survey. Neurosurgery 1984; 14: 315-17.
50. Linthicum FH, Rand CW. Neuro-otological observations in 
concussion of the brain. Arch Otolaryngol 1931; 13: 785-821.
51. Muller R, Naumann B. Early ambulation and psychotherapy for 
treatment of closed head injury. Arch Neurol Psychiatry 1956; 76: 
597-607.
52. Wrightson P.Management of disability and rehabilitation services 
after mild head injury. In: HS Levin, HM Eisenberg, AL Benton, 
eds. Mild Head Injury. New York, Oxford University Press, 1989; 
245-56.
53. Haggard MP, Hughes EG. Screening Children's Hearing. London: 
HMSO, 1991.
54. Stevens J, Webb H. Targeted hearing screening in neonates—  
comparison of follow-up with neonatal results. Audiens (BACDA 
Newsletter) 4 April 1995.
55. Sutton G, Rowe S. Risk factors for childhood sensorineural hear­
ing loss in the Oxford Region. BrJ Audiol 1997; 31: 39-54.
56. National Deaf Children’s Society. Quality Standards in Paediatric 
Audiology, Vol. 1. London: NDCS, 1994.
57. Wood S, Davis AC, McCromick B. Changing performance of 
the health visitor distraction test when targeted neonatal 
screening is introduced into a health district. Br J Audiol 1997; 
31: 35-61.
58. Lutman ME, Davis AC, Fortnum HM, Wood S. Field sensitivity 
of targeted neonatal hearing screening by transient otoacoustic 
emissions. Ear Hear 1997; 18: 265-76.
59. NDCS. Quality Standards in Paediatric Audiology, Vol. 2. London: 
NDCS, 1996.
60. Cochrane AL. Effectiveness and Efficiency. Random Reflections on 
Health Services. London: The Nuffield Provincial Trust, 1971.
61. Davis A. The epidemiology of hearing in an ageing population. In: 
M & J Pathey (eds). Principles and Practice of Geriatric Medicine, 
John Wiley and Sons Ltd, 1998, pp. 1087-92.
  

Radiology of auditory 
and vestibular disease
Jan W Casselman
Introduction
In this chapter, the radiological findings in patients with sen- 
sorineural hearing loss (SNHL) and vertigo or abnormal find­
ings at vestibular testing will be discussed. In these patients, the 
imaging is focused on the inner ear, internal auditory canal 
(IAC), cerebellopontine angle (CPA) and auditory and 
vestibular nuclei and central pathways. The possibilities of 
studing these structures with conventional X-ray methods are 
limited. In the early 1980s computed tomography (CT) enabled 
us for the first time to study the bony labyrinth, IAC, CPA and 
brainstem in more detail. However, the advent of magnetic res­
onance (MR) in the early 1990s made it possible to evaluate 
the membranous labyrinth, to see small structures and lesions in 
the IAC and CPA, and to localize the auditory and vestibular 
nuclei and pathways in the brainstem. Therefore, MR became 
the method of choice to study patients with SNHL and/or 
vestibular disease.
Normal anatomy
High-resolution CT (HRCT) can demonstrate the bony 
labyrinth and IAC in detail. New software programs and the 
advent of the helical-CT technique made it possible to make 
better three-dimensional (3D) reconstructions (surface recon­
structions, volume rendering reconstructions), multiplanar 
reconstructions, and virtual images.1 The relations of the differ­
ent foramina on the surfaces of the temporal bone can be eval­
uated on these surface reconstructions, while the foramina of 
the semicircular canals, the vestibular aqueduct and the oval 
and round window in the vestibule can be seen on virtual 
images of the vestibule. Virtual images can also show the falci­
form crest, Bill’s bar and the foramina for the four nerve 
branches near the fundus of the IAC (Figure 7.1).
The ability of MR imaging to define soft-tissue structures 
and fluid-containing structures is well known. However, the 
advent of new gradient-echo T2-weighted sequences led to the 
imaging of many structures that were previously not visible.2-5
Figure 7.1 Virtual imaging of the internal auditory canal (IAC). Axial CT image 
through the IAC (a) and virtual image (b) made by using a series of axial CT 
images, (a) The point in the IAC corresponds with the site where the viewer is 
situated. The white line shows the direction in which the viewer is looking, (b) 
The falciform crest (large black arrows) and Bill's bar (long white arrow) can be 
recognized on this image. At the fundus, the foramen for the facial nerve (small 
white arrows), cochlear nerve (long black arrows), inferior vestibular (small black 
arrows) and superior vestibular nerve (arrowheads) can be distinguished. A, 
anterior, P, posterior.

102 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
With this sequence, the cochlear branch, inferior vestibu­
lar branch and superior vestibular branch of the vestibulo­
cochlear nerve and the facial nerve can be distinguished from 
one another in the IAC, and even the posterior ampullar nerve 
can sometimes be seen (Figure 7.2). The scala tympani and 
vestibuli can be separated inside the different turns of the 
cochlea, the utricular nerve can be seen in the vestibule, and 
the vascular loop (often the anterior inferior cerebellar artery 
(AICA)) can be followed in the CPA and/or IAC. The semi­
circular ducts and their ampullae, and the fluid in the endolym­
phatic sac and duct, can all be seen on these images.
The auditory and vestibular nuclei cannot be visualized but 
their location can be deduced when the adjacent myelinated 
structures are demonstrated.6 This is best achieved when selec­
tive T2-weighted spin-echo images of the brainstem are made 
(Figure 7.3).
The same sequence is used to study the auditory and 
vestibular pathways, and, in particular, the medial longitudinal 
fasciculus (MLF) can easily be seen on these images. Finally, the 
auditory cortex can be evaluated on coronal thin T2-weighted 
images through the temporal lobes.
MR technique
Several sequences are needed to exclude all possible disease in 
patients with SNHL and/or vestibular disorders (see Table 7.1 
for the parameters of these sequences).
T2-weighted brain study
A  routine axial T2-weighted brain study is ‘mandatory’ in all 
patients with SNHL, vertigo and tinnitus. It is not always easy 
for the clinicians to distinguish a central cause from a periph­
eral cause of SNHL or vertigo. Therefore, central pathology, 
such as multiple sclerosis or infarctions, must always be 
excluded.
Unenhanced T1-weighted images
These images are needed to detect spontaneous hyperintensities 
inside the membranous labyrinth, IAC or CPA. These hyperin­
tensities can be seen in cases of tumour (schwannomas), fat 
(lipoma), blood (trauma, cholesterol granuloma, vascular mal­
formation) or fluid with a high protein concentration.7 Slice
P
Figure 7.2 Normal anatomy of the cerebellopontine angle (CPA), internal auditory canal (IAC) and membranous labyrinth. Axial 3DF-CISS (three-dimensional 
Fourier transformation constructive interference in steady state) image through the upper (a) and lower part (b) of the IAC, and parasagittal reconstructions through 
the CPA (c), porus (d) and deep part of the IAC (e).
(a) The facial nerve (large black arrow) can be followed from the brainstem to the fundus of the IAC. The vestibulocochlear nerve (small black arrow) can be seen 
parallel to the facial nerve and becomes the superior vestibular branch of the vestibulocochlear nerve (long black arrow) in the IAC. Scala vestibuli and scala media 
of the cochlea (white arrow), scala tympani (arrowhead). ★, ampulla of the lateral semicircular duct.
(b) The nerves are bifurcating in the lower part of the IAC. The cochlear branch of the vestibulocochlear nerve is seen anteriorly (small white arrow), and the inferior 
vestibular branch is seen posteriorly (arrowheads). Main trunk of the vestibulocochlear nerve (black arrow), cochlea (long white arrows). V, vestibule.
(c) Parasagittal reconstruction through the CPA along line 1. The vestibulocochlear nerve (small black arrow) and facial nerve (large black arrow) can be seen in the 
CPA. At this site, the vestibulocochlear nerve is always 1.5-2 times larger than the facial nerve.
(d) Parasagittal reconstruction through the porus of the IAC along line 2. The facial nerve can be seen high and anteriorly in the IAC (large black arrow). The 
vestibulocochlear nerve has divided in a cochlear branch (white arrow) and common vestibular nerve (open arrow).
(e) Parasagittal reconstruction through the deep part of the IAC along line 3. The facial nerve is seen high and anterior in the IAC (large black arrow). The three 
branches of the vestibulocochlear nerve can now be seen separately: the cochlear branch (white arrow), the inferior vestibular nerve (arrowhead), the superior 
vestibular nerve (long black arrow). P, posterior fossa.
  

Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
103
Figure 7.3 Cochlear nucleus. Axial T2-weighted spin-echo image with long 
repetition time through the upper medulla. The myelinated structures, like the 
corticospinal tracts (large black arrows), medial lemniscus (arrowheads), and 
medial longitudinal fasciculus (long black arrows), are used as reference 
structures. The cochlear nuclei (small black arrows) are situated lateral to the 
medial longitudinal fasciculus at this level.
thickness should never exceed 3 mm, and 2-mm-thin slices are 
state of the art. The use of 1-mm slices can add information, 
and slices of this thickness are routinely used in our institution 
in the follow-up of acoustic schwannomas (volume measure­
ments) and to evaluate all segments of the facial nerve. For this 
purpose, we use a 3DFT-MPRAGE sequence.
Gadolinium-enhanced Tl-weighted images
Several 
studies 
have 
shown 
that 
gadolinium-enhanced 
T1-weighted images are the most sensitive images to detect 
pathology in the membranous labyrinth, IAC and CPA. There­
fore, the use of a Gd-enhanced T1-weighted sequence is 
mandatory.8
T1-weighted images with fat saturation
This sequence is used in patients who have undergone a 
translabyrinthine or retrosigmoid resection of an acoustic 
schwannoma. On these images, tumour recurrence or remnants 
can be distinguished from the fat, used to close the surgical 
access route. This sequence is also valuable in the differentia­
tion between subtle enhancement along the walls of the IAC 
and fatty marrow inside the walls of the IAC.
T2-weighted gradient-echo or fast spin-echo 
imaging
Gradient-echo or fast spin-echo images are required to evaluate 
the very small structures and to detect certain pathologies in 
the CPA, IAC and membranous labyrinth. Good gradient-echo 
images must be very thin and must provide high contrast 
between the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), intralabyrinthine fluid,
nerves, and bone. This sequence is mainly used to check the 
three branches of the vestibulocochlear nerve and the facial 
nerve in the IAC, to check if the membranous labyrinth is nor­
mal and to exclude loss of fluid inside the membranous 
labyrinth (due to fibrosis or tumour). These images must be very 
thin and have a very high in-plane resolution (Table 7.1).2-5’9
Vascular ‘time-of-flight* sequence
This sequence can be used to study vascular loops, vascular 
malformations or vascular tumours in and around the tempo­
ral bone, and is mandatory in patients presenting with pul­
satile tinnitus. On these sequences, the vessels have high 
signal intensity, whereas the nerves remain low in signal inten­
sity. They are used prior to (showing only the arteries) and 
after (showing arteries and veins) the intravenous administra­
tion of Gd.10
T2-weighted imaging of brainstem and 
auditory cortex
In patients with SNHL and/or vertigo, the cochlear and 
vestibular nuclei, trapezoid body, lateral lemniscus, inferior col- 
liculus, MLF etc. must be checked. A  heavily T2-weighted 
sequence with high resolution and thin slices is used for this 
purpose. The myelinated structures are easily seen on these 
images, and the location of the nuclei and structures belonging 
to the vestibular and auditory pathways can be presumed once 
the positions of the adjacent myelinated structures are seen. In 
special cases, very small structures must be evaluated in detail 
(e.g. MLF), and then an even longer, very sensitive, T2- 
weighted sequence is used.
Figure 7.4 shows which sequences should be used in cases of 
SNHL, vertigo and tinnitus. The most important clinical symp­
toms, SNHL, vertigo or tinnitus, will influence the choice of 
the sequences. Moreover, different sequences will be used for a 
central SNHL or vertigo than for a peripheral SNHL or vertigo. 
It is, however, an illusion to think that peripheral and central 
SNHL or vertigo can always be distinguished from one another 
in an easy way.
Lesions involving the membranous 
and bony labyrinth
Similar lesions can involve the anterior (cochlea) and posterior 
(vestibule, semicircular canals) labyrinth and can therefore 
cause SNHL and/or vertigo.11 The possibilities of visualizing 
these lesions on CT and MR are discussed here.
Labyrinthitis
Labyrinthitis accounts for 50% of the labyrinthine pathology 
found in patients presenting with vertigo, and for more than
  

Table 7.1 
Sequence parameters
104 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
1/1
V"l
m
ps.
’'fr-
LO
*—
CM
*—
O
u rt
E
E
E
E
<
■5
LO
CO
r-*
CO
E
o
c
E
r--
s= &
I  e
03 CTl
E -a
o £
^
 CD
£ Q_
CT3 aj
0
*3-
t—
CM
CM
,'sf-
1^ -
LO
cr>
CD
CO
CD
CD
O
O
0
O
O
O
X
X
X
X
X
X
cn
^r
CD
0 0
T—
CJ)
O
CD
p
0
O
O
*—
=3 
CD 
O  
NJ 
U_ +5
00 CT
1/1 
£  
LO E
CJ - e
il 
CO o
ij" "5^
E _aj
CD
§ s
«  -2 
S’ 00
n£I>  >
p  p
Uu Uh
s
Cu £
O 3
3Sc
.Si £
-C d
H —-
oro
CM
5 £ 
i -  
-  
c/i a.
COI
o
CM 
«—
CLaj
CD
00
00
lo
CT)
CDI
O
CO
CM
E
E
CM —
CM CL
^  E #
II « &
1 -  o 
■S u !=
on O
LO
I^S.
o
E
E
to
cn
IIjp
CDI
OCO
o
o
oro
CM
to
co
CD
CM
CO
CO
LO
LO
LO
10
LO
CM
CN
CM
LO
CM
CN
X
X
X
X
X
X
0
CM
CM
0
r-v.
00
CO
CD
CD
CO
LO
CN
"'tf'
0
O
O
0
O
O
O
CO
o
E ^
-4= Q
aj CD 
- <! 
LU cc 
•—  Cl.
. o
uj 'Zn 
to on
. _ <u
> <D 
■g & 
<4- >~
° 'S
CD
]o <u 
aj to 
^  _c
1 ^  
CD CD 
C C
+3 ”cn
CJ CT3 
-  . i
p  .ro
cc To 
^  E
o
 
c n
LO
cj 
o
£= LL.
? Q
UJ
O
CM
CD
to
CO
oCO
o
00
<y t
E aJ"
< s
oc 00
P5I
o
CD
,s f
LO
CO
ooart
ooo■^1"
o
cc
<D
<cc
o_
£O
CO
uo
!£?
oIizoCO
-I fc
CM
*— <u
£ =
— <u
S a-
1/)
e  8 
1
5 
y
. -
a .  q_j
on 3n
§
<u
cn 
c:
e’ 
cd
03 
CJ 
03
a. =» . i  
lZ on O 
- c r
<
 
O  
CJ
  

Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
105
Peripheral SNHL/vertigo
1) Axial unenhanced T7W images
2) Thin T2W gradient-echo images
3) Axial Gd-enhanced T1W images
4) Coronal Gd-enhanced T1W images
Always start with a T2-weighted brain study
Central SNHlVvertigo
1) Axial T2W brainstem images
2) Thin T2W gradient-echo images
3) Axial Gd-enhanced T1W images
4) Gd-enhanced T1W brain study
5) Coronal T2 images of auditory 
cortex (only in case of SNHL)
1) Axial unenhanced T1W images
2) Thin T2W gradient-echo images
3) Axial Gd-enhanced T1W images
4) Unenhanced and Gd-enhanced 
high-resolution MRA
Figure 7.4 Sequences to be used in SNHL, vertigo and tinnitus. Sequences in italics can be omitted to save time, while other sequences are necessary. Gd, 
gadolinium; MRA, magnetic resonance angiography; SNHL, sensorineural hearing loss; T1W, T1-weighted, T2W, T2-weighted.
50% of the pathology found in patients presenting with SNHL. 
Several types of labyrinthitis can be distinguished (Tables
7.2-7.4).
Acute labyrinthitis
Acute labyrinthitis can only be recognized on MR. It is char­
acterized by an intralabyrinthine enhancement following intra­
venous Gd injection. 
In cases of acute labyrinthitis, the 
‘blood-labyrinth’ barrier is ruptured and Gd leaks from the ves­
sels into the intralabyrinthine fluid. Most often both the ante­
rior and posterior labyrinth enhance, and the edges of the 
enhancement are not sharp (Figure 7.5). It is obvious that this 
pathology is best seen on the Gd-enhanced T1-weighted 
images. However, T2-weighted gradient-echo images (3DFT- 
CISS) are needed to exclude enhancing tumoral pathology
inside the labyrinth. In cases of labyrinthitis, the intra­
labyrinthine fluid is mixed with Gd and can still be seen as 
high-signal fluid on the gradient-echo images. However, when 
a tumour is present inside the labyrinth, the tumour will replace 
the intralabyrinthine fluid, and the high signal intensity of the 
fluid will disappear on the gradient-echo image. Therefore, an 
additional T2-weighted gradient-echo sequence is needed to 
distinguish these two entities when an enhancement is seen in 
the membranous labyrinth. Unfortunately, the labyrinthine 
enhancement is not always present in cases of labyrinthitis. 
Probably there is an enhancement threshold, explaining why in 
cases of moderate labyrinthitis, no enhancement is visible. 
Sometimes the labyrinthitis can be haemorrhagic, and then a 
spontaneous hyperintensity can be seen inside the membranous 
labyrinth on the unenhanced T1-weighted images.
Table 7.2 Labyrinthitis
Acute labyrinthitis
Chronic labyrinthitis 
Causes
Intralabyrinthine enhancement = >  seen on Gd-enhanced T1W images 
Intralabyrinthine haemorrhage = >  seen on unenhanced 11W images
Fibrotic obliteration of the membranous labyrinth = >  seen on gradient-echo T2W images 
Calcification or ossification of the membranous labyrinth = >  best seen on CT
Viral
Bacterial
Autoimmune
Herpes
Haemophilus influenzae 
Mumps
Rubella (German measles)
Pneumococcus
Meningococcus
Cogan's syndrome 
Sarcoidosis 
Polychondritis 
Wegener’s disease 
Lupus erythematosus
  

106 
Fundamentals nf audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Table 7.3 Causes of intralabyrinthine enhancement in order 
of frequency (results of a study performed by the European 
Society of Head and Neck Radiology*-! 14 cases)
Frequency
fib)
47.4 
212 
6.1
4.4
3.5
3.5
7,9
Pathology
Labyrinthitis (acute, chronic, autoimmune) 
Intralabyrinthine schwannomas 
Postoperative fibrosis 
Otosclerosis
Tumours invading the membranous labyrinth 
Meningioma 
Glomus jugulare 
Cholesteatoma
Ductal carcinoma of parotid gland
Metastases
Others
Sarcoidosis
Pachymeningitis
Psoriasis
Wegener
Gamma knife treatment 
Alport syndrome 
Undefined mass
Casselman JW, Marsot-Dupuch K, Hermans R, Gayet Delacroix M, Manfre L, 
Krikke AD, Kosling S, Etorre GC, Appel B, Phelps PD, Majoie CB. Presented at 
International Congress o f Head and Neck Radiology, Strasbourg, France, 
October 15-18, 1997.
Viral labyrinthitis
This can only be recognized in the acute phase, when intra­
labyrinthine enhancement is seen. Herpes, Haemophilus 
influenzae infections and rubella are the most frequent causes. 
Most frequently, the enhancement is rather weak and does 
not persist for a very long time. However, as mentioned 
above, this enhancement can be absent in less severe cases. 
Normally, no inflammatory tissue or fibrosis is present in the 
labyrinth in cases of viral labyrinthitis; this explains why the 
intralabyrinthine fluid remains visible on the T2-weighted 
gradient-echo images.
Bacterial labyrinthitis (e.g. Pneumococcus,
Meningococcus)
A bacterial infection can reach the labyrinth through a fistula 
between the middle and inner ear (e.g. fistula caused by a 
cholesteatoma, malformation of a window, post-osteitis) or 
along the meninges in the cochlear aqueduct into the perilym­
phatic space. In acute bacterial labyrinthitis, enhancement is 
again seen inside the membranous labyrinth. The enhancement
Figure 7.5 Acute viral labyrinthitis in a patient presenting with sudden hearing 
loss and vertigo. Axial Gd-enhanced T1-weighted spin-echo image through the 
left inner ear. Enhancement can be seen in the cochlea (small white arrows) and 
in the vestibule (long white arrow). The edges of the enhancing area are not 
sharp. Note normal common crus (arrowheads) and neurovascular bundle in the 
IAC (black arrows). The gradient-echo T2 images (3DFT-CISS) images showed 
normal fluid inside the membranous labyrinth (not shown).
is strong and can persist for a very long time (several months to 
more than a year). However, inflammatory tissue and fibrous tis­
sue are often formed very quickly and replace the normal intra­
labyrinthine fluid. This can be recognized as regions with 
decreased signal intensity on the T2-weighted gradient-echo 
images. This is the first phase of chronic labyrinthitis, and in 
this phase the Gd enhancement is subtle or is no longer present. 
In a later stage, the inflammatory tissue or fibrous tissue can 
eventually calcify or ossify (labyrinthitis ossificans).13 It is not 
possible to distinguish fibrous and calcified obliterations on 
gradient-echo MR only. An additional CT is needed to distin­
guish fibrous (obliteration on MR, normal CT) and calcified 
(obliteration on MR, intralabyrinthine calcifications on CT) 
obliterations. The detection of calcifications and/or fibrous 
obliteration inside the membranous labyrinth is, of course, 
essential in the preoperative assessment of cochlear implant 
candidates. As mentioned above, only a combined CT-M R 
evaluation provides the surgeon with all the necessary informa­
tion. Moreover, unlike CT, MR is often capable of showing 
whether a single scala is still open and can be used for cochlear 
implantation (Figure 7.6).
Autoimmune labyrinthitis
Pathology inside the membranous labyrinth was described in five 
patients with Cogan’s syndrome.14 They all had vertigo and 
SNHL. These patients also presented with nonsyphilitic inter­
stitial keratitis. The aetiology is still debated but ischaemia and 
vasculitis are mentioned as possible causes. In these patients, 
new bone formation and/or calcifications can be found inside the 
membranous labyrinth (best seen on CT). However, acidophilic 
coagulum, cellular debris, connective tissue and hypertrophy of 
the stria vascularis are more frequent and replace the normal 
intralabyrinthine fluid (only visible on T2-weighted gradient-
  

Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
107
Table 7,4 Preferred imaging techniques-
Pathology 
Acute labyrinthitis
Chronic labyrinthitis 
Congenital malformations
Postoperative obliteration
Intralabyrinthine schwannomas 
Tumours growing in labyrinth
Bony labyrinth lesions 
Trauma of labyrinth
membranous and bony labyrinth
Imaging technique
Intralabyrinthine enhancement = >  Gd-enhanced Tl images 
Intralabyrinthine blood = >  unenhanced Tl images
Labyrinthitis ossificans = >  CT
Fibrous obliteration = >  gradient-echo T2 images
Note: cochlear implant candidates: CT and gradient-echo 12 images
CT first choice
T2-weighted gradient-echo images add information in selective cases and when 
presence of normal cochlear nerve must be checked
T2-weighted gradient-echo images (fibrosis) and unenhanced (blood) and 
Gd-enhanced (recent fibrosis) T1-weighted images
Gd-enhanced Tl-weighted images and T2-weighted gradient-echo images
Destruction of bony labyrinth = >  CT
Involvement of membranous labyrinth = >  gradient-echo T2 images and 
Gd-enhanced T1-weighted images 
Characterization of lesions = >  spin-echo Tl, Gd T1 and T2 images
CT
First CT to exclude fracture
MR when clinical findings cannot be explained by CT: unenhanced Tl images 
(blood) and gradient-echo T2 images (obliterations by clot or fibrosis)
Figure 7.6 Labyrinthitis ossificans in a cochlear implant candidate. Axial CT 
(a) and 3DFT-CISS image (b) through the right inner ear.
(a) The posterior part of the basal turn of the cochlea is calcified (large black arrows). Note round window (long black arrow).
(b) MR shows loss of the high-signal-intensity fluid in the posterior part of the scala tympani (long white arrows). Only MR showed clearly that the scala 
vestibula/scala media compartment was not involved (arrowheads) and could still be used for cochlear implantation. Note normal fluid in the ampulla of the 
posterior semicircular duct (black arrow) and anterior part of the scala tympani (white arrow). F, floccule.
echo images). Moreover, in the acute phase, enhancement on 
the contrast-enhanced Tl-weighted images could be seen in one 
of the patients, probably representing leakage through the 
abnormal labyrinthine membrane (vasculitis affecting the stria 
vascularis). Enhancement inside the membranous labyrinth has 
also been noticed in relapsing polychondritis, and similar find­
ings have been seen in patients with BBS disease, Wegener’s dis­
ease and lupus erythematosus.
Congeni tal maIform ations
Congenital malformations of the cochlea and vestibular system 
are frequently found in patients with SNHL and vertigo, and 
accounted for 25% of the labyrinthine pathology found in a 
series of patients presenting with vertigo. A congenital mal­
formation will only be found on CT and/or MR in 20% of 
the patients presenting with congenital hearing loss. These
  

108 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
malformations can be detected on CT, but patients presenting 
with SNHL and/or vertigo are today best first examined on MR. 
Therefore, the MR technique must include the thin T2- 
weighted gradient-echo images (3DFT-CISS), as this pathology 
can be overlooked on the other MR sequences.15
Large vestibular aqueduct/duct-sac
The most frequent congenital malformation is a large vestibu­
lar aqueduct (CT) or large vestibular duct and sac (MR). The 
patients present with SNHL, often triggered by minor traumata, 
and vertigo and loss of equilibrium. In one-third of these 
patients both SNHL and vertigo are present. The vestibular 
aqueduct or sac is considered to be large when its diameter is 
larger than 1.5 mm or when it is greater than the diameter of 
the posterior semicircular canal or duct.16,17 This enlargement 
occurs bilaterally in more than 50% of the cases. A large 
vestibular aqueduct is often found in patients with a ‘gusher’ 
ear. An enlargement of the scala vestibuli/scala media in com­
parison with the scala tympani can also be detected on MR in 
some of these patients (Figure 7.7). This probably indicates that 
the hydrops of the scala vestibuli/scala tympani compartment 
already existed during embryologyical development when the 
bony structures still could be deformed.18
Malformations of the semicircular canals (ducts)
Semicircular canals or ducts with an abnormal shape, or 
increased or decreased diameter, or which are partially absent, 
can be detected on CT and on T2-weighted gradient-echo 
images. The lateral semicircular canal or duct is most fre­
quently involved. This is explained by the fact that this is the 
last structure formed during embryology. These patients often 
have abnormal findings at vestibular testing. The most frequent
Figure 7.7 Large vestibular aqueduct in a patient with SNHL Axial CT image 
(a) and 3DFT-CISS image (b) through the right inner ear.
(a) The enlarged vestibular aqueduct can be seen (large black arrows) and is 
clearly larger in diameter than the posterior semicircular canal (arrowheads).
(b) The enlarged endolymphatic sac (small white arrows) can be seen, and its 
diameter is wider than the diameter of the posterior semicircular duct 
(arrowhead). Note the enlargement of the scala vestibuli/scala media 
compartment (black arrow), which is much larger than the scala tympani 
compartment (long white arrow). In normal circumstances, both compartments 
have the same size (see also Figure 7.2). V, vestibule.
malformation is, however, a saccular semicircular canal conflu­
ent with an enlarged vestibule. The term ‘LCVD’ (lateral semi­
circular canal-vestibule dysplasia) is used when this occurs as a 
sole radiographically detectable anomaly.19 Aplasia of all semi­
circular canals is nearly always associated with a ‘CHARGE’ 
(Coloboma, Heart disease, Atresia of choanae, Retarded 
mental development, Genital hypoplasia, Ear abnormalities- 
deafness) association.
Malformations of the cochlea
These malformations are often associated with severe congen­
ital SNHL. Aplasia of the complete temporal bone (Michel’s 
syndrome— aplasia of the bony and membranous labyrinth and 
IAC), aplasia of the cochlea, common cavity formation 
(cochlea and vestibule form one cavity), dysplasia (severe mal­
formation of the cochlea) and hypoplasia of the cochlea 
(cochlea is small, number of turns can be reduced) and less 
severe malformations (Mondini malformation) can all be 
detected on CT and MR.20 Jackler et al demonstrated that the 
severity of these cochlear malformations corresponded with 
the time when the embryological development was inter­
rupted.19 However, sometimes only subtle signs can be seen on 
MR. For instance, the inter- and intrascalar defects inside the 
cochlea, described by Mondini, can now be recognized in vivo 
on high-resolution MR and support the diagnosis of a Mondini 
malformation (Figure 7.8).
Gusher ear
Abnormal connections can exist between the subarachnoid 
spaces and the perilymphatic space in patients with congenital 
inner ear malformations. These patients can present with recur­
rent meningitis, progressive fluctuating hearing loss, tinnitus
Figure 7.8 Mondini malformation. Axial CT (a) and 3DFT-CISS image (b) 
through the left inner ear.
(a) The different turns of the cochlea can still be seen (arrowheads) but the 
modiolus and bony plate between the cochlea and internal auditory canal are 
absent (white arrow). V, vestibule.
(b) Normal fluid can be seen in the basal and second turn of the cochlea (white 
arrowheads). However, the separation between the two turns is incomplete 
(black arrowheads), and only a part of the bony wall (black arrow) can be 
recognized. V, vestibule.
  

Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
109
and/or vertigo. The pressure of the CSF is transmitted to the 
cochlea and causes a perilymphatic hydrops. When these 
patients are operated on (e.g. stapedectomy), the intra­
labyrinthine fluid gushes out of the cochlea and results in deaf­
ness.21 Therefore, the radiologist must warn the surgeon if he 
detects signs indicating the presence of a ‘Gusher ear* (Figure 
7.9). The most important imaging signs are:
m 
absence of bone structure between the cochlea and fundus 
of the IAC
« 
enlargement of the labyrinthine segment of the facial nerve 
canal
m 
convex angle anteriorly between the labyrinthine and tym­
panic segment of the facial nerve canal.
<* 
large vestibular aqueduct/duct and sac
■ 
cochlear dysplasia.
Miscellaneous
Abnormalities of the oval window, round window, facial nerve 
canal and carotid artery and its canal can be detected on CT. 
Absent, closed or malformed oval and/or round windows can be 
the cause of the hearing loss.
Postoperative labyrinth obliteration
The intralabyrinthine fluid can be replaced by fibrous tissue 
after an intervention. When a translabyrinthine resection of a
Figure 7.9 Gusher ear. Axial CT and 3DFT-CISS images at the level of the right facial nerve (a, b) and at the level of the right cochlea (c, d).
(a) The angle between the labyrinthine and tympanic portion of the facial nerve canal has an anterior convexity (small black arrows). The vestibular aqueduct is 
enlarged (large black arrows). These are two findings which are frequently seen in patients with a 'gusher ear'. Note that the ossicles are fixed to the lateral wall of 
the tympanic cavity (long black arrow).
(b) Fluid (small white arrows) can be seen between the facial nerve (long white arrow) and the walls of the labyrinthine segment of the facial nerve canal. In normal 
circumstances, fluid can never be seen in this segment of the facial nerve canal. Note IAC (arrowheads).
(c) The cochlea is dysplastic (large black arrow) and there is no bony separation (long black arrows) between the cochlea and the IAC. Note abnormal position of the 
mastoid segment of the facial nerve canal in the middle ear cavity (white arrow), and IAC (arrowheads).
(d) The absence of the bony wall between the dysplastic cochlea and IAC can again be seen (long white arrows) and several branches of the vestibulocochlear nerve 
(black arrowheads) can be followed in the dysplastic cochlea. Note facial nerve (small black arrow), common trunk of the vestibulocochlear nerve (large black arrow), 
large endolymphatic duct (small white arrow), and posterior semicircular duct (white arrowhead).
  

110 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
schwannoma is performed, the remaining parts of the membra­
nous labyrinth which have not been destroyed can lose their 
fluid and become obliterated. These obliterations also occur 
when surgery is performed in the vicinity of the membranous 
labyrinth (Figure 7.10). This can, for instance, be seen in the 
cochlea after surgery in the region of the geniculate ganglion of 
the facial nerve. On MR a spontaneous hyperintensity on the 
unenhanced Tl-weighted images can sometimes be seen in 
the membranous labyrinth, representing blood. Later on the 
hyper intensity will disappear and fibrous tissue or fibrosis will 
replace the intralabyrinthine fluid, only visible on T2-weighted 
gradient-echo images. This will, of course, cause SNHL or ver­
tigo/abnormal findings at vestibular testing when the cochlear 
or vestibular structures are respectively involved. Even an acute 
labyrinthitis can be caused by surgery.
Intralabyrinthine schwannomas
Nearly all intralabyrinthine tumours are schwannomas. They 
can only be visualized on MR, are slightly hyperintense com­
pared to normal CSF or intralabyrinthine fluid on the unen­
hanced Tl-weighted images, and enhance strongly after 
intravenous Gd administration.22 Schwannomas are the second 
most frequent cause of an intralabyrinthine enhancement. (The 
edges of these enhancements are sharp, and most often the 
schwannoma only occupies one compartment of the labyrinth, 
the cochlea, or the vestibule/semicircular canals.) Schwanno­
mas can be distinguished from acute labyrinthitis on thin 
T2-weighted gradient-echo (3DFT-CISS) images. In cases
Figure 7.10 Postoperative obliteration of the membranous labyrinth. Patient 
with hearing loss on the left side and abnormal findings at vestibular testing. 
Axial 3DFT-CISS images through the normal right (a) and obliterated left (b) 
inner ear.
(a) Normal high-signal-intensity fluid can be seen in the cochlea (long white 
arrows), vestibule (small white arrows) and posterior semicircular canal 
(arrowhead).
(b) The normal high signal intensity of fluid is replaced by low-signal-intensity 
fibrosis in the left cochlea (long white arrows), and vestibule (small white arrows), 
and the signal nearly completely disappears in the posterior semicircular duct 
(arrowhead). Note postoperative changes in the CPA (large black arrow).
of schwannoma the high-signal-intensity 
(white) 
intra­
labyrinthine fluid will be replaced by the low-signal-intensity 
(grey) of the tumour, which is not the case in acute labyrinthi­
tis8 (Figure 7.11). Patients present with progressive SNHL or 
vertigo/abnormal findings at vestibular testing.
Schwannomas in the vestibule originate in the fibres of the 
vestibular nerves. Branches of these nerves reach the ampullae 
of the semicircular canals (the superior vestibular nerve reaches 
the superior and lateral semicircular canal, and the inferior 
vestibular nerve reaches the posterior semicircular canal), and 
therefore larger schwannomas will eventually grow into these 
ampullae. Schwannomas in the vestibule are frequently found 
in patients with neurofibromatosis type II.23 In other patients, 
schwannomas seem to be more frequent in the cochlea (Figure 
7.12). Intracochlear schwannomas will only cause vertigo when 
they block the normal communication between cochlea and 
vestibule. Intralabyrinthine schwannomas can also grow back 
into the IAC and can then cause vertigo, because they involve 
the superior or inferior branch of the vestibulocochlear nerve. 
Growth of these schwannomas cannot be predicted, and even 
after several years of no or slow growth, the schwannoma can 
suddenly grow very quickly and surprise both radiologist and 
clinician. Nevertheless, a follow-up examination every 6 
months during the first 2 years and every year thereafter is a rel­
atively safe way to follow these patients and helps to ascertain 
the growth rate of the lesion. Today, removal of the intra­
labyrinthine schwannoma is performed for two reasons. First, 
when no hearing is left in the involved ear, removal eliminates 
the chance of sudden growth, which could cause other damage 
(facial nerve etc.). Second, the tinnitus, which is often associ­
ated with cochlear schwannomas, can disappear when the 
schwannoma is removed.
Tumours invading the membranous labyrinth
Tumours originating in the middle ear (e.g. cholesteatomas), 
IAC (e.g. metastases, schwannomas)24 or pneumatization cells 
of the temporal bone (e.g. cholesterol granulomas) can invade 
the cochlea, vestibule or semicircular canals/ducts. The bone 
destruction can be seen on CT but the tumour itself and its 
characteristics are better or can only be evaluated on MR. High 
signal intensity of the lesion on unenhanced T l- and T2- 
weighted spin-echo images corresponds with blood, which is 
typically found in cholesterol granulomas. Strong Gd enhance­
ment can be seen in metastases. However, only thin T2- 
weighted gradient-echo images can be used to find the fistula 
between the lesion and the membranous labyrinth and are able 
to confirm the replacement of the intralabyrinthine fluid by an 
invasive tumour. CT, of course, remains the best technique to 
demonstrate erosions of the lateral semicircular canal and other 
parts of the bony labyrinth in patients with middle ear 
cholesteatoma. The coronal plane is the ideal plane to demon­
strate lateral semicircular canal fistulas. However, MR can 
detect whether the underlying membranous labyrinth is 
involved (loss of high signal of the underlying intralabyrinthine
  

Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
111
Figure 7.11 Schwannoma in the vestibule in a young woman presenting with vertigo and subtle SNHL Axial unenhanced T1-weighted image (a), coronal Gd- 
enhanced image (b) and axial 3DFT-CISS image (c) of the left inner ear, and 3DF-CISS reconstructions of the right (d) and left (e) inner ear.
(a) The schwannoma can be seen in the vestibule as a region of increased signal intensity (long white arrow) in comparison with the fluid in the rest of the 
membranous labyrinth. Note cochlea (small white arrow), and IAC (arrowheads).
(b) The schwannoma enhances strongly and is situated in the vestibule (long white arrows) but extends into the lateral and superior semicircular ducts (small white 
arrows). Note IAC (arrowheads).
(c) The schwannoma replaces the normal high-signal-intensity intralabyrinthine fluid (long white arrows). Normal fluid can be seen in the cochlea (small white 
arrows). Note IAC (arrowheads).
(d) 3DFT-CISS reconstruction of the right membranous labyrinth with normal high signal intensity in the cochlea (long white arrow), vestibule (small white arrow) 
and semicircular ducts (arrowheads).
(e) 3DFT-CISS reconstruction of the left membranous labyrinth showing the hypointense schwannoma in the vestibule (small white arrows). Normal high-signal- 
intensity intralabyrinthine fluid can be seen in the cochlea (long white arrow) and semicircular ducts (arrowheads).
fluid), often predicting severe or total hearing loss following 
surgery. Other lesions invading the labyrinth are glomus jugu- 
lare tumours, rhabdomyosarcomas, spinocellular tumours and 
adenoid cystic carcinomas originating high in the head and 
neck region, histiocytosis X, etc. (Figure 7.13). Lipomas can also 
be found inside the membranous labyrinth.25 Finally, endolym­
phatic sac tumours (EST) can cause a hydrops of the labyrinth. 
These patients can present with (fluctuating) SNHL and ver­
tigo or balance disorders. ESTs occur frequently in patients with 
von Hippel-Lindau disease. On CT, a defect of the bone is 
found in the region of the endolymphatic sac and vestibular 
aqueduct. On MR, the lesions can have both a high (blood) 
and low (cystic) signal intensity on Tl-weighted images. The
regions containing blood will also have a high signal on T2- 
weighted images, and the tumour can also have solid parts 
which enhance strongly after Gd administration. They can 
eventually invade the facial nerve canal, the CPA, IAC, and 
jugular foramen, and can extend into the middle ear cavity.26
Bony labyrinth lesions
Paget’s disease, fibrous dysplasia, osteopetrosis and otosclerosis 
can cause vertigo, tinnitus and SNHL.27,28 These abnormalities 
of the bony labyrinth are best studied on CT. Thin T2-weighted 
gradient-echo images (3DFT-CISS) are needed to recognize 
compression of and involvement of the membranous labyrinth.
  

112 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Only these images can detect the loss of intralabyrinthine fluid 
in these patients.
Demineralization of the bony labyrinth with a fluffy cotton 
wool appearance of surrounding bone can be seen in Paget’s dis­
ease. The hearing loss can be explained by the elongation of the 
neurovascular bundle in the IAC, and the involvement of the 
bony labyrinth or craniocervical junction.
Enlarged dense bone with an ‘hourglass’ appearance is seen 
in fibrous dysplasia, and the bony changes can narrow the IAC 
or can encase the aqueducts or membranous labyrinth.8 The 
bone abnormalities in fibrous dysplasia vary considerably and
_  i
Figure 7.12 Schwannoma in the basal turn of the cochlea. Patient presenting 
with severe SNHL, especially at the high frequencies. Axial Gd-enhanced 
T1-weighted image (a) and 3DFT-CISS image (b) through the left inner ear.
(a) An enhancing lesion can be seen in the anterior part of the basal turn (long 
white arrow). Note internal auditory canal (arrowheads). V, vestibule.
(b) The lesion can be seen as a hypointense area in the anterior part of the 
basal turn. Moreover, MR shows that the schwannoma is completely situated in 
the scala tympani (long white arrows) and that the scala vestibuli is open (small 
white arrows).
Figure 7.13 Metastases from a lung carcinoma in the left and right cochlea 
and left IAC. Patient with bilateral SNHL and vertigo. Axial Gd-enhanced 
T1-weighted image through both inner ears. Enhancement can be seen in the 
right and left basal turn of the cochlea (long white arrows). Enhancement 
(metastases) can also be seen deep in the left IAC (short white arrows).
high signal intensity on T2-weighted spin-echo images and 
unenhanced Tl-weighted images and strong enhancement after 
Gd administration indicate active fibrous dysplasia.
Thick dense bone with a narrow medullary space is seen in 
osteopetrosis. The neurovascular bundle can be compressed by 
the narrowed IAC. Dense bone can be seen on CT, and the 
bone has a hypointense signal on MR.
In fenestral otosclerosis spongy decalcified foci of bone or 
otosclerotic plaques can involve the anterior and, less fre­
quently, the posterior oval window region, the annular ligament 
or footplate of the stapes (thickened footplate) and the round 
window. In these patients, a conductive hearing loss (CHL) is 
also present. In retrofenestral otosclerosis, the bone around the 
cochlea is primarily involved and SNHL is the dominant symp­
tom. On CT, hypodense regions are found around the cochlea, 
vestibule, semicircular canal and IAC. These lesions have a 
signal intensity similar to the signal intensity of the membra­
nous labyrinth on Tl-weighted images and have a high signal 
intensity on T2-weighted images. The borders of the labyrinth 
become unsharp on MR images when these lesions are present. 
Active lesions enhance after intravenous Gd administration 
(Figure 7.14).
These lesions can be difficult to recognize on MR, but oto­
sclerosis lesions often have intermediate signal intensity on the 
unenhanced Tl-weighted images and can enhance after Gd 
administration (active lesions).
Focal or lytic lesions can sometimes be found in patients 
with SNHL, vertigo or tinnitus. Focal lesions can be caused by
Figure 7.14 Bilateral otosclerosis in patient with mixed hearing loss. Axial Gd- 
enhanced T1-weighted spin-echo image (a) and 3DFT-CISS image (b) through 
the right inner ear.
(a) Enhancement can be seen in and around the basal turn of the cochlea 
(arrows). These lesions correspond with active otospongiosis/otosclerosis lesions. 
Note neurovascular bundle in the IAC (arrowheads).
(b) Normal high-signal-intensity intralabyrinthine fluid can still be seen in the 
complete scala vestibuli/scala media and anterior part of the scala tympani of 
the basal turn of the cochlea (long white arrows). The otosclerosis has, however, 
caused obliteration of the posterior part of the scala tympani (small white 
arrow). High signal changes can also be seen in the surrounding bony labyrinth 
(arrowheads). Note: facial nerve (long black arrow), and common 
vestibulocochlear nerve (large black arrow).
  

Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
113
Figure 7.15 Cholesterol granuloma with fistula towards the inner ear. Young woman presenting with vertigo and subtle loss of the low frequencies. Axial 
unenhanced T1-weighted spin-echo images (a), T2-weighted spin-echo images (b) and 3DFT-CISS images (c) through the left inner ear.
(a) A high-signal-intensity lesion (black arrows) can be seen in the bone behind the IAC. The abnormal high signal intensity can also be seen in the vestibule (white 
arrow). Note nerves in the IAC (arrowheads). On CT (not shown) only a lytic ovoid lesion could be found behind the IAC.
(b) The high-signal-intensity lesion (black arrows) can still be seen on the T2-weighted image, proving that we are dealing with blood/cholesterol granuloma and not 
fat. The cholesterol granuloma can again be seen in the vestibule (small white arrow). Note fluid in the IAC (arrowheads).
(c) The lesion (black arrows) can be followed to the posterior semicircular duct (arrowhead). At this site, the fistula between the lesion and the posterior semicircular 
canal can be seen (long white arrow). The cholesterol granuloma followed this fistula and eventually ended up in the vestibule (small white arrow). These findings 
were confirmed during surgery.
mucocoeles, cholesterol granulomas, congenital cholesteatomas 
and chondromas. Cholesterol granulomas have a typical high 
signal intensity on T l and T2-weighted images (Figure 7.15). 
Chondromas have a very high signal intensity on T2-weighted 
images and enhance strongly. Congenital cholesteatomas (epi­
dermoid tumour) have a low signal intensity on Tl-weighted 
images and do not enhance.
More diffuse lytic lesions are caused by metastases, histio­
cytosis, osteomyelitis/apicitis and granulomatosis (e.g. TB, 
syphilis).
Temporal bone trauma
CT is unparalleled in the demonstration of fractures involving 
the bony labyrinth, explaining the SNHL or vertigo, and is also 
the best technique to detect a pneumolabyrinth29 (Figure 7.16). 
Fractures or lesions of the round or oval window can cause ver­
tigo, very often disappearing in a couple of weeks. Vertigo will 
more frequently be found in patients with fractures of the bony 
labyrinth. SNHL is, of course, more frequent when the fracture 
involves the cochlea. Concussion of the labyrinth in the 
absence of a fracture can only be seen as high signal intensity 
on unenhanced Tl-weighted images. In the presence of a frac­
ture, blood can again be recognized on MR (Figure 7.17), and 
loss of intralabyrinthine fluid and fibrosis formation can be seen 
on the T2-weighted gradient-echo images.
A perilymph fistula can result in vertigo associated with 
fluctuating SNHL. They can develop spontaneously or can be 
caused by trauma/barotrauma. These fistulas result from a tear 
either in the round window membrane or in the ligamentous 
attachment of the stapedial footplate. CT findings are often
negative in these patients, and the haemorrhages resulting from 
these tears are too small to be detected on unenhanced MR 
images. The subsequent inflammatory changes that develop fol­
lowing the occurrence of the tear can, however, result in intra­
labyrinthine enhancement, which is visible on Gd-enhanced
Figure 7.16 Pneumolabyrinth. Patient suffering from severe vertigo attacks, 
following trauma (cotton bud entered middle ear cavity due to a fall). Coronal 
CT (a) and axial unenhanced gradient-echo T1-weighted image (b).
(a) Air can be seen inside the vestibule (white arrows). The stapes is displaced 
inside the vestibule (black arrows). Therefore, a fistula must exist at the level of 
the oval window (arrowheads) causing the pneumolabyrinth and the vertigo 
attacks. ★, IAC.
(b) Low-signal-intensity regions (long white arrows) can be seen inside the 
vestibule. It is impossible to distinguish low signal intensity caused by air, 
calcifications or displaced ossicles (stapes) on MR images. Only CT can 
distinguish these entities. Note normal intralabyrinthine fluid in the cochlea 
(small white arrow). ★, IAC.
  

114 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Figure 7.17 Post-traumatic labyrinthine concussion. Patient presenting with hearing loss following a trauma. CT of the temporal bone showed only obliteration 
of the middle ear cavity. Coronal T1-weighted image through the left inner ear (a) and axial 3DFT-CISS image through the right (b) and left (c) inner ear.
(a) High-signal-intensity fluid, blood, can be seen in the middle ear cavity (black arrows). The vestibule (long white arrow) and posterior and lateral semicircular 
ducts (small white arrows) are also filled with high-signal-intensity blood. Note nerves in the IAC (arrowheads).
(b) Normal high-signal-intensity fluid can be seen in the scala vestibuli/media (long black arrow) and scala tympani (long white arrow) of the cochlea, the vestibule 
(V), and the lateral (arrowheads) and posterior (large black arrow) semicircular ducts.
(c) Normal high-signal-intensity fluid can be seen in the scala vestibuli/media (long black arrow) and scala tympani (long white arrow) of the cochlea. The vestibule 
(V) still contains high-signal-intensity fluid, although the signal on the T1 -weighted spin-echo images was high. This corresponds with intralabyrinthine fluid mixed 
with blood. The lateral (arrowheads) and posterior (large black arrow) semicircular ducts have lost their high signal intensity on the T2-weighted CISS image but 
have a high signal intensity on the T1-weighted spin-echo image. This corresponds with blood clot formation and the start of fibrosis.
Tl-weighted images. Enhancement inside the cochlea or 
vestibule could, therefore, be a possible indicator of perilym­
phatic fistulas.30
Lesions involving the internal 
auditory canal
The value of CT in the IAC is limited to the evaluation of the 
bony walls. MR has almost completely replaced CT in the study 
of lesions situated inside the IAC (Table 7.5).
Acoustic schwannomas
Acoustic schwannomas are the most frequent lesions found 
inside the IAC and can cause SNHL, vertigo and tinnitus. 
They can all be detected on Gd-enhanced Tl-weighted images; 
however, differentiation from neuritis can be difficult. Gradi- 
ent-echo T2-weighted images are used to distinguish both enti­
ties. In cases of schwannoma, a nodular hypointensity will be 
found in the course of the involved nerve, and a normal or 
fusiforme thickened nerve will be found in cases of neuritis 
(Figure 7.18). This applies especially to facial nerve neuritis, as 
enhancement of the vestibulocochlear nerve (VUIth nerve 
neuritis) is rarely seen.
Figure 7.18 Schwannoma of the superior vestibular branch of the Vlllth nerve. 
Patient presenting with hearing loss and vertigo. Axial Gd-enhanced 
T1-weighted spin-echo image (a) and 3DFT-CISS image (b) through the right 
IAC.
(a) A strongly enhancing lesion can be seen deep in the IAC (white arrow). 
Normal fluid can be seen in the cochlea (black arrow) and vestibule 
(arrowheads). F, floccule.
(b) The 0.7-mm-thick T2-weighted image shows that the tumour (white arrows) 
is located in the course of the superior vestibular branch of the Vlllth nerve 
(white arrowheads). Note facial nerve (black arrowheads). F, floccule.
  

Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
115
When the schwannoma is small, one can even determine 
on which branch (cochlear, inferior vestibular or superior 
vestibular) of the Vlllth nerve the schwannoma is located. 
Imaging studies show that vertigo is more frequently correlated 
with very small and strictly intracanalicular schwannomas. 
Clinical studies also show that purely intracanalicular acousti­
cal schwannomas result in earlier onset of vestibular symptoms.
Once the diagnosis of a schwannoma is made, the ‘growth 
potential’ of the lesion must be assessed. This is best achieved 
using 1-mm-thick Tl-weighted gradient-echo images (e.g. 
3DFT-MPRAGE) on which volume measurements are per­
formed. Follow-up studies should be done every 6 months in the 
first year, and subsequently annually, in case the schwannoma is 
not growing quickly.
Once it is decided that the schwannoma must be removed, 
one must find out whether hearing preservation surgery is still 
possible or not. Imaging plays a key role. First, the presence of 
fluid between the schwannoma and the fundus of the IAC must 
be assessed. If fluid is still present, then the surgeon can stay 
away from the base of the cochlea and a suboccipital or middle 
cranial fossa approach can be used, so preserving hearing func­
tion (Figure 7.19).31’32 If no fluid is left, the surgeon has to drill 
in the cochlear canal, and the patient becomes deaf; therefore, 
the less invasive translabyrinthine approach is chosen in these 
patients.
Another important sign is the signal intensity of the CSF 
between the schwannoma and fundus of the IAC and/or intra­
labyrinthine fluid. A normal signal intensity of these fluid spaces 
seems to correlate very well with good results after hearing 
preservation surgery. However, when the signal intensity of the 
fluid is decreased, the success of hearing preservation surgery is 
significantly lower (Figure 7.19).33
Neuritis
Neuritis (viral, sarcoid) is the second most frequent pathology 
found in the IAC in patients presenting with vertigo. However, 
rarely, an enhancement along the course of the nerve is found 
on MR in cases of viral neuritis. As already mentioned, a nor­
mal or fusiforme thickened nerve can be detected on T2- 
weighted gradient-echo images.34
Tumours (excluding acoustic schwannomas) 
involving the IAC
Metastases (subarachnoid seeding, melanoma), plasmocytomas, 
meningiomas, 
facial 
nerve 
schwannomas, 
arteriovenous 
malformations, glomus tumours, choristomas, cholesterol gran­
ulomas, haemangiomas, congenital cholesteatomas, lipomas, 
lymphomas, gliomas, carcinomas of the head and neck region, 
extension of a endolymphatic sac tumour etc. can grow in the 
IAC or can compress it and can be responsible for the vertigo 
or SNHL (Figure 7.20).24’35,36 Most of these tumours are best 
visualized on Gd-enhanced Tl-weighted images. Their exten­
sion is also best seen on these images. The extension of these
Figure 7.19 Schwannoma of the left CPA. Patient presenting with progressive 
SNHL on the left side. Axial 3DFT-CISS image through the right (a) and left (b) 
inner ear.
(a) Normal high-signal-intensity fluid can be seen in the cochlea (small white 
arrows), the vestibule (V) and the IAC (long white arrows).
(b) A large acoustic schwannoma can be seen in the left CPA (arrowheads). The 
fluid blocked in the IAC (long white arrows) and the fluid in the cochlea (small 
white arrows) have a lower signal intensity than the normal fluid in the CPA 
and vestibule (V). The decrease of the signal intensity in the fluid in the IAC and 
of the fluid in the cochlea corresponds with worse results when hearing 
preservation surgery is attempted.
Figure 7.20 Rhabdomyosarcoma involving the IAC. Young child presenting with 
SNHL. Axial unenhanced (a) and Gd-enhanced (b) T1-weighted spin-echo image.
(a) A tumour can be seen in the CPA (black arrows) and is extending into the 
IAC (white arrow). Moreover, masses with similar signal intensity are replacing 
the normal signal intensity of the petrous apex (P) and Meckel's cave (M).
(b) The tumour can be better delineated in the CPA (black arrows) and IAC 
(white arrow) when Gd is injected. The aggressive nature of the tumour is better 
seen on the Gd-enhanced images, and the involvement of the tissues around 
the temporal bone (arrowheads), the petrous apex (P) and Meckel's cave (M) is 
also better seen on these images. (Courtesy of Dr B. De Foer, St-Augustinus 
Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.)
tumours in the CPA is often different from the extension seen 
in schwannomas. Unlike schwannomas, these tumours (e.g. 
meningiomas) follow meningeal surfaces and meninges and not 
the course of the nerve. That is why the nerves sometimes come
  

116 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
out of these masses in a perpendicular way, making the diagno­
sis of acoustic schwannoma unlikely.
Unenhanced Tl-weighted images and T2-weighted spin- 
echo images can be used to characterize the lesions, and can, for 
instance, show the presence of blood in a cholesterol granu­
loma, involving the IAC.
Congenital cholesteatoma is caused by congenital inclu­
sion of epithelial cells. These slow-growing lesions cause lytic 
regions in the inner ear; the lesions will not displace the nerves, 
but will rather follow them. They have a low signal intensity 
compared to brain tissue on the unenhanced Tl-weighted 
images, and they do not enhance and have a high signal inten­
sity, similar to CSF, on T2-weighted images.
Lipomas have a characteristic high signal intensity on 
unenhanced Tl-weighted images and have a lower signal inten­
sity on T2- or fat suppressed Tl-weighted images.37
In the case of a small facial schwannoma, thin gradient- 
echo images can demonstrate the tumour in the course of the 
Vllth nerve, and the diagnosis also can be made when exten­
sion in the facial nerve canal is seen on Gd-enhanced images.
In the case of a haemangioma, a slightly high signal 
intensity can be seen in the lesion on the unenhanced T l- 
weighted images, and subtle calcifications are seen on CT. 
The preoperative differentiation between an acoustic neuri­
noma and haemangioma is important (but often difficult), 
because haemangiomas lie adjacent to the (facial or vestibulo­
cochlear) nerve and can be removed without nerve inter­
section, whereas in schwannomas, the nerve often has to be 
cut and reconstructed.
Meningitis, postoperative changes
In patients with apicitis or severe meningeal disease (e.g. pachy­
meningitis), the enhancing meninges can be followed deep in 
the IAC (Figure 7.21).38 These findings are a potential explana­
tion for SNHL or the vertigo/abnormal findings at vestibular 
testing. Sometimes, the thickened meninges completely obliter­
ate the IAC, making the nerves invisible. The cause of the 
pachymeningits can be infection, venous thrombosis, metas­
tases, liquor hypotension, idiopathic, granulomatosis, etc.
Absence of the vestibular and/or cochlear branches of the 
Vlllth nerve following surgery can also be depicted on MR and 
helps to explain SNHL or vertigo in previously operated 
patients.
Congenital malformations
In patients with congenital deafness or SNHL, the internal 
auditory canal (IAC) can be absent, very narrow, double, etc. 
In these patients, the facial nerve canal can leave the IAC, in 
its middle one-third, or can be completely separated from the 
IAC and sometimes only a sulcus for the nerve can be found on 
the roof of the temporal bone. All these malformations can be 
seen on CT; however, what happens with the nerves in these 
patients can only be evaluated on MR.
Figure 7.21 Idiopathic pachymeningitis. Young man with progressive and 
nearly total SNHL Axial T2-weighted (a) and Gd-enhanced T1 -weighted (b) 
spin-echo images through the posterior fossa and both lACs. Several blood tests 
excluded viral disease, granulomatous disease etc.
(a) The thickened meninges surround Meckel's cave (white arrowheads), follow 
the meninges on the medial wall of the temporal bone (black arrowheads) and 
obliterate the lACs (white arrows). Moreover, the thick meninges follow the 
cisternal segment of the abducens nerve on both sides (black arrows). The low 
signal intensity of the thickened meninges is caused by a high concentration of 
cells, situated close to one another, and with only little space between them (no 
space for protons).
(b) The thick meninges around Meckel’s cave (black arrowheads), on the medial 
surface of the temporal bone (white arrowheads), along the cisternal segment 
of the abducens nerve (black arrows) and in the lACs (white arrows) enhance 
strongly after Gd injection.
The vestibulocochlear nerve can be hypoplastic or absent 
in these patients.39 Two different types can be distinguished 
on gradient-echo T2-weighted MR images. In ‘type T, the 
Vlllth nerve is completely absent (three branches of the 
nerve are absent), and this is often associated with a very 
narrow IAC, only containing the Vllth nerve. In ‘type 2’, a 
common vestibulocochlear nerve is found with absence or 
hypoplasia of its cochlear branch (Figure 7.22). In ‘type 2A’, 
the labyrinth is abnormal, while in ‘type 2B’ it is normal.
  

Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
117
Figure 7.22 Hypoplasia of the vestibulocochlear nerve and its branches. Patient 
with congenital severe SNHL on the right side, axial T2-weighted 3DFT-CISS 
images throught the right (a) and left (b) IAC and parasagittal reconstruction 
through the right (c, e) and left (d, f) CPA and IAC.
(a) A very small cochlear (small white arrow) and inferior vestibular branch 
(long white arrow) of the Vlllth nerve are seen in the inferior part of the right 
IAC.
(b) A normal cochlear (small white arrow) and inferior vestibular branch (long 
white arrow) of the Vlllth nerve can be seen in the left IAC.
(c) The facial nerve (long black arrow) and vestibulocochlear nerve (large black 
arrow) have a similar size. This proves that the Vlllth nerve is hypoplastic, as 
normally the Vlllth nerve is 1.5-2 times larger than the facial nerve (see (d)). P, 
posterior fossa.
(d) The Vlllth nerve (large black arrow) is 1.5-2 times larger than the facial nerve (long black arrow). P, posterior fossa.
(e) Only the facial nerve (black arrow) has a normal size at the level of the IAC. The cochlear branch (small white arrow) and common vestibular branch (long white 
arrows) of the vestibulocochlear nerve are hypoplastic. Compare with the normal nerves on the left side in (f). P, posterior fossa.
(f) The facial nerve (black arrow), the cochlear branch (small white arrow) and common vestibular branch (long white arrows) of the vestibulocochlear nerve all have 
a normal size. P, posterior fossa.
Table 7.5 Preferred imaging techniques-interna! auditory canal
Imaging technique
Gd-enhanced Tl-weighted images 
Gradient-echo T2-weighted images (CISS)
Volume measurement/follow-up: 1-mm-thick Tl-weighted 
gradient-echo images (3DFT-MPRAGE)
Gd-enhanced Tl-weighted images 
Gradient-echo 12 images (CISS}
Tumours (excluding schwannomas) involving the IAC 
Unenhanced Tl-weighted images
Gd-enhanced T1-weighted images
T2-weighted spin-echo images
CT: to look for fat, calcifications, changes of bony walls
Meningitis, postoperative changes 
Gd-enhanced Tl-weighted images
Gradient-echo T2-weighted images (CISS)
Pathology
Schwannoma
Neuritis
Congenital malformations
Gradient-echo T2-weighted images (CISS) 
CT (evaluation IAC and facial nerve canal)
  

118 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
One should always check for the presence of a normal 
cochlear branch in all cochlear implant candidates and in 
patients with congenital SNHL. In type I, cochlear implant 
installation is not possible as there is no nerve. In type II, 
implantation is still possible, as long as the patient has a fluid 
filled cavity and a single nerve, which is not the facial nerve, 
that reaches the fluid-filled cavity. Very often this nerve is a 
so-called ‘common nerve’ carrying vestibular and cochlear 
information in its different fibres.
Lesions involving the 
cerebellopontine angle
Schwannomas of the vestibulocochlear nerve (most frequent 
lesion in the CPA), meningiomas, cholesterol granulomas 
and congenital cholesteatomas are discussed above. It is 
obvious that these lesions can also result in vertigo and SNHL 
when they appear in the CPA. Other lesions occurring in the 
CPA24 and that cause SNHL and/or vertigo are discussed 
below.
Tumours: schwannomas of other nerves, 
metastases, epidermoid and dermoid cysts, 
lipoma etc.
Schwannomas of the Vth and lower cranial nerves (IX, X, XI, 
XII) can compress the vestibulocochlear nerve and therefore 
can cause SNHL and vertigo. The best sequence to detect them 
is the Gd-enhanced Tl-weighted sequence (Figure 7.23).
Metastases can be found in the CPA (and IAC) and are 
again best seen on Gd-enhanced Tl-weighted images. They 
can be nodular or can follow the nerve. Meningeal metastases 
can be seen as local or more diffuse meningeal enhancements. 
The MR appearance of a metastasis is atypical. Only a known 
history of a primary tumour or the presence of multiple lesions 
helps in the differentiation from other tumours.
Dermoid cysts are rare. They are composed of fat, calcifica­
tions and soft tissue elements. The fat is hypodense on CT and 
has high signal intensity on unenhanced Tl-weighted images. 
The calcifications are hyperdense on CT and are seen as ‘signal 
voids’ on MR. The soft tissue parts enhance after Gd adminis­
tration. In lipoma, the fat characteristics described above can 
be seen on CT and MR.
Epidermoid cysts are very difficult to detect, as they are 
isointense with CSF on Tl-weighted, proton density and 
T2- weighted images. They can, however, be seen in a reliable 
way on T2-weighted gradient-echo images. On these images 
their signal intensity is much lower than the signal of the CSF 
(Figure 7.24).
Arachnoid cysts
These are CSF-filled cysts, lined by a thin arachnoid wall. 
These cysts can compress the nerves or can push them away. 
They are isointense with CSF on all sequences, but their signal 
intensity is sometimes slightly higher than that of the signal of 
CSF on T2-weighted gradient-echo images, because the flow of 
the free CSF around the brainstem causes a slight decrease in 
signal intensity. The stationary fluid in the cyst, of course, 
retains its high signal intensity (Figure 7.25).
Figure 7.23 Trigeminal nerve schwannoma. Patient presenting with SNHL on the right side. Axial T2-weighted 3DF-CISS image through the IAC (a) and axial Gd- 
enhanced T1 -weighted image through Meckel's cave (b).
(a) A large tumour is seen in the CPA (long white arrows) and reaches the IAC (arrowheads). The lesion is hyperintense, but some inhomogeneous regions with lower 
signal intensity can be seen in the posterior part of the lesion. The nerves in the IAC have a perpendicular orientation to the surface of the tumour. However, the 
tumour is always oriented along the course of the nerves in cases of acoustic schwannoma.
(b) An enhancing dumbbell lesion can be seen at the level of Meckel's cave. A solid component is obliterating Meckel's cave (white arrows) and corresponds with 
the middle fossa component of the trigeminal schwannoma. A more cystic part extends in the posterior fossa (black arrows) and descends to the level of the IAC 
(see (a)). Note Meckel’s cave on the left side (arrowheads).
  

Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
119
Figure 7.24 Epidermoid tumour in the CPA. Patient presenting with vertigo. Axial unenhanced T1-weighted spin-echo (a) and T2-weighted 3DFT-CISS image 
through the right CPA.
(a) A large lesion isointense with CSF (also isointense with CSF on the T2-weighted spin-echo image and not enhancing after Gd administration-not shown) can be 
seen in the right CPA (long white arrows). A subtle internal architecture can be presumed on the T1-weighted image. It is, however, not possible to differentiate a 
subarachnoidal cyst from an epidermoid tumour on these images. Note IAC (arrowheads).
(b) The T2-weighted 3DFT-CISS images prove that the mass is solid (long white arrows) because the high-signal-intensity fluid of the CPA is replaced by low-signal- 
intensity solid tissue. Note IAC (arrowheads).
Figure 7.25 Subarachnoid cyst in the right CPA. Patient presenting with SNHL on the right side. Axial T1-weighted (a) and T2-weighted spin-echo image (b) and 
3DFT-CISS image (c) through the right CPA.
(a) A space-occupying lesion with low signal intensity, isointense with CSF, can be seen in the right CPA (black arrows). Note IAC (arrowheads).
(b) The lesion remains isointense with CSF on the T2-weighted spin-echo images (black arrows). Note IAC (arrowheads).
(c) The lesion still has a signal intensity isointense with CSF on the 3DFT-CISS images (white arrows), proving that the lesion is cystic. An epidermoid lesion can 
therefore be excluded. The lesion is displacing the vestibulocochlear nerve anteriorly (large black arrows). Note facial nerve (long black arrow).
Siderosis
Following a severe posterior fossa haemorrhage (surgery, 
aneurysm, trauma), haemosiderin deposition on the surface of 
the Vllth and Vlllth nerves can occur. In these patients, the 
nerves have very low signal intensity on T2-weighted spin-echo 
or T2 -weighted gradient-echo images. A nodular thickening of 
the nerves can sometimes be appreciated on the high-resolution 
and very thin T2-weighted gradient-echo images (CISS) 
(Figure 7.26).40
Neurovascular conflicts
Another frequent indication for imaging is to look for a neuro­
vascular conflict in the CPA causing (fluctuating) SNHL 
and/vertigo/tinnitus.4M3
Both veins and arteries can compress the nerves at their 
root entry zone (REZ), which is the transition zone from cen­
tral to peripheral myelin. For the Vlllth nerve, this REZ is sit­
uated 10 mm lateral to the site where the nerve leaves the 
brainstem. At this point, compression of the nerve frequently
  

120 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Figure 7.26 Siderosis on the surface of the vestibulocochlear nerve. Patient 
presenting with post-traumatic severe SNHL, several years after a trauma. Axial 
3DFT-CISS image through both CPAs. The vestibulocochlear nerves are thickened 
and have an irregular diameter (black arrows). This corresponds with changes 
due to haemosiderin deposition on the nerves, caused by post-traumatic 
bleeding. The nerves also had a very low signal intensity on the T2-weighted 
spin-echo images (not shown). The cochlear (small white arrow) and inferior 
vestibular branches (long white arrows) of the Vlllth nerve are atrophic. This is 
probably secondary to nerve dysfunction, caused by the siderosis.
results in symptoms. Only MR is able to visualize the nerves 
and vessels simultaneously (Figure 7.27). Both nerves and ves- 
sels can be seen as black structures surrounded by white CSF 
on the very thin T2-weighted gradient-echo images (3DFT-
CISS). Nerves are seen as straight structures, and vessels are 
winding structures. Excellent multiplanar reconstructions and 
3D virtual images can be made using 3DFT-CISS images. 
High-resolution vascular MR images (3DFT-FISP time-of- 
flight images) can be used when the vessels and nerves are dif­
ficult to distinguish. Only the vessels will have a high signal 
on these MRA images. Moreover, these MRA images allow us 
again to make good paracoronal reconstructions (following the 
course of the nerves). It is very often possible to identify the 
tortuous, dilated or abnormal vessel, which is compressing the 
nerve near the REZ, on MR. The vessel can often be identified 
on the contiguous images or 3D maximum intensity projection 
(MIP) images. If there is doubt about whether one is dealing 
with a vein or artery, unenhanced and Gd-enhanced MRA 
images can give the solution. If it is an artery, the vessels will 
be seen on both the unenhanced and Gd-enhanced MRA 
images, whereas a vein will only be seen on the Gd-enhanced 
MRA sequence. Finally, the chances that the neurovascular 
conflict is really causing the symptoms increases when the fol­
lowing apply:
m 
Compression near the REZ (10 mm from the place where 
the Vlllth nerve leaves the brainstem) 
ft 
The vessel is an artery
m 
The vessel crosses the nerve in a perpendicular way 
m 
The vessel displaces the nerve
Vertebrobasilar dolichoectasia and posterior fossa aneurysm can 
also cause Vlllth nerve compression and displacement.
Figure 7.27 Neurovascular conflict. Patient presenting with fluctuating hearing loss and vertigo. Axial T2-weighed 3DFT-CISS image (a) and paracoronal 
reconstruction (b) through the left CPA and virtual image (c) of the left CPA, viewed from above.
(a) A winding vessel (arrowheads) is crossing the vestibulocochlear nerve (large black arrow) in a perpendicular way at a distance of approximately 10 mm from its 
emergence from the brainstem. This is the site where the central myelin of the nerve changes into peripheral myelin and where the nerve is most vulnerable. Note 
facial nerve (long black arrow).
(b) The vessel (arrowheads) is crossing the inferior border of the Vlllth nerve (large black arrows).
(c) The vestibulocochlear nerve (large black arrows) and facial nerve (long black arrows) are crossing the CPA and reach the porus of the IAC (white arrows). The 
anterior inferior cerebellar artery is crossing the inferior border of the Vllth and Vlllth nerve (arrowheads). B, brainstem.
  

Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
121
Petrous bone lesion
Finally, lesions of the petrous bone can become so large that 
they can displace or compress the nerves in the IAC or CPA. 
Paget’s disease, fibrous dysplasia (Figure 7.28), osteopetrosis 
and otosclerosis are discussed above. Lesions of the petrous 
apex, such as cholesterol granuloma, mucocele, epidermoid 
tumour or primary cholesteatoma, cholesteatoma, cartilaginous 
tumours, or chordomas, can also cause a conflict with the 
Vlllth nerve. A more detailed description of these lesions is, 
however, beyond the scope of this chapter.
Central auditory and vestibular 
pathways
Tumours, vascular anomalies, haemorrhages, infections or 
abscesses and demyelination of the brainstem can all involve 
the cochlear and/or vestibular nuclei and pathways.44
The most important structures, which must be checked, are 
listed in Table 7.6. Lesions involving structures of the auditory 
or vestibular pathway can cause sudden deafness or vertigo. The 
deafness will be unilateral when the cochlear nucleus is 
involved. Bilateral asymmetric SNHL will be found when the 
lateral lemniscus, inferior colliculus or medial geniculate body 
are involved. Sounds are perceived, but the interpretation is 
impaired (auditory agnosia) when the auditory cortex is
involved. Lesions in the brain and brainstem at different loca­
tions can produce different kinds of vertigo (central vestibular 
signs) (see Chapter 49).
Infarctions—ischaemia
Infarctions or ischaemic lesions involving structures of the 
auditory or vestibular pathway can cause sudden deafness or 
vertigo (Figure 7.29).45,46 They represent the most frequent 
brainstem pathology causing deafness or vertigo. The infarc­
tions are most often caused by atheromatosis. Emboli, compres­
sion of an artery or dissection (cervical manipulation or 
trauma) are less frequent causes. Infarctions are best seen on 
routine T2-weighted spin-echo images and are visible as high- 
signal-intensity regions. They are only seen on unenhanced T l- 
weighted images when there is a lot of oedema (low signal) or 
when they are haemorrhagic (high signal intensity). Enhance­
ment on the Gd-enhanced Tl-weighted images is present when 
the blood-brain barrier is affected. The T2-weighted sequence 
with a very long TR (repetition time) is used when small lesions 
in the brainstem are suspected, e.g. vestibular nuclei, MLF, or 
oculomotor nuclei. The infarctions are again seen as high-signal- 
intensity regions on these images.
The vertigo and hearing loss can be associated with other 
neurological signs due to the brainstem involvement. Patients 
sometimes present with a combination of peripheral and central 
symptoms when both the posterior inferior cerebellar artery 
(PICA) and anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) are
Figure 7.28 Bilateral cholesterol granuloma of the petrous apex. Patient presenting with SNHL Unenhanced T1-weighted (a) and T2-weighted (b) spin-echo images 
and 3DFT-CISS image of both temporal bones.
(a) A hyperintense mass is situated in the right petrous apex (white arrowheads) and is displacing the Vllth and Vlllth nerves posteriorly (long white arrows). A similar 
mass but with low signal intensity is situated in the left petrous apex (black arrowheads) and is also touching the nerves (small white arrows).
(b) The mass in the right petrous apex remains hyperintense (white arrowheads) and is therefore a cholesterol granuloma, containing blood products. The mass on 
the left side becomes hyperintense on the T2-weighted images (black arrowheads) and is therefore cystic. Previously, the mass on the left side was also a cholesterol 
granuloma, but the lesion was marsupialized into the mastoid. This caused replacement of the blood products by fluid. The nerves on the right side are displaced 
posteriorly (long white arrows). Note left IAC (small white arrows).
(c) Both the cholesterol granuloma (white arrowheads) and the drained granuloma (black arrows) have a high signal intensity on the 3DF-CISS images. The right 
vestibulocochlear nerve is displaced posteriorly (long white arrows), while the nerves on the left side have a normal position in the IAC (small white arrows).
  

122 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Table 7.6 Central auditory and vestibular structures to be checked
Auditory pathway
Brainstem
Cochlear nucleus 
Trapezoid body (its fibres run 
through medial lemniscus) 
Lateral lemniscus 
Inferior colficulus
Vestibular pathway
Vestibular nucleus
MLF and oculomotor nuclei (VOR)
Nucleus Praepositus hypoglossus
Inferior olive
Lateral cuneate nucleus
Supratentorial
Posterior fossa
Medial geniculate body 
Planum temporale (auditory cortex) 
Lobus of Heschl (auditory cortex)
Thalamus
Area 2v and 3a (vestibular cortex)
Flocculonodular lobe
Flocculus
Uvula
Nodulus
Cerebellum
Figure 7.29 Infarction affecting the central vestibular structures. Patient with acute vertigo. Axial T2-weighted spin-echo image (a) and coronal Gd-enhanced 
T1-weighted spin-echo image (b).
(a) Several high-signal-intensity infarctions are seen in the left cerebellum (large black arrows) and are extending in the region of the left floccule (long black 
arrows), and in the region of the nodus and uvula of the left cerebellum (arrowheads).
(b) The infarctions in the left cerebellum (black arrows) and in the uvula and nodus of the left cerebellum (white arrows) can again be seen and are hypointense. 
There is no enhancement and therefore the blood-brain barrier must be intact. The infarctions are causing deviation of the midline structures and therefore the 
infarctions must be recent (oedema). There is also involvement of the left tonsil (arrowheads).
involved. This is possible because the PICA and AICA supply 
overlapping territories in the brainstem and cerebellum, and 
the AICA also supplies the peripheral labyrinth via the inter­
nal auditory end artery.
The anterior vestibular branch of the internal auditory 
artery supplies the superior part of the vestibular labyrinth (only 
the posterior semicircular canal and utricle are not supplied by 
this artery), which is very vulnerable to ischaemia. This can 
result in a vestibular syndrome, which is difficult to distinguish 
from vestibular neuritis. The AICA further supplies the middle 
cerebellar peduncle and the anteroinferior cerebellum.
The PICA supplies the paramedian part of the cerebellum 
with its medial branch and the more lateral part of the cerebel­
lum with its lateral branches. The PICA is responsible for the 
region towards the transition zone ‘cerebellum pons’, and lesions 
in this region will disconnect the vestibular nuclei from the 
flocculus and vermis.
Today, diffusion imaging on MR enables us to distinguish 
recent infarctions (already in the first hours after the insult) 
from old infarctions, so that a ‘clinical imaging’ correlation can 
be made in the first hours following the onset of the deafness or 
vertigo.
  

Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
123
Multiple sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis can also cause SNHL and vertigo (Figure 
7.30).47’48 Vertigo is the first symptom in 5 to 7% of patients 
with multiple sclerosis. High-signal-intensity lesions can be 
seen on proton density and T2-weighted spin-echo images or 
on fluid attenuated inversion recovery images. The lesions 
enhance when they are active. The cochlear and vestibular 
nuclei and complete pathways must again be checked on MR.
Tumours
Deafness and vertigo can also be caused by brainstem tumours. 
Gliomas, fibrillary astrocytomas (Figure 7.31), metastases, lym­
phoma etc. can all cause deafness and vertigo but very often 
other brainstem structures are also involved, causing additional 
symptoms. Fast-growing or fast-appearing tumours like meta­
stases and lymphomas can cause acute deafness. The deafness is 
more progressive when the tumours are slow-growing.
Miscellaneous
The nuclei and pathways can also be damaged by the following 
lesions: haemorrhages (traumatic, in tumour, vascular malfor­
mation, ischaemic), trauma (Figure 7.32-33) (haemorrhage, 
contusion, diffuse axonal injury, siderosis), vascular malforma­
tion, and inflammation (Figure 7.34). Finally, congenital malfor­
mations can be the cause of the hearing loss, e.g. polymicrogyria 
or pachygyria of the auditory cortex (Figure 7.35).
Figure 7.30 Multiple sclerosis, involving the vestibular nucleus. Patient 
presenting with acute vertigo. Axial T2-weighted (a) and Gd-enhanced 
T1-weighted (b) spin-echo image through the region of the vestibular nuclei.
(a) A hyperintense lesion can be seen at the site where the left vestibular 
nucleus is situated (white arrowheads). Note medial longitudinal fasciculus (long 
black arrows), and vestibulocochlear nerve (small black arrow).
(b) Two small enhancements can be seen in the lesion (black arrows) and 
therefore this lesion (in a patient with known MS and several other lesions in 
the brain) is an active one. Note vestibulocochlear nerve (white arrow).
Figure 7.31 Fibrillary astrocytoma. Patient with SNHL on the right side. 
Axial T2-weighted (a) and Gd-enhanced T1-weighted (b) image through the 
right CPA.
(a) A large high-signal-intensity tumour is situated between the brainstem and 
the right cerebellum (black arrows) and obliterates part of the CPA (arrowheads).
(b) The lesion clearly enhances (black arrows) and nearly completely obliterates 
the CPA (arrowheads).
Figure 7.32 Haemorrhagic contusion of the auditory cortex. Patient with 
hearing loss on the left side due to a trauma. The CT and MR examinations of 
the temporal bone were negative, and it was difficult to communicate with 
the patient. Coronal T1-weighted image through the left auditory cortex. 
High-signal-intensity blood can be seen in the subdural space (arrowheads), 
and a haemorrhagic contusion is involving the left planum temporale (white 
arrows). The lobus of Heschl (black arrows), also belonging to the auditory 
cortex, is still intact.
  

Figure 7.33 Siderosis involving the auditory pathways. Patient with SNHL, 
status several months after the trauma. Severe bleeding caused by the trauma 
resulted in significant haemosiderin deposition on the surface of the vermis, 
cerebellum (black arrows) and on the posterior surface of the brainstem. The 
auditory pathways are involved at the level of the inferior colliculus (white 
arrows) and/or lateral or auditory lemniscus (arrowheads).
Figure 7.35 Polymicrogyria or pachygyria of the auditory cortex. Cochlear 
implant candidate, bilateral congenital SNHL Coronal Gd-enhanced 
T1 -weighted MPRAGE image. The auditory cortex on the left side is abnormal 
and the different gyri cannot be distinguished from one another (arrowheads). 
These changes correspond with polymicrogyria or pachygyria. Compare with the 
normal planum temporale (small white arrow) and lobus of Heschl (long white 
arrow) on the right side.
rv V/T
I
J
EIPIPIPI
Figure 7.36 Functional MR-normal example. Echo planar imaging (EPI) images 
during 'noise' stimulation. The stimulation diagram shows the periods without 
(arrowheads) and with (black arrows) 'noise' stimulation. Activation in the right 
auditory cortex can be depicted on the second EPI image (white arrow).
» [ y |
Figure 7.34 Rhombencephalitis/encephalitis: young patient with severe SNHL and fast, severe worsening of all functions (intensive care treatment). Coronal 
T2-weighted image through the auditory cortex (a) and axial proton-density image through the mesencephalon (b).
(a) High-signal-intensity changes can be seen in the white matter tracts going towards the auditory cortex (arrowheads). The signal intensity of the white matter is 
increased in the lobus of Heschl (long black arrows) and in the planum temporal (short black arrows).
(b) High-signal-intensity changes can be seen in the wall of the brainstem and especially at the level of the inferior colliculus (white arrows) and lateral/auditory 
lemniscus (arrowheads) on both sides. Both structures belong to the auditory pathways.
  

Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
125
Meniere’s disease
Today, it is not possible to make the diagnosis of Meniere’s dis­
ease using CT or MR. Both techniques confirm that the 
vestibular aqueduct is frequently smaller than in the normal 
population, but this is not a reliable sign. The distance between 
the posterior semicircular canal or duct and the CSF in the pos­
terior fossa is also often very small in patients with Meniere’s 
disease. However, this can sometimes also, but less frequently, be 
seen in the normal population. The value of imaging in patients 
with Meniere’s disease is to exclude other pathology mimicking 
Meniere’s disease.49 The most frequent lesions found in these 
patients are intracanalicular schwannomas, infarctions in the 
brainstem and/or cerebellum, and obliterations in the membra­
nous labyrinth.
Craniocervical junction
Basilar impression has to be ruled out when vertigo is associ­
ated with a palsy of the lower cranial nerves. This can be rec­
ognized on the sagittal localizer. The line of Chamberlain 
(from the hard palate to the posterior border of the foramen 
magnum) normally passes 5 mm below the upper point of the 
dens. In case of basilar impression, this line lies more than 5 
mm below the upper border of the dens and the tonsils are in 
a low position, and the brainstem is elongated; syringomyelia 
can also be present.
Functional MR
The potential of functional MR to study patients with SNHL 
or cochlear implant candidates is huge. The most frequently 
used technique today is the ‘blood oxygenation level -  depen­
dent’ (BOLD) technique.50 This technique depends on small 
changes in the steady-state level of paramagnetic deoxy­
genated haemoglobin. These changes become visible when the 
unstimulated auditory cortex and stimulated auditory cortex 
are compared. This method is not invasive and has an unlim­
ited repeatability. Stimulation can be achieved using a head­
phone and noise, but better results are possible when an 
electrode, placed in the external auditory canal or on the sur­
face of the bony labyrinth, is used.51 The applications are obvi­
ous. Normal activation of the auditory cortex indicates an 
intact auditory pathway, obviating the need to check the 
cochlea, IAC, CPA, brainstem and cortex separately. More­
over, in cochlear implant candidates, one can check which ear 
results in the best activation of the auditory cortex. Of course, 
this technique is also a tool to perform basic scientific studies 
on hearing. Today, many of the studies performed are still 
using normally hearing persons and are done to ameliorate the 
technique. Large clinical studies in deaf patients or cochlear 
implant candidates are still lacking.
Tinnitus
Patients with pulsatile tinnitus can today be examined in a 
non-invasive way with MR.10,44,52 Patients with subjective and 
non-pulsatile tinnitus can also be examined using MRA, but 
the yield is much lower. Neurovascular conflicts near the REZ 
of the facial and vestibulocochlear nerves can best be recog­
nized on gradient-echo T2-weighted images, and were discussed 
above. These images can also be used to provide the surgeon 
with virtual images of the conflict in the CPA. Vascular time- 
of-flight images can be used to identify the vessel causing the 
conflict or to differentiate between arteries and veins (non­
enhanced and Gd-enhanced images).
However, a neurovascular conflict is not the most frequent 
cause of pulsatile tinnitus. Paragangliomas, dural arteriovenous 
fistulas, idiopathic venous tinnitus and benign intracranial 
hypertension are the most frequent causes, and only the first 
two can be shown on MR. Dural fistulas, causing early venous 
drainage on the non-enhanced images, can be detected (Fig­
ure 7.37). Glomus tumors (Figure 7.38), arteriovenous mal­
formations, aberrant vessels running through the middle ear, 
high or dehiscent jugular bulbs (Figure 7.39), tortuous 
carotid arteries near the skull base, fibromuscular dysplasia 
(Figure 7.40) and carotid dissection (Figure 7.41) can all be 
detected on both the unenhanced and Gd-enhanced MRA 
images. Vascularized tumours like meningiomas cause higher 
arterial and venous flow in their surroundings and therefore 
can cause tinnitus. This is the reason why tumours in the 
neighbourhood of the temporal bone must be excluded in 
these patients. Finally, CT is sometimes necessary to find the 
cause of the tinnitus. An example is Paget’s disease.
Figure 7.37 Dural fistula. Patient presenting with pulsatile tinnitus on the left 
side. Unenhanced MR time-of-flight images with 3D reconstruction viewed 
from above (a), lateral view (b) (on next page).
(a) Early venous drainage can be seen in the transverse and sigmoid sinus (black 
arrows). Abnormal tortuous vessels coming from the external carotid artery 
branches (black arrowheads) and the middle meningeal artery territory (white 
arrowheads) can be seen.
  

126 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Figure 7.37 (b) The early venous drainage in the transverse and sigmoid sinus 
(black arrows) can again be recognized, and the tortuous vessels coming from 
the occipital artery (black arrowheads) and middle meningeal artery (white 
arrowheads) can be seen.
However, MRA has become the method of first choice and 
is able to detect many more causes of tinnitus than CT. 
Angiography is only used to treat patients (embolization) or 
when the pulsatile tinnitus renders a normal life impossible 
and MR and CT remain negative. An overview of the pos­
sible causes of tinnitus is given in Table 7.7.
Figure 7.39 Dehiscent jugular bulb. Patient with pulsatile tinnitus on the right 
side. Axial CT image through the jugular foramen. A large and high jugular bulb 
(J) can be seen, and there is no bony plate between the jugular bulb and the 
middle ear cavity. Moreover, the jugular bulb is protruding in the middle ear 
cavity (small white arrow) and is lying against the stapes (arrowhead). Note 
umbo of the malleus (long white arrow).
Figure 7.38 Glomus jugulotympanicum. Patient with tinnitus on the left side. Coronal CT image (a) and MRA time-of-flight image, paracoronal reconstruction (b) 
through the left middle ear and jugular foramen.
(a) The middle ear cavity is completely obliterated (white arrows). The edges of the jugular foramen are unsharp and destroyed, a common finding in glomus tumours 
(arrowheads).
(b) The MRA image shows the glomus tumor in the middle ear cavity (long white arrows) and in the canal of Jacobson (★). The extension in the jugular foramen 
(long black arrows) can also be seen, and the compressed and enhancing jugular bulb can be recognized (small white arrows). Note IAC (arrowheads).
  

Table 7.7 Causes of tinnitus52
Arterial causes 
Atherosclerosis 
Fibromuscular dysplasia
Spontaneous dissection ICA 
Styloid carotid compression 
Petrous carotid aneurysm
Aberrant carotid artery
Laterally displaced carotid artery 
Persistent stapedial artery 
Miscellaneous arterial anomalies
Arteriovenous causes 
Paraganglioma
Miscellaneous vascular head and 
neck tumours
Paget's disease
Otosclerosis or spongiosis
Cerebral arteriovenous malformation
Dural arteriovenous fistula 
Direct arteriovenous fistula
Venous causes 
Systemic conditions 
Intracranial hypertension
Transverse sinus stenosis
Idiopathic venous tinnitus
Large or exposed jugular bulb or large 
emissary veins
Figure 7.40 Fibromuscular dysplasia of the internal carotid artery. Patient with 
pulsatile tinnitus on the left side, getting worse during exercise and when the 
head is turned to the left side. Three-dimensional MRA reconstruction, antero­
posterior view. The left internal carotid artery has an inconstant diameter and 
an irregular wall, compatible with fibromuscular dysplasia (white arrows). 
Compare with the normal smooth right internal carotid artery (arrowheads).
Figure 7.41 Dissection of the internal carotid artery. Patient presenting with a Horner syndrome and pulsatile tinnitus on the left side. Coronal unenhanced 
T1-weighted image (a) and 3D MRA reconstruction (b), viewed from above.
(a) Methaemoglobin can be seen in the wall of the internal carotid artery, situated just under the skull base (arrowheads). The remaining lumen with a flow void in it 
can also be seen (long white arrows). Compare with the normal diameter of the right internal carotid artery (small white arrows).
(b) The haematoma in the wall of the left internal carotid artery can be seen (long white arrows). The intracerebral part of the left internal carotid artery is narrowed 
(arrowheads). Compare with the normal diameter of the right internal carotid artery.
  

128 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Cochlear implants
CT is needed to evaluate the pneumatization of the mastoid 
and middle ear cavity prior to surgery. Moreover, CT can be 
used to exclude the presence of an artery in an abnormal posi­
tion in the middle ear cavity (e.g. stapedial artery) (Figure
7.42), a dehiscent tympanic portion of the facial nerve canal, 
abnormal course of the facial nerve in the middle ear cavity, 
and dehiscent or protruding jugular bulb (Figure 7.39). CT can 
also detect calcifications inside the cochlea (Figure 7.6) and the 
presence of a narrowed round window, jeopardizing normal
Figure 7.42 Stapedial artery. Patient with pulsatile tinnitus on the left side. Three-dimensional MRA reconstruction, lateral view (a) and axial CT image at the level 
of the stapes (b).
(a) An abnormal branch (arrowheads) leaves the internal carotid artery in its vertical (temporal bone) segment (white arrows) and has an abnormal course through 
the middle ear cavity.
(b) The stapedial artery (small white arrow) runs between the crurae of the stapes and is lying against the anterior crus of the stapes (long white arrow). Note 
posterior crus of the stapes (arrowhead). (Courtesy of Professor F. Veillon, CHRU Strasbourg, France.)
<10
□
Figure 7.43 Aplasia of the vestibulocochlear nerve with abnormal course of the facial nerve. Bilateral congenital deafness, cochlear implant candidate. Coronal CT 
image (a) and coronal (b) and axial (c) 3DFT-CISS image through the inner ears.
(a) The left IAC is stenotic (black arrows), and the tympanic segment of the facial nerve canal is not seen in its normal position under the lateral semicircular canal 
(white arrows). Similar findings were seen on the right side (not shown).
(b) The stenotic lACs are confirmed (arrowheads). No nerves enter the lACs and the facial nerves (long black arrows) can be seen above the level of the lACs and are 
seen just below the trigeminal nerves (large black arrows).
(c) The vestibulocochlear nerves could not be found on both sides. The right facial nerve leaves the brainstem very high (black arrows). At this level, we see the 
temporal lobe above the temporal bone. The nerve could be followed to the roof of the temporal bone, where it disappeared between the roof of the temporal bone 
and the temporal lobe.
  

Radiology of auditory and vestibular disease 
129
cochlear implant installation. The above-mentioned signs of a 
‘gusher ear’ can also be recognized (Figure 7.9). MR is comple­
mentary to CT and offers the following possibilities:
Detection of fibrotic obliteration of the membranous 
labyrinth
m 
Detection of enhancement in the cochlea due to infection, 
recent fibrosis, schwannoma 
m 
Detection of the gusher ear signs
■ 
Detection of a normal or absent or hypoplastic cochlear 
branch of the vestibulocochlear nerve (Figure 7.22) 
m 
Detection of lesions along the central auditory pathway and 
in the auditory cortex, or detection of white matter disease 
which could be life-threatening or could result in important 
psychomotoric retardation (Figure 7.35).
The real contraindications are absence of a fluid-filled cavity in 
the temporal bone and absence of a vestibulocochlear nerve 
(Figure 7.43).
References
1. Alexander AE, Caldemeyer KS, Rigby P. Clinical and surgical 
application of reformatted high-resolution CT of the temporal 
bone. Neuroimaging Clin North Am 1998; 8: 31-50.
2. Casselman JW, Kuhweide R, Deimling M et al. Constructive 
interference in steady state (CISS)-3DFT MR imaging of the 
inner ear and cerebellopontine angle. Am J Neuroradiol 1993; 14: 
47-57.
3. Schmalbrock P, Brogan MA, Chakeres DW et al. Optimization of 
submiilimeter-resolution MR imaging methods for the inner ear. J 
Magn Reson Imaging 1993; 3: 451-9.
4. Tanioka H, Shirakawa T, Machida T et al. Three-dimensional 
reconstructed MR imaging of the inner ear. Radiology 1991; 178:
141-4.
5. Tien RD, Felsberg GJ, Macfall J. Three dimensional MR gradient 
recalled echo imaging of the inner ear: comparison of FID and 
echo imaging techniques. Magn Reson Imaging 1993; 11: 429-35.
6. Bradley WG. MR of the brain stem: a practical approach. Radiology 
1991; 179: 319-32.
7. Weissman JL, Curtin HD, Hirsch BE et al. High signal from the 
otic labyrinth on unenhanced magnetic resonance imaging. Am J 
Neuroradiol 1992; 13: 1183-7.
8. Casselman JW, Kuhweide R, Ampe W, Meeus L, Steyaert L. 
Pathology of the membranous labyrinth: comparison of Tl- and 
T2-weighted and gadolinium-enhanced spin-echo and 3DFT- 
CISS imaging. Am J Neuroradiol 1993; 14: 59-69.
9. Tien R, Felsberg GJ, Macfall J. Fast spin-echo high resolution MR 
imaging of the inner ear. Am J Roentgenol 1992; 159: 395-8.
10. Dietz RR, Davis WL, Hamsberger HR, Jacobs JM, Blatter DD. 
MR imaging and MR angiography in the evaluation of pulsatile 
tinnitus. Am J Neuroradiol 1994; 15: 890-2.
11. Casselman JW, Kuhweide R, Ampe W et al. Magnetic resonance 
examination of the inner ear and cerebellopontine angle in 
patients with vertigo and/or abnormal findings at vestibular test­
ing. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1994; 513(suppl): 15-27.
12. Mark AS. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the 
temporal bone. Neuroimaging Clin North Am 1994; 4: 561-78.
13. Matthews VP, Kuharik MA, Edwards MK, d’Amour PG, Azzarelli 
B, Dreesen RG. Gd-DTPA enhanced MR imaging of experimen­
tal bacterial meningitis evaluation and comparison with CT. Am J 
Neuroradiol 1988; 9: 1045-50.
14. Casselman JW, Majoor MHJM, Albers F. MR of the inner ear in 
patients with Cogan syndrome. Am J Neuroradiol 1994; 15: 
131-8.
15. Casselman JW, Kuhweide R, Ampe W et al. Inner ear malforma­
tions in patients with sensorineural hearing loss detection with 
gradient-echo (3DFT-CISS) MR imaging. Neuroradiology 1996; 
38: 278-86.
16. Jackler RK, De la Cruz A. The large vestibular aqueduct syn­
drome. Laryngoscope 1989; 99: 1238-43.
17. Hirsch BE, Weisman JL, Curtin HD, Kamerer DB. Magnetic reso­
nance imaging of the large vestibular aqueduct. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1992; 118: 1124-7.
18. Davidson HC, Hamsberger HR, Lemmerling MM, Mancuso AA, 
White DK, Tong KA, Dahlen RT, Shelton C. MR evaluation of 
vestibulocochlear anomalies associated with large endolymphatic 
duct and sac. Am J Neuroradiol 1993; 20: 1435-41.
19. Jackler RK, Luxford WM, House WF. Congenital malformations 
of the inner ear: a classification based on embryogenesis. Laryngo­
scope 1987; 97: 2-14.
20. Hasso AN, Casselman JW, Broadwell RA. Temporal bone con­
genital anomalies. In Som PM, Curtin HD, eds. Head and Neck 
Imaging. St Louis: Mosby-Year Book, 1996; 1351-90.
21. Phelps PD, Reardon W, Pembrey M. X-linked deafness, stapes 
gushers and a distinctive defect of the inner ear. Neuroradiology 
1991;33:326-30.
22. Mafee MF, Lachenauer CS, Kumar A, Arnold PM, Buckingham 
RA, Valvassori GE. CT and MR imaging of intralabyrinthine 
schwannoma: report of two cases and review of the literature. 
Radiology 1990; 174: 395-400.
23. Yamamoto M, Hagiwara S, Ide M, Jimbo M, Arai Y, Ono Y. Con­
servative management of acoustic neurinomas: prospective study 
of long-term changes in tumor volume and auditory function. 
Minim Invasive Neurosurg 1998; 41: 86-92.
24. Lo WW, Solti-Bohman LG. Tumors of the temporal bone and the 
cerebellopontine angle. In Som PM, Bergeron RT, eds. Head and 
Neck Imaging. St Louis: Mosby-Year Book, 1996: 1449-531.
25. Ouallet JC, Marsot-Dupuch K, Kujas M, VanEffenterre R, Tubiana 
JM. Imaging features of temporal bone tumors in Von Hippel- 
Lindau disease: tumors with a papillary pattern. J Neurosurg 1997; 
87: 445-449.
26. Huang TS. Primary intravestibular lipoma. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryn­
gol 1989; 98: 393-5.
27. Urman ST, Talbot M. Otic capsule dysplasia: clinical and CT find­
ings. Radiographics 1990; 10: 823-38.
28. Swartz JD, Hamsberger HR. The otic capsule and otodystrophies. 
In: Swartz JD, Hamsberger HR, eds. Imaging of the Temporal Bone. 
New York: Thieme, 1998; 240-317.
29. Veillon F, Baur P, Dasch JC, Braun M, Pharaboz C. Traumatismes 
de l’os temporal. In: Veillon F, ed. Imagerie de Voreille. Paris, 
Medecine-Sciences Flammarion, 1991; 243-81.
  

130 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
30. Mark AS, Fitzgerald D. Segmental enhancement of the cochlea 
on contrast-enhanced MR: correlation with the frequency of 
hearing loss and possible sign of perilymphatic fistula and autoim­
mune labyrinthitis. Am J Neuroradiol 1993; 14: 991-6.
31. Casselman JW. Temporal bone imaging. Neuroimaging Clin North 
Am 1996; 6: 265-89.
32. Dubrulle F, Ernst O, Vincent C, Vaneecloo FM, Lejeune J-P, 
Lemaitre L. Enhancement of the cochlear fossa in the MR evalu­
ation of vestibular schwannoma: correlation with success at hear­
ing preservation surgery. Radiology 2000; 215: 458-62.
33. Somers T, Casselman J, de Ceulaer G, Govaerts P, Offeciers FE. 
Prognostic value of MRI findings in hearing preservation surgery 
for vestibular schwannoma. Otol Neurotol 2001; 22: 87-94.
34. Sartoretti-Schefer S, Kollias S, Wichmann W, Valavanis AS. T2- 
weighted three-dimensional fast spin-echo MR in inflammatory 
peripheral facial nerve palsy. Am J Neuroradiol 1998; 19:491-5.
35. Smith MM, Thompson JE, Castillo M, Carrier D, Mukherji SK, 
Gilliam D. Choristomas of the seventh and eighth cranial nerves. 
Am J Neuroradiol 1997; 18: 327-30.
36. Ouallet JC, Marsot-Dupuch K, Kujas M, VanEffenterre R, Tubiana 
JM. Imaging features of temporal bone tumors in Von Hippel- 
Lindau disease: tumors with a papillary pattern. J Neurosurg 1997; 
87: 445-9.
37. Cohen Tl, Powers SK, Williams DW. MR appearance of intra­
canalicular eighth nerve lipoma. Am J Neuroradiol 1992; 13: 
1188-90.
38. Goyal M, Malik A, Mishra NK, Gaikwad SB. Idiopathic hyper­
trophic pachymeningitis: spectrum of the disease. Am J Roentgenol 
1997; 169: 1421-4.
39. Casselman JW, Offeciers FE, Govaerts PJ et al. Aplasia and 
hypoplasia of the vestibulocochlear nerve: diagnosis with MR 
imaging. Radiology 1997; 202: 773-81.
40. Bracchi M, Savoiardo M, Triulzi F et al. Superficial siderosis of the 
CNS: MR diagnosis and clinical findings. Am j Neuroradiol 1993; 
14: 227-36.
41. Jannetta PJ. Neurovascular cross-compression in patients with 
hyperactive dysfunction symptoms of the eighth cranial nerve. 
Surg Forum 1975; 26: 467-8.
42. Girard N, Poncet M, Chays A et al. Neurovascular compression in 
the CP angle. Riv Neuroradiol 1995; 8: 981-9.
43. Rousseau GL, Jannetta PJ, Hirsch B, Moller MB, Moller AR. 
Restoration of useful hearing after microvascular decompression of 
the cochlear nerve. Am J Otol 1993; 14: 392-7.
44. Swartz JD, Hamsberger HR. Temporal bone vascular anatomy, 
anomalies, and diseases, emphasizing the clinical-radiological 
problem of pulsatile tinnitus. In: Swartz JD, Hamsberger HR, eds. 
Imaging of the Temporal Bone. New York: Thieme, 1998; 170-239.
45. Deplanque D, Godefroy O, Guerouaou D, Laureau E, Desaulty A. 
Sudden bilateral deafness: lateral inferior pontine infarction. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1998; 64: 817-18.
46. Praamstra P, Hagoort P, Maassen B, Crul T. Word deafness and 
auditory cortical function. A case history and hypothesis. Brain 
1991; 114: 1197-225.
47. Sasaki O, Ootsuka K, Taguchi K, Kikukawa M. Multiple sclerosis 
presented acute hearing loss and vertigo ORL J Otorhinolaryngol 
Relat Spec 1994; 56: 55-9.
48. Schweitzer VG, Shepard N. Sudden hearing loss: an uncommon 
manifestation of multiple sclerosis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1989; 100: 327-32.
49. Weissman JL. Imaging in Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol Clin North 
Am 1997; 30: 1105-16.
50. Kim SG, Ugurbil K. Comparison of blood oxygenation and cere­
bral blood flow effects in fMRI: estimation of relative oxygen con­
sumption change. Magn Reson Med 1997; 38: 59-65.
51. Millen SJ, Haughton VM, Yetkin Z. Functional magnetic reso­
nance imaging of the central auditory pathway following speech 
and pure-tone stimuli. Laryngoscope 1995; 105: 1305-10.
52. Lo WWM, Solti-Bohman LG. Vascular tinnitus. In: Som PM, 
Curtin HD, eds. Head and Neck Imaging. St Louis, Mosby-Year 
Book, 1996; 1535-49.
  

Ethics, law and related 
matters
Ronald Hinchcliffe
Introduction
The scientist will have it that ‘The universe we observe has pre­
cisely the properties we should expect if there is, at bottom, no 
design, no purpose, no evil and no good, nothing but blind, piti­
less indifference ... DNA neither cares nor knows. DNA just is. 
And we dance to its music.’1 Nevertheless, here on planet 
Earth, life-forms have evolved in the form of organisms (ani­
mals and plants) and microorganisms.
The biologist will attribute human behaviour and beliefs to 
genes2 and memes.3 Another perspective4 will see the lives and 
working practices of humans over planet Earth being deter­
mined by a constellation of behavioural controls (normative 
systems) which are subsumed under the headings: customs, reli­
gion, laws, ethics, standards, guidelines, instructions. These 
controls or recommendations range from laws that say we must 
not kill other members of our species to the instructions on a 
packet whose contents are for the preparation of a cup of soup. 
Failure to obey can affect one’s quality of life permanently and 
to the severest degree, or merely transitorily and minimally, as 
we sense that the taste of the soup is not what we might have 
expected. These controls are, indeed, all-pervasive. They 
govern what I say in this chapter, the paper on which it is 
printed, on which days it may be read, and even whether it may 
be read at all.
A previous review5 on the theme of this chapter 
approached the matter from the perspective of the English com­
mon law. But, as pointed out more than half a century ago, 
‘Nothing can distort the true picture of conditions and events 
in this world than to regard one’s own country as the centre of 
the universe, and to view all things solely in their relationship 
to this fixed point. It is inevitable that such a method of obser­
vation should create an entirely false perspective.’6 This review 
will seek to remedy the Christian anglocentric bias of the pre­
vious review, which nevertheless complements this chapter.
Ethics and law have their origins in customs and religion. It 
is therefore appropriate to consider first these two precursors.
NORM ATIVE SYSTEM S
■ 
Custom 
Religion
■ 
Ethics
■ 
Customary law
■ 
Law
Customs and customary law
Customs
The customs or mores of a society are those patterns of behav­
iour in a society which have come to be accepted as character­
istic of, and accepted within, that society.4 These unwritten 
customs and conventions are not dictated by some external 
agency but result from a slow process of social evolution.7
Knowledge of the customs within, and the organization of, 
societies comes from the reports of anthropologists, sociologists, 
travellers and others. There is, and always has been, an immense 
amount of literature on this topic. It ranges, for example, from 
studies of a pre-literate people in East Africa, the Ik,8 to studies 
of a most advanced, culturally and economically, society in Far 
East Asia, the Japanese.9 The Ik are reported as ‘Man without 
Law’; Japanese society, although capitalistic and industrialized, 
runs along different lines to European societies.
Customary law
The basis for customary law is when a judicial authority has 
established sanctions in respect of one or more custom. Non- 
legal customs remain social conventions.4
Customary law is much more important outside Europe, e.g. 
in Latin America10 and in Northern Asia.11 Traditional Arabian 
tribal society has preserved in its customary law and practice a 
very great deal that derives directly from the pre-Islamic 
period.12 Nevertheless, ‘Adah (customs -  of individuals or

132 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
groups) and (Urf (recurring practices which are acceptable to 
people of sound nature) are recognized as a subsidiary source of 
the Shari'ah by all Islamic schools of jurisprudence.13
The hiit khoong code of the Lao in Thailand is in all likeli­
hood of pre-Buddhist origin, though partially influenced by 
Buddhist thought and morality. The practical purpose of the 
code is the prevention of social and political conflicts. Har­
mony and conflict-free social interaction are highly appreciated 
by the Lao. The hiit khoong code is the most important expedi­
ent to ensure contant social harmony. The preventive charac­
ter shows an important difference to Western law conceptions, 
which accept the conflict as a social reality and which are ori­
ented to solve existing conflicts rather than to prevent them.14
Customary law gradually became written down, in Europe 
at least. In France, for example, this was effected under the 
authority of the local seigneurs, and later under royal ordinance, 
e.g. the Ordonnance de Montils-les-Tours of Charles VII in 1453. 
However, Article 7 of the Act of 21 March 1804 (30 ventose an 
XII), which introduced the Code civil des Frangais (renamed the 
Code Napoleon in 1807), provided that custom was to cease to 
have effect in matters covered by the Code. Nevertheless, in 
1902 the Corn de Cassation (the highest court in France) held 
that a judge must take into account a custom if he is aware of 
its existence.15 In Germany, Gewohnheitsrecht (customary law) is 
now a limited source of new law, although it provides the judi­
ciary with an instrument with which they can introduce general 
principles of law to fill gaps in legislation and to overcome 
ambiguities in a Gesetz (a Statute).
Religion
Religion may be defined as a system of beliefs and practices by 
means of which a group of people struggle with the ultimate 
problems of human life.17
Hinduism18,19
The Srutis (1500 to 600 BC) are the ancient sacred texts of 
Hinduism, the directly revealed scripture. They are the source 
of all knowledge. They describe principles of morality and 
behaviour to which everyone must conform in order to live in 
divine harmony. Only fragments of the Srutis remain. To under­
stand fully the teachings of the Srutis, one needs to consult the 
s(h)astras or smr(i)tis (‘memorized tradition’), which are thus 
secondary to the divine revelations. This second tier comprises 
four goals for humankind, or pillars on which world order rests, 
i.e. dharma, artha, kama and moksha. Dharma encompasses the 
totality of religion; it specifies the moral norm, which is specific 
to an individual’s social class and stage of life. But other cultures 
have also sanctioned the stratification of society, and perhaps 
more so. Early Irish society was hierarchical and inegalitarian. 
A maxim in an Old Irish law text, Tecosca Cormaic, was: isel 
cach aithech (every commoner is low).20
Dharma like the Muslim fikh, rejects the distinction
between religious and legal obligations but is much more all- 
embracing than fikh. In so doing, dharma obviates the problems 
in other cultures of conflicts between law and morality.21 The 
concept of ‘rights’ is alien to dharma. Artha encompasses the 
whole range of activities associated with material gain and its 
protection, extending to the art of government, with concepts 
reminiscent of those in Machiavelli’s The Prince,22 which was to 
follow much later. Kama is concerned with the pursuit of both 
aesthetic and sensual pleasure. Moksha (liberation) is the cul­
mination of dharma, artha and kama when properly followed, i.e. 
the supreme goal of mortal existence.
Buddhism"5,4
Buddhism is the tradition of the thinking and practice of 
Shakyamuni, the Buddha, who lived in India in the 6/5 century 
BCE. Gautama Buddha’s Ariva-Sacca (four Noble Truths) relate 
to the universality of suffering, which is the result of desire and 
craving. In order to eradicate the suffering, one must follow the 
threefold path (way, training) of sila, samadhi and panna 
(prajna).25 Sila is the moral code, which comprises the five pre­
cepts (pansil) of refraining from (1) harming living things, (2) 
taking that which has not been given to one, (3) excessive sen­
suality, (4) false and harmful speech, and (5) using intoxicants. 
The three positive features of sila are right speech, right bodily 
action, and right means of livelihood. Samadhi is interpreted var­
iously as concentration,26 meditation, or even trance.25 Prajna 
signifies wisdom or, more strictly, apprehending the truth taught 
by the Buddha,25 and so perhaps can be interpreted as insight.26
Reflecting their belief in Buddhism, the Chinese and 
Japanese perceive death as a natural part of and an extension of 
life itself. 7
Judaism
The Torah constitutes the divine teachings of Judaism, a reli­
gion which is much older than Christianity or Islam. In its 
narrowest sense, it refers to the Pentateuch, the first five books 
of the Hebrew Bible. In its broadest sense, Torah encompasses 
the whole of the Jewish Bible, together with the whole of 
traditional Jewish lore and law. The Mishnah constitutes the 
first text of rabbinical Judaism; the Talmud is the wide-ranging 
commentary on the Mishnah. Halakhah refers to the legal mater­
ial in the Talmud. Aggadah refers to the non-legal, but ethical, 
material in rabbinical literature in addition to the Talmud.25,28
Christianity
With more than a billion followers, Christianity29 is the most 
common religion in the world, although in the highly secular­
ized countries of Europe and North America it is often nominal.
Islam
With around a billion followers, Islam30 is a religion and a way 
of life based on the commandments of Allah contained in the
  

Ethics, law and related matters 
133
Holy Quran and the Sunnah of the Prophet of Islam, Muham­
mad (Sallallaho ‘Alaihi Wasallam).31 Unlike Christianity, 
Islam could never become a private religion of personal con­
science and ethics. It is a complete way of life. Even the way 
in which a glass of water is to be drunk is determined by 
Islamic religious law.32
Shintoism
Shinto33,34 is a religion that is unique to Japan. Purity of body 
and soul is a central tenet of Shintoism. Shinto priests will 
ceremonially cleanse an individual’s body and soul (harai) to 
achieve the clean ideal. People will go to the Shinto shrines to 
pray to the gods, e.g. to avoid disease or seek a cure, or for suc­
cess in examinations.35
Ethics
In general
Ethics is basically concerned with what is good, and what is 
bad, with what are right courses of action, and what are not. 
Every culture has developed an ethic of its own. Depending on 
the social setting, the authority invoked for good conduct is 
the will of God, the pattern of nature, or the rule of reason. 
Religions provide various forms of motivation for moral, i.e. 
ethical, action. Buddhism,36’37 Christianity,38-41 Hinduism,42 
Islam,43 Judaism44,45 and Shintoism35 all make contributions. 
Buddhism teaches us not to harm animals, plants, trees or 
forests; it is therefore in the forefront of conservation and 
environmentalism. Its Path of Life offers prescriptions for the 
ethico-spiritual wellbeing of every individual. Moral as well as 
intellectual perfection is a constituent of the Buddhist nirvana 
(final good).46 Christian belief makes a crucial difference to an 
understanding of ethical issues, while at the same time demon­
strating some of the weaknesses and confusions of certain 
popular approaches to them.47 Several Hindu ethical themes are 
worthy of the attention of Western philosophers. These include 
the Bhagavadgita, since it is open to various interpretations.42 
Judaism is rooted in the ethical principles of justice and mercy. 
The Aggadah has been referred to as the ‘wellspring’ of Jewish 
morality.28 The Inaba-no-Shirousagi (white hare of Inaba) story 
in the Kojiki illustrates the mercy of the Shinto gods to all crea­
tures—comparable to the Zihi (benevolence) of Buddhism.35
Medical ethics48
There are few matters related to health and medical practice 
that have no ethical implications. The problems range from the 
use of highly technical procedures, or how the value of these 
should be assessed, to whether or not resources should be allo­
cated at all to such use or enquiries.49
The compassion for all creatures, without discrimination, 
which Buddhism teaches is an essential component of the
medical practitioner’s attitude towards his patients.50 Although 
beginning from very different religious premises, Buddhism 
tends to medical ethical conclusions which are broadly similar 
to those found within mainstream Christianity.52 Islam also 
makes a contribution to medical ethics.
A common ethical code for everybody involved in health­
care is desirable, but there are important limitations to the role 
such a code could play. Such an ethical code could establish 
important values and describe a common ethical context for 
healthcare, but it may be of limited use in solving new and com­
plex ethical problems.54
It is useful to analyse medical ethical concepts in terms of 
legal principles and court decisions,55 but attempts to respond to 
complex bioethical questions by legislation are difficult and 
may become controversial.56
Related matters 
Professional medical ethics
In European civilization, the history of medical ethics goes back 
to the Hippocratic tradition. The British Medical Association57 
pointed out that, while the ethical systems of other European 
countries have been codified and incorporated in national civil 
and criminal law, the UK has proceeded along a different path. 
The UK’s General Medical Council (GM C)58 has enforced pro­
fessional standards on the basis of guidance rather than through 
a codified system. The GM C has the power to restrict or remove 
a doctor’s right to practice if he is found to be guilty of ‘serious 
professional misconduct’.59
ETH ICS
Professional
Doctor-patient
Research
Partly because of professional solidarity and partly because 
of the stigma of being a ‘whistle-blower’, there has been an 
undoubted reluctance of colleagues to report instances of clini­
cal or research misconduct. The Public Interest Disclosure Act 
1998, which took effect from 2 July 1999, has changed this 
situation in the UK.
Doctor-patient relationship
The basis of the doctor-patient relationship is trust60 and con­
fidence.61 The patient has to be given sufficient information for 
consent to investigation and treatment62 to be grounded in 
trust.
Research on human subjects
There are basically two ethical problems in respect of medical 
research. First, is there valid consent? In this context, consent 
to an action which is basically wrong cannot change it into a 
rightful one. Second, do the ends justify the means?63 To these
  

134 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
two basic problems, one should add a third problem: is the con- 
fidentiality of the required data safeguarded?
As pointed out by the Council for International Organiza­
tions of Medical Sciences,64 the generalized application of the 
experimental scientific method by medical research is a product 
of the present century. Consideration is required both in devel­
oped and developing countries as to whether prevailing legal 
provisions and administrative arrangements ensure that the 
rights and welfare of subjects involved in research are ade­
quately considered and protected in conformity with the ethi­
cal principles prescribed in the Declaration of Helsinki by the 
18th World Medical Assembly 1964, as revised by the 48th 
World Medical Assembly in 1997,65 or in conformity with other 
research codes.66
In Britain, the Royal College of Physicians of London pro­
duced Guidelines on the Practice of Ethics Committees for Medical 
Research.67 In 1991, the Department of Health produced its own 
guidelines for local research ethics committees (LRECs).68 A 
subsequent Health Service Guidelines document HSG(97)23 
introduced a new system for obtaining ethical approval for 
multicentre research.69 Multicentre research ethics committees 
(MRECs) complement the work of existing LRECs. Multi­
centre research is defined as that which is carried out within 
five or more LRECs’ geographical boundaries.
In the USA, the institutional review boards (IRBs) equate 
with the British LRECs. The University of Pittsburgh’s IRB, for 
example, maintains a website (Acrobat format) for its guide­
lines. 
The US Food and Drug Administration maintains a 
website71 for the guidance of IRBs and clinical investigators. 
The US National Institutes of Health also provides information 
on bioethics resources on the web.72
Of particular relevance to research on human subjects, the 
US National Library of Medicine provides information at web­
sites on consent,73 privacy and confidentiality,74 and clinical 
trials.75
One publication covers every significant ethical issue likely 
to be faced by researchers and research ethics committees.76
Research misconduct
Research misconduct is a topic which is attracting increasing 
attention.77 The term covers piracy, plagiarism and fraud.78
Medical audit
Medical audit79,80 encompasses the collection and use of infor­
mation for effective resource management and improved 
patient care. Increasingly, computers are becoming an integral 
part of the clinical audit function.81 Medical audit is not with­
out ethical considerations,82 and there are questions as to who 
audits audit.83 In making use of clinical audit, one should have 
in mind its relationship to other forms of quality assurance and 
knowledge generation.84 With this in mind, one should not 
forget the contribution that autopy studies can make.85
Medical audit leads on to clinical effectiveness,86-88 and this 
leads to clinical governance.89-92 In association with all this, 
clinical risk management is of increasing concern.93,94
Law
Law has been defined as the enforceable body of rules that 
governs any society.95 As the Social Sciences and Humanities 
Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) points out, the law 
tends to compel obedience to behavioural norms. Ethics aim to 
promote high standards of behaviour through an awareness of 
values, which may develop with practice and which may have 
to accommodate choice and liability to err. Further, though 
ethical approaches cannot pre-empt the application of the law, 
they may well affect its future development or deal with situa­
tions beyond the scope of the law.96
M AJOR LEG A L SYSTEM S
Romano-Germanic (civil law) 
English common law
■ 
Socialist law
■ 
Religious
Sharfah
Legal systems 
Hindu law
The three realms of human activity, dharma, artha and kama, 
together constitute the custom of Hinduism. Hindu society is 
expected to live and resolve disputes according to custom. Hence 
Hindu law is customary law. The Dharma-S(h)astras, together 
with the Artha-S(h)astras and Kama-S (h)astras, which constitute 
the commentaries on dharma, artha and kama, are taken as 
sources for this customary law. The nibandhas, which are com­
mentaries on the dharma-shastras, are necessary in order to resolve 
any apparent contradiction in the dharma-shastras, which, inter 
alia, include the laws of Manu, of Yajnavalkya and Narada. If 
there is no rule of law applicable to the case in question, an indi­
vidual must act, and the judges decide, according to equity, good 
conscience and justice. The doctrine of precedents has no place 
in Hindu customary law; a judge (a prince in historical times) 
must be able in all cases to vary a decision so that it will conform 
to a more expedient policy at any time in the future.97-99
Buddhist law
The influence of law derived from Buddhism has not been com­
parable to that derived from other religions, such as Islam. It 
was nevertheless evident in South-East Asia in historical 
times.100 In Thailand, Buddhist law codes developed under the 
influence of Theravada Buddhism from the 13 th century. 
Buddhist law was of special juridical significance in religious 
and urban centres.14 A Buddhist theocracy existed in Tibet 
until 1951, although its excesses were inconsistent with the 
tenets of the religion it purported to represent.101 In Bhutan, 12 
monastic representatives are elected to the Tshogdu (National 
Assembly) by the Buddhist ecclesiastical bodies.102 In this way,
  

Ethics, law and related matters 
135
Bhutanese law is influenced by Buddhist religion and morality. 
Article 9 of the Sri Lankan 1972 republican constitution gave 
pre-eminence to Buddhism.
Jewish law
Jewish Law is founded on the faith that the Torah is the word of 
God. Although it is not primarily a code of law, the Halakhah 
can be equated with Rabbinic jurisprudence.28 The traditional 
Jew is bound by codified halakhic decisions.
Islamic law103
Every Muslim is under an obligation to model the entirety of his 
life in accordance with the dictates of the Qur'an and Sunnah. 
He therefore must observe at every step the distinction between 
what is right (Halal) and what is wrong (Haram). This high­
lights the need for, and the importance of, a knowledge of the 
corpus juris of Islam, the Shari’ah. The Qur'an is the first primary 
source of Shari’ah, and the Sunnah the second primary source. 
Sunnah needs to be distinguished from Hadith; the latter is a 
narration of the conduct or sayings of the Prophet, whereas 
Sunnah is the law deduced from such.13 AUljma\ Al-Quiyas, Al- 
Ijtihad, Istishab, and Istihsan constitute secondary sources for the 
Shari’ah. AUIjma’ encompasses the consensus of Islamic juristic 
opinions; A l-Qiyas is the legal principle for deriving a logical 
conclusion by analogical reasoning; Al-ljtihad is the exercise of 
reasoning (Al-Qiyas is thus a special case of AUIjtihad); Istishab 
is a presumption in the laws of evidence that a state of affairs 
known to exist in the past continues to exist until the contrary 
is proved; a special case is the presumption of innocence until 
guilt has been proven.31 As well as coming into play when 
judgements could be contrary to the public interest, Istihsan is 
similar to the equity of the English common law, in that both 
are inspired by the principles of fairness and conscience; both 
authorize a departure from the rule of positive law when its 
enforcement leads to unfair results; but whereas equity recog­
nizes some superiority of natural law, Istihsan recognizes only the 
superiority of divine revelation.13 Usui aUfiqh embodies the 
study of the sources of Islamic law and the methodology for its 
development, i.e. Islamic jurisprudence.104
At a time when many Muslim states are moving towards 
the reintroduction or reinforcement of Islamic law, there is the 
need for some acquaintanceship with the Shari’ah. However, 
many Islamic states have recently modified their law to meet 
society’s changing values.105
Canon law
Canon law is that law which was developed and applied by the 
Christian church.106 The ecclesiastical courts in the 12th and
13 th centuries exercised considerable control in a number of 
European countries.97 This influence declined with the secular­
ization associated with the Reformation. The Vatican City state 
is now the only one in which canon law now holds sway. The 
Pope exercises sovereignty there; he has absolute legislative, 
executive and judicial powers.102
English common law
The common law is a uniquely English derivation.107 Following 
the end of the Roman occupation in AD 430, England saw 
invasions by a number of tribes (Angles, Jutes, Saxons and 
Vikings) from northwestern Europe over the next six centuries. 
Each brought with them their own customary law. It was 
William the Conqueror’s arrival from Normandy in AD 1066 
which resulted in the definition of what these various custom­
ary laws had in common: hence the designation of this collated 
law as the ‘common law’.
As well as being uncoded, the common law system is char­
acterized by two other features, i.e. by the method of acquisition 
of evidence (adversarial, as opposed to the inquisitorial method 
of civil law systems), and the practice of judicial precedent. It is 
the latter which gives rise to what is termed case law.
Civil code (Romano-German law)
Civil law countries are those which have a codified law which 
was based originally on Roman legal principles.108 Having been 
at one time part of the Roman Empire or subject to Napoleon’s 
dictates explains the similarities which exist among the civil 
law countries of contemporary Europe.15
Socialist law
Marxist-Leninists saw law as a means of transforming society in 
the desired direction. Once the ideal of a pure socialist society 
had been achieved, it would no longer be needed. But the aim 
of law as being one of ‘social engineering’ was also perceived by 
the Harvard jurist Roscoe Pound.109 Only the conceived end 
result differed. It has nevertheless been argued that, however 
ideal the society that socialists envisage, legal institutions 
would still be necessary to adjudicate conflict between private 
and public interests.110
Geographical entities 
State laws
Before the Industrial Revolution, the two principal functions of 
governments had been to maintain domestic law and order and 
to make war on the governments and peoples of foreign states. 
The inhuman conditions of work and life that the Industrial 
Revolution imposed on a new social class, the workers in mech­
anized factories, compelled governments to undertake a third 
function— the provision for social welfare. The first legislation 
for the protection of factory workers was enacted in Britain in 
1802. Between 1883 and 1889, Bismarck extended the social 
field of governmental action in Germany by securing the 
passage of legislation that provided insurance against sickness, 
accidents and incapacitation by old age and other causes. This 
recognition that governments have a duty to provide for their 
subjects’ welfare was a beneficial ethical advance in the field of 
politics. The state has now become a welfare organization, 
besides continuing to be a law-enforcing and a war-making 
organization, in most of the world’s industrialized countries. 
However, the welfare state is still a controversial issue. The
  

136 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
provision of public services for the benefit of the indigent 
majority of the population required the raising of additional 
public revenue by steeply graded taxation of the affluent minor­
ity. But all states, whatever their ideological colour, have con­
tinued to be war-making institutions (with the exception of 
Costa Rica, which has no Army).111
Thus each modem state, e.g. the UK, has developed its 
social security law,112 healthcare law,113 and workers’ health and 
safety law.
Medical law is a rapidly expanding area of law in, for exam­
ple, Belgium,114 Canada,115 Eire,116 Finland,115 Greece,117 New 
Zealand,115 the U K118 and the U SA .115
With increasing worldwide concern regarding environ­
mental pollution, an ever-increasing number of states have 
specific environmental laws, but there are different approaches 
of English, European and international law to environmental 
pollution control.119
With more than 200 states in the world, space does not 
allow the inclusion of references to the laws of all these coun­
tries. A sample of the world’s states, in alphabetical order, is 
considered below.
China
The traditional Chinese concept of law is completely different 
from that in the West.97 Confucius (551-479 BC), who was 
himself a judge, held that the basis of society was not law but 
ethics and ritual (ways of living). To enact laws was bad policy. 
The very exactitude which laws establish in social relation­
ships, and the way in which they fix the rights and obligations 
of each individual, were considered evils. Once individuals 
think of their ‘rights’, there is, it was thought, some form of 
social illness; the only true matter of concern is one’s duty to 
society and to one’s fellow men. There is thus some similarity to 
the ancient principles of Celtic culture, where firrinys (truth), 
onoir (honour) and currym (duty) were dominant.
When private interests conflict, the Chinese argued that 
some middle road must be sought which takes into considera­
tion the interests of both parties. One or other social group 
should act as arbitrator or mediator. Between World Wars I and
II, Romano-Germanic codes were adopted to avoid coloniza­
tion. With the communist takeover in 1949 and the abolition 
of private property, China was set to implement Soviet-style 
socialist law. Following the rupture with the USSR, the work of 
the codification commission came to an end. There was no 
more mention of socialist legality or humanistic socialism. Both 
concepts were considered incompatible with true Marxist- 
Leninist doctrine. With the more recent moves towards 
capitalism, changes in the law are again taking place.120-122
France
The Act of 21 March 1804 (30 Ventose An XII) introduced the 
Code civil des Frangais (renamed the Code Napoleon in 1807, and 
finally the Code civil in 1870). Napoleon’s codification of the 
French law was to have a wide impact on the rest of Europe, as 
a direct result of French military and political power. Thus a
number of countries share the common legal heritage not only of 
Roman law but also of the Code civil des Frangais, e.g. Belgium, 
Germany, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, 
Quebec, Spain and Switzerland.15,123
Germany
A more scientific model of the Code civil emerged in Germany 
when the Biirgerliches Gesetzbuch (Code of Civil Law) came 
into force on 1 January 1900. This Gestzbuch has influenced the 
legal systems of Austria, Brazil, Greece, Hungary, Japan, 
Mexico, Peru, Switzerland and Turkey.16,124
The function of the judiciary in the German legal system is 
to apply the law, not to create it. Thus the doctrine of precedent 
does not exist; court decisions do not have any effect on future 
decisions.
India
Section 372 of the 1950 Constitution provided for the continu­
ance of the previous law of India, which was based on the English 
common law.125 The Hindu Code Acts 1955-56 largely abol­
ished the shastraic basis of Hindu law and established a more or 
less uniform law for Hindus of all castes and regions. The current 
Code applies only to Hindus in India. Outside of the codified 
law, Hindu law retains its customary and religious base.98,99
The aim is to replace eventually all the religion-based laws 
of Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, Muslims and Parsees with a 
national secular law which will provide equality of status and 
opportunity for all individuals and promote the greatest degree 
of personal freedom consistent with the public good.126
Israel
The law of the state of Israel derives from when that land was 
part of the Ottoman Empire, and then under British rule. Only 
isolated remnants of Ottoman legislation are in force today. 
The application of religious laws is covered by the Law of 
Personal Status (personal, family and succession law). The qadi 
(Islamic judge) decides for Muslims, in accordance with the 
Shari’ah, and the various ecclesiastical courts in respect of the 
appropriate Christian sect. The Druze also have their own 
courts. Nevertheless, Jewish law plays an important role in 
interpreting the law, even in matters outside the jurisdiction of 
the religious courts. One or two experts in Jewish law sit on the 
Supreme Court.127
Japan
Until Japan was opened up in the mid-19th century, law as such 
did not exist there. As in China, which had influenced Japan’s 
early history, rules of behaviour (more specifically, rules of pro­
priety), giri, governed society. There were no school of law, 
lawyers or judges in the occidental sense. The whole constella­
tion of giri specified the conduct to be observed on all occasions 
when individuals came into contact with one another. The 
concept was that of filial relationships based on attentive 
protection and respectful subordination. Social reprobation was 
attached to its non-observance. However, following the west-
  

Ethics, law and related matters 
137
emization programme that developed in the 19th century, a 
legal code based primarily on German law appeared in 1898. 
After 1945, legal reforms aimed at democratization were intro­
duced at the behest of the U SA .128,129 However, questions have 
been raised as to whether or not Japanese society has undergone 
any substantial change behind this facade of westernization. 
Japanese mystical sentimentalism has rendered the people, basi­
cally poetic rather than logical, indifferent to the occidental 
ideals of human dignity and freedom.97
Russia
Prior to the Bolshevik revolution, the Russian social order was 
dominated by customs and not law. After the revolution, the 
U SSR  adopted a socialist legal system.130 The dissolution of the 
U SSR  was followed by a new legal system. The new legal system 
has its roots in the political and economic origins of 
perestroika.131
Turkey
Turkish law exhibits a melange of the laws of various other 
European countries.132,133 The Civil Code and the Code of 
Obligations have been adapted from the corresponding Swiss 
codes; the Penal Code is based mainly on the Italian Penal 
Code; the Commercial Code is based on that of Germany. The 
Code of Civil Procedure is similar to that of Neuchatel.102
UK
It was chance that played a major part and led to the paradox 
of a collection of feudal laws of continental origin becoming 
one of the most typical manifestations of English life and 
thought.134 The universities have not played the role in the 
developments of the law of the UK that they have done in the 
countries of mainland Europe. Consequently, English law 
stands apart from the mainstream of Western legal culture.135 
Nevertheless, the English common law underpins to some 
degree or another the operational legal systems that affect more 
than a billion people on the planet. However, in common with 
Bhutan, the UK has no written constitution.
USA
It was natural that, after independence, the American colonies 
should continue with the English common law.
Regional law
In the case of Costa v ENEL (1964), the European Court of 
Justice (ECJ) ruled, inter alia, ‘The transfer by the States from 
their domestic legal system to the Community legal system of 
the rights and obligations arising under the Treaty carries with 
it a permanent limitation of their sovereign rights, against 
which a subsequent unilateral act incompatible with the con­
cept of the Community cannot prevail.’ Thus the ECJ showed 
that EC provisions which do not specifically mention individu­
als may still create rights for them. Moreover, the ECJ indicated 
that the logic of EC law gives it supremacy over the domestic 
laws of its member states.136,137
Evidence, experts and judges 
Evidence
A  definition of evidence which was approved by a former 
Chancellor of Monash University138 was that given in the 
Indian Evidence Act 1872, which is still in force in India today: 
‘Facts not otherwise relevant are relevant (1) if they are incon­
sistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact; (2) if by them­
selves or in connection with other facts they make the 
existence or non-existence of any fact in issue or relevant fact 
highly probably or improbable’ (Section 11).
Expert witnesses
The Society of Expert Witnesses139 has defined an expert as 
‘anyone with knowledge or experience of a particular field or 
discipline beyond what is expected of a layman’, and an expert 
witness as ‘an expert who makes his or her knowledge available 
to a court (or other judicial or quasi-judicial body)’. The 
Society of Expert Witnesses is an independent non-profit- 
making UK body which is run entirely by ‘expert witnesses for 
expert witnesses’ (unofficial motto); Quisque ad praestantium 
nitens (each towards excellence striving) (official motto).
Expert witnesses have existed for a long time in legal his­
tory. An Old Irish law text, Bretha Crolige, states that the sick- 
maintenance of a woman skilled in handicraft be assessed by 
three brithems: a brithem who is knowledgeable about food, a 
brithem competent in legal language, and an evaluating 
brithem.20 Although the second is clearly a lawyer, the first and 
third are expert witnesses.
The Australian Federal Court has prepared Guidelines for 
Expert Witnesses.140 The Medical Protection Society has pro­
vided advice on how to write medico-legal reports.141
In the UK, articles by lawyers142-144 have drawn attention to 
rules for expert witnesses which follow Lord Woolf’s report.145 
The British Medical Journal advises doctors to download and 
study the rules. They may have difficulty in accessing the cited 
URL (the Lord Chancellor’s). It is easier at http://www.david- 
marshall.co.uk/cpr.html, where they have been consolidated 
into a single file (769 kbytes) in Microsoft Word Format.
The lawyers highlight two principal problems, inter­
examiner (or inter-expert) variability and financial matters. 
Inter-expert variability was not a problem when a large and 
diverse group of individuals and organizations (including repre­
sentatives of the noise-exposed workers) gave evidence to the 
Industrial Injuries Advisory Council.146 None of them were 
paid. Should we recommend examiners (and experts) to waive 
their fees? There are historical precedents.147 In 1687, the 
College of Physicians and the Society of Apothecaries in 
London passed a resolution ‘that all members of the College, 
whether fellows, candidates, or licentiates, shou’d give the 
advice gratis...’ But a problem will remain. There appears to be 
an unbridgeable gap between the common law lawyers and the 
doctors, scientists and statisticians who are committed to an 
evidence-based society.148
  

138 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Judgements
Under German law, the Grundsatz der freien richterlichen 
Beweiswiirdigung (principle of the unfettered consideration of 
the evidence) means that there are no legal rules compelling 
the judge to consider evidence in any particular way and saying 
what emphasis, if any, should be put on any particular piece of 
evidence.16
Some European jurists have denied ‘altogether that judicial 
law finding was based upon a rational process. The finding of 
the law according to him [Isay] is an intuitive process directed 
by certain sentiments and prejudices while the logical argument 
is substituted as an after-thought for the intuitive process and 
serves as make-believe towards the other world ... It is an illu­
sion frequent among German exponents of the Freirechtlehre 
that the English judge has that majestic freedom from the fet­
ters of the statute law which the continental judge lacks. In 
reality the obstacles presented to a progressive development of 
the law in the English system of precedent are considerably 
greater than those existing under codes which either contain 
general clauses or, like the Swiss code, specifically instruct the 
judge to develop the law in case of need.’149
A US judge has arguedly cogently that intuition is involved 
in judgements.150 More recently, a psychologist has assessed 
studies of intuition and concluded that ‘cognitive science is 
now well on the way to resuscitating the idea of the “intelligent 
unconscious” and along with it, the neglected faculty of 
intuition’.151 However, in one case known to the author, a UK 
judge was unable to intuit the existence of a control group that 
showed no anamnestic or audiometric differences compared to 
a group of hazardous noise-exposed claimants.
Judges
It has often been said that the narrow-social-class background 
of English judges influences them. Eighty years ago, a senior 
British judge (Lord Justice Scrutton) said ‘It is very difficult 
sometimes to be sure that you have put yourself into a thoroughly 
impartial position between two disputants, one of your own 
class and one not of your own class.’ 
However, a study of judi­
cial decisions affecting trade unions does not bear out claims 
that judges are biased against them, at least not in respect of 
actions in the civil courts.153 It has been argued that judges in 
general (not just English judges) are biased in their approach to 
certain issues not so much because of their social background 
but because of the nature of their function, which is seen 
mainly to preserve the status quo.
The considerable 
inter-judicial variability might be 
resolved by greater attention to training and selection
154
processes.
Alternative dispute resolution
In general, parties to disputes have become increasingly dissatis­
fied with litigation as a means of resolving disputes, and look to
D ISPU TE RESO LUTIO N
Consensual procedures
Negotiation
Conciliation
Mediation
Adjudicatory
Arbitration
Litigation
resolutions other than by litigation. Alternative dispute resolu­
tion (ADR) has been develped and implemented to provide such 
alternatives.155,156 ADR allows the parties greater control over 
resolving the issues between them. It encourages problem-solv- 
ing approaches and provides for more effective settlements. Most 
importantly, it tends to enhance cooperation and be conducive 
to the preservation of relationships. Of the various ADR 
processes, the role of the neutral party in arbitration is to con­
sider the issues and then make a decision which determines the 
issues and is binding on the parties. However, in mediation, the 
neutral party does not have any authority to make any decision 
for the parties, who thus retain full autonomy. Medical media­
tion is concerned specifically with disputes where there is a med­
ical issue. The contact point is: Tel/Fax: +44 (0) 171 834 3351 
ADR is developing rapidly not only in Australasia, Europe 
and North America, but also in Asia.
Standards and definitions
Standards
There are national, regional and international bodies that 
develop standards for goods and services to facilitate interna' 
tional trade and exchange. The prefix ISO or IEC means that 
the standard is an international one (put out by the Interna-
STAN DARD S
Global
ISO
IEC
Regional
EN
National
ANSI
BS
DIN
IS
  

Ethics, law and related matters 
139
tional Organization for Standardization158 or the International 
Electrotechnical Commission159 respectively); an international 
standard prefixed by EN (‘Euronorm’) means that the standard 
has been adopted by Europe; if an international standard is pre­
fixed by BS, it means that the standard has been adopted by the 
UK and that the British Standards Institution (the national 
body in the UK dealing with standards)160 is providing the 
English language version of that standard; the prefix IS indi­
cates that a standard has been approved by the NSAI (National 
Standards Authority of Ireland).161
The addresses of national standards bodies are available at 
a website.162
Definitions
As with all other branches of Medicine, Audiologieal Medicine 
can look to official international documents regarding what 
things should be called or have been called, and how they can 
be defined and classified.
TERM INOLOGY
Termmolo^a Anatomica 
Index Virum
Approved List of Bacterial Names
ICD-10
ICF
INN
ISO 31
ISO 1000
IEC 60050
The Terminologia A natomica (TA)163 has replaced the 
Nomina A natomica (NA) as the official international list of 
anatomical terms. Enzyme nomenclature is determined by the 
Nomenclature Committee of the International Union of Bio­
chemistry and Molecular Biology. An Approved List of Bacter­
ial Names (by the Judicial Commission of the International 
Committee on Systematic Bacteriology) is published by the 
American Society for Microbiology. The Index Virum is the 
collection of index files that list all the names of virus 
families, genera and species in the Sixth Report of the 
ICTV.177’178
Bertillon’s 1893 Classification of Diseases and Related 
Health Problems is today’s WHO’s Tenth Revision of the Inter­
national Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related 
Health Problems (ICD-10). ICF (International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health)179 is the successor to 
WHO’s ICIDH series the first in which appeared in 1980 as the 
‘International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities, and 
Handicaps: A Manual Of Classification Relating To The Con­
sequences of Disease’. It has moved away from the 1980 ICIDH
‘consequence of disease’ classification to being a ‘components of 
health’ classification. This reflects significant developments in 
the way one thinks about disablement in general. The applica­
tion of these developments to the field of auditory disorders has 
also been profound.180 ICF is a classification of health and 
health related domains that describe body functions and struc­
tures, activities and participation. The domains are classified 
from body, individual and societal perspectives. Since an indi­
vidual’s functioning and disability occurs in a context, ICF also 
includes a list of environmental factors. ICF is useful to under­
stand and measure health outcomes. It can be used in clinical 
settings, health services or surveys at the individual or popula­
tion level. Thus ICF complements ICD-10.
WHO has published Cumulative List No. 9 of Inter­
national Nonproprietary Names (INN) for Pharmaceutical 
Substances.
The International Electrotechnical Commission has pro­
duced glossaries. For example, IEC 60050-801 (1994-08) 
encompasses definitions in acoustics and electroacoustics, and 
IEC 60050-881 (1983-01) definitions in radiology and radio­
logical physics. The symbols and definitions for officially recog­
nized quantities are given by ISO 31, of which Part 7 covers 
Acoustics. SI,181 already endorsed by the IEC and other inter­
national science bodies, finds expression in ISO 1000: 1992.
Guidelines
A  guideline has been defined as: ‘a formal statement about a 
defined task or function. Examples include clinical practice 
guidelines, guidelines for the application of preventive screen­
ing procedures, and guidelines for the ethical conduct of epi­
demiologic practice and research.164 Clinical guidelines have 
been defined as ‘systematically developed statements which 
assist clinicians and patients in making decisions about appro­
priate treatment for specific conditions ... Clinical guidelines 
are produced for one reason, and for one reason only: to 
improve the quality of care.165
There is a whole constellation of guidelines, ranging from 
Guidelines for Bias-free Writing,166 to Guidelines for the Assessment 
of General Damages in Personal Injury.167
There are guidelines for developing clinical guidelines,168 
implementing clinical guidelines,169 using computers to do so,170 
considering their legality171 and questioning why clinicians do 
not use guidelines.172
Instructions and manuals
Aside from the guidelines just mentioned, there is an array of 
what are essentially ‘How to do it’ books and manuals. These 
range from how to do audiometry173 through a step-by-step 
guide to conducting a clinical audit project174 to a series of 
exercises to provide a foundation for clinical governance.175
  

140 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
Evidence based medicine
Evidence-based medicine was a logical consequence of two 
books which were published in 1972, i.e. one by the epidemiol­
ogist Cochrane,182 the other by the philosopher, Popper.183
Popper dismissed the value of clinical experience per se: 
‘The Freudian analysts emphasised that their theories were con­
stantly verified by their ‘clinical observations’. As for Adler, I 
was much impressed by a personal experience. Once, in 1919,1 
reported to him a case which to me did not seem particularly 
Adlerian, but which he found no difficulty in analysing in terms 
of his theory of inferiority feelings, although he had not even 
seen the child. Slightly shocked, I asked him how he could be 
so sure. ‘Because of my thousandfold experience’, he replied; 
whereupon I could not help saying: ‘And with this new case, I 
suppose, your experience has become a thousand-and-one-fold.’ 
(at p 35).
‘Evidence-based medicine de-emphasises intuition, unsys­
tematic clinical experience (it is this that distinguishes the clin­
ical opinion per se to which Popper (1972) objected and the 
clinical opinion which is sought in modem evidence-based 
medicine) and pathophysiologic rationale as sufficient grounds 
for clinical decision making and stresses the examination of 
evidence from clinical research. Evidence-based medicine 
requires new skills of the physician, including efficient litera­
ture searching ... We will refer to this process as the critical 
appraisal exercise. ’184
Our otolaryngological colleagues had this to say: ‘The term 
‘evidence-based medicine’ has been much used in the health 
care debate in the 1990s. The concept that everything done in 
medicine should have proof has been taken up as a mantra not 
only by politicians but also a considerable body of the medical 
profession. Indeed, a new journal, Evidence Based Medicine, has 
been introduced in response to this wave of enthusiasm. Those 
who have been in the profession of medicine, and especially 
surgery, for any length of time, know that basing every action 
on previously published proof is virtually impossible. Yet to 
speak against evidence-based medicine is akin to saying that 
the king has no clothes (at p 152)... Our conclusion, therefore, 
is that on the basis of examination of 5000 articles in leading 
ENT journals, ENT is not an evidence-based specialty ... the 
same might be applied to all surgical sub-specialties since there 
is a fundamental difference between the evaluation of medi­
cines as opposed to surgical procedures.’ (at p 156185)
One of his colleagues responded: ‘Whilst it is pertinent to 
look at the evidence for practice in a particular specialty, there 
is a danger that if the results are considered unsatisfactory, oth­
ers might take this to imply that the specialty was inferior to 
other specialities ... Certainly, the medical specialities are more 
active in carrying out randomized controlled trials than sur­
geons, one of the main reasons being that they are required to 
do this before a drug licence is issued. As yet this is not required 
for surgical procedures ... What one also wants to known [sic] 
is how best to arrive at a diagnosis, what the epidemiology of 
the condition is to understand the natural history and the out­
come of the conditions as well as the economics of all aspects
, 186
There have been a number of critiques of the methodology 
of Evidence-based medicine, e.g. by the MRC Biostatistics 
Unit, which has considered the heterogeneity between study 
results.187
Evidence-based medicine has spawned a plethora of bodies 
(se Glossary) which follow in the wake of this Zeitgeist.
The Commission for Health Improvement’s188 aim is to 
improve the quality of patient care in the NHS. CHI will raise 
standards by:
*  
assessing every NHS organisation and making its findings 
public
■ 
investigating when there is serious failure
■ 
checking that the NHS is following national guidelines
■ 
advising the NHS on best practice
Conclusions
It is clear that there is a spectrum of customs, customary law, reli­
gions, ethical codes, law and related controls that affect humans. 
The law in a given state reflects, in many cases, the state’s unique 
and complex history. In Sri Lanka, for example, the one and a 
half centuries of Dutch rule provided Roman-Dutch Law. This 
was endorsed by the subsequent British rule, the persistence of 
which for the next one and a half centuries allowed the infusion 
of English common law principles. But Sri Lankan law also 
incorporates the customary law of the Buddhist Sinhalese 
(Kandyan la<w), the Hindu Tamils (T(h)esawalamai) and those of 
Arab origins, some being pre-Islamic.
Nevertheless, one needs to bear in mind that some societies 
do not distinguish these various normative systems from one 
another. The cognosphere of these societies is holistic, cul­
turally bound and embraces competence in day-to-day living. 
This unitary, grass-roots knowledge, termed indigenous knowl­
edge, can produce conservationist, environmentally sound and 
socially harmonious practices.176
References
1. Dawkins R. River Out of Eden. London: Phoenix, 1995.
2. Slater PJB. Behaviour and Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 1994.
3. Blackmore S. The Meme Machine. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1999.
4. Allott A. The Limits of Law. London: Butterworths, 1980.
5. Hinchcliffe R, Bellman S. Legal and ethical matters. In: Stephens 
D, ed. Scott-Brown’s Otolaryngology, 6th edn, Vol. 2, Adult Audi­
ology. London: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1997, pp. 2/7/1-2/7/43.
6. Reves E. The Anatomy of Peace. London: Penguin, 1947: 13.
7. Hallpike CR. The Principles of Social Evolution. Oxford: Clarendon, 
1986.
  

Ethics, law and related matters 
141
8. Turnbull C. The Mountain People. London: Pan, 1974.
9. Nakane C. Japanese Society. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin, 
1974.
10. Sieder R. Customary Law and Democratic Transition in Guatemala. 
London: University of London, Institute of Latin American Stud- 
ies, 1997.
11. Riasanovosky V. Customary Law of the Nomadic Tribes of Siberia. 
London: Curzon, 1997.
12. Serjeant RB. Customary and Shari’ah Law in Arabian Society. 
Aldershot: Ashgate, 1991.
13. Kamali MH. Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence. Cambridge: The 
Islamic Text Society, 1991.
14. Raendchen O, Raendchen ]. The Lao Hiit Khoong Code: 
Traditional Community Rights and Social Values of the Lao. 
7th International Conference on Thai Studies, Amsterdam, 
4-8 July 1999. In: Community Rights in Thailand http://www. 
pscw.uva.nl/icts7/community.html
15. Dadomo C, Farran S. The French Legal System. London: Sweet and 
Maxwell, 1993.
16. Foster N. German Law and Legal System (Deutsches Recht und 
Deutsches Rechtssystem). London: Blackstone, 1993.
17. Yinger JM. Religion, Society and the Individual. New York: Macmil- 
lan, 1957.
18. Chaudhuri NC. Hinduism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.
19. Klostermaier KK. Hinduism: a Short History. London: Oneworld, 
2000.
20. Kelly F. A Guide to Early Irish Law. Dublin: Dublin Institute for 
Advanced Studies, 1998.
21. Lee S. Law and Morals. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986.
22. Machiavelli N. The Prince. London: Penguin, 1981.
23. Harvey P. An Introduction to Buddhism. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1990.
24. Kulananda. Principles of Buddhism. London: Harper Collins, 1996.
25. Hinnells JR. Dictionary of Religions. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: 
Penguin, 1986.
26. Buddhadasa 
Bhikku. 
Handbook 
for 
Mankind. 
Bangkok: 
Buddhadasa Foundation, 1986.
27. Char DF, Tom KS, Young GC, Murakami T, Ames R. A view of 
death and dying among the Chinese and Japanese. Hawaii MedJ 
1996; 55: 286-90.
28. Lewittes M. Jewish Law. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1994.
29. Labriolle P. The History and Literature of Christianity. London: 
Taylor & Francis, 1997.
30. Waines D. An Introduction to Islam. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1995.
31. Doi ARI. Shari’ah: The Islamic Law. London: Ta Ha, 1984.
32. Horrie C, Chippindale P. What is Islam? London: Virgin, 1994.
33. Muraoka T, Brown DM, Araki JT. Studies in Shinto Thought. 
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1988.
34. Breen J, Teeuwen M. Shinto in Historical Perspective. London: 
Curzon, 2000.
35. Higuchi S, Ogawa T. In: Duncan AS, Dunstan GR, Welboum RB, 
eds. Dictionary of Medical Ethics. London: Darton, Longman & 
Todd, 1981: 397-99.
36. Jamgon KLT. Buddhist Ethics. Ithaca NY: Snow Lion, 1998.
37. Harvey P. An Introduction to Buddhist Ethics. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000.
38. Gill R. A Textbook of Christian Ethics. Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 
1995.
39. Pinckaers S. The Sources of Christian Ethics. Edinburgh: T & T 
Clark, 1995.
40. Hoose B. Christian Ethics. London: Continuum International, 1998.
41. Porter J. Moral Action and Christian Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1999.
42. Perrett RW. Hindu Ethics. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii, 
1998.
43. Amin SH. Islamic and Iranian Ethics. Edinburgh: Royston, 1991.
44. Dorff E, Newman LE. Contemporary Jewish Ethics and Morality. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.
45. Sherwin BL. Jewish Ethics for the Twenty-first Century. New York, 
NY: Syracuse University Press, 1999.
46. Keown D. The Nature of Buddhist Ethics. London: Macmillan, 1992.
47. Banner M. Christian Ethics and Contemporary Moral Problems. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
48. Walton JN. Report of the Select Committee on Medical Ethics. 
London: HMSO, 1994.
49. Duncan AS, Dunstan GR, Welboum RB (eds). Dictionary of 
Medical Ethics. London: Darton, Longman & Todd, 1981: viii.
50. Rivers J. Buddhism. In: Duncan AS, Dunstan GR, Welbourn RB, 
eds. Dictionary of Medical Ethics. London: Darton, Longman & 
Todd, 1981: 44-6.
51. Barnes M. Euthanasia: Buddhist principles. Br Med Bull 1996; 52: 
369-75.
52. Eijk WJ. Carrying on the healing mission of Christ: medical ethics 
in the Christian tradition. A eta Neurochirurg Suppl 1999; 74: 53-8.
53. Ali Raja I, Chaudhry MR. Islam and medical ethics. A eta 
Neurochirurg Suppl 1999; 74: 29-34.
54. Limentani AE. The role of ethical principles in health care and 
the implications for ethical codes. J Med Ethics 1999; 25: 394-8.
55. Mason JK, Smith AM. Law and Medical Ethics. London: 
Butterworths Law, 1999.
56. Baker R, Strosberg MA, Bynum J. Legislating Medical Ethics. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1995.
57. British Medical Association. The Handbook of Medical Ethics. 
London: BMA, 1984.
58. General Medical Council, http://www.gmc-uk.org
59. General Medical Council. Facing A Complaint. London: GMC,
1997.
60. General Medical Council. Good Medical Practice. London: GMC,
1998.
61. General Medical Council. Confidentiality. London: GMC, 1995.
62. General Medical Council. Seeking Patients’ Consent. London: 
GMC, 1998.
63. Pappworth M. Medical ethical committees: a review of their func­
tions. World Med 1978; 13: 199-78.
64. Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences. 
Human Experimentation and Medical Ethics. Geneva: CIOMS, 1982.
65. Declaration of Helsinki. Recommendations guiding physicians in 
biomedical research involving human subjects. JAMA 1997; 277: 
925-6.
  

142 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
66. International Research Codes of Ethics. Bull PanAmerican Health 
Org 1990; 24: 604-21.
67. Royal College of Physicians of London. Guidelines on the Practice 
of Ethics Committees in Medical Research. London: Royal College of 
Physicians of London, 1984.
68. Department of Health. Local Research Ethics Committees. 
HSG(91)5. London: Department of Health, 1991.
69. MRECs. http://dialspace.pipex.com/mrec/
70. http://www.ofreS'hs.upmc.edu/irb/irbref/guidelines.pdf
71. Food and Drug Administration, http://www.fda.gov/oc/oha/irb/ 
toe.html (1998 Update).
72. Bioethics Resources on the web 
(NIH provided), 
http:// 
www.nih.gov/sigs/bioethics/
73. US NLM. Informed Consent, http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/cbm/ 
hum_exp.html#5 0
74. US NLM. Privacy and Confidentiality, http://www.nlm.nih.gov/ 
pubs/cbm/hum_exp.html#7 0
75. US NLM Clinical Trials, http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/cbm/hum_ 
exp.html#140
76. Smith T. Ethics in Medical Research: a Handbook of Good Practice. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
77. Nimmo WS. Joint Consensus Conference on Misconduct in Bio­
medical Research. Proc R Coll Physicians Edin 2000; 30(Suppl 7): 
1-26.
78. Royal College of Physicians of London. Fraud and Misconduct in 
Medical Research. London: Royal College of Physicians of London, 
1991.
79. Morell C, Harvey G. The Clinical Audit Handbook. London: Har- 
court, 1999.
80. Sheldon R. Auditing Clinical Care in Scotland. London: HMSO,
1994.
81. Kinn S, Siann T. Computers and Clinical Audit. London: Hodder & 
Stoughton Publishers, 1993.
82. British Medical Association. Ethical Issues in Medical Audit. 
London: BMA, 1996.
83. Eamshaw JJ. Auditing audit: the cost of the emperor’s new 
clothes. BrJ Hosp Med 1997; 58: 189-92.
84. Kogan M, Redfem S, Kober A, Norman I, Packwood T, Robinson
S. Making Use of Clinical Audit. Milton Keynes: Open University 
Press, 1995.
85. Behrendt N, Heegaard S, Fomitz GG. Hospitalsodbuktionen. En 
vaesentlig faktor i sygehusenes kvalitetssikring. [The hospital 
autopsy. An important factor in hospital quality assurance.] 
Ugeskrift for Laeger 1999; 161: 543-7.
86. Houghton G. From audit to effectiveness: an historical evaluation 
of the changing role of Medical Audit Advisory Groups. J Eval 
Clin Prac 1997; 3: 245-53.
87. Chambers R. Clinical Effectiveness Made Easy. Oxford: Radcliffe 
Medical Press, 1998.
88. Miles A. Progress in Clinical Effectiveness. London: Royal Society of 
Medicine, 2000.
89. Clinical Governance. Circular: NHS MEL (1998) 7. London: 
HMSO, 1998.
90. Dewar S. Clinical Governance Under Construction. London: King’s 
Fund, 1999.
91. Lugon M. Clinical Governance: Making It Happen. London: Royal 
Society of Medicine, 1999.
92. British Association of Otorhinolaryngologists—Head and 
Neck Surgeons. Clinical Governance and the Role of the British 
Association of Otorhinolaryngologists Head and Neck Surgeons. 
London: British Association of Otorhinolaryngologists—Head 
and Neck Surgeons at the Royal College of Surgeons of 
England, 2000.
93. Vincent C. Clinical Risk Management. London: British Medical 
Journal, 1996.
94. Wilson J, Tingle J. Clinical Risk Management. London: Butter- 
worth-Heinemann, 1997.
95. Martin EA. A Dictionary of La<w. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1994.
96. Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. 
http://www.sshrc.ca/english/programinfo/policies/Intro03.htm
97. David R, Jauffret-Spinosi C. Les Grands Systemes de Droit 
Contemporains. Paris: Dalloz, 1992.
98. Lingat R. The Classical Law of India. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1998.
99. Derrett JDM. Religion, Law and the State in India. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1999.
100. Huxley A. The Reception of Buddhist Law in SEAsia 200 
BCE-1860 CE. In: Doucet M, Vanderlinden J, eds. La Reception 
des 
Systemes Juristiques: Implantation et Destin. 
Bruxelles: 
Bruglant, 1994: 139-237.
101. Epstein I. Tibet Transformed. Beijing: New World Press, 1983.
102. Turner B (ed.). Statesman's Yearbook. London: Macmillan, 2000.
103. Cotran E, Mallat C. Yearbook of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1997.
104. Ibrahim A. Foreword to Kamali 1991.13
105. Coulson NJ. A History of Islamic Law. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 1994.
106. Jones R. The Canon Law of the Roman Catholic Church and Church 
of England. Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 2000.
107. Kynell K von. Saxon and Medieval Antecedents of the English 
Common Law. New York: Edwin Mellen, 1999.
108. Watkin TG. An Historical Introduction to Modem Civil Law. 
Aldershot: Ashgate, 1999.
109. Pound R. A survey of social interests. 57 Harvard Law Review I, 
1943/4. Cambridge, Mass.
110. Sypnowich C. The Concept of Socialist Law. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1990.
111. Toynbee A. Mankind and Mother Earth. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1976: 583.
112. East R. Social Security Law. London: Macmillan, 1999.
113. Montgomery J. Health Care Law. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1997.
114. Nys H. Medical Law in Belgium. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1998.
115. McLean SAM. Law Reform and Medical Injury Litigation. 
Aldershot: Ashgate, 1995.
116. Tomkin D, Hanafin P. Irish Medical Law. London: Sweet 
& Maxwell, 1995.
117. Koniaris TB, Karlovassitou-Koniari AD. Medical Law in Greece. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1999.
  

Ethics, law and related matters 
143
118. Kennedy I, Grubb A. Principles of Medical Law. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1998.
119. Thornton J, Beckwith S. Environmental Law. London: Sweet 
& Maxwell, 1997.
120. Chen J. Chinese Law. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1999.
121. Wang G, Mo ]. Chinese Law. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1999.
122. Lin Feng. Constitutional Law in China. London: Sweet 
& Maxwell, 1998.
123. Bell ], Boyron S, Whittaker S. Principles of French Law. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1998.
124. Ebke WF, Finkin MW. Introduction to German Law. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer, 1997.
125. Bhattacharjee AM. Hindu Law and the Constitution. New Delhi: 
Eastern Law House, 1994.
126. Galanter M. Law and Society in Modem India. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1993.
127. Bin-Nun A. The Law of the State of Israel. Jerusalem: Rubin Mass, 
1972.
128. Fujikura K. Japanese Law and Legal Theory. Aldershot: Ashgate,
1995.
129. Oda H. Japanese Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
130. Butler WE. Russian Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
131. Feldbrugge FJM. Russian Law. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1993.
132. Ansay T, Wallace D. Introduction to Turkish Law. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer, 1996.
133. Ural E. Handbook of Turkish Law. London: Milet, 1999.
134. van Caenegem RC. The Birth of the English Common Law. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
135. van Caenegem RC. Judges, Legislators, and Professors. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1992.
136. Steiner J. Textbook on EC Law. London: Blackstone, 1994.
137. Oppenheimer A. The Relationship Between European Community 
Law and National Law: the Cases. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1994.
138. Eggleston R. Evidence, Proof and Probability. London: Weidenfeld 
and Nicolson, 1983.
139. Society of Expert Witnesses, http://www.sew.org.uk/
140. Expert Witnesses, Guidelines re Federal Court of Australia. 
http://www.fedcourt.gov.aU/practice.htm#practicedl.htm
141. Writing Medico-legal Reports. Prepared for members of the 
Medical Protection Society, 1997. Knight BH, Palmer RN. 
http://www.mps.org.uk/medical/articles/pumlrepl.htm,
http:// www.mps.org.uk/medical/articles/pumlrep2.htm and 
http:// www.mps.org.uk/medical/articles/puml rep3 .htm
142. Foy J. New court rules for expert witnesses. ENTNews 1999; 8: 
28-9.
143. Clement-Evans C. Cenric Clement-Evans comments. ENTNews 
1999; 8: 29.
144. Friston M. New rules for expert witnesses: the last shots of the 
medicolegal hired gun. BMJ 1999; 316: 1365-6.
145. Woolf, Lord. Access to Justice: Interim Report to the Lord 
Chancellor on the civil justice system in England and Wales, July 1996. 
http://www.law.warwick.ac.uk/woolf/report/
146. Department of Health and Social Security. Occupational Deaf­
ness. Report by the Industrial Injuries Advisory Council in accordance
with Section 62 of the National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act 
1965 on the question whether there are degrees of hearing loss due to 
noise which satisfy the conditions for prescription under the Act. 
Cmnd 5461. London: HMSO, 1973.
147. Gray BK. A History of English Philanthropy. New York: Kelley, 
1967.
148. Smith AFM. Mad cows and ecstasy: chance and choice in an 
evidence-based society. J R Statist Soc A 1996; 159: 367-83.
149. Friedmann W. Legal Theory. London: Stevens, 1949.
150. Hutcheson JC. The judgement intuitive: the function of the 
‘Hunch’ in judicial decision. Cornell Law Q 1929; 14: 274-88.
151. Claxton G. Investigating human intuition: knowing without 
knowing why. Psychologist 1998; 11: 217-20.
152. Wedderburn KW. The Worker and the Law. Harmondsworth, 
Middlesex: Penguin, 1965: 20.
153. O’Higgins P, Partington M. Industrial conflict: judicial attitudes. 
32 Modem Law Rev 1969: 53.
154. Council of Europe. The Training of Judges and Public Prosecutors in 
Europe. Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing, Council of 
Europe, 1996.
155. Brown H, Marriott A. ADR Principles and Practice. London: 
Sweet and Maxwell, 1999.
156. York S. Practical ADR Handbook. London: Sweet and Maxwell,
1999.
157. Mittal DP. New Law of Arbitration, ADR and Contract Law in 
India. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1997.
158. International Organization for Standardization. http://www. 
iso.ch/addresse/membodies.html
159. International Electrotechnical Commission, http://www.iec.ch/
160. British Standards Institution. http://194.74.46.150/bsis/SISO/ 
index.htm
161. National Standards Authority of Ireland, http://www.nsai.ie/
162. Addresses of national standards bodies, http://www.iso.ch/ 
addresse/membodies.html
163. FCAT (Federative Committee on Anatomical Terminology). 
Terminologia A natomica. Stuttgart: Thieme, 1998.
164. McDonald CJ, Overhage JM. Guidelines you can follow and can 
trust: an ideal and an example. JAMA 1994; 271: 872-3.
165. National Health Service Executive. Clinical Guidelines: Using 
Clinical Guidelines to Improve Patient Care within the NHS. 
London: Department of Health, 1996.
166. Schwartz M. Guidelines for Bias-free Writing. Bloomington, IN: 
Indiana University Press, 1995.
167. Judicial Studies Board. Guidelines for the Assessment of General 
Damages in Personal Injury. London: Blackstone, 1998.
168. Grimshaw J, Eccles M. Clinical Guidelines from Conception to Use. 
Oxford: Radcliffe Medical Press, 2000.
169. Humphris D, Littlejohns P. Implementing Clinical Guidelines: a 
Practical Guide. Oxford: Radcliffe Medical Press, 1999.
170. Corb GJ, Liaw Y, Brandt CA, Shiffman RN. An object- 
oriented framework for the development of computer-based 
guideline implementations. Methods Information Med 1999; 38: 
148-53.
171. Hurwitz B. Clinical Guidelines and the Law. Oxford: Radcliffe 
Medical Press, 1998.
  

144 
Fundamentals of audiologieal and vestibular medicine
172. Cabana MD, Rand CS, Powe NR et al. Why don’t physicians 
follow clinical practice guidelines? A framework for improve- 
ment. JAMA 1999; 282: 1458-65.
173. Arlinger S (ed.). Manual of Practical Audiometry. Vol. 1. London: 
Whurr, 1989.
174. Morell C, Harvey G. The Clinical Audit Handbook. London: 
Harcourt, 1999.
175. Lilley R. Making Sense of Clinical Governance. Oxford: Radcliffe 
Medical Press, 1999.
176. Indigenous 
Knowledge, 
http://www.nuffic.nl/ciran/ikdm/l-2/ 
articles/aspects.htmL
177. The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. A 
Perspective on Virus Taxonomy and the Role of the ICTV. 
http://www.uct.ac.za/microbiology/ictv/ICTV.html
178. Virus Taxonomy: The Classification and Nomenclature of Viruses. 
The Sixth Report of the International Committee on Taxonomy 
of Viruses. Murphy FA, Fauquet CM, Bishop DHL, Ghabrial 
SA, Jarvis AW, Martelli GP, Mayo MA, Summers MD. Vienna: 
Springer-Verlag, 1995.
179. International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health. 
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2001.
http: //www3 .who. in t/icf/icftemplate.cfm ?myurl= introduction. 
html%20<Suny title= Introduction
Glossary
CHI Commission for Health Improvement 
Clinical Outcomes Group A multi-professional committee 
which advises the Department of Health on how to improve 
outcomes of clinical care.
Clinical Standards Board Scottish equivalent to National 
Institute of Clinical Excellence.
COG Clinical Outcomes Group
National Institute of Clinical Excellence For decision as to 
whether or not a new drug or interventional procedure will be 
used by the NHS (England and Wales).
180. Stephens SDG, Kerr P. Auditory Disablements: An Update. 
Audiology 2000; 19: 322-332.
181. SI (Le Susteme International d!Unites). The International System 
of Units. National Physical Laboratory. HMSO. 1993. 6th 
edition see ISO 1000: 1992; BS 5555: 1993.
182. Cochrane AL. Effectiveness and Efficiency: random reflections on 
health services. London: Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust, 
1972.
183. Popper KR. Conjectures and Refutations. London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul, 1972.
184. Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group. Evidence-Based 
Medicine: A New Approach to Teaching the Practice of Medi­
cine. J Am Med Asso 1992; 420: 2425.
185. Maran AGD, Molony NC, Armstrong MWJ, Ah-See K. Is 
there an evidence base for the practice of ENT surgery? Clin Oto­
laryngol 1997; 22: 152-57.
186. Browning GG. Is there an evidence base for the practice of ENT 
surgery? Clin Otolaryngol 1998; 23: 1-2.
187. Higgins J, Thompson S, Deeks J, Altman D. Statistical hetero­
geneity in systematic reviews of clinical trials: a critical appraisal 
of guidelines and practice. J Health Serv Res Pol 2002; 7: 51-61.
188. Commission for Health Improvement, http://www.chi.nhs.uk/ 
(accessed 13-10-2002)
NICE National Institute of Clinical Excellence 
Safety and Efficacy Register of New Interventional Proce­
dures The body to which all new interventional procedures 
must be reported (UK).
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network A collaborative 
Scottish Development which produces guidelines for the health 
care specialties; the establishment of each guideline starts with 
a systematic review a la Cochrane, everything being annotated 
with a grading of the evidence.
SERNIP Safety and Efficacy Register of Ne<w Interventional 
Procedures
SIGN Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
  

jiection II 
Audiology

Development and 
plasticity of the 
human auditory 
system
Remy Pujol, Mireille Lavigne-Rebillard
Introduction
This chapter specifically describes the anatomy and function of 
cochlear development in the human, with an emphasis on mat- 
uration of sensory cells and their neural connections. Subse­
quently, 
the development of the auditory pathways is 
summarized, focusing on the critical role of a healthy cochlea in 
building the auditory brain.
Development of the human cochlea
The development of the peripheral auditory organ, the cochlea, 
is relatively well documented in humans (reviewed in refer­
ences 1 and 2) as well as in most common experimental small 
mammals (reviewed in references 1, 3, 4 and 5). A detailed 
account of this development does, however, remain to be com­
pleted. Functional data concerning the earlier stages are still 
missing, due to obvious difficulties in fetal recordings, while 
anatomical data from the latter stages are of poor quality, due to 
the bad preservation of tissues from therapeutic abortions. It is, 
however, possible to achieve quite good extrapolations from 
experimental data, due to the remarkable similarity of structure, 
and to a lesser extent of function, of most mammalian cochleas. 
It is thus possible to precisely date the onset of human cochlear 
function on the basis of anatomical data. Similarly, the com­
pletion of human cochlear maturation can be mostly estimated 
from physiological recordings in premature babies.
The human cochlea develops in utero. At 10-12 weeks of 
gestation, the sensory hair cells differentiate. At 18-20 weeks of
gestation, the cochlea starts functioning. At 30-36 weeks, it is 
mature. At birth, although cochlear development is almost 
complete, the brain auditory structures are far from mature: the 
last part of the primary auditory pathway (i.e. the thalamocor­
tical connections) is not believed to be fully developed until 
postnatal year 4-8. During these first years of life, synapses in 
the auditory brain are formed, selected, stabilized, and inter­
connected depending on the type of stimulation they receive 
from the peripheral organ. Thus a normally functioning 
cochlea, normally stimulated, is needed.
Anatomy of the developing human cochlea 
Embryology and gross morphology
The neural and sensory elements of the inner ear develop from 
the ectodermal otic placode, which forms in the 23-day-old 
human embryo, and gives rise to the otocyst.6 Differentiation of 
the vestibular and then the cochlear end organs from the oto­
cyst takes place during the second month of pregnancy.
The gross anatomical development of the human cochlea 
has been precisely described.7 Complete coiling of the cochlea 
can be observed at 8-9 weeks of gestation. However, complete 
formation of the bony capsule is not achieved before the last 
months of pregnancy.
Anatomy and histology
First signs of differentiation
The first sign of differentiation of the organ of Corti, as 
observed by scanning and light microscopy (Figure 9.1), is not

148 
Audiology
observed until 9-10 weeks of pregnancy.2,8,9 As in most com­
mon mammals studied,3,10 development appears to proceed reg­
ularly from the base towards the apex. Meanwhile, since a 
complete serial study of the whole cochlea has never been per­
formed, the possibility cannot be excluded that although devel­
opment starts in the first turn, it may begin at a certain distance 
from the basal end and progress toward both extremities.4 The 
cochlea in a 9-week-old human fetus is completely coiled2,9 
(Figure 9.1a), but its sensory epithelial surface is totally 
undifferentiated, i.e. all the cells have microvilli and a kinocil- 
ium.9,11 The tectorial membrane is just beginning to form at this 
stage (Figure 9.1b).
Hair cell differentiation
Hair cells begin to morphologically differentiate at 11-12 weeks 
of gestation. About 1 week earlier, nerve fibres are seen enter­
ing the undifferentiated epithelium.11 This indicates that nerve 
endings interact very early with the differentiation of hair cells. 
The growing of stereocilia (i.e. ciliogenesis) is the main 
morphological criterion of hair cell differentiation. It starts 
around week 122’8,9 (Figure 9.2a),9 and it is characterized by 
two gradients: a basal-to-apical and an inner hair cell (IHC) to 
outer hair cell (OHC) gradient. From the beginning, the 
classical pattern of one row of IHCs and two rows of OHCs can 
be observed. When they first appear, the bundles of stereocilia 
are quite similar on both types of hair cells (Figure 9.2a): round 
with stereocilia of about the same length, a pattern resembling 
that of auditory hair cells from lower vertebrates.9
Then, staircase and V-like arrangements are created (Figure 
9.3). On IHCs, the ‘V-shaped’ arrangement is broad, especially 
at the base of the cochlea, where stereocilia appear to be almost 
linearly arranged. The OHC V- or W-pattem is always more
recognizable. An adult-like organization of stereocilia is 
observed in the fetal cochlea around week 22.2,9
Bredberg,12 using surface preparations, first detailed the 
organization (number and pattern) of human cochlear sensory 
cells. It would appear that an adult-like pattern is acquired as 
soon as the 4th month in utero. The numbers of sensory cells in 
the fetal cochleas are slightly greater than the mean adult val­
ues, i.e. 3500 IHCs and 13000 OHCs.
Transient appearance of supernumerary hair cells (Figure 9.4)
With the exception of the extreme apex, the single row of 
IHCs and the three rows of OHCs are clearly visible at week
14 along almost the entire length of the cochlea.2,12 For a cou­
ple of weeks, however, IHCs are loosely arranged, with spaces 
between adjacent cells. This could explain the transitory 
appearance of extra IHCs at about week 15 or 16 (Figure 9.4), 
which seems to occur more frequently in the human than in 
other mammalian cochleas.13 At OHC level, a transitory over­
production is also clearly seen (Figure 9.4). OHCs are fre­
quently organized in four or even five rows. Again, this pattern 
is much more frequently encountered in the human9,14 than in 
other mammals and it lasts longer than extra IHCs. The tran­
sitory extra OHCs have been tentatively correlated with the 
observation that otoacoustical emissions in human babies pre­
sent a richer spectrum of peaks than in adults.15,16 It is inter­
esting to note that the apical coil of the human cochlea 
displays this supernumerary feature of OHCs even in adult­
hood, suggesting some ‘uncompleted maturation’ of the apical 
cochlea (see below). Both a normal overproduction of OHCs17 
and a drug (retinoic acid)-stimulated overproduction of IHCs 
and OHCs18 have been described. Overproduction of hair 
cells, followed by a down regulation process, seems to be a
Figure 9.1 Nine to ten weeks of gestation, (a) Scanning EM (bar: 1 mm) showing the complete coiling of the cochlear spiral. The black arrow indicates the plane of 
section seen in Nomarski optics on the right (bar: 50 urn), (b) The sensory epithelium is not yet differentiated, as only a ridge and some filaments of the nascent tectorial 
membrane (white arrow) mark its location. However, the spiral ganglion (triangular arrow) is visible and nerve fibres may be tracked (arrow) up to the otocyst.
  

Development and plasticity of the human auditory system 
149
Figure 9.2 Twelve to fourteen weeks of gestation, (a) Scanning EM (bar: 10 ^m). The round-shaped bundle of growing stereoeilia, jutting out from the surrounding 
microvilli, appears first on the IHCs and then on OHCs. This is the clearest sign of morphological differentiation of hair cells, (b) Nomarski section along the plane of 
the black arrow seen on the left (bar: 10(j,m). The IHC (triangular arrow), the inner pillar and three OHCs (arrows) are easily recognizable.
Figure 9.3 (a) A 15 weeks of gestation, the classic organization of IHC (top row) and OHC (bottom rows) stereoeilia is recognizable on most of the hair cells. 
However, some OHCs still display the typical immature round-shaped tuff (white arrow). Note the advanced maturation of IHC stereoeilia Bar: 5 urn. (b) At 16 weeks 
of gestation, the IHC surface shows graded rows of stereoeilia, tip links (black arrow) and glabrous (devoid of microvilli) cuticular plate (star). Bar: 3|im.
‘normal’ phenomenon during the in vivo development of the 
phenomenon may appear to be most valuable for the ‘regener^ 
human cochlea. Tracking the molecular mechanisms of this 
ation’ challenge.
  

150 
Audiology
Figure 9.4 Supernumerary hair cells. Frequently, two rows of IHCs (triangular 
arrows) and four or five rows of OHCs (arrows) are seen in the human 
developing cochlea between 16 (a, Nomarski) to 18 (b, scanning EM) weeks 
of gestation.
Stage of onset of cochlear function 
At about gestational weeks 18-20, human cochlear morphology 
(Figure 9.2) is similar to what has been reported experimentally 
in other mammals at a stage corresponding to the onset of 
cochlear function.19 This stage is characterized by an opening of 
the tunnel of Corti, the formation of NuePs spaces, and the 
regression of Kolliker’s organ that results in the release of the 
tectorial membrane. From this stage onwards, the main changes
observed at the light microscopic level are an elongation of the 
outer pillars and OHCs, and a development of neighbouring 
Deiters’ and Hensen’s cells.
End of morphological maturation
As stated above, the end of morphological maturation is hard to 
determine in the human, because of the poorer preservation of 
tissues as fetal specimens get older. Nevertheless, it seems that 
by 8 months in utero, the histological development of the 
human cochlea is completed, apart from the ganglion of Corti, 
where myelination has not yet been achieved.19 At this stage, 
the human organ of Corti resembles what has been described in 
most adult common laboratory mammals1,20 (Figure 9.5).
Figure 9.5 End of maturation of the mammalian organ of Corti. This adult stage is reached in human cochlea at around 30 weeks of gestation, (a) Scanning EM from 
the base of a rat cochlea (courtesy of Marc Lenoir); the black arrow indicates the plane of the right section, (b) Normarski optics. Bars: 12^im (a) and 20 ^m (b).
  

Development and plasticity of the human auditory system 
151
Figure 9.6 (a) The OHC is first exclusively innervated by afferent endings probably belonging to radial (left) and spiral (right) systems. The OHC is a pure sensory 
cell. Stage 14-16 weeks, (b) Medial efferent endings begin to form synapses with the OHC, while radial afferents retract. The OHC turns into the motile type. Stage 
18-20 weeks (at onset of cochlear function), (c) All OHCs in the basal half of the cochlea have lost radial afferents: large medial efferent synapses are now 
prominent. Stage 26-30 weeks.
Synaptogenesis
IHCs mature earlier than OHCs, and synaptogenesis in both 
types of cells begins very early.11 In a 12-13-week-old fetus (i.e. 
at least 6-8 weeks before the onset of function), classic afferent 
synapses, with presynaptic bodies surrounded by vesicles, can be 
first seen at the IHC bases, and then a week later at the OHC 
bases. The first pattern of IHC innervation is not really differ­
ent from the eventual adult configuration, apart from the great 
number of afferent endings due to the branching of dendrites, 
and the frequent occurrence of direct ‘synaptic-like’ contacts 
between efferent endings and the base of the IHC. On the con­
trary, at this stage, the OHCs are exclusively innervated by 
afferents (Figure 9.6a). The late stages of synaptogenesis, as 
described in small experimental mammals,21 then quite exclu­
sively involve OHCs. Here, together with a drastic modifica­
tion of cell shape when pear-shaped becomes cylindrical, the 
development of synapses involves the late arrival of fibres from 
the medial efferent system, which eventually form synapses 
directly with the OHC base (Figure 9.6b). This occurs at about 
the onset of cochlear function, i.e. around week 20 in the 
human fetus. However, mature efferent-OHC synapses are not 
found until 1 or 2 months later (Figure 9.6c).
To summarize, in the human as in other mammals, the evo­
lution of the synaptic organization at OHC level seems to fol­
low its physiological evolution. Starting from a typical sensory 
stage (i.e. a cell just innervated to send auditory messages to the 
brain), the OHC eventually takes on at the end of maturation 
specific properties more linked to cochlear micromechanics (i.e. 
its motile properties are regulated by the efferent system). It 
appears that this complete OHC development occurs mainly in 
the basal part of the cochlea (the portion involved in coding 
high or mid-range frequencies). In the apical part, this devel­
opment may be incomplete, especially because fewer efferents
arrive at this level. The adult apical OHC may well retain some 
classical sensory properties; at least it seems to be innervated for 
that purpose.
A similar conclusion thus emerges from the study of two 
of the major events in the sensory and neural maturation of 
the cochlea: synaptogenesis and ciliogenesis. Not only do the 
maturation processes begin at the base, but they do not appear 
to be completed at the apex. It would appear from our findings 
that humans have a ‘basal’ cochlea (with OHCs mechanically 
very ‘active’) less extended than in most common laboratory 
mammals. Conversely, a longer portion of the cochlea bearing 
‘apical’ properties: i.e., with OHCs having a prominent affer­
ent innervation22 and possibly more classic sensory properties, 
could have something to do with a better coding of low- 
frequency tones.
Physiology of the developing human auditory 
system
If animal physiological data are abundant and strongly corre­
lated with anatomy (reviewed in references 1, 2 and 3), our 
knowledge about the physiological development of the human 
cochlea is to a large extent based not on cochlear recordings, 
but on much more integrated responses such as brainstem audi- 
tory-evoked potentials (BAEP) or behavioural responses. This 
implies that some bias is introduced by the maturation of the 
brain auditory pathway. Indeed, when the cochlea starts send­
ing auditory messages to the brain (around week 20 of gesta­
tion), the maturation of auditory pathways is far from 
completed (Figures 9.7 and 9.9). Moreover, while the cochlea 
finishes its maturation during the last trimester of pregnancy, 
the auditory brain structures are not supposed to end their 
development until the age of 4-8 years.1
  

152 
Audiology
Cochlear maturation
I 
I 
I
Sensory cell 
Onset of 
End of
differentiation function 
maturation
I 
i 
i
Birth 
10 days 
20 days
End of CNS 
auditory maturation
2 months
3 months 
{in utero)
4 Vz months 
(in utero]
Thyroid deficiency 
Hypersensitive periods
Birth
Aminoglycosides
6 years
Noise trauma
Figure 9.7 Linear development of the cochlea and the auditory brain in both 
human and rat. The human scale (bottom black line) shows the three main 
stages of cochlear development (all in utero) and the delayed completion of 
maturation for the auditory brain (up to 6 or 8 years). Hypersensitive periods 
are the estimated periods of development when the cochlea has been shown, in 
the rat, to be particularly affected by thyroid deficiency, exposure to ototoxic 
drugs, or noise trauma. CNS, central nervous system.
The maturation within the auditory pathways proceeds fol­
lowing a centripetal gradient from the brainstem to the cerebral 
cortex:23 this means that primary or basic decoding (frequency, 
intensity, localization) and reflex responses mature earlier than 
complex decoding and cognitive aspects of auditory perception.
Onset of cochlear function
The BAEP technique has been used to assess hearing and to 
measure its maturation in newborn and premature infants.24 
Starr et al25 succeeded in recording slow cortical-evoked 
potentials from preterm infants as young as 25 weeks of gesta­
tion. Interestingly, the minimum stimulus intensity required to 
elicit evoked responses was 65dBSPL. Uziel et al26 recorded 
BAEP in three premature infants ranging in gestational age 
from 30 to 32 weeks, and found the thresholds to be about 
40-50 dBSPL.
Despite these late first recordings, the onset of cochlear 
function in the human fetus can be estimated from the struc­
tural development of the cochlea and its correlation with simi­
lar studies in experimental mammals (see previous section). By 
20 weeks of gestation, the human cochlea has achieved a devel­
opmental status comparable to that found in other mammals 
when the first responses to sound can be readily evoked.20 At 
this time, the cochlea has high thresholds and very poor dis­
criminative properties which, together with the environment of 
the fetal inner ear (fluids in external and middle ear, sound 
attenuation by maternal tissues, etc.), account for the impossi­
bility of detecting signs of cochlear activity using behavioural or 
electrophysiological methods until a few weeks later.
End of physiological cochlear development
It is also reasonable to assume from morphological data on the 
fetal cochlea that the period of development of cochlear poten­
tials is all included within the normal prenatal period. Actually, 
morphological findings tend to indicate that the development 
of the human cochlea is achieved by 30 weeks of gestation.
This is confirmed by behavioural and BAEP studies per­
formed in premature infants showing that threshold sensitivity 
is adult-like at about 35 weeks of gestational age.25,26 It is likely 
that, as in other mammals, the development of frequency selec­
tivity is achieved at about the same time. N1 latency, as mea­
sured from BAEP, only reaches adult values a few weeks after 
birth, partly because of the delayed maturation (myelination) of 
the spiral ganglion and auditory nerve fibres.24-26
Otoacoustical emissions, which directly reflect the activity 
of OHCs, have been used to assess cochlear function in new- 
borns.15’16’27 It appears that most of the development of this 
sophisticated cochlear function also occurs prenatally: only sub­
tle changes are observed in the first few weeks after birth.
Critical periods during cochlear development
Many experimental studies have shown that the developing ear 
is more susceptible than the adult ear to factors arising from 
external or internal development (reviewed in reference 28). 
These studies have found periods of increased susceptibility to 
various factors such as ototoxic antibiotics (reviewed in refer­
ence 29), noise exposure (reviewed in reference 30), and thy­
roid deficiency (reviewed in reference 31). Here, we will just 
emphasize the main points from these experimental data and 
their possible implications for human cochlear development. 
Figure 9.7 gives a schematic representation of the sensitive 
period of the rat cochlea to hypothyroidism, aminoglycosides, 
and noise trauma. The corresponding stages of the cochlear 
development both in rat and human are indicated.
Period of sensitivity to thyroid deficiency
The association of congenital deafness with thyroid deficiency 
has been reported for years. A detailed experimental study done 
in rats31 clearly demonstrates that thyroid deficiency, at a very 
early stage of cochlear development, results in severe abnor­
malities in the anatomical and functional maturation of the 
cochlea. A translation from the rat to the human scale (see Fig­
ure 9.7) enables a thyroid hormone-sensitive period in the 
human fetus cochlea to be scheduled at about the 3rd month of 
pregnancy.
Period of sensitivity to antibiotic treatment
Above a certain dosage, aminoglycoside antibiotics are well 
known to have an ototoxic effect on the adult cochlea. How­
ever, these drugs have different effects on developing 
cochleas.29 Three main results arise from experimental data: (1) 
the cochlea is affected by aminoglycosides as soon as it begins 
to function; (2) during the period of its functional maturation, 
the cochlea is much more sensitive to aminoglycosides than in 
adulthood— the threshold of ototoxicity can be reached with a 
4-5 times lower dose; (3) in the guinea pig, which undergoes in 
utero cochlear development, this increased susceptibility to 
aminoglycosides also occurs.
  

Development and plasticity of the human auditory system 
1 53
If such a period of sensitivity is to be found in humans, it 
would be (see Figure 9.7) during the last 5 months of pregnancy, 
and as a result premature babies would be at higher risk than 
expected from aminoglycoside antibiotic treatment.
Period of sensitivity to noise trauma
The traumatic effects of intense noise on the adult cochlea 
have been also extensively studied. In young rodents or cats, 
during the developmental period, damage has been reported to 
occur at a level of noise exposure which would not have been 
traumatic in adulthood.30 This period of supra-sensitivity to 
noise trauma has been correlated with the last stage of cochlear 
development, when the cochlea acquires its exquisite properties 
of sensitivity and frequency-selectivity. This means that a 
developing human cochlea is probably more sensitive to noise 
from 6 months in utero to a few months after birth. Again, pre­
mature babies represent a high-risk group, especially if we take 
into account an overlapping at that time of antibiotic and 
noise-sensitive periods (see Figure 9.7). These two factors could 
well combine to increase the deleterious effect, as suggested in 
animal experiments. Indeed, a harmful combination of noise 
(non-traumatic by itself) and aminoglycoside treatment (also 
non-ototoxic by itself) often occurs with premature babies 
maintained in incubators.
From what we know of the existence and the precise time- 
course of these sensitive periods in experimental mammals, we 
must take all precautions in human premature babies to prevent 
a possible combined effect of the potentially harmful factors 
that may affect cochlear development. This is a serious matter, 
even if most of the studies carried out in paediatric ear, nose and 
throat (ENT) departments do not show clear damage linked 
with antibiotics, or noise trauma. In fact, damage could well be 
small and/or limited to a high-frequency range, causing it to be 
overlooked at the time of treatment.32 Later, if perceptible hear­
ing impairment develops, a correlation with what happened in 
the developmental period may prove to be difficult.
What does the human fetus hear?
As stated just above, the human fetus cochlea is both anatomi­
cally and functionally capable of coding a sound and sending 
the message to the brain from about mid-pregnancy onwards. 
There is also behavioural evidence that the human baby is able 
to hear in utero.33-36 The human fetus shows motor responses to 
acoustical stimuli between 24 and 25 weeks33 and cardiac 
responses from 26 weeks on.34,35 Several studies have quantita­
tively assessed the sound environment that surrounds the fetus 
in utero.36 Maternal tissues may attenuate sounds from the 
external environment, depending upon the frequency (the 
higher the frequency, the higher the attenuation). The rather 
good transmission of low-frequency environmental sounds 
makes it likely that stimuli of sufficient intensity in this range 
of frequencies are audible during the 3rd trimester of gestation.
It is nevertheless very difficult to estimate exactly what the 
human baby hears in utero, as both the external and middle ear 
are filled with amniotic fluid. In an extrauterine organism, such
a status would result in a threshold increase of 30-40 dB. Con­
sequently, any estimation of what the human baby is really 
capable of hearing is speculative. Recent observations suggest 
that the fetus is more sensitive to temporal than spatial cues; at 
least, prenatal auditory learning involves the rhythm or prosody 
more than frequency selectivity.
Plasticity of the developing auditory 
system
Plasticity, defined as a change in the functional properties of 
neurones mainly depending on synaptic remodelling, is a gen­
eral characteristic of neural structures. The auditory system, like 
all other sensory systems, is thus susceptible to lesion- and/or 
use-related plasticity, and this plasticity is much more pro­
nounced during development than in adulthood.
After peripheral deprivation or lesion, as well as after spe­
cific training, the auditory brain (especially the cortex) is 
known to reorganize its structures and functional properties (re­
mapping, for instance, its frequency representation). Even the 
first synapses in the cochlea (between the IHCs and the audi­
tory nerve) have been shown to regenerate after being wiped 
out by an excitotoxic injury.37 Only a brief review of develop­
mental plasticity will be given, and the hot debate about hair 
cell regeneration will not be included, as it deserves a special 
chapter.
Developmental plasticity
The development of any specific sensory areas in the brain 
depends on appropriate stimulations during the developmental 
period. This has been abundantly documented in the visual sys­
tem where it is clear that early experience is critical for the acqui­
sition of different properties of vision, such as stereoscopy. 
Similarly, in the auditory system the cochlea plays a key role dur­
ing the first years of life in building the adult auditory brain. 
Therefore, any impairment in the development and functioning 
of the cochlea will affect the development of the auditory brain.
This can be summarized as follows. Normal maturation of 
the cochlea, reaching its maximum performance at birth, will 
slowly (within 4-8 years, depending on the perceptual task) 
drive a normal auditory brain to the acquisition of its maximum 
performance (Figure 9.8a).
Conversely, with abnormal or uncompleted maturation of 
the cochlea, the auditory brain will not receive enough stimu­
lation to fully develop (Figure 9.8b).
The influence of early stimulation (i.e. messages sent by the 
cochlea) on the auditory cortex neurones is illustrated in Figure 
9.9. The same area of the cat auditory cortex is represented at 
the time before the onset of cochlear function (Figure 9.9a), 
when pyramidal neurones have few dendritic branches (i.e. few 
synapses), and at the end of cortical maturation (after months 
of normal functioning of the cochlea) (Figure 9.9b), when
  

154 
Audiology
Figure 9.8 (a) Scheme illustrating that a cochlea reaching 100% of performance will enable the auditory brain to reach the same level later on. (b) Scheme 
illustrating that, with a cochlea reaching over 50% of performance, the auditory brain development will be limited.
Figure 9.9 (a) Pyramidal cortex auditory neurones in a new born kitten (a stage which corresponds to 16 weeks of gestation in humans). The cochlea has not yet 
begun to send messages, and dendritic branches (and therefore synapses) are poor, (b) Similar neurones in a 6-month (fully mature) cat auditory cortex (a stage 
which corresponds to age 6 years in human). Mostly because of messages sent by a normal cochlea, the dendritic branches (and therefore synapses) of pyramidal 
neurones are very dense.
pyramidal neurones exhibit a profuse dendritic branching (i.e. a 
lot of synapses). In deaf white cats, where the cochlea is genet­
ically dysfunctional, the neurones in adulthood resemble more 
those of the immature stage, as they have not received the 
proper stimulation to form and stabilize their synapses.
These findings are relevant for an early rehabilitation or 
implantation in infants: anything which can improve the mes­
sages sent to the brain during the developmental period, will 
improve the abilities of the cortical neurones to carry out their 
perceptual tasks.
It should be mentioned that the brain can be deprived of 
normal stimulation, not because of cochlear problems, but 
because of middle ear problems. While the clinical solution is
easier, the same care should be taken to detect and cure the 
problem as early as possible.
Similarly, it could be particularly rewarding to ‘feed’ the 
cochlea (and therefore the auditory brain) early in a specific 
domain, in order to obtain the best perceptual and long-lasting 
results: this is particularly true for learning a foreign language or
. 
38
music.
Acknowledgements
The authors of this chapter are deeply indebted to their past 
co-workers, especially to Alain Uziel for the physiological
  

Development and plasticity of the human auditory system 
155
and pathological data in the human, and to Marc Lenoir, 
who did a lot of reference work in experimental mammals. 
Illustrations have been realized thanks to Centre Regional 
d’Imagerie Cellulaire (Universite Montpellier 1 / INSERM) 
and its staff. Thanks also go to George Tate for editing work. 
Most of the figures are from the educational web site of the 
Centre ‘Promenade around the cochlea’ by R. Pujol, S. 
Blatrix, and T. Pujol. (http://www.iurc.montp.inserm. fr/cric/ 
audition).
References
1. Pujol R, Uziel A. Auditory development peripheral aspects. In: 
Meisami E, Timiras PS, eds. Handbook of Human Growth and 
Developmental Biology. Vol I. Neural, Sensory, Motor, and Integra­
tive Development. Part B. Sensory, Motor, and Integrative Develop­
ment. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1988; 109-30.
2. Lavigne-Rebillard M, Pujol R. Auditory hair cells in human 
fetuses: synaptogenesis and ciliogenesis. J Electron Microsc Techn 
1990; 15: 115-22.
3. Rubel EW. Ontogeny of structure and function in vertebrate audi- 
tory system. In: Autrum H, Jung R, Loewenstein WR, MacKay 
DM, Teuber HL eds. Handbook of Sensory Physiology, Vol. IX. 
Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1978.
4. Romand R. Development of Auditory and Vestibular Systems. New 
York: Academic Press, 1983.
5. Pujol R, Lavigne-Rebillard M, Lenoir M. Development of sensory 
and neural structures in the mammalian cochlea. In: Rubel EW, 
Popper AN, Fay RR, eds. Development of the Auditory System, 
Springer Handbook of Auditory Research, Vol. XII. New York: 
Springer, 1997; 146-92.
6. Streeter GL. The development of the scala tympani, scala 
vestibuli and perioticular cistern in the human embryo. Am J Anat 
1917;21:299-320.
7. Bast TH, Anson BJ. The Temporal Bone and Ear. New York: 
Charles C. Thomas, 1949.
8. Igarashi Y. Cochlea of the human fetus: a scanning electron micro- 
scope study. Arch Histoljap 1980; 43: 195-209.
9. Lavigne-Rebillard M, Pujol R. Development of auditory hair cell 
surface in human fetuses: a scanning electron microscopy study. 
Anat Embryol 1986; 174: 369-77.
10. Pujol R. Morphology, synaptology and electrophysiology of the 
developing auditory periphery. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1985; 
Suppl 421: 5-9.
11. Pujol R, Lavigne-Rebillard M. Early stages of innervation and sen­
sory cell differentiation in the human fetal organ of Corti. Acta 
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1985; Suppl 423: 43-50.
12. Bredberg G. Cellular pattern and nerve supply of the human organ 
of Corti. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1968; Suppl 236.
13. Kawabata I, Nomura Y. Extra internal hair cells: a scanning elec­
tron microscopic study. Acta Otolaryngol 1978; 85: 342-48.
14. Tanaka K, Sakai N, Terayama Y. Organ of Corti in the human 
fetus. Scanning and transmission electron microscope studies. Ann 
Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1979; 88: 749-58.
15. Bonfils P, Uziel A, Pujol R. Screening for auditory dysfunction in 
infants by evoked otoacoustic emissions. Archiv Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1988; 114: 887-90.
16. Kemp DT, Ryan S. Otoacoustic emission tests in neonatal screen­
ing programmes. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1991; Suppl 482: 
73-84.
17. Abdouh A, Despres G, Romand R. Hair cell overproduction in 
the developing mammalian cochlea in culture. Neuroreport 1993; 
5: 33-6.
18. Kelley MW, Xiao-Mei Xu, Wagner MA, Warchol ME, Corwin JT. 
The developing organ of Corti contains retinoic acid and forms 
supernumerary hair cells in response to exogenous retinoic acid in 
culture. Development 1993; 119: 1041-53.
19. Chiong CM, Burgess BJ, Nadol JB. Postnatal maturation of human 
spiral ganglion cells: light and electron microscopic observations. 
Hear Res 1993; 67:211-19.
20. Pujol R, Hilding D. Anatomy and physiology of the onset of audi­
tory function. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1973; 76: 1-11.
21. Pujol R. Synaptic plasticity in the developing cochlea. In: Ruben 
RW, Van de Water TR, Rubel EW, eds. The Biobgy of Change in 
Otolaryngology. New York: Elsevier, 1986; 47-54.
22. Nadol JB. Serial section reconstruction of the neural poles of the 
hair cells in the human organ of Corti. II. Outer hair cells. Laryn­
goscope 1983; 93: 780-91.
23. Pujol R. Development of tone-burst responses along the audi­
tory pathway in the cat. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1972; 74: 
383-91.
24. Schulman-Galambos C, Galambos R. Brainstem auditory evoked 
responses in premature infants. J Speech Hear Res 1975; 18: 
456-65.
25. Starr A, Amlie RN, Martin WH, Sanders S. Development of audi­
tory function in newborn infants revealed by auditory brainstem 
potentials. Pediatrics 1977; 60: 831-9.
26. Uziel A, Marot M, Germain M. Les potentiels evoques du nerf 
auditif et du tronc cerebral chez le nouveau-ne et l’enfant. Rev 
Laryngol Otol Rhinol 1980; 101: 55-9.
27. Morlet T, Collet L, Salle B, Morgon A. Functional maturation of 
cochlear active mechanisms and of the medial olivocochlear effer­
ent system in humans. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1993; 113: 
271-7.
28. Eggermont JJ, Bock GR. Critical periods in auditory development. 
Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1986; Suppl 429.
29. Pujol R. Periods of sensitivity to antibiotic treatment. Acta Oto­
laryngol (Stockh) 1986; Suppl 429: 29-33.
30. Lenoir M, Pujol R, Bock GR. Critical periods of susceptibility to 
noise induced hearing loss. In: Salvi R, Henderson RP, Hamemik, 
Colletti V eds. Basic and Applied Aspects of Noise Induced Hearing 
Loss. New York: Plenum Publishing, 1986, pp. 227-36.
31. Uziel A. Periods of sensitivity to thyroid hormone during the 
development of the organ of Corti. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 
1986; Suppl 429: 23-7.
32. Bernard PA. Freedom from ototoxicity in aminoglycoside-treated 
neonates: a mistaken motion. Laryngoscope 1981; 16: 1985-94.
33. Bimholz JC, Benacerraf BR,. Development of human fetal hear­
ing. Science 1983; 222: 516-18.
  

156 
Audiology
34. Sonntag LW, Wallace RE Changes in the rate of the human fetal 
heart in response to vibratory stimuli. Am] Obstet Dis Child 1936; 
51:583-9.
35. Read JA, Miller FC. Fetal heart rate acceleration in response to 
acoustic stimulation as a measure of fetal well-being. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1977; 129: 512-17.
36. Granier-Deferre C, Lecanuet JP, Cohen H, Busnel MC. Feasibility 
of prenatal hearing tests. A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1985; Suppl 
421:93-101.
37. Puel JL, Safieddine S, Gervais d’Aldin C, Eybalin M, Pujol R. 
Synaptic regeneration and functional recovery after excitotoxic 
injury in the guinea pig cochlea. CR A cad Sci Paris, ser III 1995; 
318: 67-75.
38. Pantev C, Oostenveld R, Engelien A, Ross B, Roberts LE, Hoke 
M. Increased auditory cortical representation in musicians. Nature 
1998; 392:811-14.
  

10 Physiology of the 
auditory system
Edward F Evans
Introduction: physics and 
psychophysics
Auditory signals
Sound is any fluctuation of air (or water) pressure which elicits 
the sensation of hearing. What we perceive as pitch is related 
to the frequency of the vibrations, and loudness is related to 
their amplitude.
Frequency is measured in the number of vibrations per sec­
ond (Hz). The human ear is sensitive to frequencies from about 
20 Hz to 20kHz (Figure 10.1). The note ‘A’ used for tuning an 
orchestra is at 440 Hz, in the middle of the piano scale. 
Frequency is commonly plotted on a logarithmic scale (as in 
Figure 10.1), which corresponds to the mapping of frequency in 
the ear (see later) and the piano scale. On this scale, equal dis­
tances represent equal ratios of frequency. Thus octaves repre­
sent doubling of the frequency.
Sound amplitude is typically measured on a logarithmic 
scale of the ratios of sound power. Thus: the decibel (dB) = 10 
log10 (intensity 1/intensity 2) = 201og10 (pressure 1/pressure 2).
It is important to remember that the decibel scale is there­
fore relative rather than absolute, i.e. it refers to ratios of pow­
ers or of intensities (same thing). However, it is conventional 
and convenient to refer any given sound intensity to an inter­
nationally accepted reference (known as 0 dBSPL). In pressure 
terms, this reference is 20 jjPa.
On this SPL scale, the human ear can hear from about 0 dB 
SPL at 4 kHz (see Figure 10.1) up to the threshold of pain 
around 140dBSPL (Table 10.1).
The ear has a substantial task to analyse and process complex 
sounds like speech (Figure 10.2). It has to break down a complex 
sound into its component frequencies (indicated by degrees of 
blackness in Figure 10.2), so that they can be separated from 
other frequency components simultaneously present and their 
trajectories followed in time. Figure 10.2a indicates the spec- 
togram of the speech sound ‘spike’, and Figure 10.2b the wave­
form as recorded by a microphone, both on the same time axis.
Figure 10.1 Frequency and intensity range of human hearing. Frequency is 
mapped out on a logarithmic scale (see piano keyboard) and intensity in terms 
of sound pressure level (dB SPL). The lower dashed line indicates the threshold 
of hearing of a young adult with normal hearing in the 'free field'. The cross- 
hatched area indicates conversational speech levels measured in 1/3 octave 
bands. (Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and JD Mollon, eds. The 
Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 13.3.1)
This is accomplished by four levels of ‘filtering’ in the audi­
tory system:
1. Peripheral mechanisms— setting the sensitivity to the audi­
tory modality; outer, middle and inner ears, especially hair 
cells.
2. Peripheral mechanisms—setting the sensitivity to the 
frequency range of hearing; outer, middle and inner ears, 
especially middle ear.
3. Peripheral filtering at the receptor/neural level.
^  120 
Cl.
03 100
- Normal
- binaural
- minimum audible 
field (MAF)
20 
100 
SOOHzl 
2 
5
Frequency
C, 
C2 
Ca 
c  
c_ 
CB 
C7 
CR
FocJ h— ---- „----------iFt
Conversational 
speech levels 
(1/3 octave 
band)
10 20kHz
h Vowels
Phons =  loudness level
m—  Approximate 
pain threshold
Loudness
discomfort
levels
Loudness = sones

158 
Audiology
Table 10.1 Relations between sound pressure, power, and level, with typical examples drawn from common situations.
Sound
pressure
level
Sound
(dBSPL,
pressure
Power
i.e.
(N/ma
(intensity)
(W/m2)
referred
Examples and some effects
or Pa)
to 20|iPa)
(approximate only]
200
100
140
Jet engine; over-amplified rock 
group; threshold for pain
20
1
120
Damage to cochlear hair cells
6.32
10"1
110
Threshold for discomfort
2
10“ 2
100
Motor cycle engine 
Orchestra playing
6.32 X 1 0 "’
10“ 3
90
f f f
2 X  1 0 '1
10 4
80
ff, busy traffic; shouting
2 X  10’ J
10"6
60
m t normal conversation
2 X  10~3
10“ a
40
pp\ quiet office
6.32 X  IO '4
10“ 9
30
ppp\ soft whisper
2 X  10"4
10“ 10
20
Country area at night
2 X  10~5
10“ 12
0
Threshold of hearing of young 
person at 1 -5 kHz
6.32 X  10“ 6
10“ 13
-1 0
Threshold of cat's hearing 
(1-10 kHz)
Figure 10.2 Spectrogram and waveform of word 'Spike' The spectrogram (a) 
shows in red the frequency analysis with time of the waveform shown in (b). 
(Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 15.8.1)
4. Central filtering—assessing the significance of complex 
sounds.
Filters and tuning
A filter is a mechanical, electronic or mathematical device that 
separates wanted from unwanted signals. Thus a coffee filter 
separates the wanted liquid from the unwanted coffee grounds. 
In radio and TV sets, filters are used to separate a wanted
channel from unwanted channels. This is accomplished by 
electronic filters tuned to the frequencies of the channels. The 
ear operates in a remarkably similar way.
Filters come in a variety o f‘flavours’: low-pass, high-pass and 
bandpass (Figure 10.3). A  low-pass filter passes low frequencies 
up to a given cut-off frequency; a high-pass filter passes high fre­
quencies down to the cut-off frequency. A  bandpass filter is the 
sum of two overlapping low- and high-pass filters, so that only a 
band of frequencies (the pass-band) between two cut-offs is 
passed. Frequencies outside the pass-band are rejected. In a band 
pass filter, the centre of the pass-band is called the centre 
frequency. The width of the filter is the width of the pass-band, 
otherwise known as its bandwidth. The curve depicting the 
outline of the pass-band (as in Figure 10.3, middle) is called its 
tuning curve, and the centre frequency its tuned frequency. 
Bandpass filters having narrow bandwidths are called sharply 
tuned, and those with wide bandwidths, broadly tuned.
Intensity
Low-pass
Bandpass
High-pass
Frequency
Figure 10.3 Diagrammatic representation of three types of filter showing the 
energy passed as a function of frequency.
  

Physiology of the auditory system 
159
As we will see, the ear acts as if it contains a very large 
number (‘a bank’) of narrow bandpass filters, each tuned to a 
slightly different frequency from its neighbour.
The outer ear
This consists of the pinna or auricle (present only in non-aquatic 
mammals) and the external auditory meatus.
The pinna and external auditory canal together form a res­
onator giving a substantial increase in sound pressure at the 
eardrum of 10-20 dB between 2 and 6 kHz, an important 
frequency region for communication. Different animals have 
different dimensions of these structures, and therefore the reso­
nant frequency will be different (typically higher in smaller 
mammals) but is also matched to the appropriate communica­
tion frequency region.
The shape and folds of the pinna, by multiple reflections 
of sounds, cause minor variations in the amplitude spectrum 
of the sounds entering the ear, and are utilized in monaural 
localization.
The outer ear can therefore be regarded as a signal 
conditioner.
Middle ear
The middle ear acts as an impedance transformer and further 
modifies the frequency response of the overall ear.
The middle ear (eardrum, ossicles, stapes footplate) con­
verts vibrations from the air to pressure changes inside the flu­
ids of the inner ear. Because the acoustical impedance of the 
fluids of the inner ear is much higher than that of the air, the 
middle ear in mammals acts as an impedance transformer. 
Without this, the efficiency of transmission of energy from the 
air to the fluids would be very poor. The transformer action is 
largely determined by the ratio of areas of the eardrum to stapes 
footplate and partly by the lever ratio (Figure 10.4).
The transmission of vibrations through the middle ear can 
be controlled to an extent by the middle ear muscles acting on 
the first and third ossicle. Reflex activation of these muscles is 
responsible for the middle ear reflex used to reduce sound trans­
mission at very high sound levels for protection.
Inner ear
Mechanics
Changes in fluid pressure transmitted by the stapes footplate in 
the oval window into the scala vestibuli (Figure 10.4) are trans­
mitted across the cochlear partition because the round window 
is able to freely vibrate. These pressure changes across the 
cochlear partition produce travelling waves (Figure 10.5) along 
part or all of the length of the basilar membrane of the cochlear
Figure 10.4 Schematic functional diagram of middle ear and uncoiled inner ear, 
and middle ear transformer. Vibrations of the tympanic membrane are 
transmitted as rotations of the malleus and incus about the common axis (normal 
to page, marked with dot). This produces piston-like movements of the stapes 
footplate in the oval window, with transmission of the pressure changes across 
the cochlear partition virtually instantaneously throughout the cochlear length. 
Arrows indicate direction of movements in response to a compression wave. The 
lower diagram illustrates transformer action of the middle ear by virtue of the 
large difference in area between the tympanic membrane and oval window, and 
the (smaller) lever ratio [L^lL). The middle ear muscles are contained in bony 
canals. The m. stapedius acts sideways on the incustapedial joint to stiffen the 
ossicular chain. (Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The 
Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 14.4.1)
Figure 10.5 Diagrammatic representation of the travelling wave along the 
basilar membrane. (Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, 
eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 14.8.1)
m.tensor tympani
m. stapedius
Vestibule
Oval window 
Scala vestibuli
Scala media
Scala tympani
Where P^is fluid pressure at oval window, Ptmis air pressure at 
tympanic membrane, .A,,,, is area of tympanic membrane, 
is 
area of oval window, J^is length of manubrium lever and L, is 
length of long process of incus lever
Pivot
Manubrium of malleus 
Long process of incus 
Tympanic
Incustapedial
Stapes Footplate
Cochlear partition
Envelope of 
travelling wave
Direction of wave 
propagation
Apex
  

160 
Audiology
partition, depending on the frequency of the sound. This map­
ping of the maximum amplitude of vibration with frequency is 
a natural consequence of the changes in width and stiffness of 
the basilar membrane along its length. For high frequencies, the 
travelling wave is limited to the basal portion (minimum width 
and maximum stiffness), whereas for low frequencies, the trav­
elling wave extends throughout the cochlear partition but is 
maximal at the apex (maximum width and lowest stiffness). 
Thus, frequency is mapped out along the basilar membrane, low 
frequencies at the furthest, apical end, to high frequencies at 
the nearer, basal end. Interestingly, this cochleotopic/tonotopic 
mapping is according to a logarithmic scale; that is, equal dis­
tances represent approximately equal ratios of frequency.
Electrochemical environment of the hair cells
Figure 10.6 shows a simplified electrical schematic of the 
cochlea. Perilymph in the scala vestibuli and scala tympani con­
sists of normal extracellular fluid rich in sodium and is at body 
(‘earth’) potential. In contrast, the fluid filling the scala media 
(endolymph) is rich in K+ and is at a relatively high endo- 
cochlear potential of about +80 mV. The high K+ concentration 
and this high voltage are generated by an energy-requiring K 
pump located in the stria vascularis. This is the main battery 
driving current through the cochlear circuit.
rent flows, predominantly carried by the abundant K+ ions). 
This current depolarizes the hair cell, producing a receptor 
potential (Figure 10.7). A  low-frequency sinusoidal tone burst 
as in Figure 10.7 (300 Hz) therefore produces a sinusoidal recep­
tor potential in the hair cell. Much higher frequencies (3 kHz in 
Figure 10.7) produce mainly a DC (i.e. biased in the depolariz­
ing direction) receptor potential.
30
20
10
i  
0
(iv) 
w \ A M A / ^ A A A a A A A "
+ 60 dB
- 
10
e 
5
Time {ms}
Figure 10.7 Receptor potentials recorded from guinea-pig inner hair cell. (After 
Russell and Sellick. J Physiol 1978: 284; 261-902 and Evans EF. In: HB Barlow 
and DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. 
Figure 14.11.1)
Because the receptor current corresponding to the poten­
tial flows out of the hair cell and across the tissue resistance (Rp 
in Figure 10.6), a small proportion will be recordable by an 
external electrode in the tissues around the cochlea, e.g. on the 
round window as the cochlear microphonic (Figure 10.8). This 
potential is used clinically, together with the cochlear action 
potential (CAP), which represents a neural response predomi­
nantly from the cochlear nerve.
Figure 10.6 Electrical diagram of the cochlea. (Reproduced from Evans EF. In:
HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1982. Figure 14.10.1)
Transduction
Deflections of the hairs on the hair cells in one direction open 
and in the other direction close relatively non-specific ion 
channels (probably at the tips of the hairs through which cur-
Inner ear and cochlear nerve
Peripheral tuning at cochlear nerve level
Cochlear nerve fibres respond to tonal stimuli by producing 
bursts of action potentials (Figure 10.9a). During a tone burst, 
the discharge rate adapts relatively slowly (Figure 10.9b).
Figure 10.10 shows that this excitatory response is sharply 
tuned. The frequency-intensity response area is bounded by the
Cochlear^”
microphonic
potential
Remote
reference
Scala tympani 
Na' 
iQmVl
  

Physiology of the auditory system 
161
(a) 
(b)
+
Figure 10.8 Gross cochlear potentials recorded by an electrode on the cochlea, 
(a) Waveform of cochlear potential (CP) evoked by a short tone burst (TB). (b) 
This waveform can be analysed into three components: gross cochlear action 
potential (CAP)-a neural response; the AC cochlear microphonic (CM)-a 
receptor response; the DCsummating potential (SP), probably also a receptor 
response.(Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The 
Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 14.12.1)
Figure 10.9 Cochlear nerve action potentials: response to tones, (a): recording 
of action potential spikes in a single nerve fibre of the guinea-pig cochlear 
nerve in response to five brief tone bursts shown as thickenings on the lower 
trace, (b): peristimulus time histograms of the discharge rate of a single cat 
cochlear nerve fibre before, during and immediately following a continuous 
tone of several minutes' duration. (Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow 
and DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. 
Figure 14.14.1)
frequency threshold (‘tuning’) curve: the FTC. Figure 10.11 
shows families of these curves from cat, guinea pig and squirrel 
monkey, the curves representing the FTCs of cochlear nerve 
fibres selected from representative different positions along the 
cochlea from apex (low frequency) to base (high frequency). 
The FTCs have comparable shapes across species: at tip fre­
quencies (characteristic frequencies (CFs)) below about 2 kHz, 
the FTCs are more symmetrical; above about 2 kHz, they are 
very asymmetrical, with an extended low-frequency ‘tail’. These 
FTCs represent excellent filters which are not easy to mimic in 
electronic hardware.
If we replot an FTC as a filter function (Figure 10.12), we 
can estimate its effective or equivalent rectangular bandwidth
- 
■■ 
I I  
H
H
 I I I U
^
H
I H
B
I  11
100
i m
n
i
i
H
H
i
i
1 —1 II 
^— Frequency threshold
' 
curve
— l - ^ —
80
to
3
i  
60
1 
M
i l l
----------------  \
1 
| 
11 
Frequency response
area
■
■
H
I
j__________
78cCTi
_________________________J H H l U f __________ 1—
in
\ | «
| | : 
|
40
___________ | 
N i l  j
_ l ___________\  ■■ :
t i i  i i —
, 
—  ^ | |  
—
10-dB bandwidth
—► 
i 
3-dB bandwidth
— 
------------,----
CF 
Minimum threshold
i—
i—
i— i 
_ i_  i 
i 
j 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
Tone frequency (kHz)
Figure 10.10 Mapping of the frequency-response area of a single cochlear 
nerve fibre. The action potential spike responses of the nerve fibre are displayed 
in response to sweeping a continuous tone frequency (horizontally in the 
Figure), each successive sweep at a higher intensity (vertically). The dashed 
outline represents the threshold contour: the frequency threshold Curve (FTC); 
the dark area the frequency response area. (Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB 
Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1982. Figure 14.15.1)
(ERB) as the width of the rectangular filter having the same 
area on linear-power, linear-frequency coordinates.
It has recently been shown that this peripheral tuning, as 
exemplified in the FTCs of cochlear nerve fibres, can account 
exactly for the psychophysical frequency selectivity in the same 
species (Figure 10.13). The circles and dotted line represent the 
bandwidths (ERBs) of cochlear nerve fibres recorded under 
optimal conditions in the guinea pig; the bracket symbols and 
continuous line indicate the behavioural ERBs in guinea pigs 
measured with comb-filtered noise masking, and the crosses 
similar measurements using band-stop noise masking. Thus our 
ear’s auditory frequency selectivity (our ability to separate a 
complex sound into its component frequency parts by filtering) 
is already accomplished at the lowest level of the auditory sys­
tem, i.e. the cochlea.
Peripheral tuning at basilar membrane and 
hair cell levels
Figure 10.11b shows the first comparison between basilar mem­
brane (lower curves) and cochlear nerve tuning (upper curves)
  

162 
Audiology
Figure 10.11 Cochlear nerve FTC's for three species. A small number of 
representative curves are depicted from (a): cat (after Kiang et al. J AcoustSoc 
Am 1967; 42: 1341 -23); (b): guinea-pig (reproduced from Evans EF. J Physiol 
1972; 226 : 263-874); and (c) squirrel monkey (reproduced from Rose. J 
Neurophysiol 1971; 34: 685-99.5) (Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and 
DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 
14.16.1)
in the same species— the guinea pig. These early measurements 
of basilar membrane tuning showed a large discrepancy with the
Figure 10.12 Cochlear nerve fibre FTC plotted as a band-pass filter function. 
The tip of the FTC is plotted upside down compared with Figure 10.11. The red 
dashed rectangle has the same area as the FC and is the equivalent rectangular 
bandwidth (ERB) of the FC considered as a filter. (Reproduced from Evans EF.
In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1982. Figure 15.1.1)
Characteristic frequency (kHz}
Figure 10.13 Comparison between the physiological and behavioural frequency 
selectivity in the same species (guinea-pig). All measurements are of ERB's as 
defined in Figure 10.12: of cochlea nerve fibre FTC's: the circle points; 
behavioural measurements using comb filtered noise masking: brackets; and 
using band-stop noise masking: crosses. Regression lines are drawn in black 
through the physiological data and in red through the behavioural to show the 
close correspondence. For comparison, human ERB's are shown as the red 
dashed line. (From Evans EF. Proc 12th international Conference of the Audio 
Engineering Society. New York: AES. 1983, 11-21. Figure 7.6)
neural tuning. Because we showed that the neural tuning was 
physiologically vulnerable, i.e. it could be changed from nor­
mally sharp to abnormally poorly tuned by lack of oxygen (Fig­
ure 10.14), mechanical or drug damage to the cochlea etc., we 
suggested that there might be two filters acting within the 
cochlea: a first filter being the poor basilar membrane filter, 
followed by some sort of additional filtering process to sharpen 
that up to produce the sharp neural tuning, a process that we 
called the cochlear ‘second filter’. It is now clear that while this
Effective bandwidth
skirts
cut-offs
6.0 
6*5
Frequency (kHz)
  

Physiology of the auditory system 
163
248
65
11 f ll IM IM I III llllIH
i 5%0j
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 12 14 
min
10 
20 
Tone frequency (kHz)
40
Figure 10.14 Effect of hypoxia on cochlear nerve fibre tuning. A: control curve 
FTC; B, C, D, E: FTC's obtained from the same fibre during progressive hypoxia 
(5% oxygen in inspired air); F shows partial recovery after re-oxygenation. From 
Evans EF. In: Zwicker, Terhardt, eds. Facts and Models in Hearing. Springer, 
Heidelberg: 1974, 118-29.7)
serial process remains a good description of cochlear tuning for 
some animals (e.g. reptiles), for mammals the second filter is 
not in series with the first, as we originally proposed, but in par­
allel with it. Measurements of basilar membrane motion in the 
last 10 years or so under very carefully controlled conditions (so 
that the function of the cochlea is unaffected by the measure­
ment conditions) have shown the mechanical tuning to be 
much sharper than the earlier measurements. This is shown in 
Figure 10.15, taken from the chinchilla.
It is clear that there is a large difference between the early 
and modern measurements of basilar membrane motion, with 
regard to tuning. The modem measurements show the basilar 
membrane to be virtually as sharply tuned as the cochlear 
nerve. Furthermore, the inner hair cell receptor potential is as 
sharply tuned as the cochlear nerve fibres (Figure 10.16).
Positive feedback of mechanical energy in the 
mammalian cochlea
A great deal of research in the last 20 years has led to the sug­
gestion that the relatively poor ‘passive’ tuning of the basilar 
membrane is sharpened up by a positive ‘feedback’ operation 
involving the outer hair cells (Figure 10.17). We now know 
that the outer hair cells undergo length changes extremely 
rapidly in an electrical field. This length change is such that it 
adds to the incoming vibration pattern on the basilar mem­
brane to reinforce it and therefore enhance its tuning. An 
analogy for this positive feedback is the ‘howl’ produced by a 
microphone too close to its own loudspeaker. Just short of the 
‘howl’, the sensitivity to frequencies in a narrow band is
90
80
70
60
50
Cl.l/l
CDT3 40
30
20
10
0,5 
1 
2 
5
Frequency (kHz)
10
Figure 10.15 Modern basilar membrane tuning curve compared with that of 
cochlear nerve fibre in chinchilla. (After Robles L et al. J Acoust Soc Am 1986;
80: 1364-74.8)
markedly enhanced. It is suggested that this is the case in the 
cochlea (Figure 10.17). Thus, the chain of events is: vibration 
of the basilar membrane, bending the stereocilia of the 
inner and outer hair cells; transduction into receptor poten­
tials; generation of length changes in the outer hair cells;
Figure 10.16 Tuning of inner hair cells receptor potential (after Russell and 
SellickJ Physiol 1978: 284; 261-902 and Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, 
eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 14.11.1)
  

164 
Audiology
Myelinated 
nerve fibres
Cells of 
Hensen
Inner hair cell
Inner spiral 
bundle 
(efferent)
Inner radial
fibres
(afferent)
Tectorial membrane
Tunnel-crossing fibres (efferent)
Basilar
membrane
Supporting (Deiter's) cells
Figure 10.17 Diagrammatic representation of positive feedback of energy from motile OHC to basilar membrane (lower arrows) and inner hair cell region (upper arrows).
mechanical feedback of these changes to the tectorial mem­
brane and basilar membrane; and enhancement of the 
frequency response (filtering) at that place. The sharp mechan­
ical filtering is therefore reflected in the basilar membrane 
tuning curve (Figure 10.15) and in the equally sharp tuning of 
the receptor potential in the inner hair cells (Figure 10.16) 
leading to equally sharp tuning of the cochlear nerve afferents 
(Figure 10.11). (The afferent fibres of the cochlear nerve 
predominantly innervate the inner hair cells.)
Evidence for positive feedback
A mechanism of this kind requires energy in order to effect 
amplification of the mechanical movements leading to bending 
of the stereocilia and those fed back from the length changes in 
the outer hair cells to the same region.
The first evidence for such a mechanism came from the 
observations of the physiological vulnerability of cochlear 
tuning (Figure 10.14), namely that reduction in oxygen, blood 
supply etc. reduced the cochlear tuning to the ‘passive’ charac­
teristics of the basilar membrane alone.
Next, the observation was made that loss of the outer hair 
cells through ototoxic antibiotic insult (Figure 10.18) led to loss 
of tuning in the frequency regions corresponding to the outer 
hair cell loss, even though the inner hair cells appeared to be 
relatively normal (under the light microscope at least).
Evidence was then obtained of the mechanical energy gen­
erated by the positive feedback process which can actually be 
recorded by a very sensitive microphone located in the ear 
canal. These are the otoacoustical emissions (OAEs), either 
evoked by acoustical stimuli (EOAEs) (e.g. clicks, Figure
10.19), or spontaneous (SOAEs), i.e. continuously emitted 
without requiring a stimulus trigger.
Finally, there has been the demonstration in vitro and then 
in vivo of length changes in the outer hair cells only, in 
response to A C electrical fields.
Control of these processes
The outer hair cells in the mammalian cochlea have very rudi­
mentary afferent terminals, so much so that it is not clear what 
their function can be. However, there are a large number of 
very large efferent terminals, i.e. from nerve fibres descending 
from higher regions of the auditory system (particularly from 
the region of the superior olivary nucleus, in the olivocochlear 
bundle (OCB)). These efferents liberate acetylcholine on the 
outer hair cells, and this produces a change in their mechanical 
characteristics such that the positive feedback is diminished. 
This has the effect of reducing the sensitivity of the cochlea and 
its tuning. Thus, these are capable of being nicely controlled by 
the higher levels of the auditory system.
Pathophysiology of cochlear hearing loss
If the ear’s frequency selectivity is already determined at the 
cochlear level, and if the tuning of the cochlea is physiologi­
cally vulnerable (Figure 10.14), this suggests that in impairment 
of inner ear function our auditory frequency selectivity will 
deteriorate, and many investigations have supported this. Thus, 
deterioration in psychophysical tuning can be used diagnosti- 
cally, and as an ‘early-warning indicator’ of impending hearing 
damage.
  

Physiology of the auditory system 
165
o.i
(b) 100
0
Tone frequency (kHz)
1 
10
50 kHz
IHC
IS 
10 
5 
0
Apex 
Distance along cochlea (mm) 
Base
Figure 10.18 Broad cochlear nerve fibre tuning associated with loss of outer 
hair cells in a guinea-pig ear damaged by long-term injections of kanamycin.
(a): the continuous curves indicate FC's recorded in the ear compared with 
FTC's expected in an intact ear (black dotted curves). The blunt curves in the 
right hand half correspond to the loss of outer hair cells in the cochleograms in
(b). (Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 15.18.1)
Figure 10.19 Click-evoked Oto-acoustic emissions recorded in two human ears. 
(After Wilson JP. Hearing Res 1980; 2: 233-52.9)
Encoding of frequency at cochlear nerve level 
Place coding
The peripheral frequency analysis outlined in the previous sec- 
tion allows the component frequencies of complex sounds to be 
dissected out and represented as peaks of activity in the array of 
cochlear nerve fibres spanning low to high frequencies (Figure 
10.20), This is the ‘place’ or ‘labelled lines’ coding of frequency. 
Deterioration in cochlear tuning will ‘blur’ this representation 
(Figure 10.20c), and cause loss of intelligibility, which cannot 
be compensated for by conventional hearing aids.
There is a problem, however, in seeing how this represen­
tation of frequency in terms of the discharge rate of cochlear 
nerve fibres can work over the wide dynamic range of intensi­
ties that we know the ear can process (Figure 10.21). These are 
the rate-level functions of a number of cochlear nerve fibres in 
the same animal (cat) showing the transition from spontaneous 
discharge rate through increase in discharge rate with stimulus 
level (the dynamic range) to saturation. This shows that the 
dynamic range of the majority of cochlear nerve fibres is rela­
tively restricted to 20-40dB, compared with some 120dB for 
hearing as a whole. This restricted peripheral dynamic range 
means that the map of discharge rate activity along position in 
the cochlear nerve fibre array (Figure 10.22) is going to be 
blurred out at moderate to high intensities (upper half of Figure
10.22), because of the saturation of the discharge rate.
However, while this is true of the majority of cochlear
nerve fibres, it is not true of all. It has been shown (Figure
10.23) that a small minority of cochlear nerve fibres (indicated 
by the upward arrows) have extended dynamic ranges. These 
are cochlear nerve fibres having the lowest spontaneous dis­
charge rates. It therefore looks as though there are at least two 
populations of nerve fibres in the cochlear nerve: a minority 
population having extended dynamic ranges and extremely low 
or absent spontaneous discharge rates (3-5%), and the majority 
of cochlear nerve fibres having relatively restricted dynamic 
ranges. It is possible, though not very parsimonious, that this 
minority of cochlear nerve fibres may serve to convey ‘place’- 
encoded information on the spectral (i.e. energy versus fre­
quency) profile of complex sounds.
Time coding
Another possibility is that the frequency of sounds is encoded 
in the ‘time’ of occurrence of the action potentials (Figure
10.24). This phase locking of spikes to individual cycles of low- 
frequency waveforms up to about 5 kHz could enable the brain 
to extract the intervals between the spikes and from the recip­
rocal, the frequency. The spectra of speech sounds can be beau­
tifully encoded in this fashion (Figure 10.25) by the degree of 
synchronization (‘phase locking’) of the neurones to the speech 
sound mapped across their characteristic frequency, far more 
precisely than by the discharge rate profiles of the majority 
(Figure 10.26, upper half), particularly at the higher sound 
levels, where saturation blurs out the ‘place’ representation. 
(On the other hand, the representation is, as noted above, 
roughly maintained in the rate profile of the low spontaneous
  

166 
Audiology
1 
2 
3
Frequency (kHz)
Energy spectrum of speech vowel
To apex
To base
Figure 10.20 Diagrammatic representation of energy spectrum of speech vowel 'ah' (a); and hypothetical representation of cochlear excitation along the normal 
cochlea (b) and in a pathological cochlea (c). (After Pick and Evans EF. In: Perkins, ed. High Technology Aids for Disabled People. London: Butterworths, 1982, Chapter 
12.10)
Figure 10.21 Rate-level functions of several cochlear nerve fibres from the cat. 
(After Palmer and Evans EF. Exp Brain Res 1979; 2 (suppl): 19-26.11)
rate fibres— lower half of Figure 10.26, again mapped out across 
characteristic frequency.) Thus, Figure 10.25 represents a ‘time’
map, and Figure 10.26 a ‘rate’ map. It needs to be noted that 
both of these are ‘place’ maps, i.e. maps of synchronization 
(Figure 10.25) and discharge rate (Figure 10.26) across the 
cochlear nerve fibre array (characteristic frequency).
What we do not know is whether the higher levels of the 
brain can make use of these ‘time’ patterns. Certainly, as far as 
the pitch of complex sounds is concerned, there is now good 
evidence that both place and time mechanisms may be 
involved in pitch: if they occur alone, then a relatively weak 
pitch is heard; but when the time and place cues occur together 
and are congruent, then the most salient and most disarm- 
inable pitch is heard.
Frequency discrimination
The ability to hear as different one tone presented after another 
is likely to depend on both ‘place’ and ‘time’ mechanisms. As 
far as ‘place’ coding is concerned it is likely to be related to the 
sharp edge between the locus of activity and inactivity as in 
Figure 10.22, left half for 8 kHz. This sharp edge in turn depends
  

Physiology of the auditory system 
167
(b) 
Cat 
1 kHz
Characteristic frequency (kHz} 
Characteristic frequency (kHz) 
Base 
Apex 
Base 
Apex
Figure 10.22 Blurring of rate place representation of pure tones at high sound 
pressure levels. The points show the activity in a population of cochlear nerve 
fibres in a single ear evoked by a tone of 8 kHz in the left-half and at 1 kHz in 
the right half. (Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. 
The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 15.5.1)
Figure 10.23 Dynamic ranges of over a hundred cochlear nerve fibres in the 
same ear. Each vertical line represents the dynamic range of a single cochlear 
nerve fibre plotted at its characteristic frequency. Only the fibres indicated with 
they arrow symbols are not saturated at the highest levels. (Reproduced from 
Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1982. Figure 15.4.1)
upon the high-frequency cut-offs of the cochlear nerve fibre 
tuning curves. Hence, frequency discrimination is far more 
acute than frequency selectivity— about 50 times better (Figure 
10.27).
Figure 10.24 Phase-locking of single cochlear nerve fibre spikes to low- 
frequency sound. (Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. 
The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 14.21.’)
11/13/78 Compensated /E/
Figure 10.25 Profiles of synchronisation of spike discharges to vowel 'eh' at six 
intensities. The vowel spectrum is clearly represented even at the highest 
intensities (top of Figure). (After Young ED and Sachs MB. J Acoust Soc Am 
1979: 66: 1381-403.12)
  

168 
Audiology
(a)
2 r
0.5
0.2
0.1
0.05
Critical band.............
5dB SL *■’
20dB SI
/  /  :{
/  
f t  
• ** 
/ /
/  
/ /
/  /
/  /•
/ /
80dB SL
Absolute 
frequency 
discrimination 
limen, A F
40dB SL
200
100
20
10
(b)
?
1.0
Qr
<3
0.8
c
E
0 6
o
rec
F
0.4
u
.SD
T5
0.2
_> 
re 
u  
cc
0
0.05 
0.1 
0.2 
O.S 
1 
2 
5 
10 
Tone level (dB attenuation)
2 £
0.5
0.05 
0.1 
0.2 
0 5 
1 
2 
Frequency (kHz)
10
Figure 10.26 Saturation of rate profile corresponding to Figure 10.25 (After 
Sachs MB and Young ED. J Acoust Soc Am 1979; 66: 4 7 0 -9 .” )
Brainstem and higher mechanisms
Here we see good examples of both serial and parallel process­
ing of auditory information as we ascend the auditory pathways 
(Figure 10.28).
Information from the cochlea passes via the cochlear nerve 
to the ipsilateral cochlear nucleus (CN). From here, several 
pathways pass across to the other side of the brainstem to inner­
vate the superior olivary nucleus (SON) and thence to the infe­
rior colliculus (IC), while some fibres reach the IC directly from 
the CN. It should be noted that, unlike the superior colliculus 
in the visual system, the IC is an obligatory station on the audi­
tory pathway in the midbrain. From there, information travels 
via the medial geniculate nucleus (MGN) in the thalamus and 
thence to the auditory cortex (AI).
Figure 10.27 Human frequency selectivity (Critical band) and frequency 
discrimination compared. (Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ 
Mollon, eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 
15.6.')
Cochlear nucleus: divergence of anatomy and 
physiology
The cochlear nucleus consists of three main divisions (Figure 
10.29, middle): the more homogeneous anterior and posterior 
ventral divisons (AVN and PVN), and a more or less laminated 
and more complex dorsal division (DCN). Each of these divi­
sions has a cochleotopic organization (Figure 10.29, top) and 
contains a wide variety of cell types, particularly the DCN 
(Figure 10.29, bottom).
Incoming cochlear nerve fibres branch to supply the many 
classes of cell types (Figure 10.30), distinguishable by their dif­
ferent anatomical shapes, output connections and physiology. 
From these different classes of cells, different pathways proceed 
across the mid-line to project to the SON and/or IC.
A great deal of work is in progress with regard to the ‘wiring 
diagram’ of the CN (e.g. Figure 10.31). We still have a long way 
to go. Of considerable help are newer techniques allowing
  

Physiology of the auditory system 
169
Figure 10.28 Main ascending anatomical pathways of auditory system. 
Simplified diagram of the ipsilateral and contralateral projections of one 
cochlea to the left and right auditory cortex in the cat (Reproduced from Evans 
EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1982. Figure 14.2.1)
injections of horseradish peroxidase (HRP) to be made from a 
microelectrode intracellularly into a cell from which physiolog­
ical recordings have been taken, thus linking structure with 
function directly.
As would be expected from their morphology (and their 
connections), the different cell types in the CN show widely 
different response characteristics (Figure 1032). Thus CN cells 
in the simpler AVN have receptive fields and response time- 
courses (PSTHs) virtually identical to those of cochlear nerve 
fibres and are therefore termed ‘primary-like’ (Figure 10.32a). 
Other cells have a cochlear nerve-like receptive field but a reg­
ular firing pattern producing a ‘chopper’ PSTH (Figure 10.32b). 
Other cells, particularly in the PVN, have broader receptive 
fields (Figure 10.32c) and on-set responses.
In the DCN, however, extensive ‘lateral’ inhibition is 
found both in the receptive fields and as seen in the complex 
‘pauser’, ‘build-up’ or ‘inhibitory’ PSTH’s (Figure 10.32d,e,f).
We are now beginning to understand where the inhibition 
comes from and what its role might be.
Figure 10.29 Anatomical organisation of cochlear nucleus, (a): cochleotopic 
organisation of neurone characteristic frequencies along electrode track shown 
by the arrow in the para-sagittal section in the middle panel, (b): shows 
examples of the cell types encountered in the section. (Reproduced from Evans 
EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1982. Figure 14.23.1)
Classical ‘lateral’ inhibition is glycinergic, and can be 
blocked by strychnine, a specific antagonist of glycine (Figure 
10.33). The left-hand receptive field in Figure 10.33a shows the 
receptive field of a typical type IV DCN cell, where the whiter 
patches represent the ‘lateral’ inhibition. After iontophoretic 
injection of strychnine around the cell recorded from (middle 
panel of Figure 10.33a), the inhibition disappears and the true 
extent of the excitatory input to the cell is revealed. By sub­
traction of these two receptive fields, we obtain the inhibitory 
receptive field shown in the right panel. This indicates that the 
inhibition is not just ‘lateral’ but extends throughout the unit’s
  

170 
Audiology
Figure 10.30 Schematic showing projections of cochlear nerve fibres to different cell types within the cochlear nucleus and their out-flow connections. After Osen 
(personal communication).
receptive field, and is in fact maximal at the receptive field 
centre. Figure 10.33b also indicates how strychnine blockade of 
the inhibition converts the complex non-monotonic discharge 
rate/stimulus level function (left) to the sigmoid function typi­
cal of cochlear nerve fibres (right). Figure 10.33c indicates the 
effect of the inhibition narrowing the excitatory response area 
and enhancing response contrast. Figure 10.33c plots the dis­
charge rates across frequency when the stimulus level is held 
constant (at the level shown by the arrow at A in Figure 
10.33a). The ‘lateral’ inhibitory dips are clearly seen on either 
side of the central excitatory response area in Figure 10.33c, 
left. After strychnine blockade, the inhibitory dips have virtu­
ally disappeared, and the true width of the excitatory response 
area is revealed. Thus ‘lateral’ inhibition narrows the response 
area and greatly increases the response contrast between the 
receptive field centre (peak) and the edge (surrounding dips), 
just as in the retina. (The DCN is the homologue of the retina.) 
Figure 10.33d indicates the time-course of the responses and 
demonstrates that the strychnine blocks the sustained inhibi­
tion with relatively little effect on the transient inhibition,
particularly the ‘off’-inhibition following the cessation of the 
stimulus (indicated by the asterisk). Thus off-inhibition must 
be mediated by another neurotransmitter or process.
Figure 10.34 shows that another inhibitory system, medi­
ated by GABA, performs a quite different function. This sets 
the ‘working point’ of the cell by inhibiting the background 
spontaneous activity. Thus blocking the GABAergic inhibition 
with bicuculline (right column) increases the background spon­
taneous activity, thus revealing the inhibition (Figure 10.34a 
and f).
Superior olivary nucleus: integration of 
information between the ears
Figure 10.35 shows highly schematically the connections 
between the outflows of the cochlear nucleus pathways (mainly 
from the ventral nuclei) and the different subdivisions of the 
SON. Cells in the medial superior olivary nucleus (MSO) and 
lateral superior olivary nucleus (LSO) receive inputs from both 
ears via the CN on each side. The MSO receives excitatory
  

Physiology of the auditory system 
171
Name 
Frequency-response 
Time histogram 
Probable 
Found
area 
morphology predominantly
in
(a) 
dB
'Primary- | 
M f Excitation 
like1
(b)
(c)
Frequency 
«
Spikes
Spherical 
AVN/PVN 
cells
Tone Time
» 
Multipolar 
AVN/PVN
cells
Octopus 
PVN 
cells
(d)
’Pauser'
w
'Build-up1 
(f)
'Inhibitory'
4
/ 1
Z Z I
dB
Figure 10.31 Provisional 'wiring diagram’ of cochlear nucleus with provisional 
indications of neuro-transmitter types (dark shading: GABA; light shading: glycine). 
(After Osen In: Glycine neurotransmission. New York: Wiley, 1990: 417-51.14)
inputs from both ears, whereas the LSO receives excitatory 
inputs from the ipsilateral cochlear nucleus and inhibitory 
inputs (via an intemeurone in the medial nucleus of the trape- 
zoid body (MNTB-NT in Figure 10.28) from the contralateral 
cochlear nucleus. The so called ‘E-E’ cells in the MSO are very 
sensitive to correlated intensities between the two ears. The 
‘ET’ cells in the LSO, on the other hand, are more sensitive to 
intensity differences between the two ears. Both nuclei, but par­
ticularly the MSO, are sensitive to interaural time delays 
between the sounds reaching the ears. Some cells have ‘critical 
delays’, in other words a maximal response at a particular inter­
aural delay, largely irrespective of the frequency or the level of 
a tone (Figure 10.36, taken from the inferior colliculus).
The sensitivity of, particularly, ‘E-I’ cells to interaural 
intensity differences and time delays means that the probability 
of discharge of a cell can be shifted by changing either the inter­
aural delay or by the interaural level. One can be traded for the 
other, and the physiological results are consistent with the 
human psychophysical data (time-intensity trading).
A  more simplified view of the pathways within the brain­
stem can therefore be given, as in Figure 10.37, where the two 
major pathways from the cochlear nucleus to the higher levels
Spikes
Inhibition
Pyramidal 
DCN 
giant 
cells
Frequency
Tone time
Figure 10.32 Varieties of frequency and time responses in different cochlear 
nucleus cells. (Reproduced from Evans TE. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The 
Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 14.24.1)
of the auditory system are emphasized: the ventral pathway 
involving the SON and chiefly concerned with ‘where is it’ 
questions; and the dorsal pathway from the DCN, direct to the 
IC, and probably concerned with ‘what is it’ questions or, in 
cats at least, with the orientation of the ears to the direction of 
the incoming sound.
Higher auditory centres
Auditory cortex: abstraction of behaviourally 
useful features from complex stimuli
While the auditory cortex is, in primates, buried in the region 
of the Sylvian fissure (Figure 10.39b), in the cat, it is conve­
niently spread out over the surface of the hemisphere (Figure 
10.38a). Recordings can be taken from unanaesthetized animals
  

172 
Audiology
Control
Strychnine: 100 nA
Inhibitory receptive fietd
_ on  A 17401 
SCL-60.00 SP/10dBc SUB- 3.0QSP 
2 
w n ----1---r“—i—i—t ■»—i------- ----1—r
-4 0
60
-80
100
....... «....
.....*.................. III!
*>■■»•....*.......*i«*'iiiiitiiiiiijtni>
- 
........
.........••■•■*■■11 
.........*....
■ ■(■■■■■■Ml I ■• t ' l l * M < | M t » l l | | | f | | || | | ( | l 'l » I H M > '........
' 
............... .................null |»| Hll III ........................
.........................mm.............. ......
■ 1...................» > II IH IM *llltllM |||||||lll*|ifll|l*||-C II I||» ltH
................*■■*■*•...........tMi»l|||||l»|)||tll|lllf|l»»i«............
2.825
Frequency (kHz)
10
Frequency {Hz)
42.000
(b)
Al 7542 
FBIN 
33 TO 38 
2
Al 7542 
FBIN 
33 TO 38 
3
Rate-level 
function 
at CF
Intensity (dB)
Intensity (dB)
(c)
Iso-level 
function 
at A
Frequency (log units)
(d)
PSTH 
8kHz 
-50 dB
Tone
Time (ms)
180 
240
0
frequency
90
Strychnine 60 nA
Frequency (fog units)
Figure 10.33 Role of 'lateral inhibition' in determining the response properties of dorsal cochlear nucleus (Type IV) cells. (From Evans, 1992. Figure 8.15)
  

Physiology of the auditory system 
173
Control
(b)
-20
-4 0
A17542 
SCL
Btcuculline; 30nA 
80,00 SP/1 QdBe SUB-
2,00SP 
38
ca 
~60
-  
-8 0
-100
2,870
• it■ 1111ti11iti«ii| i 
1*iiiiin1111|< i*i
Mtlll|l|l|||lll|||i<
llltll llll j< M tl I N I .......... ...............................f o i l
i I I I I I  i 111 III | |l H « M |  III i t l » 
r » i i i i i | | i « | i l l n i i i i i | i | i i i i M . . .
11 *i ■ 111< 'ii i
■ 111 ii i *........
■ 11H111J11MI • I ii i < 1111M...... •
IIIU IIII.....................II........
.........................
11 1 1 1 1 1 1  i i  111 M i  11111 i i  i .......... . . . . .
I l j | | * l l l l l l l ' | l | * l l - | M H I I 1 .......... .
..................................... *
11M1111111111 ] 1111 n 111 n 11111111111
ilillll illliiiH lim iillliillM lllll ............. 
i ■ * 111 -111111
11111 [ 111111114111 * 11111111111111111 [ 111111»111»11 - * l • l • 111111 
1111111111111111111 • i ■ 111111111111111111111111111111 - i 11 h 111 n
Kifiiiiuiiiitiii >i.........................................................................
||1 1 IIIIIIIIII|||II|III||1 II1 III1 I|I||||||||1 |I| IIIIIIM IM IIDI
■I 1111llll->111
♦
1II1111 II l»t 1
■ I ■ ■! |
........... 
•. . 
ii|
• tinH) II*...* ■
tii!
fi<|i*tlll>l . >
..ii.
..............1............
<••1111
10
23.759
Frequency (kHz}
A17542
FBIN 
33 TO 37
38
A17542
FBIN 
33 TO 37
41
(C)
Rate-level £ 
function 
at CF 
^
(d)
Intensity (dB)
(f)
Tone
Time (ms)
Figure 10.34 Role of GABA- ergic inhibition in cochlear nucleus type IV cell. (After Evans EF and Zhao W. Prog Brain Res 1993; 97: 117-26.16)
  

174 
Audiology
Figure 10.35 Functional anatomy of superior olive. (Reproduced from Evans EF. 
In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1982. Figure 14.26.1)
Figure 10.36 'Critical delay' unit in inferior colliculus. (Reproduced from Evans 
EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1982. Figure 14.27.1)
Figure 10.37 Simplified diagram of dorsal and ventral pathways in brain stem 
of cat. From Evans EF. The cochlear nerve and cochlear nucleus. In: Handbook of 
sensory Physiology Vol V/2 Auditory System. WD Keidel and WD Neff, eds 
Heidelberg: Springer 1975: 1-108.17)
Figure 10.38 Auditory cortex of cat and monkey showing primary (Al) and 
secondary areas. (Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. 
The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 14.28.1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d) 
to
(0
Response type: 
Excitatory
Inhibitory
W
'Off'
'On-off*
FM Response
Tone
0.5 s
Sinusoidal frequency modulation 
-------M------------ 1 4 --------1-----------
Upward 
Downward
frequency ramp 
frequency ramp
t z ^ A / V W
—
*  J I M H M
\J
i t  Time
Figure 10.39 Diversity of single unit responses in unanaesthetised primary 
auditory cortex. (Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. 
The Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 14.30.1)
  

Physiology of the auditory system 
175
by means of a permanently implanted chamber into which 
microelectrodes can be introduced at intervals without any dis- 
comfort while recordings are made from the animal in a nor­
mally behaving or even sleeping condition. (The brain has no 
pain receptors.)
There is a striking diversity of response patterns recordable 
from neurones in the unanaesthetized primary auditory cortex 
(Figure 10.39). What is even more striking is that, in contrast 
to the auditory periphery, not all neurones respond to pure 
tones (Figure 10.40). A small number respond to visual stimuli, 
most to some sort of auditory stimulus; only about 60%, how­
ever, respond to tones. Some 20% respond only to complex 
sounds, and these are the most effective stimuli for the majority 
of cells, namely ‘backdoor noises’— the noises heard outside the 
average British backdoor when the pet feline is called in for the 
night!
Even many of the cortical cells that do respond to pure 
tones respond only when the pure tones are patterned in time. 
Many show habituation of response to repeated presentations of 
the same stimulus. It requires a great deal of ingenuity and 
patience on the part of the experimenter to obtain consistent 
responses and to elucidate the optimal stimulus pattern for a 
given cell.
Of particular interest are the small proportion of cells 
(about 10%) that respond to tonal stimuli only if their fre­
quency is changing (Figure 10.39f,g). This part of Figure 10.39 
shows the excursions in frequency: sinusoidally in (f) and in 
upward- and downward-going ‘ramps’ (i.e. linear frequency 
changes) in (g). These cells that are selective to frequency 
change are often selective to the direction also. The cell in 
Figure 10.39f and 10.39g is selective only to downward 
frequency changes. Some of the cells are selective, in addition, 
for the rate of frequency change.
Of great interest is the finding that a very small proportion 
of cortical cells of the squirrel monkey are selective for individ­
ual calls of the animal’s vocal repertoire. Squirrel monkeys are 
an intensely social species living in an arboreal environment. 
They have developed a system of species-specific vocalizations 
or calls, each of which has a specific significance. Thus, Figure 
10.41 shows a cell responding selectively to the ‘trill’ call, 
which means ‘go away— I’m feeding— leave me alone’.
Cells in the auditory cortex are organized according to their 
input projection fibres into cochleotopic maps (Figure 10.42), 
and also into slabs which relate to ear dominance (Figure 
10.42).
Thus cells in the cortex can answer questions such as: is the 
stimulus on, or off? If on, how is it patterned in time? Is the 
frequency changing? Is it changing up or down? How often is it 
changing? What is the position of the stimulus in space? Thus, 
cells in the auditory cortex are less interested in the frequencies 
and intensities of sound (as in the periphery) than in the pat­
terning of these in time and in space. These cells are therefore 
capable of acting as feature-selective units, and may be involved 
in extracting features of behavioural significance from a com­
plex sound. The finding of call-specific neurones in the auditory 
cortex of the squirrel monkey suggests that there may be in our 
own brains neurones specifically selective for the acoustical 
features associated with speech. There is behavioural evidence 
from studies of auditory perception in infants that there may be 
a ‘critical period’ during which acoustical distinctions necessary 
for correct speech interpretation are established or can be lost 
by the auditory cortex.
Ablation of the auditory cortex produces specific defects in 
pattern recognition, e.g. in discriminating frequency change, 
and in the ability of an animal to localize a sound source in 
space.
Classification of units
474 units 
= 100%
80
___
60
40
20
r~— i
13
"Click"
85
21
rV\r
57
25
unitimi mi
m m  i
(Excitatory)
—llLLiil 
(Inhibitory)
u 
-------  
('On')
_________ lllll
(O ff)
lllll
(’0 n -0 ff)
-U---------U (FM)
i 
i
Figure 10.40 Classification of units in unanaesthetised primary auditory cortex. (After Evans EF and Whitfield IC. J Physiol 1964; 171: 476-93.18)
  

176 
Audiology
Figure 10.41 Response of three units in squirrel monkey primary auditory 
cortex to trill vocalisation. (After Winter and Funkenstein. Proc 3rd Congress in 
PrimatologyZurich. 2. Basel: Kruger 1971: 24-8.19)
Figure 10.42 Ear dominance slabs in a cat auditory cortex shaded area shows 
predominant contralateral eye dominance dominance of contralateral ear. 
(Reproduced from Evans EF. In: HB Barlow and DJ Mollon, eds. The Senses. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Figure 14.29.1 Originally published 
in Imig and Adrian, Brain Res 1977; 138: 241-57.20)
Descending control
Running in the opposite direction to the ascending auditory 
pathway are pathways descending from higher centres and pre­
sumably exerting some form of control from the higher to the 
lower levels of the auditory pathway. The best known of these 
is the OCB, ending particularly on the outer hair cells in the 
cochlea, from the contralateral medial part of the periolivary
nuclei. Stimulation of these crossed OCB fibres is known to 
reduce the sensitivity and the tuning of the cochlea, presumably 
by changing the mechanical properties of the outer hair cells. 
There is also a predominantly uncrossed projection from the 
more lateral regions of the olivary nuclei to the inner hair cells, 
but ending on the primary afferents themselves. The function 
of these is not yet known.
An obvious use for these descending pathways is to reduce 
the sensitivity of the auditory system during an animal’s own 
vocalizations. This happens from the level of the middle ear 
muscles upwards, particularly in bats, so that they may more 
easily detect the weak echos from their own vocalizations.
References
1. Evans, EE In: HB Barlow and JD Mollon, eds. The Senses. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982: 239-332.
2. Russell IJ, Sellick PM. Intracellular studies of hair cells in the 
mammalian cochlea. J Physiol 1978: 284; 261-90.
3. Kiang NYS, Sachs MB, Peake WT. Shapes of tuning curves 
for single auditory-nerve fibers. J A const Soc Am 1967; 42: 
1341-2.
4. Evans EE The frequency response and other properties of single 
fibres in the guinea-pig cochlear nerve. J Physiol 1972; 226: 
263-87.
5. Rose JE, Hind JE, Anderson DJ, Brugge, JE Some effects of stimu­
lus intensity on response of auditory nerve fibers in the squirrel 
monkey. J Neurophysiol 1971: 34; 685-99.
6. Evans EE 1993 Proc 12th International Conference of the Audio 
Engineering Society. New York: A E S ,  1993: 11-21.
7. Evans, EE In: Zwicker E, Terhardt, E eds. Facts and Models in Hear- 
ing. Heidelberg: Springer, 1974, 118-29.
8. Robles L, Ruggero MA, Nola CR. Basilar membrane mechanics at 
the base of the chinchilla cochlea. I Input-output functions, tun­
ing curves, and response phases. J Acoust Soc Am 1986; 80: 
1364-74.
9. Wilson JP. Evidence for a cochlear origin for acoutic re-emissions 
threshold fine-structure and total tinnitus. Hearing Res 1980; 2: 
233-52.
10. Pick and Evans EE In: Perkins, ed. High Technology Aids for 
Disabled People. London: Butterworths, 1982, Chapter 12.
11. Palmer AR, Evans EE On the peripheral coding of individual 
frequency components of complex sounds at high sound levels. 
Exp Brain Res 1979; Suppl 2: 19-26.
12. Young ED, Sachs MB. Representation of steady-state vowels in 
the temporal aspects of the discharge patterns of populations of 
auditory nerve fibers. J A const Soc Am 1979: 66: 1381-403.
13. Sachs MB, Young ED. Encoding steady-state vowels in the audi­
tory nerve: representation in terms of discharge rate. J A const Soc 
Am 1979; 662: 470-9.
14. Osen KK. In: Glycine Neurotransmission. New York: Wiley, 1990: 
417-51.
15. Evans EE Auditory processing of complex sounds: an overview. 
Phil Trans Roy Soc B 1992; 336: 295-306.
20 kHz
15 kHz 
10 kHz
5 kHz
25
me
25
25 21.5 
c+ c+
22.7
20.5/ 
,7.8
/ 18 
*  17 
c •
17,5 
, c -
25
me 
23 
c+
21 
19.5 
c -  
\c— 
18
21.5 
c - 
c_ 
18.3 
TS *
21 ;  
e + 1 7 - 5  C “
/ . :
I + .C+ 
/ 18,8 C+ 
M S  
21 ; 1+ 
!& + 
C+ 
' 
18.5 
16 \
' + 1+ ,
16.5
,+ 17 
\ 
l+i7.5; „
.'14 
1,2.6 
'/*, 1+ 1 
16.5,
6.8
6 ■
l±,c- 1+ *
f !  
5 7  5 . 3  ;
12.2
c +
14 C±
12.3
C"  12.5 c -
c -
12 ,
0±
12.2
12.8
+
/ 8.5 
, 
10 
9.3 
q te+
V c>, 
e - C± 
6.1
6.5 
6.4 c -  
*
2 C- 
C - r ,  
4.8
_ 
4.9 
c +
C—
7 , 6.9 
6.6 
55 ;
5,1 /
lie-
7.5
11,8 11 
1+ 
1 +
5.5 
7.4 
+
7.1
5.2 
C +
6.3
C+
1mm
75-134m
4,6IO
4.8
C -
  

Physiology of the auditory system 
177
16. Evans EF and Zhao W. Varieties of inhibition in the processing 
and control of processing in the mammalian cochlear nucleus. 
Prog Brain Res 1993; 97: 117-26.
17. Evans EF. The cochlear nerve and cochlear nucleus. In: WD 
Keidel and WD Neff, eds. Handbook of Sensory Physiology Vol 
VI2 Auditory System. Heidelberg, Springer, 1975: 1-108.
18. Evans EF and Whitfield IC. Classification of unit responses in the 
auditory cortex of the unanaesthetised and unrestrained cats. J 
Physiol 1964; 171: 476-93.
19. Winter P, Funkenstein H. Proc Third Congress in Prirmtology 
Zurich. 2. Basel: Kruger, 1971: 24-8.
20. Imig T] and Adrian HO. Binaural columns in the primary field 
(Al) of cat auditory cortex. Brain Res 1977; 138: 241-57.
Further reading
Evans EF. Auditory processing of complex sounds: an overview.
Phil Trans R Soc B 1992; 336: 295-306.
Haggard MP, Evans EF. (ed.) Hearing. Br Med Bull 1987; 
43.
Pickles JO. Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing 2nd edn. 
London: Academic Press, 1988: 775-1042.
  

Central auditory 
anatomy and function
Frank E Musiek, Victoria B Oxholm
Central auditory nervous system: 
anatomical definition
We define the anatomical limits of the central auditory nervous 
system (CA N S) as beginning at the cochlear nucleus (CN) and 
ending at the auditory cortex. However, the endpoint of the 
CA N S is unclear, as it might be somewhere in the efferent sys­
tem or possibly in a non-auditory area of the cerebrum. The 
endpoint of the CA N S may also depend on the types of acousti­
cal stimuli and the task to be completed. Thus, it may be phys­
iologically rather than anatomically determined (Figure 11.1).
Cochlear nucleus (CN)
The CN is located in the cerebellopontine angle area, a lateral 
recess formed at the juncture of the pons, medulla and cerebel­
lum. It consists of three principal sections: the anterior ventral 
cochlear nucleus (AVCN), the posterior ventral cochlear 
nucleus (PVCN), and the dorsal CN. Cochlear nerve fibers 
enter this complex at the junction of the AVCN and PVCN, 
where each fiber then divides and sends branches to the three 
individual nuclei1 (Figures 11.1 and 11.2).
The CN is composed of multiple cell types. Among the most 
prominent of these are the pyramidal (fusiform), octopus, stel­
late, spherical (bushy), globular (bushy) and multipolar cells.2,3 
The pyramidal cells in the cat are at the dorsal fringe of the dor­
sal CN, the octopus cells are in the PVCN, and the spherical 
cells are in the AVCN. Globular and multipolar cells are found 
between the AVCN and PVCN3,4 (Figures 11.3 and 11.4).
Incoming neural impulses can be modified by these cells in a 
characteristic manner that provides the basis for coding infor­
mation by the type of neural activity within the CN. The aver­
age response of a particular neural unit over time to a series of 
short tones presented at the unit’s characteristic frequency is 
shown in post-stimulatory histograms.5 The principal response 
patterns include the following: (1) primary-like response, an ini­
tial spike preceded by a steady response until the stimulus ceases; 
(2) the ‘chopper’ post-stimulatory response, an extremely rapid
Figure 11.1 Coronal view of the brain with key auditory structures and areas 
defined. 1, Cochlear nerve; 2, cochlear nucleus; 3, stria (dorsal, intermediate, 
ventral); 4, superior olivary complex; 5, lateral lemniscus; 6, nuclei of lateral 
lemniscus; 7, inferior colliculus; 8, medial geniculate bodies; 9, insula (shaded); 
10, primary auditory region in temporal and parietal lobes (shaded); 11, internal 
capsule; 12, corpus callosum.
oscillatory neural response to the stimulus; (3) the onset 
response, a solitary initial spike at the onset of the stimulus; and 
(4) the pauser response, similar to the primary-like response but 
which ends soon after the initial spike and resumes a graded 
response.6 An additional pattern, the ‘build-up’ response, is 
when the cell fires increasingly throughout the stimulus presen­
tation.5,6 This correspondence between cell type and response 
pattern suggests a significant relationship between anatomy 
(structure) and physiology (function) of the cells within the CN. 
Post-stimulatory histograms from the CN provide details of the 
complex processing of auditory information at the CN, such as 
the precise timing needed for localization and distinguishing 
interaural time differences.7 The various cell types also have

180 
Audiology
Figure 11.2 Posterior view of the human brainstem (cerebellum and vessels 
removed). 1, Cochlear nerve (entering cochlear nucleus just below the cerebellar 
peduncle); 2, cochlear nucleus; 3, fourth ventricle; 4, inferior colliculus; 5, 
brachium of inferior colliculus; 6, medial geniculate body; 7, thalamus.
(Courtesy of W. Mosenthal and F. Musiek.)
associated tuning curves; the main difference among the cell 
types is the shape of their tails (Figures 11.3 and 11.4).
The cochlear nerve enters the brainstem on the lateral pos­
terior aspect of the pontomedullary juncture and projects to the 
cochlear nuclear complex. Cochlear nerve fibers entering each 
section of the CN are arranged in a systematic fashion which 
preserves the frequency organization from the cochlea.8,9 All 
three sections of the CN contain this tonotopic organization, 
with low frequencies represented ventrolaterally and high fre­
quencies represented dorsomedially within each nucleus8,9 (Fig­
ure 11.5a). Some tuning curves derived from AVCN units using 
tone bursts have a similar shape to those of the cochlear 
nerve.7,10 However, some CN fibers produce wider tuning curves 
than do cochlear nerve fibers.11 Frequency resolution of acousti­
cal information coming from the cochlear nerve may thus be 
maintained but not necessarily enhanced by CN units.
The tuberculoventral tract, a fiber pathway thought to be 
primarily inhibitory in nature, connects the dorsal and ventral 
portions of the CN (Ortel, personal communication). Three 
main neural tracts continue from the CN complex to the supe­
rior olivary complex (SO C) and higher levels of the CANS.
Figure 11.3 Examples of five cell types found in the cochlear nucleus with 
associated post-stimulatory histogram types and tuning curve configurations.
A large fiber tract called the dorsal acoustical stria 
emanates from the dorsal CN and continues contralaterally to 
the SOC, lateral lemniscus (LL),12 and inferior colliculus (IC).6 
The intermediate acoustical stria originates in the PVCN and 
communicates with the contralateral lemniscus (ventral 
nucleus) as well as the central nucleus of the contralateral IC6 
(Figure 11.5b). The ventral acoustical stria, the largest tract, 
arises from the AVCN and merges with the trapezoid body as it 
nears the mid-line of the brainstem.12 The ventral stria extends 
contralaterally along the LL to the SO C and other nuclear 
groups. Interestingly, in animal studies for simple detection 
tasks of tones or noise, performance was not affected by sec­
tioning of the intermediate and dorsal acoustical stria. How­
ever, severe deficits were noted with sectioning of the ventral
_ . 
13
stria.
In addition to these three primary tracts, other fibers pro­
ject ipsilaterally from each division of the CN. Some of these 
fibers synapse at the SO C and nuclei of the LL within the pons. 
Other fibers synapse only at the IC, and bypass completely the 
SO C and the nuclei of the LL. The contralateral pathways 
carry the largest number of fibers, even though many neural 
tracts project both ipsilaterally and contralaterally from the 
CN .14
The CN is a unique brainstem auditory structure, in that its 
only afferent input is ipsilateral, coming from the cochlea via the 
cochlear nerve. Consequently, damage to the CN can mimic 
cochlear nerve dysfunction,15 as it may only produce ipsilateral 
pure tone deficits.16”18 Extra-axial tumors, such as vestibular 
schwannomas (acoustic neuromas), often affect the CN, due to 
its posterolateral location on the brainstem surface.17,19,20
Tumors situated in this cerebellopontine region can often 
affect the CN and may produce central auditory deficits. Never­
theless, the cerebellopontine angle is large enough in some 
cases to accommodate lesions of sizeable mass without compro­
mising neural function.21,22
  

Central auditory anatomy and function 
181
Spherical cells
globular and 
multipolar cells
Octopus cells
Multipolar cells
Pyramidal cells
PVCN
AVCN
Figure 11.4 Location of cell types in the cochlear nucleus. AVCN, anterior 
ventral cochlear nucleus; AN, auditory nerve; PVCN, posterior ventral cochlear 
nucleus; DCN, dorsal cochlear nucleus. (Based on the work of Osen. J Comp 
Neurol 1969; 136: 453-84.3)
Superior olivary complex
The SO C is positioned ventral and medial to the CN in the 
caudal portion of the pons14 (Figure 11.5a). It consists of 
numerous groups of nuclei, but this discussion will be limited to 
the following five: the lateral superior olivary complex (LSO), 
the medial superior olivary nucleus (MSO), the nucleus of the 
trapezoid body, and the lateral and medial preolivary nuclei. In 
humans, evidence suggests that the MSO is the largest of these 
nuclei.23 In some animal species, however, the largest and most 
prominent nucleus is the S-shaped LSO.24
Similar to that of the CN, tonotopic organization in the 
SO C seems to be preserved in all groups of nuclei. The LSO and 
MSO have been studied most extensively. In the LSO, lower fre­
quencies are represented laterally and the higher frequencies 
medially following the S-shaped contour of the nucleus, which 
gives it a unique tonotopic organization.25 The MSO has a pri­
marily low-frequency representation, while the LSO responds to 
a broader range of frequencies.14 The nucleus of the trapezoid 
body has a tonotopic orientation, with the low frequencies rep­
resented laterally and the high frequencies medially.
The tuning curves for the trapezoid body, LSO and MSO 
are mainly quite sharp, denoting good frequency selectivity.4 
The trapezoid and MSO post-stimulatory responses are primary­
like with a notch, whereas the LSO has shown ‘chopper’ and 
primary-like-type responses.4,26
Within the SOC, the LSO is innervated bilaterally27 and 
receives ipsilateral input from the AVCN and contralateral 
innervation from both the AVCN and PVCN.28 Both ipsilateral 
and contralateral inputs from the AVCN are also received in 
the MSO.29 Afferent input to the trapezoid body is not fully 
understood, but a significant contribution seems to arise from 
the contralateral CN.27 Innervation of the lateral and the 
medial preolivary nuclei may come primarily from the ipsilat­
eral AVCN, but this is also unclear and appears to differ among 
species.27
The SO C is a complex relay station in the auditory path­
way. It is the first, but not only, place where a variety of ipsilat­
eral and contralateral inputs provide the system with the 
anatomical foundation for unique functions in binaural listen­
ing. Sound localization is determined mainly by interaural 
time30 and intensity31 variations reflected in inputs to the SOC. 
The SO C has excitatory and inhibitory cells (and also some 
cells that are both excitatory and inhibitory) which are time 
(and hence directionally) sensitive. These excitatory and 
inhibitory responses help clarify directional cues for the higher 
auditory system.32 Tasks that necessitate the integration and 
interpretation of binaurally presented signals depend on the 
SO C and convergence of neural information from each ear. For 
example, audiologieal tests, such as rapidly alternating speech 
perception and the binaural fusion test (see Chapter 29), rely 
on binaural integration and the interaction of information in 
the SO C.33 Abnormal results are often seen on these tests in
Characteristic frequency 
Low 
High
Cross section of brainstem 
at caudal most pons
(b)
Figure 11.5 (a) Cross-section of the lower pons, focusing on the cochlear nucleus, superior olivary complex and associated structures in this region of the 
brainstem, (b) The same cross-section as in (a), showing the three acoustical stria coursing from the left cochlear nucleus only. VIII, Cochlear nerve; VCN, ventral 
cochlear nucleus; DCN, dorsal cochlear nucleus; DAS, dorsal acoustical stria; IAS, intermediate acoustical stria; VAS, ventral acoustical stria. Arrows indicate fibers 
ascending via the lateral lemnicus.
  

182 
Audiology
cases with signal degradation prior to the SOC or SO C pathol­
ogy.34 Binaural integration is also necessary for the measure- 
ment of masking level differences (MLDs), which are a 
sensitive index of brainstem integrity.35 Changing the phase of 
the stimulus (tones or speech) in the presence of noise results 
in a change in the ability to detect the signal, which makes 
temporal cueing at the SO C critical in MLDs. The importance 
of the SO C in the measurement of MLDs and the fusion of bin­
aural signals is supported by several studies which show that 
low-brainstem lesions affect MLDs, while lesions in the upper 
brainstem or auditory cortex do not.35,36
The SO C also appears to be an important relay station in 
the reflex arc of the acoustical stapedius muscle reflex.37 The 
reflex is thought to entail both direct and indirect neural path­
ways,38 but the neurophysiology of the reflex arc is not entirely 
understood.39 The direct reflex arc appears to consist of a three- 
or four-neurone chain which is activated when a sufficiently 
intense acoustical stimulus is presented to one or both ears. 
Neural impulses are conveyed via the cochlear nerve to the 
AVCN, and then proceed to the ipsilateral MSO and/or facial 
nerve nucleus. Transverse input seems to arise from the AVCN 
and travels to the contralateral MSO by way of the trapezoid 
body. Neurones originating in the MSO region terminate in the 
motor nucleus of the facial nerve area, from where motor fibers 
then descend to innervate the stapedius muscle. Consequently, 
unilateral acoustical stimulation results in bilateral stapedius 
muscle contractions.37
The existence of an indirect pathway for the acoustical 
reflex has also been postulated. A slower polysynaptic pathway, 
possibly including the extrapyramidal system of the reticular 
formation, has been proposed by Borg37 as this indirect reflex 
arc. Although all the pathways involved in the neural arc are 
not specified, significant clinical acoustical reflex data support 
the existence of this neural pathway.39
Lateral lemniscus
The LL is the primary auditory pathway in the brainstem and is 
composed of both ascending and descending fibers. The ascend­
ing portion extends bilaterally from the CN to the IC in the 
midbrain and contains both crossed and uncrossed fibers from 
the CN and SO C40 (Figure 11.1).
Within the LL, there are two main cell groups: the ventral 
and dorsal nuclei of the lateral lemniscus (NLL), and a minor 
cell group called the intermediate nucleus of the LL. These 
nuclei are located posterolaterally in the upper portion of the 
pons, near the lateral surface of the brainstem.41 Afferent input 
to the NLL arises from the dorsal CN on the contralateral side, 
and from the ventral CN on both sides of the brainstem.42 Both 
the ipsilateral and contralateral SO C also provide input to the 
NLL.14 The dorsal NLL from either side of the brainstem are 
interconnected by a fiber tract called the commissure of 
Probst.43 Lemniscal fibers may also cross from one side to the 
other through the pontine reticular formation.41 Most neurones 
of the dorsal segment of the LL can be activated binaurally.
However, a majority of neurones from the ventral segment can 
be activated only by contralateral stimulation.26 As with the 
CN and the SOC, definite tonotopic organization has been 
demonstrated for both the dorsal and ventral NLL.23 However, 
recent work has questioned the tonotopic arrangement of the 
LL, and indicated a possible concentric organization.44 Tuning 
curves are highly variable, and temporal resolution appears to 
be markedly decreased at the LL, as compared to more caudal 
auditory nuclei.
Inferior colliculus
The IC is one of the largest and most identifiable auditory struc­
tures of the brainstem.45 The IC is located on the dorsal surface 
of the midbrain, approximately 3-3.5 cm rostral to the pon- 
tomedullary junction (Figure 11.2).
From the dorsal aspect of the midbrain, the IC is clearly vis­
ible as two spherical mounds.38 Two additional rounded projec­
tions, the superior colliculi, can be seen on the dorsal surface of 
the midbrain, slightly rostral and lateral to the IC.38
Two major divisions exist within the IC: the central 
nucleus— or core—which is composed of purely auditory fibers, 
and the pericentral nucleus—or belt—which surrounds the 
central nucleus and consists mainly of somatosensory and audi­
tory fibers.26
The majority of auditory fibers from the LL and the lower 
auditory centers synapse directly or indirectly at the IC.46 Van 
Noort47 found that the IC receives input from the dorsal and 
ventral CN, lateral and medial superior olivary nuclei, dorsal 
and ventral nuclei of the LL, and contralateral IC. Other 
reports12,26,48 suggest that the lower nuclei provide both con­
tralateral and ipsilateral inputs to the IC. Many interneurones 
appear to exist in the IC, suggesting the presence of strong neu­
ronal interconnections.45 The superior colliculi, generally asso­
ciated with the visual system, also receives input from the 
auditory system, which is integrated into the reflexes involving 
the position of the head and eyes.49
Many of the functional properties of the IC have been 
described. As with other brainstem auditory structures, the IC 
has a high degree of tonotopic organization. In the IC, the high 
frequencies are ventral and the low frequencies are dorsally 
positioned.50
Moreover, the IC contains a large number of fibers which 
yield extremely sharp tuning curves, suggesting a high level of 
frequency resolution.51 The IC contains many time- and spatial- 
sensitive neurones52,53 and neurones sensitive to binaural stim­
ulation.54 This suggests a role in sound localization.38 Finally, in 
considering its neural connections and its position astride the 
auditory pathways, the IC has been referred to as the obligatory 
relay nuclear complex in transmitting auditory information to 
higher levels.14
As with the LL, the IC has a commissure that permits 
neural communication between the left and right IC.12 A 
unique feature of the IC is its brachium, a large fiber tract that 
lies on the dorsolateral surface of the midbrain. This tract pro­
  

Central auditory anatomy and function 
183
jects fibers ipsilaterally to the medial geniculate body (MGB), 
which is the principal auditory nucleus of the thalamus. Three 
cell types make up the majority of neural elements in the IC. 
Disk-shaped cells represent 75-85% of the cells in the central 
nucleus. Simple and complex stellate cells also exist in the IC.55 
In terms of response properties, the IC has two main types of 
responses: transient onset and sustained. The transient onset is 
an increase in response that grows only at the beginning of 
the stimulus; the sustained response gradually increases for the 
duration of the stimulus.56 It is important to know that, in the 
IC, all the response types described at the CN are present, 
although apparently to a lesser degree.57 The temporal resolu­
tion of the IC, as with the LL, is less efficient than at the lower 
brainstem auditory structures.4 Interestingly, intensity coding at 
the IC reveals a large number of neurones with non-monotonic 
functions.57
Medial geniculate body
The MGB is located on the inferior dorsolateral surface of 
the thalamus, just anterior, lateral and slightly rostral to the 
IC (Figure 11.2). Although the MGB sits in the thalamus 
and the IC in the midbrain, these structures are located only 
approximately 1 cm apart. The MGB contains ventral, dorsal
58
and medial divisions. 
Cells in the ventral division respond 
primarily to acoustical stimuli, while the other divisions con­
tain neurones that respond to both somatosensory and 
acoustical stimulation.26,48 The ventral division appears to be 
the portion of the MGB that transmits specific discrimination 
(speech) auditory information to the cerebral cortex.59,60 The 
dorsal division projects axons to association areas of the audi­
tory cortex. This division may maintain and direct auditory 
attention. The medial division may function as a multisen- 
sory arousal system.59
Afferent inputs to the MGB are primarily uncrossed, arriv­
ing from the IC via the branchium. It is possible, however, 
that some input may come from the contralateral IC and that 
some lower nuclei may input directly on the MGB.53 In the 
cat, crossed inputs from the IC connect to the medial division 
of the MGB.58'59
Tonotopic organization has been reported in the ventral 
segment of the MGB, with low frequencies represented laterally 
and high frequencies represented medially. Tuning curves range 
from broad to sharp, but MGB fibers in general are not as 
sharply tuned as are those of the IC.61 As reviewed by Rouiller,4 
the MGB has neurones with response properties that include 
transient onset, sustained, offset and inhibitory. The MGB also 
has sharp tuning curves which allow good frequency selectivity. 
There are both monotonic and non-monotonic neurones for 
the coding of intensity. Temporal resolution varies across the 
three regions of the MGB, and the ventral division has the best 
fidelity (measured by phase locking or synchronization to indi­
vidual clicks). In general, the temporal resolution of the ventral 
portion is similar to that of the IC and much poorer than that 
of the CN.
As with the IC, the MGB has many neurones sensitive to 
binaural stimulation and interaural intensity differences.48,61
Another important structure that closely interacts with the 
auditory pathway is the reticular formation or reticular activat­
ing system. Discussion of this system is beyond the scope of this 
chapter, but those interested in reviewing the reticular forma­
tion are directed to references 62 and 64.
Vascular anatomy of the brainstem
Many auditory dysfunctions of the brainstem and periphery 
have a vascular basis. For example, vertebrobasilar disease, 
mini-strokes, vascular spasms, aneurysms and vascular loops 
have all been shown to affect the auditory system.21,65,66
The major blood supply of the brainstem is the basilar 
artery, which originates from the left and right vertebral arter­
ies, 1-2 mm below the pontomedullary junction on the ventral 
side of the brainstem (Figure 11.6). At the low- to mid-pons 
level, the anterior inferior cerebellar artery branches from the 
basilar artery to supply blood to the CN. The CN may also 
receive an indirect vascular supply from the posterior inferior 
cerebellar artery.67 In many cases, the anterior inferior cerebel­
lar artery gives rise to the internal auditory artery, which sup­
plies the Vlllth nerve, and then branches into three divisions 
to supply the cochlear and vestibular periphery. The internal 
auditory artery sometimes branches directly from the basilar 
68
artery.
At the mid-pons level, small pontine branches of the basi­
lar artery, perhaps with the circumferential arteries, indirectly 
supply the SO C and possibly the LL.25 In addition, a strong pos­
sibility exists that the paramedian branches of the artery supply 
the SO C and LL. The superior cerebellar arteries are located at 
the rostral pons or midbrain level. Their branches supply the IC
Figure 11.6 Key vessels of the rostral medulla and pons segment of the 
brainstem. These vessels are located on the ventral side of the pons/medulla. 1, 
Vertebral arteries; 2, posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA); 3, anterior 
inferior cerebellar artery (AICA); 4, internal auditory artery; 5, basilar artery; 6, 
pontine arteries; 7, superior cerebellar artery; 8, posterior cerebral artery.
  

184 
Audiology
and in some cases the NLL.64 At the midbrain level, the basilar 
artery forms the posterior cerebral arteries. Each posterior cere­
bral artery has circumferential branches that supply the MGB 
ipsilaterally (Waddington, personal communication).
Significant variability has been shown in the vasculature of 
the brainstem.67,69 Because vascular patterns vary among speci­
mens, no one description can encapsulate all vascular patterns. 
Because most brainstem auditory structures are on the dorsal 
side of the brainstem, they may receive secondary and tertiary 
branches of the key arteries mentioned previously.
Key concepts in function
The following section introduces concepts about general audi­
tory anatomy and physiology and reviews them in reference to 
auditory brainstem structures.
Intensity coding
As sound intensity increases, the firing rate of many of the audi­
tory fibers in the brainstem increases; exceptions to this will be 
discussed later. Because the range between the threshold and 
saturation point of any given fiber is much smaller than the 
range of intensities audible to the human ear, large-intensity 
increases cannot be encoded by individual nerve fibers.70 
Rather, at high intensities many neurones must interact to 
achieve accurate coding. The mechanisms of this interaction 
are poorly understood,48,71 since most information on intensity 
coding is based on the study of individual neurones.
Neurones of various brainstem nuclei respond to stimulus 
intensity in three principal ways.12,48 One type of response is 
monotonic, meaning that as the stimulus intensity increases, 
the firing rate of the neurone(s) increases proportionally. The 
second type of intensity function is monotonic for low intensi­
ties, but, as stimulus intensity increases, the firing rate levels off. 
The third type of intensity function is non-monotonic. With 
this type of function, the neuronal firing rate reaches a plateau 
at a relatively low intensity and sometimes actually decreases as 
intensity increases, resulting in a rollover phenomenon. For 
example, some neurones in the IC reach their maximum firing 
rate 5 dB above their threshold.12 These three types of intensity 
coding appear to be common throughout the auditory brain­
stem, although the extent of each type varies among nuclei 
groups. On the other hand, most fibers in the CN have mono­
tonic intensity function. The CN fibers have a 30-40-dB 
dynamic range, and, in this regard, are similar to the cochlear 
nerve fibers.4
One can hypothesize that a high-intensity signal would be 
coded inappropriately when there is damage to brainstem audi­
tory neurones of the first type (monotonic) but not to the latter 
two types of neurones. This could result in higher intensities 
being coded incorrectly, which might result in what is known 
clinically as the rollover phenomenon.72
Aspects of temporal coding
The CAN S is an elegant time-keeper. Physiological 
measures of latency, phase locking, phase difference and 
synchronicity are common ways of detailing temporal 
processing. The latency of brainstem neuronal responses 
varies, depending on the type of auditory stimulus and 
the neurone or neurone group a n a l y z e d . S o m e  
neurones react quickly to stimulation, while others have 
lengthy latency periods. Some neurones respond only 
upon termination of the stimulus.
Phase locking is another phenomenon related to timing in the 
auditory system.26,70 Many auditory neurones appear to lock 
onto the stimulus according to phase, and fire only when the 
stimulus waveform reaches a certain point in its cycle. This is 
particularly evident with low-frequency sounds. Moreover, at 
lower frequencies certain neurones fire on every cycle, while at 
higher frequencies they fire only at every third or fifth cycle. 
This phase relationship is especially apparent in lower auditory 
brainstem neurones and may have considerable relevance to 
the mechanisms underlying MLDs.73 Generally, the firing rates 
of brainstem auditory neurones are higher than those of corti­
cal nerve fibers for steady-state signals or for periodic signals. 
The speed with which a neurone can respond to repeated stim­
uli depends on its refractory period. The refractory period is the 
time interval between two successive discharges (depolariza­
tions) of a nerve cell. The refractory period depends on the cell 
metabolism, and dysfunction of metabolic activity will 
lengthen the refractory period.74 Phase locking could be viewed 
as a form of synchronicity, in that responses occur repeatedly in 
the same time domain. A good example of auditory syn­
chronicity is the auditory brainstem response (ABR). In an 
ABR, the waves represent synchronous electrical activity.
In reviewing timing of the auditory system, it is necessary 
to discuss temporal processing. As Phillips75 conveys, this 
phrase may mean different things to different people. Clinicians 
often use the phrase temporal processing to indicate perfor­
mance on an audiologieal test that requires some type of timing 
decision about the stimuli presented. Basic scientists look at 
various types of temporal processing and how these contribute 
to other auditory functions. Phillips provides several examples 
of how timing is key to certain auditory processes. Localization 
of a sound source requires relative timing of acoustical signal 
arriving at the two ears. The auditory system has a temporal 
sensitivity to phase differences (of the signal) which may help 
us hear in noise. MLD is a good example of phase differential 
sensitivity. The pitch perception of complex sounds depends on 
timing (and related coding) of rapidly repeated acoustical 
events. In addition, sequencing of successive stimuli, masking 
of signals (existing close in time), discrimination of element 
duration and time intervals, integration of acoustical energy 
and pitch changes can all be considered aspects of temporal
  

Central auditory anatomy and function 
185
processing. Even detection, recognition and discrimination 
processes operate over critical time periods and thus may be 
considered as having a temporal element.
Frequency coding
The three concepts relevant to our discussion of frequency cod' 
ing include tonotopicity, frequency discrimination, and physio- 
logical tuning curves. 
The 
central auditory system 
is 
tonotopically arranged, and certain neurones respond best to 
certain frequencies. This arrangement provides a ‘spatial array’ 
of various frequencies to which the system responds. The char­
acteristic frequency is the frequency at which a neurone has its 
most sensitive threshold to a pure tone stimulus (the frequency 
that requires the least amount of intensity to raise a neurone’s 
activity just above its spontaneous firing rate). A physiological 
tuning curve refers to a plot of the intensity level needed to 
reach the threshold of a nerve cell over a wide range of fre- 
quencies. This measure can convey much information about 
the frequency resolution of a neurone (or group of neurones). 
Frequency discrimination is the differential sensitivity to vari- 
ous frequencies. This differential measurement can be accom­
plished psychophysically and is often referred to as a difference 
limen, which is the smallest frequency difference that can be 
discerned between two acoustical stimuli. An electrophysiolog- 
ical correlate of the frequency difference limen can be accom­
plished using the evoked potential mismatched negativity 
(MMN). Differential sensitivity to intensity and duration of 
tones can be accomplished in the same way, but is not used in 
physiological studies on audition as much as the frequency para­
meter is used.
The auditory brainstem response
In concluding this section on the auditory pathways of the 
brainstem, it is important to discuss aspects of the ABR (see 
Chapter 16). The ABR has gained most of its popularity 
because of its clinical applications, but it has also been a 
valuable addition to basic science. The ABR has provided a 
physiological approach to the study of multiple neurone 
groups and the way in which they interact in the brainstem. 
This avenue of study is different from the single-neurone 
studies which have been common in auditory brainstem 
anatomy and physiology.
The exact origins of some elements of the ABR are uncer­
tain, but research on humans has helped clarify the subject.70,76 
Moller70 indicated that wave I of the ABR is generated from the 
lateral aspect of the auditory nerve, whereas wave II originates 
from the medial aspect. Wave III probably has more than one 
generator, as do other subsequent waves of the ABR, but the 
CN is probably the principal source of wave III.70,76 In a study 
on patients with multiple sclerosis who underwent detailed 
magnetic resonance imaging and ABRs, observations indicated 
that waves I and II were generated peripheral to the rostral ven­
tral acoustical stria.77 This same study indicated that wave III
was generated by the AVCN and rostral ventral stria, with the 
IV-V complex generated rostrally to these structures. Clinical 
studies have shown that a mid-line lesion in the low pons 
which did not affect the cochlear nuclei preserved waves I, II 
and III and delayed the IV-V wave complex. This lesion 
appeared to compromise the SO C.78 Wave IV probably has 
multiple generator sites as well, but it arises predominantly from 
the SO C and has a contralateral influence that may be stronger 
than the ipsilateral contribution. According to Moller70 and to 
Wada and Starr,76 wave V is generated from the LL. Levine et 
al77 state that the IV-V complex may be generated by the MSO 
system, perhaps where it projects contralaterally onto the LL or 
IC. In a simplified view of the ABR origins, it is plausible that 
the first five ABR waves may be generated entirely within the 
cochlear nerve and pons. However, the IC may exert some 
influence on wave V, and this has been shown in detailed analy­
ses of the ABR.79
The typical clinical findings of ABR abnormalities in the 
ear ipsilateral to a brainstem lesion80-82 seem to be inconsistent 
with known neuroanatomy, which shows a majority of the audi­
tory fibers crossing to the contralateral side at the level of the 
SOC. It is unclear what these ABR findings mean with regard 
to brainstem pathways and associated physiology. However, it is 
important to consider these clinical findings in the framework 
of how the brainstem pathways may function in the pathologi­
cal situation.
Animal studies by Wada and Starr76 and our own observa­
tions with humans show that the first five waves of the ABR are 
not affected by specific lesions of the IC, with the exceptions 
noted earlier. Unfortunately, the ABR may not be a useful tool 
in evaluating lesions at or above the IC. Powerful clinical tests 
such as the ABR, MLDs and acoustical reflexes appear to be 
restricted to detecting lesions below the midbrain level. In cases 
where lesions of the IC or the MGB (midbrain and thalamic 
levels) are suspected, other procedures are necessary to detect 
and define the abnormality.
The cerebrum
Auditory cortex and subcortex
Neurones originating in the MGB and radiating outward to the 
auditory areas of the brain create the ascending auditory system 
that proceeds from the thalamic area to the cerebral cortex 
(Figure 11.7).
The cerebral cortex, the gray matter comprising the brain 
surface, consists of three principal types of cells: pyramidal, 
stellate and fusiform. Six cell layers in the cortex can be dis­
tinguished by type, density and arrangement of the nerve 
cells.64 In the auditory region of the cortex, cells responsive to 
acoustical stimuli exist in all the layers, with the exception of 
layer one.83
The principal auditory area of the cortex is considered to be 
Heschl’s gyrus, sometimes referred to as the transverse gyrus
  

186 
Audiology
Researchers disagree on which areas constitute the 
auditory cortex. This controversy results from adapting 
animal models to the human brain, and from disagree­
ment over whether to include ‘association' areas as part of 
the auditory cortex.M We believe these association areas 
are critical to understanding the system, although they 
also contain some fibers which are not sensitive to 
auditory stimuli.
Figure 11.7 Coronal section through a human brain (gray matter stained), 
emphasizing the subcortical structures. 1, Internal capsule; 2, corpus callosum;
3, insula; 4, external capsule with the claustrum (gray matter strip); 5, putamen; 
6, globis pallidus; 7, Sylvian fissure; 8, caudate. (Courtesy of W. Mosenthal and 
F. Musiek.)
(Figure 11.8). This gyrus is located in the Sylvian fissure, 
approximately two-thirds posterior on the upper surface of the 
temporal lobe (supratemporal plane). It courses in a posterior 
and medial direction. HeschPs gyrus can be defined by the 
acoustical sulcus at its anterior and transverse sulcus at its pos­
terior fringes. The temporal lobe must be displaced inferiorly or 
separated from the brain to expose the supratemporal plane to 
examine Heschl’s gyrus.
Campain and Minckler85 analyzed numerous human 
brains and concluded that the configuration of Heschl’s gyrus 
differed on the left side compared to the right. In some 
brains, double gyri were present unilaterally, while in other 
brains double gyri were present on both sides. Musiek and 
Reeves86 studied 29 human brains and reported that the num­
ber of HeschPs gyri ranged from one to three per hemisphere, 
although there was no significant left-right asymmetry in the 
number of HeschPs gyri within individual brains. The mean 
length of HeschPs gyrus, however, was found to be larger in 
the left hemisphere.86
The planum temporale is located on the cortical surface 
from the most posterior aspect of HeschPs gyrus and continuing 
posteriorly to the endpoint of the Sylvian fissure. In the human
Figure 11.8 Lateral view of the left hemisphere of the brain with the auditory 
responsive area encircled. 1, Temporal pole; 2, Sylvian fissure; 3, supramarginal 
gyrus; 4, angular gyrus; 5, superior, posterior temporal gyrus. From Waddington 
Atlas of Human Intracranial Anatomy.67 Rutland Vt: Academy Books 1984: 79-95. 
with permission.
brain, the planum temporale was shown to be significantly 
larger on the left side (3.6cm) than on the right (2.7 cm) by 
Geschwind and Levitsky.87 These researchers thought that the 
planum temporale may be an anatomical correlate to language 
(receptive) in humans, since the planum temporale is located in 
Wernicke’s region and in the left hemisphere, which is domi­
nant for speech. Musiek and Reeves86 supported these earlier 
findings87 on the differences in the lengths of the left and right 
planum temporale. Musiek and Reeves proposed, however, that 
asymmetries in higher auditory and language function may be 
related to anatomical differences not only of the planum tem­
porale but also of HeschPs gyrus.
The primary auditory area and a portion of the language 
area in humans are contained within the Sylvian fissure. 
Rubens88 reviewed earlier anatomical work on the Sylvian fis­
sure showing the left Sylvian fissure to be larger than the right. 
Others have corroborated this finding, including Musiek and 
Reeves,86 who found that asymmetry of the Sylvian fissure was 
correlated with the greater length of the planum temporale on 
the left side.
Curving around the end of the Sylvian fissure is the supra­
marginal gyrus, an area responsive to acoustical stimulation.89 It 
is located in the approximate Wernicke’s area region, along with 
the angular gyrus, which is situated immediately posterior to the 
supramarginal gyrus.87 These constitute a portion of a complex 
association area that appears to integrate auditory, visual and 
somesthetic information, making it vital to the visual and somes- 
thetic aspects of language, such as reading and writing.
Also responsive to acoustical stimulation are the inferior 
portion of the parietal lobe and the inferior aspect of the frontal 
lobe89,90 (Figure 11.8). The insula (a portion of the cortex 
located deep within the Sylvian fissure medial to the middle
  

Central auditory anatomy and function 
187
segment of the temporal gyrus) is yet another acoustically 
responsive area. It appears that the most posterior aspect of the 
insula is contiguous with Heschl’s gyrus. The only way to 
observe the insular cortex is by removing the temporal lobe or 
displacing it inferiorly (Figures 11.9 and 11.10).
The insula contains fibers that respond to somatic, visual 
and gustatory stimulation. Acoustical stimulation, however, 
causes the greatest neural activity.91 The posterior aspect of the 
insula, the section nearest to Heschl’s gyrus, seems to possess 
the most acoustically sensitive fibers.91 Located just medial to 
the insula is a narrow strip of gray matter called the claustrum. 
The function of the claustrum is not well understood, but it 
seems to be highly responsive to acoustical stimulation.14,91
People with dyslexia have been reported to have anatomi- 
cal brain irregularities.92,93
The planum temporale, normally significantly longer in 
the left hemisphere, was found to be symmetrical bilater- 
ally in the brains of dyslexic patients. Furthermore, brains 
of patients with dyslexia had an unusually large number 
of cell abnormalities called cerebrocortical microdys­
genesias, which are nests of ectopic neurones and glia in 
the first layer of the cortex. These ectopic areas are often 
connected with dysplasia of cortical layers (including 
focal microgyria), sometimes with superficial growths 
known as brain warts. Up to 26% of normal brains may 
contain these focal anomalies, but they are usually found 
in small numbers, often in the right hemisphere. A 
greater number of anomalies occur in patients with devel­
opmental dyslexia, frequently in the left hemisphere in 
the area of the presylvian cortex.9'
The findings just mentioned are interesting for two reasons. 
First, the areas of symmetry versus asymmetry and microdysge­
nesias appear to involve areas that in humans are mostly con­
sidered auditory regions of the cerebrum. Second, the reason for 
the high incidence of cortical dysplasias in people with learning 
disorders is unknown. One might speculate that these morpho­
logical abnormalities have functional or perhaps dysfunctional 
correlates. More studies are needed to relate these findings to 
behavioral consequences.
Thalamocortical connections
Auditory fiber tracts ascending from the MGB to the cortex and 
other areas of the brain follow multiple routes. One of these 
groups of fibers provides input to the basal ganglia, which is the 
large subcortical gray matter structure consisting of the caudate 
nucleus, putamen and globus pallidus (Figures 11.7 and 11.10). 
The lenticular process, or nucleus, lies between the internal and 
external capsules, the white matter neural pathways, and con­
tains the putamen and globus pallidus. In animal studies, the 
MGB has been shown to transmit fibers that connect with the
Figure 11.10 Transverse section of the right hemisphere cut along the Sylvian 
fissure. 1, Internal capsule; 2, external capsule with claustrum coursing through 
it; 3, insula; 4, Heschl's gyrus; 5, anterior part of the planum temporale 
Figure 11.9 Right lateral view of the insula observed after removal of part of 
(posterior part is cut away); 6, caudate; 7, thalamus; 8, lenticular process 
the parietal, frontal and temporal lobes. (Courtesy of W. Mosenthal and F. Musiek.) 
(putamen, globis pallidus).
  

188 
Audiology
putamen, the caudate nucleus and the amygdaloid body, a small 
almond-shaped expansion located at the tail of the caudate 
nucleus.94
Two main pathways link the MGB and the cortex besides 
the aforementioned connections to the basal ganglia. The first 
pathway follows a sublenticular route through the internal cap­
sule to Heschl’s gyrus and contains all auditory fibers emanating 
from the ventral MGB. The second pathway courses from the 
MGB through the inferior aspect of the internal capsule, and 
ultimately under the putamen to the external capsule, and con­
sists of auditory, somatic and possibly visual fibers. Beyond the 
external capsule, fibers connect to the insula.21,95 Further con­
nections proceed from the MGB to the auditory cortex and 
most likely overlap the two pathways discussed here.96,97 These 
pathways represent the varied and complex connections of the 
thalamocortical auditory anatomy.
Interhemispheric connections
The corpus callosum (CC), which is located at the base of the 
longitudinal fissure, is the primary connection between the left 
and right hemispheres (Figures 11.1, 11.7 and 11.11).
The CC  is covered by the cingulate gyri and forms most of 
the roof of the lateral ventricles.98 It consists of long, heavily 
myelinated axons and is the largest fiber tract in the primate 
brain. In an adult, the CC is approximately 6.5 cm long from 
the anterior genu to the posterior splenium, and is approxi­
mately 0.5-1 cm thick.99 The CC  seems to be larger in left- 
handed than in right-handed people, but it has significant 
morphological variability.100
The CC is not exclusively a mid-line structure," as it essen­
tially connects the two cortices and thereby must span much of
Figure 11.11 Sagittal cut separating the two hemispheres of the brain and 
sectioning the corpus callosum at its mid-line. The focus is on the corpus 
callosum. 1, Splenium (visual); 2, sulcus (auditory); 3, trunk or body (somatic 
and motor); 4, genu (olfactory? frontal lobe fibers), rostrum (olfactory?);
5, anterior commissure. (Courtesy of W. Mosenthal and F. Musiek.)
the intercortical space above the basal ganglia and lateral ven­
tricles. Because it encompasses such a large portion of the cere­
brum, it is probable that in many ‘cortical’ lesions some region 
of the CC  is involved.
Homolateral fibers (those which connect to the same locus 
in each hemisphere) are the primary fibers in the CC. The CC 
also contains heterolateral fibers, which are those connecting to 
different loci on each hemisphere.101 Heterolateral fibers fre­
quently have a longer and less direct route to the opposite side, 
which may necessitate a longer transfer time than required by 
their homolateral counterparts. The latency of an evoked 
potential recorded from one point on the cortex following stim­
ulation of the homolateral point on the other hemisphere is 
referred to as the transcallosal transfer time (TCTT). The 
TCTT in humans decreases with age, and minimum values are 
achieved during teenage years.102 These findings are consistent 
with increased myelination of the CC axons.103 The TCTT 
varies significantly, from a minimum of 3-6 ms to a maximum of 
100 ms, in primates and humans.104-106 The concept of 
inhibitory and excitatory neurones in the CC may be substan­
tiated by this variability.
The neural connections of the CC  correspond to, and the 
anatomy subserves, various regions of the cortex. The genu, or 
anterior region of the CC, contains fibers leading from the ante­
rior insula and the olfactory fibers.107 The trunk comprises the 
middle section of the CC, where the frontal and temporal lobes 
are also represented. The posterior half of the trunk, called the 
sulcus, is thinner and contains most of the auditory fibers from 
the temporal lobe and insula. The splenium is the most poste­
rior portion of the C C  and contains mostly visual fibers that 
connect with the occipital cortex.107
Just anterior to the splenium in the posterior half of the CC 
is the auditory area of the CC  at the mid-line. Although this 
information was obtained through primate research,107 data on 
humans helped localize the auditory areas of the CC. Baran et 
al108 found little or no change in tasks requiring interhemi­
spheric transfer (i.e. dichotic listening or pattern perception) 
after the sectioning of the anterior half of the CC. However, 
markedly poorer performance on these auditory tasks was 
shown in patients with a complete section of the C C .109
Lesions along the transcallosal auditory pathway may bring 
about interhemispheric transfer degradation. Although we have 
much information about the anatomy of the CC  at the mid- 
line, we know little about the course of the transcallosal audi­
tory pathway. It is thought to begin at the auditory cortex and 
course posteriorly and superiorly around the lateral ventricles. 
It then crosses a periventricular area known as the trigone, and 
courses medially and inferiorly into the CC proper. This infor­
mation about the transcallosal auditory pathway comes from 
anatomical and clinical studies.109
A recent study demonstrated size differences in the CC for 
children with attention deficits, as compared with control sub­
jects.110 The auditory and the genu areas of the CC in the
experimental group were smaller than those of the control
in
group.
  

Central auditory anatomy and function 
189
The vascular anatomy of the CC is simple. The splenium, 
or posterior fifth, is supplied by branches of the posterior cere- 
bral artery.64 The remainder of the CC is supplied by the peri- 
callosal artery, a branch of the anterior cerebral artery.64
Tonotopic organization
As in the brainstem, distinct tonotopic organization exists in the 
primary auditory cortex of the primate, with low frequencies rep­
resented rostrolaterally and high frequencies represented caudo- 
medially.112 Using positron emission tomography (PET) to 
measure changes in cerebral bloodflow, Lauter et al113 demon­
strated a similar pattern in the human brain. Tones of 500 Hz 
evoked increased activity in the lateral part of Heschl’s gyrus, 
while tones of4000 Hz resulted in activity in the medial position. 
Most tonotopic information on the insular cortex has been 
obtained from studies of cats.114 In the cat insula, the high- 
frequency neurones appear to be located in the inferior segment.114
In the primary auditory area where cells are sharply tuned, 
highly definable tonotopic organization and isofrequency strips 
(contours) can be found.115 There appear to be ‘columns’ within 
the cortex which have similar characteristic frequencies.83 
There also seems to be a spatial component to frequency repre­
sentation in the auditory cortex; approximately 2 mm is 
required to encompass the frequency range of one octave. For
extremely high frequencies, less space is needed to represent an
116
octave range.
The tonotopicity of the auditory cortex has the plasticity 
to change if there is a lack of input at a given frequency 
range. Schwaber et allh demonstrated in primates that if 
one frequency band of the auditory cortex was deprived 
of input, after about 3 months that frequency band 
shifted to the neighboring lower frequency for which 
there was input and stimulation. In this manner, the 
cortical tissue remains active and viable, even though its 
tonotopic arrangement was different. This type of finding 
has important clinical implications.
Intensity coding
The discharge or firing rate of cortical neurones in primates 
varies as a function of intensity, and takes two forms: monoto­
nic and non-monotonic.118 Most neurones in the primary audi­
tory cortex display rate-intensity functions similar to those of 
the cochlear nerve (i.e. the firing rate is monotonic for incre­
ments of approximately 10-40dB). Intensities greater than 40 
dB do not increase firing rates. Many neurones in the auditory 
cortex are sharply non-monotonic. In some cases, the firing rate 
may be reduced to a spontaneous level, with a 10-dB increase 
above the threshold intensity.48
Phillips71 reported similar results with cats, identifying 
both monotonic and non-monotonic profiles. For some non­
monotonic neurones, firing rates decreased precipitously, often 
to zero, at stimulus levels slightly above threshold. Phillips71 
also found that the introduction of wide-band noise raised the 
threshold level of the cortical neurones. However, once 
threshold sensitivity was achieved in noise, the firing rate 
increased in a manner similar to the unmasked condition, with 
the intensity profile remaining basically unchanged. With suc­
cessive increments in the level of the masking noise, the tonal 
intensity profile is displaced toward progressively higher sound 
pressure levels. This phenomenon could be a way in which 
some cortical neurones can provide the auditory system with 
an improvement in signal-to-noise ratio, perhaps permitting 
better hearing in noise. One may also hypothesize that if these 
cortical neurones are damaged, the signal-to-noise ratio is 
compromised and that hearing in noise may be more difficult.
Animal studies show some cortical neurones to be intensity 
selective. Certain cells respond only within a given intensity 
range, but collectively the neurones cover a wide range of 
intensities. For example, cortical cells may respond maximally, 
minimally or not at all at a given intensity. When the intensity 
is changed, different cells may respond at a maximum level, and 
the previous neurones may respond minimally or not at al.112
Temporal factors
Like the brainstem, the auditory cortex responds in various 
ways to the onset, presence and offset of acoustical stimuli. 
Abeles and Goldstein119 found four types of responses of corti­
cal neurones to a 100-ms tone. One type of neurone sustained 
a response for the duration of the stimulus, although the firing 
rate was considerably less at the offset of the tone. ‘On’ neu­
rones responded only to the onset, and ‘off’ neurones responded 
only after the tone was terminated. The fourth type responded 
to both the onset and the offset of the tone, but did not sustain 
a response during the tone.
Additional information on timing or temporal processing 
in the auditory cortex can be found in the work of Goldstein et 
a i 120 These investigators studied cells in the primary auditory 
area (Al) of rats and found four categories of response to clicks 
presented at different rates. Approximately 40% of the A l cells 
responded to each click at rates of 10-1000/s while 25% of the 
A l cells did not respond at all. The third classification of A l 
cells showed varying response patterns as the click rate 
changed. The fourth group of cells responded only to low click 
rates. Eggermont121 reported that several studies found click 
rates of auditory cortex neurones to be approximately 50-100/s 
or less. He also reported that recording methodology may influ­
ence the quantification of the response rates of these neurones. 
However, it seems that cortical neurones have difficulty follow­
ing high-rate periodic events.
The coding of transient events by the cortex is related to 
temporal resolution and is different from coding periodic 
events. Examples of transient events would be tasks such as 
click fusion or temporal ordering. For these kinds of tasks, the 
cortex is temporally sensitive.75 Only 2-3-ms differences were
  

190 
Audiology
needed between two clicks to determine in humans that there 
are two stimuli and not one.122
Timing within the auditory cortex plays a critical role in 
localization abilities. Many neurones in the primary auditory 
cortex are sensitive to interaural phase and intensity differ­
ences.123 In a soundfield, more cortical units fire to sound stim­
uli from a contralateral source than from an ipsilateral 
source.124,125 This finding provided the basis for the initial clin­
ical work on sound localization.
In 1958, Sanchez-Longo and Forster126 reported that 
patients with temporal lobe damage had difficulty in locating 
sound sources in the soundfield contralateral to the damaged 
hemisphere. Recently, Moore et al127 studied the abilities of 
both normal and brain-damaged subjects to track a fused audi­
tory image as it moved through auditory space. The perceived 
location of the auditory image, which varies according to the 
temporal relationship of paired clicks presented one each from 
matched speakers, is referred to as the precedence effect. 
Although the normal subjects were able to track the fused audi­
tory image accurately, two subjects with unilateral temporal 
lobe lesions (one in the right hemisphere, one in the left) 
exhibited auditory field deficits opposite the damaged hemi­
spheres. Results of these investigations are consistent with 
other localization and lateralization studies which show contra­
lateral ear effects.128,129
Electrical stimulation of the auditory cortex
Various auditory stimulation experiments with humans during 
neurological procedures were performed by Penfield and co­
workers.130,131 These investigators electrically stimulated areas 
along the margin of the Sylvian fissure while the patient, under 
local anesthesia, reported what he or she heard. Numerous 
patients reported experiencing no auditory sensation during the 
electrical stimulation. Some patients, however, reported hear­
ing buzzing, ringing, chirping, knocking, humming and rushing 
sounds when the superior gyrus of the temporal lobe was stimu­
lated. These sounds were directed primarily to the contralateral 
ear, but sometimes to both ears.
Penfield’s patients frequently reported the impression of 
hearing loss during the electrical stimulation, although they 
heard and understood spoken words. Furthermore, patients 
claimed that the pitch and volume of the surgeon’s voice varied 
during the electrical stimulation. A later study 
reported cases 
where patients heard music and singing during electrical stimu­
lation of the right auditory cortex. When the left postero- 
superior temporal gyrus was stimulated, many patients who 
responded heard voices 
shouting 
and 
other acoustical 
phenomena.
Lateralization of function in the auditory 
cortex
One important issue in central auditory assessment using 
behavioral tests relates to lateralization of the deficit. It is well
known that behavioral testing often indicates deficiencies in 
the ear contralateral to the damaged hemisphere. The fact that 
each ear provides more contralateral than ipsilateral input to 
the cortex may explain this contralateral ear deficit. Solid phys­
iological evidence upholds this theory. Mountcastle116 reported 
that contralateral stimulation of cortical neurones ordinarily 
had a 5-20-dB lower threshold for activation than did ipsilat­
eral stimulation. Celesia89 also showed that near-field potentials 
recorded from human auditory cortices during neurosurgery had 
larger amplitudes with contralateral ear stimulation than with 
ipsilateral stimulation. Studies of cats have also demonstrated 
comparable findings which indicate a stronger contralateral 
representation.133
Late 
auditory 
evoked 
potentials 
recorded 
with 
temporal/parietal region electrode placement in humans also 
revealed variances between contralateral and ipsilateral stimu­
lation. The auditory evoked potentials recorded from contralat­
eral stimulation were generally earlier and of greater amplitude 
than ipsilateral recordings.134 However, this may not always be 
the case, and these findings for far-field evoked potentials are 
controversial.133
Behavioral ablation studies
Ablation experiments have served as the basis for the develop­
ment of several auditory tests. By monitoring auditory behavior 
in animals, the effects of partial or total ablation of the auditory 
cortex have been measured and have been valuable in the 
localization of function.
Kryter and Ades, *' in one of the first studies involving 
ablation of the cat auditory cortex, found little or no 
effect on absolute thresholds or differential thresholds for 
intensity. These findings are consistent with data 
obtained from humans with brain damage or surgically 
removed auditory cortices.1 
However, some investi­
gators' 1,1 i8,n ? report that bilateral ablations of the primate 
auditory cortex result in severe hearing loss for pure 
tones. Bilaterally ablated animals demonstrated gradual 
recovery, but many retained some permanent pure tone 
sensitivity loss, especially in the middle frequencies.1'9 
Unilateral cortical ablations resulted in hearing loss in 
the ear contralateral to the lesion and normal hearing in 
the ipsilateral ear,1,8 Permanent residual hearing loss has
also been reported in humans with bilateral cortical 
* . 
140-142 
lesions.
Differences among animal species are shown in studies with 
opossums143 and ferrets,144 in which auditory threshold recovery 
is almost complete after bilateral lesions of the auditory cortex. 
The effects of auditory cortex ablation on frequency discrimi­
nation in animals remain unclear, even after many years of 
research. Early studies145,146 reported that frequency discrimina­
  

Central auditory anatomy and function 
191
tion was lost after ablation of the auditory cortex, while later 
studies147 contradicted these early findings. These discrepancies 
may be related to the difficulty of the discrimination tasks, as 
each study used a different test paradigm to measure pitch per- 
ception. The complexity of the tasks, rather than the differ- 
ences in frequency discrimination, is probably responsible for 
the discrepant findings.48
Lesion effects on frequency discrimination in humans may 
differ from those in animals. Thompson and Abel148 showed that 
patients with temporal lobe lesions have significantly poorer 
frequency discrimination for tones than do normal control sub' 
jects. Patients with lesions of the left temporal lobe yielded a 
greater deficit than did patients with right temporal lobe lesions 
(Figure 11.12). Similar results of poor frequency discrimination 
in patients with central auditory lesions have been noted on a 
more informal test basis by the authors of this chapter.
Because ablation of the auditory cortex has debatable 
effects on absolute or differential thresholds for intensity or fre­
quency, more complex tasks were sought to examine the results 
of cortical ablation. Diamond and Neff149 used patterned 
acoustical stimuli to examine the ability of cats to detect differ­
ences in frequency patterns after various bilateral cortical abla­
tions. After ablation of primary and association auditory 
cortices, the cats could no longer discriminate different acousti­
cal patterns, and despite extensive retraining they could not 
relearn the pattern task. Based on subsequent studies, Neff150 
reported that auditory cortex ablations affected primarily tem­
poral sequencing and not pattern detection or frequency dis­
crimination of the tones comprising patterns. Colavita151,152 
demonstrated in cats that ablation of only the insular-temporal 
region resulted in the inability to discriminate temporal pat­
terns. The early research of Diamond and Neff influenced Pin- 
heiro in her development of the frequency (pitch) pattern test, 
a valuable clinical central auditory test in humans.153-155 
Another pattem-perception test, duration patterns, has
L Temporal 
R. Temporal 
Control
Lesion site
Figure 11.12 Column graph shows the mean difference limen (DL) in hertz 
obtained from subjects with left and right temporal lobe lesions, as compared 
to a control group. (Based on the work of Thompson and Abel. Scan Audiol 
1992; 21(35): 3-22.148)
emerged as a potentially valuable clinical tool.156 Temporal 
ordering appears to be a critical part of pattern perception, 
which in turn is affected by lesions of the auditory cortex.
Other studies show that the temporal dimension of hearing 
is linked to the integrity of the auditory cortex. Gershuni et al157 
demonstrated that a unilateral lesion of the dog’s auditory cor­
tex resulted in decreased pure tone sensitivity for short but not 
long tones in the ear contralateral to the lesion.
In contrast, Cranford158 showed that cortical lesions had no 
effect on brief tone thresholds in cats. Cranford158 also demon­
strated that auditory cortex lesions in cats markedly affected the 
frequency difference limen for short- but not long-duration 
tones presented to the contralateral ear. Following the animal 
study, Cranford et al159 examined brief tone frequency differ­
ence limens in seven human subjects with unilateral temporal 
lobe lesions. Findings with human subjects were essentially the 
same as those with animals. Brief tone thresholds for subjects 
with temporal lobe lesions were the same as those of a normal 
control group, but the brief tone frequency difference limen was 
markedly poorer for subjects with lesions. The frequency differ­
ence limen was poorer for the contralateral ear for stimulus 
duration under 200 ms.
Auditory stimulation influences on the 
auditory cortex
The auditory cortex appears to respond to acoustical stimula­
tion and/or auditory training. This statement is associated with 
a number of important recent studies. One such study was con­
ducted by Recanzone et al160 on owl monkeys. These animals 
were trained on a frequency discrimination task. After exten­
sive training, each animal’s auditory cortex was tonotopically 
mapped. The neural substrate matching the frequency of the 
training was two to eight times larger than the same region in a 
control group of animals that did not receive training. In addi­
tion, these animals’ behavioral frequency discrimination 
improved markedly after training. Other studies, though differ­
ently oriented, have also shown changes (reorganization) in the 
auditory cortex as a result of stimulation and/or training.161,162 
This has changed our view on auditory training, especially its 
use with auditory processing disorders; for reviews see Chermak 
and Musiek163 and Musiek and Berge.164
Imaging techniques
Advanced imaging technology has made possible anatomical 
and physiological inspection of the human brain. This is impor­
tant, because at the subcortical and cortical levels animal brains 
are structurally and functionally different from the human 
brain, and it has been with concern that extrapolations have 
been made from animal models to humans with regard to brain 
function related to audition. With imaging techniques, it is pos­
sible to measure some functions of hearing in humans. 
Although it is too soon for these imaging techniques to replace 
the important animal studies, they have important potential.
  

192 
Audiology
Two types of imaging technique will be discussed here: 
positron emission tomography (PET), and functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI). 
The basis of PET is the decay of 
radioactive tracers which have been introduced into the body 
and emit positrons. These positrons undergo transformations 
that result in the release of photons which are detected by the 
scanning equipment. The radioactive tracer becomes perfused 
in the brain, and brain activity results in photon emissions, 
which are measured. There are two types of PET: one based on 
regional bloodflow, and one based on glucose metabolism. The 
bloodflow technique requires inhalation or injection of the 
radioactive tracer, which has a short half-life of about 2min. 
Because the body clears the radioactive substance quickly, 
repeated tests are possible, but each test is obviously limited by 
time. The glucose metabolism technique uses fluoro-2-deoxy- 
D-glucose (FDG), which has a byproduct linked to glucose, 
which in turn perfuses the brain differentially. The maximum 
perfusion is where the metabolism is greatest. The time window 
for measurement is 30-40 min after tracer injection, and multi­
ple scans should not be performed, because of risk to the 
patient.
The second imaging technique is fMRI. In fMRI, a strong 
magnetic field is used to align the body’s protons, and a brief 
radio signal is then used to alter the tilt of the aligned protons. 
The energy released when the protons resume their original 
positions is measured. Since the blood acquires paramagnetic 
properties when the body is in a strong magnetic field, blood­
flow can be visualized via MRI. Bloodflow is related to blood 
volume and oxygenation, which are increased when certain 
areas of the brain are active. Hence, the magnetic susceptibility 
of the blood changes with increased neural activity, and these 
changes are reflected in the MRI measurements.165 With fMRI, 
no radioactivity is involved and the resolution is greater than 
that of PET. The noise present during fMRI testing is consider­
able, and this remains a factor in auditory studies.
There have been many contributions from imaging studies 
to auditory anatomy and physiology, but we will highlight only 
a few studies. As mentioned, one early PET study investigated 
the tonotopic arrangement of Heschl’s gyrus.113 This showed 
low frequencies (500 Hz) to be anterior and lateral, while the 
high frequencies (4000 Hz) were posteromedial. Similar tono­
topic results have been reported recently for fMRI.166
An fMRI study167 using speech (context, reading passages) 
and tonal stimuli showed primarily activation at the superior 
temporal gyrus, with more activity on the left side than on the 
right. Activity appeared to occur in the insula as well. The 
regions that were active along the superior temporal gyrus var­
ied. Interestingly, different intensities of the stimuli seemed to 
have no effect on activation patterns. In an fMRI study on word 
presentation rates, greater activation was seen on the left side 
than on the right, with activity increasing from 10 to 90 
words/min, and a drop in activity at 130 words/min. The supe­
rior temporal gyrus areas, including Heschl’s gyrus, planum tem­
porale and a small area immediately anterior to Heschl’s gyrus,
were activated at high rates of word presentation. The posterior 
insula also became involved at high rates.168 In a PET study 
using words from a song for which pitch judgement of target 
words was required, the left cortex was more active than the 
right. Most activity was in the area of Heschl’s gyrus, but activ­
ity often extended both posteriorly and anteriorly beyond 
Heschl’s gyrus. In this study, the subjects were also asked to imag­
ine performing the task. The auditory regions (though smaller 
and less intense) were activated for this type of task. This showed 
a way to activate the auditory cortex without external stimuli.169
Auditory cortex vascular anatomy
The middle cerebral artery (MCA) branches directly from the 
internal capsule at the base of the brain and is the main artery 
supplying blood to the auditory cortex.69 The length of the 
M CA varies. It can be only 2 cm long prior to its diffuse branch­
ing,157 or it can extend the full length of the Sylvian fissure 
before becoming the angular artery and coursing posteriorly and 
laterally on the brain surface. Its route fluctuates greatly 
between species, but it courses primarily in an anterior-to- 
posterior direction within the Sylvian fissure.69
Starting with an anterior view of the MCA, the fronto- 
opercular artery is the first major branch supplying an auditory 
region. This artery follows a superior route, supplying the ante­
rior section of the insula. Just posterior to the fronto-opercular 
artery is the central sulcus artery which supplies the posterior 
insula and the anterior parietal lobe. Three arteries ascend from 
the MCA and course over the middle and posterior part of the 
temporal lobe.69 These three are the anterior, middle and pos­
terior arteries and they supply the middle and superior tempo­
ral gyri. A combination of the MCA and angular artery 
presumably supplies the primary auditory area, along with the 
angular gyrus and a portion of the supramarginal gyrus. The pos­
terior parietal artery supplies the remainder of the supramar- 
ginal gyrus.
Significant tissue damage to gray and white matter in the 
temporparietal regions of the brain may be caused by vascular 
insults involving the MCA. These lesions are devastating to 
both the morphology and function of the auditory cortex, and 
are among the most common anomalies affecting this region.
The efferent auditory system
The efferent auditory system probably functions as one unit, but 
the pathways are often viewed in two sections. The caudal-most 
part of the system, the olivocochlear bundle (OCB), has been 
studied, but little is known about the more rostral system. The 
rostral efferent pathway starts at the auditory cortex and 
descends to the medial geniculate and the midbrain regions, 
including the IC. A loop system appears to exist between the cor­
tex and these structures, and fibers descend from the cortex to 
neurones in the brainstem. The IC also receives efferents from
  

Central auditory anatomy and function 
193
the medial geniculate.48 The descending connections from the 
IC to nuclei in the SO C have not been well established. Sahley 
et al170 reviewed these connections and stated that connections 
exist from the IC to the ipsilateral trapezoid body nuclei and pre- 
olivary nuclei. There also appear to be widespread bilateral con­
nections from the IC to different areas of the SOC. Some areas 
of the descending pathway have not been well studied, but a sys­
tem is known to exist which allows neural communication from 
the cortex to the cochlea. In this regard, it is known that electri­
cal stimulation of the cortex results in the excitation or inhibi­
tion of single units in the lower auditory system.171 Physiological 
evidence exists for a descending train of impulses which eventu­
ally reaches the cochlea from the cortex.172
The OCB is the best-known circuitry of the efferent sys­
tem. The OCB has two main tracts: the lateral and the 
medial.170,173 The lateral tract originates from preolivary cells 
near the lateral superior olive and is composed mostly of 
uncrossed, unmyelinated fibers which terminate on the (ipsilat­
eral) dendrites beneath the inner hair cells. These preolivary 
cells also send projections ipsilaterally to the cochlear nuclei by 
way of the ventral and dorsal acoustical stria. The medial tract 
of the OCB is composed of myelinated fibers which originate in 
preolivary nuclei in the area around the medial superior olive. 
Most fibers cross to the opposite cochlea, where they connect 
directly to the outer hair cells. There are also bilateral (mostly 
contralateral) connections to the CN via both the dorsal and 
ventral acoustical stria. The lateral and medial OCB fibers, after 
connecting to various divisions of the CN, course along the 
vestibular nerves in the internal auditory meatus before termi­
nating at the type I auditory nerve fibers below the inner hair 
cells and the base of the outer hair cells (see Sahley et al170 for
x 48,173
review).
Early physiological studies show that stimulation of the 
crossed (medial) OCB fibers results in reduced neural response 
from the cochlea and cochlear nerve.174 Since then, the sup­
pressive effect of the medial system has been shown in humans. 
In 1962, Fex175 showed that acoustical stimulation of the con­
tralateral ear will trigger medial OCB function. By stimulating 
the contralateral ear in humans, the action potential is reduced 
in amplitude, as is the amplitude of the transient and distortion 
product otoacoustic emissions.176,177 It has also been shown that 
cutting the vestibular nerves in the internal auditory meatus 
results in absent suppression of otoacoustical emissions.178
Another important aspect related to function of the OCB 
is hearing in noise. Pickles and Comis179 showed that the appli­
cation of atropine (a cholinergic blocker) in the region of the 
OCB resulted in poorer hearing in noise in animals. Other stud­
ies have also shown that the OCB has an important role in 
hearing in noise.180-182 The mechanism underlying this facilita­
tion of hearing in noise may be related to the ability of the 
medial OCB to trigger outer hair cell expansion/contraction, 
thereby enhancing or damping basilar membrane activity. This, 
in turn, may limit to low levels cochlear nerve activity for 
unimportant (noise) stimuli, resulting in a larger dynamic range
for the cochlear nerve neurone to respond to other acoustical 
stimuli (see Sahley et al170 for review). It is also important to 
consider that the OCB may sometimes enhance responses, even 
though data indicate that many of its activities are related to 
suppression (see below). Evidence shows that when an animal 
is surrounded by noise and the OCB is triggered (by electrical 
stimulation or by contralateral noise presented to the ear), a 
release of the cochlear nerve from noise is accomplished, allow­
ing better overall hearing in noise.
Auditory neurochemistry
Neurochemistry is reviewed as part of the discussion of auditory 
neuroanatomy and physiology because many known neuro­
transmitters are associated with the central auditory system. 
Neurotransmitters are neurochemical agents which convey 
information across the synapse between nerve cells. The type of 
synapse and particular neurotransmitters involved may influ­
ence many characteristics of auditory function and processing. 
Research on auditory neurotransmitters frequently has pro­
found clinical implications.
The anatomy of neurotransmission
The synapse is the connecting link between nerve cells, and the 
main structure in neurotransmission. It involves the synaptic 
button of the axon, which communicates neurochemically with 
the dendrites, or in some cases the cell body, of another nerve 
cell. The neurotransmitters are released by vesicles and perme­
ate the synaptic region to bind to proteins, called receptors, 
embedded in the adjacent cell membrane. Various events can 
take place as a result of this transmitter binding. One such 
event is a change in ion concentrations across the cell mem­
brane, which may induce an alteration in a postsynaptic cell 
receptor potential. A number of neurotransmitter interactions 
occurring in a restricted time period will cause the postsynaptic 
cell to depolarize and fire its own impulse or action potential. 
An excitatory neurotransmitter 
is associated with this
183
response.
Hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic cell membrane is 
caused by inhibitory neurotransmitters making the cells less 
likely to fire an impulse or more difficult to excite.183 The 
synapse can also be influenced by other biochemical actions of 
the cell, but these will not be discussed.
Numerous therapeutic drugs are used to influence synaptic 
activity. Agonists can bind to and activate postsynaptic 
receptors, mimicking natural neuretransmitters. Antago­
nists can produce the opposite effect by binding to but 
not activating the receptor, thus blocking the natural 
neurotransmitter function.
  

194 
Audiology
Afferent auditory neurotransmission
If synaptic activity can be controlled by neurotransmitters, it 
may be feasible to control the functions that are based on these 
synaptic interactions. To accomplish this, neurotransmitters 
must first be localized and identified, keeping in mind that 
before a chemical can be considered as a neurotransmitter it 
must meet strict criteria.183 New information on function and 
dysfunction of a system may be obtained through the use of ago- 
nists and antagonists, once these neurotransmitters have been 
identified.
It is not known which neurotransmitter operates between 
the cochlear hair cells and cochlear nerve fibers, but one possi­
bility is glutamate.184 Glutamate or aspartate is believed to be 
involved in cochlear nerve-to-CN transmission.184,185 Within 
the CN, it is likely that several excitatory neurotransmitters 
exist, 
such 
as 
aspartate, 
glutamate 
and 
acetylcholine 
(A Ch).186-188 Inhibitory amino acids found at high levels within 
the CN are gamma-amino-butyric acid (GABA) and glycine.189 
Gamma-amino-butyric acid and glycine are also both found in 
the SO C .190,191 Also located in the SO C are excitatory amino 
acids, including quisqualate, glutamate and N-methyl-D-aspar- 
tate (NM DA).192 Glycine and glutamate are likely neurotrans­
mitters in the IC.193 Increased activity at the IC level has been 
shown with both NMDA and aspartate.194
Little information exists on auditory cortex transmitters. 
Evidence shows that ACh and opiate drugs affect auditory cor­
tex activity or evoked potentials, but further research is 
needed before the neurochemistry of this brain region is 
understood fully.195,196
Efferent auditory neurotransmission
More data are available on efferent neurotransmitters than on 
afferent neuro transmitters. Neuro transmission within the 
OCB, for example, has been studied extensively. Both medial 
and lateral systems are cholinergic, and the lateral system also 
contains the opioid peptides enkephalin and dynorphin.197,198 
These efferent neurotransmitters can be found in the perilymph 
of the cochlea. The results of electrical stimulation on the OCB 
can be mimicked by applying ACh to this region.199
Auditory function and neurotransmitters
Several studies have examined neurotransmitter effects on 
auditory function which are measured electrophysiologically or 
behaviorally. Cousillas et al200 found that cochlear nerve activ­
ity during sound stimulation was diminished when glutamater- 
gic blockers were perfused through guinea pig cochleas. The 
application of aspartate, an excitatory amino acid, was also 
found to increase the spontaneous and acoustically stimulated 
firing rates of CN fibers. This effect was reversed when an 
antagonist drug was administered. Homogeneous neural mod­
ulating outcomes were shown in a similar study using antago­
nists and agonists such as glutamate, aspartate and NMDA at 
the IC level.194
The late auditory evoked potential (P2) also showed an 
increased amplitude after administration of naloxone, an opioid 
antagonist, in humans. Fentanyl, an opioid agonist, was also 
found to reduce the P2 amplitude in the same study.
Auditory function of the OCB and neurotransmission have 
also been studied. The OCB plays a role in enhancing hearing in 
noise.179,201 The chemical interaction of the OCB and the hair 
cells of the cochlea may mediate this role. The fact that outer 
hair cells can expand and contract might indicate a link to the 
OCB, since neurotransmitters may control this hair cell func­
tion. Regulation of this motor activity may in turn allow the 
OCB modulation of incoming impulses via the outer hair cells.
In studies on chinchillas, the cochlear nerve action poten­
tial was enhanced significantly by injecting the opioid agonist 
pentazocine.170,202 Because opioids are found in the (lateral) 
OCB system, this effect, only noted at intensity levels near 
threshold, assuredly involves the OCB system.
Summary and conclusions
Knowledge of the structure and function of the CA N S is vital 
to the audiologist. Audiologieal procedures and related com­
munication increasingly involve the CANS, and without an 
understanding of the way in which this system works, potential 
clinical insights will not be realized. The CA N S is a complex 
system in which parallel and sequential processing take place. 
In the brainstem, there are ipsilateral, contralateral and com­
missural connections to various auditory nuclei. Auditory neu­
rones in the brainstem are composed of a variety of different 
cell types, which respond in certain ways (often according to 
their structure) to alter or preserve the impulse pattern coming 
into the cell. This same type of processing takes place in the 
cells of the auditory cortex, but there are fewer cell types in the 
cortex than in the brainstem. This type of processing may pro­
vide a basis for increased information pertaining to complex 
acoustical stimuli. The brainstem and the cortex are both 
highly tonotopic and present with a variety of tuning curves. In 
regard to intensity coding, the majority of cells in the brainstem 
and cortex have a range of 30-40 dB; however, some have 
severely reduced dynamic ranges. It is of interest that in a lis­
tening situation with background noise some cortical neurones 
will not respond until the target sound is above the noise floor, 
with apparently no restriction in their dynamic range.
In the cerebrum, the auditory regions have intrahemi- 
spheric and interhemispheric connections to other auditory 
areas and to sensory, cognitive and motor regions. At the cor­
tical level, seldom does a system function totally indepen­
dently. This makes for efficient processing of environmental 
input, but also makes it difficult to design tests to isolate only 
auditory function. Much scientific study has been devoted to 
the afferent auditory system, and information on the efferent 
system is increasingly available. We have known for years that 
the efferent system -  especially the OCB -  can affect acousti­
cal input. The OCB appears to play a role in allowing better
  

Central auditory anatomy and function 
195
hearing in noise. In a broader sense, the OCB (and probably 
the entire efferent system) may have a modulatory effect on 
peripheral function. Some influences of the OCB can be mea- 
sured in humans by using otoacoustical emissions and/or 
evoked potentials.
Contributions to the anatomy and physiology of the 
CA N S have been, and will continue to be, made by careful 
study of patients with lesions of the auditory system. This 
kind of study often involves the clinician and clinical tests. 
The study of patients with structural abnormalities of the 
auditory system can now be enhanced by the use of PET or 
fMRI studies. These imaging techniques can provide insight 
about the locus and degree of function in normal and abnor­
mal states. The use of functional imaging techniques will 
help solve two major problems in the study of the CANS. 
One is that now humans can be studied directly, the other is 
more complex and relevant stimuli such as speech can be 
used to study associated physiology.
A  new area of study of the CA N S is its neurochemistry or 
neuropharmacology. Surprisingly, the neurotransmitters of the 
OCB are better known than those of the afferent system. 
Neuro transmission takes place at the synapse of the nerve cell, 
and synaptic activity is governed largely by the type and 
amount of the neurotransmitter. Agonists are chemicals that 
can enhance the neural response and the synapse, while 
antagonists will shut down the response. Complex synaptic 
interactions among agonists and antagonists are the basis for 
complex auditory processing.
New information on the CA N S is increasing on all fronts. 
More data on audition are available from audiologists, phar­
macologists, physiologists, anatomists and psychologists. The 
basic scientists have provided much knowledge that will 
enhance the diagnosis and treatment of central auditory disor­
ders. However, this basic knowledge can be used to its greatest 
potential only if the clinician is well versed in the structure 
and function of the CANS.
References
1. Schuknecht HT. Pathology of the Ear. Cambridge: Harvard Uni­
versity Press, 1974.
2. Pfeiffer RR. Classification of response patterns of spike discharges 
for units in the cochlear nucleus. Tone burst stimulation. Exp 
Brain Res 1966; 1: 220-35.
3. Osen KK. Cytoarchitecture of the cochlear nuclei in the cat. J 
Comp Neurol 1969; 136: 453-84.
4. Rouiller EM. Functional organization of the auditory pathways. 
In: Ehret G, Romand R, eds. The Central Auditory System. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1997: 3-96.
5. Rhode W. The use of intracellular techniques in the study of the 
cochlear nucleus. J Acoust Soc Am 1985; 78: 320-7.
6. Kiang NYS. Stimulus representation in the discharge patterns of 
auditory neurons. In: Tower DB, ed. The Nervous System. Vol. 3. 
Human Communication and its Disorders. New York: Raven Press, 
1975: 81-96.
7. Rhode W. Physiological-morphological properties of the cochlear 
nucleus. In: Altschuler R, Bobbin R, Clopton B, Hoffman D, eds. 
Neurobiology of Hearing: The Central Auditory System. New York: 
Raven Press, 1991: 47-78.
8. Sando I. The anatomical interrelationships of the cochlear nerve 
fibers. Aeta Otolaryngol 1965; 59: 417-36.
9. Webster DB. Projection of the cochlea to cochlear nuclei in 
Merriam’s kangaroo rat. J Comp Neurol 1971; 143: 323-340.
10. Rose JE, Galambos R, Hughes JR. Microelectrode studies of the 
cochlear nuclei of the cat. Johns Hopkins Hosp Bull 1959; 104: 
211-51.
11. Moller AR. Physiology of the ascending auditory pathway with 
special reference to the auditory brain stem response (ABR). In: 
Pinheiro ML, Musiek FE, eds. Assessment of Central Auditory Dys­
function: Foundations and Clinical Correlates. Baltimore: Williams 
and Wilkins, 1985: 23-41.
12. Whitfield IC. The Auditory Pathway. Baltimore: Williams and 
Wilkins, 1967.
13. Masterton RB, Granger EM. Role of acoustic striae in hearing 
contribution of dorsal and intermediate striae to detection of 
noises and tones. J Neurophysiol 1988; 60: 1841-60.
14. Noback CR. Neuroanatomical correlates of central auditory func­
tion. In: Pinheiro ML, Musiek FE, eds. Assessment of Central Audi­
tory Dysfunction: Foundations and Clinical Correlates. Baltimore: 
Williams and Wilkins, 1985: 7-21.
15. Jerger J, Jerger S. Auditory findings in brain stem disorders. Arch 
Otolaryngol 1974; 99: 342-50.
16. Matkin N, Carhart R. Auditory profiles associated with Rh incom­
patibility. Arch Otolaryngol 1966; 84: 502-13.
17. Dublin W. Fundamentals of Sensorineural Auditory Pathology. 
Springfield: Charles C. Thomas, 1976.
18. Dublin W. The cochlear nuclei—pathology. Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1985; 93: 448-63.
19. Nodar R, Kinney S. The contralateral effects of large tumors on 
brain stem auditory evoked potentials. Laryngoscope 1980; 90: 
1762-8.
20. Musiek FE, Kibbe-Michael K. The ABR wave IV-V abnormalities 
from the ear opposite large CPA tumors. Am J Otol 1986; 7: 
253-7.
21. Musiek FE, Gollegly KM. ABR in eighth nerve and low brain stem 
lesions. In: Jacobson JT, ed. The Auditory Brain Stem Response. San 
Diego: College-Hill Press, 1985: 181-202.
22. Musiek FE, Kibbe-Michael K, Geurkink N, Josey A, Glasscock M. 
ABR results in patients with posterior fossa tumors and normal 
pure tone hearing. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1986; 94: 568-73.
23. Brugge IF, Geisler CE. Auditory mechanisms of the lower brain 
stem. Am Rev Neurosci 1978; 1: 363-94.
24. Moore JK. The human auditory brainstem: a comparative view. 
Hear Res 1987; 29: 1-32.
25. Tsuchitani C, Boudreau JC. Single unit analysis of cat superior 
olive S-segment with tonal stimuli. J Neurophysiol 1966; 29: 
684-97.
26. Keidel W, Kallert S, Korth M, Humes L. The Physiological Basis of 
Hearing. New York: Thieme-Stratton, 1983.
27. Strominger NL, Hurwitz JL. Anatomical aspects of the superior 
olivary complex. J Comp Neurol 1976; 170: 485-97.
  

196 
Audiology
28. Warr WB. Fiber degeneration following lesions in the anterior 
ventral cochlear nucleus of the cat. Exp Neurol 1966; 14: 453-74.
29. Strominger NL, Strominger AL. Ascending brain stem projections 
of the anteroventral cochlear nucleus in the rhesus monkey. J 
Comp Neurol 1971; 143: 217-32.
30. Masterson B, Thompson GC, Bechtold JK, Robards MJ. Neu- 
roanatomical basis of binaural phase difference analysis for sound 
localization: a comparative study. J Comp Physiol Psychol 1975; 89: 
379-86.
31. Boudreau JC, Tsuchitani C. Cat superior olive S-segment cell 
discharge to tonal stimulation. In: Neff WD, ed. Contributions to 
Sensory Physiology Vol. 4. New York: Academic Press, 1970: 
143-213.
32. Tsuchitani C, Johnson DH. Binaural cues and signal processing in 
the superior olivary complex. In: Altschuler RA, Bobbin, RP, 
Clopton BM, Hoffman DW, eds. Neurobiology of Hearing: The 
Central Auditory System. New York: Raven Press, 1991: 163-93.
33. Tobin H. Binaural interaction tasks. In: Pinheiro ML, Musiek FE, 
eds. Assessment of Central Auditory Dysfunction: Foundations and 
Clinical Correlates. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1985: 
151-71.
34- Matzker J. Two new methods for the assessment of central auditory 
functions in cases of brain disease. Am Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1959; 
68: 1188-97.
35. Lynn G, Gilroy J, Taylor P, Leiser R. Binaural masking level dif­
ferences in neurological disorders. Arch Otolaryngol 1981; 107: 
357-62.
36. Cullen J, Thompson C. Masking release for speech in subjects 
with temporal lobe resections. Arch Otolaryngol 1974; 100: 
113-16.
37. Borg E. On the organization of the acoustic middle ear reflex. A 
physiologic and anatomic study. Brain Res 1973; 49: 101-23.
38. Musiek FE, Baran JA. Neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, and cen­
tral auditory assessment. Part 1: Brain stem. Ear Hear 1986; 7: 
207-19.
39. Hall JW III. The acoustic reflex in central auditory dysfunction. 
In: Pinheiro ML, Musiek FE, eds. Assessment of Central Auditory 
Dysfunction: Foundations and Clinical Correlates. Baltimore: 
Williams and Wilkins, 1985: 103-30.
40. Goldberg JM, Moore RY. Ascending projections of the lateral 
lemniscus in the cat and the monkey. J Comp Neurol 1967; 129: 
143-55.
41. Ferraro J, Minckler J. The human lateral lemniscus and its nuclei. 
The human auditory pathways. A quantitative study. Brain Lan­
guage 1977; 4: 277-94.
42. Jungert S. Auditory pathways in the brain stem. A neurophysio- 
logic study. Acta Otolaryngol (Suppl) 1958; 138.
43. Kudo M. Projections of the nuclei of the lateral lemniscus in the 
cat. An autoradiographic study. Brain Res 1981; 221: 57-69.
44. Merchan M, Saldana E, Plaza I. Dorsal nucleus of the lateral lem­
niscus in the rat. Concentric organization and tonotopic projec­
tion to the inferior colliculus. J Comp Neurol 1994; 342: 259-78.
45. Oliver DL, Morest DK. The central nucleus of the inferior col­
liculus in the cat. J Comp Neurol 1984; 222: 237-64.
46. Barnes W, Magoon H, Ranson S. The ascending auditory path­
way in the brain stem of the monkey. J Comp Neurol 1943; 79: 
129-52.
47. Van Noort J. The Structure and Connections of the Inferior Collicu­
lus: An Investigation of the Lower Auditory System. Leiden: Van 
Corcum, 1969.
48. Pickles JO. An Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing. 2nd ed. 
New York: Academic Press, 1988.
49. Oliver D, Huerta M. Inferior and superior colliculi. In: Webster D, 
Popper A, Fay R, eds. The Mammalian Auditory Pathway: Neuro­
anatomy. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992: 168-221.
50. Merzenich MM, Reid MD. Representation of the cochlea within 
the inferior colliculus of the cat. Brain Res 1974; 77: 397-415.
51. Aitken LM, Webster WR, Veale JL, Crosby DC. Inferior collicu­
lus, I. Comparison of response properties of neurons in central, 
pericentral, and external nuclei of adult cat. J Neurophysiol 1975; 
38: 1196-207.
52. Knudson El, Konishi M. Space and frequency are represented sep­
arately in auditory midbrain of the owl. Neurophysiology 1978; 41: 
870-84.
53. Pickles JO. An Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing. New York: 
Academic Press, 1982.
54. Benerento L, Coleman P. Responses of single cells in cat inferior 
colliculus to binaural click stimuli: combinations of intensity lev­
els, time differences, and intensity differences. Brain Res 1970; 17: 
387-405.
55. Oliver DL, Shneiderman A. The anatomy of the inferior collicu­
lus: a cellular basis for integration of monaural and binaural infor­
mation. In: Altschuler RA, Bobbin RP, Clopton BM, Hoffman 
DW, eds. Neurobiology of Hearing: The Central Auditory System. 
New York: Raven Press, 1991: 195-222.
56. Moore DR, Irvine DRF. Development of binaural input, response 
patterns and discharge rate in single units of the cat inferior col­
liculus. Exp Brain Res 1980; 38: 103-8.
57. Ehret G, Merzenich MM. Complex sound analysis (frequency res­
olution, filtering and spectral integration) by single units of the 
inferior colliculus of the cat. Brain Res Revs 1988; 13: 139-63.
58. Morest DK. The neuronal architecture of medial geniculate body 
of the cat. J Anat 1964; 98: 611-30.
59. Winer JA. The human medial geniculate body. Hear Res 1984; 15: 
225-47.
60. Winer JA. The medial geniculate body of the cat. Adv Anat 
Embryol Cell Biol 1985; 86: 1-98.
61. Aitkin LM, Webster WR. Medial geniculate body of the cat: orga­
nization and response to tonal stimuli of neurons in the ventral 
division. J Neurophysiol 1972; 35: 365-80.
62. Sheperd G. Neurobiology. New York: Oxford Press, 1994: 284-555.
63. French J. The reticular formation. Sci Am 1957; 66: 1-8.
64. Carpenter M, Sutin J. Human Neuroanatomy. Baltimore: Williams 
and Wilkins, 1983.
65. Colclasure J, Graham S. Intracranial aneurysm occurring as a sen­
sorineural hearing loss. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1981; 89: 
283-7.
66. Moller M, Moller AR. Auditory brain stem evoked responses 
(ABR) in diagnosis of eighth nerve and brain stem lesions. In: 
Pinheiro ML, Musiek FE, eds. Assessment of Central Auditory Dys­
  

Central auditory anatomy and function 
197
function: Foundations and Clinical Correlates. Baltimore: Williams 
and Wilkins, 1985: 43-65.
67. Waddington M. Atlas of Human Intracranial Anatomy. Rutland, 
Vt: Academy Books, 1984: 79-95.
68. Portman M, Sterkers J, Charachon R, Chouard C. The Internal 
Auditory Meatus: Anatomy, Pathology, and Surgery. New York: 
Churchill Livingstone, 1975.
69. Waddington M. Atlas of Cerebral Angiography With Anatomic Cor­
relation. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1974.
70. Moller AR. Auditory Physiology. New York: Academic Press, 1983.
71. Phillips D. Neural representation of sound amplitude in the audi­
tory cortex: effects of noise masking. Behav Brain Res 1990; 37: 
197-214.
72. Jerger J, Jerger S. Diagnostic significance of PB word functions. 
Arch Otolaryngol 1971; 93: 573-80.
73. Jeffress L, McFadden D. Differences of interaural phase and level 
of detection and lateralization. J Acoust Soc Am 1971; 49: 
1169-79.
74. Tasaki I. Nerve impulses in individual auditory nerve fibers of the 
guinea pig. J Neurophysiol 1954; 17: 97-122.
75. Phillips D. Central auditory processing: a view from auditory neu­
roscience. Am J Otol 1995; 16: 338-50.
76. Moller A. Hearing: its Physiology and Pathophysiology. San Diego: 
Academic Press, 2000: 265-342.
77. Levine RA, Gardner JC, Stufflebeam SM et al. Binaural auditory 
processing in multiple sclerosis subjects. Hear Res 1993; 68: 59-72.
78. Musiek FE, Baran JA, Pinheiro M. Neuroaudiology: Case Studies. 
San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, Inc., 1994.
79. Durrant J, Martin W, Hirsch B, Schwegler J. ABR analysis in a 
human subject with unilateral extirpation of the inferior collicu­
lus. Hearing Res 1994; 72: 99-107.
80. Oh S, Kuba T, Soyer A, Choi I, Bonikowski F, Viter J. Lateraliza­
tion of brain stem lesions by brain stem auditory evoked poten­
tials. Neurology 1981; 31: 14-18.
81. Musiek FE, Geurkink N. Auditory brain stem response and central 
auditory test findings for patients with brain stem lesions. Laryn­
goscope 1982; 92: 891-900.
82. Chiappa K. Evoked Potentials in Clinical Medicine. New York: 
Raven Press, 1983.
83. Phillips D, Irvine D. Responses of single neurons in physiologi­
cally defined area Al of cat cerebral cortex: sensitivity to interau­
ral intensity differences. Hear Res 1981; 4(9): 299-307.
84. Musiek FE. Neuroanatomy, neurophysiology and central auditory 
assessment. Part II: The cerebrum. Ear Hear 1986; 7: 283-94.
85. Campain R, Minckler J. A note in gross configurations of the 
human auditory cortex. Brain Language 1976; 3: 318-23.
86. Musiek FE, Reeves AG. Asymmetries of the auditory areas of the 
cerebrum. J Am Acad Audiol 1990; 1: 240-5.
87. Geschwind N, Levitsky W. Human brain: left-right asymmetries 
in temporal speech region. Science 1968; 161: 186-7.
88. Rubens A. Anatomical asymmetries of the human cerebral cortex. 
In: Harnad S, Doty R, Goldstein L, eds. Lateralization in the Ner­
vous System. New York: Academic Press, 1976.
89. Celesia G. Organization of auditory cortical areas in man. Brain 
1976; 99: 403-14.
90. Galaburda A, Sanides F. Cytoarchitectonic organization of the 
human auditory cortex. J Comp Neurol 1980; 190: 597-610.
91. Sudakov K, MacLean P, Reeves A, Marino R. Unit study of exte­
roceptive inputs to the claustrocortex in the awake sitting squir­
rel monkey. Brain Res 1971; 28: 19-34.
92. Galaburda A, Sherman G, Rosen G, Aboitiz F, Geschwind N. 
Developmental dyslexia: four consecutive patients with cortical 
anomalies. Ann Neurol 1985; 18: 222-35.
93. Kaufman W, Galaburda A. Cerebrocortical microdysgenesias in 
neurologically normal subjects: a histopathological study. Neurol­
ogy 1989; 39: 238-43.
94. LeDoux J, Sakaguchi A, Reis D. Subcortical efferent projections 
of the medial geniculate nucleus mediate emotional responses 
conditioned to acoustic stimuli. J Neurosci 1983; 4: 683-98.
95. Streitfeld B. The fiber connections of the temporal lobe with 
emphasis on the Rhesus monkey. Int J Neurosci 1980; 11: 
51-71.
96. Seltzer B, Pandya D. Afferent cortical connections and architec­
tonics of the superior temporal sulcus and surrounding cortex in 
Rhesus monkey. Brain Res 1978; 149: 1-24.
97. Jones E, Powell T. An anatomical study of converging sensory 
pathways within the cerebral cortex of the monkey. Brain 1970; 
93: 793-820.
98. Seines OA. The corpus callosum: some anatomical and func­
tional considerations with special reference to language. Brain 
Language 1974; 1: 111-39.
99. Musiek FE. Neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, and central audi­
tory assessment: Part III: Corpus callosum and efferent pathways. 
Ear Hear 1986; 7(6):349-58.
100. Witelson S. Wires of the mind: Anatomical variation in the 
corpus callosum in relation to hemispheric specialization and 
integration. In: Lepore F, Ptito M, Jasper H, eds. Two Hemispheres— 
One Brain: Functions of the Corpus Callosum. New York: Alan R. 
Liss, Inc., 1986: 117-38.
101. Mountcastle V. Interhemispheric Relations and Cerebral 
Dominance. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1962.
102. Gazzaniga M, Sperry R. Some functional effects of sectioning the 
cerebral commissure in man. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1962; 48: 
1765-9.
103. Yakovlev P, LeCours A. Myelogenetic cycles of regional 
maturation of the brain. In: Minkowski A, ed. Regional Develop­
ment of the Brain in Early Life. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1967:3-70.
104. Chang HT. Cortical response to activity of callosal neurons. J 
Neurophysiol 1953; 16: 117-31.
105. Bremer F, Brihaye J, Andre-Balisaux G. Physiologie et pathologie 
du corps calleux. Arch Suisses Neurol Psychiat 1956; 78: 31-2.
106. Salamy A. Commissural transmission: maturational changes in 
humans. Science 1978; 200: 1409-10.
107. Pandya D, Seltzer B. The topography of commissural fibers. In: 
Lepore F, Pitito M, Jasper H, eds. Two Hemispheres—One Brain: 
Functions of the Corpus Callosum. New York: Alan R. Liss, Inc., 
1986: 47-74.
108. Baran JA, Musiek FE, Reeves AG. Central auditory function fol­
lowing anterior sectioning of the corpus callosum. Ear Hear 1986; 
7(6): 359-62.
  

198 
Audiology
109. Musiek FE, Kibbe K, Baran J. Neuroaudiological results from 
split-brain patients. Semin Hear 1984; 5(3): 219-29.
110. Damasio H, Damasio A. Paradoxic ear extension in dichotic lis­
tening: Possible anatomic significance. Neurology 1979; 25(4): 
644-53.
111. Hynd GW, Semrud-Clikeman M, Lorys AR, Novey ES, Eliopu- 
los D, Lyytinen H. Corpus callosum morphology in attention 
deficit-hyperactivity disorder: morphometric analysis of MRI. J 
Learn Dis 1991; 24: 141-6.
112. Merzenich M, Brugge J. Representation of the cochlear partition 
on the superior emporal plane of the Macaque monkey. Brain Res 
1973; 50: 275-96.
113. Lauter J, Herscovitch P, Formby C, Raichle M. Tonotopic orga­
nization of human auditory cortex revealed by positron emission 
tomography. Hear Res 1985; 20: 199-205.
114. Woolsey C. Organization of cortical auditory system: a review 
and synthesis. In: Rasmussen G, Windell W, eds. Neuromechanics 
of the Auditory and Visibility Systems. Springfield, IL: Charles C. 
Thomas, 1960: 165-80.
115. Pickles JO. Physiology of the cerebral auditory system. In: 
Pinheiro M, Musiek F, eds. Assessment of Central Auditory Dys­
function: Foundations and Clinical Correlates. Baltimore: Williams 
and Wilkins, 1985: 67-85.
116. Mountcastle V. Central neural mechanisms in hearing. In: 
Mountcastle V, ed. Medical Physiology Vol 2. St. Louis: CV Mosby 
Co., 1968: 1296-355.
117. Schwaber M, Garraghty P, Morel A, Kaas J. Neuroplasticity of 
the adult primate auditory cortex following cochlear hearing loss. 
Am] Otol 1994; 14(3): 252-8.
118. Pfingst B, O’Conner T. Characteristics of neurons in auditory 
cortex of monkeys performing a simple auditory task. J Neuro­
physiol 1981; 45: 16-34.
119. Abeles M, Goldstein M. Responses of a single unit in the primary 
auditory cortex of the cat to tones and to tone pairs. Brain Res 
1972; 42: 337-52.
120. Goldstein M, DeRibaupierre R, Yeni-Komshian G. Cortical cod­
ing of periodicity pitch. In: Sachs M, ed. Physiology of the Audi­
tory System. Baltimore: National Education Consultants Inc., 
1971: 299-306.
121. Eggermont J. Rate and synchronization measures of periodicity 
coding in cat primary cortex area. Hear Res 1991; 56: 153-67.
122. Lackner JR, Teuber HL. Alterations in auditory fusion thresholds 
after cerebral injury in man. Neuropsychologia 1973; 11: 409-415.
123. Benson D, Teas D. Single unit study of binaural interaction in 
the auditory cortex of the chinchilla. Brain Res 1976; 103: 
313-338.
124. Evans E. Cortical representation. In: de Reuck A, Knight J, eds. 
Hearing Mechanisms in Vertebrates. London: Churchill Living­
stone, 1968: 277-87.
125. Eisenmann L. Neurocoding of sound localization: An electro- 
physiological study in auditory cortex of the cat using free field 
stimuli. Brain Res 1974; 75: 203-14.
126. Sanchez-Longo L, Forster F. Clinical significance of impairment 
of sound localization. Neurology 1958; 8: 118-25.
127. Moore C, Cranford J, Rahn A. Tracking for a ‘moving’ fused
auditory image under conditions that elicit the precedence effect. 
J Speech Hear Res 1990; 33: 141-8.
128. Pinheiro M, Tobin H. Interaural intensity differences for intracra­
nial lateralization. J Acoust Soc Am 1969; 40: 1482-7.
129. Liden G, Rosenthal V. New developments in diagnostic auditory 
neurological problems. In: Paparella M, Meyerhoff W, eds. Sen­
sorineural Hearing Loss, Vertigo and Tinnitus. Baltimore: Williams 
and Wilkins, 1981: 273-94.
130. Penfield W, Rasmussen T. The Cerebral Cortex of Man. New York: 
Macmillan and Company, 1950.
131. Penfield W, Roberts L. Speech and Brain Mechanisms. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1959.
132. Penfield W, Perot P. The brain’s record of auditory and visual 
experience: a final summary and discussion. Brain 1963; 86: 
596-695.
133. Donchin E, Kutas M, McCarthy G. Electrocortical indices of 
hemispheric utilization. In: Hamad S et al, eds. Lateralization in 
the Nervous System. New York: Academic Press, 1976: 339-84.
134. Butler R, Keidel W, Spreng M. An investigation of the human 
cortical evoked potential under conditions of monaural and bin­
aural stimulation. Acta Otolaryngol 1969; 68: 317-26.
135. Kryter K, Ades H. Studies on the function of the higher acoustic 
centers in the cat. Am J Psychol 1943; 56: 501-36.
136. Hodgson W. Audiologieal report of a patient with left hemi- 
spherectomy. J Speech Hear Dis 1967; 32: 39-45.
137. Berlin C, Lowe-Bell S, Janetta P, Kline D. Central auditory 
deficits after temporal lobectomy. Arch Otolaryngol 1972; 96: 
4-10.
138. Heffner H, Heffner R. Hearing loss in Japanese Macaques fol­
lowing bilateral auditory cortex lesions. ] Neurophysiol 1986; 55: 
256-71.
139. Heffner H, Heffner R. Hearing loss in Japanese Macques follow­
ing bilateral auditory cortex lesions. ] Neurophysiol 1986; 55: 
256-71.
140. Jerger J, Weikers N, Sharbrough F, Jerger S. Bilateral lesions of 
the temporal lobe. A case study. Acta Otolaryngol 1969; 258: 
1-51.
141. Auerbach S, Allard T, Naeser M, Alexander M, Albert M. Pure 
word deafness. Analysis of a case with bilateral lesions and a 
defect at the prephonemic level. Brain 1982; 105: 271-300.
142. Yaqub B, Gascon G, Al-Nosha M, Whitaker H. Pure word deaf­
ness (acquired verbal auditory agnosia) in an Arabic-speaking 
patient. Brain 1988; 111: 457-66.
143. Ravizza R, Masterton R. Contribution of neocortex to sound 
localization in opossum (Didelphis virginiana). ] Neurophysiol 
1972; 35: 344-56.
144. Kavanagh G, Kelly J. Hearing in the ferret (Mustela putorius): 
effects of primary auditory cortical lesions on thresholds for pure 
tone detection. J Neurophysiol 1988; 60: 879-88.
145. Allen W. Effect of destroying three localized cerebral cortical 
areas for sound on correct conditioned differential responses of 
the dog’s foreleg. Am J Physiol 1945; 144: 415-28.
146. Meyer D, Woolsey C. Effects of localized cortical destruction on 
auditory discriminative conditioning in the cat. J Neurophysiol 
1952; 15: 149-62.
  

Central auditory anatomy and function 
199
147. Cranford ], Igarashi M, Stramler J. Effect of auditory neocortical 
ablation on pitch perception in the cat. J Neurophysiol 1976; 39: 
143-52.
148. Thompson ME, Abel SM. Indices of hearing in patients with 
central auditory pathology. Scand Audiol 1992; 21(35): 3-22.
149. Diamond I, Neff W. Ablation of temporal cortex and discrimina- 
tion of auditory patterns. J Neurophysiol 1957; 20: 300-15.
150. Neff W. Neuromechanisms of auditory discrimination. In: 
Rosenblith W, ed. Sensory Communication. New York: John Wiley 
and Sons, 1961: 259-78.
151. Colavita E Auditory cortical lesions and visual pattern discrimi­
nation in cats. Brain Res 1972; 39: 437-47.
152. Colavita E Insular-temporal lesions and vibrotactile temporal 
pattern discrimination in cats. Psychol Behav 1974; 12: 215-18.
153. Musiek FE. Application of central auditory tests: an overview. In: 
Katz J, ed. Handbook of Clinical Audiology. Baltimore: Williams 
and Wilkins, 1985: 321-36.
154. Pinheiro M, Musiek FE. Sequencing and temporal ordering in 
the auditory system. In: Pinheiro M, Musiek, eds. Assessment of 
Central Auditory Dysfunction: Foundations and Clinical Correlates. 
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1985: 219-38.
155. Musiek FE, Pinheiro M. Frequency patterns in cochlear, brain­
stem, and cerebral lesions. Audiology 1987; 26: 79-88.
156. Musiek FE, Baran JA, Pinheiro M. Duration pattern recognition 
in normal subjects and patients with cerebral and cochlear 
lesions. Audiology 1990; 29: 304-13.
157. Gershuni J, Baru A, Karaseva T. Role of auditory cortex and dis­
crimination of acoustic stimuli. Neurol Sci Trans 1967; 1: 370-2.
158. Cranford J. Detection vs. discrimination of brief tones by cats 
with auditory cortex lesions. ] Acoust Soc Am 1979; 65: 
1573-5.
159. Cranford J, Stream R, Rye C, Slade T. Detection vs. discrimina­
tion of brief duration tones: findings in patients with temporal 
lobe damage. Arch Otolaryngol 1982; 108: 350-6.
160. Recanzone G, Schreiner C, Merzenich M. Plasticity in the fre­
quency representation of primary auditory cortex following dis­
crimination training in adult owl monkeys. J Neurosci 1993; 13: 
87-103.
161. HassmannovaJ, MyslivecekJ,Novakova V. Effects of early auditory 
stimulation on cortical centers. In: Syka J, Aitkin L, eds. Neuronal 
Mechanisms of Hearing. New York: Plenum Press, 1981:355-9.
162. Knudsen E. Experience shapes sound localization and auditory 
unit properties during development in the bam owl. In: Edelman 
G, Gall W, Kowan W, eds. Auditory Function: Neurobiological 
Basis of Hearing. New York: John Wiley <St Sons, 1988: 137-52.
163. Chermak GD, Musiek FE. Central Auditory Processing Disorders. 
San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, Inc., 1997.
164. Musiek FE, Berge B. Neuroaudiological aspects of auditory train­
ing/stimulation and CAPD. In: Katz J, ed. Central Auditory Pro­
cessing Disorders: Mostly Management. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 
1998: 15-32.
165. Elliott LL. Functional brain imaging and hearing. J Acoust Soc 
Am 1994; 96(3): 1397-408.
166. Talavage TM, Ledden PJ, Sereno MI, Benson RR, Rosen BR. 
Preliminary fMRI evidence for tonotopicity in human auditory
cortex. Paper presented at the 2nd International Conference on 
Functional Mapping of The Human Brain, Boston, MA.
167. Millen SJ, Haughton VM, Yetkin Z. Functional magnetic 
resonance imaging of the central auditory pathway following 
speech and pure tone stimuli. Laryngoscope 1995; 105: 1305-10.
168. Dhankhar A, Wexler BE, Fulbright RK, Halwes T, Blamire AM, 
Shulman RG. Functional magnetic resonance imaging assess­
ment of the human brain auditory cortex response to increasing 
word presentation rates. J Neurophysiol 1997; 77(1): 476-83.
169. Zatorre RJ, Halpem AR, Perry DW, Meyer E, Evans AC. Hear­
ing in the mind’s ear: a PET investigation of musical imagery and 
perception. J Cognit Neurosci 1996; 8(1): 29-46.
170. Sahley TL, Nodar RH, Musiek FE. Efferent Auditory System: 
Structure and Function. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, 
Inc., 1997.
171. Ryugo D, Weinberger N. Corticofugal modulation of the medial 
geniculate body. Exp Neurol 1976; 51: 377-91.
172. Desmedt J. Physiological studies of the efferent recurrent auditory 
system. In: Keidel W, Neff W, eds. Handbook of Sensory Physiol­
ogy. Vol. 2. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1975: 219-46.
173. Warr WB. Efferent components of the auditory system. Ann Otol 
Rhinol Laryngol 1980; 89(suppl 74): 114-20.
174. Galambos R. Suppression of auditory nerve activity by stimulation 
of efferent fibers to cochlea. J Neurophysiol 1956; 19: 424-37.
175. Fex J. Auditory activity in centrifugal and centripetal cochlear 
fibers in cat Acta Physiol Scand 1962; 189(55): 5-68.
176. Folsom RL, Owsley RM. Ni action potentials in humans. Influ­
ence of simultaneous contralateral stimulation. Acta Otolaryngol 
1987; 103: 262-5.
177. Collet L. Use of otoacoustic emissions to explore the medial 
olivocochlear system in humans. Br J Audiol 1993; 27: 155-9.
178. Williams EA, Brookes GB, Prasher DK. Effects of contralateral 
acoustic stimulation on otoacoustic emissions following vestibu­
lar neurectomy. Scand Audiol 1993; 22: 197-203.
179. Pickles JO, Comis SD. Role of centrifugal pathways to cochlear 
nucleus in detection of signals in noise. J Neurophysiol 1973; 29: 
1131-7.
180. Dewson J. Efferent olivocochlear bundle: some relationships to 
stimulus discrimination in noise. J Neurophysiol 1968; 31:122-30.
181. Nieder P, Nieder I. Antimasking effect of crossed olivocochlear 
bundle stimulation with loud clicks in guinea pigs. Exp Neurol 
1970; 28: 179-88.
182. Kawase T, Liberman MC. Antimasking effects of the olivo­
cochlear reflex. I. Enhancement of compound action potentials 
to masked tones. J Neurophysiol 1993; 70(6): 2519-32.
183. Musiek FE, Hoffman D. An introduction to the functional neu- 
rochemistry of the auditory system. Ear Hear 1990; 11: 
395-402.
184. Bledsoe S, Bobbin R, Puel J. Neuro transmission in the inner ear. 
In: Jahn A, Santo-Sacchi J, eds. Physiology of the Ear. New York: 
Raven Press, 1988: 385-406.
185. Guth P, Melamed B. Neuro transmission in the auditory system: a 
primer for pharmacologists. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1982; 
22: 383-412.
186. Oliver DL, Potashner S, Jones D, Morest D. Selective labeling of
  

200 
Audiology
spiroganglion and granule cells with D-aspartate in the auditory 
system of the cat and guinea pig. ] Neurosci 1983; 3: 455-72.
187. Altschuler RA, Wenthold R, Schwartz A et al. Immunocyto- 
chemical localization of glutaminase-like immunoreactivity in 
the auditory nerve. Brain Res 1984; 29: 173-8.
188. Godfrey D, Park J, Dunn J, Ross C. Cholinergic neurotransmis- 
sion in the cochlear nucleus. In: Drecher D, ed. Auditory Neuro­
chemistry. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1985: 163-83.
189. Godfrey D, Carter J, Berger S, Lowry D, Matschinsky F. Quanti­
tative histochemical mapping of candidate transmitter amino 
acids in the cat cochlear nucleus. J Histochem Cytochem 1977; 25: 
417-31.
190. Helfert R, Altschuler R, Wenthold R. GABA and glycine 
immunoreactivity in the guinea pig superior olivary complex. 
Neurosci Abstr 1987; 13: 544.
191. Wenthold R, Huie D, Altschuler R, Reeks K. Glycine immunore­
activity localized in the cochlear nucleus and superior olivary 
complex. Neuroscience 1987; 22: 897-912.
192. Otterson O, Storm-Mathison J. Glutamate- and GABA-contain- 
ing neurons in the mouse and rat brain, as demonstrated with a 
new immunocytochemical technique. J Comp Neurol 1984; 229: 
374-92.
193. Adams ], Wenthold R. Immunostaining of GABA-ergic and 
glycinergic inputs to the anteroventral cochlear nucleus. Neu­
rosci Abstr 1987; 13: 1259.
194. Faingold CL, Hoffmann WE, Caspary DM. Effects of excitant
amino acids on acoustic responses of inferior colliculus neurons. 
Hear Res 1989; 40: 127-36.
195. Velasco M, Velasco, F, Castaneda R, Sanchez R. Effect of fentanyl 
and naloxone on human somatic and auditory-evoked potential 
components. Neuropharmacology 1984; 23(3): 359-66.
196. McKenna T, Ashe ], Hui G, Weinberger N. Muscarinic agonists 
modulate spontaneous and evoked unit discharge in auditory cor­
tex of the cat. Synapse 1988; 2: 54-68.
197. Altschuler RA, Fex J. Efferent neurotransmitters. In: Altschuler 
RA, Hoffman DW, Bobbin RP, eds. Neurobiology of Hearing: The 
Cochlea. New York: Raven Press, 1986: 383-96.
198. Hoffman DW. Opioid mechanisms in the inner ear. In: 
Altschuler RA, Hoffman DW, Bobbin RP, eds. Neurobiology of 
Hearing: The Cochlea. New York: Raven Press, 1986: 371-82.
199. Bobbin RP, Konishi T. Acetylcholine mimics crossed olivo­
cochlear bundle stimulation. Nature 1971; 231: 222-4.
200. Cousillas H, Cole KS, Johnstone BM. Effect of spider venom on 
cochlear nerve activity consistent with glutamatergic transmis­
sion at hair cell-afferent dendrite synapse. Hear Res 1988; 36: 
213-20.
201. Winslow R, Sachs M. Effect of electrical stimulation of the 
crossed olivocochlear bundle on auditory nerve responses to 
tones in noise. J Neurophysiol 1987; 57: 1002-21.
202. Sahley TL, Kalish R, Musiek FE, Hoffman D. Effects of opiate 
drugs on auditory evoked potentials in the chinchilla. Hear Res 
1991; 55: 133-42.
  

■
 Acoustics,
measurement of sound 
and calibration
John Stevens
Introduction
This chapter gives an introduction to those aspects of acoustics, 
sound measurement and calibration that are relevant to clinical 
audiology. The reader is referred to references 1 and 2 for more 
comprehensive texts on acoustics and to reference 3 for a more 
detailed description of those aspects of acoustics found in audi- 
ology. In addition, there are many excellent publications from 
the various professional organizations. The Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America, Acustica, and the Journal of the 
Audio Engineering Society are particularly well respected. Manu­
facturers of acoustical equipment also produce many good tech­
nical publications which can provide an excellent source of 
practical information. The various standards institutes (see 
Appendix), national standards laboratories and national insti­
tutes of acoustics and vibration research are also very good 
sources of up-to-date information.
Sound
Nature of sound and wave propagation
Sound is used to describe a mechanical disturbance propagated 
in a solid or fluid elastic medium, whether audible or not. Fre­
quencies higher than the audible range are described as ultra­
sonic, and those below the audible range as infrasonic. In this 
chapter, sound refers only to frequencies in the audible range.
Sound levels within a room
The simplest generator of sound is a point source radiating 
sounds equally in all directions. However, this situation only 
exists in practice in a room with no reflections— i.e. an an- 
echoic chamber. Such rooms are difficult and expensive to con­
struct and would not form an acceptable environment in the 
audiology clinic. Sound field testing in clinical audiology uses 
sound sources, such as a hand-held stimulator, that can often be 
considered as point sources. A knowledge of how the sound 
level from such a source will vary across a typical test room is 
therefore useful. As the sound propagates from the source, it 
will initially be in a free-field environment, and will drop off at 
a rate governed by the inverse square law (6-dB drop for each 
doubling of distance). However, at greater distances the sound 
level is affected by reflections from the walls, and the rate of 
reduction in sound level will reduce. This is illustrated in Fig­
ure 12.1. In a typical test room, the relationship between sound 
level and distance cannot be assumed, and direct measurements 
of the sound level presented to the subject should be made. This 
is discussed in more detail under soundfield calibration.
Figure 12.1 Reduction in sound level at a distance from a point source in a room. 
(Reproduced from Hassel and Zaveri, Acoustic Noise Measurements with 
permission from Bruel and Kjaer.)

202 
Audiology
FOR A TYPICAL TEST ROOM
Initial drop of 6dB for doubling of distance 
Changing to a more uniform sound level
Measurement of sound 
Sound level and decibels
In general, it has been found more practical to measure the 
level of sound in terms of pressure rather than the power. The 
international unit for pressure is the pascal, but for sound the 
decibel is used more in practice. The decibel value for a sound 
gives the ratio of the measured sound to a reference value. A 
chart of typical sounds with the sound levels in pascals and 
decibels is given in Table 12.1. Note that the decibel is a much 
more practical scale, as the range of values is much less. A sec­
ond reason for using the decibel is that equal intervals on the 
decibel scale describe approximately equal increments in per­
ceived loudness, for example, lOdB describes an approximate 
doubling in loudness. The loudest sound shown in Table 12.1 
still represents a very small perturbation in pressure when com­
pared with the static atmospheric pressure.
Decibel formulae
The equation which is used to calculate the decibel sound pres­
sure level from the value in pascals is given below:
Sound pressure level (SPL) = 201og10p/f)0dBSPL
where p is the measured pressure in pascals, and p0 the reference 
pressure (see below)
Table 12.T Some typical sound pressure levels
Sound pressure (^Pa) 
Sound pressure level (dB re 2 X 10 s Pa)
100000000
10000000
1 000000
100000
10000
1000
100
20
Near to a jet aircraft taking off
Inside a motor car
140 
130 
120 
110
100 
Near a pneumatic drilf 
90 
80 
70
60 
General office 
50
40 
Quiet living room 
30 
20
From this formula, it can be seen that 6 dB represents a dou­
bling of sound pressure, and 20 dB represents a 10-fold increase.
It is always important to remember that the decibel value is 
a relative measure and not an absolute measure. When using a 
decibel scale, the reference value must be given or implied by 
the type of decibel scale used, e.g. dB SPL, decibel hearing level 
(dBHL). It is also important to use only the term sound pres­
sure level and not sound intensity level, as intensity usually 
refers to power and not pressure.
Reference levels
The internationally agreed reference level for sound pressure is 
20|iPa (20 X  10 6N/m2). The reference point for sound pres­
sure level was chosen to coincide approximately with the 
threshold of hearing of normal subjects at 1 kHz.
Hearing level scale
In the human ear, the threshold of hearing varies with fre­
quency, as shown in Figure 12.2. For the purpose of pure tone 
audiometry, a practical scale is required which enables the hear­
ing threshold of an individual to be easily compared with the 
normal average value. This scale is the hearing level scale mea­
sured in decibels. Instead of a fixed value for the reference level, 
the median normal hearing threshold at each frequency is used. 
Values for the reference level are given in ISO 389. This is dis­
cussed further under audiometric equipment calibration later in 
this chapter.
Sound pressure level, hearing level and sensation level
The basis of the sound pressure level scale and the hearing level 
scale have already been outlined. Sound pressure level (dB 
SPL), as expressed in decibels, is used to measure the physical 
pressure of sound above the internationally recognised refer­
ence value of 20|iPa. The hearing level scale (dB HL) is used to 
express the decibel difference between a measured hearing 
threshold and the median value for those with normal hearing 
at a particular audiometric frequency. The term dBnHL (n = 
normal) may be found which is also used to express the level of 
a sound in decibels above the threshold in those with normal 
hearing. In some instances it is useful to use a fourth scale, sen­
sation level (dB SL). This is defined as the level of sound, 
expressed in decibels, relative to the threshold for that sound 
for the individual listener. This may be of use where sounds are 
presented to subjects at a set level above their individual 
thresholds rather than at a level relative to the threshold for 
those with normal hearing.
10
Quiet countryside
0 
Threshold of hearing
Decibels (dB) are a relative measure 
A reference value is required
The hearing level scale uses the median normal 
threshold as a reference
20 dB is a 10-fold increase in physical sound pressure 
A doubling of perceived loudness is about 10 dB
  

Acoustics, measurement of sound and calibration 
203
20 40 
100 200 400 1000 2000 4000 10000 
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 12.2 Normal equal-loudness contours for pure tones heard binaurally in 
a free field, from ISO 226. The dashed line shows the minimum audible level.
Frequency weighting
We have noted the use of a frequency correction in the hearing 
level scale. If it is required to measure the perceived level of 
sound correctly, some form of frequency weighting will be 
required in our measuring instrument. Figure 12.2 shows the 
equal-loudness contours at different sound levels which are used 
to define the weighting required. Note that the weighting must 
also vary with sound level, as the curves shown in Figure 12.2 
are not the same at each sound level.
Many weighting standards have been produced. The prin­
cipal one in international use is called the ‘A* weighting scale 
(defined in IEC 60651). The ‘A’ weighting curve corresponds 
approximately to the equal-loudness contour passing through 
40dBSPL at 1kHz (Figure 12.3). Sound measurement equip­
ment often provides other weightings, such as B and C, relating 
to equal-loudness contours passing through 70 and 100 dB SPL 
at 1 kHz, and which are intended for use when sounds with a 
mean sound pressure level around these values are being 
recorded. However, in the majority of cases, the ‘A’ weighting is 
used. Levels measured using the ‘A’ weighting should always be
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 12.3 The internationally standardized weighting curves for sound level 
meters and suggested E and SI weighting. (Reproduced from Hassel and Zaveri, 
Acoustic Noise Measurements with permission from Bruel and Kjaer.)
suffixed thus: 23 dBA SPL. Similarly, any other weighting curve 
used should be included in the unit description.
Temporal integration
If the duration of a sound is less than about 200 ms, then its per­
ceived loudness is less than when the sound is heard continu­
ously. In the assessment of hearing, it is particularly important 
to be aware of this, as many stimuli used in behavioural testing 
and electrophysiological testing are of short duration. This will 
be dealt with in more detail under calibration.
Weighting is required to simulate the variation in 
threshold with frequency
Different weighting is required at different sound levels 
In practice, most measurements are made with A 
weighting
The loudness of a sound is less when its duration is 
below about 200 ms
Frequency analysis
A very useful method of analysing sounds is to consider the fre­
quency content. This is particularly the case when the fre­
quency content of a stimulus is required or when analysing 
otoacoustic emissions. The analysis calculates the energy at 
each frequency and plots this against frequency to give a fre­
quency spectrum. Long pure tones with a slow rise time, as used 
in pure tone audiometry, will have narrow spectra, and short 
transient sounds, such as those used in electric response 
audiometry, will have broader spectra. The determination of 
the spectrum of a stimulus as perceived by the cochlea is a com­
plex subject and is outside the scope of this chapter.
Statistical analysis
Most environmental sounds vary in amplitude and frequency 
content with time. It is therefore necessary to carry out a statis­
tical analysis in order to adequately describe the sound. For 
example, it might be specified that the noise level in a hospital 
ward should not exceed 40 dBA SPL for more than 10% of the 
time during the working day. A recording of the sound through­
out a typical working day and an analysis of the time at each 
sound level would be required to determine whether the speci­
fication had been met. Similar methods need to be employed in 
the measurement of industrial and other noise that may be the 
cause of hearing loss.
Summary
Sound is a mechanical disturbance propagated in a solid or fluid 
elastic medium.
Sound is normally measured in terms of pressure rather 
than power. A decibel scale is preferred. This is a relative scale 
with a reference approximating to the threshold of human hear­
ing at 1 kHz.
  

204 
Audiology
The threshold of hearing varies with frequency. The hear­
ing level scale, used for pure tone audiometry, uses the median 
normal hearing threshold at each frequency as its reference.
As decibels give only a relative value, the reference value 
must always be indicated in the unit description, e.g. dB SPL or 
dB HL, but not just dB.
The effect of frequency and temporal integration needs to 
be taken into account when measuring the sound pressure level.
Frequency and statistical analysis over time are two useful 
methods of analysing sound.
Standards and calibration
Introduction
Calibration of audiometric equipment is essential for safe and 
accurate working practices in an audiology clinic. National and 
international bodies cooperate very closely to bring together 
scientific data to establish and maintain standards that can be 
used to design and calibrate audiometric equipment. The 
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and the 
International Organization for Standardization provide most of 
the international standards used in audiology. In the UK, these 
standards are also provided by the British Standards Institution 
(BSI), and the American National Standards Institution also 
provides a range of standards. A list of those standards most fre­
quently used in audiology is given in the Appendix.
For any professional involved in acoustical measurements 
and calibration, it is essential to be familiar with the relevant
standards. They are being continuously updated. It is therefore 
important, when putting these standards into practice, that the 
most up-to-date information is used, and any laboratory should 
ensure that it is notified of revisions as they appear.
Standards usually refer to measurements made under highly 
specified conditions. In audiological practice, clinical measure­
ments can be subject to many factors which introduce errors, 
and the professional audiologist should be aware of this. Exam­
ples of such errors are assumptions made about ear canal volume 
for insert earphones, the effect of coupling force when carrying 
out bone conduction audiometry, measuring sounds that are 
only just above the background noise, and not understanding 
the limitations of the sound level meter.
The IEC and ISO are the main international sources 
of standards for audiology
A knowledge of the relevant standards affecting clin­
ical practice is required
There are many factors which if not understood can 
result in incorrect measures
Equipment for sound level measurement 
Sound level meters
The purpose of a sound level meter is to measure the sound 
pressure level of the incident sound and provide an appropriate 
analysis. A diagram showing the main elements of a sound level 
meter is given in Figure 12.4.
Range
Frequently Sound 
weighing incidence
External filter
Time
weighing
200 V _ 
Polarization voltage
Figure 12.4 Block diagram of a typical sound level meter. (Reproduced from Hassel and Zaveri, Acoustic Noise Measurement with permission from Bruel and Kjaer.) 
Imp. = Impulse; Inst. =  Instantaneous; Att. = Attenuation.
  

Acoustics, measurement of sound and calibration 
205
The most critical element of a sound level meter is the 
microphone. A microphone is a device which converts sound 
energy into electrical energy. Most high-grade sound level 
meters use a condenser microphone. These microphones have 
high sensitivity and low distortion, but are expensive and prone 
to damage. For some low-cost sound level meters, an electret 
microphone is used. Their major advantage is their extreme 
ruggedness; they are resistant to shock, vibration, humidity, and 
other adverse environments. This type of microphone is com­
monly used in hearing aids.
Free-field and pressure microphones
When using a sound level meter, it is important to ensure that 
the correct type of microphone is being used. Microphones are 
generally designed to work in a free field or in a closed cavity 
(pressure type), e.g. in a coupler. An example of the use of the 
former would be in soundfield testing, and of the latter in the 
calibration of an audiometer using a coupler. The sensitivity at 
high frequencies is particularly affected by the wrong choice of 
microphone. Expert advice should be sought when selecting 
which microphone to use.
Filters and weighting
The need to use frequency weighting in some sound level mea­
surements was noted earlier. Most sound level meters offer one 
or more of A, B, C and D weightings. A ‘linear’ setting is also 
usually present on higher-grade sound level meters to enable 
unweighted sound pressure levels to be measured.
It was also noted that it can be useful to carry out a fre­
quency analysis of the sound. The higher grades of sound level 
meter incorporate octave and one-third-octave filters to mea­
sure the sound level in each frequency band. This is now often 
done by digital signal processing within the sound level meter, 
allowing a near-continuous spectrum to be displayed.
The most crucial component of a sound level meter is 
the microphone
Different microphones are required for free-field and 
coupler measurements
The correct frequency weighting should be selected
Amplitude measures—root mean square and peak
Sound waves may be sinusoidal in nature (such as a pure tone) 
or they may have a more complex morphology. The amplitude 
of a pure tone could be described by its peak-to-peak value. In 
practice, the root mean square (RMS) value has been chosen as 
the normal value that is displayed. Figure 12.5 compares the 
peak, peak-to-peak and RMS values for a pure tone. The sound 
levels of more complex waveforms are more difficult to describe 
by a single parameter. For a transient sound, the peak value may 
be a better measure; for example in sound-field audiometry, a 
short stimulus such as a drum beat may be best measured in 
terms of its peak or peak-to-peak value. More information on 
this is given under soundfield calibration.
Figure 12.5 Sinusoidal signal (pure tone) showing various measures of signal 
amplitude. (Reproduced from Hassel and Zaveri, Acoustic Noise Measurements 
with permission from Bruel and Kjaer.)
Time weighting
Sound level meters incorporate a fast or slow time constant. The 
fast time constant (0.125 s) allows rapidly fluctuating sound lev­
els to be monitored, while the slow time constant (Is) smooths 
out rapid fluctuations. It was noted earlier that for sounds of less 
than about 200 ms in duration, the perceived level will be 
reduced due to the effect known as temporal integration. For 
example, a sound of duration 20 ms will be perceived at about 
—10 dB, compared to the same sound if it were continuous.
On higher-grade sound level meters, an impulse scale is 
often available which is intended to give a closer reading to the 
perceived level for short-duration sounds. However, for any 
short-duration sounds used in clinical testing, calibration 
should not rely on such meter settings (see sections on sound­
field calibration and ERA calibration).
Display
Sound level meters can have either an analogue or a digital dis­
play. The former has the advantage that rapidly changing sound 
levels can be more easily followed. More complex meters have 
the advantage of a dual display. The choice will depend on the 
use of the sound level meter. In the clinic, an analogue display 
may be found to be quicker and easier to read, whereas in cali­
bration work a digital display may be more useful.
The electrical signal corresponding to the sound signal is 
available on most sound level meters to enable more complex 
analysis of the sound to be carried out by external equipment 
such as a frequency analyser. Many sound level meters now also 
incorporate a digital output for connection to computers to 
enable sound level measurements to be stored on a computer for 
later analysis.
Calibration of sound level meters
Regular calibration of sound level meters is essential. A cali­
brated sound source is used which is placed over the micro­
phone. A typical calibrator contains a miniature loudspeaker, 
the output level and frequency of which are controlled within 
fine limits by a built-in electronic circuit. A typical example 
operates at 1.0 kHz at 94dBSPL, which corresponds (conve­
niently) to a sound pressure of 1 Pa. This device permits cali­
brations to within about ±0.3 dB to be obtained.
  

206 
Audiology
The pistonphone is the most accurate calibrator of this 
type, permitting accuracies of about ±0.15 dB. However, it 
should be noted that both the sound source and pistonphone 
only calibrate at a single frequency and level. If the sound level 
meter lost sensitivity at frequencies other than that tested, this 
would go unnoticed and errors would result.
Standards for sound level meters
The IEC Publication 60651 consolidates a number of preceding 
standards. This divides the performance into several classes, in 
descending order of sophistication and precision:
m 
Type 0 laboratory reference grade
n 
Type 1 precision grade
n 
Type 2 general field application
is 
Type 3 noise survey application
Other noise*measuring instruments
In addition to the sound level meter, other noise-measuring 
devices exist. One of the most important of these for routine 
noise survey and monitoring purposes is the personal sound 
exposure meter, often called the noise dose meter. This is a 
small instrument designed to measure personal exposure to 
noise in, for example, industrial situations.
The microphone of the device is simply clipped on the 
lapel or mounted in an alternative position close to the ear, in 
order to receive approximately the same noise as the wearer’s 
ear. These meters measure the average noise dose, which takes 
into account both the sound level and its duration. Occupa­
tional safety regulations define a maximum allowable noise 
exposure for a normal working period. In most countries, 85 
dBA SPL or 90 dBA SPL is the defined equivalent continuous 
level for an 8-h day. Higher levels are permitted if a corre­
sponding shorter exposure time occurs.
Summary
International standards for the construction and calibration of 
audiometric equipment exist. Regular calibration of audiomet­
ric equipment using these standards is essential for safe working 
practice.
A sound level meter enables sound to be measured and 
analysed by converting sound into an electrical signal.
Sound level meters enable both frequency and time weight­
ing to be applied to the sound signal and for the result to be dis­
played in several ways. A knowledge of the effects of different 
settings and choice of microphone is essential before using a 
sound level meter.
Sound level meters are built to international standards and 
need regular calibration.
Specialized noise-measuring instruments are available to 
simplify the measurement of personal noise exposure.
Audiometric equipment and 
calibration
Audiometers
Figure 12.6 shows the main components of a pure tone 
audiometer. Standards have been produced for both screening 
and diagnostic audiometers (IEC 60645). Modem audiometers 
are very stable in both the level of output and frequency of the 
test tone. However, faults still occur, particularly in the leads, 
earphones and bone conduction transducers. It is important, 
therefore, in clinical practice to have a protocol to ensure reg­
ular calibration and the identification of faults.
Practitioners should carry out a daily subjective check of 
the output level from the audiometer at different test frequen­
cies and listen for the presence of unwanted sounds, which may 
give a false threshold. They should be familiar with their own 
hearing threshold and have this checked regularly, so that they 
can interpret the results of their daily check accurately.
At regular intervals, a full laboratory calibration should be 
carried out. In the laboratory calibration, the main parameters 
that define the sound presented to the subject are checked. 
Essentially, the objective of the procedure is to determine 
whether the audiometer meets the specifications given in IEC 
60645. An example of one of the specifications is the charac­
teristic of the attenuator, which must be linear, such that the 
difference between the actual and measured sound levels at 
adjacent settings (normally 5dB) is within ±1 dB. The output 
of the audiometer is compared to that given in the relevant part 
of ISO 389 (Appendix).
Figure 12.6 Block diagram of a pure tone audiometer.
The root mean square (RMS) is normally used to 
measure sound levels
For transient sounds, the peak or peak-to-peak mea­
sure may be better
Slow and fast settings change the time constant on 
the sound level meter
The sound level can be displayed in analogue or dig­
ital form
The pistonphone is the most accurate calibrator for 
sound level meters
  

Acoustics, measurement of sound and calibration 
207
Artificial ears and couplers
The sound that emanates from the earphone of an audiometer 
is measured by placing the earphone on an artificial ear. This is 
a device that is designed to mimic the acoustical characteristics 
of the ear. Two types are in common use: that designed to IEC 
60318-3 (based on the 6-ml-volume NBS 9A coupler defined 
by the National Bureau of Standards in Washington) and that 
designed to IEC 60318-1, which is a more accurate representa- 
tion of the ear and allows a wider range of earphones to be cal­
ibrated. A version of the former of these is shown in Figure 
12.7. The reference equivalent threshold sound pressure levels 
(RETSPLs) used for the calibration for each earphone and cou­
pler combination are given in ISO 389-1.
Mechanical coupler (artificial mastoid)
The force produced by the bone conductor used for bone con­
duction audiometry is measured by placing the bone conduc­
tor on an artificial mastoid defined in IEC 60373. This 
simulates the compliance of the skin and soft tissues covering 
the mastoid. An artificial mastoid built to this standard is 
shown in Figure 12.8. The standard reference equivalent 
threshold force levels over the frequency range 250 Hz to 8 
kHz are defined in ISO 389-3.
Couplers for insert phones and hearing aids
Two couplers have been defined for the measurement of hearing 
aids. Both are intended to represent the ear when occluded by 
an earmould and fitted with either an insert- or postaural-type 
earphone. The oldest and most basic is the ‘2cc’ coupler (Figure 
12.9) as defined in IEC 60126. This does not represent the 
response of the occluded ear well, particularly at low and high 
frequencies, and it is therefore of limited application. However, 
because of its simplicity, it is still the standard coupler used in 
commercially available hearing aid test equipment. An 
improved device, the occluded ear simulator, is defined in IEC 
60711 and closely reproduces the physical characteristics of the 
average human ear. This permits the accurate measurement of
Figure 12.7 Cross-section of the NBS9A acoustic coupler (equivalent to IEC 
60318-3) used for earphone calibration. (Reproduced from Hassel and Zaveri, 
Acoustic Noise Measurements with permission from Bruel and Kjaer.)
Butyl rubber 
-  Domed mass
Central electrode 
— Output
Seismic mass
Figure 12.8 Cutaway view of the most important parts of the artificial 
mastoid (to IEC 60373). (Reproduced from Hassel and Zaveri, Acoustic Noise 
Measurements with permission from Bruel and Kjaer.)
the performance of insert earphones and postaural hearing aids 
fitted with tubes. The performance of ‘in-the-ear’ aids can also 
be measured.
Modern audiometers are very stable
Faults still occur with mechanical components, e.g.
leads
A daily subjective check is important 
Regular laboratory calibration is required 
Special couplers exist to measure the output from ear­
phones and bone conductors
Two couplers are available for measuring hearing aid 
output
Equipment for speech audiometry
Historically, speech audiometry was implemented by recording 
the material on a tape recorder and playing it back through an 
audiometer to control the sound level. Digital methods of 
recording are now readily available, and the material for speech 
audiometry is slowly becoming available in a digital format. 
This gives the considerable advantages of a much higher- 
quality signal and random access to each stimulus. A compact 
disk is often the chosen source for routine speech audiometry, 
whereas a computer might be the source for a more complex 
speech test.
Speech audiometry calibration
The calibration of speech audiometers which use recorded 
material is difficult, due to the problem of defining the sound 
level of speech. The difficulty is complicated by the fact that 
different sets of ‘standard’ word lists are available. In practice, 
the reference threshold of each word list must be determined 
locally from speech audiograms carried out on normal sub­
jects. The reader is referred to Martin4 for more details. The 
move to the use of digitally recorded material should ensure
Loading mass
Silicone rubber 
Guide pins —
Piezoelectric 
disks ------
Microphone preamplifier 2619 
with adapter DB 0375
Guard ring adapter DB 1021
Adjustable clamping 
mechanism
Capillary tube 
Coupler adapter ring DB 0111 
Microphone cartridge 4144 
Coupler mounting
Scale
Hole for 
insertion of 
thermometer
Adjustable
clamping
mechanism
support
  

208 
Audiology
Elbow
Airtight seat and support 
for tube coupling device
Effective length 25 ±  1
Hearing aid
Calibrated pressure 
microphone
Connecting tube 
Inside 0 2 nominal 
Inside 0 2 ±  0,04 
Tube coupling device 
0 0,6 Pressure equalization 
capillary length 5= 12.5
Wire 0 0.5
Earmould substitute
Airtight seal 
0 3 ±  0.03
Cavity 2 cm3 ± 
effective 0 18-21
Figure 12.9 Cross-section of a '2cc' coupler to IEC 60126. All measurements are 
in mm. (Reproduced from Hassel and Zaveri, Acoustic Noise Measurements with 
permission from Bruel and Kjaer.)
that speech material is of higher quality and there will be 
greater comparability across centres using it for audiological 
assessment.
Acoustical impedance meters
Acoustical impedance or otoadmittance meters represent the 
second most commonly used instrument in diagnostic test­
ing. The basic components of an acoustical impedance meter 
are shown in Figure 12.10. The specification for their design 
is given in IEC 61027. In the majority of basic instruments, 
the measurement is made at one frequency, usually about 
220 Hz.
The more complex instruments allow the separate compo­
nents of admittance (reciprocal of impedance) to be measured 
at more than one frequency. These find application in the diag- 
nosis of such conditions as otosclerosis and in the measurement 
of admittance in the neonate.
It is possible to carry out daily checks on otoadmittance 
instruments by the use of test cavities whose volumes cover 
the range of admittance values found (using units of equiva­
lent volume). In addition, the operator can measure his own 
tympanogram and reflex thresholds to check whether there is 
any change which might indicate a fault with the instrument. 
However, at regular intervals, the equipment should be given 
a full laboratory calibration against the IEC 61027 standard 
and the manufacturer’s specification. Included in the calibra­
tion should be: a check of the pressure system against a cali­
brated pressure meter; a check on admittance values for a 
range of test cavity sizes; and a check on the stimulus genera­
tor for acoustical reflex testing using the standards for pure 
tone audiometers.
Speech material should be held in digital format
Reference threshold for speech audiometry requires
calibration on normal subjects
Acoustical impedance meters should be calibrated
against the IEC 61027 standard
Regular checks can be made by using test cavaties
and the operator’s own tympanogram
Calibration of sound generators for soundfield 
testing
In many audiometric test situations, it is desirable to use a stim­
ulus presented in the soundfield rather than by earphones. This 
is particularly the case in paediatric audiology, where earphones 
may not be tolerated. However, this presents a problem with 
calibration, as it is more difficult to specify the test conditions. 
For example, there are many different types of sound generator 
being used, and the geometrical relationship to subject and 
room acoustics can affect the level of sound that reaches the ear 
under test.
One method of checking the sound delivered by a sound­
field stimulator is by presenting the sound again to a sound level 
meter. The value obtained is fairly repeatable if the procedure is 
carried out carefully, and the meter will give a reasonably accu­
rate value in dBA SPL if the sound is continuous, with little 
fluctuation in level. However, most sound level meters can only 
measure accurately in dBA SPL down to a level of 35-40 dBA 
SPL. In addition, many sounds used in soundfield testing are 
transient in nature, and a sound level meter will not give a cor­
rect reading.
Ideally, a value referenced to the threshold of hearing is 
required. For warble tones and narrow band noise, standards are 
now available to enable sound field testing to be set up accu-
Figure 12.10 Schematic diagram of an acoustical impedance meter. AVC, 
automatic volume control.
  

Acoustics, measurement of sound and calibration 
209
rately, giving values referenced to the normal threshold of hear­
ing (ISO 8253-2 and ISO 389-7, see Appendix). The solution 
to this is to carry out a study on normally hearing subjects to obtain 
the RETSPL for each stimulus used. A room quiet enough to hear 
the sounds over the range of normal human hearing thresholds is 
required. Such conditions are difficult to achieve in normal clini­
cal rooms. This is discussed later under audiometric test environ­
ment. The scale used for the stimuli is dB relative to normal 
hearing level (dBnHL).
Electric response audiometry calibration
The stimuli used in electric response audiometry (ERA) vary 
with the type of test being carried out. Click and tone burst 
stimuli of varying length are the two most common of these. 
The procedure for establishing an RETSPL again requires the 
measurement of threshold for each stimulus in a group of nor­
mally hearing subjects. Suitable couplers to measure the sound 
output from the earphone are those to IEC 60318-1 and IEC 
60318-3.
The procedure for establishing the RETSPL for soundfield 
and ERA stimuli is time-consuming, and it is sensible to 
exchange information on this between audiology centres to 
avoid duplication of effort.
The recorded waveform on ERA equipment is scaled in 
amplitude against time. Both of these variables need to be cali­
brated to ensure that clinical results are accurately reported. 
Internal calibration sources are often provided to allow a check 
to be made of the recording system.
Most sound level meters cannot measure very quiet 
sounds accurately
Transient sounds are also difficult to measure 
A calibration on normal subjects should be carried 
out
Calibration data should be shared to reduce costs
Audiometric test environment
Many of the general principles described in the previous section 
apply to audiometric test rooms. The environment must be suf­
ficiently quiet for the test signal to be heard and, for soundfield 
tests, to enable the sound to be presented at an accurate level 
without reverberation. Standards have been produced for the 
maximum permissable ambient noise levels for audiometric test 
rooms. Two examples are ISO 8253-2 and ANSI S3.1. The 
ANSI standard specifies maximum levels that will produce neg­
ligible masking (<2dB) of pure tones presented at the RETSPL 
as specified in ISO 389. The low sound levels required can be 
difficult to achieve, particularly where the audiometric test 
room is located in a busy hospital or near to roads with a high 
traffic density. In many cases, it is necessary to use a double 
sound-insulated room, i.e. a room within a room, the inner one
of which is mounted on flexible supports, and has no rigid struc­
tural contact with the outer room. It is very important to carry 
out a full noise survey and to use these data together with those 
provided by manufacturers of audiometric test rooms in order to 
determine whether the desired ambient noise levels will be 
achieved within the test room.
As well as achieving acceptable ambient noise level within 
the test room, it is important to ensure that the room has ade­
quate temperature control, ventilation, lighting and power sup­
ply. The additional sound insulation provides very high levels of 
thermal insulation, and it may be necessary to provide cooling 
within the ventilation system. Most ventilation equipment is 
too noisy to be used for audiometric test rooms without the 
addition of silencer ducts. For both temperature and ventilation 
control, a careful engineering design procedure is required to 
ensure that the correct environment will be provided.
Electrophysiological testing has now become routine in 
clinical audiology. The electrical potentials are often less than 
one microvolt, and recordings can be subject to artefacts from 
electrical and magnetic field sources such as power cables, lift 
motors and fluorescent lights. Artefacts can usually be avoided 
by location of the test room away from magnetic sources of 
interference and by the provision of a metal screen lining to the 
test room, which is earthed. The latter will greatly attenuate 
any electrical fields that are present. Finally, care should be 
taken that no significant electrical or magnetic fields are then 
introduced into the room. For example, lighting should be 
screened or short filament lamps should be used, power cables 
should be screened or be in screened trunking, and the patient 
should be kept well away from the test equipment. Where test­
ing has to take place outside a specially designed test room, e.g. 
in a neonatal intensive care unit or in the operating theatre, 
sources of artefact are more difficult to control. Expert advice 
should be sought.
Environmental sound levels for audiometric rooms 
can be specified
A careful engineering design procedure is required to 
ensure the correct environment 
For ERA, electrical interference from power cables 
and lighting must be controlled
Summary
A daily subjective check and a regular laboratory calibration to 
the international standards should be carried out on all 
audiometers to ensure accurate hearing measurements.
Specialized couplers have been developed to calibrate ear­
phones and bone conductors used in audiometry.
Couplers have also been developed for the measurement of 
hearing aid performance and the output of insert earphones.
Speech test material is calibrated by reference to the 
thresholds of a group of normal subjects.
  

210 
Audiology
Acoustical impedance meters should also be subject to reg- 
ular calibration.
Sound sources used for soundfield testing and electrical 
response audiometry can only be properly calibrated by carrying 
out measurements on a group of normally hearing subjects. 
There are important limitations if the calibration of the sound 
stimulus is carried out by a sound level meter alone.
Standards now exist for the specification of the audiomet- 
ric test environment to enable tests to be carried out down to 
threshold in normal subjects. Of equal importance to sound 
insulation is the control of temperature and lighting.
References
1. 
Hall DE. Basic Acoustics. Krieger US, 1993.
2. 
Kinsler LE, Frey AR, Coppens AB, Sanders JV. Fundamentals and 
Acoustics, 3rd edn. New York: John Wiley, 1983.
3. 
Stevens JC. Acoustics. In: Stephens D, ed. Adult Audiology Vol.
2 of Scott'Brown’s Otolaryngology. Butterworth Heinemann, 
1997.
4. 
Martin M. Speech Audiometry. London: Whurr, 1987.
Further reading and useful 
organizations
National Physical Laboratory, UK. http://www.npl.co.uk 
Harris CM. Handbook of Acoustical Measurements and Noise Control 
McGraw, 1991.
Hassall JR, Zaveri K. Acoustic Noise Measurements, 5th edn. Copen~ 
hagen: Bruel and Kjaer, 1988.
Haughton PM. Acoustics for Audiologists. London: Elsevier/Academic 
Press, 2002.
Rossing TD. The Science of Sound. New York: Addison Wesley, 1989.
Appendix: Selection of standards relevant to audiology (contact standards 
organizations for latest information)
International Organization for Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland: http://wwwJso.ch/
ISO 226: 1987 
ISO 389
ISO TR 4870:1991 
ISO 6189:1983 
ISO 7029:1984
ISO 8253
Acoustics—Normal equal loudness level contours.
Acoustics—Reference zero for the calibration of audiometric equipment:
389-1: 1989—Reference equivalent threshold sound pressure levels for pure tones and supra-aural 
earphones.
389-2: 1994—Reference equivalent threshold sound pressure levels for pure tones and insert 
earphones.
389-3: 1994—Reference equivalent threshold force levels for pure tones and bone vibrators. 
389-4: 1994— Reference levels for narrow band masking noise.
389-5: 1998—Reference equivalent threshold sound pressure levels for pure tones in the 
frequency range 8 kHz to 16 kHz.
389-7:1996— Reference threshold of hearing under free-field and diffuse field listening conditions. 
Acoustics—The construction and calibration of speech intelligibility tests.
Acoustics— Pure tone air conduction threshold audiometry for hearing conversation purposes. 
Acoustics—Threshold of hearing by air conduction as a function of age and sex for otologically 
normal persons.
Acoustics—Audiometric test methods:
8253-1: 1989— Basic pure tone air and bone conduction threshold audiometry.
8253-2: 1992— Sound field audiometry with pure tone and narrow-band test signals.
8253-3: 1996— Speech audiometry.
International Electrotechnical Commission, Geneva, Switzerland: http://www.iec.ch/
Hearing aids:
Measurement of electroacoustical characteristics (2nd edition).
Hearing aids with induction pick-up coil input (2nd edition).
Hearing aids with automatic gain control circuits (2nd edition) (+AMD 1: 1993). 
Hearing aid equipment not entirely worn on the listener (2nd edition).
Magnetic field strength in audio-frequency induction loops for hearing aid purposes. 
Nipples for insert earphones.
Characteristics of electrical input circuits for hearing aids.
IEC 60118
60118-0 1983
60118-1
1983
60118-2 1983
60118-3
1983
60118-4 1981
60118-5
1983
60118-6 1999
  

Acoustics, measurement of sound and calibration 
211
60118-7: 1983
60118-8: 1983
60118-9: 1985 
60118-10: 1986 
60118-11: 1983 
60118-12: 1996 
IEC 60126: 1973
IEC 61260: 1995 
IEC 60318
IEC 60373: 1990 
IEC 60645
IEC 60651: 1979 
IEC 60711: 1981
IEC 60942: 1997 
IEC 60959: 1990
IEC 61027: 1991
Measurements of performance characteristics of hearing aids for quality inspection or delivery 
purposes.
Methods of measurement of performance characteristics of hearing aids under simulated in situ 
working conditions.
Methods of measurement of characteristics of hearing aids with bone vibrator output.
Guide to hearing aid standards.
Symbols and other markings on hearing aids and related equipment.
Dimensions of electrical connection systems.
Reference coupler for the measurement of hearing aids using earphones coupled to the ear by means 
of ear inserts (2nd edition). (Will become IEC 60318-5.)
Octave band and fractional octave band filters.
Electroacoustics: simulators of the human head and ear.
60318-1: 1998—Ear simulator for the calibration of supra-aural earphones.
60318-2: 1998—An interim acoustic coupler for the calibration of audiometric earphones in the 
extended high frequency range.
60318-3: 1998—Acoustic coupler for the calibration of supra-aural earphones used in audiometry. 
Mechanical coupler for measurements on bone vibrators (2nd edition). (Will become IEC 
60318-6.)
Audiometers
60645-1: 1992— Pure-tone audiometers (+ Corrigendum: 1992).
60645-2: 1993— Equipment for speech audiometry.
60645-3: 1994—Audiometric test signals of short duration for audiometric and neuro-otological 
purposes.
60645-4: 1994— Equipment for extended high frequency audiometry.
Sound level meters
Occluded-ear simulator for the measurement of earphones coupled to the ear by ear inserts. (Will 
become IEC 60318-4*)
Sound calibrators
Provisional head and torso simulator for acoustic measurements on air conduction hearing aids.
(Will become IEC 60318-7.)
Instruments for the measurement of aural acoustic impedance/admittance.
British Standards Institution, London, UK: http:/Avww.bsi*gIobal.com
BS EN ISO 389: 
Equivalent
BS 3383: 1988 
Equivalent
BS 4009: 1991 
Equivalent
BS 6083 
Equivalent
BS 6111: 1981 [1988] 
Equivalent
BS 6310: 1982 
Equivalent
BS 6655: 1986 
Equivalent
BS 6951: 1988 
Equivalent
BS EN ISO 8253-1: 1998 
Equivalent
BS EN ISO 8253-2: 1998 
Equivalent
BS EN ISO 8253-3: 1998 
Equivalent
BS EN 60318 
Equivalent
BS EN 60645 
Equivalent
BS EN 61027: 1993 
Equivalent
to ISO 389. 
to ISO 226: 1987. 
to IEC 60373.
to IEC 60118-0 to 60118-11.
to IEC 60126.
to IEC 60711.
to ISO 6189:1983.
to ISO 7209:1984.
to ISO 8253-1:1989.
to ISO 8253-2:1992.
to ISO 8253-3:1996.
to IEC 60318.
to IEC 60645.
to IEC 61027.
American National Standards, Washington, USA: http://www*ansi.org/
ANSI SI.4-1997 
Specification for sound level meters.
ANSI S I.40-1984 (R 1997) Specifications for acoustical calibrators.
ANSI S3.1-1991 
Maximum permissible ambient noise levels for audiometric test rooms.
ANSI S3.5-1997 (R 1986) 
Methods for the calculation of the articulation index.
  

212 
Audiology
ANSI S3.6-1996
Specification for audiometers.
ANSI S3.7-1995 (R 1986)
Method for coupler calibration of earphones.
ANSI S3.13-1987
Mechanical coupler for measurement of bone vibrators.
ANSI S3.22-1996
Specification of hearing aid characteristics.
ANSI S3.25-1989
Occluded ear simulator.
ANSI S3.36-1985 (R 1990)
Specification for a manikin for simulated in situ airborne acoustic measurements.
ANSI S3.39-1987
Specifications for instruments to measure aural acoustic impedance and admittance (aural acoustic
immittance).
ANSI S3.35-1985 (R 1997)
Methods of measurement of performance characteristics of hearing aids under simulated in situ
working conditions.
  

13 The threshold of 
hearing
Ronald Hinchcliffe
Introduction
It was inevitable that attempts should have been made to quan­
tify what has been variously termed the acuity or sensitivity of 
an individual’s hearing. Essentially, it is answering the question 
of how quiet a sound a particular individual can hear. The 
answer can be provided in its simplest form by asking him (or 
her) whether or not they can hear a pin drop, a whisper, a con­
versational voice or a shout. These questions can be supple­
mented at this zero level of technology by determining at what 
distance a forced whisper or conversational voice may be heard. 
Minimum technology, e.g. tuning forks, can provide the means 
to measure this ability with greater precision. A higher level of 
technology using electroacoustical equipment is claimed to pro­
vide even greater precision by what has come to be termed 
audiometry (Figure 13.1).
Apart from the level of technology that is employed, meth­
ods for measuring hearing sensitivity may vary according to:
Figure 13.1 SRA, self-recording audiometry.

214 
Audiology
& 
the type of test material, e.g. pure tones,1 noise2 or speech3 
m 
the primary acoustical path, i.e. by air conduction (AC) or 
bone conduction (BC) 
i 
the mode of coupling of the acoustical source to the indi­
vidual, i.e. free-field (soundfield) or close coupling (by 
means of earphones)4
*  
whether it is monoaural or binaural stimulation 
•3 
the psychophysical procedure for measuring the threshold, 
i.e. method of adjustment, method of limits, method of con­
stant stimuli5
For the past 100 years, the most widely employed methods for 
measuring hearing sensitivity have been those using pure tones, 
almost exclusively by earphone listening.1,6,7
In the UK, the Royal Air Force (RAF) conducted the 
major study (‘a thousand ears of subjects between the ages of 18 
and 23 years’)8 that was to form the basis for a series of national 
and international standards (the first was BS 2497:1954; cur­
rently BS EN ISO 389-1:2000). Care was taken in selecting the 
subjects (all men) to ensure that all were clinically otologically 
normal and able to hear a forced whisper at a distance of 20 
feet. Only subjects who had shown an ability to undergo 
audiometry 
successfully 
(using 
a 
commercial 
5-dB-step 
audiometer) were accepted. The subjects were then tested at 
seven frequencies over the range 256-8192 Hz with purpose- 
designed equipment which had attenuator settings in multiples 
of 2 dB. The Standard Telephones and Cables type 4026 ear­
phones (probably the best earphones ever produced) were cali­
brated by the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) on their ‘3 
c-c, Artificial Ear’.9 The data analysis was restricted to thresh­
olds within a 20-dB band centred on the value of maximum 
occurrence so that the results would be representative only of 
subjects with ‘normal good hearing’. A quantization error (QE) 
of 1 dB was not allowed for. The study was such that it was able 
to detect differences of less than 1 dB between the thresholds of 
the various skill groups who provided the subjects. A better 
threshold was demonstrated only for wireless operators and 
attributed to ‘their being accustomed to listening to keyed 
tones’. Paradoxically, poorer hearing in those who were exposed 
to potentially hazardous occupational noise levels could not be 
demonstrated. This was attributed to ‘the short time of employ­
ment in the trades concerned’ (the average age of the whole 
group was 19.7 years). The RAF did not measure thresholds at 
6 kHz. Appreciable unexplained variability had already been 
noted by that time. Moreover, clinicians had noted that those 
who have hearing impairment only at very high frequencies (>6 
kHz) do not report speech communication problems.10 Further­
more, it was argued that if a shift in threshold at 6 kHz had 
become meaningful and significant, a detectable shift at one or 
other frequency on either side of 6 kHz would have appeared.
A parallel study by the NPL9 on 99 otologically normal sub­
jects (45 men, 54 women) extended the upper age limit to 25 
years and tested over a broader frequency range (80 Hz to 15 kHz, 
including 6 kHz). The NPL did not employ separate pretest 
audiometry, but immediately prior to the 2-dB-step threshold
measurement the threshold was determined ‘by varying the 
intensity in 5-dB steps’. The NPL allowed the force of applica­
tion of the headband to ‘range from 350 to 500, averaging about 
450 [equivalent to 4.41 N]’ (the RAF kept the force constant at 
383 g (equivalent to 3.76N)). The standard (BS 2497:1954) to 
which these studies gave rise provided for an ‘application of the 
standard earphone to human ears with a force of the order of 500 
g weight [equivalent to 4.9 N]\ BS 2497:1992 (technically 
equivalent to ISO 389: 1991) stated that ‘a headband shall be 
provided to hold the earphone on the human pinna [auricle] 
with a static force of 4.5 N ± 0.5 N\
Standardization
IEC 60645 
ISO 389 
ISO 8253
Calibration
The stringent clinical exclusion criteria, equipment, testing 
procedure, calibration system and data processing employed by 
the NPL were identical to those employed by the RAF.
Over the six frequencies (0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 8kHz), the 
mean threshold difference between the two studies was 0.0 dB; 
for the mode it was +0.5 dB.
A subsequent Medical Research Council/Royal Navy 
(MRC/RN) study11,12 showed that the thresholds for young men 
in the RN were essentially the same (after allowing for the QE) 
as those for their colleagues in the RAF.
The RAF/NPL thresholds were nearer to the best weighted 
means of a number of laboratory studies of auditory threshold,4 
but around 10 dB lower (more sensitive) than the then US 
Standard (ASA Z24.5-1951), which was based on a population 
survey.13 It was therefore suggested that there existed both lab­
oratory and field ‘norms’. An MRC survey of a general rural 
population with a high yield showed this not to be the case, 
provided that a correction of 2.5 dB was made for the audiome­
ter’s 5-dB attenuator step and 1.5 dB for the learning effect.14 
This accounts for the 4-dB difference between other population 
studies and the International Reference Zero for audiometers. 
In retrospect, the use of a 2.5-dB correction for QE represented 
an overcorrection by 1 dB, since neither the NPL nor the RAF 
subtracted 1 dB from their data in respect of the use of a 2-dB- 
step attenuator.
As a result of further work in a number of laboratories,15-18 
the standard reference zero for the calibration of pure tone AC 
audiometers has undergone several changes over the years. 
Concern has centred on the frequency of 6 kHz19 and the TDH 
39 earphone.16,20
Paralleling studies on the AC threshold, there have been a 
number of laboratory studies on the BC threshold.21-25 Conse­
quently, the standard reference zero for the calibration of pure 
tone BC audiometers (currently BS ISO 389-3:1994) has also
  

The threshold of hearing 
215
undergone changes over the years. BS 6950:1988 (ISO 7566- 
1987) typically yielded BC thresholds that were about 3-4 dB 
less acute averaged over 1, 2 and 3 kHz as compared with BS 
2497, Part 4: 1972, and about 5-8 dB less acute at 1 kHz in par­
ticular, depending on the date of manufacture of the mechani­
cal coupler used for calibration.26
Factors influencing the measured 
threshold
Apart from disorders of the auditory system, a considerable 
number of factors, including sources of error, have now been 
identified (Figure 13.2).
At the outset, it is important to know to what standard an 
audiometer has been calibrated. Moreover, one needs to know 
how long before and how long after any threshold measurement 
the calibration had been performed. In the UK, the audiometer 
should be calibrated by a United Kingdom Accreditation
Service (UKAS)-approved laboratory27 to provide a National 
Accreditation of Measurement and Sampling (UK) (NAMAS) 
certificate. The audiometer should be used according to a set 
procedure (BS EN ISO 8253-1:1998).
SOURCES OF ERROR IN THRESHOLD 
MEASUREMENTS
Calibration errors
Ambient noise
Earphone placement
External acoustical meatus collapse
Personal equations
Change in threshold with age
Ageing processes, of which there are many,28’29 produce a vari­
ety of effects on auditory functioning.30 A diminution in audi­
tory sensitivity with increasing age is the one effect which
Figure 13.2 Factors affecting measured threshold of hearing. LFC, L-factor complex; CTS, conductive threshold shift; OAS, otological abnormality score; SNTS, 
sensorineural threshold shift; NICTS, noise-induced compound threshold shift; NITTS, noise-induced temporary threshold shift; NIPTS, noise-induced permanent 
threshold shift; EAM, external acoustical meatus; SEE, socio-economic-environmental.
  

216 
Audiology
dominates all others and which may indeed underlie most other 
changes.
Despite the plethora of ageing processes, there appear to 
be systematic changes in the threshold of hearing with increas­
ing age. This may well be because the basic biological process 
is apoptosis.31-34 The mathematical expressions used to 
describe these changes have been exponential functions,35’36 
power functions,37-39 or polynomials, specifically a second- 
degree polynomial (parabola).40 Deviations in the ‘oldest old’41 
may well appear because these are what epidemiologists refer 
to as ‘survivor populations’. The latter will be different in 
different communities.
The parabolic and two of the power function formulations 
indicate that young adults have the most sensitive hearing, 
becoming poorer on either side of that peak. This is consistent 
with measurements of the hearing of young children.42 How­
ever, 16-year-old males43 have better hearing than 18-year-old 
males, although the parents of these younger teenagers were 
‘mostly middle socioeconomic status’. The apparently poorer 
sensitivity in young children may be due to secondary factors 
which have masked the basic exponential decay that character­
izes apoptotic processes.
Threshold measurements made by the MRC on a random 
sample of a rural population44 provided the core of an NPL 
analysis of epidemiological data in general45 that was to estab­
lish ISO 7029. Figures 13.3-13.5 show that the ISO 7029’s val­
ues for changes in auditory threshold with age can be fitted very 
well with exponential equations. This applies equally to those 
who are more ‘susceptible’ to ageing processes.
Since ISO 7029 is yoked to the standard reference zero for 
the calibration of pure tone AC audiometers (currently BS EN 
ISO 389-1:2000), it will change every time that that standard 
changes. When the zero-offset effect is taken into account, it 
would appear that the changes in thresholds with age have
Age (Years)
Figure 13.3 Change with age in the 1°/oile ('highly susceptible' to ageing) 
thresholds of hearing at 1 kHz as given by ISO 7029 for men (IS01 k-1); trend 
line (exponential) fitted. Thus the 'normal' ageing of hearing acuity can be 
considered as an exponential decay process.
Age (Years)
Figure 13.4 Change with age in the 1°/oile ('highly susceptible' to ageing) 
thresholds of hearing at 4kHz as given by ISO 7029 for men (IS04k-1); trend 
line (exponential) fitted. Thus the 'normal' ageing of hearing acuity can be 
considered as an exponential decay process.
Age (Years)
Figure 13.5 Change with age in the 10°/oile ('susceptible' to ageing) thresholds 
of hearing at 4kHz as given by ISO 7029 for men (IS04k-10); trend line 
(exponential) fitted.
remained stationary, in the UK at least, over a period of 30
46
years.
Epidemiological studies in Jamaica47 and in Nigeria48 indi­
cate that melanoderms may have slower deteriorations in 
thresholds with increasing age than do leucoderms. However, 
even leucoderms may show differences from one country to 
another.49
Since ISO 389 refers to a point (or series of points) on a 
function(s) which is defined by ISO 7029, it would have seemed 
more logical to have defined ISO 389 in terms of the threshold 
which corresponds to 16 years, 18 years or any other age instead 
of vice versa.
  

The threshold of hearing 
217
Threshold analysis in practice: an 
example for guidance
An ability to assess threshold of hearing is particularly impor- 
tant in the matter of chronic noise trauma to hearing (occupa- 
tional noise-induced hearing loss, ONIHL). The condition is 
characteristically not only asymptomatic but also asemeionic.50 
Moreover, if symptoms are present they are non-specific.51 The 
audiogram in cases of alleged or proven chronic noise trauma 
therefore assumes a particular importance. The English com­
mon law appears to have endorsed, at least in the countries of 
the British Isles, the dictum ‘Every decibel counts’.52 The med­
ical examiner in these countries therefore needs to be able to 
conduct a more critical analysis of thresholds of hearing than 
would be required in clinical practice.
INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR THRESHOLD 
ANALYSIS
■ 
Sex
■ 
Age
AC Threshold 
BC Threshold
Cortical electrical response audiometry thresholds
Medical examinations conducted during the course of liti­
gation provide audiometric data that have been acquired in a 
milieu that is different to that of healthcare practice. Questions 
arise regarding the appropriateness of comparative data. This 
has rested primarily on what might be termed the numerical 
descriptors of historical controls. The epidemiologist would 
rightly regard these with suspicion. There is a requirement to 
compare ‘like with like’.53 In the course of 20 years of litigation 
in the UK in this field, the lawyers have provided us (unwit­
tingly, it would appear) with only one example to which one 
could apply the principles of evidenced-based medicine. This is 
in respect of what will be referred to as Factory ‘X’.
Broadly speaking, some of the workers in Factory ‘X’ had 
been assemblers and had not been exposed to equivalent con­
tinuous sound levels in excess of 90dB(A). ‘The limit for con­
tinuous exposure to a reasonably steady sound for 8 hours in any 
one day is that the sound level should not exceed 90dB(A).’54 
Others had been press operators with exposure to noise levels 
of, typically, 96dB(A) (Figure 13.6).
The essential information on the six workers on whom this 
analysis is based is set out in Table 13.1.
Each of three medical examiners (MX-1, MX-2 and MX-3) 
had examined the ears clinically and obtained both AC and BC 
manual audiograms as well as tympanograms on each claimant. 
MX-2 had examined the acoustical stapedius reflexes also on 
each of the six.
All the medical examiners’ audiograms were obtained over a 
3.4'year period after the first audiogram on 30 July 1988. During
Octave band centre frequency (kHz)
125 Hz 
250Hz 
500Hz 
1kHz 
2kHz 
4kHz 
8kHz 
Octave band 
79 
83 
92 
88 
88 
89 
87 db(A)
Figure 13.6 A-weighted octave band noise spectrum of forge press impact 
noise.104
that period, one would ideally have hoped to have found some­
thing like the following in a UK examiner’s report: ‘All audio­
grams were obtained with a clinical audiometer (make and 
model) fulfilling the requirements of BS 5966:1980 and cali­
brated according to BS 2497:1988. The audiometer was fitted 
with (make and model) earphones with (type) cushions and a 
(?standard) headband. The reference zero for the bone conduc­
tion calibration was that of BS 6950:1988. The headband pro­
vided to hold the bone vibrator in position exerted a static force 
of (giving a value in the range 5.4 ± 0 5 N). The measurements 
were performed in a sound-insulated booth whose ambient 
sound levels were lower than those specified in ISO/DIS 
8253:1984, thus fulfilling the criteria for threshold measure­
ments at OdBHL. The frequency and methods of calibrating 
(including daily biological calibration) also conformed to that 
standard.’ In the absence of such information, one can only pre­
sume (hopefully) that those standards had been adhered to. 
MX-3 had provided no such information for any of his six 
reports. MX-1 had stated on each occasion that the ‘results were 
obtained in a quiet room using a diagnostic audiometer recently 
calibrated to BS 5966.’ (Presumably, what he intended to say was 
‘an audiometer fulfilling the requirements of BS 5966:1980 and 
calibrated to BS 2497:1988’.) In all cases, MX-2 stated that the 
audiometric examination ‘was performed by an experienced 
audiological technician in the purposely adapted audiological 
facilities ... using regularly maintained and calibrated equip­
ment after (duration that claimant had not been exposed to 
potentially hazardous noise specified) free from noise.’
Each claimant had also been tested in a centre specializing 
in auditory measurement (CSAM), where cortical electrical 
response audiometry (CERA) was performed and a fourth air 
conduction audiogram obtained. Bekesy audiometry was not 
performed on any occasion.
Having regard to the number of tests conducted and the 
frequencies tested, more than 600 measurements had thus been 
performed. These data form the basis for this analysis.
  

218 
Audiology
Table 13.1 Data on six claimants, three of whom (F65, M56, F35} had been exposed to noise levels of 96 dB (A) and were subject 
to a court hearing, and three of whom (F44, F42, M36) had been exposed to noise levels not exceeding 90dB(A) and were not sub­
ject to a court hearing; the latter three served as controls.
ID
Sex
Age
Age
Age
Age
C
f
TNIL9
at la
at llb
at ll!c
at IN/1
F65
F
23.4
24,2
26.2
26.3
96
1.5
97.8
M56
M
32.4
33.2
35.1
35.3
96
5.0
103.0
F35
F
53.4
54.5
56.0
56.3
96
5.0
103.0
F44
F
44.1
45.3
46.6
47.2
84
F42
F
45.9
46.6
48.5
48.7
84
M36
M
52.1
53.0
55.4
55.5
90
It may well be said that even this control group was exposed to ^ qs in excess of the 71 dB(A) which a Health and Safety Executive (UK) report154 indicates is the 
level at which noise starts to become hazardous. A gradient should nevertheless be discernible in the ^/hearing sensitivity (acuity) relationship. All six workers 
lived in the same geographical area, were exposed to the same economic, environmental and social factors, and the same factory conditions (apart from the 
level of noise exposure). None of the claimants were albinos or melanoderms, factors which might have influenced the hearing.146’ 152 All were also (at least 
initially) pursuing an action for damage to their hearing. All six had been examined by the same three medical examiners (MX-1, MX-2 and MX-3), in the same 
sequence and separated by about the same intervals of time. Each examiner had examined each subject in the same place and, it would appear, with the same 
equipment. The only difference was that the average age of the first group was 37.6 years, and that of the second group 48.6 years (a difference of 11 years); 
the age range of the total group was 30 years. For the audiometric analyses, age corrections could be (and were) made to measured hearing threshold levels 
using ISO 7029-1984. Age adjustments were made to take into account the various times of the hearing tests. During the court hearing, Counsel for the three 
plaintiffs announced that the claimants were an unselected group (or words to that effect). There was therefore no reason to suspect any sampling bias. 
aAge when examined by first medical examiner. 
bAge when examined by second medical examiner.
°Age when examined by third medical examiner.
dAge when tested in centre specializing in auditory measurements.
Equivalent continuous sound level of factory noise to which they were exposed, 
duration in years for which worker was exposed to that noise.
9Total noise immission level for corresponding worker.
Based on the CSAM’s pure tone audiograms, none of the 
six would have been considered to be deaf, 
or to have a dis- 
abling hearing impairment,56 a material impairment,57 or a hear­
ing loss.58 None reached the threshold of hearing inability59 or 
the ‘handicap’ level of the British Standard (BS 5330). All had 
normal hearing threshold levels54 at all frequencies in both ears, 
except for one man (M36) and one woman (F65) who had one 
frequency in one or other ear where the age-corrected thresh­
old exceeded 20dBHTL. (The age-corrected level was 24.1 dB 
at 8 kHz in the right ear, and 24.7 dB at 6 kHz in the left ear of 
the man; and 29.2 dB at 6 kHz in the left ear of the woman.)
Figure 13.7 indicates that there was some degree or other of 
non-organic threshold shift (NOTS). This did not appear to be 
systematic (Figures 13.8 and 13.9).
There was no difference in thresholds between the 
96-dB(A) exposed group and a control group (Figure 13.10).
The age-adjusted CERA thresholds for the two groups 
straddled the thresholds for young UK manual work­
ers (Figure 13.13).
MX-2 reported that one of the six claimants was ‘an incon­
sistent audiological subject’ and another was ‘slightly inconsis­
tent’; in the report of a third claimant, there appeared the words 
‘suggests the hearing loss in the low tones which appears rather 
severe may be a little better ...’. After age adjustments and 
comparison with the manual pure tone thresholds obtained by 
CSAM (and so confirmed as genuine), these three ‘suspicious’ 
responders had consistently poorer thresholds at all frequencies 
tested than the non-suspicious responders. The four frequency 
average (FFA) difference was 6.7 dB. Neither MX-1 nor MX-3 
(nor their technicians) noted anything untoward in the audio­
metric responses of any of the claimants. Nevertheless, their 
threshold data showed the same separation when the analysis 
was performed on the basis of MX-2’s classification. The accu­
racy of the measurements performed by MX-2’s technician was 
supported by comparison with the manual pure tone audiomet­
ric thresholds obtained by the CSAM audiometer operator. The 
mean FFA (age-adjusted) of the non-suspicious responders as 
measured by MX-2’s technician was 1.04 dB with respect to the
  

The threshold of hearing 
219
Frequency (kHz)
Frequency (kHz)
1 kHz
2 kHz
3 kHz
4 kHz
6kHz
MSG
15.0
15.0
10.1
7.6
12,6dB
F35
7.6
2.6
10.2
12.7
17.8
Figure 13.7 Interexaminer variability. The mean thresholds for the six ears of 
the noise-exposed group which apply to the three medical examiners are shown 
together with the mean CERA thresholds for comparison. All three examiners 
report thresholds which are consistently poorer than the CERA thresholds, and 
to varying degrees. All thresholds have been age-adjusted (appropriate to sex) 
using ISO 7029.
Figure 13.9 Hearing thresholds of two claimants (M56 and F35) reported by 
MX-3 expressed with respect to thresholds recorded by CERA; thresholds 
reported by MX-3 were adjusted (using ISO 7029) to the age when CERA was 
performed. Although all differences are positive, there does not appear to be 
any systematic trend; these age-adjusted thresholds are the average levels of 
the two ears.
Frequency (kHz)
Figure 13.8 Hearing thresholds of two claimants (M56 and F35) reported by 
MX-1 expressed with respect to thresholds recorded by CERA; thresholds 
reported by MX-1 were adjusted (using ISO 7029) to the age when CERA was 
performed. Although all differences are positive, there does not appear to be 
any systematic trend; these age-adjusted thresholds are the average levels for 
the two ears.
mean CSAM threshold. The latter would have been about 
(CERA was not conducted at 500 Hz) —1.35 dB with respect to 
the corresponding CERA threshold. Hence the MX-2 techni­
cian’s measurements were 0.31 dB (FFA) better than CERA. 
On this basis, it could well be argued that the MX-2 technician 
provided the most accurate threshold measurements in the 
entire case.
The NOTS theme is developed in Figures 13.12-13.16. 
The term ‘non-organic’ does not necessarily imply that such
Figure 13.10 The mean manually determined AC hearing threshold levels 
(HTLs) (after the fiftieth centile ISO 7029 values for the age appropriate to the 
sex had been subtracted) for both ears of three factory workers who had been 
exposed to potentially hazardous noise levels (AV-HAZ), and for both ears of 
three factory workers who had been exposed to noise levels which were not 
considered to be hazardous (AV-CTRL); there was one man and two women in 
each group; these thresholds are the means for those measured by three 
examiners, i.e. three audiograms on each ear.
  

220 
Audiology
20
40
60
80
100
□ 
AVCERAN
□ 
AVCERAC 
- AV-NSH-F
AV-NSH-M
0,5
1kHz
2 kHz
Frequency (kHz)
3 kHz 
4 kHz
6 kHz
8 kHz
AVCERAN
7.6
2.1
3.3
10,5
17.1
not done dB
AVCERAC
9.1
4,0
3.5
7.9
16.9
8.2
AV-NSH-F
6.4
6.3
6.4
7.8
16.4
9.9
AV-NSH-M
4.1
5.2
5.0
10.1
15.3
9,5
MX-1
MX-2
MX-3
0.5
1
2
4
8
Frequency (kHz)
500 Hz
1kHz
2 kHz
3 kHz
4 kHz
6 kHz
8 kHz
7.4
7.5
6.3
7.7
6.6
12.2
11.2 dB
11.3
7.2
7.6
9.6
6.7
7.9
4.2
13.4
10.9
8.5
11.0
7.7
21.1
15.3
Figure 13.11 The mean CERA thresholds (corrected for the 50°/oile ISO 7029 
values which relate to the appropriate sex and age) for both ears of three 
workers in factory 'X' who had been exposed to 96dB(A) for a period of ls -5  
years (AVCERAN). Comparison with thresholds for three other workers in the 
same factory whose noise exposure was not considered to be potentially 
hazardous (AVCERAC). AV-NSH-F = mean HTLs for 18-30-year-old manual 
female workers with no previous hazardous noise exposure and with no 
audiometric evidence for middle ear malfunction (Table 538 in reference 142); 
AV-NSH-M =  mean HTLs for 18-30-year-old manual male workers with no 
previous hazardous noise exposure and with no audiometric evidence for middle 
ear malfunction (Table 540 in reference 143). In each case, the mean is the 
average value for the two ears. Adjusting the claimants’ mean threshold for the 
2.45dB element of conductive threshold shift and the gunfire element at 4 kHz 
(see later) would show the claimants to have a better basic sensorineural 
hearing sensitivity than their counterparts in the general population of the UK.
threshold shifts (TS) are due entirely to conscious exaggeration 
on the part of the subject. They could well be due to factors in 
the domain of the audiometer operator. The ephemeral nature 
of the 6-kHz notch suggests that poor placement of the ear- 
phone or undetected external acoustical meatus (EAM) col­
lapse might be responsible.
Figure 13.17 points to gunfire as a factor influencing thresh­
olds at 4 kHz.
Figures 13.18 and 13.19 show that hazardous occupational 
noise exposure cannot be implicated in any TS.
Nine of the 12 ears had clinical (structural and/or func­
tional) or acoustical impedance evidence for some degree or 
other of conductive hearing impairment. Support for a con­
ductive component was forthcoming from an analysis of the 
air-bone gap (ABG) (Figures 13.20 and 13.21). The authen­
ticity of the ABG might well be questioned on the grounds 
that the AC threshold has already been shown to be contam­
inated with NOTS. However, it is likely that all the biases
Figure 13.12 Factory 'X': mean auditory thresholds for the ’suspicious' 
audiometric responders for each medical examiner with respect to thresholds 
for that group reported by a CSAM using manual audiometry with confirmation 
that these were genuine by CERA. 'Suspicious' categorization based on report by 
MX-2 of some inconsistency. The enhancement of the 6-kHz notching is not 
what one would expect if these non-organic shifts were to be attributed to the 
subject latching onto equal-loudness contours; 6-kHz notch enhancement must 
therefore reside in the examination (? external auditory meatus collapse). The 
values have been corrected for age differences between the time when seen by 
the medical examiner and the CSAM.
1-kHz threshold with respect to CSAM threshold
Figure 13.13 Factory 'X': notch magnitude as a function of overall auditory 
sensitivity (using the threshold at 1 kHz as an indicant) for the three claimants 
in 'the 'suspicious responding' group (averages for the two ears). This picture of 
increasing notch magnitude as a function of overall auditory sensitivity is not 
what one would expect if the 6-kHz thresholds were also being influenced 
primarily by exaggeration on the part of the claimants.
  

The threshold of hearing 
221
x>
Frequency (kHz)
DIFF-H
DIFF-C
4 kHz 
1.11 
4.17
6 kHz 
8.07 
9,17
8 kHz 
4,44 dB 
7.22
DIFF-H
DIFF-C
4 kHz 
1.67 
4.17
Frequency (kHz)
6 kHz 
6.67 
15.00
8 kHz 
8.33 dB 
11.67
Figure 13.14 The graphical presentation concentrates on the area of interest, 
i.e. 6 kHz. DIFF-H = Difference between the means of the HLs which had been 
reported by the three medical examiners (at mean age 37.6 years) and the 
means of the levels reported by a CSAM (at mean age of 39.3 years). (Data for 
the workers who had been exposed to equivalent continuous sound levels of 
96dB(A).) DIFF-C = Difference between the means of the HLs which had been 
reported by the three medical examiners (at mean age of 48.6 years) and the 
means of the levels reported by a CSAM (at mean age of 50.5 years). (Data for 
the workers who had been exposed to equivalent continuous sound levels of 
less than 90dB(A).) The similarity of the effect (improvement in threshold) in 
the two groups would oppose an attribution to a resolution of an occupational 
noise-induced temporary threshold shift. One or other worker in each group 
had had some weapons noise exposure, but this had not been for the last 10 
years. Thus an attribution of the 6-kHz notching to a resolution of a weapons 
noise-induced temporary threshold shift cannot be countenanced either.
arising in the domain of the tester and of the testee which had 
affected the AC measurements would have affected the BC 
measurements also. The technician would have been the same
THRESHOLD COMPONENTS
Age-associated threshold shift 
Non-organic threshold shift 
Conductive threshold shift 
Sensorineural threshold shift
Nosoacusis
Noise-induced compound threshold shift 
Noise-induced permanent threshold shift 
Socioacusis 
Gunfire 
Occupational 
Quantization error 
L-factor complex
Figure 13.15 This graphical presentation concentrates on the area of interest, 
i.e. 6 kHz. Change (a deterioration in threshold) from the second (MX2) to the 
third (MX3) examiner. DIFF-H = Difference between the means of HLs which had 
been reported by MX-2 (at mean age of group 37.3 years) and MX-3 1.8 years 
later. (Data for the workers who had been exposed to equivalent continuous 
sound levels of 96dB(A).) DIFF-C = Difference between the means of HLs which 
had been reported by MX-2 (at mean age of group 48.3 years) and MX-3 1.9 years 
later. (Data for the workers who had been exposed to equivalent and continuous 
sound levels of less than 90dB(A)J The greater effect in the control group would 
oppose attributing the growth of the 6 kHz notching to the development or 
progression of an occupational noise-induced threshold shift. Moreover, all three 
workers who had previously been exposed to 96dB(A) were wearing hearing 
protection over the period when examined by MX-2 and MX-3. One or other 
worker in each group had had some weapons noise exposure, but this had not 
been for at least 10 years. The effect is not of a pattern which would be 
attributed to exaggeration by the claimants. The effect must lie in the domain of 
the examiners (hence the classification in Figure 13.16).
NOTS
NOTS-S,-,* 
NOTS-Ay*
Figure 13.16 Classification of NOTS. NOTS-S^ denotes NOTS associated with 
subject i at frequency j  on test k\ similarly, NOTS-A^ denotes NOTS associated 
with audiometrician / at frequency j  on test k. Separation of these various 
components is difficult, but Bekesy audiometry can help in detecting and 
demonstrating NOTS-S.
and the BC test would most likely have been conducted 
immediately after the AC test.
This analysis produces an apportionment of threshold 
which is shown in Table 13.2.
Note that this approach to the analysis is an extension of 
that adopted by the NPL in analysing thresholds within the 
normal range.19 The analysis does not depend on the
  

222 
Audiology
Stated number of rounds fired
Figure 13.17 Factory X  Correlation between threshold reported for CERA at 
4 kHz in the left ear and number of rounds of ammunition fired. Data are for 
the three workers ('A', 'B' and 'C') among the six who had fired guns. 'A' had 
fired 3 times, 'B' 9 times, and *C' 420 times; all had fired from the right 
shoulder. 'A' and *B' had also both been exposed to potentially hazardous 
factory noise with an equivalent continuous sound level of 96dB(A) for 5 years. 
All CERA thresholds had been adjusted using ISO 7029 for age-associated TS 
appropriate to the sex.
Table 13*2 Composition of measured FFA (500 Hz, 1 kHz, 2 kHz 
and 4 kHz) threshold of the Factor X  workers.
Factor 
How determined 
Magnitude
NOTS 
PTA-CERA 
6.24 dB
AATS 
ISO 7029 
6,19
QE 
Half of audiometer
attenuator step 
2,50
CTS 
AC-BC 
2.40
Gunfire 
Regression equation 
0.60
ONITS 
Residual TS 
0.00
LFC 
Residual TS 
0.00
Overall threshold 
17.93
The calculated threshold shift (17.93 dB) agrees well with the measured 
threshold shift of 17.87 dB; NOTS, non-organic threshold shift; AATS, age- 
associated threshold shift; CTS, conductive threshold shift; QE, quantization 
error; ONITS, occupational noise-induced threshold shift; PTA, manual pure 
tone audiogram; CERA, cortical evoked response audiogram; ISO 7029, 
International Specification for the threshold of hearing by air conduction as a 
function of age and sex for otologically normal persons; AC, air conduction 
threshold of hearing; BC, bone conduction threshold of hearing; TS, threshold 
shift; LFC, L-factor complex73 refers to the aggregate of all the social, 
economic and environmental factors which affect the threshold of 
hearing,142,155 it may have a value anywhere in the range 0-6.156
0 -------- 1------ -— j-------- 1-------- 1--------- 1
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6
Years of exposure to 96dB(A)
Figure 13.18 Factory X  Correlation between threshold reported for CERA at 
4 kHz (average for the two ears) and number of years of exposure to an 
equivalent continuous sound level of 96dB(A). Data are for three workers ('D',
'B* and 'C') who had been exposed to this sound level. HTLs for 'B' and 'C, who 
had been exposed for 5 years, have been adjusted for the use of firearms using 
a regression equation derived from the data. The interpretation of this graph is 
that the longer the exposure to this potentially hazardous noise, the better the 
hearing. This graph therefore fails to confirm the positive gradient that would 
be needed to implicate industrial noise and exposure as a factor influencing HTL 
in this group. The thresholds had been adjusted for the use of firearms by 'B' 
and *C, both of whom had been exposed to 96dB(A) of noise for 5 years.
application, or even the validity, of any formula. It does not 
depend on the validity of the noise immission level (NIL) or 
other principle or of how noise-induced threshold shifts and 
age-associated threshold shift interact. It generates its own 
model.
It may well be pointed out that a clinician’s diagnosis is a 
pattern-recognition exercise.60-62 One would therefore have 
expected the examiners to have noted that the audiometric pic­
tures which they obtained were those of EAM collapse (Figure 
13.22). None had commented on this and asked their techni­
cians to repeat the audiogram with a stent in place. We shall 
therefore never know to what extent the apparent impairment 
of high-frequency hearing with its 6 kHz notching can be attrib­
uted to this artefact. It may be pointed out that we have already 
accounted for the measured thresholds (Table 13.2). There is 
nothing more to explain. However, any EAM collapse would 
have been accommodated under NOTS-A in that table. But 
CERA thresholds are also not immune from being affected by 
EAM collapse.
The finding that three out of six claimants were exaggerat­
ing is consistent with US reports that ‘25-40% of claims for 
deafness have a significant amount of NOHL in them’.63 An 
even higher proportion would be expected if the amount might 
not be considered to be ‘significant’ for the individual and the 
NOTS not sufficient to amount to an NOHL. Medical examin­
ers need to be more vigilant in detecting spurious thresholds; 
this is particularly so when one considers that there is a 0.6 
probability that there is no ‘underlying organic element’ in 
these cases.63
  

The threshold of hearing 
223
Frequency (kHz)
Frequency (kHz)
500 Hz 
1kHz 
2 kHz 
3 kHz 
4 kHz 
ABG-N-av 
22 
3.3 
1.7 
2.3 
2.8 dB
ABG-C-av 
2*5 
3.1 
0.6 
2.8 
2.8
Figure 13.19 F65: shift in manually determined AC threshold from 24.6 years 
of age to 26.3 years of age (averages for the right and left ears). The threshold 
at 24.6 years of age was the mean for three manually determined AC HTLs 
recorded by three experienced examiners. The manually determined AC HTLs at 
26.3 years of age were obtained on the same day as CERA was done. ISO 
indicates the shift in the 50th centile of ISO 7029 between 24.6 and 26.3 years 
of age. The data indicate that, over the 1.7-year period from the ages of 24.6 
years to 26.3 years, there had been a deterioration, averaged for the two ears, 
of 7.5 dB at 4 kHz and 2.5dB at 6 kHz (or more if we take into account what 
appears to have been a baseline shift of 2dB). This pattern is consistent with 
the course of occupational noise-induced damage to hearing. However, F65 said 
that earmuffs had been worn over the period in question, beginning 2 months 
prior to the first examination, when a normal non-notched audiogram had been 
recorded on one side (occupational noise-induced damage to hearing affects 
both ears). The expected real-world sound attenuation for earmuffs is 20 dB.
The equivalent continuous sound level applying to the period in question would 
therefore have been (96 -  20) = 76dB(A). Redundancy had occurred 7 weeks 
prior to the third examination.
Bekesy audiometry or CERA may not be available to the 
examiner to validate manual pure tone audiometric thresholds. 
There are, however, tests which can be performed with manual 
audiometers to verify thresholds64,65 or even used as the method 
of choice for manual audiometry.66 If medical examiners find 
that they have a poor detection rate for NOTS, they should 
employ these tests routinely.
Six-kilohertz notches have many causes.67 Medical examin­
ers need to bear this in mind. They should avoid using TDH39 
earphones; if they have already done so, the earphones should 
be calibrated using an artificial ear complying with IEC 60318- 
1 instead of using an IEC 60318-3 coupler.
The analysis shows that the measurement of BC thresholds 
is important. Care needs to be exercised in doing so. The Rinne 
is too insensitive a test, particularly with the 512-Hz tuning 
fork68,69 used to analyse thresholds which are within the range
Figure 13.20 Mean ABGs of the manually determined air and bone conduction 
HTLs for both ears of the three unselected noise-exposed claimants (ABG-N-av) 
and of the three control subjects (ABG-C-av) (three audiograms done on each 
ear of each factory worker); the average ABG for the noise-exposed claimants is 
2.5dB, and for the controls 2.4dB. These conductive TSs reflect the residua of 
childhood middle ear disease, so that they would have been there before adult 
employments. The effect of the 2.5 dB on the 96 dB(A) noise exposure would be 
to reduce the effective level to 93.5 dB(A).
or normality. Only one examiner had used the more sensitive 
Bing test,69,70 and then not consistently.
In some factories, as here, gunfire exposure may be more 
important than factory noise exposure.10
One might have expected 1 \ of the 3 cases to have had an 
occupational noise-induced permanent threshold shift.71 Zero 
out of three is not significantly different from 1 \ out of 3.
This analysis serves as a cautionary tale for medical exam­
iners in the UK, lest they fall for the logical fallacy of post hoc, 
ergo propter hoc. Science is not an extension of common sense; 
much is counter-intuitive and unexpected.72
The lawyers withdrew the controls. The claims of F65, M56 
and F35 were heard in court. The judge accepted the evidence 
of MX-1 and MX-3 that these three claimants suffered noise- 
induced hearing loss as a result of their exposure to the 96- 
dB( A) industrial noise. He castigated those who said otherwise. 
This is a salutary lesson for all who would dare sail into the 
unchartable and shark-infested waters of litigation.
Formulae
As well as the formulae which have been mentioned above in 
respect of age changes in threshold, a number of other formulae 
have appeared which incorporate the effects of noise and other
  

224 
Audiology
Figure 13.21 Dependence of AC threshold on ABG; ABG is the mean 
air-bone gap (the AC threshold less the BC threshold) in decibels over the 
frequencies 0.5, 1 and 2 kHz; AC-FFA is the four frequency (0.5, 1, 2 and 
4 kHz) average HTL corrected for the ageing factor usig ISO 7029. Data are 
from the manual AC and BC audiograms obtained by three medical 
examiners on the ears of the six factory workers. This analysis shows that, 
after accounting for ageing effects, 83% of the variation in the workers' 
overall hearing acuity (sensitivity) is accounted for by the magnitude of the 
ABG, i.e. factors related to middle ear malfunction. At zero ABG, the 
equation gives an FFA AC HTL of 9.33 dB. Correction of this value for NOTS 
(6.24 dB), QE (2.50 dB) and gunfire (0.60 dB) gives an FFA of -0.01 dB 
(BS EN ISO 389). The overall hearing sensitivity of the six workers can 
therefore be explained without recourse to postulating the influence of other 
factors, such as occupational noise-induced damage to hearing.
factors.73 The bearing that these have on the medical exam­
iner’s report has been discussed previously.74
Audiometry
The special tests employed to measure the threshold of hearing 
in clinical practice are referred to collectively as audiometry.1,7,84 
The electro-acoustic instruments used for this purpose are 
termed audiometers.
In a number of papers Stephens6,157,158 has traced the devel­
opment of audiometers since Hughes’159 invention in 1879.
Around a hundred years ago audiometers were being intro­
duced not only into the UK but also into other countries.157,160,161
The first audiometer was enthusiastically accepted by the 
doctor who should be considered to have been the first audio- 
logical physician.162 Otology in the USA was later to be enthu­
siastic about the Western Electric 1A audiometer.163 However, 
even later, Otology in the UK was less than enthusiastic: ‘They 
[the earphones of audiometers] have the following disadvan­
tages: ... They exert different degrees of pressure on the carti­
lage, and if this is excessive the tragus may be displaced so that
Figure 13.22 Manually determined AC thresholds for the left ears of F65, M36, 
M36 and F35 as reported by MX-1, MX-2, MX-1 and MX-3, respectively, 
compared to the similarly determined thresholds for the left ear of a 19-year- 
old man (MG) who had a spurious hearing loss due to close of the EAM 
occasioned by the pressure of the audiometer earphone on the auricle.133 This 
phenomenon is not an all-or-none effect. It exists in varying degrees which 
exhibit a family of curves to which these audiograms appear to conform. The 
audiograms were not repeated with a tubular insert in place,132,133 or the 
thresholds re-determined with soundfield audiometry.135 It will therefore never 
be known to what extent the phenomenon contributed to the TS reported by 
these examiners. In the current analysis, it would have been included in the 
category of N0TS-A^ (Figure 13.16). By the time these factory workers were 
tested, the phenomenon had been known to British otology for over half a 
century.131 BC threshold measurements are insufficiently accurate at 6 kHz to be 
helpful in the detection of meatal collapse. The above pattern 'mimics the type 
of impairment often associated with small-arms noise. The left ear is more 
affected than the right in a man who fires from the right shoulder, and 
maximum effect at 6000 Hz is usual with this type of noise'.133 This is in contrast 
to ONIHL, where the maximum effect is at 4 kHz.141 Both M36 and F35 had fired 
guns. It might therefore just as well be claimed that the 6 kHz notching in those 
cases was attributable to gunfire exposure.
the full sound does not reach the meatus [now referred to as 
‘external acoustic meatus collapse’, or just ‘canal collapse’, and 
a recognised source of spurious high tone audiometric notches, 
e.g. Coles,133 Mahoney and Luxon.164]. If the pressure is insuffi­
cient there may be a leakage of sound and an inaccurate result 
in testing’ [since confirmed: Erber127 (at p 15). The report 
concluded: ‘As oscillometers, the present audiometers are scien­
tifically accurate. It is in their application to clinical otology 
that they have failed, in that results obtained differ from those 
obtained from tuning forks. The results of testing by tuning 
forks have been for many years, and still are, the standard in 
otology, and until audiometers give results directly comparable 
with them, they cannot be accepted as a standard means of test­
ing. New methods must evolve from existing knowledge, and 
the Committee considers that future methods of testing must be 
based on the old-established tests by tuning forks’ (at p 15).131
  

The threshold of hearing 
225
This report has neither been revoked nor amended. No other 
report has dealt with the clinical examination of hearing in 
such detail. The committee had been advised by an eminent 
physicist (Sir William Bragg*).
There was no official acceptance of audiometers in the UK 
until a 1947 Medical Research Council report.165
The data obtained by audiometric testing are usually pre­
sented graphically as audiograms. Such graphs were constructed 
initially, as one would expect from engineers and scientists, 
with the horizontal axis setting out the frequency and the ver­
tical axis setting out the signal sound intensity166 or pressure.167 
Both co-ordinates were on a logarithmic scale.Until the mid 
20th century it was held that the subjective magnitude of a 
sensation varied as the logarithm of the physical magnitude of 
that stimulus (Weber-Fechner Law).5 This scientific graphic 
presentation168,169 can reflect different audiometric patterns in 
different disorders just as well as the present convention.
The explanation for the change in audiogram format is 
given by Davis and Silverman: ‘When the famous Western 
Electric Company 2A audiometer was designed in the Bell 
Telephone Laboratories in the early 1920s, a basic decision was 
made concerning the reference zero level. An obvious choice 
fom the engineering point of view would have been the dyne 
per square centimeter [the pascal is now the unit for pressure], 
the same for all frequencies.. .However, the otological consul­
tant to the project, Dr Edmund R Fowler, saw the new instru­
ment as a diagnostic tool for the otologist, and wished to 
emphasize the deviation from normal of each subject. He 
believed, probably quite correctly, that this form of presentation 
of the results would promote the acceptance and general use of 
the electric audiometer by otologists. Dr. Fowler’s counsel pre­
vailed, and the intensity dial of the audiometer was labeled 
‘hearing loss’ meaning ‘decibels less sensitive than normal.’ The 
format of the audiogram was devised with the reference zero 
level represented as a straight horizontal line near the top of the 
sheet and hearing loss (poorer hearing) plotted downwards.’ 
(76at pp 194-5). This decision was the source of problems and 
misunderstandings ever since. Metrologists saw this ‘reference 
zero level’ concept as providing the major problem for pure tone 
audiometry. ‘The problems of pure-tone audiometry can be 
conveniently grouped into three distinct phases. The first and 
most fundamental of these is the determination of the absolute 
threshold of hearing for normal listeners. The second is the 
transfer of this information to the dials of practical audiometers, 
which we refer to as the realization of the audiometric zero. 
Finally there is the actual technique of hearing loss measure­
ment, which is principally though not exclusively to be thought 
of in terms of clinical application.. .The importance of an 
internationally agreed set of standard values for the normal 
threshold of hearing, as a step towards interchangeability of 
clinical information, is widely recognised, and the task of
* Nobel Prizewinner, formerly Professor of Physics, London, and 
subsequently President of the Royal Society.
formulating such a standard has been undertaken by the 
Acoustics Committee of the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO).170 But towards the end of his life this 
leading British audiological scientist was coming round to the 
belief that the article of faith that he had enunciated forty years 
previously ‘The first and most fundamental of these is the 
determination of the absolute threshold of hearing for normal 
listeners’ was indeed a quest for the Holy Grail of ‘pure and 
unsullied hearing.’
Controversy continues regarding the level of ‘normal’ audi­
tory sensitivity. Gradenigo had conducted an early study of 
hearing sensitivity.171 Licklider172 conjectured that having the 
subject hold the earphone to his ear may have accounted for 
relative poorer sensitivities in some earlier surveys of hearing. 
The act of holding the earphone to the ear produces a measur­
able amount of low-frequency noise in the external acoustic 
meatus.173 Yet even laboratory based studies are subject to 
disagreements. There are claims that Standards based on the 
1952 British work8,9 are too stringent. But previous studies by 
Bekesy174 in Budapest and by Waetzmann and Keibs175 in 
Breslau [now Wroclaw, Poland] had indicated even more sensi­
tive hearing. This merely serves to emphasize the importance of 
having appropriate controls whenever any studies involving the 
threshold of hearing are conducted. There are a plethora of 
factors influencing measured auditory thresholds. ’
The biophysical bases for audiometry are clarified by 
Haughton.177
Manual audiometry
The instruments that we have mentioned so far have been 
manual audiometers. They are ‘manual’ in the sense that the 
selection and presentation of test tones to the subject is made 
by the operator (sometimes referred to as the ‘audiometrician’). 
They are also ‘manual’ in the sense that the recognition of 
responses, noting at which stimulus levels these occur and 
transferring this information to the audiogram blank is also 
made by the operator.
Manual air conduction audiometry
The instruments that we have mentioned so far have also been 
manual audiometers with earphone listening.
It is termed ‘with earphone listening’ because the test tones 
are delivered from the audiometer to the ears by means of 
earphones. The alternative method would be ‘with loudspeaker 
listening’ (sound field listening). The latter condition would be 
more akin to natural conditions and would be free from those 
problems listed previously which arise from the use of ear­
phones. It is often said that audiometry took the path it did 
towards the use of earphone listening because one had less 
control over a signal in a sound field than from an earphone. A 
more likely explanation is that the audiometric evolution 
followed the technological one. Hughes’ invention was a
  

226 
Audiology
logical development after Alexander Graham Bell’s invention 
of the telephone three years previously, i.e. in 1876. Moreover, 
a suitable transducer to permit sound field listening was not 
available until later (in the 20th century), when CW Rice and 
EW Kelley invented the electrodynamic loudspeaker.178 There 
is now a standard (ISO 389-7:1996) for the reference zero for 
the calibration of audiometric equipment used for measuring 
the threshold of hearing under free-field and diffuse-field listen- 
ing conditions. However even had the technological evolution 
been otherwise it is unlikely that we would now have had 
‘audiometry with sound field listening’ in clinical practice 
because of the size and cost of equipping with sound treated 
testing chambers.
Matters relevant to manual air conduction audiometry 
with earphone listening have been discussed earlier in this 
chapter. But here we should say something about the problem 
of cross-hearing, i.e. the ear not under test responding to test 
sounds.
A hundred years ago Barany invented his noise box to 
demonstrate cases of unilateral deafness.179 Clinicians must 
therefore have been aware of the problem of cross-hearing and 
of the need to apply masking noise to the ear not being tested 
for a much longer period of time. With the advent of audio­
meters the problem and its solution needed to be addressed 
again.180,181 The basis of the problem has been well set out in a 
recent textbook on ‘Adult Audiology’: ‘It is natural to assume 
that, when sound is presented to the earphone on the left ear, 
it is the sensitivity of the left ear which is being measured; like­
wise for the right ear. Unfortunately, this assumption does not 
hold true under all circumstances because the earphone also 
transmits a certain amount of energy into the skull as a vibra­
tion, albeit at a much lower level than the acoustic signal. The 
vibration energy travels through the skull almost equally to 
both cochleae.84 The risk of cross-hearing is governed by the 
contralateral cochlear sensitivity. If this is normal then a sound 
level in the test earphone of as little as 40 dB HL may be suffi­
cient to be heard in that contralateral ear, i.e. ear not being 
tested. The level is frequency dependent and there is consider­
able inter-subject variability. If there appears to be a risk of 
cross-hearing then the problem is managed (but not necessarily 
always solved) by reducing temporarily the hearing sensitivity 
of the non-test ear. This is accomplished by delivering an audi­
ble noise (termed a masking noise) through either a supra-aural 
or an insert earphone to that contralateral ear. The threshold 
for that contralateral cochlea is elevated in proportion to the 
level of the masking noise. The exercise of determining an ear’s 
threshold of hearing at increasing levels of contralateral mask­
ing noise is termed a graduated masking (or plateau-seeking) pro­
cedure. The results appear as a zig-zag curve when plotted 
graphically. The segment of the curve which appears as a 
plateau corresponds to the true threshold of hearing for the 
tested ear.
Studies of the masking of one pure tone by another182 and 
of pure tones by noise183 contributed to understanding the sci­
entific basis of the masking phenomenon. A unifying concept
was provided by Fletcher’s184 critical band. This is derived from 
two assumptions: (1) the only frequencies in a given noise 
which are important for masking lie within a narrow band of 
the noise (hence the term ‘critical band’), (2) when a tone is 
just audible in the given noise, the total energy in the critical 
band is equal to the energy of the tone. Subsequent experimen­
tal work indicated that the critical band of noise needs to be 
about 4 dB more intense than the pure tone.185
There is sometimes a problem of spurious audiograms, more 
so with medico-legal cases. One may need to address the prob­
lem of exaggeration by the testee or by the tester. A number of 
tests are available to clarify the situation.186,187 These include tests 
using manual audiometry,63-66 aural acoustic immittance,188,189 
Bekesy audiometry (see later), CERA,87,88 evoked otoacoustic 
emissions190 and speech audiometry.63
Exaggeration by the tester can be detected by Bekesy 
audiometry. The tester can have no influence on the response 
or the transcription of thresholds.
Manual bone conduction audiometry
The first bone conduction audiometer was developed by 
Gradenigo in 1892.191 The principles and practice of bone con­
duction audiometry have been set out by Hood,91,192 Lutman84 
and others.
With bone conduction audiometry the stimulus to the 
cochlea is delivered by vibrational energy transmitted through 
the skull from a transducer (termed a vibrator) that has been 
placed on the head. The mode of excitation of the cochlear 
sound receptors is the same whether the sound stimulus is 
delivered by air conduction or by bone conduction.193
The simplistic interpretation of thresholds of hearing 
measured by bone conduction audiometry is that these reflect 
hearing sensitivity, which is not contaminated by any external 
or middle ear lesion. Having ‘by passed’ the aural sound trans­
mission mechanism they reflect solely the function of the 
cochlea and its nerve, i.e. the sensorineural sensitivity. Alas, 
this is not the case (see below). Disorders of the external and 
middle ear may affect measured bone conduction thresholds to 
varying degrees and in various ways. Nevertheless the differ­
ence between an ear’s air conduction threshold and its bone 
conduction threshold, termed the air-bone gap (ABG), is used 
as a measure of the degree of conductive threshold shift, i.e. the 
impairment of the aural sound transmission mechanism. This is 
of course where the measured air conduction threshold is poorer 
than the bone conduction threshold. Excluding minor separa­
tions attributable to mensurational uncertainties, the converse 
relationship (bone conduction poorer than air conduction) 
indicates that the measured thresholds are spurious.
The complex bases of bone conduction audiometry have 
been elucidated principally through the experimental studies 
of Bekesy,193-195 Barany,196-198 Allen and Fernandez,199 and 
Tonndorf.200,201 Athough there were earlier experimental studies 
on the biophysics of the tympano-ossicular mechanism by von 
Helmholtz.202
  

The threshold of hearing 
227
Three different mechanisms are involved when the ear is 
being stimulated by bone conduction, i.e. inertial bone con- 
duction, compressional bone conduction and a bone conduc­
tion pathway that reaches the cochlea via the air in the 
external acoustic meatus.
Inertial bone conduction arises mainly when the bone con­
ducted sound is of a frequency which is less than 800 Hz. In this 
situation the skull moves as a rigid body. Because of inertial 
forces ossicular movements do not follow skull movements. 
Consequently there is a relative sinusoidal movement of the 
stapes base in the round window thereby providing an acoustic 
stimulus to the cochlea.
Compressional bone conduction occurs when the skull is 
stimulated with bone conducted sounds above its resonant fre­
quency (between 800 Hz and 1 kHz). With these frequencies 
the skull no longer moves as a rigid body but undergoes alter­
nate compressions and expansions. These vibration patterns 
also involve the osseous labyrinth thereby providing another 
acoustic stimulus to the cochlea.
The third mode of bone conducted stimulation arises when 
the skull bones transmit the vibrations to the air in the external 
acoustic meatus.
This complexity of the biophysical basis for bone conduc­
tion stimulation contributes to the variance of bone conduction 
threshold measurements. Moreover, and most importantly, it 
denies bone conduction audiometry any claim to be a ‘pure* 
measure of sensorineural (cochlear and auditory pathway) 
sensitivity. Hearing sensitivity to both higher203 and lower 
frequency bone conducted sound can be affected by outer and 
middle ear disorders.
There are a number of factors, which influence bone con­
duction threshold measurements. Vibrator placement204 has 
been the subject of a number of studies. Data relating to 
ing the vibrator on the vertex197 and on the frontal bone 0 -208 
are also available.
Increase in vibrator surface area improves bone conduction 
thresholds for frequencies greater than 2 kHz.209,210 The 
application force of the vibrator influences measured bone 
conduction thresholds.211-214
As mentioned earlier, erroneous bone conduction thresh­
old measurements may arise as a result of air-borne radiation 
from bone-conduction transducers.92-96 This artefact occurs 
when measuring bone conduction thresholds at 3 kHz and 4 
kHz. To nullify the effect when testing at these frequencies the 
insertion of an earplug into the external acoustic meatus of the 
test ear has been recommended. But this means that the result­
ing bone conduction audiogram for that ear is in part an 
absolute bone conduction threshold, and in part a relative bone 
conduction threshold (see later). It is assumed that the occlu­
sion effect is negligible at these two frequencies. It would be 
preferable to measure full bone conduction thresholds twice, on 
one occasion the relative bone conduction thresholds, on the 
other occasion the absolute bone conduction thresholds. This 
would then constitute the Aubry and Giraud method (see later) 
of bone conduction threshold measurements.
Artefacts may arise due to tactile sensation, especially at 
low frequencies.215
The problem that dominates bone conduction threshold 
measurements is that of cross-hearing, i.e. the ear not under test 
responding to test sounds. The cross-hearing problem is greater 
for bone conduction threshold measurements than for air con­
duction threshold measurements because transmission losses 
across the skull are effectively zero. A vibrator positioned any­
where on the head is effectively stimulating both cochleae 
simultaneously.84,92,192 It follows that all bone conduction 
measurements should be made using graduated masking proce­
dures. However, in clinical practice (especially when the testee 
is a claimant) useful information can be gained by first deter­
mining the bone conduction thresholds without masking. The 
testee is also asked to say, when responding to a test tone, where 
he hears the sound. Bekesy attached great importance to this 
response in determining which cochlea was responding. 
Correlating this information with that derived from measured 
unmasked and masked air conduction and bone conduction 
thresholds can give a reasonable indication of the actual aural 
and cochlear sensitivities. Neither cochlea can be more sensi­
tive than the unmasked bone conduction thresholds. The 
cochlear sensitivity on one or other side cannot be poorer than 
the aural sensitivity, i.e. air conduction threshold, on the 
corresponding side.
Alternative bone conduction methods are available to 
counteract the problem of cross-hearing.216-219
In spite of all these precautions bone conduction threshold 
measurements have limited accuracy.26
The occlusion phenomenon is less exploited than it should 
be in bone conduction audiometry. Depending on the stimulus 
frequency and the condition of the auditory mechanism, bone 
conduction thresholds may be modified by occluding the 
external acoustic meatus. As well as being elicited by a thresh­
old method the phenomenon can be elicited by a loudness com­
parison method. The latter was described by Wheatstone in 
1827.220 The test is usually attributed to Bing221 who reported 
the use of this occlusion phenomenon for the diagnosis of dis­
orders of hearing. The phenomenon was however first described 
by Koyter over 400 years ago.222 It is due primarily to the elim­
ination of the normal high-pass filter effect produced by the 
unoccluded external acoustic meatus.200 A quantitative expres­
sion of the occlusion phenomenon can be obtained by bone 
conduction audiometry. It is, of course, the difference between 
Aubry and Giraud’s223 CO A (conduction osseuse absolue) 
curve and their COR (conduction osseuse relative) curve 
[Clinicians will recognise that the former corresponds to 
Pomeroy’s test,224 the value of which was stressed by Hallpike,225 
and the latter to the Schwabach test226]. Previous studies by 
Kelley and Reger227 had shown that this shift was of the order of 
20 dB for frequencies below 1 kHz. An ‘occlusion index’ has 
been used to quantify the phenomenon.228 The index is the sum 
of the differences between the absolute and the relative bone 
conduction thresholds at 250 Hz, 500 Hz, 1 kHz and 2 kHz. The 
value of the index ranged from 0 dB to 60 dB, normal ears
  

228 
Audiology
giving an average value of 34 dB. As well as the test being 
negative in conductive hearing losses, the test was negative in 
the majority of 28 ears with Meniere’s disease. The response to 
the test was associated with the activity of the disorder. During 
periods of remission, the test became positive, i.e. normal. A 
possible explanation is that a dilated saccule (or other part of 
the membranous labyrinth) splints the stapes base. Bone con- 
duction measurements with the meatus occluded are as repro­
ducible as those with the meatus open.229 One source of 
variability is the force of an applied occluding device. For exam­
ple, the magnitude of the effect is a function of the force of 
application of an occluding earphone.230
Although an old instrument (stemming from the 19th 
century) the manual pure-tone audiometer has been, and still 
is, the workhorse for the measurement of the threshold of 
hearing in clinical practice. However, it is not being used to its 
full potential. For all those who contemplate using the instru­
ment, or even are already doing so, perusing the publications 
mentioned here should reap dividends.
Arlinger has provided manuals of practical audiometry7 
which should be of help to those needing to perform audio­
metric testing themselves.
International Standards that apply to manual pure tone 
audiometry are given at the end of this chapter.
Self-recording (Bekesy and 
Rudmose) audiometry
A technological advance on manual pure tone audiometry was 
reported by Bekesy in 1947,231 the year in which he moved from 
the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm to Harvard 
University.
The applications of SRA 
(automatic, self-recording 
audiometry) to medical practice and research occurred in the 
first instance in the country in which he developed the instru­
ment and in the country which then received him. Lundborg232 
reported results obtained on individuals with tumours of the 
nerve of hearing. The Harvard137 and the Iowa233,234 schools 
showed the value of the instrument both in research and in 
clinical medicine.
The use of both sweep and fixed frequencies and both con­
tinuous and intermittent test tones and for both threshold and 
most comfortable loudness tracking provides an eminently suc­
cessful battery of Bekesy audiometric tests for the investigation 
of sensorineural hearing disorders.235
What is a Bekesy audiometer?
‘An audiometer is described, in which the intensity of the tone 
increases continuously so long as a signal button is pressed and 
decreases automatically when the button is released [subsequent 
audiometers provided the opposite arrangement, i.e. pressing
the button produces a progressive decrease in the sound level of 
the signal; releasing the button allows the sound level to pro­
gressively increase]. The subject controlling the button thus is 
able to let the intensity of the tone fluctuate between just above 
and just below threshold231 (at p 411) ... The subject deter­
mines his own threshold [hence the description of this type of 
audiometry as self recording audiometry] by pressing the button 
until the tone is perceived, then releasing the button until the 
tone disappears, pressing the button again till the tone reap­
pears etc, etc. In this way the tone oscillates around the thresh­
old of the subject the whole time ... A motor Mj causes a 
continuous change in the frequency of the audio generator. The 
whole range between 100 and 10000 c.p.s. is covered in 15 
minutes. On the same shaft as the frequency control is a drum 
supporting a paper on which the intensity of the sound at each 
frequency is recorded by a stylus. The audio frequency generator 
works into a potentiometer which covers a range of 140 db and 
supplies the telephone receiver.’231 (at p 412).
This instrument thus differs from the conventional, manual 
audiometer in that the sound level is under the control of the 
subject. But even this control may be overridden by the operator.
It is outside the scope of this review to consider the various 
commercially available products which enable the practitioner 
to conduct Bekesy audiometry. However, the Grason-Stadler 
Company of the USA produced Bekesy audiometers based on 
Scott Reger’s machines.233 Currently the author use a Grason 
Stadler GSI instrument which incorporates Telephonies TDH-
50 earphones.
What has Bekesy audiometry had to 
offer?
In clinical practice
A threshold audiogram
(a) air conduction
‘In order to give the normal audiogram the appearance of a 
straight line at zero level, a suitable filter circuit is inserted 
between the attenuator and the receiver. This filter circuit 
attenuates the frequencies between 1000 and 3000 especially 
much .. .231 (at p 413) ... If one wants a completely straight and 
horizontal line for the normal audiogram it may be suitable to 
compensate for small residual differences left by the electric 
equalizing circuit by means of a mechanical arrangement, the 
drum carrying the audiogam paper being shifted along the db 
axis by means of a guiding profile on the same shaft of the 
drum.’231 (at p 422) [the curvilinear absolute threshold of hear­
ing was indeed corrected mechanically on the earlier commer­
cially available Bekesy audiometers.]
As with manual pure tone audiometry, Bekesy audiometry 
provides information on the threshold pattern, which consti­
tutes the basic information that a clinician requires of audiom­
etry as a diagnostic aid.
  

The threshold of hearing 
229
(b) bone conduction
‘. .. in bone conduction measurements, it is necessary to change 
the intensity of the noise masking the not investigated ear in 
proportion to the intensity of the test tone [so he anticipated 
the arguments for a graduated masking procedure]. This can 
easily be done in the described audiometer. The result is an 
arrangement which with certainty prevents the masking noise 
to interfere with the hearing of the ear under investigation, 
while at the same time it always is sufficiently strong.’231 (at 
p411)*
The importance of the technique for masking the non-test 
ear in the various Bekesy audiometric procedures has been 
stressed by Priede and Coles.236
Authentication of recorded thresholds
‘In order to control if the real auditory threshold is observed or 
not it is possible to use an extra attenuation of 10 db which is 
periodically inserted in the circuit. If one lets the recording 
paper make a corresponding movement automatically, a normal 
audiogram keeps its straight course, with the exception of one 
larger spike at each change in attenuation (at p 420) ... In 
malingering and dissimulation, where the real threshold is not 
observed, the subject is unable to follow the intensity changes 
and a typical curve is obtained ... the periodic 10 db shifts are 
easily distinguished.’231 (at p 422).
Jerger and Herer237 subsequently reported that a particular 
Bekesy audiometric pattern (Type V) pointed to a nonorganic 
hearing loss. It was characterised by better thresholds for contin- 
uous (sustained) than for intermittent (pulsed) test tones. 
Rinteleman and Carhart238 suggested that this pattern arose 
because of the higher sound pressure levels that are required for 
pulsed (compared to sustained) test tones to achieve equal 
loudness with the Bekesy audiometer. Out of a group of 30 
former military personnel with otherwise diagnosed nonorganic 
hearing loss, Stein239 observed that 17 had Type V Bekesy 
audiograms and a further nine had unclassifiable patterns.
An increased tracking width is also indicative of a nonorganic 
hearing loss.240
A number of reports from the Iowa school241-243 demon­
strated the possibility of conducting and quantifying the Stenger 
test using Bekesy audiometry.
Other refinements in Bekesy testing244-246 showed how dif­
ferent procedures could increase the detection of nonorganic 
hearing loss.
Loudness functions
‘The new audiograms besides giving a graph representing the 
absolute intensity as a function of frequency also show how the 
difference limen for intensity changes with frequency. This 
gives additional data for the differential diagnosis between per­
ceptive and conductive lesions. In normal ears, the difference 
limen increases somewhat between 100 and 1000 c.p.s. and 
then keeps constant to about 4000 c.p.s. Above this frequency 
it drops again and reaches the original value at 10000 c.p.s. This 
relation between difference limen and frequency agrees with
the well-known Kingsbury curves of equal loudness [i.e. equal 
loudness contours], (at pp 418, 419) ... The method is equiva­
lent to the recruitment test of Fowler but permits isolated 
investigation of one ear. It is of special value when the 
perceptive lesion does not affect the whole frequency region to 
the same extent, because in this case the difference limen 
changes between different regions of the same audiogram.’231 
(at p 420). 
^
Lundborg 
showed that the tracking width (sometimes 
referred to as the amplitude or extent of the Bekesy audiometric 
excursions) was reduced in patients with various types of 
sensorineural hearing losses (acoustic trauma, Meniere’s disease, 
retrocochlear lesions). He considered this pattern to be charac­
teristic of cochlear, and not retrocochlear, sensorineural hearing 
losses and so consistent with the observations of Dix and her 
colleagues.247 They had shown that the phenomenon of loud­
ness recruitment, as demonstrated by the alternate binaural 
loudness balance test of Fowler [248, 249], was characteristic of 
cochlear lesions. Thus Lundborg supported Bekesy’s interpreta­
tion of reduced tracking width, i.e. it was an index of loudness 
recruitment. However, others250 suggest that this phenomenon 
reflects rapid abnormal auditory adaptation, i.e. occurring in 
milliseconds, yet still arising from cochlear events.
Bilger251 confirmed the significance of the tracking width,
i.e. relating these to cochlear malfunction, for fixed frequency 
continuous test tones.
Most comfortable loudness levels are also of diagnostic 
value.252-254 Reductions in the size of the excursions of the 
tracked threshold for most comfortable loudness levels are 
indicative of cochlear disorders.
The most comfortable loudness level which has been 
tracked with a glide tone is a convenient way of recording a 
particular equal loudness contour. It is thus similar to the equal 
loudness contours, which Reger255 obtained by monaural bi­
frequency loudness matches. When plotted on a threshold 
audiogram equal loudness contours provide evidence for loud­
ness recruitment255 which, as Hirsh5 showed, is particularly con­
vincing in respect of the phenomenon being associated with 
high tone notches.
The threshold of uncomfortable loudness256 can also be used as 
a measure of loudness recruitment, as exploited by Hood and 
Poole257 in their loudness discomfort level. Bekesy audiometry 
provides a convenient means of recording the threshold of 
uncomfortable loudness.258
One should bear in mind that most comfortable (and 
threshold of uncomfortable) loudness level contours are not 
identical to equal loudness contours.259
Abnormal auditory adaptation
‘It is necessary to avoid sounds which are appreciably louder 
than the threshold, since they cause fatigue phenomena which 
may interfere with correct threshold determinations.’231 (at 
p 411). Bekesy was clearly aware of perstimulatory adaptation/ 
fatigue but did not grasp the full extent of these phenomena 
since he used only sustained (continuous) test tones. Moreover,
  

230 
Audiology
fixed frequency test tones do not appear to have been used in 
the testing of patients. Such a signal mode appears to have been 
used only for assessing reproducibility of recorded thresholds 
and to investigate the effect of various test parameters.
Reger and Kos234 showed that the drift of a tracked fixed 
frequency threshold for a steady state, i.e. continuous, test tone 
was associated with retrocochlear lesions. This drift of a con­
tinuous test tone could occur in the presence of normal thresh­
olds for pulsed test tones, as Kos260 showed for a patient with a 
pinealoma. The phenomenon of what came to be termed abnor­
mal auditory adaptation emerged as a feature of tumours of the 
nerve of hearing.261
The influence of tracking direction on the recorded threshold 
was demonstrated by Rose.262 Sweep frequency tracings using 
both continuous and pulsed test tones were each tracked in an 
ascending mode from 100 Hz to 10 kHz and in a descending 
mode from 10 kHz to 100 Hz. There was no effect on pulsed test 
tones but a downward sweep for continuous test tones accentu­
ated the separation between the continuous and pulsed trac­
ings. Harbert and Young263 pointed out that the relationship of 
continuous and pulsed audiograms to one another was essen­
tially the same whether they are obtained in an ascending or 
descending mode unless abnormal auditory adaptation is 
present. The reverse sweep threshold is always the poorer when 
differences are observed between ascending and descending 
continuous test tone thresholds and this is associated with 
retrocochlear lesions.264
An additional, and diagnostically important, factor is that 
both fixed frequency265 266 and sweep frequency Bekesy tracings 
are affected by both ipsilateral and contralateral masking noise at 
low-intensity levels even when there is no question of cross­
hearing. The application of contralateral masking noise accen­
tuates the detection of abnormal auditory adaptation, and 
increases its magnitude if present.
Use of the Collet effect267 has demonstrated a link between 
otoacoustic emission behaviour and abnormal auditory adapta­
tion.268 This study should herald a better approach to under­
standing the various types (there is not one, but a number of, 
types of abnormal auditory adaptation) of this phenomenon 
which can be recorded by Bekesy audiometry.
Abnormal auditory adaptation may be evident on most 
comfortable loudness tracking when it is absent on threshold 
tracking. Orchik and colleagues269 described two such cases 
(surgically confirmed vestibulocochlear schwannomas). Thus 
most comfortable loudness level tracking provides evidence 
for both 
loudness 
recruitment 
and 
abnormal 
auditory 
adaptation.270
Tinnitus studies
Bekesy audiometry is eminently suitable for the investigation of 
tinnitus. The results of pitch and loudness matching studies can 
be conveniently recorded. A particular method can be used to 
determine personal loudness functions as a necessary prelimi­
nary to expressing the subjective magnitude of tinnitus in terms 
of personal loudness units.271
Categorisation of patterns
‘In pathological cases three different types of audiograms were 
observed ... In the top curve [first type] ... there is no great 
change in difference limen with frequency ... In the lower 
curve [second type] ... there is a sharp decrease in the ampli­
tude of the intensity oscillations, »spikes», the difference 
limen drops at the higher frequencies. The top curve was 
obtained in a case where from other reasons a diagnosis of 
conductive lesion was made. The lower curve similarly was 
diagnosed as a perceptive lesion (p 419) ... The third type of 
pathological curve ... large spikes at irregular intervals indicate 
the presence of tinnitus, which disturbs the observations.’231 
(at p 420).
Jerger’s classification of Bekesy audiometric patterns for 
diagnostic purposes272 has been extended by Jerger and Herer,237 
Harden and Kiessling273 and others.
In addition to considering audiometric patterns, the sub­
ject’s perception of the test tone also has diagnostic signifi­
cance. S0rensen74 reported that some patients noticed a change 
in the sound of a continuous test tone from a tonal to an atonal 
quality. The bilateral occurrence of this phenomenon, termed 
‘tone perversion’, has been reported in association with 
disorders involving the pons.275
In occupational medicine 
Discrete frequency SRA
The Rudmose audiometer276 is an automated pulsed fixed 
frequency audiometer designed for hearing conservation pro­
grammes in industry. Consequent on their systematic studies, 
McCommons and Hodge277 recommended pulsed test tones in 
industrial and military hearing conservation programmes.
Studies in British industry concluded that the ‘use of 
occupational health nurses with self-recording audiometers is a 
satisfactory method of audiometric screening in hearing conser­
vation programmes.’278 The British Armed Services have also 
confirmed the value of self-recording audiometry in hearing
279
conservation programmes.
However, a study in the USA280 found differences of the 
order of 10 dB between thresholds measured by self-recording 
audiometry and those measured by manual audiometry, the 
latter being the more acute. The phenomenon was related to a 
claims environment.
Sweep frequency SRA
Swedish studies demonstrated the superiority of sweep 
frequency self-recording audiometry over manual audiometry 
for hearing conservation programmes in industry.281 Sweep- 
frequency methods, using whatever equipment, are more sensi­
tive than fixed frequency methods for detecting the notches on 
the threshold of hearing that provide the first evidence for noise 
damage to hearing.282 Bekesy audiometry is eminently suitable 
for the early detection of noise damage to hearing.283
  

The threshold of hearing 
231
Forensic purposes
The arguments for* using sweep frequency self-recording 
audiometry (vis-a-vis manual audiometry) for medicolegal work 
are:
■ 
Virtual elimination of bias attributable to the audio­
metrician
■ 
The unambiguous nature of the subject’s response. If 
necessary, sweep frequency SRA can be backed up by fixed 
frequency SRA, e.g. if there is uncertainty about the thresh­
old measured by sweep frequency testing.
* 
The provision of a permanent record without possibility of 
transcription errors.
m 
There is a visible indication of the quality of the subject’s 
test performance 
m 
Sweep frequency SRA has the advantage that it can detect 
incipient, or other noise-induced, notches when discrete 
frequency audiometry, whether manual or self-recording, 
has failed to do so.
■ 
The use of continuous test tone sweep frequency audio­
metry, in addition to pulsed test tone sweep frequency 
audiometry, 
considerably 
enhances 
the possibility 
of 
detecting spurious thresholds.
*  
Diagnostic sweep frequency SRA also has a much greater 
facility of picking up hearing losses due to conditions other 
than noise damage to the ear.
Full acceptance of double sweep SRA could well rid us of 
the scourge of multiple audiometry. Many claimants say ‘Why 
do I have to have yet another test?’ Yes ‘Why?’
Other auditory investigations
Gauz and his colleagues extended the frequency ran^e of 
conventional Bekesy audiometry up to 16 kHz or 20 kHz. 84 
Albers285 reported the use of Bekesy techniques in the 
measurement of binaural diplacusis. The Bekesy technique can 
also be used to measure and record monaural frequency dis­
crimination.286 Domico287 has used Bekesy audiometry to study 
aural harmonic distortion thresholds.
John and his colleagues288 showed low frequency shifts of 
the Bekesy audiogram were associated with raised intracranial 
pressure.
Over thirty years ago there were reports that sweep 
frequency Bekesy audiometry could detect the normal hearing 
carriers of genes for sensorineural hearing disorders.289 This has 
been confirmed in respect of X-linked hearing loss.290 Others 
have either failed to detect carriers using sweep frequency 
Bekesy audiometry291 or found it less sensitive than another 
sweep frequency methodt-292 These findings may have been due 
to the use of a pulsed instead of a continuous test tone. The 
optimum parameters of the test tones for carrier detection have
t Meyer-Bisch’s (1990) Audioscan.
yet to be defined. Nevertheless, even those workers who have 
used interrupted glide tones have found Bekesy audiometry a 
useful adjunct to the Audioscan. A possible carrier may have a 
hearing loss due to a factor (or factors) other than the gene 
under investigation. In such cases the Audioscan takes too 
long, the subject becomes fatigued and spurious results ensue. 
Because of its pre-constrained test duration, Bekesy audiometry 
presents no such problems.293
Because of the ability to track thresholds over short periods 
of time, self-recording audiometry provides a convenient tool 
for both human and animal research. In particular, it is useful in 
tracking the temporary changes in threshold in experimental 
studies of the effects of noise.137,220
Stability, specificity and sensitivity of recorded 
measures
Studies of these features can be grouped broadly into those 
which have been concerned with the factors influencing 
measured thresholds, and those which have been concerned 
with the factors influencing other patterns of response. The first 
group has thus centred around the use of Rudmose audiometry 
because of its employment in hearing conservation programmes 
with the need to detect deviations from some reference thresh­
old which has been derived from the individual or from some 
outside source. The second group has centred around the use of 
Bekesy audiometry because of employing patterns of response in 
the diagnosis of auditory disorders.
Measurements of the threshold of hearing
From the mid-fifties studies were conducted to relate thresholds 
of hearing measured by self-recording audiometry to manual
j. 
12,101,102,104,281,295,296 ^
 
j.rr 
j
audiometry. 
1 he differences reported were
probably primarily attributable to inter-tester variability influ­
encing the manual audiometric measurements and to the failure 
in some instances to take into account Leijon’s114 quantization 
error in respect of manual audiometer attenuation steps.
McCommons and Hodge277 conducted two studies to deter­
mine the parameters affecting the sensitivity and variability of 
fixed frequency self-recorded thresholds. The first study was 
concerned with the effects of varying period, duty cycle and 
frequency on threshold measurements obtained using pulsed 
test tones in order to derive an ‘optimal’ pulsed test tone. The 
‘optimal’ tone was found to have a period of 500 ms, a duty 
cycle of at least 50% but probably no greater than 60% and an 
attenuation rate of at least 4, but not to exceed 5 dB.s-1, The 
second study compared thresholds taken with the ‘optimized’ 
pulsed test tone to those obtained with continuous test tones. 
Pulsed test tones were found to yield superior threshold 
measurements both in terms of greater sensitivity and less 
intratest variability. Continuous tone thresholds were suscepti­
ble to changes in attenuation rate; pulsed tone thresholds were 
not. The authors considered that ‘the primary advantage of the 
pulsing tone is greater feedback that has the effect of making
  

232 
Audiology
the S’s task easier. This, in turn, makes him better able to make 
or delay his response, whichever is appropriate.’
For young normal adults, Jokinen297 found that, for experi­
enced listeners, manually determined thresholds were superim­
posed on continuous fixed frequency thresholds, but, for 
inexperienced listeners, the manual thresholds were poorer 
than the continuous thresholds.
The ‘Notes on Occupational Deafness’ issued by the British 
Department of Health and Social Security (1974) state, with 
regard to audiometry, ‘There is an initial learning period which 
leads to improvements of from 1 to 15 dB with manually 
operated audiometry. A proportion of persons have difficulty 
with self-recording audiometry and may show learning effects of 
up to 30dB.’54 This statement must apply to claimants. It is not 
my experience. In the 1960s MRC/NPL survey of noise and 
hearing in British industry the subjects were tested by Rudmose 
self-recording audiometry. ‘The mean audiogram level (average 
HTL across 6 frequencies, i.e. 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 kHz) repeated 
on average to within ± 3 dB ... Positive and negative shifts 
were nearly equal in frequency of occurrence indicating that 
the principal cause was a random process, and this is attributed 
mainly to subjective uncertainty of the threshold.’298
Knight studied learning effects on sixteen normally hearing 
adults. 
The subjects were tested by Rudmose audiometry 
twice daily for five consecutive days. There was an improve­
ment of the order of 1 dB from the first to the second test each 
day. After the ten complete audiometric tests there had been a 
mean improvement of about 3 dB, which improvement 
appeared to be continuing. The learning effect appears to be 
frequency dependent, being maximum around 1 kHz and falling 
off on either side of that, becoming negative at 4 kHz.115 The 
effect was slightly greater with introverts than with extraverts.
There have been occasions when the greater sensitivity of 
sweep frequency Bekesy audiometry in detecting high tone 
notches has been questioned. These have been when the 
Bekesy audiometer has ‘missed’ a 6 kHz notch that has been 
picked up with manual audiometry. In most, if not all, cases this 
has been because the manual audiometer has been equipped 
with Telephonies TDH-39 earphones, which have been cali­
brated (following correct procedures) according to ISO 389 on 
an IEC 303 coupler. The Bekesy audiometer has been equipped 
with Telephonies TDH-50 earphones. The common occurrence 
of 6 kHz notches is an artefact arising from a particular inter­
action between the IEC 303 coupler and the TDH-39, but not 
the TDH-50, earphone.20
Sweep frequency Bekesy audiometry may, however, miss high 
tone notches at higher attenuation rates (and therefore higher 
sweep speeds) that it would otherwise detect at lower rates.
Measurements of other responses
At a given frequency, the tracking width is primarily determined 
by the attenuation rate, for continuous test tones increasing 
from 4 to 9 dB for a 1 dB.s 1 rate to 10 to 30 dB for a 4 dB.s-1 
rate.300 Using an attenuation rate of 2.1 dB.s \ Jokinen297
observed that for both continuous or pulsed fixed frequency test 
tones, the width is greater for low than for higher frequencies, 
falling by about 30% over the range from 125 Hz to 8 kHz. 
Stephens115 confirmed this slight frequency dependence for 
pulsed fixed frequency test tones, the width falling from mean 
values of 6.5 dB at 250 Hz to 6 dB at 8 kHz. Tracking width is 
influenced both by reaction time301 and by personality factors.302
Earlier failures232,303 to observe abnormal auditory adaptation 
in retrocochlear lesions may well have been attributable to 
using instruments where the attenuation changed in steps of 
1 dB or more.272 A silent interval of less than 20 ms between 
successive short tones was sufficient to maintain a stable hori­
zontal trace in a patient who would exhibit abnormal auditory 
adaptation on continuous stimulation. Jerger’s instrument 
featured 25 mB attenuation changes, i.e. a virtually continuous 
attenuation change.
Classification of Bekesy audiograms according to the Jerger 
method shows little inter-observer variation.304 The poor 
performance of Bekesy audiometry in studies using clinical 
decision analysis 305 is almost certainly attributable to including 
Bekesy audiograms which have been obtained without reverse 
glide tones, contralateral noise application and suprathreshold 
recordings.
Hopkinson’s report306 that 48% of her 52 patients with 
conductive hearing loss showed Type V Jerger patterns points to 
the need, as she states, to define more precisely the criteria for 
this pattern class. Quantification of the continuous-pulsed 
threshold separation would appear to be one approach.
Factors influencing the threshold of uncomfortable loudness 
(TUL) have been studied at the National Physical Laboratory. 
Stephens258 found that the mean pulsed fixed frequency TUL 
for 25 naive, normally hearing adults was 105.7 dB HL, the 
corresponding value for a continuous fixed frequency test tone 
was 101.4 dB HL and for conventional 5-dB step manual 
audiometry, 93.4 dB HL. The TUL is influenced by both test 
anxiety and failure avoidance motivation.258,307
Influence of age 
Younger
‘I am testing five to seven year old children. I tested a four year 
old the other day who had a swing of only 20 about the thresh­
old as a mean ...’ (Reger in discussion of communication by 
Reger and Kos.234
One in twelve children show better thresholds for con­
tinuous test tones than for pulsed test tones, but this tendency 
decreases with age.308
Price and Falck309 stated that it is possible to obtain clini­
cally useful information with Bekesy audiometry from 98% of 
all subjects with a mental age of 7 years or more.
Older
Using fixed frequency test tones, Jokinen297 reported that ‘. .. 
switch button manipulation caused no difficulties even at 
advanced age: 12 of the subjects were over 70 and 2 over 80
  

The threshold of hearing 
233
years, and their performance’ was comparable to younger age 
groups. In young normal adults the ‘continuous and pulsed tone 
tracings were overlapping ... but in old age the pulsed tone 
tracing was clearly better than the steady tone threshold.’ The 
attenuation rate was 2.1 dB.s 1 in 25 mB steps; the tone pulse 
had a rise and fall time of 25 ms and a duty cycle of 50%.
Using sweep frequency test tones changing at 5 dB.s 1 in 
25 mB steps, Harbert and colleagues 310 had reported that for 
older people the tracking width was relatively constant as a 
function of frequency for pulsed test tones, but showed a steady 
decrease with increasing frequency for continuous test tones. 
There was no separation between continuous and pulsed test 
tone thresholds for younger adults but for older people there was 
a separation (pulsed better) which became greater with increas­
ing frequency, attaining an average difference of 5 dB at 8 kHz.
Other sources of variance
Rarely it has been observed during the course of hearing surveys 
that the subject has been responding to individual pulses 
instead of the ‘quietest sound’ that he could hear. On one 
occasion out of many thousands of tests a non-response was 
observed to be due to the patient pressing the retaining screw of 
the signalling switch instead of the button proper. Both of these 
observations point to the need for all self-recorded audiograms 
to be monitored by experienced staff.
Computerised statistical analyses; taxonometry
A variety of schemes for grouping threshold configurations has 
been proposed since Guild311 published his method for classify­
ing manual pure tone audiograms. Concomitant with the 
recent surge of interest in genetical auditory disorders there has 
been a corresponding upsurge of interest in these configura­
tions.312 But ‘pure tone audiometry may be insufficient’.313 
Moreover, the classification of threshold configurations remains 
at the best an intuitive, Gestalt approach.
These considerations therefore lead us not only to consid­
ering sweep frequency Bekesy audiometry but also to a more 
sophisticated numerical approach in line with Sokal and 
Sneath’s taxonometric one.314 Following this line, Job and his 
colleagues315 have applied a Hotelling principal component 
analysis316 to the threshold configurations of Bekesy audio­
grams. Three components were extracted and explained 70% of 
the total variance. The first component reflected the degree of 
hearing loss. The second and third reflected the different con­
figurations (asymmetry, shape). The use of cluster analysis317 
produced four main classes: normal, attributable to firearms, 
associated with ‘skin-diving and pressure problems’, and attrib­
utable to ‘heterogeneous pathologic problems with no apparent 
correlation to the army context.’318 The authors used a form of 
discriminant analysis 
’ 
to ‘correctly’ classify 93% of con­
figurations. Ozdamar and his colleagues321 reported a dynamic 
Bayesian procedure, which was applied to the behavioural 
testing of the hearing of young children. The method depends
on using an already accepted classification of audiometric 
configurations. It could be adapted to classifying Bekesy 
audiograms.
The classification of audiograms is a pattern recognition 
exercise. This leads to considering signal analysis techniques 
which treat the audiogram as a stochastic waveform. Conse­
quently, Chalabi and Souckova322 pointed to the type of 
mathematical analysis needed to classify the threshold patterns 
of sweep frequency Bekesy audiograms. The approach is to 
discard the notion of dividing any one audiogram into a number 
of principal segments where a classification procedure is carried 
out separately on each segment. Instead an audiogram is con­
sidered as a singleton within in its own stochastic nature. The 
problem is to determine an optimal mathematical strategy for 
discriminating between the different classes of audiograms in 
order to attach a statistical significance to each audiogram as 
being either a member of any one single class, the nth stage of 
a progressive condition, or the nth degree of severity of a con­
dition existing in varying degrees of severity. The mathematical 
strategies used orthogonal transformation based on the 
Karhunen-Loeve expansion. The optimal orthogonal expan­
sion basis functions were Chebyshev polynomials. The audio­
grams were smoothed using cubic spline interpolation. The 
analysis used orthogonal Householder transformation, Gauss- 
Markov theory, and Sturm-Liouville differential equation 
properties.
This signal statistical approach to classifying Bekesy audio­
grams could be applied to both fixed and sweep frequency and 
both threshold and suprathreshold trackings following both 
pulsed and continuous test tone stimulation, as well their 
separations. Nor should tracking width be forgotten.
The production of a Windows software application318 for 
the analysis and classification of Bekesy audiograms brings these 
exercises nearer to clinic usage.
It is both inevitable and desirable that the next generation 
of Bekesy type audiometers will make full use of technological 
developments, especially in computer science, that have 
emerged and progressed in the past half century. There will be 
greater control over stimulus parameters to maximise the value 
of each of various tests. A randomisation facility would dispose 
of the ‘predictability’ of the stimuli in current Bekesy audio­
meters. On line analysis of a number of subject responses will 
provide an immediate printout (or display on a monitor) for the 
clinician, occupational hygienist or research worker. To meet 
the constraints of clinical practice, algorithms will maximise 
the information to be derived in a given time-window. This 
customising facility could annul the main argument (speed) for 
using manual audiometry. All this will of course bring us into 
another programme of standardisation.
Conclusions
A large repertoire of methods for the examination of the thresh­
old of hearing is available. Different tests can demonstrate
  

234 
Audiology
different features of auditory sensitivity, and each with a differ- 
ent diagnostic value. Practical advice is given on analysing 
threshold data in order to avoid the many pitfalls. As the data 
presented in respect of the Factory ‘X’ litigation show it is 
imperative that medical examiners, at least in the UK, use 
controls drawn from their own contemporaneous and situation- 
specific clinical and audiometric experience.
Computerisation of audiometric testing, which began more 
than a quarter of a century ago323 and has continued but 
slowly324,325 should now flourish. Current developments in the 
mathematical and statistical sciences will now be able to 
exploit more fully the examination of the various features of 
thresholds of hearing using all audiometric techniques.
Acknowledgements
I am indebted to all who have read the manuscript for this 
chapter and provided most helpful and constructive comments.
No funding was either obtained or solicited for the data 
analyses in this chapter or for writing the chapter.
References
1. Bunch CC. Clinical Audiometry. St Louis: Mosby, 1943.
2. Hinchcliffe R. Threshold of hearing for random noise. ] Speech 
Hear Res 1961; 4: 3-9.
3. Martin M. Speech Audiometry, 2nd edn. London: Whurr, 1997.
4. Sivian LJ, White SD. On minimum audible sound fields. J Acoust 
Soc Am 1933; 4: 288-321.
5. Hirsh IJ. The Measurement of Hearing. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1952.
6. Stephens SDG. David Edward Hughes and his audiometer. J 
Laryngol Otol 1979; 93: 1-6.
7. Arlinger S (ed.). Manual of Practical Audiometry. London: Whurr, 
1990 (Vol. 1), 1991 (Vol. 2).
8. Wheeler LJ, Dickson EDD. The determination of the threshold of 
hearing. J Laryngol Otol 1952; 66: 379-95.
9. Dadson RS, King JH. A determination of the normal threshold of 
hearing and its relation to the standardization of audiometers. J 
Laryngol Otol 1952; 66: 366-78.
10. Dobie RA. Medical-Legal Evaluation of Hearing Loss. New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993.
11. Knight JJ, Coles RRA. Determination of the hearing threshold 
levels of naval recruits in terms of British and American standards. 
J Acoust Soc Am 1960; 32: 800-4.
12. Knight JJ. Normal hearing threshold determined by manual and 
self-recording techniques. J Acoust Soc Am 1966; 39: 1184-5.
13. US Public Health Service. National Health Survey, Bulletins in the 
Hearing Study Series. Washington: USPHS, 1938.
14. Hinchcliffe R. The threshold of hearing of a random sample rural 
population. A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1959; 50: 411-22.
15. Whittle LS, Robinson DW. British normal threshold of hearing. 
Nature 1961; 189: 617-18.
16. Whittle LS, Delany ME. Equivalent threshold sound-pressure lev­
els for the TDH39/MX41-AR earphone. ] Acoust Soc Am 1966; 
39: 1187-8.
17. Weissler PG. International standard reference zero for audiome­
ters. J Acoust Soc Am 1968; 44: 264-75.
18. Robinson DW. A Proposal for Audiometric Zero Referred to the IEC 
Artificial Ear. Acoustics Report Ac 65. Teddington: National 
Physical Laboratory, 1978.
19. Robinson DW, Shipton MS, Hinchcliffe R. Audiometric zero for 
air conduction. Audiology 1981; 20: 409-431.
20. Lutman ME, Qasem HYN. A source of audiometric notches at 6 
kHz. In: Prasher D, Luxon LM eds. Advances in Noise Research 
Series, Vol. 1. London: Whurr, 1997, pp. 170-6.
21. Dirks DD, Lybarger SF, Olsen WO, Billings BL. Bone conduction 
calibration—present status. ] Speech Hear Disord 1979; 44: 
143-55.
22. Robinson DW, Shipton MS. A standard determination of paired 
air and bone conduction thresholds under different masking noise 
conditions. Audiology 1982; 21: 61-82.
23. Haughton PM, Pardoe K. Normal pure tone thresholds for hearing 
by bone conduction. Br J Audiol 1981; 15: 113-21.
24. Richter U, Brinkmann K. Threshold of hearing by bone conduc­
tion— a contribution to international standardization. Scand 
Audiol 1981; 10: 235-7.
25. Brinkmann K, Richter U. Determination of the normal threshold 
of hearing by bone conduction using different types of bone vibra­
tors. Audiol Acoust 1983; 22: 62-85, 114-22.
26. Coles RRA, Lutman ME, Robinson DW. The limited accuracy of 
bone conduction audiometry: its significance in medicolegal 
assessments. J Laryngol Otol 1991; 105: 518-21.
27. http://www.ukas.org.
28. Schuknecht HF. Pathology of the Ear. Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
Harvard University Press, 1974.
29. Hinchcliffe R. The age function of hearing— aspects of the epi~ 
demiology. Acta Otolaryngol 1991; Suppl 476: 7-11.
30. Willott JF. Aging and the Auditory System. London: Whurr, 1991.
31. Kerr JFR, Wyllie AH, Currie AR. Apoptosis: a basic biological 
phenomenon with wide-ranging implications in tissue kinetics. Br 
J Cancer 1972; 26: 239-57.
32. Wyllie AH, Kerr JFR, Currie AR. Cell death: the significance of 
apoptosis. Int Rev Cytol 1980; 68: 251-306.
33. Raff M. Why are your cells waiting to kill themselves? MRC News 
1995; 28-30.
34. Usami S-I, Takumi Y, Fujita S, Shinkawa H, Hosokawa M. Cell 
death in the inner ear associated with aging is apoptosis? Brain Res 
1997; 747: 147-50.
35. Beasley WC. The general problem of deafness in the population. 
Laryngoscope 1940; 50: 856-905.
36. Hinchcliffe R. The pattern of the threshold of perception for hear­
ing and other special senses as a function of age. Gerontologia 1958; 
2:311-20.
37. Glorig A, Nixon J. Hearing loss as a function of age. Laryngoscope 
1962; 72: 1596-610.
38. Spoor A. Presbycusis values in relation to noise induced hearing 
loss. Int Audiol 1967; 6: 48-57.
  

The threshold of hearing 
235
39. Robinson DW, Sutton GJ. Age effect in hearing— a comparative 
analysis of published threshold data. Audiology 1979; 18: 320-34.
40. Pearson JCG. Prediction of presbycusis. J Soc Occup Med 1977; 27: 
125-33.
41. Rosenhall U, Jonsson R, Davis A, Parving A. Hearing in the ‘old- 
est old’ a cross-sectional collaborative study from three European 
countries. J Audiol Med 2000; 9: 43-52.
42. Delany ME, Whittle LS, Knox EC. A note on the use of self- 
recording audiometry with children. J Laryngol Otol 1966; 80: 
1135-43.
43. Roche AF, Siervogel RM, Himes JH, Johnson DL. Longitudinal 
study of human hearing: its relationship to noise and other factors. 
AMRL-TR-76-110, 1976.
44. Hinchcliffe R. The threshold of hearing as a function of age. Acus- 
tica 1959; 9: 303-8.
45. Robinson DW, Sutton GJ. Age effect in hearing— a comparative 
analysis of published threshold data. Audiology 1979; 18: 320-34.
46. Hinchcliffe R. Hypoacousies et bourdonnements: une perspective 
globale. Rev Laryngol 1993; 114: 93-101.
47. Hinchcliffe R, Jones WI. Hearing levels of a suburban Jamaican 
population. Int Audiol 1968; 7: 239-58.
48. Hinchcliffe R, Osuntokun BO, Adeuja AOG. Hearing levels in 
Nigerian ataxic neuropathy. Audiology 1972; 11: 218-30.
49. Karlsmose B, Lauritzen T, Engberg M, Parving A. A five-year lon­
gitudinal study of hearing in a Danish rural population aged 31-50 
years. Br J Audiol 2000; 34: 42-55.
50. Atherley GRC. The extent and severity of occupational deafness 
among men employed as drop forgers. In: Taylor W, ed. Disorders 
of Auditory Function. London: Academic Press, 1973: 159-66.
51. Department of Health and Society Security. Occupational Deaf­
ness. Report by the Industrial Injuries Advisory Council in accor­
dance with Section 62 of the National Insurance (Industrial 
Injuries) Act 1965 on the question whether there are degrees of 
hearing loss due to noise which satisfy the conditions for prescrip­
tion under the Act. Cmnd 5461. London: HMSO, 1973.
52. Merluzzi F, Hinchcliffe R. Threshold of subjective auditory handi­
cap. Audiology 1973; 12: 65-9.
53. Armitage P. Statistical Methods in Medical Research. Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1973.
54. Department of Health and Social Security. Notes on Occupational 
Deafness ND1. London: HMSO, 1974.
55. World Health Organization. International Classification of Impair­
ments, Disabilities, and Handicaps—A Manual of Classification 
Relating to the Consequences of Disease. Geneva: WHO, 1980.
56. World Health Organization. Conclusions and Recommendations of 
First Informal Consultation on Future Programme Developments for 
the Prevention of Deafness and Hearing Impairment. Geneva: WHO, 
1997.
57. US Department of Labor— Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration. Occupational noise exposure: hearing conserva­
tion amendment. Fed Reg 1981; 46(11): 4078-179.
58. British Society of Audiology. Descriptions for pure-tone audio­
grams. Br J Audiol 1988; 22: 123.
59. Robinson DW, Wilkins PA, Thyer NJ, Lawes JF. Auditory Impair­
ment and the Onset of Disability and Handicap in Noise-induced
Hearing Loss. ISVR Technical Report No. 126. Southampton: 
University of Southampton, 1984.
60. Abernathy CM, Hamm RM. Surgical Intuition. Philadelphia, PA: 
Hanley and Belfus, 1994.
61. Abernathy CM, Hamm RM. Surgical Scripts. Philadelphia, PA: 
Hanley and Belfus, 1994.
62. Dunea G. Diagnosing trees and men. BMJ 1997; 315: 434.
63. Coles RRA, Priede VM. Nonorganic overlay in noise-induced 
hearing loss. Proc R Soc Med 1971; 64: 194-9.
64. Harris DA. Rapid and simple technique for detection of non- 
organic hearing loss. Arch Otolaryngol 1958; 68: 758-60.
65. Kerr AG, Gillespie WJ, Easton JM. Deafness: a simple test for 
malingering. Br J Audiol 1975; 9: 24-6.
66. Cooper J, Lightfoot G. A modified pure-tone audiometric tech­
nique for medico-legal assessment. Br J Audiol 2000; 34: 37-46.
67. Luxon LM. The clinical diagnosis of noise-induced hearing loss. 
In Prasher D, Luxon LM, eds. Advances in Noise Research Series, 
Vol. 1. London: Whurr, 1998, pp. 83-113.
68. Hinchcliffe R, Littler TS. The detection and measurement of con­
ductive deafness. J Laryngol Otol 1961; 75: 201-15.
69. Golabek W, Stephens SDG. Some tuning fork tests revisited. Clin 
Otolaryngol 1980; 4: 421-30.
70. Sheehy JL, Gardner G, Hambley WM. Tuning fork tests in mod­
em otology. Arch Otolaryngol 1971; 94: 132-8.
71. Dobie RA, Archer RJ. Results of otologic referrals in an industrial 
hearing conservation program. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1981; 
89: 294-301.
72. Wolpert L. The Unnatural Nature of Science. London: Faber and 
Faber, 1992.
73. Hinchcliffe R. Hearing threshold level and its component parts. 
In: Rossi G, ed. Proceedings of the International Advanced Research 
Workshop: 1975-1995: Man and Environmental Noise Twenty Years 
After. Turin: Minerva Medica, 1995.
74. Hinchcliffe R. Effects of noise on hearing— aspects of assessment: 
guidelines for giving advice to expert witnesses. J Audiol Med 
2000; 9: 1-18.
75. DHSS. Occupational Deafness. Cmnd 5461. London: HMSO, 
1973: para. 31.
76. Davis H, Silverman SR. Hearing and Deafness. New York: Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, 1978.
77. Hinchcliffe R. Clinical tests of auditory function in the adult and 
in the schoolchild. In: Beagley HA ed. Audiology and Audiological 
Medicine, Vol. 1. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981: 320-64.
78. Klingon GH, Bontecou DC. Localisation in auditory space. Neu­
rology 1966; 16: 879-86.
79. S4>hoel T. Acute suppurative otitis media in children 0-10 years 
of age. Acta Otolaryngol 1956; 46: 422-38.
80. King PF. Some imperfections of the free-field voice tests. J Laryn­
gol Otol 1953; 67: 358-64.
81. Feldmann H. Die Geschichte der Stimmgabel. Teil II: Die 
Entwicklung der klassischen Versuche nach Weber, Rinne und 
Schwabach. Laryngorhinootol 1997; 76: 318-26.
82. Schulze FA. Monochord zur Bestimmung der oberem Horgrenze 
und der Perzeptionsfahigkeit des Ohres fur sehr hohe Tone. Z 
Ohrenheilkunde 1908; 56: 17-173.
  

236 
Audiology
83. Burckhardt>Merian A. Vergleichende Ergebnisse verschiedenar^ 
tiger Horpriifung. Arch Ohren Nasen Kehlkopfheilkunde 1885; 22: 
177-94.
84. Lutman ME. Diagnostic audiometry. In: Stephens D, ed. Scott- 
Brown’s Otolaryngology, 6th edn, Vol. 2 Adult Audiology. London: 
Butterworth-Heinemann, 1997: 2/12/1-2/18/31.
85. Beagley HA. The role of electrophysiological tests in the diagno­
sis of nonorganic hearing loss. Audiology 1973; 12: 470-80.
86. Sayers BMcA, Beagley HA, Ross AJ. Auditory evoked potentials 
of cortical origin. In: HA Beagley, ed. Auditory Investigation: The 
Scientific and Technological Basis. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979, 
pp. 489-506.
87. Coles RRA, Mason SM. The results of cortical electric response 
audiometry in medicolegal investigations. Br J Audiol 1984; 18: 
71-8.
88. Prasher D, Mula M, Luxon LM. Cortical evoked potential crite­
ria in the objective assessment of auditory threshold: a compari­
son of noise induced hearing loss with Meniere’s disease. J 
Laryngol Otol 1993; 107: 780-6.
89. Knight JJ, Littler TS. The technique of speech audiometry and a 
simple speech audiometer with masking generator for clinical 
use. J Laryngol Otol 1953; 67: 248-65.
90. Priede VM, Coles RRA. Speech discrimination tests in investi­
gation of sensorineural hearing loss. J Laryngol Otol 1976; 90: 
1081-92.
91. Hood JD. Principles and practice of bone conduction audiometry. 
Laryngoscope 1960; 70: 1211-28.
92. Lightfoot GR. Air-borne radiation from bone-conduction trans­
ducers. Br J Audiol 1979; 13: 53-6.
93. Bell I, Goodsell S, Thornton ARD. A brief communication on 
bone conduction artefacts. Br J Audiol 1980; 14: 73-5.
94. Shipton MS, John AJ, Robinson DW. Air-radiated sound from 
bone vibration transducers and its implications for bone conduc­
tion audiometry. Br J Audiol 1980; 13: 53-6.
95. Lightfoot GR, Hughes JB. Bone conduction errors at high fre­
quencies: implications for clinical and medico-legal practice. J 
Laryngol Otol 1993; 107: 305-8.
96. Harkrider AW, Martin FN. Quantifying air-conducted acoustic 
radiation from the bone-conduction vibrator. J Am A cad Audiol 
1998; 9: 410-16.
97. Anon. Recommended procedures for pure-tone audiometry using 
a manually operated instrument. Br ] Audiol 1981; 15: 213-16.
98. Anon. Recommendations for masking in pure tone audiometry. 
B r] Audiol 1986; 20: 307-14.
99. Meyer-Bisch C. Audioscan: a high definition audiometry tech­
nique based on constant-level frequency sweeps— a new method 
with new hearing indicators. Audiology 1996; 35: 63-72.
100. McMurray RF, Rudmose W. An automatic audiometer for indus­
trial medicine. Noise Control 1956; 2: 33-6.
101. Rice CG, Coles RRA. Normal threshold of hearing for pure 
tones by earphone listening with a self-recording audiometric 
technique. J Acoust Soc Am 1966; 39: 1185-7.
102. Robinson DW, Whittle LS. A comparison of self-recording and 
manual audiometry: some systematic effects shown by unprac­
tised subjects. ] Sound Vibration 1973; 26: 41-62.
103. Hinchcliffe R. Gyorgy Bekesy (1899-1972) 50 years of Bekesy 
audiometry (1947-97). ] Audiol Med 1999; 8: 72-91.
104. Kryter KD. The Handbook of Hearing and the Effects of Noise. San 
Diego: Academic Press, 1994.
105. Alberti PW. Noise and the ear. In: Stephens D, ed. Scott-Brown’s 
Otolaryngology, 6th edn. Vol. 2 Adult Audiology. London: Butter- 
worth-Heinemann, 1997: 2/11/1-2/11/34.
106. Glorig A. Noise and Your Ear. New York: Grune and Stratton, 
1958.
107. Davis AC, Fortnum HM, Coles RRA, Haggard MP, Lutman ME. 
Damage to Hearing Arising from Leisure Noise: A Review of the Lit­
erature. London: HSE, 1985.
108. Clark WW. Noise exposure from leisure activities: a review. J 
Acoust Soc Am 1991; 90: 175-81.
109. Coles RRA, Garinther GR, Hodge DC, Rice CG. Hazardous 
exposure to impulse noise. ] Acoust Soc Am 1968; 43: 336-43.
110. Hinchcliffe R. Noise hazards to the general population: hearing 
surveys reassessed. J Audiol Med 1999; 8: 113-21.
111. Robinson DW (ed.). Occupational Hearing Loss. London: Acade­
mic Press, 1971.
112. Sataloff RT, Sataloff J. Occupational Hearing Loss. New York: 
Dekker, 1993.
113. Steinberg JC, Montgomery HC, Gardner MB. Results of the 
World’s Fair Hearing Tests. J Acoust Soc Am 1940; 12: 291-301.
114. Leijon A. Quantization error in clinical pure-tone audiometry. 
Scand Audiol 1992; 21: 103-8.
115. Stephens SDG. Some individual factors influencing audiometric 
performance. In: Robinson DW, ed. Occupational Hearing Loss. 
London: Academic Press, 1971: 109-20.
116. Dancer A, Buck K, Parmentier G, Hamer YP. The specific prob­
lems of noise in military life. In: Prasher D, Luxon LM eds. 
Advances in Noise Research Series, Vol. 1. London: Whurr, 1998: 
139-56.
117. Coles RRA, Rice CG. Auditory hazards of sports guns. Laryngo­
scope 1966; 76: 1728-31.
118. Prosser S, Tartari MC, Arslan E. Hearing loss in sports hunters 
exposed to occupational noise. B rJ Audiol 1988; 22: 85-91.
119. Berry BF. Ambient Noise Limits for Audiometry. NPL Acoustics 
Report Ac 60 (2nd). Teddington: National Physical Laboratory, 
1973.
120. Bryan ME, Parbrook HD, Tempest W. A note on quiet threshold 
shift in the absence of noise. J Sound Vibration 1965; 2: 147-9.
121. Feam RW, Hanson DR. Audiometric zero for air conduction 
using manual audiometry. BrJ Audiol 1983; 17: 87-90.
122. Pyykko I, Starck J, Farkkila M, Hoikkala M, Kohonen Ol, Nur- 
minen M. Hand-arm vibration in the aetiology of hearing loss in 
lumberjacks. Br J Indust Med 1981; 38: 281-9.
123. Morata TC, Engel T, Durao A et al. Hearing loss from combined 
exposures among petroleum refinery workers. Scand Audiol 1997; 
26: 141-9.
124- Morata TC, Fiorini AC, Fischer FM et al. Toluene-induced hear­
ing loss among rotogravure printing workers. Scand ] Work Envi­
ronment Health 1997; 23: 289-98.
125. Burkhard MD, Corliss ELR. The response of earphones in ears 
and couplers. J Acoust Soc Am 1954; 26: 679-85.
  

The threshold of hearing 
237
126. Delany ME. The acoustical impedance of human ears. J Sound 
Vibration 1964; 1: 455-67.
127. Erber NP. Variables that influence sound pressures generated in 
the ear canal by an audiometric earphone. J Acoust Soc Am 1968; 
44: 555-62.
128. Ithell AH. The measurement of the acoustical input impedance 
of human ears. Acustica 1963; 13: 140-5.
129. Ithell AH. A determination of the acoustical input impedance 
characteristics of human ears. Acustica 1963; 13: 311-14.
130. Zwislocki J. Some measurements of the impedance at the 
eardrum. J Acoust Soc Am 1957; 29: 349-56.
131. Royal Society of Medicine. Report of the Committee appointed by 
the Section of Otology for the Consideration of Hearing Tests. London: 
Longmans Green, 1932.
132. Ventry IM, Chaiklin JB, Boyle WE Collapse of the ear canal dur- 
ing audiometry. Arch Otolaryngol 1961; 73: 727-31.
133. Coles RRA. External meatus closure by audiometer earphone. 
J Speech Hear Disord 1967; 32: 296-7.
134. Chaiklin JB, McClellan ME. Audiometric management of col- 
lapsible ear canals. Arch Otolaryngol 1971; 93: 397-407.
135. Hickling S. Studies on the reliability of auditory threshold val­
ues. J Auditory Res 1966; 6: 39-46.
136. Chamberlain D. Occupational deafness: audiometric observations 
on aural fatigue and recovery. Arch Otolaryngol 1942; 35:595-602.
137. Hirsh IJ, Ward WD. Recovery of the auditory threshold after 
strong acoustic stimulation. J Acoust Soc Am 1952; 24: 131-41.
138. Atherley GRC. Monday morning auditory threshold in weavers. 
B rJ Indust Med 1964; 21: 150-4.
139. Gallo R, Glorig A. Permanent threshold shift changes produced 
by noise exposure and aging. Am Indust Hygiene Assoc J 1964; 25: 
237-45.
140. Bums W, Robinson DW. Hearing and Noise in Industry. London: 
HMSO, 1970.
141. Robinson DW. Characteristics of noise-induced hearing loss. In 
Henderson D, Hamernik RP, Dosanjh DS, Mills JH eds. Effects of 
Noise on Hearing. New York: Raven, 1976: 383-94.
142. Davis A. Hearing in Adults. London: Whurr, 1995.
143. Ward WD, Glorig A, Sklar DL. Susceptibility and sex. J Acoust 
Soc Am 1959; 31: 1138.
144. Jerger J, Chmiel R, Stach B, Spretnjak M. Gender affects audio­
metric shape in presbyacusis. J Am Acad Audiol 1993; 4: 42-9.
145. Gatehouse S, Lowe GDO. Whole blood viscosity and red cell fil- 
terability as factors in sensorineural hearing impairments in the 
elderly. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1991; Suppl. 476: 37-43.
146. Tota G, Bocci G. L’importanza del colore dell’iride nella valu- 
tazione della resistenza dell’udito all’affaticamento. Riv Otoneu- 
rooftalmol 1967; 43: 183-92.
147. Hood JD, Poole JP, Freedman L. The influence of eye colour upon 
temporary threshold shift. Audiology 1976; 15: 449-64.
148. Carter NL. Eye colour and susceptibility to noise-induced per­
manent threshold shift. Audiology 1980; 19: 86-93.
149. Royster LH, Driscoll DP, Thomas WG, Royster JD. Age effect 
hearing levels for a black nonindustrial noise exposed population 
(ninep). Am Indust Hygiene Assoc J 1980; 41: 113-19.
150. Royster LH, Royster JD, Thomas WG. Representative hearing
levels by race and sex in North Carolina industry. J Acoust Soc 
Am 1980; 68: 551-66.
151. Thomas GB, Williams CE, Hoger JM. Some nonauditory corre­
lates of the hearing threshold levels of an aviation noise-exposed 
population. Aviation Space Environ Med 1981; 52: 531-6.
152. Barrenas M-L. Pigmentation and Noise-induced Hearing Loss. 
Goteborg: Sahlgren’s University Hospital, 1996.
153. Laird DA. Acuity of hearing. Science. 1935; 82: 152-3.
154. Robinson DW, Lawton BW, Rice CG. Occupational Hearing Loss 
from Low-level Noise. HSE Contract Research Report No. 
68/1994. Southampton: Institute of Sound and Vibration 
Research, University of Southampton, 1994.
155. Lutman ME, Spencer HS. Occupational noise and demographic 
factors in hearing. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1991; Suppl. 476: 
74-84.
156. Robinson DW, Lawton BW. Concept of the notional person in 
the assessment of hearing disability. B rJ Audiol 1996; 30: 45-54.
157. Stephens SDG. Audiometers from Hughes to modem times. B rJ 
Audiol 1979; 13: 17-23.
158. Stephens SDG. The British medical profession and the first 
audiometers. J Laryngol Otol 1981; 95: 1223-35.
159. Hughes DE. On an induction-current balance and experimental 
researches made therewith. Proc Royal Soc London 1879; 29: 
56-65.
160. Gradenigo G. Ueber ein neues elektrisches Akumetermodell1. 
Archiv fur Ohren-, Nasen- und Kehlkopfheilkunde 1890; 30: 240-5.
161. Urbanschitsch V. Zwei neue Hormessapparate2. Monatschift fiir 
Ohrenheilkunde 1914; 48: 561-8.
162. Richardson BW. Some researches with Professor Hughes’ new 
instrument for the measurement of hearing; the audiometer. Proc 
Royal Soc London 1879; 29: 65-70.
163. Phillips WC. Diseases of the Ear, Nose and Throat. 6th edition. 
Philadelphia: Davis, 1922.
164. Mahoney CF, Luxon LM. Misdiagnosis of hearing loss due to ear 
canal collapse: a report of two cases. J Laryngol Otol 1996; 110: 
561-6.
165. Medical Research Council. Hearing Aids and Audiometers. Com­
mittee on Electro-acoustics, Medical Research Council. Special 
Report Series No. 261. London: HMSO, 1947.
166. Beatty RT. Hearing in Man and Animals. London: Bell and Sons, 
1932.
167. Bekesy G von, Rosenblith. The mechanical properties of the ear. 
Ch 27 in SS Stevens (Ed). Handbook of Experimental Psychology. 
New York: John Wiley, 1951. pp 1075-115.
168. Waetzmann E. Ein erb-biologisches Problem am menschlichen 
Gehororgan3. Nachrichtung Gesellschaft Wissenschaft Gottingen 
1935; 1: 157-61.
169. Waetzmann E. Ueber Symmetrie- und Erblichkeitsfragen am 
menschlichen Gehororgan . Akustiche Zeitung 1936; 1: 155-9.
1 Concerning a new electrical acoumeter [audiometer].
2 Two new audiometers.
3 Heredity and the organ of hearing in man.
4 Questions of symmetry and heredity in the human auditory organ.
  

238 
Audiology
170. Robinson DW. Variability in the Realization of the Audiometric 
Zero. Ann Occupational Hygiene 1960; 2: 107-26.
171. Gradenigo G. Studien und Vorschlage zur Messung der 
Horscharfe5. Archiv fiir Ohrenheilkunde 1912; 87: 123-33.
172. Licklider JCR. Basic correlates of the auditory stimulus. Ch 25 in 
SS Stevens (Ed). Handbook of Experimental Psychology. New York: 
John Wiley, 1951. pp 985-1039.
173. Brogden WJ, Miller GA. Physiological noise generated under 
earphone cushions. J Acoustic Soc Am 1947; 19: 620-3.
174- Bekesy G von. Ueber die Horschwelle und Fiihlgrenze langsamer 
sinusformiger Luftdruckschwankungen6. Annalen die Physik 1936; 
26: 554-66.
175. Waetzmann E, Keibs, L. Horschwellenbestimmungen mit dem 
Thermophon und Messungen am Trommelfell. A nnalen die 
Physik 1936; 26: 141-4.
176. Stephens SDG. Clinical Audiometry. Ch. 15 in HA Beagley (Ed) 
Audiology and Audiological Medicine. Volume 2. Oxford: OUP, 
1981. pp 365-90.
177. Haughton PM. Acoustics for Audiologists. New York: Academic 
Press, 2002.
178. Wimberly M. An Application of Electromagnetics: The 
Loudspeaker 
http://ece.gmu.edu/~pceperle/st3/ece305~ 1 .htm 
(accessed 10 October 2002)
179. Barany R. Larmapparat zum Nachweis der einseitegen Taubheit8. 
Verhandlung Deutsche Otobgische Gesellschaft 1908; 84-5.
180. Aubry M, Giraud JC. Le probleme de l’assourdissement dans 
l’examen de Paudition . Annales d’Oto-Laryngologie 1939; 4: 
333-48.
181. Studebaker GA. Clinical masking of air- and bone-conducted 
stimuli. J Speech Hear Disord 1963; 29: 23-35.
182. Wegel RL, Lane CE. The auditory masking of one pure tone by 
another and its probable relation to the dynamics of the inner 
ear. Phys Rev 1924; 23: 268-85.
183. Hawkins JE Jr, Stevens SS. The masking of pure tones and of 
speech by noise. J Acoustic Soc Am 1950; 22: 6-13.
184. Fletcher H. Auditory patterns. Rev Modern Phys 1940; 12: 47-65.
185. Scharf B. Critical bands. In: JV Tobias (Ed). Foundations of 
Modem Auditory Theory. Volume 1. New York: Academic Press, 
1970. Pp 157-202.
186. Chaiklin JB, Ventry IM. The efficiency of audiometric measures 
used to identify functional hearing loss. J Auditory Res 1965; 5: 
196-211.
187. Haughton PM, Lewsley A, Wilson M,D Williams RG. A Forced- 
Choice Procedure to Detect Feigned or Exaggerated Hearing 
Loss. BrJ Audiol 1979; 13: 135-8
188. Niemeyer W, Sesterhenn G. Calculating the hearing threshold 
from the stapedius reflex threshold for different sound stimuli. 
Audiology 1974; 13: 421-7.
189. Jerger J, Burney P, Maudlin L, Crump B. Predicting hearing loss 
from the acoustic reflex. J Speech Hearing Disord 1974; 96:513-23.
190. Kemp DT. Evidence for mechanical nonlinearity and frequency 
selective wave amplification in the cochlea. Arch Oto-Rhino- 
Laryngol 1979; 224: 37-45.
191. Stephens D, Orzan E. Pioneers of audiological medicine: 
Giuseppe Gradenigo (1857-1926). J Audiol Med 1997; 6: 59-61.
192. Hood JD. The principles and practice of bone conduction 
audiometry. J Royal Soc Med 1957; 50: 689-97.
193. Bekesy G von. Zur theorie des Horens bei der Schallaufnahme 
durch Knochenleitung10. A nnalen die Physik 1932; 13: 111-36.
194. Bekesy G von. Ueber die Schallausbreitung bei Knochen­
leitung11. Zeitschrift fiir Hals- Nas, -Ohrenheilkunde 1941; 47: 
430-42.
195. Bekesy G von. Vibration of the head in a sound field and its role 
in hearing by bone conduction. J Acoustic Soc Am 1948; 20: 
749-60.
196. Barany E. Ueber die Bedeutung der Knochenleitung fiir das 
horen von Luftschall12. Acta otoAaryngol 1935; 22: 229-33.
197. Barany E. A contribution to the physiology of bone conduction. 
Acta oto-laryngol 1938, Supplement 26, pp 1-223.
198. Barany E. New points of view on the problem of bone conduc­
tion. Acta oto-laryngol 1940; 28: 393-9.
199. Allen GW, Fernandez C. The mechanism of bone conduction. 
Ann Otology, Rhinol Laryngol 1960; 69: 5-29.
200. Tonndorf J, Campbell RA, Bernstein L, Reneau JP. Quantitative 
evaluation of bone conduction components in cats. Acta oto- 
laryngol 1966; Supplement 213 pp 10-38.
201. Tonndorf J. Bone conduction. Ch 2 in Keidel WD, Neff W (Eds) 
Handbook of Sensory Physiology Vol 3 Berlin: Springer, 1976.
202. von Helmholtz H. Ueber die Mechanik der Gehorknochelchen 
und des Trommelfels13. Pfliigers A rchiv fiif gesampte Physiologie 
1868; 1: 1-60.
203. Carhart R. Clinical application of bone conduction. Arch Oto­
laryngol 1950; 51: 798-807.
204. Watson PB, Gengel RW, Hirsh IJ. Effects of vibrator types and 
their placement on bone-conduction threshold measurements. 
J Acoustic Soc Am 1967; 41: 788-92.
205. Bekesy G von. Ueber die piezoelektrische Messung der absoluten 
Horschwelle bei Knochenleitung . Akustiche Zeitung 1939; 4: 
113-25;
206. Link R, Zwislocki J. Audiometrische Knockenleitungsunter- 
suchungen15. Zeitschrift fiir Ohrenheilkunde 1951; 160: 347-57.
5 Studies [on] and proposals [for] the measurement of hearing sensitivity.
6 Concerning the thresholds of hearing and feeling for slow sinusoidal 
pressure variations.
7 The determination of auditory thresholds by means of the thermo­
phone; impedance measurements on the tympanic membrane.
8 A noise device for proving unilateral deafness.
9 The problem of masking (the contralateral ear) in the examination
of hearing.
10 The theory of hearing applied to sound perception through bone 
conduction.
11 On the transmission of sound by bone conduction.
12 The significance of bone conduction for air conduction.
13 The mechanics of the auditory ossicles and the eardrum
14 Determination of the absolute threshold for bone conduction by 
piezoelectric measurements.
15 Audiometric investigation of bone conduction.
  

The threshold of hearing 
239
207. Hart C, Naunton R. Frontal bone conduction tests in clinical 
audiometry. Laryngoscope 1961; 71: 24-9.
208. Dirks D, Malmquist C. Comparison of frontal and mastoid bone 
conduction thresholds in various conduction lesions. J Speech 
Hearing Res 1969; 12: 725-46.
209. Watson NA. Limits of audition for bone-conduction. J Acoustic 
Soc Am 1938; 9: 294-300.
210. Nilo ER. The relation of vibrator surface area and static applica­
tion force to the vibrator-to-head coupling. J Speech Hearing Res 
1968; 11: 805-10.
211. Bekesy G von. Ueber die piezoelektrische Messung der absoluten 
Horschwelle bei Knochenleitung16. Akustiche Zeitung 1939; 4: 
113-25.
212. Harris JD, Haines HL, Myers CK. A helmet-held bone conduc­
tion vibrator. Laryngoscope 1953; 998-1007.
213. Konig E. Les variations de la conduction osseuse en fonction 
de la force de pression exercee sur la vibrateur17. Proceedings of 
the 2nd Congress of the International Society of Audiology, Paris, 
1955.
214. Whittle LS. A determination of the normal threshold of hearing 
by bone conduction. J Sound Vibration 1965; 2: 227-48.
215. Boothroyd A, Cawkwell S. Vibrotactile thresholds in pure tone 
audiometry. Acta otoAaryngol 1970; 69; 381-7.
216. Rainville MJ. Nouvelle methode d’assourdissement pour le revele 
des courbes de conduction osseuse18. Journal frangais d’otorhino- 
laryngologie 1955; 4: 851-8.
217. Jerger J, Tillman T. A new method for the clinical determination 
of sensorineural acuity level. (SAL). Arch Otolaryngol 1960; 71: 
948-53.
218. Lightfoot C. The M-R test of bone conduction. Laryngoscope 
1960; 70; 1552-9.
219. Tillman T. The assessment of sensorineural acuity. In: B Graham 
(Ed). Sensorineural hearing processes and disorder. Boston: Little, 
Brown and Co., 1967.
220. Wheatstone C. Experiments in audition. Quarterly Journal of 
Science, Literature and Arts 1827 pp 67-72.
221. Bing A. Ein neuer Stimmgabelversuch19. Wiener medizinisch Blatt 
1891; 14: 637-8.
222. Koyter (or Coiter) De Auditus Instrumento. Groningen, 1572.
223. Aubry M, Giraud JC. Etude de la conduction osseuse . Presse 
medicale 1939; 47: 653-5.
224. Pomeroy OD. Diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the ear. New 
York: Appleton, 1883. at p 337.
225. Hallpike CS. Suggested graphic method of representing the 
tuning fork tests. J Laryngol Otol 1927; 32: 322-7.
16 Determination of the absolute threshold for bone conduction by 
piezoelectric measurements.
17 Variations in bone conduction as a function of the force applied to 
the vibrator.
18 New method of masking for the determination of bone conduction 
curves.
19 A new tuning fork test.
20 A study of bone conduction.
226. Schwabach P. Ueber den Werth des Rinne’schen Versuches fur 
die Diagnostik des Gehorkrankheiten21. Zeitschrift fiir Ohren­
heilkunde 1885; 14: 61-148.
227. Kelley NH, Reger SN. The effect of binaural occlusion of the 
external auditory meati on the sensitivity of the normal ear for 
bone conducted sound. J Exp Psych 1937; 21: 211-17.
228. Sullivan JA, Gotlieb CC, Hodges WE. Shifts of bone conduction 
threshold on occlusion of the external ear canal. Laryngoscope 
1947; 57: 690-703.
229. Dirks D, Swindeman J. The variability of occluded and unoc­
cluded bone conduction thresholds. J Speech Hearing Res 1967; 
10: 232-49.
230. Hodgson WR, Tillman T. Reliability of bone conduction occlu­
sion effects in normals. J Auditory Res 1966; 6: 141-53.
231. Bekesy G von. A new audiometer. Acta oto-laryngol (Stockholm) 
1947; 35:411.
232. Lundborg T. Diagnostic problems concerning acoustic neuromas. 
Acta oto-laryngol (Stockholm) Supplement 1952; 99, 1-110.
233. Reger SN. A clinical and research version of the Bekesy 
audiometer. Laryngoscope 1952; 62: 1333-51.
234. Reger SN, Kos CM. Clinical measurements and implications of 
recruitment. Ann Otol, Rhinol Laryngol 1952; 61: 810-23.
235. Hinchcliffe R. Examen otoneurologique pour le diagnostic des 
neurinomes acoustiques. Acta oto-rhino-laryngologica belgica 1971; 
2 5 :770-83.
236. Priede VM, Coles RRA. Masking of the non-test ear in tone 
decay, Bekesy audiometry, and SISI tests. J Laryngol Otol 1975; 
89: 227-36.
237. Jerger J, Herer G. An unexpected dividend in Bekesy audiome­
try. J Speech Hearing Disord 1961; 26: 390-1.
238. Rintelman WF, Carhart R. Loudness tracking by normal hearers 
via Bekesy audiometer. J Speech Hearing Res 1964; 7: 79-93.
239. Stein L. Some observations on type V Bekesy tracings. J Speech 
Hearing Res 1963; 6: 339-48.
240. Istre CO, Burton M. Automatic audiometry for detecting malin­
gering. Arch Otolaryngol 1969; 90: 326-32.
241. Reger SN, Reneau J, Watson JE. Quantitative evaluation of the 
Stenger test. Int Audiol. 1963; 2: 144-7.
242. Cheesman AD, Stephens SDG. A new method for the detection 
of functional hearing loss. Charing Cross Hospital Gazette 1965; 
63: vii-xi.
243. Watson JE, Voots RJ. Clinical application of the Reger modifica­
tion of the Stenger test. Int Audiol. 1965; 4: 149-53.
244. Hood WH, Campbell RA, Hutton CL. An evaluation of the 
Bekesy ascending descending gap. J Speech Hearing Res 1964; 7: 
123-32.
245. Hattler KW. Lengthened-off time: a self-recording screening 
device for nonorganicity. J Speech Hearing Disord 1970; 35: 
113-22.
246. Chaiklin JB. A descending LOT-Bekesy screening test for func­
tional hearing loss. J Speech Hearing Disord 1990; 55: 67-74.
21 Concerning the worth of Rinne’s tests for the diagnosis of hearing
disorders.
  

240 
Audiology
247. Dix MR, Hallpike CS, Hood JD. Observations upon the loudness 
recruitment phenomenon, with especial reference to the differ- 
ential diagnosis of disorders of the internal ear and VIII nerve. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine 1948; 41: 516-26.
248. Fowler EP. A method for the early detection of otosclerosis. Arch 
Otolaryngol 1936; 24: 731-41.
249. Fowler EP. The diagnosis of diseases of the neural mechanism of 
hearing by the aid of sounds well above threshold. Trans Am Otol 
Soc 1937; 27: 207-19.
250. Harbert F,D Young IM. Threshold auditory adaptation. J Auditory 
Res 1962; 2: 229-46.
251. Bilger RC. Some parameters of fixed frequency Bekesy audiome­
try. J Speech Hearing Res 1965; 8: 85-95.
252. Melnick W. Comfort level and loudness matching for continuous 
and interrupted signals. J Speech Hearing Res 1967; 10: 99-109.
253. Jerger J, Jerger S. Diagnostic value of Bekesy comfortable loud­
ness tracings. Arch Otolaryngol1974; 99: 351-60.
254- Dancer JE. Excursion size of Bekesy tracings of continuous and 
interrupted tones at threshold and at most comfortable loudness 
in cochlear-impaired ears. J Auditory Res 1983; 23: 72-6.
255. Reger SN. Differences in loudness response of the normal and 
hard-of-hearing ear at intensity levels slightly above the thresh­
old. Ann Otol, Rhinol Laryngol 1936; 45: 1029-39.
256. Watson NA. Certain fundamental principles in prescribing and 
fitting hearing aids. Laryngoscope 1944; 54: 531-8.
257. Hood JD, Poole JP. Tolerable limit of loudness: its clinical and 
physiological significance. J Acoustic Soc Aml966; 40: 47-53.
258. Stephens SDG. Studies on the uncomfortable loudness level. 
Sound 1970; 4: 20-5.
259. Tsuiki T, Sakamoto S, Homma T, Numakura M, Aizawa H, 
Ishimoda M. Loudness Tracking for Supra-threshold Levels. Pro­
ceedings of Xth Annual Congress of Japan Audiological Society, 
Kyoto 19-20 October 1965; pp 7-10.
260. Kos CM. Auditory function as related to a complaint of dizziness. 
Laryngoscope 1955; 65: 711-21.
261. McLay K. The place of the Bekesy audiometer in clinical 
audiometry. J Laryngol Otol 1959; 73: 460-5.
262. Rose DE. Some effects and case histories of reversed frequency 
sweep in Bekesy audiometry. J Auditory Res 1962; 2: 267-78.
263. Harbert F, Young IM. Clinical application of Bekesy audiometry. 
Laryngoscope 1968; 78: 487-97.
264. Karja J, Palva A. Reverse frequency-sweep Bekesy audiometry. 
Acta oto-laryngol 263 (suppl), 1970; pp 225-8.
265. Dirks DD, Norris JD. Shifts in auditory thresholds produced by 
ipsilateral and contralateral maskers at low-intensity levels. 
J Acoustic Soc Am 1966; 40: 12-19.
266. Blegvad B. Contralateral masking and Bekesy audiometry in 
normal listeners. Acta oto-laryngol 1967; 64: 157-65.
267. Collet L, Kemp DT, Veuillet E, Duclaux R, Moulin A, Morgon 
A. Effect of contralateral auditory stimuli on active cochlear 
micromechanical properties in human subjects. Hearing Res 
1990; 43: 251-62.
268. Ryan S, Kemp DT, Hinchcliffe R. The influence of contralateral 
stimulation on click-evoked otoacoustic emissions. Br J Audiol 
1991; 25: 391-7.
269. Orchik DJ, Dunckel DC, Culbertson MC. Bekesy comfortable 
loudness: supportive case studies. J Speech Hearing Disord 1977; 
42: 126-9.
270. Bolla I, Baldo D, Bottazzi D, Collini M. Audiometria automatica 
sopraliminare nelle ipoacusie neurosensorali. Ateneo Parmense - 
Acta Bio-Medica 1980; 51: 453-9
271. Hinchcliffe R, Chambers C. Loudness of tinnitus: an approach to 
measurement. Adv Oto-Rhino-Laryngol 1983; 29: 163-73.
272. Jerger J. Bekesy audiometry in analysis of auditory disorders. 
J Speech Hearing Res 1960; 3: 275-87.
273. Harden T, 
Kiessling J. 
Zur 
Interpretation von 
Bekesy- 
Audiogrammen. Arch Oto-Rhino-Laryngol 1979; 222: 265-71.
274. S0rensen H. Clinical application of continuous threshold record­
ings. Acta oto-laryngol 1962; 54: 403-22.
275. Parker W, Decker RL, Richards NG. Auditory function and 
lesions of the pons. Arch Otolaryngol 1968; 87: 228-40.
276. Rudmose W. Ch.2 Automatic audiometry. In: Modem Develop­
ments in Audiology J Jerger (Ed). New York: Academic Press, 
1963.
277. McCommons RB, Hodge DC. Comparison of Continuous and 
Pulsed Tones for Determining Bekesy Threshold Measurements. 
J Acoustic Soc Aml969; 45: 1499-1503.
278. Pelmear PL,D Hughes BJ. Self-recording audiometry in industry. 
B rJ ind Med 1974;31:304-9.
279. Frampton MC, Counter RT. A comparison of self recording 
audiometry in naval establishments and clinical audiometry in a 
hospital setting. J Royal Naval Med Serv 1989; 75: 99-104.
280. Gosztonyi RE, Vassallo RA, Sataloff J. Audiometric reliability in 
industry. Arch Env Health 1971; 22: 113-18.
281. Erlandsson B, HakHnson H, Ivarsson A, Nilsson P. Comparison of 
the Hearing Threshold Measured by Manual Pure-Tone and by 
Self-Recording (Bekesy) Audiometry. Audiology 1979; 
18: 
414-29.
282. Plomp R. Hearing Losses induced by small arms. Int Audiol 1967; 
6: 31-6.
283. West PDB, Evans EF. Early detection of hearing damage in young 
listeners resulting from exposure to amplified music. Br J Audiol 
1990; 24: 89-103.
284. Gauz MT,D Smith MM. High-frequency Bekesy audiometry. 
VI Pulsed vs. continuous signals. J Auditory Res 1987; 27: 
37-52.
285. Albers GD. Diplacusimetry. Proceedings of VIII International 
Congress of Otolaryngology Tokyo 1965. Amsterdam: Excerpta 
Medica, 1966. p 401.
286. Grisanti G. An automatic test for frequency discrimination. Br J 
Audiol 1987; 21: 233-7.
287. Domico WD. Bekesy-tracked aural harmonic distortion thresh­
olds and uncomfortable loudness levels. Ear & Hearing 1985; 6: 
260-5.
288. John PY, Kacker SK, Tandon PN. Bekesy audiometry in evalua­
tion of hearing in cases of raised intracranial pressure. Acta oto- 
laryngol 1979; 87: 441-4.
289. Anderson H, Wedenberg E. Audiometric identification of 
normal hearing carriers of genes for deafness. Acta oto-laryngol
1968; 65: 535-54.
  

The threshold of hearing 
241
290. Parving A. Reliability of Bekesy threshold tracing in identifica- 
tion of carriers of genes for an X-linked disease with deafness. 
A eta oto-laryngol 1978; 85: 40-4.
291. Cohen M, Francis M, Luxon LM, Bellman S, Coffey R, Pembrey 
M. Dips on Bekesy or audioscan fail to identify carriers of auto- 
somal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss. A eta Oto-Laryngol 
1996; 116: 521-7.
292. Meredith R, Stephens D, Sirimanna T, Meyer-Bisch C, Reardon 
W. Audiometric detection of carriers of Usher’s syndrome type II. 
J Audiol Med 1992; 1: 11-19.
293. Stephens SDG. Personal communication, 1999.
294. Hood JD. Hearing acuity and susceptibility to noise induced 
hearing loss. Br J Audiol 1987; 21: 175-81.
295. Corso JF. Effect of testing methods on hearing thresholds. Arch 
Otolaryngol 1955; 63: 78-91.
296. Bums W, Hinchcliffe R. Comparison of the Auditory Threshold 
as Measured by Individual Pure Tone and by Bekesy audiometry. 
J Acoustic Soc Am 1957; 29: 1274-7.
297. Jokinen K. Presbyacusis. Acta oto-laryngol 1969; 68: 327-35.
298. Robinson DW. Audiometric configurations and repeatability in 
noise-induced hearing loss. 1SVR Technical Report No. 123. 
Southampton: Institute of Sound and Vibration Research, 
University of Southampton, 1984.
299. Delany ME. Some sources of Variance in the Determination of 
Hearing Level. In Occupational Hearing Loss DW Robinson (Ed) 
London: Academic Press, 1971. pp 97-108.
300. Epstein A. Variables involved in automatic audiometry. Ann 
Otol,, Rhinol Laryngol 1960; 69: 137-41.
301. Suzuki T, Kubota K. Normal width in tracing on Bekesy audio­
grams. J Auditory Res 1966; 6: 91-6.
302. Shepherd DC, Goldstein R. Intrasubject variability in amplitude 
of Bekesy tracings. J Speech Hearing Res 1968; 11: 523-5.
303. Palva T. Recruitment tests at low sensation levels. Laryngoscope 
1956; 66: 1519-40.
304. Granitz DW, Byers VW. Typing of Bekesy audiograms. Audiology 
1976; 15: 215-21.
305. Turner RG, Shepard NT, Frazer GL. Clinical performance of 
audiological and related diagnostic tests. Ear & Hearing 1984; 5: 
187-94.
306. Hopkinson NT. Type V Bekesy audiograms: specification and 
clinical utility. J Speech Hearing Disord 1965; 30: 243-51.
307. Stephens SDG, Anderson CMB. Experimental studies on the 
uncomfortable loudness level. J Speech Hearing Res 1971; 14: 
262-70.
308. Stark EW. Jerger types in fixed frequency Bekesy audiometry with 
normal and hypacusic children. J Auditory Res 1966; 6: 135-40.
309. Price LL, Falck VT. Bekesy audiometry J Speech Hearing Res 1963; 
6: 129-33.
310. Harbert F, Young IM, Menduke H. Audiologic findings in 
presbycusis. J Auditory Res 1966; 6: 297-312.
311. Guild S. A method of classifying audiograms. Laryngoscope 1932; 
42: 821-36.
312. Gorlin RJ, Toriello HV, Cohen MM. Hereditary hearing loss and its 
syndromes. Oxford: OUP, 1995.
313. Martini A, Milani M, Rosignoli M, Mazzoli M, Prosser S. 
Audiometric Patterns of Genetic Non-syndromal Sensorineural 
Hearing Loss. Audiology 1997; 36: 228-36.
314. Sokal RR, Sneath PH A. Principles of Numerical Taxonomy. San 
Francisco, CA: Freeman, 1963.
315. Job A, Delplace F, Anvers P, Gorzerino P, Grateau P, Picard J. 
Analyze automatique d’audiogramme visant a la surveillance 
epidemiologique de cohortes exposees aux bruits impulsifs. Revue 
d’Epidemiologie et de Sante Publique 1993; 41: 407-15.
316. Hotelling H. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into 
principal components. J ed Psycd 1933; 24: 498-520.
317. Gower JC, Ross GJS. Minimum spanning trees and single linkage 
cluster analysis. J Royal Stat Soc 1969; C 18.
318. Job A, Buland F, Maumet L, Picard J. Windows software 
application for Bekesy audiogram analysis and hearing research. 
Computer Methods & Programs in Biomedicine 1996; 49: 95-103.
319. Romeder JM. Methodes et Programmes pour I’Analyse Discrimi- 
nante. Paris: Dunod, 1973.
320. Robert C. Analyse desciptive multivariee: application a I’intelligence 
artificielle. Paris: Flammarion, 1989.
321. Ozdamar O, Eilers RE, Miskiel E, Widen J. Classification of 
audiograms by sequential testing using a dynamic Bayesian pro­
cedure. J Acoustic Soc Am 1990; 88: 2171-9.
322. Chalabi Z, Souckova S. Pattern analysis of Bekesy audiograms. 
J Acoustic Soc Am 1985; 77: 1185-91.
323. Wood TJ, Wittich WW, Mahassey RB. Computerised pure-tone 
audiometric procedures. J Speech Hearing Res 1973; 16: 676-94.
324. Harris JD. A Comparison of Computerized Audiometry by 
ANSI, Bekesy fixed frequency, and Modified ISO Procedures in 
an Industrial Hearing Conservation Program. J Auditory Res 
1980; 20: 143-67.
325. Lutman ME. Microcomputer-controlled psychoacoustics in 
clinical audiology. B rJ Audiol 1983; 17: 109-14.
  

242 
Audiology
Glossary
(Abstracted with permission from Hinchcliffe R, Luxon LM, 
Williams RG. Readings for the Medical Examiner Assessing Cases 
of Occupational Noise-induced Hearing Loss, Vol. I of Luxon LM, 
ed. Noise and Hearing. London: Whurr, 2001.)
abiotrophy 
Tissue degeneration with loss or disturbance of 
function, particularly in diseases of genetic origin, 
accreditation 
A formal recognition of competence; accredita­
tion is granted when measurement competence is demon­
strated in all of the laboratory’s technical practices (UKAS). 
acuity 
Sharpness, acuteness, as in auditory acuity. 
air-bone gap 
The separation between the hearing threshold 
levels measured by air conduction and by bone conduction 
audiometry expressed as the degree to which the air con­
duction hearing threshold level exceeds the corresponding 
bone conduction hearing threshold level; having regard to 
degrees of uncertainty, the value, if positive, would indicate a 
conductive (middle ear) impairment of hearing, and, if nega­
tive, a non-organic component in the measured threshold of 
hearing.
air conduction audiometry 
Audiometry, invariably using ear­
phones, whereby the test sounds are sent through the normal 
air conduction pathway of hearing, i.e. through the air- 
containing outer and middle ears. The method is used to 
determine an individual’s threshold of hearing by air con­
duction; the results are portrayed graphically as an air con­
duction audiogram. 
apoptosis 
Biologically programmed cell death (the molecular 
biological basis of ageing), 
artificial ear 
A piece of equipment used to calibrate air con­
duction audiometers; the device is designed to simulate the 
physical properties (specifically, the acoustic impedance of the 
ear) of the average normal adult human ear which are rele­
vant to measuring hearing by earphone listening; the specifi­
cation for such a device is given in IEC 318 (referred to as an 
ear simulator in IEC 60318-1 (1998-07)). 
artificial mastoid 
A piece of equipment used to calibrate bone 
conduction audiometers; specifically, it is designed to simu­
late the relevant physical properties of the firm prominence 
of the adult human head behind the auricle for the purpose of 
calibrating a bone vibrator. 
audiogram 
A chart which portrays in graphic form the results 
of audiometry.
audiometer 
An electroacoustical instrument for the measure­
ment of hearing, 
audiometric picture 
The constellation of audiometric abnor­
malities which either characterizes a hearing disorder or char­
acterizes a particular individual’s hearing disorder; for 
occupational noise damage to hearing, there is ‘a characteris­
tic pattern on the audiogram showing typically the greatest 
loss at the 4,000 Hz frequency.’75 
audiometry 
The measurement of hearing using electro- 
acoustical equipment.
auditory acuity 
A term to denote sharpness of hearing; used 
to refer to the hearing threshold level or more broadly to also 
cover other auditory functions, e.g. frequency and intensity 
discriminations; broadly synonymous with auditory sensitivity. 
auditory sensitivity 
A term to denote hearing sensitivity 
without any commitment as to whether or not the hearing is 
within the range of normality or outside it, and, if the latter, 
whether it is better or poorer, and, if the latter, whether it 
amounts to an impairment (material or otherwise) or a hearing 
loss and whether or not it results in one or more inabilities, 
disabilities or handicaps; broadly synonymous with auditory 
acuity.
auricle 
The soft flange-like structure on either side of the 
head which, being the only visible part of the ear, is generally 
recognized as ‘the ear’ (syn. pinna).
P 
(Greek letter beta) 
Response criterion; a measure derived 
from signal detection theory.
Bekesy audiometer 
An automatic (self) recording audio­
meter which is able to conduct sweep frequency audiometry, 
i.e. to test a subject’s hearing using a continuously variable 
test tone (glide tone), 
bone conduction audiometry 
Audiometry using a bone vibrator 
in lieu of earphones in order to send the test sounds through 
the solid structures of the head to the cochlea of the internal 
ear; the aim is to bypass the normal air conduction pathway 
of hearing so that any obstruction to the passage of sound 
therein is circumvented, 
calibration 
A test procedure applied to a piece of equipment 
to ensure that it conforms to a particular standard. 
conductive threshold shift 
That shift in the auditory thresh­
old which is to be attributed to sound attenuation through 
the outer and middle ear and which is measured by the 
air-bone gap; it may or may not be of sufficient degree to 
amount to a conductive hearing loss. 
d' 
Detectability index; a measure derived from signal detec­
tion theory; ROC curves show the probability of a true posi­
tive response versus a false-positive response for a signal, 
sound or other, 
deafness 
Total hearing loss.
decibel 
The unit used for expressing the physical magnitude 
of sounds.
decibel scale 
A logarithmic ratio scale used to quantify the 
magnitude of a sound level; since it is a ratio scale, there is a 
reference sound level; a sound which has a (sound) level of 0 
dB is one whose pressure (in pascals) is numerically equiva­
lent to that of the reference zero; consequently, there are 
many OdB levels (not one), depending on the reference level 
used; the decibel scale is thus unlike the arithmetically linear 
scales that are used, for example, to measure length and mass, 
where each scale has one zero value only, 
disabling hearing impairment 
(1) In adults should be defined 
as a permanent unaided hearing threshold level of 41 dB or 
greater; (2) in children under the age of 15 years should be 
defined as a permanent unaided hearing threshold level for 
the better ear of 31dB or greater. For both children and
  

The threshold of hearing 
243
adults, the ‘hearing threshold level’ is to be taken as the bet­
ter ear average hearing threshold level for the four frequen­
cies: 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 kHz.56 
EUROMET 
A cooperative organization linking the national 
metrological organizations in the EU and EFTA states and 
the European Commission; the participating metrology insti­
tutes intend to collaborate in EUROMET, with the objective 
of promoting the coordination of metrological activities and 
services with the purpose of achieving higher efficiency.
FFA 
Four frequency average (the average of the hearing 
threshold levels at 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 kHz); used by the Medical 
Research Council as an index of hearing ability, 
frequency 
An attribute of a periodic quantity being the repe­
tition rate of the cycles; unit is the hertz (Hz), 
hearing level 
For a specified frequency of pure tone and test­
ing system, the sound pressure level (essentially the physical 
magnitude of the sound) (in the case of air conduction 
audiometers) or vibratory force level (essentially the physical 
magnitude of the vibration) (in the case of bone conduction 
audiometers) or the tone relative to that of a reference zero 
(as defined by an International or National Standard). It is 
the dial setting of an audiometer if the instrument has been 
properly calibrated. Expressed in decibels, i.e. as dB HL. 
hearing loss 
An impairment of hearing that exceeds a criter- 
ial level; no units, but may be qualified, in terms of severity, 
as ‘mild’, ‘severe’ etc. Neither the term ‘hearing loss’ nor the 
term ‘hearing gain’ should be used to describe hearing which 
is, respectively, greater than, or less than, the average hearing 
threshold level, just as the terms ‘height loss’ or ‘height gain’ 
would not be used to describe the height of someone who was 
less than, or greater than, average height unless it had been 
shown that a loss or a gain in height had occurred, e.g. by ser­
ial measurements. Criteria for defining a ‘hearing loss’ of an 
individual ear: an ear with a ‘mild hearing loss’ (the mini­
mum severity of a hearing loss) needs to show an audiomet­
ric threshold of 20 dB to 40dBHL averaged over the five 
frequencies 250 Hz, 500 Hz, 1000 Hz, 2000 Hz and 4000 Hz; 
but ‘average hearing losses of less than 20 dB do not neces­
sarily imply normal hearing’.58 
hearing status 
A description of the degree to which the hear­
ing of an individual functions normally with respect to 
accepted criteria (analogous to health status), 
hearing threshold level 
For a particular ear, and a given fre­
quency and test system, it is an individual’s threshold of hear­
ing (i.e. the quietest sound that the individual can hear) as 
determined in a stated manner and expressed by the system’s 
indicated ‘hearing level’ value. Expressed in decibels, i.e. as 
dB HTL.
hearing threshold shift 
The change in the threshold of hear­
ing for a given frequency (or group of frequencies) over a par­
ticular period of time; expressed in decibels.
IEC 
International Electrotechnical Commission, the interna­
tional body (based in Geneva) that deals with standards in 
the field of electrical technology; a prefix to a standard to 
denote that it is one of that organization.
IHR 
Institute of Hearing Research (the MRC unit for 
research on hearing; epidemiology forms a strong component 
in its research programme).
International Organization for Standardization 
The interna­
tional body (based in Geneva) including standards groups 
from many countries which develops standards for goods and 
services to facilitate international trade and exchange.
ISO 
International Organization for Standardization; a prefix 
to a standard to denote that it is one of that organization. 
LAeq 
Equivalent continuous A-weighted sound pressure level 
(in dB with respect to 20 |aPa).
L-factor complex 
A term used at the 1995 International 
Advanced Research Workshop on Man and Environmental 
Noise to cover the various factors affecting hearing threshold 
levels which are subsumed under the term socio-economic 
factor (hence L(ibra)-factor); the term serves to emphasize 
the multifactorial nature of such a factor and avoids 
implicating any strictly ‘social’ or ‘economic’ factor, 
manual audiometer 
A pure tone audiometer where selecting 
the ‘loudness’ and pitch of a test tone (signal) is done manu­
ally, as is the presentation of the signal, and the recording of 
the subject’s responses to it. 
mastoid process 
The bony prominence of the skull which 
underlies the mastoid prominence, 
mastoid prominence 
The firm projection of the head behind 
the auricle which covers the bony mastoid process and on 
which a bone vibrator is placed, 
mean 
The arithmetic mean (colloquially termed the ‘aver­
age’) is the sum of all the observations divided by the num­
ber of observations. In hearing surveys, the difference 
between “mean” and “median” hearing level can be signifi­
cant. The mean, however, ... gives a better description of 
the sample when supplemented with standard deviations. 
Mean HTLs are particularly sensitive to clinical rejection 
criteria.
median 
The middle point when a series of measurements is 
ranked in ascending or descending order, 
mode 
The most frequently occurring value in a distribution. 
MRC 
Medical Research Council (the main UK government 
body for the promotion of medical and related biological 
research).
NAMAS 
National Accreditation of Measurement and Sam­
pling (UK). NAMAS accreditation is granted by UKAS. 
Certificates bearing the NAMAS logo are widely accepted in 
the UK and throughout the world. There are multilateral 
agreements recognizing the equivalence of accreditation. 
National Measurement System 
The technical and organiza­
tional infrastructure within the UK which ensures that every­
one can have confidence in the measurements that are made 
in support of research and development, manufacturing, 
commerce, health and safety; responsibility of NMSPU. 
NMSPU 
National Measurement System Policy Unit: that 
part of the DTI (UK) which has responsibility for the 
integrity and efficient functioning of the National Measure­
ment System.
  

244 
Audiology
National Physical Laboratory (UK) 
The focus of the 
National Measurement System with responsibility for devel­
oping, maintaining and disseminating measurement stan­
dards for most physical quantities; all activities in the NPL, 
excluding those accredited by UKAS, are operated to a certi­
fied ISO 9001:1994 quality system standard; accredits cali­
bration services to EN 4500/ISO Guide 25. 
noise immission level 
A measure of noise exposure that takes 
into account both the level of the noise and the time to 
which an individual has been exposed to such a noise, com­
bining these two factors into a single value which is expressed 
in dB (NI); employs equal energy principle (3-dB change for 
halving or doubling the time component) to trade these two 
factors one with the other. Basis of NPL Ac 61 model, 
noise-induced compound threshold shift 
Inclusive of both 
noise-induced temporary threshold shift and noise-induced 
permanent threshold shift, 
non-organic hearing loss 
A hearing loss which is not to be 
attributed to a disorder of the subject’s auditory system, 
non-organic threshold shift (NOTS) 
A threshold shift 
which is not to be attributed to a disorder of the subject’s 
auditory system and which may or may not be of sufficient 
degree to amount to a hearing loss, 
normal threshold of hearing 
‘A term which should be 
avoided because of its medical and medicolegal implica­
tions.’76 There is no single normal threshold of hearing; there 
are indeed a number of normal thresholds of normal hearing. 
NOTS-S 
NOTS residing in the domain of the subject (testee). 
NOTS-E 
NOTS residing in the domain of the examiner 
(tester) or examination.
NSH 
National Study of Hearing (the principal epidemiolog­
ical programme of the IHR).
ONITS 
Occupational noise-induced threshold shift, i.e. a 
shift in the threshold of hearing which may or may not 
amount to an occupational noise-induced hearing loss, 
presbyacusis 
A diagnostic term applied by clinicians to 
explain the difficulties in hearing of older people; strictly 
speaking, such a term should be used only after a medical 
examination has shown no cause for a patient’s hearing 
difficulties apart from an age-related permanent threshold 
shift which is of sufficient degree to constitute a hearing loss, 
pure tone audiometer 
An audiometer which uses pure tones 
to measure a subject’s ability to hear, in particular, the qui­
etest sounds that he can detect (threshold of hearing).
reference zero 
A point on a scale of measurement to which 
all other measurements on that scale are referred; there will 
thus be values (at least in theory) both above (denoted as ‘+ ’ 
values) and below (denoted as 
’ values) that point; values 
other than zero do not necessarily denote values that are 
abnormal, since the reference zero itself does not predicate a 
range of normality, let alone what is that range, 
reference zero, standard 
A reference zero which has been set 
by one or other national or international standards institute, 
e.g. the British Standards Institution, the International Orga­
nization for Standardization; specifications exist for a stan­
dard reference zero for the calibration of pure tone air (BS EN 
ISO 389-1:2000) and bone (BS ISO 389-3:1994) conduction 
audiometers.
Rudmose audiometer 
An automatic recording audiometer 
which tests a subject’s hearing using a fixed-frequency test 
tone 
only 
(used 
in 
industrial 
hearing 
conservation 
programmes).
sensorineural threshold shift 
A shift in the threshold of 
hearing due to disorder of the auditory nervous system (inclu­
sive of cochlea) which may or may not be of sufficient mag­
nitude to be termed a sensorineural hearing loss.
SI 
The international abbreviation for Le Systeme International 
d’Unites.
socioacusis 
Non-industrial noise-induced threshold shifts, 
threshold shift, noise-induced permanent 
The term that has 
been used for some 40 years or more by workers in the field of 
noise-induced damage to hearing to designate the permanent 
noise component in a threshold of hearing that would be 
attributable to noise damage, 
traceability 
The ability to trace back any calibration to the 
primary standard.
United Kingdom Accreditation Service 
UK national body 
responsible for assessing and accrediting the competence of 
organizations in the fields of calibration, measurement, test­
ing, inspection and the certification of systems, personnel and 
products. UKAS-accredited calibration laboratories repre­
sent the main focus for traceable calibration in the UK, act­
ing as local guarantors of measurement quality.
United States of America Standards Institute 
Name of the 
national standards body of the USA from 1966 until Octo­
ber 1969, when renamed American National Standards 
Institute.
  

The threshold of hearing 
245
Appendix 
Some standards relating to 
measurements of the threshold of 
hearing
IEC 60318-1:1998
Electroacoustics— Simulators of human head and ear— Part 1: 
Ear simulator for the calibration of supra-aural earphones.
IEC 60318-2:1998
Electroacoustics— Simulators of human head and ear— Part 2: 
An interim acoustic coupler for the calibration of audiometric 
earphones in the extended high-frequency range.
IEC 60318-3:1998
Electroacoustics— Simulators of human head and ear—Part 3: 
Acoustic coupler for the calibration of supra-aural earphones 
used in audiometry (formerly IEC 303).
IEC 60645-1:1992
Audiometers— Part 1: Pure-tone audiometers.
Specifies general requirements for audiometers and particular 
requirements for pure tone audiometers designed for use in 
determining hearing threshold levels in comparison with the 
standard reference threshold level by means of psycho- 
acoustical test methods.
IEC 60645-1 Corr. 1 (1993-02)
Audiometers— Part 1: Pure-tone audiometers.
IEC 60645-2:1993 Audiometers. Part 2: Equipment for speech 
audiometry.
Specifies requirements for audiometers designed to present 
speech sounds to a subject in a standardized manner, e.g. for 
the measurement of speech recognition.
IEC 60645-4:1994
Audiometers— Part 4: Equipment for extended high-frequency 
audiometry.
Specifies requirements for audiometric equipment designed 
for use in pure tone audiometry in the frequency range from 
8000 Hz to 16000 Hz, in addition to those that are applicable 
and specified in IEC 60645-1.
IEC 61027:1991
Instruments for the measurement of aural acoustic imped­
ance/admittance.
Covers instruments designed primarily for the measurement 
of modulus of acoustical impedance/admittance in the 
human external acoustical meatus using a probe tone of 226 
Hz. Defines the characteristics to be specified by the manu­
facturer, lays down performance specifications for four types 
of instrument, and specifies the facilities to be provided on 
three of these types. Methods of test to be used for approval 
testing rather than routine calibration are also specified.
BS 6950:1988 specified a standard reference zero for the cali­
bration of pure tone bone conduction audiometers (superseded
by BS ISO 389-3:1994).
BS EN ISO 389-1:2000 (formerly BS 2497: 1992) Acoustics. 
Reference zero for the calibration of autiometric equipment -  
Part 1: Reference equivalent threshold sound pressure levels for 
pure tones and supra-aural earphones.
Specifies reference equivalent threshold sound pressure levels 
for Beyer DT 48 and telephonies TDH 39 earphones in a 
coupler complying with IEC 60318-3:1998 together with 
other supra-aural earphones, meeting stated requirements, in 
an artificial ear complying with IEC 60318-1:1998. Note that 
the term ‘normal’ which appeared in the title of the first 
British Standard, i.e. BS 2497:1954, was subsequently 
deleted. The original samples (i.e. not random samples of the 
general population.) (Royal Air Ford; National Physical 
Laboratory) on which the standard was based provided modal 
values for a clinically otologically normal population; the indi­
vidual subjects, having had a prior screening audiogram, were 
tested with a precision 2-dB step audiometer [Note that this 
standard is one to which audiometers should conform, not 
individuals].
BS ISO 389-3:1999—Acoustics. Reference zero for the calibra­
tion of audiometric equipment. Reference equivalent threshold 
force levels for pure tones and bone vibrators (specifies a stan­
dard reference zero for the calibration of pure tone bone con­
duction audiometers).
BS ISO 389-4:1999—Acoustics. Reference zero for the calibra­
tion of audiometric equipment. Reference levels for narrow­
band masking noise.
BS ISO 389-5:2001—Acoustics. Reference zero for the calibra­
tion of audiometric equipment. Reference equivalent threshold 
sound pressure levels for pure tones in the frequency range 8 
kHz to 16 kHz.
BS EN ISO 389-7:1998—Acoustics. Reference zero for the cal­
ibration of audiometric equipment. Reference threshold of 
hearing under free-field and diffuse-field listening conditions.
BSEN ISO 8253-1:1998—Acoustics. Audiometric test meth­
ods. Basic pure tone air and bone conduction threshold 
audiometry.
The standard dealing with methods for performing audio­
metry; it also covers methods (biological and physical) and 
frequency of calibrations as well as standards for maximum 
permissible ambient noise levels for audiometric test rooms.
BS EN ISO 8253-2:1998—Acoustics. Audiometric test meth­
ods. Soundfield audiometry with pure tone and narrow-band 
test signals.
Specifies test signal characteristics and procedures for deter­
mining hearing threshold levels in the range 125-12 500 Hz.
BSEN ISO 8253-3:1998—Acoustics. Audiometric test meth­
ods. Speech audiometry.
  

246 
Audiology
ISO 6189-1983: the International Standard specification for 
pure tone air conduction audiometry for hearing conservation 
purposes: ‘0 Introduction. This International Standard lays 
down requirements and procedures for conducting pure tone 
air conduction audiometry when it is deemed by the responsi­
ble authority to monitor the hearing of subjects exposed to 
noise at work ... Methods of conducting audiometric tests 
with manual and automatic recording fixed frequency [i.e. for 
the Rudmose audiometer which is used in industry, not the 
sweep frequency Bekesy audiometer which is used for clinical 
diagnostic purposes] audiometers are presented in this Interna­
tional Standard ... 2 Field of Application ... The specifica­
tions in this International Standard are not intended for 
clinical purpose [i.e. for the Rudmose audiometer] ... 8.2 
Determination of hearing threshold levels in automatic
recording audiometry ... Average the peaks and (the) valleys 
of the tracing ... This mean value, rounded up to the nearest 
whole number in decibels, is taken as the hearing threshold 
level at that frequency and that ear ... 9.2 Comparison of 
Audiograms ... To compare audiograms which have been 
recorded by automatic recording and manual audiometry, 3 dB 
should be added to the hearing threshold levels determined by 
means of automatic recording audiometers.’
ISO 7029-1984— International Specification for the threshold 
of hearing by air conduction as a function of age and sex for oto- 
logically normal persons [of course, this cannot be so, since the 
data reflect the effects of ageing (as the standard intends)].
The web sites for various International and National Standards 
bodies are shown in Tables 13.3 and 13.4.
Table 13.3: Some International Standards bodies and their websites
STANDARDS BODY
ABBREV
WEBSITE
Comite Europeen de Normalisation (European Committee 
for Standardisation)
CEN
http://wwwxenorm.be/
http://www.cenorm.be/ci
Comite Europeen de Normalisation Electrotechnique
CENELEC
http://www.cenelec.org/
European Telecommunications Standardization Institute
ETSI
http://www.etsi.org/
International Electrotechnical Commission
I EC
http://www.iec.ch/
International Organization for Standardization
ISO
http://www.iso.ch/
Table 13.4: Some National Standards bodies and their websites. Others are given at the World Standards Services Network web­
site: http://www.wssn.net/WSSN/script-cache/links_national.htm, All CEN (Comite European de Normalisation) members are listed 
here and denoted by an asterisk.
COUNTRY
STANDARDS BODY
ABBREV
WEBSITE
Australia
Standards Australia International Ltd
SA
h ttp:// w w w.sta nda rds.com .a u/ 
ca ta log ue/scri pt/search.asp
Austria*
Osterreichisches Normungsinstitut
ON
http://www,on-norm.at
Belgium*
Institut Beige de Norm a lisa tion/Belgisch Instituut voor 
Normalisotie
IBN/BIN
http://www.ibn.be
Canada
Standards Council of Canada - Conseil canadien des normes
see
http://www.scc.ca/
Czech Republic*
Czech Standards Institute
CSNI
http://www.csni.cz
Denmark*
Dansk Standard
DS
http://www.ds.dk
Finland*
Suomen StandardisoimisHitto r.y.
SFS
http://www.sfs.fi
France*
I1Association frangaise de normalisation.
AFNOR
http://www.afnor.fr
Germany*
Deutsches Institut fur Normung e.V.
DIN
http://www.din.de
Greece*
Hellenic Organization for Standardization
ELOT
http://www.elot.gr
Iceland*
Stadlarod Islands (Icelandic Standards)
1ST
http://www.stadlar.is
India
Bureau of Indian Standards
BIS
http://www.bis.org.in/
  

The threshold of hearing 
247
Table 13.4: continued.
COUNTRY
STANDARDS BODY
ABBREV
WEBSITE
Indonesia
Badon Standardisasi Nasional
BSN
http://www.bsn.goJd/
Iran
Institute of Standards and Industrial Research of Iran
ISIRI
http://wwwjsiri.org/
Ireland*
National Standards Authority of Ireland
NSAI
http://www.nsai.ie
Israel
The Standards Institution of Israel
Sll
http://www.sii.org.il/
Italy*
Ente Nazfonale Italiano di Uniftcazione
UNI
http://www.uni.com
Japan
Japan Industrial Standards Committee
JISC
http://www.jisc.go.jp/
Luxembourg*
Service de I'Energie de I'Etat Organism? Luxembourgeois de 
Normalisation
SEE
http://www.seeJ u
Malta*
Malta Standards Authority
MSA
http://www.msa.org.mt
Netherlands*
Ned erlands Nor mo lisa tie- insti tu u t
NEN
http://www.nen.nl/
New Zealand
Standards New Zealand
SNZ
http://www.5tandards.CG.nz/
Norway*
Norges Standardiseringsforbund
NSF
http://www.standard.no/nsf
Peru
fnstituto National de Defensa de io Competencia y de la 
Protection de la Propiedad Intelectual
INDECOPI
http://wwwJndecopi.gob.pe/
Portugal*
instituto Portugues da Qualidade
IRQ
http://wwwjpq.pt
Russia
State Committee of the Russian Federation for Standardization, 
Metrology and Certification
GOST-R
http://www.gost.ru/sls/gost.nsf
South Africa
South African Bureau of Standards
SABS
http://www.sabs.co.za/
Spain*
Asociacion Espahola de Normalization y Certification
AENOR
http://www.aenor.es
Sweden*
Swedish Standards Institute
SIS
http://www.sisse
Switzerland*
Schweizerische Normen-Vereinigung (Swiss Association for 
Standardization)
SNV
http://www.snv.ch
Thailand
Thai Industrial Standards Institute
TISI
http://www.tisLgo.th/
Turkey
Turk Standard lari Enstitusu
TSE
http://www.tse.org.tr/
UK*
British Standards Institution
BSI
http://www.bsi-global.com
USA
American National Standards Institute
ANSI
http://www.ansi.org/
  

14 Psychoacoustical 
auditory tests
Joseph W Hall
Psychoacoustics is the study of the psychological correlates of 
the physical parameters of sound. Perhaps the simplest psycho- 
acoustical measurement deals with the determination of the 
lowest level of sound that can be detected reliably in a quiet set­
ting (the auditory detection threshold). This measurement is 
the cornerstone of clinical audiological assessment and is con­
sidered in some detail elsewhere in this book, along with other 
auditory measures that are valuable in clinical diagnosis. In 
addition to providing diagnostic information, psychoacoustical 
testing can furnish information about the basic nature of hear­
ing and hearing impairment. For example, psychoacoustical 
measurements can be performed to indicate the extent to which 
the ear can hear a target sound in the presence of a competing 
sound, and the effect that hearing loss has on that ability. Such 
knowledge can contribute to the understanding of the disabil­
ity associated with hearing loss, and may suggest possible strate­
gies for mitigating the effects of hearing loss (perhaps through 
design of hearing aid hardware/software). This chapter focuses 
on the psychoacoustical study of the nature of hearing impair­
ment. In this chapter, the main focus is on hearing loss of 
cochlear origin. In most cases of sensorineural hearing loss, the 
main site of lesion is usually assumed to be in the cochlea (outer 
hair cells, inner hair cells, or both outer and inner hair cells), 
rather than the cochlear nerve itself. A more thorough treat­
ment of this subject matter can be found in Moore.1
Basic measures related to the coding 
of sound level
Loudness and the dynamic range of hearing
Figure 14.1 depicts what might be termed the dynamic range of 
hearing, describing the limits between the audibility threshold 
(extremely soft)2 and the discomfort/pain threshold (extremely 
loud).3 Notable characteristics are the range of frequencies to 
which the healthy human ear is sensitive (approximately 20 Hz 
to 20 kHz), the pronounced sensitivity in the 3-kHz frequency
Signal frequency (Hz)
Figure 14.1 The lower, solid line refers to the lowest level of sound that can be 
detected in the free field as a function of sound frequency. The upper, dotted 
curve refers to the threshold of pain.
range, and the enormous range of intensity values encoded by 
the ear. The main psychological correlates of frequency and 
intensity are pitch and loudness, respectively. An interesting 
question is how loudness relates to the range of intensities 
shown in Figure 14.1. One way of addressing this question is to 
ask listeners to rate the loudness of sounds of various intensities. 
An example of this type of method is the loudness growth in 1/2 
octave bands,4 where sounds are rated categorically as very soft, 
soft, OK, loud, very loud or too loud; this is depicted in Figure 
14.2. This figure shows typical data from a normal ear and an 
ear with a moderate hearing loss of cochlear origin.5 One way of 
characterizing the hearing loss is in terms of a reduction of the 
dynamic range of intensity. As seen in Figure 14.2, the upper 
bound of the range in the hearing-impaired ear is similar to nor­
mal, but the hearing-impaired ear is insensitive to sound at the
A defining characteristic of cochlear hearing loss is the 
reduced dynamic range between auditory threshold and 
loudness discomfort. The steep growth of loudness is 
referred to as loudness recruitment.

250 
Audiology
Stimulus level (dB SPL)
Figure 14.2 Examples of the type of loudness growth functions that are 
obtained for normal ears (solid line) and ears with moderate sensorineural hear­
ing loss (dotted line).
lower intensity values. One of the hallmarks of cochlear hear­
ing loss concerns the relationship between this reduced 
dynamic range and the growth of loudness with increasing 
intensity. The finding is that the ear experiences a change from 
soft to loud over a relatively small range of intensities. This steep 
growth of loudness is referred to as loudness recruitment.6-8
Intensity discrimination
One of the most basic measures of hearing is the ability to dis­
criminate a small change in the intensity of a sound. One test 
of intensity discrimination, the Short Increment Sensitivity 
Index, ~ 
was used at one time in audiology to differentiate 
cochlear from retrocochlear (e.g. vestibular schwannoma) 
hearing loss. In this test, the sensitivity to 1-dB intensity mod­
ulations is determined for a sinusoidal carrier presented 20 dB 
above threshold (20-dB sensation level). Patients having a 
primarily cochlear site of lesion are generally quite sensitive to 
such increments, whereas patients with vestibular schwanno­
mas are not. This test is no longer used widely, because it has 
been replaced by electrophysiological and imaging tests with 
greater diagnostic utility.
Generally, intensity discrimination is substantially poorer 
in cases of vestibular schwannoma than in cases of 
cochlear hearing loss or normal hearing. Intensity dis­
crimination can be poorer than normal in cochlear- 
impaired listeners, depending upon aetiology.
Differences in intensity discrimination between normally 
hearing listeners and listeners with cochlear impairment have 
been studied for a number of years. Two basic methodologies 
have been used (Figure 14.3). One involves an intensity incre­
ment being imposed upon a carrier, and is sometimes referred to 
as the loudness modulation method. This is similar to the 
method used in the Short Increment Sensitivity Index. The 
other method involves the presentation of temporally discrete 
stimulus presentations that differ in intensity, and is sometimes 
referred to as the loudness memory method. Difference in 
intensity discrimination between normal and impaired ears 
depends critically upon whether stimuli are presented at the 
same sensation level (SL) or at the same sound pressure level 
(SPL). When stimuli are presented at matched, low SL (e.g. 20 
dBSL), listeners with cochlear hearing loss generally show bet­
ter performance. Under such circumstances, the SPL is higher 
for the hearing-impaired ear. When stimuli are presented at 
matched, high SPL (e.g. 85-90 dB SPL), large differences in 
intensity discrimination between normal and impaired ears are 
generally not seen.12-14 However, a study by Fasti and Schom15 
indicated that intensity discrimination may vary significantly 
among aetiologies of cochlear-related hearing loss. For example, 
they found relatively poor performance in listeners with 
Meniere’s disease.
Intensity discrimination reflects very basic auditory abili­
ties, and the practical implications of poor intensity discrimi­
nation are not completely clear. One possibility relates to the 
differentiation and recognition of complex sounds based upon 
subtle across-frequency differences in intensity (spectral shape 
processing). If the ability to code intensity cues is reduced, the 
processing of certain complex environmental sounds could be 
compromised.
Figure 14.3 Time-amplitude representations of the types of stimuli used in (a) 
the loudness memory and (b) the loudness modulation methods of intensity 
discrimination.
  

Psychoacoustical auditory tests 
251
Basic measures related to frequency 
coding
Frequency resolution
The mapping of frequency to a place on the basilar membrane 
is one of the bases of the frequency selectivity of the ear. One 
result of this process is that simultaneously present sounds from 
different spectral regions will not interfere with or mask each 
other substantially, because they are associated with activity in 
frequency-specific, 
quasi-independent 
neural 
populations. 
Although several different psychoacoustical methods reveal the 
frequency-selective nature of the ear, perhaps the method that 
is subject to the fewest problems in interpretation is the 
notched noise method.16 In this method, the detection thresh­
old of a pure tone signal in masking noise is determined as a 
function of the width of a spectral notch (band-stop region) in 
the vicinity of the signal frequency (Figure 14.4). Techniques 
have been developed17-19 for deriving auditory filter bandwidths 
and shapes using this technique. In ears with normal hearing, 
the threshold of the signal improves steeply as the width of the 
notch increases, a finding consistent with a high degree of fre­
quency selectivity. In contrast, many cases of cochlear hearing 
loss are associated with only a gradual improvement with 
increasing notch width, consistent with poor frequency selec­
tivity.20-22 Cochlear hearing losses often indicate abnormally
Cochlear hearing impairment is often associated with a 
reduced ability to process a particular frequency region in 
a complex sound. This may limit the ability of listeners 
with cochlear hearing impairment to code the spectral 
variations that provide cues for the understanding of 
speech.
asymmetrical auditory filter shapes, with a disproportionate 
amount of low-frequency energy being present at the auditory 
filter output.20
A second psychoacoustical measure of frequency selectiv­
ity, the psychophysical tuning curve (PTC),23-25 is worthy of 
mention, partly because of its conceptual similarity to the phys­
iological tuning curve. In the physiological tuning curve, the 
lowest level of stimulation that results in an increase in the 
spontaneous rate of an cochlear nerve neurone is determined as 
a function of the frequency of stimulation. The best frequency 
of the neurone is associated with the lowest sound level, with 
frequencies diverging from this frequency requiring progress­
ively higher intensities to alter the spontaneous rate of the 
neural firing. The steepness of the resulting V-shaped function 
summarizes the frequency selectivity of the neurone. In the 
PTC, the threshold for a target tone of a given frequency is first 
determined (Figure 14.5). Then, the level of the target tone is 
maintained at approximately lOdBSL, and the level of a nar­
row band of noise required to mask the target tone is deter­
mined as a function of the centre frequency of the narrow band 
of noise. The resulting ‘tuning curve’ is similar in shape to that 
for the physiological tuning curve, with progressively higher 
masking energy required as the frequencies of the masking and 
target stimuli diverge. In agreement with the notched noise 
results, hearing-impaired ears show broader PTC functions 
with raised tips, and sometimes ‘W’ shapes instead of the 
normal ‘V’ shape.26,27 The practical implications of reduced fre­
quency resolution may include poor hearing in noise and poor 
ability to discriminate/recognize sounds based upon spectral 
shape differences (e.g. certain speech sounds).
Figure 14.4 Schematic representations of the stimuli (a) and masked signal 
thresholds (b) associated with the notched noise method of measuring 
frequency resolution.
Figure 14.5 Schematic representation of the psychophysical tuning curve 
method of measuring frequency resolution. The signal has a constant frequency, 
and its level is held at approximately 10 dB SL. The level of a narrow-band noise 
masker that just masks the signal is then determined as a function of masker 
frequency. The dotted line represents the finding that greater masker level is 
required as the frequencies of the signal and masker diverge.
  

252 
Audiology
Frequency discrimination
Frequency discrimination refers to the ability to report that two 
sequentially presented pure tones differ in frequency. Listeners 
usually hear this frequency difference as a change in pitch. The 
two cues that are thought to contribute to frequency discrimi­
nation are related to the place of cochlear activation (and sub­
sequent tonotopic neural coding) and the phase-locked neural 
coding of stimulus fine structure periodicity. The coding of tem­
poral fine structure has a low-pass characteristic, as neural phase 
locking diminishes above 1-2 kHz,28 so the respective roles of 
temporal and place cues may vary importantly as a function of 
stimulus frequency. In normal ears, frequency discrimination is 
remarkably good, with frequency difference limens on the order 
of 0.5%. ’ Frequency discrimination is often diminished in lis­
teners with hearing loss of cochlear origin, both at low and high 
frequencies.31-33 Some of this reduction in frequency discrimi­
nation can probably be attributed to the broader cochlear tun­
ing (poor frequency resolution) that often occurs in cochlear 
loss. It has also been speculated that there may be a reduced 
phase-locking ability in cochlear hearing loss. A reduction in 
phase locking would then be associated with relatively poor fre­
quency discrimination performance in middle to low frequen­
cies. Some studies have suggested that the detection of low rates 
of frequency modulation depends upon neural phase locking at 
low and middle signal frequencies.34 Lacher-Fougere and 
Demany35 found relatively poor detection at low-rate frequency 
modulation in listeners with cochlear hearing loss. They inter­
preted this as possibly indicating poor phase locking with 
cochlear hearing loss, particularly for hearing losses greater 
than 50 dB. Physiological evidence concerning the question of 
phase locking in hearing losses of cochlear origin is equivocal at 
this point,36’37 and it is uncertain what mechanism might 
underlie such a condition in cochlear-based hearing loss.
It is again somewhat problematic to delineate precisely the 
practical implications of poor frequency discrimination. One 
possible implication relates to the fact that many speech sounds 
are characterized by frequency transitions that provide informa­
tion for speech identification. Poor ability to encode differences 
in frequency and changes in frequency value may therefore be 
associated with reduced speech-understanding abilities.
Basic measures related to temporal 
coding
Temporal resolution
Temporal resolution refers to the ability of the ear to follow 
rapid transitions in the amplitude envelope of a stimulus. Tem­
poral resolution in hearing-impaired listeners has most often 
been investigated using either the gap detection method or the 
temporal modulation transfer function (TMTF) method. Gap 
detection refers to the ability to detect a short silent gap in an
Measures of temporal resolution often indicate similar 
time constants for normal and cochlear-impaired listeners. 
However, some cochlear-impaired listeners show in­
creased time constants that may contribute to overall 
hearing disability in individual cases.
otherwise continuous signal.38-41 With the TMTF method,42’43 
temporal resolution is characterized in terms of the steepness 
with which sensitivity to the presence of amplitude modulation 
falls off as the modulation frequency is increased. The stimuli 
used in the gap and TMTF methods are represented in Figure 
14.6. Such measures in the normal ear indicate relatively pre­
cise temporal coding and suggest a time constant of 1-3 ms. 
Although many listeners with cochlear hearing loss also show 
relatively precise temporal resolution, some show markedly 
poor performance.44-47 In interpreting results from these experi­
ments, care must be taken to ensure that the results of hearing- 
impaired listeners are not critically limited because all or part of 
the stimulus is below or near the threshold of hearing. When 
this factor is taken into account, results usually indicate time 
constants that are near the normal range, with an occasional 
hearing-impaired listener showing abnormally prolonged time 
constants. Because some aspects of speech perception depend 
upon the coding of rapid acoustical transitions,48’49 it is possible 
that reduced temporal resolution may contribute to poor speech 
recognition in hearing-impaired listeners.
Temporal summation
Temporal summation is a term that is used to describe the func­
tion relating signal duration to detection threshold (Figure
14.7). In the normal ear, it is found that as the signal duration 
increases (up to durations of 200-400ms), the signal intensity 
necessary for detection decreases. As an approximation, it is 
found that the signal intensity at threshold reduces by 3 dB for 
every doubling of duration. Although this would be consistent 
with an interpretation of a simple integration of intensity over 
a relatively long temporal interval of 200-400 ms, it is probably 
not appropriate to conceptualize the temporal summation phe­
nomenon in this way. For one thing, the relatively small time 
constant indicated by temporal resolution studies would suggest 
that a long summation time is not obligatory. In a similar vein, 
a study by Viemeister and Wakefield50 indicated that the tem­
poral summation of sound can be somewhat ‘selective’. This 
study showed that the energy from two short signals separated 
in time by a masking appeared to be integrated without a con­
comitant integration of the intervening masking noise. This 
suggests that some aspects of temporal summation might be 
viewed as a combination of information obtained through mul­
tiple, sequential samples.
A number of studies have indicated that temporal summa­
tion is often substantially reduced in cases of hearing loss of 
cochlear origin, and at one point in the history of audiology,
  

Psychoacoustical auditory tests 
253
Figure 14.6 Representation of the stimuli used in the TMTF (a) and gap detection (b) measures of temporal resolution. In the TMTF, the listener must be able to 
differentiate an unmodulated noise (top) from a modulated noise (bottom). The arrow represents the fact that the depth of modulation is the manipulated 
parameter. The modulation detection threshold is obtained as a function of the rate of modulation. In gap detection, the listener must be able to differentiate an 
uninterrupted noise (top) from a noise having a temporal gap (bottom). The arrow represents the fact that the gap duration is the manipulated parameter. The gap 
detection threshold is the shortest gap that can just be detected.
measures of temporal summation were used in diagnostic site- 
of-lesion tests. ~ Although several hypotheses have been put 
forward to explain this reduction in temporal summation (see 
Moore1 for a discussion), none would presently appear to 
account entirely satisfactorily for the effect found with cochlear 
hearing loss.
Manifestations of abnormality in 
cochlear amplification
Whereas the main function of inner hair cells is to transduce 
mechanical energy into signals carried by the cochlear nerve, a 
primary role of the outer hair cells of the cochlea appears to be 
to provide frequency'Specific amplification.54 This process 
results in relatively low auditory thresholds and fine frequency 
selectivity, and the associated intensity input-output function 
is non-linear and compressive. One way of conceptualizing this 
compressive function is in terms of a saturating amplification 
wherein progressively less amplification is applied as intensity 
increases.55 Unfortunately, outer hair cells are vulnerable to 
damage, and impaired outer hair cell function probably
Figure 14.7 Schematic representation of the stimuli (a) and threshold data (b) 
associated with the temporal summation paradigm. Signal detection threshold is 
determined as a function of the duration of the signal.
It is likely that most cases of elevated thresholds in 
cochlear hearing loss can be understood in terms of 
reduced frequency-specific amplification associated with 
the outer hair cells. This reduced amplification probably 
has wide-ranging implications for hearing, including 
frequency resolution, loudness recruitment, and other 
basic hearing abilities.
  

254 
Audiology
accounts for much of the poor sensitivity and frequency selec­
tivity associated with mild-to-moderate cochlear hearing 
losses.56,57 It has been hypothesized that other psychoacoustical 
findings in cochlear-impaired listeners (including some consid­
ered above) can also be attributed to abnormalities in cochlear 
amplification. For example, reduction or elimination of 
cochlear amplification would diminish the compressive nature 
of the intensity input-output function, potentially accounting 
for the steeper growth of loudness (loudness recruitment) often 
found in cochlear hearing loss. Moore1 has also pointed out that 
the abnormal cochlear amplifier associated with outer hair cell 
damage may also account for aspects of reduced temporal reso­
lution and reduced temporal summation.
Binaural hearing
Because the two ears are in different spatial locations and are 
separated by the head, they often receive substantially different 
acoustical signals. For example, a sound located on a listener’s 
right side will reach the right ear of the listener approximately 
600 jus before it reaches the left ear. In addition, the higher fre­
quencies of the sound will be attenuated by the ‘head shadow’, 
resulting in a more intense sound in the right ear. These binau­
ral differences of time and amplitude constitute cues that aid in 
the spatial analysis of auditory sources in the environment (Fig­
ure 14.8). Perhaps the two most prominent benefits related to 
binaural hearing are sound source localization and enhanced 
perception of signals in noise.
Figure 14.8 Schematic representation of binaural cues that aid in the 
localization of sound. The cues include time-of-arrival differences between the 
ears, and interaural differences in intensity due to the head shadow.
Sound localisation
Measures of localization ability indicate that cochlear hearing 
loss is often associated with poor sound localization ability.58-62 
As might be expected, poor localization ability is particularly 
likely to occur in cases of asymmetrical hearing loss. However, 
poor localization is not uncommon even when hearing loss is 
relatively symmetrical and stimulation occurs well above 
threshold.63 Although measures of sound localization are valu­
able in that they provide direct evidence of the highly practical 
ability to localize sound sources in the free field, they do not 
always provide clear interpretations of the particular cues that 
are utilized by the listener. Therefore, several studies have been 
performed using headphones to investigate the effect of hearing 
loss on particular types of binaural hearing ability.
Interaural time and intensity discrimination
In headphone testing, it is relatively easy to manipulate inter­
aural time and amplitude cues separately and examine the sen­
sitivity to each. Measurement of the sensitivity to interaural time 
disparities in low-frequency sounds indicates particularly acute 
sensitivity in the normal ear. For example, classical studies show 
that interaural time differences as small as 10- 20ps can be 
detected for stimuli up to frequencies of approximately 1.0- 1.5 
kHz.64,65 For pure tone signal frequencies higher than this, sen­
sitivity to interaural time differences in the ongoing stimulus 
fine structure is poor or absent in the human ear. However, if 
the stimulus has a relatively low-frequency temporal envelope 
(as occurs with amplitude modulation, or with a narrow-band 
noise stimulus), interaural time differences in the envelope can 
support relatively acute interaural time discrimination even for 
high-frequency stimuli.66,67 Interestingly, interaural time dis­
crimination is often poor in listeners with hearing loss of 
cochlear origin.68-71 Because interaural time discrimination 
depends ultimately upon binaural neural analysis, the mecha­
nism underlying poor performance in listeners with hearing loss 
of cochlear origin is not entirely obvious. One possibility is that 
some forms of cochlear hearing loss may affect the precision of 
phase locking to stimulus periodicity. As noted above, this argu­
ment has also been applied to the finding that the detection of 
frequency modulation at low modulation frequencies is often 
poor in cases of cochlear hearing loss.
Binaural hearing is often poor in cases of cochlear hear­
ing loss. It is currently a challenge to determine whether 
binaural processing deficits may be related to basic 
peripheral processes such as neural phase locking.
Interaural intensity discrimination is also sometimes poorer 
in listeners with cochlear hearing loss than in listeners with 
normal hearing.71 However, there are instances where listeners 
with cochlear hearing loss show normal interaural intensity dis­
crimination,70 and it is probably the case that interaural time
  

Psychoacoustical auditory tests 
255
discrimination is more deleteriously affected than interaural 
intensity discrimination in cases of cochlear hearing loss.
Detection in noise
The masking-level difference (MLD)72 refers to a paradigm in 
which the masked detection threshold for a signal is determined 
as a function of the relative interaural differences of the signal 
and masker. The MLD depends upon the ability of the auditory 
system to process relatively subtle interaural difference cues of 
time and intensity. Whereas the anatomical stage of processing 
most critical for the MLD has its locus in the auditory brain' 
stem, the MLD also hinges upon more peripheral auditory pro­
cessing. The most common MLD conditions are referred to as 
NoSo (noise and signal both presented interaurally in phase) 
and NoStc (noise presented interaurally in phase, but signal pre­
sented 180° out of phase, Figure 14.9). In normally hearing 
listeners, the threshold for the NoS7i condition is approxi­
mately 15 dB better than that for the NoSo condition, reflect­
ing the sensitivity of the auditory system to the small interaural 
differences that are introduced when the Stc signal is presented 
in the No noise. Several studies have indicated that this 
binaural advantage is often reduced in listeners with cochlear 
hearing loss.69,73,74 MLDs are particularly likely to be reduced in 
cases of asymmetrical hearing loss, but reduced MLDs are not 
uncommon in cases of symmetrical loss.
NoSo
Figure 14.9 Schematic representation of stimuli used in typical MLD experi­
ment In the NoSo condition (top), both the masking noise and the sinusoidal 
signal have exactly the same phase relation between the two ears, and detec­
tion is relatively poor. In the NoSn; condition (bottom), the masking noise has 
exactly the same phase relation between the two ears, but the sinusoidal signal 
is interarally phase inverted. Here, signal detection improves substantially.
As suggested above, poor sensitivity to interaural differ­
ences of time and intensity and reduced MLDs indicate the 
likelihood of reduced binaural hearing performance in real 
environments. This could take the form of a reduced ability to 
localize sounds and detect and recognize desired signals when 
they occur at low signal-to-noise ratios in spatially complex 
backgrounds.
Conductive hearing loss
Conductive hearing loss is often considered in terms of a simple 
attenuation of sound. In this sense, performance in an ear with 
conductive hearing loss would be expected to be similar to that 
in a normal ear stimulated at a lower level. Therefore, it is not 
surprising that basic measures of temporal75 and frequency76 res­
olution indicate normal performance in conductive hearing loss 
for stimuli presented at appropriate sensation levels. The situa­
tion for binaural hearing is less straightforward. If the conduc­
tive loss is different in the two ears, the associated attenuation 
will be asymmetrical. This asymmetry could reduce the effi­
ciency of binaural hearing. Colburn and Hausler77 also showed 
that another possible source of poor binaural hearing in con­
ductive impairment is related to bone conduction. For sound 
delivery over headphones, both the air conduction route and 
the bone conduction route are relevant. In the normal ear, the 
bone-conducted sound is generally better than 40-50 dB down 
relative to air-conducted sound. In such a case, the bone- 
conducted sound probably does not have a material effect on 
the composite sound. This may not be the case when a con­
ductive loss is present. Here, the bone-conducted sound may be 
lower than the air-conducted sound by, for example, 10 dB. In 
such a case, the bone-conducted sound could have a material 
effect on the composite waveform, and could appreciably affect 
the interaural difference cues. Therefore, in cases of conductive 
hearing loss, MLDs could be substantially reduced because of 
this factor.
Several studies that have investigated binaural hearing in 
conductively impaired listeners have found that, in many sub­
jects, binaural hearing is rather poor.59-61,78,79 Perhaps of greater 
interest, binaural hearing does not always return to normal 
immediately following corrective middle ear surgery. For exam­
ple, it has been shown that binaural hearing may remain abnor­
mal for up to 1-2 years following the restoration of a normal 
audiogram, both in adults78,80,81 and in children.82-84 It has been 
speculated that some of the difficulties in the binaural hearing
Binaural hearing is often surprisingly poor in cases of con­
ductive hearing loss, and can remain poor for some time 
after corrective surgery. Slow recovery after corrective 
surgery may be related to alterations in the efficiency of 
the neural processing of binaural difference cues.
  

256 
Audiology
of conductively impaired listeners may be related to alterations
in the efficiency of the neural processing of binaural difference
82
cues-
Vestibular schwannoma
Although vestibular schwannoma is rare in comparison to 
other forms of auditory disease, the condition has received con­
siderable attention in the audiological literature because of the 
importance of differentiating cochlear from retrocochlear sites 
of lesion. Several psychoacoustical findings have been noted in 
cases of vestibular schwannoma. One is abnormal adaptation, 
wherein a tone presented above detection threshold rapidly 
fades into inaudibility.85 Another typical finding pertains to 
loudness growth. Whereas loudness recruitment occurs typi­
cally in cases of cochlear site of lesion, this phenomenon is less 
common in cases of schwannoma.86 Acoustical neuroma is also 
associated with poor performance in the binaural MLD task.73,87 
It is thought that the reduced MLD may be related to an inabil­
ity to code temporal fine structure cues when an vestibular 
schwannoma is present. This type of processing problem may 
also underlie the very poor speech perception performance 
often found in patients with vestibular schwannomas.88,89
Summary
The most obvious, and usually the most significant, characteris­
tic of hearing loss of cochlear origin is a reduction in sensitivity 
to the presence of sound. This loss of sensitivity, in and of itself, 
results in serious problems in communication. The focus of this 
chapter has been on a compounding of this problem due to 
degradations in the auditory processes that underlie our abilities 
to analyse the subtle spectral, temporal and spatial features of 
suprathreshold sounds. The literature indicates that such 
suprathreshold analyses are often compromised in hearing loss 
of cochlear origin.
Abnormalities in auditory processes related to frequency, 
temporal and spatial analyses probably contribute significantly 
to the disability that hearing-impaired listeners face when try­
ing to hear desired signals in complex auditory backgrounds.
References
1. Moore BCJ. Perceptual Consequences of Cochlear Damage. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995: 232.
2. Sivian LJ, White SD. On minimum audible sound fields. J 
Acoust Soc Am 1933; 4: 288-321.
3. Bekesy GV. Experiments in Hearing. New York: McGraw- 
Hill, 1960.
4. Allen JB, Hall JL, Jeng PS. Loudness growth in 1/2-octave 
bands (LGOB)— a procedure for the assessment of loud­
ness. J A coust Soc Am 1990; 88: 745-53.
5. Hall JW, Grose JH, Hatch DR. Temporal analysis and stim­
ulus fluctuation in listeners with normal and impaired hear­
ing. J Speech Hear Res 1998; 41: 340-54.
6. Reger SN. Differences in loudness response of the normal 
and hard-of-hearing ear at intensity levels slightly above 
the threshold. Ann Otol 1936; 45: 1029-39.
7. Fowler EP. A method for the early detection of otosclerosis. 
Arch Otolaryngol 1936; 24: 731-41.
8. Hallpike CS. The loudness recruitment phenomenon: its 
clinical significance and neurological basis. Proc R Soc Med 
1965; 58: 190-6.
9. Jerger J. The SISI test. Int Audiol 1962; 1: 246-7.
10. Buus S, Florentine M, Redden RB. The SISI test: a review. 
Part I. Audiology 1982; 21: 273-93.
11. Buus S, Florentine M, Redden RB. The SISI test: a review. 
Part II. Audiology 1982; 21 365-85.
12. Turner CW, Zwislocki JJ, Filion PR. Intensity discrimina­
tion determined with two paradigms in normal and hear- 
ing-impaired subjects. J A coust Soc Am 1989; 86: 109-15.
13. Schroder AC, Viemeister NF, Neslon DA. Intensity dis­
crimination in normal-hearing and hearing-impaired lis­
teners. J A coust Soc Am 1994; 96: 2683-93.
14. Glasberg B, Moore B. Psychoacoustics abilities of subjects 
with unilateral and bilateral cochlear hearing impairments 
and their relationship to the ability to understand speech. 
Scand Audiol Suppl 1989; 32: 1-25.
15. Fasti H, Schom K. Discrimination of level differences by 
hearing impaired patients. Audiology 1981; 20: 488-502.
16. Patterson RD. Auditory filter shapes derived with noise 
stimuli. ] A coust Soc Am 1976; 59: 640-54.
17. Patterson RD, Nimmo-Smith I, Weber DL, Milroy R. The 
deterioration of hearing with age: frequency selectivity, the 
critical ratio, the audiogram, and speech threshold. ] A coust 
Soc Am 1982; 72: 1788-803.
18. Glasberg BR, Moore BCJ, Patterson RD, Nimmo-Smith I. 
Dynamic range and asymmetry of the auditory filter. J 
A coust Soc Am 1984; 76: 419-27.
19. Glasberg BR, Moore BCJ. Derivation of auditory filter 
shapes from notched-noise data. Hear Res 1990; 4 7 :103-38.
20. Tyler RS, Hall JW, Glasberg BR, Moore BCJ, Patterson RD. 
Auditory filter asymmetry in the hearing impaired. J A coust 
Soc Am 1984; 76: 1363-76.
21. Hall JW, Grose JH. Spectro-temporal analysis and cochlear 
hearing impairment: effects of frequency selectivity, tempo­
ral resolution, signal frequency and rate of modulation. J 
Acoust Soc Am 1989; 85: 2550-62.
22. Glasberg BR, Moore BCJ. Auditory filter shapes in subjects 
with unilateral and bilateral cochlear impairments. J A coust 
Soc Am 1986; 79: 1020-33.
23. Zwicker EB. On the pscyhophysical equivalent of tuning 
curves. In: Zwicker E, Terhardt E, eds. Facts and Models in 
Hearing. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1974.
24. Moore BCJ. Psychophysical tuning curves measured in 
simultaneous and forward masking. J Acoust Soc Am 1978; 
63: 524-32.
  

Psychoacoustical auditory tests 
257
25. Moore BCJ, Glasberg BR, Roberts B. Refining the measure- 
ments of psychophysical tuning curves. J A coust Soc Am 
1984; 76: 1057-66.
26. Zwicker E, Schom K. Psychoacoustical tuning curves in 
audiology. Audiology 1978; 17: 120-40.
27. Tyler RS, Wood EJ, Fernandes M. Frequency resolution and 
hearing loss. B rJ Audiol 1982; 16: 45-63.
28. Rose JE, Brugge JF, Anderson DJ, Hind JE. Patterns of activ­
ity in single auditory nerve fibres of the squirrel monkey. In: 
Reuck AVSD, Knight J, eds. Hearing Mechanisms in 
Vertebrates. London: Churchill, 1968: 144-57.
29. Wier CC, Jesteadt W, Green DM. Frequency discrimina­
tion as a function of frequency and sensation level. J Acoust 
Soc Am 1977; 61: 178-84.
30. Shower EG, Biddulph R. Differential pitch sensitivity of 
the ear. J Acoust Soc Am 1931; 2: 275-87.
31. Formby C. Frequency and rate discrimination by Meniere 
patients. Audiology 1986; 25: 10-18.
32. Hall JW, Wood EJ. Stimulus duration and frequency dis­
crimination for normal-hearing and hearing-imp aired sub­
jects. J Speech Hear Res 1984; 27: 252-6.
33. Freyman RL, Nelson DA. Frequency discrimination as a 
function of signal frequency and level in normal-hearing 
and hearing-impaired listeners. J Speech Hear Res 1991; 34: 
1371-86.
34. Moore BC, Sek A. Detection of frequency modulation at 
low modulation rates: evidence for a mechanism based on 
phase locking. J Acoust Soc Am 1996; 100: 2320-31.
35. Lacher-Fougere S, Demany L. Modulation detection by 
normal and hearing-impaired listeners. Audiology 1998; 37: 
109-21.
36. Woolf NK, Ryan AF, Bone RC. Neural phase-locking prop­
erties in the absence of cochlear outer hair cells. Hear Res 
1981; 4: 335-46.
37. Harrison RV, Evans EF. Some aspects of temporal coding by 
single cochlear fibres from regions of cochlear hair cell 
degeneration in the guinea pig. Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1979; 
224:71-8.
38. Plomp R. Rate of decay of auditory sensation. J Acoust Soc 
Am 1964; 36: 277-82.
39. Eddins DA, Hall JW, Grose JH. The detection of temporal 
gaps as a function of frequency region and absolute noise 
bandwidth. J Acoust Soc Am 1992; 91: 1069-77.
40. Shailer MJ, Moore BCJ. Detection of temporal gaps in 
bandlimited noise: effects of variations in bandwidth and 
signal-to-masker ratio. J A coust Soc Am 1985; 77: 635-9.
41. Grose JH. Gap detection in multiple narrow bands of noise 
as a function of spectral configuration. J A coust Soc Am 
1991;90:3061-8.
42. Viemeister NF. Temporal modulation transfer functions 
based upon modulation thresholds. ] Acoust Soc Am 1979; 
66: 1364-80.
43. Eddins DA. Amplitude modulation detection of narrow­
band noise: effects of absolute bandwidth and frequency 
region. J Acoust Soc Am 1993; 93: 470-9.
44. Bacon SP, Viemeister NF. Temporal modulation transfer 
functions in normal-hearing and hearing-impaired subjects. 
Audiology 1985; 24: 117-34.
45. Buus S, Florentine M. Gap detection in normal and 
impaired listeners: the effect of level and frequency. In: 
Michelsen A, ed. Time Resolution in Auditory Systems. New 
York: Springer-Verlag, 1985: 159-79.
46. Moore BCJ, Glasberg BR, Donaldson E, McPherson T, 
Plack CJ. Detection of temporal gaps in sinusoids by nor­
mally hearing and hearing-impaired subjects. J Acoust Soc 
Am 1989; 85: 1266-75.
47. Hall JW, Grose JH. The relation between gap detec­
tion, loudness and loudness growth in noise-masked 
normal-hearing listeners. J Acoust Soc Am 1997; 101: 
1044-9.
48. van Wieringen A, Pols LCW. Frequency and duration dis­
crimination of short first-formant speechlike transitions. J 
Acoust Soc Am 1994; 95: 502-11.
49. Tyler RS, Summerfield AQ, Wood EJ, Fernandes MA. Psy­
choacoustic and phonetic temporal processing in normal 
and hearing-impaired listeners. J Acoust Soc Am 1982; 72: 
740-52.
50. Viemeister NF, Wakefield GH. Temporal integration and 
multiple looks. ] Acoust Soc Am 1991; 90: 858-65.
51. Sanders JW, Honig EA. Brief tone audiometry. Results in 
normal and impaired ears. Arch Otolaryngol 1967; 85: 
640-7.
52. Pedersen CB. Brief tone audiometry in patients with 
acoustic trauma. Acta Otolaryngol 1973; 75: 332-3.
53. Olsen WO, Rose DE, Noffsinger D. Brief-tone audiometry 
with normal, cochlear, and eighth nerve tumor patients. 
Arch Otolaryngol 1974;99:185-9.
54. Patuzzi R. Cochlear micromechanics and macromechanics. 
In: Dallos P, Popper AN, Fay RR, eds. The Cochlea. New 
York: Springer, 1996; 186-257.
55. Yates GK. Basilar membrane nonlinearity and its influence 
on auditory nerve rate-intensity functions. Hear Res 1990; 
50: 145-62.
56. Ryan A, McGee TJ. Development of hearing loss in 
kanamycin treated chinchillas. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1977;86:176-82.
57. Patuzzi RB, Yates GK, Johnstone BM. Outer hair cell recep­
tor current and sensorineural hearing loss. Hear Res 1989; 
42: 47-72.
58. Abel S, Birt B, McClean J. Sound localization: value in 
localizing lesions of the auditory pathway. C anJ Otol 1978; 
7: 132-40.
59. Hausler R, Marr EM, Colburn HS. Sound localization with 
impaired hearing. J A coust Soc Am 1979; 65: S133.
60. Jonkees L, van der Veer R. Directional hearing capacity in 
hearing disorders. Acta Otolaryngol 1957; 48: 465-74.
61. Nordlund B. Directional audiometry. Acta Otolaryngol 
1964; 57: 1-18.
62. Roser D. Directional hearing in persons with hearing disor­
ders. J Laryngol Rhinol 1965; 45: 423-40.
  

258 
Audiology
63. Hausler R, Colburn HS, Marr E. Sound localization in sub­
jects with impaired hearing. A eta Otolaryngol 1983; Suppl 
400: 1-62.
64. Klump RG, Eady HR. Some measurement of interaural time 
difference thresholds. J Acoust Soc Am 1956; 28: 859-60.
65. Zwislocki J, Feldman RS. Just noticeable differences in 
dichotic phase. J Acoust Soc Am 1956; 28: 860-4.
66. Henning GB. Detectability of interaural delay in high- 
frequency complex waveforms. J Acoust Soc Am 1974; 55: 
84-90.
67. McFadden D, Pasanen EG. Lateralization at high frequencies 
based on interaural time differences. J Acoust Soc Am 1976; 
59: 634-9.
68. Smoski WJ, Trahiotis C. Discrimination of interaural tem­
poral disparities by normal-hearing listeners and listeners 
with high-frequency sensori-neural hearing loss. J Acoust 
Soc Am 1986; 79: 1541-7.
69. Hall JW, Tyler RS, Fernandes MA. Factors influencing the 
masking level difference in cochlear hearing-impaired and 
normal-hearing listeners.J Speech Hear Res 1984; 27:145-54.
70. Hawkins DB, Wightman FL. Interaural time discrimination 
ability of listeners with sensori-neural hearing loss. Audiol- 
ogy 1980; 19: 495-507.
71. Gabriel KJ, Koehnke J, Colburn HS. Frequency depen­
dence of binaural performance in listeners with impaired 
binaural hearing. J Acoust Soc Am 1992; 91: 336-47.
72. Hirsh IJ. Binaural summation and interaural inhibition as a 
function of the level of the masking noise. J A coust Soc Am 
1948; 20: 205-13.
73. Olsen W, Noffsinger D. Masking level differences for 
cochlear and brainstem lesions. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1976; 85: 1-6.
74. Jerger J, Brown D, Smith S. Effect of peripheral hearing loss 
on the MLD. Arch Otolaryngol 1984; 110: 290-6.
75. Zwicker E, Schom K. Temporal resolution in hard of hear­
ing patients. Audiology 1982; 21: 474-92.
76. Florentine M, Buus S, Scharf B, Zwicker E. Frequency 
selectivity 
in 
normal-hearing 
and 
hearing-impaired 
observers. J Speech Hear Res 1980; 23: 643-69.
77. Colburn HS, Hausler R. Note on the modeling of binaural 
interaction in impaired auditory systems. In: Brink GVD, 
Bilsen FA, eds. Physical Physiological and Behavioral Studies in 
Hearing. Delft: Delft University, 1980: 491-503.
78. Hall JW, Derlacki EL. Effect of conductive hearing loss and 
middle ear surgery on binaural hearing. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1986; 95: 525-30.
79. Quaranta A, Cervellera G. Masking level differences in 
normal and pathological ears. Audiology 1974; 13: 428-31.
80. Hall JW, Grose JH, Pillsbury HC. Predicting binaural hear­
ing after stapedectomy from pre-surgery results. Arch Oto­
laryngol Head Neck Surg 1990; 116: 946-50.
81. Magliulo G, Gagliardi M, Muscatello M, Natale A. Masking 
level difference before and after surgery. Br J Audiol 1990; 
24:117-21.
82. Hall JW, Grose JH, Pillsbury HC. Long-term effects of 
chronic otitis media on binaural hearing in children. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995; 121: 847-52.
83. Moore DR, Hutchings ME, Meyer SE. Binaural masking 
level differences in children with a history of otitis media. 
Audiology 1991; 30: 91-101.
84. Pillsbury HC, Grose JH, Hall JW. Otitis media with effusion 
in children: binaural hearing before and after corrective 
surgery. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1991; 117: 
718-23.
85. Jerger J, Jerger S. A simplified tone decay test. Arch Oto­
laryngol 1975; 102: 403-7.
86. Fowler EP Some attributes of ‘loudness recruitment’ and 
‘loudness decruitment’. Trans Am Otol Soc 1965; 53: 78-84.
87. Noffsinger D, Martinez CD, Schaefer AB. Auditory brain­
stem responses and masking level differences from persons 
with brainstem lesion. Scan Audiol 1982; 15: 81-93.
88. Jerger J, Neely JG, Jerger S. Speech, impedance, and audi­
tory brainstem response audiometry in brainstem tumors. 
Importance of a multiple-test strategy. Arch Otolaryngol 
1980; 106: 218-23.
89. Bess FH, Josey AF, Humes LE. Performance intensity func­
tions in cochlear and eighth nerve disorders. Am J Otol 
1979; 1: 27-31.
  

15 Otoacoustic 
emissions
Borka Ceranic
Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) are weak signals that can be 
recorded in the ear canal and are considered to reflect cochlear 
activity- OAEs were demonstrated and recorded for the first 
time by Kemp in 19781 and led to a revolutionary change in 
hearing research and clinical audiology, as our understanding of 
how the cochlea processes sound has fundamentally altered.
Introduction
Historical background
The basic understanding that the cochlea converts sound waves 
into nerve impulses, which are transmitted into the brain, has 
existed for more than 200 years. Throughout this period, a 
number of theories on how the cochlea processes sound were 
proposed. The auditory theory, established by the eminent tele­
phone engineer von Bekesy,2 following a series of experiments 
in the early 1940s, assumed the rise of the travelling wave in a 
mechanically passive and linear system, which delivered sound 
energy of different frequencies to different parts of the cochlea. 
However, this passive, anterograde travelling wave, in a viscous 
environment, would lead to energy loss and degradation of the 
cochlear travelling wave, which would inevitably lead to loss of 
sensitivity and frequency resolution of the cochlea. This theory 
was challenged by Gold,3 who proposed a theoretical model in 
which he anticipated active involvement of the cochlea in a 
positive, self-enforced system, which compensated for the 
energy loss of sound propagation through the high damping 
inner ear fluids. However, at that time, his views were not seri­
ously considered. Only with Kemp’s discovery of OAEs was 
there direct proof that the cochlea is capable not only of for­
ward propagation of the travelling wave, but also of retrograde 
transmission of sound. The cochlea was shown to represent an 
active, highly non-linear system, able to overcome the damping 
of the travelling wave and enable sound amplification and sharp 
frequency tuning.
Cochlear micromechanics and generation of 
OAEs
Kemp has proposed that OAEs are emitted from the cochlea as 
a byproduct of an active, non-linear, biomechanical, feedback 
process from the outer hair cells (OHCs) to the basilar mem­
brane. This process improves low-level sensitivity and sharp­
ness of tuning, by enhancing the vibration of a narrow region of 
the cochlear partition. The concept of sound emission from the 
cochlea implies a transmission mechanism to propagate the 
sound out of the cochlea. According to Kemp,4 this retrograde 
energy transmission in the cochlea could be due to some form 
of ‘localized perturbation’, possibly as a result of discontinuities 
in OHC arrangements, resulting in modification of the propa­
gation of the forward travelling wave.
Research over the past two decades has provided the evi­
dence that OAE generation is related to active, fast and slow, 
physiologically vulnerable, motility of the OHCs,5’6 through the 
contraction of the actinomyosin complex in the cytoskeleton of 
the OHCs. Thus, the OHCs have the capacity to act as periph­
eral effector cells. This has been demonstrated by efferently 
induced OHC motility following electrical5,7 or chemical 
(y-aminobutyric acid -  one of the main neurotransmitters of the 
efferent auditory system) stimulation.8 The fast contractions5 
are phase-locked to the stimulating sound and follow sound- 
driven passive vibrations of the cochlear partition. They stimu­
late the actinomyosin network of the OHCs, acting to oppose 
viscous damping in the cochlea and to enhance the oscillations 
of the cochlear partition and, thus, the mechanical stimu­
lation of the IHCs. The slow, tonic contractions of the OHCs6 
can alter the stiffness of the cochlear partition in a sharply 
restricted area, modifying the envelope of the travelling wave. 
These slow contractions result from the activity of the efferent 
system (see below), known as electromechanical transduction 
(electromotility), and have an important role in setting the 
position of the basilar membrane. These active oscillations of 
the OHCs are responsible for the generation of OAEs.
The vibrations of the stapes footplate in the oval window, 
driven by sound pressure waves, cause a dynamic displacement

260 
Audiology
of the cochlear partition in the shape of a travelling wave. 
Since the walls of the endolymphatic duct (scala media) are 
flexible, the travelling waves are transmitted to the scala tym- 
pani, and the wave-like distortion of the endolymphatic duct 
causes Reissner’s membrane and the basilar membrane to swing 
from one side to the other, i.e. towards the scala tympani and 
the scala vestibuli, alternately. The amplitude of the travelling 
wave has a clearly defined maximum. The site at which maxi­
mal displacement of the endolymphatic duct occurs is the ‘char­
acteristic’ for the frequency of sound: high frequencies have 
their maximum reception near the stapes, while low frequencies 
are situated towards the apex. The velocity of the travelling 
waves and their wavelength gradually decrease with increasing 
distance from the oval window. Among the reasons for this 
attenuation, besides the damping properties of the liquid-filled 
scalae, is that towards the apex, the basilar membrane gradually 
becomes wider (increased mass) and less rigid (reduced stiff­
ness). This hydrodynamic mechanism, initially thought to be a 
passive response to the propagating sound, was extensively 
investigated and described by von Bekesy.2 Sound-driven pas­
sive mechanical movements of the basilar membrane and 
OHCs are accompanied by additional induction of active, fast, 
mechanical movements of the OHCs and subsequent slow 
movements, thus creating a highly non-linear and saturating 
positive feedback system. The OHC fast motility, which 
enhances the basilar membrane motion (near-hearing thresh­
old amplification by »40dB), is linearly correlated with the 
intensity of sound stimuli.9 However, with an increase in sound 
pressure level, the cochlea is capable of correcting undesirable 
(high) shifts of the basilar membrane by the slow OHC move­
ments, leading to a reduction of the passive displacement, and 
non-linear compression of cochlear dynamics (attenuation).9,10 
Thus, the OHCs act as controlled mechano-amplifiers within 
the cochlea and feed amplified mechanical oscillations to the 
inner hair cells (IHCs), which are directly involved in the 
transformation of mechanical energy into neural activity.
The OHCs’ activity is controlled by the positive feedback 
mechanism, involving the efferent olivocochlear (OC) system 
(Figure 15.1), which was first described by Rasmusen.11 The 
fibres of the OC system originate from the superior olivary com­
plex, in the medulla oblongata, which consists of medial and 
lateral nuclei.
The fibres from the lateral nucleus are arranged in the pre­
dominantly uncrossed, lateral OC bundle which projects to the 
afferent fibres of the IHCs. The fibres from the medial nucleus 
are arranged in the mainly crossed, medial OC bundle, which 
travels along the vestibular nerve and projects directly onto the 
OHCs. The medial efferent OC (MOC) system is considered to 
be inhibitory12 and responsible for the control of OHC motility 
(cochlear micromechanics). This effect is consistent with the 
results of a number of studies in which stimulation of the effer- 
ents in the silent condition has been employed. However, when 
efferents are activated in noisy background, they exhibit an 
enhancement of the transient stimulus.13,14
With the introduction of OAEs, the MOC system has been
extensively investigated. However, very little is known about 
the lateral OC system. It is believed that it plays an important 
role in the firing of cochlear neurones, and therefore may have 
a protective role against excessive noise and/or excitotoxicity.15
The OC system is only a part of the auditory efferent sys­
tem and has multisynaptic connections with the upper parts of 
the auditory system.
The first recording of OAEs in 1978 revolutionized clin­
ical audiology and hearing research. OAEs have sup­
ported the existence of active mechanical amplification 
of sound in the cochlea and retrograde propagation of the 
travelling wave, with a small ‘leakage’ of sound energy 
from these active processes, which can be recorded in the 
ear canal.
The active processes in the cochlea are the result of 
contractile properties of the OHCs, thus creating the 
basis for the generation of OAEs. The sound vibrations 
that produce active and passive fast oscillations of the 
OHCs at the same time activate the medial OC system. 
This leads to the slow tonic contraction of the OHCs, 
creating the forces to oppose the displacement of the 
cochlear partition, i.e. a suppressive effect on the OHCs.
Classification and recording of OAEs
Classes of OAEs
OAEs can be recorded in the ear canal in the absence of 
acoustical stimulation, as spontaneous OAEs (SOAEs), or can 
be evoked by acoustical stimuli. Evoked OAEs are divided into 
different categories, according to the type of stimuli: transient 
evoked OAEs (TEOAEs), distortion product OAEs (DPOAEs), 
and stimulus frequency (SFOAE) OAEs. SOAEs, TEOAEs and 
DPOAEs are commonly used in clinical practice and will be 
described in this chapter in more detail.
  

Otoacoustic emissions 
261
SFOAEs are the signals generated by the cochlea at the 
same frequency as the stimulating continuous tone, but they are 
difficult to measure and the instrumentation is complex. 
Therefore, a recording system for SFOAEs is not commercially 
available.
and more peaks (? better sensitivity in recording of SOAEs) 
than those obtained by direct recording; the reasons for this are 
yet to be clarified.
Figure 15.3 shows a standard default screen with SOAEs 
using the ILO88 Otodynamics equipment.
Recording of OAEs
A standard recording setup (Figure 15.2) includes the stimulus 
generator, stimulus delivery system (including probe), signal 
averager and signal display system.16 A probe, which is inserted 
into the ear canal, contains the transducer, which delivers the 
stimulus. The stimulus generates a travelling wave, a part of 
which is reflected and described as the ‘cochlear echo’. The 
‘cochlear echo’ radiates out and is recorded using a sensitive 
microphone, which is also contained in the probe.
It is of importance to stress that only a fraction of the 
reflected energy can be recorded in the ear canal, partly due to 
loss through the retrograde transmission via the middle ear. The 
influence of middle ear function on OAEs is very well doc­
umented.17 Therefore, when OAE responses are evaluated, the 
middle ear function must be taken into account.
SOAEs
SOAEs represent a unique class of OAEs, since they can be 
recorded in the absence of any acoustical stimulation.18 They 
result from the process of enhancing the vibration of a narrow 
region of the cochlear partition, feeding energy back into the 
mechanical system. The excess of acoustical energy from that 
feedback process is radiated out of the cochlea, and a small 
amount of that energy may be recorded in the ear canal.
SOAEs can be recorded in two ways. In one, the sound 
pressure level in the ear canal is recorded by a sensitive micro­
phone placed in the ear canal with no stimulus applied, and the 
signal is averaged in the frequency domain. In the other (used 
in the ILO88 system), SOAEs are synchronized by acoustical 
stimuli (clicks), using averaging in the time domain. This 
method allows the detection of sustained oscillations following 
stimulus (click)-evoked OAEs.
Studies applying these two methods have shown, generally, 
good correspondence of obtained SOAEs.19,20 With the syn­
chronizing method, SOAEs exhibit lower levels («10dB less)
EAR
Microphone 
I
Amplifier
1 
y  
Averager
Transducer
Attenuator
C  1 
Generator
PROBE
COMPUTER
TEOAEs
TEOAEs are recorded in response to the transient stimuli and 
show a delay (latency) with respect to the onset of the acousti­
cal stimulus. The click is the most commonly used stimulus, 
because it has energy over a broad frequency range. Similar to 
the travelling wave, click-evoked OAEs also demonstrate fre­
quency dispersion, with the shortest latency being for the high, 
and the longest for the low, frequencies (about 4 ms for 5 kHz; 
20 ms for 0.5 kHz).
TEOAEs exhibit ‘compressive’ non-linearity, i.e. ‘compres­
sive’ growth of the TEOAE amplitude as a function of the stim­
ulus intensity. The maximal gain occurs at lower sound levels 
(around hearing threshold level) and gradually reduces with an 
increase in sound intensity, before reaching saturation level, 
after which a further increase in sound intensity does not lead 
to an increase in TEOAE amplitude.1
TEOAEs can be recorded using different techniques, as 
follows.
Differential non-linear technique (ILO88 system, Otodynamics) 
This technique has been in widespread clinical use since the 
commercial availability of the hardware and software (1988). 
The stimulus presentation, data recording, averaging and spec­
trum analysis have been described by Kemp et al.16 The stimuli 
are clicks (bandwidth «5kHz), with a duration of 80 |ns, pre­
sented at a repetition rate of 50/s, with a peak reception level at 
around 80 dB SPL. They are presented in the non-linear differ­
ential mode: four clicks, with three clicks at the same level and 
polarity, and a fourth click three times greater in level and 
reverse polarity, and with a 10-dB increase in amplitude. This
IL088 BP+TEOftEs 
Patient:
Ear.
Date
8 DP+TEOftEs 
U5.60U9 
ent:C J 
rig h t Case:HT 
..,.21/81/1998 
;
EHode4 STIMULUS 
HX ♦ i 0 
SPONT
dB GAIN 
0 J
Response FFT
»0ISE
REJECTION AT 4 4 . 6 1
QUIEI IN 26&802 
ic is y KH 
a
[ = ]
Frequency Analysis
i f m
r n
(RESPONSE
Synchronised
spontaneous
m
STItfJUtSTCdBpk
START TO DO 
-----
STftBiLlTY 98/
fTKTTIK tt1
SME DIRECTOR* 
C'MurwNEDCfeTfl 
FI UUP 16/939 
REVIEW DIRECTORY 
tf\SET
SCREEN HAT ft SOKCE
fi=S$T
Figure 15.2 A schematic view of a standard setup for recording of OAEs.
Figure 15.3 Spontaneous OAEs in a normal subject with a multiple frequency 
component spectrum.
  

262 
Audiology
paradigm cancels the linear portion of the stimulus and 
response, including the meatal and middle ear echoes, so that 
non-linear cochlear emissions can be extracted. The responses 
from the cochlea are recorded and averaged alternately in two 
separate buffers (A and B) using a synchronous time-domain 
averaging technique. The waveforms present in the buffers A 
and B are compared, and their high cross-correlation (repro­
ducibility) suggests the presence of the cochlear response. The 
post-stimulus analysis time is 2.5-20 ms. The fast Fourier trans­
formation (FFT) spectrum analysis of averaged waveforms is 
automatically performed and plotted against the averaged ran­
dom noise in the ear canal. A typical screen of a normal adult 
is displayed in Figure 15.4.
The recording of TEOAEs using maximum length sequence 
(MLS) technique
This technique21 has been developed specifically to improve the 
quality and duration of TEOAE recording in less than optimal 
conditions (e.g. a noisy child). It applies MLS, which represents 
a quasi-random train of clicks and silences, with a higher click 
stimulus rate (up to 5000 clicks/s, in contrast to the conven­
tional 50 clicks/s), and the subsequent overlapped responses are 
subjected to the process of recovery.
This technique, as well as the deconvolution method,22 
although not used in routine clinical practice, heralds further 
developments in OAE recording technology.
DPOAEs
DPOAEs or ‘combination tones’, can be defined as acoustical 
energy resulting from the non-linear interaction of two simul­
taneously applied pure tones, which partially overlap the vibra­
tion fields in the cochlea. The continuous tones, known as the 
primaries f x and f2 (the frequency /2 <  ), are most commonly
presented with equal levels (in dBSPL) at the eardrum (or with 
the level of f2 slightly less than/L) at closely-spaced frequencies, 
with the optimal^//! ratio about 1.22.23 DPOAEs consist of new 
frequencies which are not represented in the primaries, and in 
humans, the strongest DPOAE is at the frequency described by 
the expression 2f { —f2.
The most frequently used application is the DPOAE-gram, 
obtained by cycling through the preset stimulus frequency 
sequence, with the fixed ratio f j f 2, and building a plot of 
DPOAE levels as a function of the frequency (Figure 15.5). 
Another method is the input-output measure of DPOAE, 
which presents signals at several levels for a specific frequency 
and provides information, such as detection threshold, growth 
function, or maximum output level.
There are several commercially available recording tech­
nologies, one of which is the IL092 Otodynamics system.
All OAEs can be divided into two classes: spontaneous 
and evoked. Spontaneous OAEs are continuous narrow­
band signals emitted by the cochlea in the absence of any 
stimulation. They can be recorded directly from the ear 
canal using a sensitive microphone or using a synchroniz­
ing click (the latter method is used in the ILOB8 Otody­
namics system). Evoked OAEs are recorded following 
stimulation by different stimuli: TEOAEs can be evoked 
by transient impulses, such as clicks or tone bursts, and 
DPOAEs can be evoked by two continuous tones, /, and 
/?, at the two closely spaced frequencies, delivered into 
the ear canal
A standard recording setup includes the stimulus 
generator, stimulus delivery system (including probe), sig­
nal averager and signal display system.
Stimulus
.3Pa
-.3Pa
11088 DP+TEOAEs 
Patient: ftdiilt 
Ear. righ t Case:
Date . 
21/81/1998
: name I
1998
STIMULUS* DA CAIN 1
ft 
CLIKM
Response FFT
■EH E KIH AT—
f H . SnP.j 
<28dB>
1—*—i—i—
Response Uauefum
St irt*8B. 41
B ns
18ns 
,i I 
i.
Preset 
t 
i 
k
ZBgs
HOISEwvt 33.01
REJECTION AT 1 2 . 8 l j 
EQUlVtt-EHT P 2-9nh
OUIET EN 26fe47i 
noisvXH Z98
flftB heah 
10.4#
fi-B DIET 
-0 .2 1
RESPONSE 10.21
UME REPftO 7ZAM 
QDCIVRPRZ S W *™
14) 1.5 2.0 3J>4j0K*
91 94 81 96 73 J£ 
1812 714 4 1
SIIHUUiS88dflpic
St ART TO END 
| 
STABILITY 95/ H
toESTTitt: 1H4SZC
SflVE DIRECTORY
FIUEIF 18/939 
REVIEW DIRECTORY
SCREEN DATA SOlKf
Figure 15.4 TEOAEs, recorded with non-linear click stimuli of 80.4dBSPL, from 
a normal subject, showing in the response window two alternate (A and B) 
recorded time waveforms and the F F  with the frequency spectrum of the 
response.
Figure 15.5 DPOAE-gram recorded from a normal subject. Amplitude of the 
distortion product (dBSPL) is illustrated as a function of frequency (f2).
  

Otoacoustic emissions 
263
Characteristics of OAEs in normal 
subjects and their clinical relevance
General properties of OAEs
1. OAEs are physiological, bio-acoustical energy and are the 
consequence of active sound processing in the cochlea. 
However, OAEs are not only the result of cochlear activity, 
but also reflect the transmission of sound through the mid- 
die ear and the resonant characteristics of the sealed ear 
canal.
2. All classes of OAEs exhibit a saturating type of non-linearity 
with stimulus level, and above 40 dB SL they become rela­
tively insignificant. OAEs themselves rarely exceed 30 dB 
SPL. The non-linear property of OAEs (which reflects non­
linear behaviour of the OHCs, as described above) provides 
the basis for distinguishing OAEs from the passive, linear 
response of the cochlea to sound.
3. OAEs exhibit periodicity in their microstructure. The phe­
nomenon of local periodicity, the presence of the ‘peaks’ 
and ‘valleys’, has been observed in the frequency spectra of 
SOAEs,18'24'25 SFOAEs, TEOAEs26'27 and DPOAEs.28 A pos- 
sible source of the periodicity is in the ‘cochlear reso­
nances’, the places where OAE peaks are most likely to 
occur,24 resulting from the recirculation and partial reflec­
tion of the acoustical stimulus energy, between the place of 
characteristic frequency and the oval window.
4. OAEs are highly reproducible, with temporal and spectral 
properties unique for each individual, being commonly 
described as ‘fingerprints’ of the inner ear.
SOAEs
Characteristics in normal subjects
SOAEs can be recorded in 30-50% (-30%  males and -50%  
females) of individuals with normal hearing, and the prevalence 
of SOAEs in individuals above the age 50 is markedly reduced.29 
It has been recognized that the detection of SOAEs depends on 
the sensitivity of the recording system, and that technological 
advances may increase the number of subjects with recordable 
SOAEs. A study by Penner and Zhang30 demonstrated that the 
detection of SOAEs (62% for males and 83% for females) could 
be increased by suitably tailored spectral analyses.
In addition to gender variation, there have also been 
reports of racial differences, SOAEs being more common in 
black than white populations,31 and a laterality effect, with 
SOAEs being more commonly recorded in right ears.32-34 The 
latter authors reported that right ears are 13% more likely to 
have SOAEs than left ears, and that the occurrence of multiple 
SOAEs is much more prevalent in females than in males. A 
genetic contribution to the expression of SOAEs is thought to 
be significant.35
In the normal population, SOAEs show intra-session, as 
well as inter-session, short-term (few hours) and long-term (4
months) frequency stability, with physiological variations, 
being typically less than 1%, but rarely exceeding 2%.36-41 The 
amplitude of SOAEs, however, may vary over a much wider 
range (more than 10dBSPL).42,43
Although SOAEs are the signals generated by the inner 
ear, they are not audible to the subjects who possess them. In 
some rare cases of high-amplitude SOAEs, they can be heard by 
another person -  e.g. at lm distance.29 It has been hypothesized 
that continuous emissions do not produce an auditory percep­
tion, because of adaptation. Perception occurs only in non- 
adaptive situations,44-47 which can be simulated in experimental 
conditions, such as changing the impedance of the middle ear, 
which may cause a change in the frequency spectrum of 
SOAEs, making them audible to the subject.18,45,48
Clinical relevance of SOAEs
SOAEs have been extensively investigated in the normal pop­
ulation, but their clinical significance still remains unclear. 
They could be an expression of the cochlear integrity, as their 
presence is associated with functionally intact OHCs and 
exquisite hearing sensitivity, with audiometric thresholds, 
according to most authors, better than 15dBHL but less than 
20dBHL at homologous frequencies.49,50 Furthermore, it has 
been demonstrated that individuals with recordable SOAEs 
have better psychophysical thresholds than those without.51 It is 
widely accepted that SOAEs are sensitive (vulnerable) to alter­
ations in the cochlear status: for example, physiological degen­
eration, i.e. ageing, leads to their loss.52 Furthermore, SOAEs 
are subject to small but systematic alterations during physiolog­
ical, e.g. circadian,37,39 or menstrual,39”41 cycles, in the form of 
systematic frequency shifts, which are thought to be governed 
by daily variation in the secretion of melatonin by the pineal 
gland, and, in females, by monthly variations linked to the pitu­
itary-gonadal axis. However, the possibility of SOAE fluctua­
tion as a result of circulatory changes cannot be excluded. The 
observation of fluctuation suggests that SOAEs may not only be 
an expression of the cochlear status, but could also be influ­
enced by higher levels of auditory and/or other central nervous 
system structures. Such an effect may be mediated through 
efferently induced mechanisms of electromechanical transduc­
tion,6 which may alter the gain in the feedback loop of a 
cochlear amplifier, and, thus, the SOAE frequency spectrum.
Kemp24 suggested that SOAEs might result from some areas 
of localized damage in the cochlea that could interfere with 
normal active feedback mechanisms. Furthermore, Ruggero et 
al.53 demonstrated that SOAEs could be generated from the seg­
ment of the organ of Corti, where there is a sharp transition 
between relatively normal OHCs and an adjacent damaged area. 
SOAEs were also reported at the frequencies that correspond to 
the abnormalities on the audiogram.48 In experiments with 
chinchillas, SOAEs have been induced by traumatic noise 
exposure,54,55 and there is evidence that they may interfere with 
auditory function: it has been observed that the presence of 
strong SOAEs degrades the ability of the neurone to respond to 
sound.55 However, there are insufficient data to explain the
  

264 
Audiology
significance of these ‘pathological’ SOAEs, and their clinical 
relevance remains unclear.
The discovery of the existence of SOAEs led to the expec­
tation that they might be an objective correlate of tinnitus, and 
the relationship between tinnitus and SOAEs has therefore 
been studied extensively.56 Although, in general, attempts to 
attribute tinnitus to SOAEs have been disappointing, there are 
some patients with convincing evidence of a close correspon­
dence between tinnitus and SOAEs.46,47,57-63 According to 
Penner,58 the 95% confidence limits for the prevalence of 
SOAE-related tinnitus among members of a self-help group 
were 1% and 9.5%. The effect of aspirin, which in these sub­
jects (with SOAE-related tinnitus) abolishes tinnitus and 
SOAEs simultaneously, has been explored.60,63,64
However, in view of aspirin ototoxicity, this treatment has 
not been considered appropriate.
SOAEs can be recorded in 40-70% of individuals with 
normal hearing and their prevalence depends on the sen­
sitivity of the recording system* SOAEs display high fre­
quency stability on repeated measurements; however, 
systematic physiological variations, although small, have 
been observed. They are associated with exquisite hear­
ing sensitivity -  they correspond to the best audiometric 
frequencies, with homologous audiometric frequency bet­
ter than !5dBH L Although SOAEs have been exten­
sively investigated in normal subjects, their physiological 
significance, and therefore their clinical relevance, 
remains unclear.
TEOAEs
Characteristics in normal subjects and clinical relevance
Since TEOAEs are invariably associated with functioning 
OHCs, they can be recorded in all subjects with normal hear­
ing:29 OAEs are present in 96-100% of normally hearing ears, 
and absent if hearing loss is greater than 25-35 dBHL. There­
fore, the presence of TEOAE responses is a reliable indicator of 
global cochlear (OHC) structural integrity (from 0.5 to 5 kHz), 
although the best responses are recorded in the 1-2-kHz range, 
where the reverse-transfer function of the middle ear is most 
effective.65 Their absence suggests at least a 25-dB loss due to 
either middle ear or cochlear lesions. In general, TEOAEs can­
not be elicited if the hearing loss is greater than 35 dBHL.66,67
TEOAE responses have been shown to have excellent 
test-retest and within-ear stability, and a measurement error 
with variability of amplitude of less than 1 dB,68-70 as shown in 
Figure 15.6. However, TEOAEs have demonstrated consider­
able between-ear variability.1,71
A major limitation of TEOAEs is that the emitted 
responses of the OHC activity are small-amplitude signals, with 
a limited dynamic range before response saturation, and are fur­
ther compromised before measurement by the necessary reverse 
transmission through the middle ear.
Stiniilus
v -
.3Pa
-JPa
-J___ I___ !___
IL088 DP+TEQAFs 
US.GOT© 
Patient' Borka 
Ear. xight Case- Mornal 
Date.. 
05/18/1994
Iqm mm cff
Response Uaueforn 
FI Help
* fl.SnPa 
<28dU)
Response FFT
i m
. . .
St i * -79,51
NOISE iw r 33,
REJECTION «t47.81E
fifrE MEAN 10,21 
ft*B D I F f _ 0 J |
IBrtS 
P r e s e t
.3Pa
fes
nm  Dp+iEOAEs 
us^evi
iPatient: Borka
lai Tight Case-nornaI
jBate,. . .  11/04/1995 
|
U
STiJtLUSJ 
j» caik 
LH—DJJfli__ jfeS___
LQU____ m  OFF -
Response FFT
M
tu .
RESPONSE10.01
HWF FfPRfl 9®lS| 
WKB REPROlSNRJ™
1-0 2*0 
4jQ 5-OKll
91 95 90 0§ 71 % 
1013 9 0 3 1
STIMULUS 88dBpk
STfiRT TO END 
-----
bmatunr % X
Response Uaueforn 
FI Help
* H.SnPa 
(Z8dB)
0ns
10ns
i 
i 
i. 
i
Preset
2Bqs
S<WE DIRECTOR 
C:\IL0-VS\ECHOTBTR 
FiltOF 18/999 
REV1EM DlREtTDRY
SCREEN BBTfl SOURCE 
N3410CS02
NOISE input 31. 4tf 
rejection at 43,7# 
■QuaVHLEWT P Z.:
□U1ET EH 260= .n, 
msvXH 
7
ft&B MEAN
BIFF
9.51
RESPONSE 9.31
JWVE REPffl) y j / A
BftND t m a r n ™
1J> 2J> iJti *jc) SjOKI
94 97 94 B5 69 V. 
121512 7 3
STIHUI Hf)80dflpk
STfftT TO m 
-----
STRB'U^y 92X
TE5; 1: Mr OH 5ra t
SflVE DIRECTORY 
t:\ll0-V5\ECHODATft 
FILLEIP 18/999 
fiEViEM DIRECTORY
SCREEN DAT ft SOURCE
\aswuoi
Figure 15.6 TEOAE responses recorded from the right ear of a normal subject 
over a period of 1 year (1994-95), demonstrating a high reproducibility of the 
response amplitude (< ±  1 dB) and power spectra.
Characteristics of TEOAEs in subjects with hearing loss
In the impaired cochlea, as judged by sensorineural hearing loss, 
the prevalence and amplitude of TEOAEs decrease and the 
detection threshold increases.66 In subjects with a history of 
noise exposure, TEOAEs exhibit a reduction/absence of the 
response amplitude in the regions where the audiometric 
thresholds are unaffected.72,73 Therefore, by recording OAEs, a 
subclinical cochlear lesion may be detected, and this is in agree" 
ment with the finding that up to 30% of the OHC population 
may be damaged prior to audiometric evidence, in the quarter- 
octave audiometry from 0.125 to 16 kHz.74
It has been demonstrated that, in addition to the lower 
amplitudes and ‘worse’ non-linearity thresholds, the spectra of 
TOAEs in ears with noise-induced hearing loss are narrow in 
comparison with those with normal hearing.75 This confirms 
that, although the TEOAE frequency spectrum is not a direct 
measure of hearing sensitivity, frequency band parameters can 
indicate whether hearing sensitivity at a homologous audio-
  

Otoacoustic emissions 
265
metric frequency is normal or abnormal (< or>20dBHL)16,76 
and, therefore, can be useful in the detection of frequency" 
specific subclinical cochlear (OHC) lesions.
The aetiology of the cochlear impairment may also be of 
relevance: TEOAEs can vary in amplitude and spectral compo­
sition in cases with a similar configuration of hearing loss of dif­
ferent aetiology. This has been demonstrated for noise-induced 
hearing loss,49 where the prevalence and spectral peaks of 
TEOAEs showed significant reduction in comparison with ears 
with similar audiometric patterns caused by other factors. In 
patients with Meniere’s disease,77 the amplitudes of TEOAEs 
were significantly lower and contained fewer spectral peaks in 
comparison with results obtained from a database. These results 
illustrate that changes in TEOAE responses may represent an 
expression of the degree and variety of the pathological 
processes in the cochlea.
TEOAEs can be recorded in practically all normal 
subjects (prevalence 96-100%). They are absent if 
hearing loss is greater than 25-30dB. TEOAEs exhibit 
excellent test-retest, intra-individual stability (± ld B ) 
and are therefore often referred to as cochlear ‘finger­
prints’. However, they show considerable inter-subject 
variability.
DPOAEs
Like TEOAEs, DPOAEs are generated by normally functioning 
OHCs, and can be recorded, essentially, in all normally hearing 
subjects.
The advantages of DPOAEs over TEOAEs are as follows:
1. DPOAEs are more frequency specific.78 
2* DPOAEs have better responses at high frequencies (up to 
6-8 kHz) than TEOAEs, where, due to time-gating and cut­
off in the first 2.5-3 ms, the responses are recorded up to 
5 kHz.
3. DPOAEs are less sensitive to hearing loss and can be 
recorded in ears with hearing loss up to 45dBHL,67 
because a continuous stimulus level provides a more 
intense stimulus than the mean level used in standard 
TEOAE recording.
Characteristics (2) and (3) enable DPOAEs to be used as a sen­
sitive method for site-of-lesion testing to track the pattern of 
OHC lesions.79
DPOAEs have some practical disadvantages:
1. Lower-frequency responses are easily contaminated by 
noise, because the DPOAE response is frequency shifted 
downwards from the test frequencies by 2/3 octave. Addi­
tionally, the noise rejection system cannot be applied in 
DPOAE recording.
2* Longer duration of the test.
DPOAEs have similar characteristics to TEOAEs. They 
are more frequency specific, and, due to the difference in 
recording techniques, they provide responses at higher 
frequencies than TEOAEs and can be recorded when 
audiometric thresholds are elevated up to 45dBHL.
Clinical applications of OAEs
CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SOAES
evaluation of cochlear (OHC) integrity 
intra-subject monitoring of cochlear status 
indicators of cochlear functional state ( overactivity ’) 
assessment of patients with tinnitus
To date, SOAEs have been used very little in clinical practice, 
partly due to the purely defined physiological significance, and 
partly because they are not recordable in all normal subjects. 
Nevertheless, there are several possible clinical applications of 
SOAEs, limited to those subjects in whom they are recordable:
1. Recordable SOAEs are indicators of structural integrity of 
the cochlea (OHCs) and exquisite hearing sensitivity in 
the frequency region in which they occur.
2. SOAEs can be used for intra-subject monitoring of the 
cochlear status as the most vulnerable product (e.g. to oto­
toxicity, noise, or hypoxia) of the active processes in the
i 
i 
64,80 
cochlea.
3. SOAE presence may suggest the ‘overactivity’ of the 
cochlea , with an ‘excess’ of acoustical energy from the pos­
itive feedback loop, and, therefore, may reflect the func­
tional status of the cochlea, as well as of the higher levels in 
the auditory system: SOAEs may result from altered feed­
back control mechanisms, but a clinical application as an 
indicator of pathology has yet to be investigated.
4. SOAEs in patients with tinnitus — in some cases, SOAEs 
may explain tinnitus. A set of criteria for establishing a rela­
tionship between tinnitus and SOAEs has been proposed by 
Penner and Burns:81
(a) correlation of tinnitus pitch with SOAE frequency
(b) suppression of SOAEs making tinnitus inaudible
(c) masking of tinnitus abolishing SOAEs
(d) frequency-specific isomasking contours of tinnitus.
CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF TEOAES
evaluation of cochlear (OHC) integrity
neonatal hearing screening
intra-subject monitormg in cochlear status
differential diagnosis of cochlear and retrocochlear lesions
  

266 
Audiology
All of these criteria should be met if tinnitus is to be 
directly related to the presence of SOAEs. It may also be 
possible that the finding of frequency-variable SOAEs (as 
opposed to the frequency-stable SOAEs) is of relevance to 
the perception of tinnitus, as they are more commonly 
observed in patients with tinnitus than in normal subjects.82
Among all the classes of OAEs, TEOAEs are the most com­
monly used in clinical practice. Their extensive use is facili­
tated by the non-invasiveness of the method and the speed at 
which they can be recorded (^60s per ear).
1. Evaluation of cochlear (OHC) integrity
As TEOAEs are invariably associated with structurally intact 
OHCs, their presence indicates normal cochlear (OHC) func­
tion. Furthermore, the absence of TEOAEs in subjects with 
normal audiometric thresholds and normal middle ear function 
is an indication of an early, subclinical, cochlear lesion.73,83
TEOAEs also display, besides a global cochlear response, 
frequency specificity.84 The narrowing of the TEOAE spectrum 
may suggest localized OHC damage (e.g. absence of high- 
frequency responses in noise-induced hearing loss).75
As an objective test, TEOAE recording is invaluable for 
screening of hearing, to separate ears with normal hearing from 
those with hearing loss, 
e.g. in difficult-to-test patients, or 
non-organic hearing loss.
2. Neonatal hearing screening
This is one of the most frequent applications of TEOAEs, and 
OAEs in general,86-88 for the detection of peripheral auditory 
lesions. At present, this programme primarily targets neonates 
and infants at risk for hearing loss, but universal neonatal 
hearing screening programmes may become the rule (see 
Chapter 20).
3. Intra-subject monitoring of changes in cochlear status
This application is a result of the high intra-subject stability of 
TEOAEs. TEOAEs can be applied in monitoring the effects of 
excessive noise exposure, ototoxicity, anaesthesia, or cochlear
67 73 89
function during vestibular Schwannoma surgery. ’ ’ They can 
be also used in monitoring the changes in cochlear status in 
Meniere’s disease.90,91
4. Differential diagnosis of cochlear and retrocochlear 
lesions
TEOAEs and other OAEs are the products of cochlear (OHC) 
activity, and their generation is independent of the afferent and 
efferent innervations.92 Therefore, if TEOAEs are recorded in 
subjects with moderate or severe sensorineural hearing loss, this 
would strongly suggest a retrocochlear lesion,93,94 providing that 
functional hearing loss has been excluded. This application is 
limited to those patients with recordable TEOAEs. No conclu­
sion can be drawn if TEOAEs are absent: the abnormality could 
be anywhere within the auditory system.
DPOAEs
The clinical applications of DPOAEs are similar to those for 
TEOAEs, with the advantages and disadvantages explained in 
the previous section.
The application of OAEs in assessing the MOC 
system
Characteristics of the MOC system
The discovery of the existence of OAEs has allowed examina­
tion of the function of the MOC system in humans, which 
innervates the OHCs. It has been demonstrated that in normal 
subjects contralateral acoustical stimulation of the MOC 
system can alter the frequency and reduce the amplitude of 
SOAEs,95,96 and reduce the amplitude and shift the phase of 
TEOAEs97,98 (Figure 15.7) and DPOAEs.99 This implies an 
inhibitory function of the MOC system. There is a suggestion 
that the MOC system may exhibit a laterality effect, with a 
greater effect in the right than the left ear in right-handers. 33,100
The magnitude of the suppressive effect on OAE responses 
during efferent MOC stimulation depends on the intensity of 
both contra- and ipsilateral stimuli. The MOC system can be 
activated by low-level contralateral acoustical stimulation (e.g. 
30-40dBSPL) and the suppressive effect increases with more 
intense contralateral stimulation.97,98 However, the suppressibil- 
ity of the OAE response evoked by lower levels of ipsilateral 
stimulation, e.g. 50-60 dB SPL, is greater than the suppressibil- 
ity of those responses evoked by higher-intensity stimuli.99,101 
This property is consistent with a physiological role in the 
amplification of low-intensity sounds. At high ipsilateral stimu­
lus levels, a loss of contralateral effect has been observed. This
Figure 15.7 TEOAEs in a normal subject, recorded without (upper trace) and 
with (lower trace) the application of contralateral white noise, with respective 
average response amplitudes of 2.6 dBSPL and -0 .5 dBSPL, thus indicating a 
3.1 -dB suppressive effect
  

Otoacoustic emissions 
267
‘compressive’ growth function can be attributed to the MOC 
system, implying a role in defining the dynamic range of 
cochlear activity. With the ability to modulate the activity of 
the OHCs, the MOC system appears to be responsible for 
automatic gain control, adaptation and homeostasis of the 
cochlea.
Confounding effects of the stapedius acoustical reflex 
and ‘cross-talk*
It is of importance to note that the stapedius reflex (SR) also 
attenuates acoustical stimuli. Therefore, the SR may have a 
synergistic effect with the MOC system. This interaction is sup­
ported by the findings of the particularly strong suppressive 
effect of the MOC system in patients with no SR99 and the 
reduction in SR thresholds after surgical section of the OCB 
(olivocochlear bundle) in rabbits.102 However, the contribution 
of the SR to the MOC suppressive effect is diminished by the 
application of contralateral acoustical stimulation at the level 
necessary to produce this effect, which is considerably lower 
than the intensity of sound which triggers the SR.
Acoustical ‘cross-talk’ is another factor with a potential 
confounding effect on the MOC reflex. However, experimental 
evidence, based on testing MOC activity in unilaterally deaf 
subjects (absent suppression), does not support any significant 
effect of ‘cross-talk’ on the suppressive effect produced by low- 
level, contralateral acoustical stimulation.97
Clinical applications of the MOC suppression test
The suppressive effect of the MOC system can be demonstrated 
by recording OAEs (in clinical use, mainly TEOAEs) under 
contralateral acoustical stimulation. The MOC suppression test 
provides general information on the structural integrity of the 
MOC reflex arc, and a glimpse into the modulation of cochlear 
mechanics by its stimulation.
Although clinical applications of this test are still being 
developed, it may be useful in the evaluation of the pathologi­
cal states in which an abnormality of the MOC system may 
exist, including the following.
Vestibular nerve section
Vestibular nerve section due to the anatomical proximity of the 
vestibular nerve and the MOC bundle is also accompanied by 
the section of the MOC bundle, resulting in the absence of an 
MOC suppressive effect.103,104
Central nervous system pathology
This may cause a lesion of the MOC arc, with a subsequently 
absent/reduced suppressive MOC effect.103,105-107 This test could 
contribute to neuro-otological topographic diagnosis, in identi­
fication of a lesion up to the brainstem level (superior olivary 
complex).
Tinnitus/hyperacusis
The alteration of the MOC effect, predominantly reduced func­
tioning, has been observed in patients with tinnitus and hyper-
acusis, 103,107 115 suggesting that the MOC system may play a role 
in dysfunction of the auditory system.
Summary
All classes of OAEs provide information on the cochlea, but 
with the application of different technologies for response mea­
surement, they complement each other. All OAEs are indica­
tors of OHC structural integrity, with SOAEs being the most 
sensitive, followed by TEOAEs and then DPOAEs. TEOAEs 
are more appropriate for assessment of global cochlear function, 
while DPOAEs provide more frequency-specific responses. As 
OAEs show remarkable intra-subject stability, they can be used 
as a sensitive tool for intra-subject monitoring of changes in 
OHC status. The important applications of OAEs are in the 
evaluation of peripheral auditory function in difficult-to-test 
subjects (e.g. children, or mentally retarded patients) and retro­
cochlear lesions, and particularly in neonatal hearing screening. 
OAEs can also be applied in exploring the MOC system.
In clinical audiology, OAEs should be applied and inter­
preted in conjunction with other tests.
References
1. Kemp DT. Stimulated acoustic emissions from within the human 
auditory system. J A coust Soc Am 1978; 64: 1386-91.
2. von Bekesy G. Experiments on Hearing. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1960.
3. Gold T. Hearing II. The physical basis for the action of the 
cochlea. Proc R Soc Lond B 1948; 135: 492-8.
4. Kemp DT. Otoacoustic emissions, travelling waves and cochlear 
mechanisms. Hear Res 1986; 22: 95-104.
5. Brownell WE, Bader CR, Bertrand D, de Ribaupierre Y. Evoked 
mechanical responses of isolated cochlear outer hair cells. Science 
1985; 227: 194-6.
6. Zenner HP. Motile responses in outer hair cells. Hear Res 1986; 
22: 83-90.
7. Nuttall AL, Ren T. Electromotile hearing: evidence from basilar 
membrane motion and otoacoustic emissions. Hear Res 1995; 92: 
170-7.
8. Plinkert PK, Gitter AH, Mohler H, Zenner HP. Structure, pharma­
cology and function of GABAa receptors in cochlear outer hair 
cells. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1993; 250: 351-7.
9. LePage EL. Frequency-dependent self-induced bias of the basilar 
membrane and its potential for controlling sensitivity and tuning 
in the mammalian cochlea. J Acoust Soc Am 1987; 82: 1539-54.
10. LePage EL. Functional role of the olivo-cochlear bundle: a motor 
unit control system in the mammalian cochlea. Hear Res 1989; 30: 
177-98.
11. Rasmussen G. The olivary peduncle and other fibre projections of 
the superior olivary complex. J Comp Neurol 1946; 84: 141-219.
12. Wiederhold ML. Physiology of the olivocochlear system. In: 
Altschuler R, Bobin R, Hoffman D, eds. Neurobiology of Hearing, 
The Cochlea. New York: Raven Press, 1986; 349-70.
  

268 
Audiology
13. Dolan DF, Nuttall AL. Cochlear whole-nerve responses altered by 
electrical stimulation of the inferior colliculus, Soc Neurosci Abstr 
1988; 14: 650.
14. Kawase T, Delgutte B, Liberman MC. Antimasking effects of the 
olivocochlear reflex. II. Enhancement of auditory'nerve response 
to masked tones. J Neurophysiol 1993; 70: 2533-49.
15. Pujol R. Lateral and medial efferents: a double neurochemical 
mechanism to protect and regulate inner and outer hair cell func- 
tion in the cochlea. BrJ Audiol 1994; 28: 185-91.
16. Kemp DT, Ryan S, Bray P. A guide to effective use of otoacoustic 
emissions. Ear Hear 1990; 11: 93-105.
17. Margolis RH, Trine MB. Influence of middle ear-disease on 
otoacoustic emissions. In: Robinette MS, Glattke TJ, eds. Otoa­
coustic Emissions: Clinical Applications. New York: Thieme, 1997: 
130-50.
18. Kemp DT. Evidence of mechanical nonlinearity and frequency 
selective wave amplification in the cochlea. Arch Otolaryngol 
Laryngol 1979; 224: 37-45.
19. Gobsch H, Tietze G. Interrelation of spontaneous and evoked 
otoacoustic emissions. Hear Res 1993; 69: 176-81.
20. Smurzynski ], Probst R. Error in the calculation of synchronised 
spontaneous otoacoustic emissions frequencies measured with the 
ILO88 system. J Acoust Soc Am 1996; 100: 2555-6.
21. Thornton ARD. Clicked-evoked otoacoustic emissions: new tech- 
niques and applications. BrJ Audiol 1993; 27: 109-15.
22. Grandori F, Ravazzani P. Deconvolution of otoacoustic emissions 
and response nonlinearity. In: Grandori F, Cianfrone D, Kemp DT, 
eds. Cochlear Mechanisms and Otoacoustic Emissions. Basel: Karger, 
1990: 99-109.
23. Harris FP, Lonsbury-Martin BL, Stagner BB, Coats AC, Martin 
GK. Acoustic distortion products in humans: systematic changes 
in amplitude as a function of f2 /fj ratio. J Acoust Soc Am 1989; 85: 
220-9.
24. Kemp DT. Physiologically active cochlear micromechanisms— 
one source of tinnitus. In: Evered D, Lawrenson G, eds. Tinnitus. 
CIBA Foundation Symposium 85. London: Pitman Books Ltd, 
1981: 54-81.
25. Schloth E. Relation between spectral composition of spontaneous 
otoacoustic emissions and fine-structure of threshold in quiet. 
Acustica 1983; 53: 250-6.
26. Zwicker E. A hardware cochlear nonlinear processing model with 
active feedback. ] Acoust Soc Am 1986; 80: 146-53.
27. Zweig G, Shera CA. The origin of periodicity in the spectrum of 
evoked otoacoustic emissions. ] Acoust Soc Am 1995; 94: 
2018-47.
28. He N, Schmiedt RA. Fine structure of the 2ix-  2f2 acoustic distor- 
tion product: changes with primary level. J Acoust Soc Am 1993; 
94: 2659-69.
29. Probst R, Lonsbury-Martin BL, Martin GK. A review of otoa- 
coustic emissions. J Acoust Soc Am 1991; 89: 2027-67.
30. Penner MJ, Zhang T. Prevalence of spontaneous otoacoustic emis­
sions in adults revisited. Hear Res 1997; 103: 20-34.
31. Whitehead ML, Kamal N, Lonsbury-Martin BL, Martin GK. 
Spontaneous otoacoustic emissions in different racial groups. 
Scand Audiol 1993; 23: 3-10.
32. Bilger RC, Matties ML, Hammel DT. Genetic implications of gen­
der differences in the prevalence of spontaneous acoustic emis­
sions, J Speech Hear Res 1990; 33: 418-32.
33. McFadden D. A speculation about the parallel ear asymmetries 
and sex differences in hearing sensation and otoacoustic emis­
sions. Hear Res 1993; 68: 143-51.
34. Penner M], Glotzbach L, Huang T. Spontaneous otoacoustic emis­
sions: measurement and data. Hear Res 1993; 68: 229-37.
35. McFadden D, Loehlin JC. On the heritability of otoacoustic emis­
sions: a twin study. Hear Res 1995; 85: 181-98.
36. Strickland E, Bums EM, Tubis A, Jones K. Long-term stability and 
familial aspects of spontaneous otoacoustic emissions. J Acoust Soc 
Am 1984; 75 (suppl 7): S82.
37. Wit HP. Diurnal cycle for spontaneous otoacoustic emission fre­
quency. Hear Res 1985; 18: 197-9.
38. Whitehead ML. Slow variation of the amplitude and frequency of 
spontaneous otoacoustic emissions. Hear Res 1991; 53: 269-80.
39. Bell A. Circadian and menstrual rhythms in frequency variations 
of spontaneous otoacoustic emissions from human ears. Hear Res 
1992; 58: 91-100.
40. Haggerty HS, Lusted HS, Morton SC. Statistical quantification of 
24-hour and monthly variabilities of spontaneous otoacoustic 
emission frequency in humans. Hear Res 1993; 70: 31-49.
41. Penner MJ. Frequency variation of spontaneous otoacoustic emis­
sions during a naturally occurring menstrual cycle, amenorrhea, 
and oral contraception: a brief report. Ear Hear 1995; 16: 428-32.
42. Wit HP. Amplitude fluctuations of spontaneous otoacoustic emis­
sions caused by internal and externally applied noise. Prog Brain 
Res 1993; 97: 59-65.
43. van Dijk P, Wit HP. Amplitude and frequency variations of spon­
taneous otoacoustic emissions. J Acoust Soc Am 1990; 88: 
1779-93.
44. Penner M], Brauth S, Hood L. Temporal cause of the masking of 
tinnitus as a basis for inferring its origin. J Speech Hear Res 1981; 
24: 257-61.
45. Schloth E, Zwicker E. Mechanical and acoustical influence on 
spontaneous acoustic emissions. Hear Res 1983; 11: 285-93.
46. Penner MJ. Audible and annoying spontaneous otoacoustic emis­
sions. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1988; 114: 150-3.
47. Bums EM, Keefe DH. Intermittent tinnitus resulting from unsta­
ble otoacoustic emissions In: Aran JM, Dauman R, eds. Tinnitus
91. Proceedings of the IV International Tinnitus Seminar, Bordeaux. 
Amsterdam: Kugler Publications, 1992: 89-93.
48. Wilson JP, Sutton GJ. Acoustic correlates of tonal tinnitus. In: 
Evered D, Lawrenson G eds. Tinnitus (CIBA Foundation Symposium). 
London: Pitman Books Ltd, 1981: 82-107.
49. Probst R, Lonsbury-Martin BL, Martin GK, Coats AC. Otoa­
coustic emissions in ears with hearing loss. Am J Otolaryngol 1987; 
8: 73-80.
50. Bonfils P. Spontaneous otoacoustic emissions: clinical interest. 
Laryngoscope 1989; 99: 752-6.
51. McFadden D, Mishra. On the relation between hearing sensitivity 
and otoacoustic emissions. Hear Res 1993; 17: 208-13.
52. Moulin A, Collet L, Veuillet E, Morgon A. Interrelations between 
transiently evoked otoacoustic emissions, spontaneous otoacoustic
  

Otoacoustic emissions 
269
emissions and acoustic distortion products in normally hearing 
subjects. Hear Res 1993; 65: 216-33.
53. Ruggero M, Rich N, Freyman R. Spontaneous and impulsively 
evoked otoacoustic emissions: indicators of cochlear pathology? 
Hear Res 1983; 10: 285-93.
54. Zurek PM, Clark WW. Spontaneous narrowband acoustic signals 
emitted by chinchilla ears after noise exposure. J Acoust Soc Am 
1981; 70: 446-50.
55. Powers NL, Salvi RJ, Wang J, Spongr V, Chun Xiao Qui. 
Elevation of auditory thresholds by spontaneous cochlear oscilla- 
tion, Nature 1995; 375: 585-7.
56. Ceranic JB, Prasher DK, Luxon LM. Tinnitus and otoacoustic 
emissions. Clin Otolaryngol 1995; 20: 192-200.
57. Penner MJ. Empirical tests demonstrating two coexisting sources 
of tinnitus: a case study. J Speech Hear Res 1989; 32: 458-62.
58. Penner MJ. An estimate of the prevalence of tinnitus caused by 
spontaneous otoacoustic emission. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 1990; 116: 418-23.
59. Plinkert PK, Gitter AH, Zenner HP. Tinnitus associated with 
spontaneous acoustic emission. Acta Otolaryngol 1990; 110: 
342-7.
60. Penner MJ, Coles RR. Indication for aspirin as a palliative for tin­
nitus caused by spontaneous acoustic emissions: a case study. Br J 
Audiol 1992; 26: 92-6.
61. Baskill JL, Coles RRA. Current studies on spontaneous emissions 
and tinnitus. In: Aran JM, Dauman R, eds. Tinnitus 91. Proceedings 
of the IV International Tinnitus Seminar, Bordeaux. Amsterdam: 
Kugler Publications, 1992: 79-83.
62. Baskill JL, Coles RA. A two year study of SOAEs in tinnitus. In: 
Reich GE, Vernon JA, eds. Proceedings of the V International 
Tinnitus Seminar 1995, Portland, Oregon. Oregon: American 
Tinnitus Association, 1996: 31-7.
63. Baskill JL, Coles RA. Pharmacological suppressive treatment for 
SOAE-tinnitus. In: Reich GE, Vernon J A, eds. Proceedings of the V 
International Tinnitus Seminar 1995, Portland, Oregon. Oregon: 
American Tinnitus Association, 1996: 195-9.
64. McFadden D, Plattsmier HS. Aspirin abolishes spontaneous 
acoustic emissions. J Acoust Soc Am 1984; 76: 443-7.
65. Kemp DT. Towards the model for the origin of cochlear echos. 
Hear Res 1980; 2: 533-48.
66. Bonfils P, Uziel A. Clinical application of evoked otoacoustic 
emissions: results in normally hearing and hearing-impaired sub­
jects. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1989; 98: 326-31.
67. Probst R, Harris FP. Transiently evoked and distortion product 
otoacoustic emissions. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993; 119: 
858-60.
68. Harris FB, Probst R, Wenger R. Repeatability of transiently 
evoked otoacoustic emissions in normal-hearing humans. Audiol­
ogy 1990; 30: 135-41.
69. Franklin DJ, McCoy MJ, Martin GK, Lonsbury-Martin BL. 
Test/retest reliability of distortion-product and transiently evoked 
otoacoustic emissions. Ear Hear 1992; 13: 417-29.
70. Engdahl B, Amesen AR, Mair IWS. Reproducibility and short­
term variability of transient evoked otoacoustic emissions. Scand 
Audiol 1993; 23: 99-104.
71. Robinette MB. Clinical observation of transient evoked otoa­
coustic emissions in adults. Semin Hear 1992; 13: 23-36.
72. Prasher D, Luxon L, Mula M. The role of oto-acoustic emissions 
in the evaluation of noise-induced hearing loss. In: Grandori F, 
eds. Advances in Otoacoustic Emissions: Fundamentals and Clinical 
Application, Vol 1. Brussels: Commission of the European 
Communities, 1994: 74-84.
73. Hotz MA, Probst R, Harris FP, Hauser R. Monitoring of the effect 
of noise exposure using transiently evoked otoacoustic emissions. 
Acta Otolaryngol 1993; 113: 478-82.
74. Bohne B, Clark WW. Growth of hearing loss and cochlear lesion 
with increasing duration of noise exposure. In: Hamemik RP, 
Henderson D, Salvi R eds. New Perspectives on Noise-induced 
Hearing Loss. New York: Raven Press, 1982: 283-300.
75. Reshef I, Attias J, Furst M. Characteristics of click-evoked otoa­
coustic emissions in ears with normal hearing and with noise- 
induced hearing loss. Br J Audiol 1993; 27: 387-95.
76. Hurley RM, Musiek FE. Effectiveness of transient-evoked 
otoacoustic emissions (TEOAE) in predicting hearing level. J Am 
Acad Audiol 1994; 5: 195-203.
77. Harris FP, Probst R. Transiently evoked emissions in patients with 
Meniere’s disease. Acta Otolaryngol 1992; 112: 36-44.
78. Avan P, Bonfils P. Frequency specificity of human distortion prod­
uct otoacoustic emissions. Audiology 1993; 32: 12-26.
79. Lonsbury-Martin BL, McCoy MJ, Whitehead ML, Martin GK. 
Clinical testing of distortion product otoacoustic emissions. Ear 
Hear 1993; 1: 11-22.
80. Norton SJ, Mott JB, Champlin CA. Behavior of spontaneous 
otoacoustic emissions following intense acoustic stimulation. Hear 
Res 1989; 38: 243-58.
81. Penner MJ, Bums E. Five empirical tests for relation between 
spontaneous acoustic emissions and tinnitus. In: Feldmann H, ed. 
Proceedings of the III International Tinnitus Seminar, Munster. 
Karlsruhe: Harsh Verlag, 1987: 82-5.
82. Ceranic B, Prasher DK, Luxon LM. Presence of tinnitus indicated 
by variable spontaneous otoacoustic emissions. Audiol Neuro-Otol 
1998; 3: 332-44.
83. Ceranic JB, Prasher DK, Upcott J, Luxon LM. Changes in 
cochlear mechanics due to impulse noise. In: Schoonhoven R, 
Kapteyn TS, de Laat JAPM, eds. Proceedings of the European 
Conference on Audiology. Leiden: Nederlandse Vereniging voor 
Audiologie 1995: 89-95.
84. Ueda H. Do click-evoked otoacoustic emissions have frequency 
specificity? J A coust Soc Am 1999; 105: 306-10.
85. Harrison WA, Norton SJ. Characteristics of transient evoked 
otoacoustic emissions in normal-hearing and hearing-impaired 
children. Ear Hear 1999; 20: 75-86.
86. Kemp D, Ryan S. The use of transient evoked otoacoustic emis­
sions in neonatal screening programs. Semin Hear 1993; 14:30-45.
87. White KR, Vohr BR, Maxon AB, Behrens TR, McPherson MG, 
Mauk GW. Screening all newborns for hearing loss using transient 
otoacoustic emissions. Int J Paediatr Otolaryngol 1994; 29: 203-17.
88. Culpepper NB. Neonatal screening via evoked otoacoustic emis­
sions. In: Robinette MS, Glattke TJ, eds. Otoacoustic Emissions: 
Clinical Applications. New York: Thieme, 1997; 233-70.
  

270 
Audiology
89. Cane MA, O’Donoghue GM, Lutman ME. The feasibility of 
using otocoustic emissions to monitor cochlear function during 
acoustic neuroma surgery. Scand Audiol 1992; 21: 173-6.
90. Uziel A, Bonfils P. Assessment of endolymphatic cochlear 
hydrops by means of evoked acoustic emissions. In: Nadol JB 
Jr, ed. Meniere’s Disease. Amsterdam: Kugler and Ghedini 
Publications, 1989: 379-83.
91. Haginomori S, Makimoto K, Araki M, Kawakami M, Takahashi
H. Effect of lidocaine injection on EOAE in patients with tinni- 
tus. Acta Otolayngol 1995; 115: 488-92.
92. Norton S. Cochlear function and otoacoustic emissions. Semin 
Hear 1992; 13: 1-14.
93. Robinette MB. Otoacoustic emissions in cochlear vs. retro- 
cochlear auditory dysfunction. Hear J 1992; 45: 32-4.
94. Stach BA, Westerberg BD, Robertson JB Jr. Auditory disorder in 
central nervous system miliary tuberculosis. J Am Acad Audiol 
1998; 9: 305-10.
95. Mott JB, Norton SJ, Neely ST, Warr WB. Changes in sponta­
neous otoacoustic emissions produced by acoustic stimulation of 
the contralateral ear. Hear Res 1989: 38: 229-42.
96. Harrison WA, Bums EM. Effects of contralateral acoustic stimu­
lation on spontaneous otoacoustic emissions. J A coust Soc Am 
1993; 94: 2649-58.
97. Collet L, Kemp DT, Veuillet E, Duclaux R, Moulin A, Morgon 
A. Effect of contralateral auditory stimuli on active cochlear 
micromechanical properties in human subjects. Hear Res 1990; 
43:251- 62.
98. Ryan S, Kemp DT, Hinchcliffe R. The influence of contralateral 
acoustic stimulation on click-evoked otoacoustic emissions in 
humans. Br J Audiol 1991; 25: 391-7.
99. Moulin A, Collet L, Duclaux R. Contralateral auditory stimula­
tion alters acoustic distortion products in humans. Hear Res 
1993; 65:193-210.
100. Khalfa S, Micheyl C, Veuillet N, Collet L. Peripheral auditory 
lateralisation assessment using TEOAEs. Hear Res 1998; 121:
29-34.
101. Veuillet E, Duverdy-Bertholon F, Collet L. Effect of contralateral 
acoustic stimulation on the growth of click-evoked otoacoustic 
emissions. Hear Res 1996; 93: 128-35.
102. Borg E. Efferent inhibition of afferent acoustic activity in the 
unanesthetised rabbit. Exp Neurol 1971; 31: 301-12.
103. Collet L, Veuillet E, Bene J, Morgon A. The effects of contralat­
eral white noise on click-evoked emissions in normal and sen­
sorineural ears: 
towards 
an exploration of the medial 
olivocochlear system. Audiology 1992; 31: 1-7.
104. Williams EA, Brookes GB, Prasher DK. Effects of contralateral 
acoustic stimulation on otoacoustic emissions following vestibu­
lar neurectomy. Scand Audiol 1993; 22: 197-203.
105. Collet L. Use of otoacoustic emissions to explore the medial 
olivocochlear system. BrJ Audiol 1993; 27: 155-9.
106. Prasher D, Ryan S, Luxon L. Contralateral suppression of tran­
siently evoked otoacoustic emissions and neuro-otology. Br J 
Audiol 1994; 28: 247-54.
107. Ceranic B, Prasher DK, Raglan E, Luxon LM. Tinnitus after head 
injury: Evidence from otoacoustic emissions. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry 1998; 65: 523-9.
108. Veuillet E, Collet L, Disant F, Morgon A. Tinnitus and medial 
cochlear efferent system. In: Aran JM, Dauman R, eds. Tinnitus 
91. Proceedings of the IV International Tinnitus Seminar, Bordeaux. 
Amsterdam: Kugler Publications, 1992: 205-9.
109. Chery-Croze S, Collet L, Morgon A. Medial olivocochlear sys­
tem and tinnitus. Acta Otolaryngol 1993; 113: 285-90.
110. Chery-Croze S, Moulin A, Collet L, Morgon A. Is the test of 
medial efferent system function a relevant investigation in tinni­
tus? BrJ Audiol 1994; 28: 13-25.
111. Chery-Croze S, Truy E, Morgon A. Contralateral suppression of 
of transiently evoked otoacoustic emissions in tinnitus. Br J 
Audiol 1994; 28: 255-66.
112. Graham RL, Hazell JW. Contralateral suppression of transient 
evoked otoacoustic emissions: intra-individual variability in tin­
nitus and normal subjects. Br J Audiol, 1994; 29: 235-45.
113. Attias J, Bresloff I, Furman V. The influence of the efferent 
auditory system on otoacoustic emissions in noise induced 
tinnitus: clinical relevance. Acta Otolaryngol 1996; 
116: 
534-9.
114. Zhao F, Meredith R, Oz^aglar H, Stephens SDG. Transient 
evoked otoacoustic emissions with contralateral stimulation in 
King-Kopetzky syndrome. J Audiol Med 1996; 6: 36-44.
115. Duchamp C, Morgon A, Chery-Croze S. Tinnitus sufferers with­
out hearing loss. In: Reich GE, Vernon JA, eds. Proceedings of the
V International Tinnitus Seminar 1995, Portland, Oregon. Oregon: 
American Tinnitus Association, 1996: 266-9.
  

Human auditory 
el ectrophy si ol ogy
Hillel Pratt
Introduction
Brief historical review
Recording the electrical responses of the auditory system of 
humans has followed the development of physiological record­
ings from animals and the development of technology for non- 
invasive signal acquisition. Five years after the cochlear 
microphonic potentials from animals were first reported,1 they 
were recorded from the round window of humans through a per­
foration in the tympanic membrane.2 Ten years after the human 
electroencephalogram (EEG) was first reported,3 changes in the 
EEG 
that were 
evoked by auditory stimulation were 
described.4,5 Auditory evoked potentials from animal cortex 
were reported 3 years later,6 and after the first description of sig­
nal averaging for recording evoked potentials7 and its imple­
mentation in the average-response computer,8 middle-latency 
cortical responses were recorded from the scalp of humans in 
response to clicks.9 Longer-latency Vertex potentials’ were 
described soon after,10 as was the P300 evoked potential associ­
ated with cognitive processing of auditory stimuli.11,12 The elec­
trical response of the cochlea, the electrocochleogram, recorded 
from the round window was developed for clinical use around 
that time, and the response components were identified as con­
taining cochlear microphonics13 and the cochlear nerve com­
pound action potential.14 Evaluation of inner ear function 
when the tympanic membrane was not perforated was per­
formed using transtympanic needle-electrode recording from 
the promontory.15,16 Moving even farther from the cochlea, and 
using signal averaging over a large number of repetitions, the 
feline cochlear action potential was recorded from the auricle, 
and was found to be followed by additional components which 
were attributed to brainstem activity.17 Three years later, the 
human cochlear nerve and brainstem evoked potentials were 
first described as such,18 and their audiological19 and neurologi­
cal20,21 applications came soon after. In the quarter century that 
followed, auditory brainstem evoked potentials reigned supreme 
in the field of auditory neurophysiology, and a variety of uses for
diagnostics, monitoring and basic research have been described 
in thousands of publications.
Outline of relevant factors
Human auditory electrophysiology includes non-invasive 
recording of cochlear potentials and of neural activity along the 
auditory pathway. Such recordings belong to a class of electro­
physiology called ‘evoked potentials’, or ‘event-related poten­
tials’, defined as changes in voltage (‘potentials’) that occur at 
a particular time before, during or after (‘related’) a change in 
the physical world and/or some psychological process (‘event’) 
that gave rise to (‘evoked’) these voltage changes.22 Evoked 
potentials are classified according to the event that evoked 
them: when evoked by a stimulus in the physical world outside 
the brain, they are called ‘exogenous’, and when evoked by a 
psychological process within the brain, they are termed ‘endoge­
nous’. Typically, exogenous evoked potentials are determined 
by the physical properties of the evoking stimulus, while 
endogenous evoked potentials reflect the psychological signifi­
cance of the stimulus. Because of the nature of information pro­
cessing in sensory systems, exogenous components of evoked 
potentials tend to be earlier (usually <  100 ms) than endoge­
nous components (typically >  100ms).
Classification of auditory evoked potentials is based on 
their latencies and on their generators. The major classes of 
auditory evoked potentials are thus the short-latency cochlear 
and brainstem potentials, the middle-latency thalamocortical 
potentials, the long-latency cortical potentials, and the late 
cognitive potentials. In addition to stimulus parameters (in 
exogenous potentials), and stimulus context (in endogenous 
potentials), the potentials are affected by subject and acquisi­
tion factors.
Stimulus factors affecting exogenous auditory evoked 
potentials include stimulus type (click, tone burst, speech), fre­
quency, duration, intensity, presentation rate, acoustical polar­
ity (condensation, rarefaction), type of transducer and mode of 
presentation (speakers in free field, earphones, monaural,

272 
Audiology
binaural). Endogenous evoked potentials are affected by the 
stimulus context. Such factors as attending to the stimulus, 
task-relevance of the stimulus, or semantic congruity in case of 
a verbal stimulus, could affect the potentials recorded.
Acquisition factors that may affect the potentials include 
type and placement of the electrodes used for recording, the 
amplification and filtering performed on the potentials, the 
time window about the stimulus (analysis time) dedicated to 
the recording, and the type and degree of processing used to 
enhance the electrical signal above background electrical noise.
Non-pathological and pathological subject 
factors
The clinical utility of electrophysiological responses depends on 
the abilities to detect changes in the responses and to deter­
mine whether these changes exceed the normative range and 
cannot be attributed to non-pathological factors affecting the 
subject’s responses. Non-pathological factors include the sub­
ject’s age, body temperature and state of arousal, the effects of 
drugs, muscle tension and, to a lesser degree, gender. Patholog­
ical factors affecting auditory evoked potentials include con­
ductive hearing loss, cochlear hearing loss, cochlear nerve 
pathology, auditory brainstem dysfunction, cortical dysfunction 
and cognitive impairments.
Determination of a pathological change, therefore, depends 
on good control and documentation of non-pathological sub­
ject factors, and well-defined limits of the normal variability of 
evoked potentials measures. The variety of factors that may 
affect electrophysiological responses necessitates incorporating 
into their evaluation as much information as possible on the 
subject’s state, to rule out non-pathological factors.
Correlation with other audiological tests
When properly acquired and analysed, auditory evoked poten­
tials are a sensitive tool to assess the functional integrity of their 
generators. These generators are each involved in a particular 
stage of transduction, transmission and processing that together 
contribute to the process of hearing. Auditory evoked poten­
tials are therefore sensitive indices of the functions of specific 
stages that comprise hearing, but they do not reflect hearing. 
Evoked potentials reflect the auditory sensitivity and neuro- 
physiological integrity of neuronal assemblies, whereas hearing 
involves the conscious appreciation and discrimination of the 
auditory stimulus at the end of its processing.
It is therefore not surprising that electrophysiological tests 
vary in their correlations with other audiological tests. Such 
correlations depend on the aspect of hearing evaluated by the 
audiological test, and on the involvement of the evoked poten­
tials’ generators in that aspect of hearing. The main contribu­
tions of evoked potentials to patient evaluation stem from their 
direct measurement of neural function, independent of subject 
report or cooperation, and their sensitivity to the functional 
integrity of specific generators along the auditory pathway.
They thus provide an objective tool for assessing auditory sen­
sitivity at specific levels of the pathway, and allow localization 
of functional lesions.
Research underpinning subject
The advent of human auditory neurophysiology has followed 
the development of auditory neurophysiology in animal models 
and the technological advances that allowed its non-invasive 
implementation in humans. This pattern of development is still 
under way, with the major developments in the field drawing 
from basic auditory research and then being implemented in 
the clinical setting using new techniques for signal acquisition 
and processing.
The primary challenge in human auditory electrophysiol­
ogy is estimation of auditory function, objectively and non- 
invasively, and the definition of site of lesion. The research 
and development directions have thus included: the develop­
ment of stimulus types and recording procedures that are fre­
quency specific, allowing estimation of the audiogram; 
signal-processing procedures that improve estimation of the 
intracranial sources of the surface-recorded potentials; signal- 
processing techniques that estimate the likelihood of a signal 
in a noisy recording; and stimulus and recording techniques 
that allow the recording of potentials at very high stimulus 
rates to save recording time.
Technique and procedures
The recording from the scalp of intracranial electrical activity 
generated by the nervous system amounts to recording poten­
tials in a volume conductor. Volume conductor theory23,24 pre­
dicts that charged membranes, such as those of living cells, 
generate potentials which are recordable at any point within, or 
on the surface of, the conducting medium. In addition to the 
electrical properties of the medium between the electrode and 
the generator membrane, the magnitude of the potential is 
determined by the membrane potential and the solid angle 
which the membrane occupies about the recording electrode. 
This solid angle is, in turn, larger near the membrane and is 
decreased by the squared distance of the recording electrode 
from the membrane and the cosine of the angle by which the 
membrane tilts relative to the recording electrode (Figure
16.1). In general, an electrode in a volume conductor records a 
potential that is determined by the potential difference across 
the membrane at the source, by the size of the membrane, by its 
distance and by its orientation relative to the electrode.
When bio-electrical events are recorded, the potential 
recorded can be predicted from the summed contributions of all 
generator membranes in the volume conductor. It can be shown 
that only charged membranes associated with active cells (i.e. 
cells undergoing a change in membrane potential) but not uni­
formly charged cells (at rest, or depolarized over the entire 
membrane) contribute to the potential recorded in a volume
  

Human auditory electrophysiology 
273
Improving SNR includes signal enhancement as well as 
noise reduction. Increasing the signal is achieved by placing the 
electrodes at optimal positions for recording the activity of 
interest, and by using a stimulus that activates a large number 
of neural elements synchronously. Noise reduction is obtained 
by minimizing irrelevant sensory stimuli, by isolating the sub­
ject in a quiet and dimly illuminated examination area. Keep­
ing the subject relaxed and comfortable minimizes myogenic 
noise and eye-movement artefacts. Electrically shielding the 
transducers and recording system minimizes stimulus artefact 
and electrical pickup from external instrumentation, radio and 
power supply sources of noise.
The interface of the recording system with the subject com­
prises the electrodes and their attachment to the skin (Figure
16.2). Proper attachment of electrodes to the subject is there­
fore crucial. The quality of attachment is assessed by the imped­
ance of the contact of the electrode, usually measured between 
pairs of electrodes on the subject. Typical electrode impedance 
when contact is good is in the range 2-5 kQ. Because input 
impedance of the differential amplifier is in the megaOhm 
range, electrode impedance has little effect on the input to the 
amplifier. However, electrode impedance determines the volt­
age recorded as a result of the local currents induced in the elec­
trode by both bio-electrical events in the volume conductor 
and external electrical artefacts. According to Ohm’s law, 
therefore, higher impedance at the electrode will lead to 
increased noise voltages resulting from a given induced current.
Figure 16.1 Solid angles that a charged membrane occupies from three 
positions in a volume conductor. From position P1, which is close and vertically 
above the membrane, the solid angle is larger than from P3, which is close but 
diagonally positioned to the membrane, and from P2, which is farther away.
conductor. The recording electrode is not selective with regard 
to the sources of the potentials, and all potentials summate at 
the electrode and contribute to the potential that is recorded. 
Consequently, an electrode on the scalp records any electrical 
activity occurring within the volume conductor— auditory or 
other. Thus, in auditory electrophysiology, in addition to the 
specific potential of interest which is generated in the auditory 
system (‘signal’), other types of activity which are not of inter­
est (‘noise’) summate at the electrode. Noise includes activity 
from the auditory system that is not the subject of study, activ­
ity from other sensory systems, ongoing background EEG, elec­
trical activity from the heart (ECG), electrical activity from 
skeletal muscles (EMG), potential changes due to eye move­
ments (EOG), and slow potentials associated with conductivity 
changes of the skin (GSR). In addition to these noises of bio­
logical origin within the body, there are external sources of 
electrical noise, such as the alternating current of the electrical 
supply lines (50/60 Hz), electromagnetic radiation from the 
stimulus transducer (stimulus artefact), radio signals, instru­
mentation noise and discharge of static electricity. The chal­
lenge of auditory electrophysiology is to increase the signal and 
decrease the noise, i.e. to improve signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
Figure 16.2 Typical surface electrodes for evoked potential recording (top) and 
their attachment to the skin (bottom). The electrodes comprise a concave metal 
disk (typically 9 mm in diameter) with a hole in its centre to allow access to the 
skin after the electrode is attached by glue or tape to the skin. The electrode is 
filled with conducting gel or paste that improves contact with the surface of 
the skin.
  

274 
Audiology
In addition, if the impedance of the electrodes is not the same 
across recording sites, the noise levels picked up by different 
electrodes will not be the same, reducing the benefit of differ­
ential amplification (see below). It is thus important to secure 
low and similar impedances across all electrodes.
The initial stage of the recording system is a differential 
amplifier, which amplifies and filters the potential difference 
between pairs of recording electrodes. The amplification is in 
the order of a few hundred thousand, and serves to bring the 
potentials from the electrodes to a magnitude of a few volts, 
which can then be further processed by the recording system. 
The potential difference between the non-inverting (positive) 
and the inverting (negative) electrodes is amplified within a 
prescribed bandpass. In addition, a third input to the amplifier, 
from the ground electrode on the subject, serves as the common 
reference which otherwise does not contribute to the output. 
Electrical activity that is recorded similarly by the inverting and 
non-inverting electrodes will be diminished by the subtraction 
of the differential. Thus, differential recording rejects activity 
that is common to both inputs (common mode rejection), and 
augments activity that is of opposite phase at the inverting and 
non-inverting amplifier inputs (Figure 16.3). If the recording 
electrodes are placed so that the signal of interest is recorded 
with opposite polarity at the two differential inputs, the signal 
will be enhanced by the subtraction of inputs. At the same 
time, noise common to both inputs will be diminished, and 
SNR will thus be markedly improved. If the impedances of the 
inverting and non-inverting electrodes are not the same, the 
noise levels picked up by them will be different, and their dif­
ference will not be zero, reducing the benefits from differential 
amplification. It is thus important to keep electrode impedance 
low and similar across inputs.
Figure 16.3 Differential recording of a noise-contaminated signal from an 
active membrane. By placing the recording electrodes so that the signal of 
interest is recorded with opposite polarity at the two differential inputs, the 
signal will be enhanced by the subtraction of inputs. At the same time, noise 
common to both inputs will be diminished, and SNR will thus be markedly 
improved.
Because the output of the differential amplifier reflects the 
difference between two inputs, the waveform obtained should 
be treated with caution: if the two inputs were not in phase, the 
output waveform may be distorted. In addition, the output 
reflects the difference between inputs, and the specific contri­
bution of each input cannot be determined from this difference: 
a positive peak in the output of a differential amplifier can 
reflect a positive peak in the non-inverting input, a negative 
peak in the inverting input, a larger positive peak in the non­
inverting than in the inverting input, or any combination that 
will yield positivity in the difference waveform (Figure 16.4).
Filtering the signals through the amplifier can also improve 
SNR by allowing frequencies (bandpass) that make up the sig­
nal and rejecting frequencies that contribute to the noise, 
above (low-pass) and below (high-pass) that band (Figure 
16.5). For example, when recording compound action poten­
tials ascending the auditory pathway, their waveform power 
spectrum includes a major frequency band around a few hun­
dred to a thousand hertz, while the ongoing EEG has most of its 
energy below 30 Hz. Allowing through only activity above 
(high-pass) 30 Hz will diminish the EEG noise, and thus 
improve SNR. On the high-frequency end, limiting frequencies
Figure 16.4 Ambiguity of determining the inputs that contributed to a given 
differential recording waveform. All input waveform pairs to the differential 
amplifiers on the left result in the same output waveform depicted on the right.
  

Human auditory electrophysiology 
275
1 
2 
5 
10 
20 50 100 200 500 IK 2K 5K 10K
EEG 
EMG 
Electromagnetic +
E0G 
AP 
Environmental noise
Figure 16.5 Filtering signals by allowing frequencies (bandpass) that make up 
the signal and rejecting frequencies which contribute to the noise, above (low- 
pass) and below (high-pass) the bandpass. In this example of recording 
compound action potentials, their waveform power spectrum includes a major 
frequency band around a few hundred to a thousand Hertz, while the ongoing 
EEG has most of its energy below 20 Hz. Allowing through only activity above 
(high-pass) 30 Hz and below (low-pass) 3000 Hz creates a bandpass of
30-3000 Hz, which will augment the contribution of compound action 
potentials relative to EEG and environmental noise.
beyond the upper limit of biological signals will reduce electro­
magnetic environmental noise. Thus a bandpass of 30-3000 Hz 
will augment the contribution of compound action potentials 
relative to EEG and environmental noise.
Differential amplification and filtering improve SNR but 
not sufficiently for identification of the small electrophysiolog­
ical signal embedded in the background noise associated with 
surface electrodes. The procedure most commonly used in 
evoked potentials to separate small signals from the noise in 
which they are embedded is averaging. Improvement of SNR by 
averaging is based on the assumption that the signal is time- 
locked to the stimulus, i.e. always occurs with the same delay 
after the stimulus, in contrast to noise that is random. Thus, 
whenever a stimulus is presented, at a given point in time fol­
lowing the stimulus, the signal will always contribute the same 
potential to the recording, whereas noise will randomly vary in 
its contribution. Because the average of random noise is zero, 
and the average of a repetitive constant is the constant, averag­
ing many repetitions of mixed random noise and a constant sig­
nal will not affect the signal but will diminish the noise, 
improving SNR (Figure 16.6). In practice, signal averaging is 
conducted digitally by first converting the analog output of the 
differential amplifier to discrete digital representation (analog- 
to-digital (A/D), conversion) at each point in time following 
the presentation of the stimulus (Figure 16.7). Thus, the con­
tinuous voltage change from the electrodes is converted to a 
series (‘sweep’) of numbers, each of which is stored in the com­
puter’s memory (‘address’). The numbers comprising a sweep 
are proportional to the magnitude and polarity of the potential 
at each point in time during the sweep. This A/D conversion is 
repeated with repeated stimulation, and corresponding points 
in time across stimulus presentations are averaged, resulting in 
an averaged sweep. With a truly random noise, the residual 
noise in the averaged sweep decreases with the square root of
Figure 16.6 Diminishing random noise and enhancing SNR by averaging. 
Random EEG diminishes with averaging, while a constant signal, such as an 
evoked potential, persists. In practice, single sweeps of electrical activity 
following a stimulus (right column) consist of the evoked potential (centre 
column), which is the same following all stimulus repetitions, and EEG noise 
(left column), which is random. The averaged waveform (bottom row, right) 
consists of the evoked potentials and some residual noise.
Figure 16.7 Analog-to-digital (A/D) conversion (digitization) of a signal. The 
continuous analog signal (top) is converted (middle) to a series of discrete 
numbers (bottom) representing the voltage at discrete points in time.
the number of sweeps included in the average. The practical 
implication of this relationship is that in order to improve SNR 
by a factor of 2, the number of sweeps that must be averaged has 
to increase four-fold.
  

276 
Audiology
The rate at which the analog output of the differential 
amplifier is converted to discrete digital representations (‘sam- 
pling rate’) will determine the temporal resolution of the 
process. In order to detect a given frequency in the signal, the 
sampling rate must be at least twice that frequency (Nyquist fre­
quency), but preferably four times the signal frequency (Figure
16.8). In order to detect low frequencies in the waveform, the 
sweep duration must include at least a quarter of the period of 
the detected frequency. In order to detect a very small signal in 
large noise, the digital representation of the noise with the sig­
nal should be different from noise alone (Figure 16.9). In other 
words, the amplitude resolution of the A/D converter should be 
fine enough to distinguish the small signal. A/D amplitude res­
olution is characterized by the power of 2 (bits) that describes 
the number of intermediate values that its full range includes. 
Thus, for example, a 12-bit A/D converter can divide its full 
range of input voltage (typically ±5 V, i.e. 10 V) into 4096 (212) 
intermediate values, i.e. a resolution of about 2.5 mV.
Sporadic, very high amplitude noise may not be sufficiently 
diminished by averaging and may thus remain as residual noise 
in the averaged waveform. To avoid such residual noise, aver­
aging often includes scanning the sweeps before they are 
included in the average, and rejection of sweeps with high- 
amplitude noise. This procedure (‘artefact rejection’) improves 
the SNR enhancement of averaging. Because SNR enhance­
ment with averaging assumes that the latency of the signal is
Sampling 
Temporal resolution 
rate
- AMAAA - A A
-  A/V\
A A AJ\l\l\
-* AAA1 ..A|\ - AAAAAA
-
| |  - mm
Figure 16.8 The effect of sampling rate (temporal resolution) on the 
reconstructed digital waveform. Sampling rates lower than twice the signal 
frequency (top two rows) result in waveform distortions (aliasing). Aliasing may 
manifest in frequencies that were not part of the signal (top row) or non­
detected frequencies (second row from top). The minimum sampling rate for 
detecting a signal is twice the signal frequency (third row), but for more 
accurate waveform reconstruction, higher sampling rates should be used 
(bottom row).
Figure 16.9 The effect of amplitude resolution of the A/D conversion on the 
detection of small signals embedded in large noise. With a low amplitude 
resolution (right column), the small signal does not contribute to the digitized 
sweep, and therefore goes undetected after averaging. When amplitude 
resolution is such that the digital representation of the single sweep is affected 
by the presence of the small signal (left column), the signal is detected after 
averaging.
constant across sweeps, any deviation from this assumption will 
result in signal distortion. Thus, if during the averaging process 
the timing of the signal is not constant, but drifts in time or jit­
ters, amplitude, waveform and even latency of the signal may be 
distorted. Factors that might affect the latency of the potential 
of interest must therefore be as constant as possible during sig­
nal acquisition. Conversely, electrical signals that are artefac- 
tual, but constant in their timing across sweeps, such as stimulus 
artefacts, will be enhanced by averaging, sometimes obscuring 
the physiological response of interest. Such artefacts must be 
treated by shielding against them and alternating their polarity, 
when appropriate, so that their average is zero.
The final product of the recording system is a series of aver­
aged numbers representing the average voltage at specific 
stimulus-related points in time. These numbers represent the 
averaged waveform of voltage fluctuations as a function of time. 
The waveform can be displayed, plotted, and stored digitally for 
further processing (Figure 16.10) to extract quantitative mea­
sures of the electrical activity evoked by the stimulus.
Waveform analysis typically includes amplitudes and laten­
cies of specific peaks, or differences between peaks (Figure 
16.11) and troughs in the waveform, or more advanced signal- 
processing procedures that quantify specific attributes of the 
response.
Description
General description of auditory evoked 
potentials
Auditory evoked potentials span activity from the full length of 
the auditory pathway, from cochlear hair cells to cerebral cor­
tex, as well as activity associated with cognitive processing of
  

Human auditory electrophysiology 
277
A-0
conversion
Averaging
!□ 
ol
la 
til
Digitized
L jl T
signal
£ signal 
1 
n
Display
rJ------ U
■____ ■
□
Storage
Figure 16.10 Data flow through a typical evoked potential recording setup, from subject to stored waveform. A stimulus-related time-locking pulse triggers the 
sampling and averaging of the signal from the subject, and the averaged waveform is displayed as a voltage-time plot and stored digitally for further analysis.
Figure 16.11 Commonly derived amplitude and latency measures, as measured 
from a schematic waveform with two peaks. Latency measures include latencies 
of each peak, measured from stimulus onset, as well as the interpeak latency 
difference. Amplitude measures include the voltage difference between the 
peak and baseline (defined as the average voltage in the pre-stimulus period) 
and between the peak and the following trough.
auditory stimuli. The methods described above separate audi- 
tory potentials that are time-locked to the stimulus from back­
ground 
noise. 
However, 
the 
recording 
electrodes 
are 
non-selective in terms of the potentials they record, and any 
stimulus-related activity along the auditory pathway will sum­
mate and contribute to the potential at a given electrode. In 
order to record selectively from a given level along the auditory
pathway, specific attributes of the activity at that level must be 
utilized. The timing and waveform of activity vary between dif­
ferent levels of the auditory system, and the orientations and 
positions of the generators vary along the pathway. Therefore, 
electrode locations, filter settings and analysis times can be set 
to selectively record activity from a specific generator along the 
auditory pathway. The following section is an overview of the 
evoked potentials generated along the auditory pathway and 
recorded from the surface, highlighting the parameters that 
determine their selective recording.
Cochlear potentials
Cochlear potentials from humans can be recorded with the 
largest amplitudes, using an electrode that is inserted as close as 
possible to the inner ear. In this procedure, ‘electrocochleogra- 
phy’, if the tympanic membrane is intact, a needle electrode is 
inserted through the tympanic membrane, and placed on the 
promontory in the middle ear. In the case of a perforation, a ball 
electrode can be used, and the electrode is then placed on to 
the round window. This procedure should be performed under 
microscope, and local anaesthetic may be applied to the tym­
panic membrane to ensure patient comfort. In the case of chil­
dren, or difficult-to-test adults, the procedure is performed 
under general anaesthesia. Transtympanic electrocochleogra- 
phy should be performed with all the precautions of a surgical 
procedure.
As this technique represents a near-field recording, 
transtympanically recorded cochlear potentials are 20 times 
larger in amplitude than those recorded non-invasively from an 
electrode in the ear canal, and 10 times greater than those 
recorded from the tympanic membrane. Cochlear potentials 
that can be recorded non-invasively from humans include the 
cochlear microphonic potentials, the summating potential, and
Peak 2
latency
Interpeak
_ P«k 1 
^----- |atency _
latencV 
difference
1
Stimulus
artifact
Prestimulus
delay
  

278 
Audiology
the compound action potential of the cochlear nerve. These 
potentials are most readily recorded in the electrocochleogram 
(ECOG), which can be recorded from the ear canal using an 
electrode resting on the tympanic membrane.25 The electrode 
(Figure 16.12, bottom) is constructed from 5-cm-long medical- 
grade silicon tubing (approximately 2 mm outer diameter and
1.5 mm inner diameter) into which a Teflon-insulated silver or 
copper wire (0.2 mm diameter) is inserted with foam rubber 2 X 
2 X 5  mm tied to one of its bared ends, protruding by about 1 
mm from the end of the tubing. The foam rubber is saturated 
with conducting gel for improved contact with the tympanic 
membrane. The other bared end of the insulated wire, protrud­
ing from the other end of the tubing, is connected to the ampli­
fier input. Before the tympanic membrane electrode is placed, 
the integrity of the tympanic membrane must be verified oto- 
scopically and the ear canal thoroughly cleansed of deposits to 
ensure good electrical contact of the electrode. Once in place, 
the electrode is stabilized by placing a compressed-foam earplug 
through which a sound delivery tube enables stimulus presenta­
tion. When the foam earplug expands, it secures the electrode 
and sound delivery tube in the ear canal (Figure 16.12, top).
When the tympanic membrane electrode is non-inverting, 
and an inverting silver disk electrode is placed on the contra­
lateral mastoid or earlobe, the cochlear compound action 
potential in response to altemating-polarity, high-intensity 
clicks is recorded as a major negative peak of a few microvolts, 
called 
or AP for action potential at approximately 1.5 ms 
after stimulus onset at the eardrum, followed by a minor nega­
tivity called N2, at about 2.5 ms (Figure 16.13). The summating 
potential (SP), preceding Ni as a negative step-like deflection 
from baseline, is recordable with altemating-polarity stimuli, 
but when all stimuli are of the same polarity, it is obscured by
Figure 16.12 Tympanic membrane recording electrode for 
electrocochleography. Its components are included in the inset at the bottom, 
and a schematic drawing of the electrode in place is shown on top. Once in 
place, the electrode is stabilized by placing a compressed-foam earplug through 
which a sound delivery tube enables stimulus presentation. When the foam 
earplug expands, it secures the electrode and sound delivery tube in the ear 
canal with the electrode tip leaning against the tympanic membrane.
Figure 16.13 Major components and the measures derived from an 
electrocochleogram in response to altemating-polarity clicks. The step-like 
negative deflection from baseline at the beginning of the record is the 
summating potential (SP), which is followed by the cochlear compound action 
potential (AP), recorded as a major negative peak, also known as Nv N, is 
followed by a minor negativity called N2.
the cochlear microphonics (CM). The electrocochleogram is 
affected by auditory sensitivity in the range 1000-4000 Hz and 
is independent of the subject’s state of arousal or the effects of 
drugs.
In routine clinical application, a typical recording bandpass 
is 3-3000 Hz, stimulus rate is around 10/s, and the number of 
responses averaged for each trace is between 1000 and 2000. To 
avoid waveform distortions and to enhance latency resolution, 
sampling rate should not be lower than 20 kHz (50 |is/address or 
less). Important measures derived from the waveform (Figure 
16.13) include 
latency (from stimulus onset) and amplitude 
(between the transition from SP to 
and the negative peak of 
Nx), as well as SP duration (between its onset and transition to 
N J and amplitude (between SP onset and its most negative 
point).
Cochlear potentials can also be recorded from the ear 
canal, using a ball-tipped wire secured against the canal wall, or 
from the mastoid or earlobe, using a standard surface disk elec­
trode, referenced to a disk electrode on the contralateral ear­
lobe or mastoid. The amplitude of cochlear potentials decreases
  

Human auditory electrophysiology 
279
when recorded farther from the cochlea, due to distance, but 
also due to the more pronounced attenuation by the interven- 
ing tissues of high than of low frequencies. Consequently, it is 
recommended that for surface recording of CM, a 1000-Hz tone 
burst be used rather than the higher-frequency click. The 
longer duration of such a burst necessitates a larger temporal 
separation between stimulus artefact and CM, which is typi­
cally achieved using a 66-cm sound delivery tube (2-ms acousti­
cal delay) and a tone burst of one period (1-ms duration). The 
diameter of the sound delivery tube should be large (1-2 cm) to 
avoid acoustical distortion of the lower-frequency tone burst. 
Therefore, for mastoid or earlobe recording of CM with surface 
electrodes, the sound delivery system includes a headset cou­
pled to the transducer with a relatively long sound delivery tube 
(Figure 16.14). When only CM are recorded, stimulus rate can 
be increased to 90/s without any effect on CM, which, having 
no refractory period, are thus enhanced relative to the neural 
potentials, which are diminished at high stimulus rates.
Auditory brainstem responses
Auditory brainstem evoked responses (ABRs) are optimally 
recorded from the scalp by disk or cup electrodes in response to 
high-intensity clicks presented at a rate of about 10/s. Potential 
differences between an electrode on the top of the head (Cz or 
F^ according to the 10-20 system26) and in the vicinity of the 
stimulated ear (mastoid or earlobe) are amplified in a bandpass 
of about 30-3000 Hz, and averaged across a few thousand 
sweeps of 10-15 ms. To avoid waveform distortions and to 
enhance latency resolution, sampling rate should not be lower 
than 20kHz (50|as/address, or less). Under such stimulus and 
recording conditions, the normal waveform includes a series of 
5-7 voltage oscillations, approximately 1 ms apart, during the 
first 6-1 0 ms after stimulus onset (Figure 16.15). Amplitudes of 
the components are in the order of tenths of a microvolt, and,
Figure 16.14 Sound delivery system for mastoid or earlobe recording of CM by 
surface electrodes. The system includes a headset coupled to the transducer 
with a relatively long sound delivery tube that delays the arrival of sound at the 
ear, temporally separating it from stimulus artefact.
Figure 16.15 Auditory brainstem responses (ABR) to alternating-polarity 
clicks, differentially recorded between vertex and the mastoid ipsilateral to 
the stimulated ear. Two replications of the recording from the same subject 
are superimposed to assess reproducibility.
like the electrocochleogram, components are affected by audi­
tory sensitivity in the range 1000-4000Hz and are independent 
of the subject’s state of arousal or the effects of drugs. Compo­
nents are labelled by Roman numerals, beginning with the ver­
tex positive peak at approximately 1.5 ms after stimulus onset, 
which is followed by a prominent negative trough. Peak I and 
its associated trough (I') are followed by four fast oscillations,
II, III, IV and V, about 1 ms apart, which appear to be super­
imposed on a slow rising positivity (the ‘pedestal’), with peak
V typically identified as the most positive in the complex. 
The components following V exhibit such large inter-subject 
variability, as well as large within-subject session-to-session 
variability, that they are not used in clinical diagnosis.
The generators of ABRs have been the subject of much 
research and controversy and are still not entirely agreed upon. 
However, for clinical purposes, the following relationships 
between ABR peaks and neuroanatomy suffice. The first peak 
in the sequence, peak I, is the only one on which there is gen­
eral agreement regarding its generator. This peak is the only one 
to survive section of the cochlear nerve central to the internal 
auditory canal, placing its generator in the cochlea. It is syn­
chronous with Nj of the electrocochleogram, is affected by 
masking, reverses polarity around the mastoid, and does not 
change polarity with stimulus polarity, indicating its neural ori­
gin within the cochlea.
The generators of the second peak, II, are among the most 
controversial. Correlations with intracranial recordings in
27 2 8  
29
humans, intraoperatively, ’ 
and from experimental animals 
indicate that it is synchronous with proximal cochlear nerve 
activity. However, it does not reverse polarity around the mas­
toid and it is not entirely obliterated with cochlear nerve sec­
tion. Some attribute it to overlapping activity from the cochlear 
nerve and from the cochlear nucleus.30 Others suggest that it is 
generated by the electrical field distortions due to the changing 
geometry and conductance of the volume conductor, as the
  

280 
Audiology
nerve passes through the internal auditory canal and through 
the posterior fossa prior to its merging into the brainstem.31 
Regardless of the fine details, there is general agreement that 
peak II is generated in the vicinity of the cochlear nerve’s entry 
into the brainstem.
Peak III is generally agreed to be generated in the brain­
stem, but there is disagreement on the exact generator set, 
because intracranial recordings from humans and correlations 
with animal experiments have not been conclusive. Suggested 
generators span the lower brainstem between the cochlear 
nucleus, through the trapezoid body to the superior olivary 
complex. Because the anatomical distance between these struc­
tures is small, for practical clinical purposes the generators may 
be attributed to the lower pons.
The fourth component is not always identified in human 
subjects, and it is generally absent in animals. When identified, 
peak IV is usually partially merged with V, creating a bifid IV-V 
complex. It is generally agreed that the fourth peak of animals 
corresponds to the human V. The exact generators of this 
complex are still under debate, but all evidence points to the 
upper pons, between the superior olivary complex, through the 
lateral lemniscus, with a possible contribution from the inferior 
colliculus. For clinical purposes, the IV-V complex can be 
attributed to the upper pons and its junction with the midbrain.
ABR measures include measuring the lowest stimulus 
intensity at which a response is detected (detection threshold). 
Neuro-otological measures of ABRs include peak latencies and 
amplitudes, as well as interpeak latency differences and ampli­
tude ratios (Table 16.1). In general, peak latencies measure the 
time lapse between stimulus onset and the time of highest syn­
chronous activity in the generator set of the measured compo­
nent. With auditory evoked potentials, this time includes sound 
conduction from the transducer (typically an earphone or 
speaker), mechanical transmission through the middle and 
inner ear, receptor transduction and cochlear nerve activation, 
and transmission along the auditory pathway to the generators 
of the surface-recorded activity. Peak latencies are therefore 
affected by all these processes, which should all be taken into 
consideration when interpreting latency data. The multitude of 
factors contributing to peak latency has led to the definition of 
interpeak latency difference measures. By deriving the differ­
ence in latency between two peaks, factors affecting the latency 
of both peaks are negated, and the latency measure gains in 
specificity. Thus, for example, the V -I interpeak latency differ­
ence reflects central transmission time from the cochlea to the 
ponto-midbrain junction, and is usually unaffected by more 
peripheral factors such as conductive hearing loss. With ABRs, 
the most widely used interpeak latency differences are V-I, III—I 
and V—III, reflecting transmission along the auditory pathway 
between cochlea and ponto-midbrain junction, between 
cochlea and pontomedullary junction, and along the pons, 
respectively.
The functionally intact auditory pathway is typically sym­
metrical, with equal transmission times in response to left-ear 
and to right-ear stimulation. Thus, a significant interaural dif-
Table 16,1 Typical adult normative upper limits for measure­
ments of BAEP in response to 10/s, 70-dB HL clicks.
Mean
Upper limit
Interaural
difference
Absolute
1
1.75
2.2
0.3
latencies
II
2,8
3.3
0.4
II!
3,9
4.5
0,4
IV
5,1
5.9
0.6
V
5.7
6.4
0,5
Interpeak
V-I
4.0
4.5
0.5
latency
Ill-I
2.1
2.5
0.5
difference
V -lll
1.9
2.4
0.5
Amplitude
V/I
1.3
0.5
Lower limit
ratio
Values are representative of three typical values and should not be used as 
norms for any particular setting. The norms for each laboratory should be 
calculated based on records from subjects recorded on the same system in the 
same setting. Neonates and children may have different normative values. 
Latency measures are in milliseconds. Interaural differences are in the same 
units as their monaural counterparts in the same line, amplitude ratios are in 
decimal fractions.
ference in respective measures, in response to left- and right-ear 
stimulation, may be indicative of a unilateral functional abnor­
mality. Peak amplitudes are affected by a variety of recording 
factors, such as electrode impedance, the precise location of the 
electrodes relative to the generators of the potentials, and the 
effective stimulus intensity reaching the inner ear. Amplitude 
measures, therefore, exhibit very large variability across subjects 
as well as between sessions with the same subject. Amplitude 
ratios between peaks in the same record quantify the amount of 
synchronous activity at different levels of the pathway, can­
celling out sources of variance that are common to both peaks, 
such as electrode impedance and relative positions of electrodes 
and generators. The most widely used amplitude ratio is that 
between peaks V and I, reflecting the amount of synchronous 
activity at the upper pons normalized by the cochlear output 
that evoked it.
ABRs are affected by a variety of non-pathological factors, 
including the subject’s age, body temperature and gender, and 
stimulus factors such as frequency composition, intensity, pre­
sentation rate and envelope. Because ABRs reflect the syn­
chronous firing of neural elements distributed along the 
auditory pathway that summates on the scalp, the more syn­
chronous their activation, the larger the peak amplitudes. Fast- 
rising stimulus envelopes result in more synchronous neural 
activation. Because high-frequency stimuli have a fast rise 
time, they are more effective in synchronous neural activation.
  

Human auditory electrophysiology 
281
Moreover, because high frequencies are represented in the more 
basal portions of the cochlea, where longitudinal mechanical 
coupling along the basilar membrane is more pronounced, the 
responses across a wider frequency range are synchronous. The 
mechanical travelling wave reaches the basal cochlea earlier, 
and therefore potentials evoked by high frequencies have 
shorter latencies. In summary, high-frequency stimuli and stim­
ulus envelopes with a steep rise time evoke ABRs with larger 
amplitudes and shorter latencies. Increasing stimulus intensity 
results in earlier activation of nerve fibres, usually because the 
cochlear postsynaptic potentials rise higher and faster, and 
reach threshold earlier. Thus, ABR peak latencies shorten 
with increasing stimulus intensity (Figure 16.16). With increas-
Figure 16.16 ABRs from a young infant to altemating-polarity clicks 
presented over a 70-dB intensity range. Note the parallel prolongation of peak 
latencies with decreasing intensity down to near-threshold levels, and the 
preservation of the V-I interpeak latency difference. Also note the typical 
neonatal waveform, with only a rudimentary peak II.
ing stimulus rate, synaptic efficacy is reduced, typically because 
recycling of the transmitter cannot keep up with the rate of its 
depletion. Thus the synaptic potentials are smaller, resulting in 
longer delays until the next neural level reaches threshold. 
Thus, because of the cumulative effect along the chain of 
synapses leading to successive generators of ABRs, peak laten­
cies are progressively prolonged with increasing stimulus rate, 
with the later peaks’ latencies more affected by high rates than 
the earlier peaks. As a result, interpeak latency differences are 
prolonged with increasing stimulus rate.
The effect of age may be divided into two periods: matura­
tion and adulthood. During maturation, which can be followed 
in premature neonates, through full-term babies and up to 2 
years of age, significant changes in component amplitudes, 
latency and interpeak latency differences take place. In prema­
ture neonates, ABRs are not detectable before 26 weeks of 
conceptional age. After 26 weeks, components II, IV and VI are 
not well defined, and peak latencies and interpeak latency dif­
ferences are prolonged. Interpeak latency differences shorten 
with maturation at a rate of 0.1- 0.2 ms/week until week 40, and 
at a slower rate until the age of 2 years, when they reach adult 
values. During childhood, the definition of components II, IV 
and VI improves. Peak amplitudes are typically larger than in 
adults, particularly component I, which is often larger than V, 
leading to an amplitude ratio between V and I which is typi­
cally larger than 1 in adults, but smaller than 1 in children. 
Consequently, the V/I amplitude ratio must be used with cau­
tion, taking into account the profound effects of age on this 
measure. During adulthood, the age-related changes in ampli­
tude and latency measures are so small as to not warrant age- 
adjusted norms in clinical use. The effects of increasing stimulus 
rate on interpeak latency differences are large in neonates, 
decrease during childhood and reach stable adult values at 
adolescence.
The effect of lowering body temperature on ABRs is pro­
longation of peak latencies such that peak V latency increases 
by 0.2ms/°C down to a core temperature of 27°C. Below 27°C, 
component definition becomes difficult. Some effects of drugs 
and alcohol, as well as circadian rhythms, on ABR measures 
have been attributed to changes in body temperature.
The effect of gender on ABRs is apparent only in adults, 
where latencies and interpeak latency differences are shorter 
and amplitudes are larger in women. Attempts have been made 
to relate these differences to gender differences in body and 
brain size and/or to differences in body temperature, water con­
tent and adipose tissue. The differences are small and well 
within normal ranges for each gender, but some insist on sepa­
rate normative adult data for men and women.
Auditory thalamocortical evoked potentials
Auditory thalamocortical potentials are also called auditory 
middle-latency evoked potentials (AMEPs) and are optimally 
recorded from the scalp by disk or cup electrodes in response to 
high-intensity clicks or tone pips presented at a rate of about 
10/s or less. Potential differences between an electrode on the
75dBnHL
65dBnHL
BSdBnHL
4SdBnHL
35dBnHL
25dBnHL
15dBnHL
BdBnHL
0.25|,iV
2 msec
  

282 
Audiology
top of the head (Cv C3 or C4 according to the 10-20 system26 
and in the vicinity of the stimulated ear (mastoid or earlobe) or 
lower neck are amplified in a bandpass of about 10-3000 Hz, 
and averaged across 1000 sweeps of 60-100 ms. To avoid wave­
form distortions and to enhance latency resolution, sampling 
rate should not be lower than 5 kHz (200|^s/address, or less). 
Under such stimulus and recording conditions, the normal 
waveform includes a series of about three voltage oscillations, 
between 10 and 50 ms after stimulus onset (Figure 16.17, top). 
Amplitudes of the components are in the order of a microvolt 
or two, and components are affected by auditory sensitivity to 
the stimulus used to evoke them. Unlike the ECOG and ABRs, 
AMEPs are affected by the subject’s state of arousal and by some 
drugs. Components are labelled according to their polarity (P 
for positive, N for negative), with a numerical or alphabetical 
subscript denoting their sequential order, beginning with the 
vertex negative-positive peaks at approximately 10 ms after
Ro
Pa,
Pa:
No
Na
Nb
10-l000Hz
0.5|W
10msec
40Hz
IO-IOOOHz
40Hz 
10-100Hz
Figure 16.17 Auditory middle latency evoked potentials (AMEPs) recorded 
from the vertex in response to clicks presented at a rate of 10/s (top trace) and 
40/s (bottom trace). When stimuli are presented at intervals of 25 ms (i.e. at a 
rate of 40/s), the AMEPs evoked by one stimulus are not over when the AMEPs 
evoked by the next stimulus are evoked. The top three traces show AMEPs that 
are replicated with a 25-ms delay, which, when summated (fourth trace from 
the top), yield a composite waveform which oscillates at 40/s. When the higher 
frequencies of this composite waveform are filtered out (bottom trace), a 
sinusoidal waveform of 40 Hz is obtained.
stimulus onset (N0, P0), followed by a negative-positive trough - 
peak (Na, Pa) at about 15 and 25 ms, and another (Nb, Pb) at 
about 35 and 50 ms.
AMEPs are generally accepted to be of thalamocortical ori­
gin, with contributions from the extralemniscal reticular for­
mation. The relative contributions of these generators differ 
according to the recording electrodes’ positions. Pa is a compos­
ite of two major contributions (Figure 16.17, top), reflecting 
more of the primary auditory cortex when recorded over tem­
poroparietal areas (e.g. C3, C4), while subcortical levels are 
optimally recorded over the midline (C J.
Because the major peaks of AMEPs are approximately 
25 ms apart, stimulation (with clicks or tone pips) at a rate of 
40/s (Figure 16.17, middle) results in summation of non­
corresponding components to consecutive stimuli (e.g. P0 from 
one stimulus with Pa to the preceding stimulus, 25 ms earlier, 
and Pb of the stimulus before that, 25 ms earlier yet), creating a 
periodic sinusoidal waveform (Figure 16.17, bottom) of 40 Hz.32 
At other stimulus rates, the components do not summate and 
the waveform does not attain a smooth sinusoidal ‘steady state’, 
as opposed to the ‘transient response’ obtained with slow stim­
ulus rates that do not superimpose components across consecu­
tive stimuli. This steady-state sinusoidal variant of AMEPs is 
also called ‘the 40-Hz response’, but the exact stimulus rate at 
which constructive summation of components occurs varies. In 
adults, constructive summation to a sinusoid occurs between 37 
and 40 Hz, and in very young children it may be closer to 20 Hz. 
The recording bandpass for the 40-Hz response can be narrow 
and around 40 Hz: for clinical use, it is set to about 10-100 Hz. 
Averaging about 1000 sweeps will usually suffice to produce a 
clean sinusoidal waveform, with amplitudes of 1-2 |LiV from 
normal awake subjects. The generators of the 40-Hz response 
are ambiguous, because of the temporal overlap of components 
from a variety of subcortical and cortical generators. The differ­
ential effect of stimulus rate on these generators adds to the 
ambiguity in their relationship to the generators of AMEPs 
with slower stimulus rates. Suspected generators include 
extralemniscal brainstem, thalamus, and possibly some contri­
bution from auditory cortex.
AMEP measures include the stimulus intensity at which a 
response is just detected (detection threshold), for both the 
40-Hz steady-state response and the transient response with a 
slower stimulus rate, as well as peak latencies of the transient 
response. Amplitudes are too variable to be clinically useful.
Unlike ABRs and the ECOG, AMEPs are affected by the 
subject’s state of arousal and by sedation and anaesthetic drugs. 
The subject’s age and stimulus rate interact to produce a marked 
effect on the potentials of young children.
Auditory cortical and cognitive potentials
Auditory cortical potentials are also called auditory long- 
latency (or late) evoked potentials (ALEPs), and they span the 
transition from exogenous to endogenous components. ALEPs 
are optimally recorded from the scalp by disk or cup electrodes 
in response to a variety of stimuli, from clicks or tone pips, to
  

Human auditory electrophysiology 
283
more complex sounds including speech and music, presented at 
a rate of less than 1/s. ALEPs are optimally recorded in response 
to tone pips with envelopes having relatively long (about 
25 ms) rise-fall times and plateaus (about 50 ms). The potential 
differences between an electrode on the top of the head (F?, Cz, 
or Pz according to the 10-20 system26) and one on the lower sur­
face of the head (mastoids, lower neck or chin), are amplified in 
a bandpass of about 1-100 Hz, and averaged across 50-100 
sweeps of 500-1000ms. To avoid waveform distortions and to 
keep a reasonable latency resolution, sampling rate should not 
be lower than 250 Hz (4 ms/address, or less).
The normal ALEP waveform (Figure 16.18, bottom) 
includes two voltage fluctuations, between 60 and 200 ms after 
stimulus onset, which are exogenous and therefore dependent 
on stimulus parameters and auditory sensitivity. These compo­
nents are followed by later components (Figure 16.18, top) 
which are endogenous and vary with the task relevance and 
with the context of the stimulus, rather than with its physical 
characteristics. Amplitudes of the components are in the order 
of a few microvolts, and are markedly affected by the task that 
the subject performs and the subject’s state of arousal. Compo­
nents are labelled according to their polarity (P for positive, N 
for negative) with Arabic numerical subscripts denoting their 
sequential order or average latency in milliseconds (e.g. Nt or 
N100 for the first vertex-negative peak at approximately 100 ms 
after stimulus onset). The initial scalp positive peak (Vx or P60) 
is followed by a negative-positive (Nb P2) complex at about 
100 and 160 ms, which is maximal in amplitude at the vertex,
Figure 16.18 Auditory long-latency evoked potentials (ALEPs) recorded from 
the vertex in response to frequent, non-target stimuli (bottom) and to rare, 
target stimuli (top). The initial, mostly exogenous P1( N, and P2 components are 
evoked by both types of stimuli, while the later, endogenous N2 and P3 
complexes are evident only in response to the target stimuli.
and is therefore also called the ‘vertex potential’. The vertex 
potential is primarily exogenous but also has a number of 
endogenous traits, many of them simultaneously contributing 
toN ,.33
Negative contributions to Ni include a slow negativity 
beginning about 70 ms after an attended stimulus, peaking 
about 30 ms later and then slowly resolving back to baseline. 
This negativity can be isolated from the exogenous components 
that it overlaps by subtracting the potentials to unattended 
stimuli from those to the physically identical stimuli when they 
are being attended to. This slow endogenous negativity is called 
‘processing negativity’34 or ‘negative difference’ (Nd), and is 
assumed to reflect selective attention.35 Another endogenous 
negative component overlapping the vertex potential is the 
mismatch negativity (MMN), beginning at about 100 ms after 
onset of a deviant stimulus. It can be isolated from the other 
components on which it is superimposed by subtracting the 
response to the rare, deviant stimuli from that to the common, 
repetitive stimuli of a train of stimuli in which the deviants are 
randomly presented. The MMN can be recorded even if stimuli 
are all unattended or even not perceived.36 The MMN is larger 
in response to more deviant stimuli, and its scalp distribution is 
compatible with generators in the primary auditory cortex.
Following the vertex potential, the components are 
endogenous and vary with the context and relevance of the 
stimuli, rather than their physical characteristics. The nega­
tive-positive endogenous components at 200 ms (N2 or N20o) 
and 300-700 ms (P3 or P300), which have been associated with 
the discrimination of a rare, task-relevant target stimulus, are 
called the N200-P 300 complex.11,37-39 The most widely used para­
digm to obtain the P300 is the ‘oddball’ paradigm, in which the 
subject discriminates unexpected or infrequent ‘target’ stimuli 
from more frequent ‘non-target’ stimuli among which the tar­
gets are randomly distributed. P300 has been shown to include 
two distinct components: P3a which is frontally distributed on 
the scalp, shorter in latency, and is associated with the detec­
tion of the mismatch between the rare and frequent background 
stimuli (the ‘orienting response’); and P3b, which is parietally 
distributed on the scalp, longer in latency, and associated with 
active discrimination of the task-relevant target stimuli.40 The 
P 300 component is affected by the subject’s age and vigilance, as 
well as by task difficulty. Children presented with infrequent 
stimuli in the ‘oddball’ paradigm show a large, frontally distrib­
uted negativity at about 700 ms, followed by a late positivity at 
1300 ms,41 and a late, parietal P300 which decreases in latency to 
reach a minimum in the early teens and then increases through­
out adulthood at a rate of 1-2 ms/year.42,43 The juvenile frontal 
negativity is diminished with development and is replaced by 
P300 by the age of 10, or adolescence at the latest. Decreased vig­
ilance is associated with a decrease in the amplitude of P300 
while decreased task difficulty (e.g. easier discriminability of 
targets from non-targets) manifests in shorter latencies of
p  
44,45
1 300*
The N400, a late negativity following the vertex potential 
and P300, has been associated with semantic processing of verbal
  

284 
Audiology
material.46 The paradigm most commonly used to elicit N400 
includes presenting the subject with sentences in which the last 
word is semantically incongruous with the preceding sentence. 
The N400 to the semantically anomalous word has an onset 
latency of about 200 ms, peaking at about 400 ms, even when 
the word is longer. This suggests that words do not need to be 
fully heard before their semantic appropriateness is recognized. 
N400 is larger over the right hemisphere’s temporal region,47 con­
sistent with that area’s role in understanding the context of nar­
ratives, in interpreting metaphors and in appreciating humour. 
N400 is smaller in response to the presentation of single words 
that are members of an established semantic category, or when 
presented after semantically related words. N400 is larger in 
response to words that are unpredictable or non-words.49
ALEPs are generally accepted to be of cortical origin, but 
the precise generators are unclear. The primary auditory cortex 
probably contributes to components N! and P2 but, in general, 
the long-latency components are generated by multiple genera­
tors that are simultaneously activated. Thus, for example, the 
P300 component has been associated with widespread brain 
activity, including activity in two systems: one related to P3a 
and orientation of attention, centred in paralimbic and fronto- 
parietocingular cortex; and the second related to P3b and 
cognitive contextual integration, involving inferotemporal, 
perirhinal and ventrolateral prefrontal cortices and the hip­
pocampus.50 The relative contributions of these multiple gener­
ators may vary with tasks and the specific strategy that the 
subject uses in the task, and thus the scalp distributions of 
endogenous components may change. It is therefore advisable 
to add scalp distribution to the measures of latency and ampli­
tude, particularly when ALEPs are studied.
Discussion of normal/abnormal
The purpose of all clinical measures is to determine whether the 
subject falls within or outside the normal variability of the 
healthy population. The definition of normalcy is therefore 
critical for the clinical use of any measure, including measures 
of auditory evoked potentials. Most normal evoked potential 
measures have a Gaussian, bell-shaped distribution, and stan­
dard deviations can therefore be used to limit normal ranges. 
The normal range should include at least 98% of the normal 
population, and therefore the normal limit most often used is
2.5 standard deviations from the normal mean, which includes 
98.8% of normals. A stricter upper limit of 3 standard devia­
tions includes 99.7% of the normal values, while the laxer 2 
standard deviations limit includes 95.4%. When measures do 
not exhibit a symmetrical normal distribution, other limits of 
normalcy are more appropriate. Amplitude measures typically 
show a steeper decline in the prevalence of low amplitudes than 
in that of high amplitudes. In such cases, using the most extreme 
value of normals as the limit may be more appropriate than 
more elaborate statistical descriptors of the non-Gaussian dis­
tribution. A normative database from 30-40 subjects is usually 
sufficient to determine stable and representative normal limits.
Relevance in diagnosis
ECoG is used to monitor cochlear function intraoperatively, to 
assist in the diagnosis of Meniere’s disease, and to enhance the 
detection of the cochlear microphonics and compound action 
potential. The sensitivity and specificity of the SP/N^ amplitude 
ratio, or SP duration, for cochlear pathology, particularly in 
Meniere’s disease, have been controversial. ~ The conflicting 
results regarding Meniere’s disease are partially due to differ­
ences in electrode placements (transtympanic or ear canal), in 
the normative variability, and in criteria for abnormality of 
ECoG. Another clinical use of ECoG includes measuring the 
latency of the cochlear action potential for the determination 
of central auditory transmission time when ABR peak I is 
unreliable due to a peripheral hearing loss. ECoG is also used in 
intraoperative monitoring when cochlear function is at risk.
ABRs represent a useful adjunct to clinical diagnosis as 
indicators of the auditory sensitivity of the cochlea and brain­
stem, as well as of the functional integrity of the auditory path­
way between the cochlea and the upper pons. Auditory 
sensitivity is estimated by noting the lowest sound level at 
which the components are detected. Typically, clicks (which 
are the optimal stimulus for evoking the potentials) are used, 
and then detection threshold for ABRs correlates with the 
audiometric threshold at 3-4 kHz within 5-10 dB (Figure
16.16). More frequency-specific stimuli may be used to assess 
auditory sensitivity at other frequencies. The appropriate stim­
ulus must present a compromise between abrupt onset and short 
duration, optimal for evoking neural responses, and long dura­
tion, which ensures frequency specificity. Such stimuli are pure 
tones gated by a smoothing window such as Hanning or Black­
man, or more simply by an envelope that includes two periods 
during onset and offset and one period at full intensity.59 When 
frequency-specific stimuli are used, the most prominent compo­
nent of ABRs is a slow negativity following peak V, at about 10 
ms,60 otherwise called SN10 (slow negativity at 10 ms). This 
slow negativity, or the preceding peak V, can be detected down 
to about 10-15 dB above the subject’s hearing threshold for the 
stimulus used to evoke SN10.
In addition to comparison of the patient’s ABR measures 
to the norms, clinical application of ABRs involves noting 
missing peaks that are always detected in normals. Such 
absence may indicate a lesion at the level activating the gener­
ators of the missing component. Detection of abnormality does 
not define the pathological process causing the impairment, but 
merely demonstrates a functional impairment at the affected 
level. Different pathological processes may have the same man­
ifestation in ABRs, and the same disease process may manifest 
at different levels of the pathway.
ABRs with all of the components present, but at longer 
latencies than appropriate for the stimulus intensity that was 
used, may indicate a peripheral hearing loss. The hearing loss 
may be conductive, resulting in a lower stimulus level reaching 
the inner ear, or a sensorineural loss affecting the high frequen­
cies. ABRs with prolonged peak I latency but normal latencies 
of the subsequent peaks are also compatible with high-
  

Human auditory electrophysiology 
285
frequency sensorineural hearing loss. It is thus essential to 
identify peak I in order to define peripheral impairments and 
differentiate them from central ones. When ABRs fail to 
reveal peak I, ECoG may be used to determine the latency of 
the cochlear action potential.
Once a peripheral hearing loss has been ruled out or 
accounted for, central auditory function can be assessed using 
interpeak latency differences. A prolonged III—I indicates slowed 
conduction between the cochlear nerve and the lower pons. 
When V—III is longer than normal, slowed transmission between 
the lower pons and midbrain is indicated. When peak I is not 
defined, the transmission to the lower pons cannot be assessed. 
The V/I amplitude ratio is the only amplitude measure that may 
be clinically helpful, and then only when used with great cau- 
tion. This measure is affected by the subject’s age, by hearing loss 
and by stimulus intensity, and is therefore susceptible to non- 
neurological biases. A genuine abnormality of this measure 
indicates impaired transmission central to the lower pons.
Interaural differences in ABRs indicate an impairment 
that is more severe on one side. With peripheral lesions, find­
ings are more abnormal in response to stimulation of the ear on 
the affected side. Surprisingly, this is often true for central 
lesions as well, in contrast to the mostly contralateral represen­
tation in the central pathway. However, there are many excep­
tions to this tendency, and, as a rule, caution should be used in 
determining the side of a central lesion based on ABRs. The 
above ABEP measures reflect impaired transmission along the 
auditory nerve and brainstem, and best correlate with conduc­
tion blocks and slowing as occurs in white matter lesions result­
ing from fibre discontinuity, compression and demyelination.
The effects of increasing stimulus rate have been suggested 
to be more sensitive to grey matter lesions such as brainstem 
nuclear lesions and synaptic efficacy impairments. The effects 
of increasing stimulus rate are assessed by subtracting the 
respective measure’s value (e.g. V -I interpeak latency differ­
ence) in response to slow-rate stimulation (e.g. 10/s clicks) from 
its counterpart in response to a higher rate (e.g. 55/s. The mea­
sures thus derived subtract sources of inter-subject variability 
common to slow and fast stimulus rates, and are thus highly spe­
cific to the effect of increased stimulus rate. These measures have 
been found to be abnormal in brainstem nuclear viral infec­
tions, mild vascular impairments, renal failure and a variety of 
metabolic abnormalities that may not affect ABRs to slow rates.
AMEPs’ clinical uses include frequency-specific threshold 
estimates in older children and adults, assessment of central 
auditory function above the level of the brainstem, and resolu­
tion of discrepancies between pure tone audiograms and ABR 
findings in older children and adults. Clinical application of 
AMEPs entails caution and is limited because of the uncer­
tainty regarding the response generators, the unreliable record­
ing of both transient and steady-state responses in young 
children and in sleeping adults. The susceptibility of both vari­
ants of AMEP to the subject’s state of arousal and the effects of 
drugs may alter the detection threshold in audiometric uses. 
These effects may also alter the contribution of cortical gener­
ators to the waveform in neuro-otological uses. When the 
appropriate precautions are taken, AMEPs can contribute to 
the evaluation of the functional integrity of the auditory system.
With the above-listed precautions, AMEPs can be reliably 
recorded in response to tone pips of mid-range frequencies; 
hence their utility in frequency-specific threshold estimation in 
awake older children and adults. For assessment of cortical 
lesions, temporoparietal recordings should be used, to enhance 
the contributions of auditory cortex to the waveform. In such 
records, marked asymmetry between the waveforms recorded 
from the two sides of the scalp is compatible with a lesion on 
the side with the absent or smaller response. The AMEPs 
recorded from the vertex may be insensitive to unilateral corti­
cal lesions. Detection of lesions above the level of the midbrain 
may help resolve discrepancies between behavioural audiome­
try (which may be impaired) and ABR findings (which may be 
normal). Another type of discrepancy may result from impaired 
synchrony along the auditory pathway, anywhere from the audi­
tory nerve (e.g. auditory neuropathy) to the midbrain (e.g. mul­
tiple sclerosis). In such cases, ABRs, which reflect highly 
synchronous activity, may be absent, while AMEPs, which, 
thanks to the longer duration of their components, are less sen­
sitive to synchrony, will be present. Because of their longer 
latency, and hence temporal separation from stimulus artefact, 
AMEPs have been used to objectively assess the efficacy of 
cochlear implants.61
ALEPs’ clinical utility is determined by their relationship to 
higher brain function and cognitive aspects of hearing, and by 
their inter- and intra-subject variabilities, which render their 
sensitivity and specificity lower than those of the earlier poten­
tials. The P300 component has been shown to be delayed in 
demented patients, 
and smaller in amplitude, 
and abnormal 
in scalp distribution,64 in schizophrenic patients. However, 
these statistical differences are not always clinically significant 
in individual cases, because of the overlap of P300 measures 
between patients and controls. Improved diagnostic value of 
P300 may be achieved by adjusting the discrimination task to the 
patient’s specific cognitive impairment.65 In the context of 
hearing, cognitive components may be used to assess higher- 
level auditory processing such as discrimination and speech per­
ception,66 but such applications are not widely accepted and are 
still in the experimental stage.
Acknowledgement
Graphics work for the figures of this chapter by Naomi Bleich is 
gratefully acknowledged.
References
1. Wever E, Bray C. Action currents in the auditory nerve in 
response to acoustic stimulation. P roc Natl Acad Sci US A 
1930; 16: 344-50.
  

286 
Audiology
2. Fromm B, Nylen C-O, Zotterman Y. Studies in the mecha­
nism of the Wever and Bray effect. Acta Otolaryngol 1935; 
22: 477-86.
3. Berger H. Uber das Elektrenkephalogramm des Menschen. 
Arch Psychiatrie Nervenkrankh 1929; 87: 527-70.
4. Davis PA. Effects of acoustic stimuli on the waking human 
brain. J Neurophysiol 1939; 2: 494-9.
5. Davis H, Davis PA, Loomis AL, Harvey EN, Hobart G. 
Electrical reactions of the human brain to auditory stimula­
tion during sleep. J Neurophysiol 1939; 2: 500-14.
6. Woolsey CN, Walzl EM. Topical projection of nerve fibers 
from local regions of the cochlea to the cerebral cortex of 
the cat. Bull Johns Hopkins Hosp 1942; 71: 315-44.
7. Dawson GD. A summation technique for detecting small sig­
nals in a large irregular background. J Physiol 1951; 115: 2-3.
8. Clark WA Jr. Average response computer (ARC-1). Q Rep 
Electronics 1958; 114-17.
9. Geisler CD, Frishkopf LS, Rosenblith WA. Extracranial 
responses to acoustic clicks in man. Science 1958; 128: 
1210- 11.
10. Davis H, Yoshie N. Human evoked cortical responses to 
auditory stimuli. Physiologist 1963; 6: 164.
11. Davis H. Enhancement of evoked cortical potentials in 
humans related to a task requiring a decision. Science 1964; 
145:182-3.
12. Sutton S, Braren M, Zubin J, John ER. Evoked potential 
correlates of stimulus uncertainty. Science 1965; 150: 
1187-8.
13. Ruben RJ, Knickerbocker GG, Sekula J, Nager GT, Bordley 
JE. Cochlear microphonics in man. Laryngoscope 1959; 69: 
665-71.
14. Ruben RJ, Sekula J, Bordley J. Human cochlear response to 
sound stimuli. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1960; 69: 459-76.
15. Yoshie N, Ohashi T, Suzuki T. Non-surgical recording of 
auditory nerve action potentials in man. Laryngoscope 1967; 
77: 76-85.
16. Aran J-M, Portmann C, Delaunay J, Pelerin J, Lenoir J. 
Uelectro-Cochleogramme: methodes et premiers resultats 
chez l’enfant. Rev Laryngol 1969; 90: 615.
17. Sohmer H, Feinmesser M. Cochlear action potentials 
recorded from the external ear in man. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1967; 76: 427-38.
18. Jewett DL, Romano MN, Williston JS. Human auditory 
evoked potentials: possible brainstem components detected 
on the scalp. Science 1970; 167: 1517-18.
19. Sohmer H, Feinmesser M. Routine use of electrocochleog- 
raphy (cochlear audiometry) in human subjects. Audiology 
1973; 12: 167-73.
20. Sohmer H, Feinmesser M, Szabo G. Sources of electro- 
cochleographic responses as studied in patients with brain 
damage. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1974; 37: 
663-9.
21. Starr A, Achor LJ. Auditory brainstem responses in neuro­
logical disease. Arch Neurol 1975; 32: 761-8.
22. Picton TW. Introduction. In: Picton TW, ed. Human Event-
Related Potentials. Handbook of Electroencephalography and 
Clinical Neurophysiology, Vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1988: 
1-5.
23. Plonsey R, Fleming DG. Bioelectric Phenomena. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1969; 202-75.
24. Nunez PL, Katznelson RD. Electric Fields of the Brain. The 
Neurophysics of EEG. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1981:42-175.
25. Stypulkowski P, Staller S. Clinical evaluation of a new 
EcoG recording electrode. Ear Hear 1987; 8: 304-10.
26. Jasper HH. The ten twenty electrode system of the interna­
tional federation. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1958; 
10:371-5.
27. Hashimoto I, Ishiyama Y, Yoshimoto T, Nemoto S. 
Brainstem auditory evoked potentials recorded directly 
from human brainstem and thalamus. Brain 1981; 104: 
841-59.
28. Moller AR, Jannetta PJ, Sekhar LN. Contributions from 
the auditory nerve to the brainstem auditory evoked poten­
tials (BAEPs): results of intracranial recording in man. 
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1988; 71: 198-211.
29. Starr A, Zaaroor M. Eighth nerve contributions to cat audi­
tory brainstem responses (ABR). Hear Res 1990; 48: 
151-60.
30. Zaaroor M, Starr A. Auditory brain-stem evoked potentials 
in cat after kainic acid induced neuronal loss. II. Cochlear 
nucleus. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1991; 80: 
436-45.
31. Martin WH, Pratt H, Schwegler JW. The origin of the 
human 
auditory 
brain-stem 
response 
wave 
II. 
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1995; 96: 357-70.
32. Galambos R, Makeig S, Talmachoff PJ. A 40-Hz auditory 
potential recorded from the human scalp. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 1981; 78: 2643-7.
33. Naatanen R, Picton TW. The Ni wave of the human elec­
tric and magnetic response to sound. Psychophysiology 1986; 
24: 375-425.
34. Naatanen R. Processing negativity: an evoked potential 
reflection of selective attention. Psychol Bull 1982; 92: 
605-40.
35. Hansen JC, Hillyard SA. Endogenous brain potentials asso­
ciated with selective auditory attention. Electroencephalogr 
Clin Neurophysiol 1980; 49: 277-90.
36. Naatanen R, Simpson M, Loveless NE. Stimulus deviance 
and evoked potentials. Biol Psychol 1982; 14: 53-98.
37. Squires KC, Wickens C, Squires NK, Donchin E. The effect 
of stimulus sequence on the waveform of the cortical event- 
related potential. Science 1976; 193: 1142-6.
38. Duncan-Johnson CC, Donchin E. On quantifying surprise: 
the variation of event-related potentials with subjective 
probability. Psychophysiology 1977; 14: 456-67.
39. Courchesne E, Hillyard SA, Courchesne RY. P3 waves to 
the discrimination of targets in homogeneous and hetero­
geneous stimulus sequences. Psychophysiology 1977; 14: 
590-7.
  

Human auditory electrophysiology 
287
40. Squires NK, Squires KC, Hillyard SA. Two varieties of 
long-latency positive waves evoked by unpredictable audi- 
tory stimuli in man. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 
1975; 38: 387-401.
41. Courchesne E. Neurophysiological correlates of cognitive 
development: changes in long-latency event-related poten­
tials from childhood to adulthood. Electroencephalogr Clin 
Neurophysiol 1978; 45: 468-82.
42. Goodin D, Squires K, Henderson B, Starr A. Age related 
variations in evoked potentials to auditory stimuli in nor­
mal human subjects. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 
1978;44:447-58.
43. Picton TW, Stuss DT, Champagne SC, Nelson RF. The 
effects 
of age 
on 
human 
event-related 
potentials. 
Psychophysiology 1984; 21: 312-25.
44. Ritter W, Simson R, Vaughan HG. Auditory cortex poten­
tials 
and reaction time 
in auditory discrimination. 
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1972; 33: 547-55.
45. McCarthy G, Donchin E. A metric for thought: a compar­
ison of P300 latency and reaction time. Science 1981; 21: 
77-80.
46. McCallum WC, Farmer SF, Pocock PV. The effects of phys­
ical and semantic incongruities on auditory event-related 
potentials. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1984; 59: 
477-88.
47. Kutas M, Hillyard SA. Brain potentials during reading 
reflect word expectancy and semantic association. Nature 
1984; 307:161-3.
48. Polich J, Vanasse L, Donchin E. Category expectancy and 
theN200. Psychophysiology 1981; 18: 142.
49. Bentin 
S, 
McCarthy 
G, 
Wood CC. 
Event-related 
potentials, 
lexical 
decision 
and 
semantic 
priming. 
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1985; 60: 343-55.
50. Halgren E, Marinkovic K, Chauval P. Generators of the late 
cognitive potentials in auditory and visual oddball tasks. 
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1998; 106: 156-64.
51. Yoshie N. Electrocochleographic study of Meniere’s disease: 
pathological pattern of the cochlear nerve compound 
action potential in man. In: Ruben RJ, Elberling C, 
Salomon G, eds. Electrocochleography. Baltimore: University 
Park Press, 1976; 353-86.
52. Eggermont JJ. Summating potentials in electrocochleogra­
phy: relation to hearing disorders. In: Ruben RJ, Elberling
C, 
Salomon G, 
eds. 
Electrocochleography. 
Baltimore: 
University Park Press, 1976; 67-87.
53. Coats AC. The summating potential and Meniere’s disease:
I. Summating potential amplitude in Meniere’s and non 
Meniere’s ears. Arch Otolaryngol 1981; 107: 199-208.
54. Goin D, Staller S, Asher D, Mischke RE. Summating 
potential in Meniere’s disease. Laryngoscope 1982; 92: 
1383-9.
55. Gibson W, Prasher D, Kilkenny G. Diagnostic significance 
of transtympanic electrocochleography in Meniere’s dis­
ease. Ans Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1983; 92: 155-9.
56. Podoshin L, Ben-David Y, Pratt H, Fradis M, Feiglin H. 
Noninvasive recordings of cochlear evoked potentials in 
Meniere’s disease. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1986; 
112: 827-9.
57. Staller SS. Electrocochleography in the diagnosis and man­
agement of Meniere’s disease. Semin Hear 1986; 7: 267-78.
58. Dauman R, Aran J-M, Savage R, Portmann M. Clinical sig­
nificance of the summating potential in Meniere’s disease. 
Am J  Otol 1988; 9: 31-8.
59. Davis H, Hirsh SK, Popelka GR, Formby C. Frequency sen­
sitivity and thresholds of brief stimuli suitable for electric 
response audiometry. Audiology 1984; 23: 59-74.
60. Davis H, Hirsh SK. A slow brainstem response for low- 
frequency audiometry. Audiology 1979; 18: 445-61.
61. Kileny PR, Kemink JL. Electrically evoked middle-latency 
auditory potentials in cochlear implant candidates. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1987; 113: 1072-7.
62. Goodin DS, Squires KC, Starr A. Long latency event- 
related components of the auditory evoked potential in 
dementia. Brain 1978; 101: 635-48.
63. Shagass C, Straumanis JJ, Roemer RA, Amadeo M. Evoked 
potentials of schizophrenics in several sensory modalities. 
Biol Psychiatry 1977; 12: 221-35.
64. Morstyn R, Duffy FH, McCarley RW. Altered P300 topo­
graphy in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1983; 40: 
729-34.
65. Attias J, Huberman M, Kott E, Pratt H. Improved detection 
of auditory P3 abnormality in dementia using a variety of 
stimuli. Acta Neurol Scand 1995; 92: 96-101.
66. Attias Y, Pratt H. Auditory event related potentials during 
lexical categorization in the oddball paradigm. Brain 
Language 1992; 43: 230-9.
  

17 Measurements of inner 
ear fluid pressure and 
clinical applications
Robert Marchbanks
Introduction
We are beginning to understand how the intracranial (cerebral) 
fluid interacts with fluid within the labyrinth, and several inter­
national scientific meetings have addressed this topic. It is now 
recognized that even small elevations in intracranial pressure 
may have adverse effects on the ear. This has been shown to be 
a cause of tinnitus, vertigo and hearing loss. Permanent damage 
to the ear can also result, as shown by Weider and Saunders,1’2 
who provided clinical evidence showing that sustained eleva­
tion of the intracranial pressure can result in recurrent perilym­
phatic fistula.
The audiovestibular symptoms associated with intracranial 
hypertension also form the basis for the diagnosis of classical 
Meniere’s disease or Meniere’s-like disorders. Correct differen­
tial diagnosis depends on identifying the underlying signs and 
symptoms of intracranial hypertension; however, this is seldom 
possible even by those experienced in neurology. The situation 
is even more complex, since we know that in many cases 
intracranial hypertension will occur without the expected 
pressure-specific headache and without papilloedema. It is 
evident that such patients are referred to the otolaryngological 
clinic but will not be cross-referred to neurology for appropriate 
treatment.
The commercially available ‘TMD cerebral and cochlear 
fluid pressure (CCFP) analyser’ now provides a valuable means 
for monitoring the treatment of intracranial pressure-related 
conditions.3 The tympanic membrane displacement measure­
ment (TMD) technique has been used in combination with 
detailed studies of the symptomatology to identify patients with 
raised intracranial pressure. The relationship between changes 
in the intracranial pressure and the symptoms can be investi­
gated using repeat TMD measurements. This technique is espe­
cially valuable for monitoring the effectiveness of treatments in
terms of changes in intracranial pressure, and can be used to 
reduce the number of repeat lumbar punctures or surgical 
intracranial pressure measurements made.
Furthermore, pathological intra-aural pressure waves can 
be seen in many patients. These are presumed to reflect pressure 
waves of intracranial origin and are clearly visible with the 
TMD system. I believe we are seeing a new beginning to our 
understanding of certain neurological and audiological disor­
ders, and that this will be at the forefront of research over the 
next decade.
INTRACRANIAL HYPERTENSION
Associated frequently with an unknown pathology that 
results in raised intracranial (cerebral) pressure. In its 
idiopathic form it is often referred to as benign intracra­
nial hypertension (BIH) or pseudo-tumour cerebri. The 
use of ‘benign’ is understood to be a misnomer as this 
condition can cause irreversible damage to the eye, optic 
nerve and also the ear, as recently shown.
DIFFICULT (IMPOSSIBLE) TO DIAGNOSE BY 
SYMPTOMS ALONE
Headaches — can be severe but often mild or not 
present at all
Neurological symptoms — not present or minor. 
Papilloedema — only present in less than 20% of 
cases and then only if you look!
Chronic fatigue — too non-specific.
Also:-
The adult form is different from the paediatric form.

290 
Audiology
Historical review
The principle of measuring cerebral and cochlear fluid pressure 
depends on qualifying movements of the tympanic membrane 
on contraction of the stapedial muscle. When we acoustically 
stimulate the stapedial reflex, the movement of the tympanic 
membrane (TM) will be in one of three configurations— 
inward, outward or inward/outward.4”7 When I first measured 
this in 1975, it appeared rather anomalous that a muscle acting 
in one direction could result in these three distinctly different 
displacements. By 1978, I had developed the TMD technique, 
which was sufficiently sensitive to show an even more puzzling 
property of the stapedial reflex, in that the TM displacement 
could be outward, then bi-directional, and then inward, in the 
same ear! An easy way of mediating the displacement configu­
ration was by changing the posture of the subject from sitting to 
supine (Figure 17.1). In 1978, I hypothesized that these differ­
ent displacements were due to the changing resting position of 
the stapes footplate within the oval window as brought about by 
changing perilymphatic fluid pressure (Figure 17.2). Around the 
same time, other independent work by Brask and Casselbrant et 
al similarly proposed that the TM displacement on contraction 
of the stapedial muscle was cochlear pressure dependent.8,9 The
Figure 17.2 Schematic showing the method by which cochlear (perilymphatic) 
pressure can be measured using the TMD system on acoustic stimulation of the 
stapedial muscle (1000 kHz, 500 ms, nominally 20 dB above acoustical reflex 
threshold), (a) In the case of raised perilymphatic pressure, there is freedom of 
motion only in the inward direction. There is a rotation about the anterior 
portion of the ligament, so for high pressure, there is an inward movement of 
the tympanic membrane, (b) Conversely in cases of lower than normal pressure 
(hypotension), the footplate will sit in towards the cochlea, so on stimulation of 
the stapedial muscle there is only freedom of movement in the outward 
direction and corresponding outward motion of the tympanic membrane.
mechanics proposed by these researchers differed in detail; 
nevertheless, the idea of a means for measuring cochlear fluid 
pressure was bom. The mechanism is a combination of a rock­
ing motion about the anterior or the posterior portion of the 
ligament and a piston-like in-out motion. This mechanism has 
been mathematically modelled10 and simulated using temporal 
bone preparations.11
The TMD measurement technique
The TMD technique indirectly measures perilymphatic 
pressure in terms of the resting position of the stapes 
footplate.
Figure 17.1 The change in TMD configuration with posture for stimulation of 
the acoustic stapedial reflex with a 500 ms, 1000 Hz tone set at 20 dB above the 
reflex threshold, (a) An average of 10 TMD records for sitting, (b) An average of 
10 TMD records for supine.
The TMD measurement technique is so called because it 
measures movement of the TM in terms of volume displace­
ment. It comprises a headset onto which is mounted an air-flow 
sensor which measures the amount of air pushed from the ear 
canal or drawn into the ear canal when the TM moves (Figure
Supine 
£ 
® 
E
a- -20
Communicating Intracranial-Cochlear Pressure
Time (s)
Time (s)
  

Measurements of inner ear fluid pressure 
291
17.3). By this method, volume displacements of the TM as 
small as a nanolitre (1 X 10 91) can be resolved.
The TMD technique provides a measure of perilymphatic 
pressure by indirectly assessing the resting position of the stapes 
footplate, and it is this resting position which is pressure sensi­
tive. The resting position of the stapes footplate is assessed by 
stimulating the acoustical reflex with a pure tone of 1000 Hz of 
500 ms and, more recently, 300 ms. The TMD technique should 
be used in conjunction with standard tympanometry and 
acoustical impedance acoustical reflex threshold measurements 
to first confirm the normality of middle ear function.
Proving the technique
A method was required by which the proposed TMD cochlear 
pressure measurement method could be proven. It was clearly 
not possible to attempt to correlate reflex TM displacement 
with direct measures of perilymphatic pressure in normal 
human subjects. An alternative could be to use direct measure­
ments of intracranial pressure; however, this depended on the 
intracranial and perilymphatic fluids being interconnected.
Prior to 1980, the cochlear aqueduct was considered to pro­
vide an effective route for pressure transfer between the intracra­
nial fluid and perilymph in certain mammals such as the cat and 
guinea pig; however, there was much doubt about the patency of 
this aqueduct in humans. In humans the cochlear aqueduct is 
known to be narrow, with connective tissue running throughout 
its length. In 1978, a histological study by Wlodyka12 demon­
strated that, in most humans, the cochlear aqueduct was patent 
and that patency decreased with age (Figure 17.4).
Figure 17.5 shows the results from the very first patient 
whom we tested with confirmed raised intracranial fluid pressure. 
This patient had a condition called benign intracranial hyper­
tension (BIH); lumbar puncture confirmed that the pressure was 
a high 300 mm of saline, and on stimulation of the stapedial mus­
cle, an inward motion of the TM occurred as predicted. The
Foetal 0
20 
40 
60 
95 
Years
Stages of development
Figure 17.4 Age dependency of cochlear aqueduct patency according to a 
histological study by Wlodyka. (Adapted from Wlodyka. Ann Otolaryngol 1978; 
87: 22-7.12)
patient was fitted with a lumbar-peritoneal shunt, which 
returned the pressure to normal, and a complete reversal of the 
tympanic displacement, from an inward displacement to an out­
ward displacement, was observed. Proof that intracranial-to- 
cochlear pressure transfer existed in humans was therefore 
provided and we published this in the form of three case studies.13
Figure 17.3 The commercially available M M S-11 Cerebral and Cochlear Fluid 
Pressure Analyser (www.marchbanks.co.uk).
Figure 17.5 The first Benign Intracranial Hypertension (BIH) patient tested with 
the TMD technique. This clearly shows a change from an inward tympanic 
displacement to an outward displacement as the high cerebrospinal fluid 
pressure is reduced to normal.
  

292 
Audiology
TMD measurements in patients undergoing direct intracra­
nial pressure monitoring confirm that in cases of low or normal 
intracranial pressure, there is an outward motion of the TM. In 
cases of normal pressure it is either outward or bi-directional, 
inward followed by outwards; and in cases of high pressure, there 
is an inward motion of the TM. The displacement is quantified 
by measuring the area under the curve, Vm (Figure 17.6).
Comparison of CCF? analyser 
measurements with direct 
intracranial pressure measurements
The relationship between reflex TM displacement and intracra­
nial pressure was first published in 1990.14 This work was later 
performed under more controlled conditions by restricting 
measurements to direct intraventricular pressure monitoring 
(Figure 17.7).15 In this study, 77 comparative measurements 
were undertaken on patients with intracranial hypotension, 
normal pressure and hypertension. A correlation of greater than 
0.9 was found between TMD and direct intraventricular 
pressure measurements. Further work is necessary to understand 
why some subjects demonstrate a very clear and well-behaved 
TMD-intracranial pressure relationship, whereas in others 
anomalies exist. The answer is likely to be found in anatomical 
differences, including varying cochlear aqueduct patency, as 
discussed later.
Clinical measurements of cochlear 
and intracranial pressure
The idea of measuring intracranial pressure through the ear is 
not new. In 1985, Krast proposed that acoustical impedance 
could be used to monitor intracranial pressure fluctuations.16 
More recently, papers have been published on the effects of 
intracranial pressure on auditory evoked potentials at high pres-
Figure 17.6 Tympanic membrane 
displacement is quantified in terms of the 
mean volume displacement, Vm, by 
measuring the hashed area under the 
curve for: (a) an outward TMD in the 
case of normal or low intracranial 
pressure (hypotension); (b) a bi-directional 
in the case of normal intracranial pressure 
and (c) an inward displacement in the 
case of raised intracranial pressure 
(hypertension).
ICP
Low or 
normal
(a)
stimulus 
on 
off
Vtm
Trends in Tympanic Displacement with Intracranial Pressure
Normal 
Normal
(e)
(b)
stimulus
High
Comparative analysis of TMD/ICP
ICP (mm Hg)
correlation coefficent =0.9
Figure 17.7 Relationship between direct intraventricular intracranial pressure 
measurements in millimetres of mercury on the x-axis, and tympanic membrane 
displacement (TMD) expressed as a mean displacement, Vm, on the y-axis.
sures and on otoacoustical emissions, although it is question­
able whether these methods are suitable as a means for non- 
invasive intracranial pressure measurement.17,18 The success of 
the CCFP analyser using TMD measurements can be measured 
in terms of its clinical use for non-invasive measurement of 
intracranial pressure.13,14,19-21 The neurological and neurosurgi­
cal applications of the CCFP analyser are of paramount impor­
tance to audiology. These allow the technique to be perfected 
on a patient population with known intracranial hypertension 
or hypotension, and also provide the opportunity to study in 
detail the auditory and vestibular symptomatology of intracra­
nial pressure problems.
The relationship between intracranial pressure and stape­
dial reflex-induced TM displacement also holds across animal 
species. Figure 17.8 demonstrates that TMD correlates with 
direct intracranial pressure recordings in the cat.22
The TMD test has been used as a non-invasive measure of 
intracranial pressure for over 15 years.23,24 The cochlear aque­
duct provides communication between the intracranial and 
cochlear fluids, and the patency of this route is assessed by per-
  

Measurements of inner ear fluid pressure 
293
Correlation of ICP/TMD recordings in cat
Figure 17.8 Tympanic membrane displacement with direct intracranial pressure 
(ICP) recordings in the cat.
forming the TMD test with the patient in the sitting posture, 
and then repeating it with the patient in the supine posi­
tion.25-27 There is a relative increase in the intracranial pressure 
in the supine position, and a more inward TMD is observed if 
there is free communication between the intracranial and 
cochlear fluids. In this instance, we assume a patent cochlear 
aqueduct, although of course we have only demonstrated that 
connectivity exists by some route. Testing in normal subjects 
shows that stable TMD results are obtained throughout the day 
and after exercise.28 These normative data also demonstrate 
large intersubject differences; nevertheless, the correlation of 
test results within one individual is high. From this, we con­
clude that the TMD test gives the optimum results when test­
ing for pressure changes within the same individual, such as 
changes which may occur with symptoms or treatment.
Clinical assessment of cochlear and 
intracranial pressure
The Southampton clinical trials allow criteria to be set for 
differentiating abnormal cochlear and intracranial pressure in 
the clinic.15
High pressure—intracranial/perilymphatic 
hypertension
A mean TM displacement, Vm, more negative than — 200 nl is 
indicative of a hypertensive condition, i.e. where an intracra­
nial pressure greater than 15 mmHg (20 cm saline) is considered 
to exist.15
The Southampton studies give a sensitivity of 83% and a 
specificity of 100%, and a positive predictive value of 100% and 
a negative predicted value of 29%, for detecting raised pressure 
by this criterion (Figure 17.9).
Figure 17.9 Inward tympanic membrane displacement as typically found with 
raised intracranial/cochlear pressure, i.e. intracranial hypertension.
Low pressure—intracranial/perilymphatic 
hypotension
For low pressure, the Southampton clinical trials give a 
TMD range of 263-717 nl, with a mean of 431nl for mean 
displacement, Vm (Figure 17.10). My experience is that if 263 nl 
is taken as the lower limit, then there will be an unacceptably 
high false-positive rate. I usually take 400 nl to be the upper 
limit for normal pressure; however, this assumption needs to be 
tested by addressing the problems associated with obtaining a 
sufficiently large sample of TMD measurements on patients 
with normal intracranial pressures.
Normal intracranial/perilymphatic pressure
The typical trace for normal pressure is bi-directional and is 
shown in Figure 17.11. Small inward and small outward traces 
which are not classified as high or low pressure are also within 
the normal range.
Figure 17.10 Outward tympanic membrane displacement as typically found 
with low intracranial/cochlear pressure, i.e. intracranial hypotension.
  

294 
Audiology
Figure 17.11 Bi-directional tympanic membrane displacement as typically 
found with normal intracranial/cochlear pressure,
The above findings are from a clinical trial where we 
compared TMD with intraventricular pressure measurements. 
Further trials are currently investigating the relationship with 
lumbar puncture pressure. The findings should be similar but 
not exactly the same.
Measurement of intra-aural pressure 
waves
The TMD technique is also used to investigate infrasound 
emitted from the ear, i.e. intra-aural pressure waves. Compo­
nents of this infra-sound include cardiovascular and respiratory 
pressure waves. Each of these components provides information 
on the normality or otherwise of the ear and the cerebral-to- 
cochlear pressure coupling. It is evident that some of these 
pressure waves come directly from the intracranial fluid.
The intracranial pressure is changing on a second-to- 
second basis. Superimposed on the baseline intracranial pres­
sure are periodic changes due to cardiovascular activity and 
respiration, and, over longer periods, there is a diurnal rhythm 
and a monthly cycle in females, as demonstrated in Figure 
17.12.7,29,30
Intracranial pressure waves of cardiovascular and respira­
tory origins can be linked to imbalance, low frequency or 
pulsatile tinnitus.
vascular activity arises from the fact that externally applied 
low-frequency sound and infrasound produce nystagmus and 
sensations of falling forwards.33-37 It is hypothesized that inter­
nally generated cardiovascular infrasound may also be linked to 
some forms of peripheral balance problems, and low-frequency 
or pulsatile tinnitus, which is experienced by patients with 
intracranial hypertension and other pressure problems.38-40
The amplitude of intra-aural cardiovascular activity has 
been studied using the TMD analyser (Figure 17.13).7,41 The 
intracranial cardiovascular pressure wave is known to increase 
with increasing intracranial pressure, due to reduced mechani­
cal compliance of the cerebrospinal fluid system. That is, as 
the cerebrospinal system becomes stiffer with increasing total 
volume, a given increase of the cerebral blood volume pro­
duces a correspondingly larger intracranial pressure change 
(Figure 17.14).42’43 The TMD technique has been used to 
study this effect in patients undergoing repeated lumbar punc­
ture. Figure 17.15 shows the increase in cardiovascular TMD 
and the relationship between amplitude and lumbar pressure.
The 
intra-aural 
cardiovascular 
amplitude 
has 
been 
observed in relation to body posture, intracochlear fluid pres­
sure, middle ear compliance and pressure, and cerebral-to- 
labyrinth fluid pressure transfer.41 The main positive findings 
were definite changes in amplitude with body posture, and a 
highly significant relationship with peak compliance of the 
middle ear (P = 0.001).
Categorization of the intra-aural pressure waves is in its 
infancy; nevertheless, distinct pressure wave characteristics can
Cyclic Variations in Intracranial Pressure in Normal Female 
Age = 29 years
□ Menstruation 
□ Menstruation
Cycle day
Intra-aural pressure waves of cardiovascular origin can be 
clearly seen in most ears. This activity is transmitted to the 
intracranial fluid and the ear via the arteries, with a fundamen­
tal frequency of 1-2 Hz, which corresponds to a heart rate of 
60-120 beats/min. The significance of intra-aural cardiovascu­
lar activity was reported by Andreasson et al in 1978 and was 
also researched by myself.7,29,31,32 Interest in intra-aural cardio­
Figure 17.12 Test results from a normal female showing the change in 
intracranial pressure, which was measured in terms of tympanic membrane 
displacement throughout the menstrual cycle. Upwards represents a decrease in 
intracranial pressure and downward an increase in intracranial pressure. 
Changing from the sitting to the lying position produces at least 100 ml of 
saline pressure change, as shown by the length of the vertical downward facing 
arrow (right). There is clearly a substantial pressure change occurring within this 
subject.
  

Measurements of inner ear fluid pressure 
295
be seen, and these are shown in Figure 17.16.44 Some of these 
intra-aural pressure waves have only been observed in patients 
with intracranial abnormalities, and they are presumed to 
reflect pressure waves of intracranial origin. In many cases, the 
wave amplitude is grossly abnormal, and the waves only appear 
in the sitting position.44 This is a new research area that I am 
sure will be of major importance for helping us to understand 
the underlying pathophysiology of neurological and audiologi­
cal disorders.
The hydromechanics of the cochlea
A knowledge of the hydromechanical interactions between the 
intracranial and intralabyrinthine fluids is important to our 
understanding of the normal physiology and pathophysiology of
Figure 17.14 Changing amplitude of the cerebrospinal (CSF) cardiovascular 
pressure wave with increasing intracranial pressure (ICP). The amplitude 
increases as the CSF compliance reduces with increasing ICP.
the labyrinth. In the normal labyrinth, a homeostasis exists 
between the intracranial fluid, the perilymph and the 
endolymph. The nature of this homeostasis will change accord­
ing to intracranial fluid pressure or blockage of one or more of 
the interconnecting pathways. Several clinical studies have 
shown that paroxysmal vertigo, tinnitus and fluctuating hearing 
loss may be present and reversible in patients with intracranial 
hypertension.45-47
There are two fluids within the cochlea, the endolymph 
and the perilymph. It is the perilymph which interfaces with 
the footplate, and it is the pressure of this fluid that is assessed 
by the CCFP analyser and the TMD technique. Both fluids are 
‘referenced’ to the same pressure, and this pressure is that of 
the intracranial fluid. The cochlear aqueduct is the main fluid 
communication route between the intracranial and perilym­
phatic fluids; it runs from the subarachnoid space and enters 
the cochlea in a niche just near the round window (Figure
17.17). The endolymph indirectly communicates with the 
intracranial fluids via the endolymphatic sac and maintains 
homeostasis with the perilymphatic pressure across the 
Reissner’s and other intralabyrinthine membranes.48 Perivascu­
lar or perineural routes between the intracranial and 
labyrinthine spaces may also provide a means of communica­
tion, but these may only be significant in cases of extremely 
raised intracranial pressure or certain malformations. Experi­
ments on the cat have demonstrated that labyrinthine pressure 
mirrors that of the cerebrospinal fluid and that no change in 
labyrinthine pressure can be measured if the cochlear and 
vestibular aqueducts are sealed.49,50
Wlodyka studied the cochlear aqueduct in over 100 tem­
poral bone preparations. At birth the cochlear aqueduct is 
open, but it seals off throughout life, so at the age of 20-39 
there is an 80% chance that a connection exists.12 Later in life, 
it decreases to 40%, and at the age of 60 the chance is only 
20%. We can replicate this work using the CCFP analyser with 
TMD measurements and by inducing increases in the intracra­
nial pressure by changing the posture of the person from sitting 
to supine. Using this method, there is good agreement between
  

296 
Audiology
Clinical studies demonstrate that imbalance, paroxysmal 
vertigo, tinnitus and fluctuating hearing loss may be 
present and reversible in patients with intracranial 
hypertension.
fb)
Lumbar puncture pressure - cm saline
Figure 17.15 Actual TMD test results obtained immediately before repeated 
lumbar puncture over a period of several months. The patient was a 15-year old 
male with Benign Intracranial Hypertension (BIH), i.e. Pseudo Tumor Cerebri. 
Repeated lumbar punctures where undertaken to drain cerebrospinal fluid 
and/or to monitor treatment, (a) These are examples of the amplitude of the 
intra-aural cardiovascular pressure wave increasing with increasing lumbar 
opening pressure (cm of saline), (b) A plot of the intra-aural cardiovascular 
pulse amplitude versus lumbar puncture opening pressure.
the Wlodyka histological findings and those of Philips and 
Marchbanks,25 who used the TMD technique to provide a func- 
tional measure of intracranial-labyrinthine pressure transfer in 
different age groups (Figure 17.18).
Importance of the intracranial- 
labyrinthine impedance mismatch
The equilibrium state that exists between the intracranial and 
labyrinthine fluids is in a perpetual state of flux (Figure 17.19). 
The cochlear aqueduct acts as a low-pass filter to intracranial 
pressure changes and attenuates frequency components above 
its cut-off frequency. Long-period intracranial pressure waves 
should be transmitted to the labyrinth without obstruction. 
The transmission of pressure waves with short periods will 
depend on the mechanical properties of the cochlear aqueduct 
and cochlear windows, as demonstrated in Figure 17.20.
Since the cochlear windows are the principal source of 
labyrinthine compliance, the compliance of these windows is of 
key importance to the hydromechanical impedance mismatch 
between the two systems. Since the compliance of the cochlear 
windows will in turn depend on the middle ear pressure, a 
mechanism exists whereby middle ear pressure may influence the 
physiology of the labyrinth and perhaps provide a link between 
middle ear problems and associated vestibular dysfunction.
  

Measurements of inner ear fluid pressure 
297
Type 3
CV amplitude 
modulation with 
respiratory phase
Type 4 
PM* waves
Type 2 
respiratory
Type 1
cardiovascular
Figure 17.16 Classification of intra-aural pressure waves into four types.
Relatively large and rapid changes in intracranial pressure 
can result from everyday events such as coughing.51 The 
intracranial-labyrinth impedance mismatch is important in 
limiting the amount of mechanical stress, and therefore possi­
ble intralabyrinthine damage, that may occur for a given 
intracranial pressure change.
A narrow cochlear aqueduct and compliant cochlear 
windows should reduce the risk of pressure-related structural
Figure 17.17 Schematic of the cochlea 
showing the pressure communication routes 
between the intracranial fluid and the inner 
ear.
SUBARACHNOID SPACE
MIDDLE EAR
Cochlear
duct
Labyrinth
Arachnoid
membrane
Cochlear aqueduct
Endolymphatic duct 
\
Endolymphatic sac
Round
Stapes 
Saccule
Scala
Utricle
  

298 
Audiology
c
100
o
"ft
E
80
2
fO
JD
60
szu
u■
40
ra
dCO
u
20
0
Age Dependency 
I Wlodyka (1978) 
□ Phillips ft Marchbanks (1989)
20-39 
40-59
Age range
Figure 17.18 A comparison of age related histological measurement of 
cochlear aqueduct patency12 with functional patency assessment using TMD 
measurements and induced changes in intracranial pressure with posture. 
(Adapted from Phillips and Marchbanks. BrJ Audiol 1989; 23: 279-84.25)
Attenuation
Pc
Pi
dB
no attenuation
attenuation
Figure 17.20 A simple model of the cochlear aqueduct considers it in terms of 
a low pass filter. This allows low frequency intracranial pressure waves to pass to 
the cochlear with little or no attenuation and high frequency pressure waves to 
be attenuated. An example of a high frequency intracranial pressure wave may 
be an impulsive pressure change with couching or sneezing where the filter 
characteristics afford the cochlea protection from mechanical damage.
damage, such as perilymphatic fistulae (Figure 17.21). In prac­
tice, this should mean that the risk of damage will be increased 
by any process that reduces the compliance of one or both of 
the cochlear windows, such as extremes of middle ear pressure 
resulting from Eustachian tube dysfunction combined with 
barometric pressure changes. Clinically, this may be seen in 
terms of perilymphatic fistulae resulting from barotrauma. The 
susceptibility to damage should also increase in cases where the 
baseline intracranial pressure is abnormal, such as with 
intracranial hypertension. Weider and Saunders provide a 
number of clinical examples of this in patients with a predispo­
sition to recurrent perilymphatic fistulae and who were found to 
have chronic raised intracranial pressure, i.e. pseudotumor 
cerebri (BIH).1,2 Treatment for the intracranial hypertension 
reduced the occurrence of perilymphatic fistulae.
A review of this topic would not be complete without 
acknowledging the extensive investigations undertaken and the 
significant contributions made by other researchers, including
Energy/pressure 
[
Bohmer and research groups in Sweden.9,11,48,50 Carlborg et al 
conclude that ‘the cochlear aqueduct patency is the single most 
important factor with respect to the pressure transfer from the 
cerebrospinal fluid to the perilymph’. The work of this group 
indicates that the characteristics of the cochlear aqueduct are 
likely to be quite complex. In particular, animal studies show 
that a patent aqueduct allows faster pressure equilibration 
between the intracranial and cochlear fluids in the case of 
reduced intracranial pressure compared with an increased pres­
sure. This seems to suggest an easier flow of fluid towards the 
cochlea than towards the cerebrospinal compartment.52 
Whether the same situation exists in humans needs to be estab­
lished, and the TMD technique is likely to play a role in this 
research. If this asymmetry of intracranial-cochlear pressure 
exchange exists, then the perpetually changing intracranial 
pressure should theoretically create pressure differentials 
between the intracranial fluids, perilymph and endolymph. Are 
these pressure differentials important in the pathogenesis of 
endolymphatic hydrops, or are they merely incidental to the 
physiology of the inner ear? It is clear that we are only at the 
beginning of our understanding of intralabyrinthine fluid 
interactions.
In 1999,1 published a set of hypotheses which relate to the 
above interactions (Appendix 1). Clearly, as hypotheses these 
are merely statements of what may be possible, and only time 
will tell how relevant these are to our understanding of the 
inner ear system. What our work has shown is that we can no 
longer consider the inner ear hydromechanics in isolation from 
the intracranial fluid system or the middle ear.
The clinical perspective
Vestibular aqueduct
Cochlear
windows
Cochlear aqueduct
Figure 17.19 Schematic showing intracranial/labyrinthine fluid interactions.
The clinical findings from patients with known intracranial 
hypertension clearly demonstrate interaction with the vestibu­
  

Measurements of inner ear fluid pressure 
299
lar system at a peripheral level. A priori, it is reasonable to 
assume that the intracranial cardiovascular pulse and other 
intracranial activity do directly stimulate the vestibular system. 
A number of centres have independently proposed these inter­
actions with the vestibular system, and the site of interaction is 
hypothesized to be the saccule or utricle.39,40 Further support 
comes from research showing that low-frequency pressure waves 
entering the labyrinth through the cochlear windows cause a 
vestibular response.35-37 It is also found that a middle ear over­
pressure may cause vertigo in otologically normal ears.54,55 It is 
difficult to explain this phenomenon in terms other than the 
effect of cochlear window compliance on intracranial- 
labyrinthine impedance mismatch as discussed earlier, and this 
should clearly be the subject of future research.
Likewise, are these intracranial pressure waves being per­
ceived as internally generated sounds? Adult patients suffering 
from BIH commonly report having a low-frequency tinnitus. 
This is often reported as a ‘rushing’, ‘water’ or ‘wind-like’ noise, 
and some patients reported the tinnitus as having characteris­
tics which are synchronous with their heartbeat— ‘sounds like a 
steam train’ or ‘I can hear my pulse and it gets worse with phys­
ical activity’. It seems likely that some people perceived the low 
frequencies associated with the intracranial cardiovascular 
pulse. Are the higher-frequency components due to fluid turbu­
lence as the intracranial pressure wave traverses regions of 
narrowing within the cochlear aqueduct? This may explain why 
adults with intracranial hypertension frequently report tinnitus, 
whereas children and adolescents rarely do— in children, we 
expect the cochlear aqueduct to be wider and therefore favour 
laminar rather than turbulent fluid flow. Otoacoustical emis­
sions are found to be intracranial-cochlear pressure depen­
dent.17 Are otoacoustical emissions being modulated on a 
second-to-second basis by intracranial pressure waves and can 
this be perceived by some as tinnitus? At present, we can only 
speculate, and only research will tell us which aspects of 
intracranial-labyrinthine hydrodynamics are important and 
which can be ignored.
Figure 17.21 Schematic of theoretical factors which 
increase the likelihood of intracranial pressure waves 
transferring to the labyrinth with little or no 
attenuation. These factors therefore increase the 
potential of mechanical damage to the inner ear.
Audiovestibular dysfunction, tinnitus 
and hearing loss
Understanding the associations between intracranial pressure 
and audiovestibular dysfunction is of key importance for correct 
diagnosis of certain audiovestibular disorders. The clinical 
aspects of this and the interactions between the intracranial 
and labyrinthine fluids are of interest to researchers worldwide. 
These have been the topic of three international meetings and 
two books.56,57
An early study was undertaken at Southampton, where a 
group of 34 patients with confirmed BIH were seen over a period 
of 6 years. 
In 29 patients, an open connection between the 
intracranial and perilymphatic fluids could be demonstrated using 
the CCFP analyser. Of these patients, 16 (55%) complained of 
tinnitus and 11 (38%) suffered from vertigo. Unilateral tinnitus 
was reported by 6 (21%), and it was bilateral in 10 (34%) cases. 
Tinnitus of a low-frequency nature with pulsatile characteristics 
was reported by 9 (31.0%) patients. When present, vertigo was 
principally objective in nature, as opposed to general imbalance, 
which occurred with most patients. However, subsequent clinical 
trials on a wider population showed that general imbalance is the 
most common feature, and vertigo will only occasionally occur 
and, in particular, in less than the 38% reported in the above 
paper. For example, my patients sometimes report the need to 
‘sight’ a distant object to walk towards when outside, as otherwise 
they will deviate or even stumble ‘sideways’.
Sismanis commented that the most common aetiologies 
for pulsatile tinnitus are idiopathic intracranial hypertension 
(BIH pseudotumour cerebri), glomus tumours, and carotid ath­
erosclerosis.58 He considers that atherosclerotic carotid artery 
disease is the most common cause of pulsatile tinnitus in 
patients older than 50 years of age, especially when associated 
risk factors for atherosclerosis exist—such as hypertension, 
angina, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes mellitus, and smoking. The 
aetiology in younger females is more likely to be ideopathic 
intracranial hypertension. We can broaden pulsatile tinnitus
  

300 
Audiology
to include the tinnitus with low-frequency characteristics, as 
described above.
Hearing loss with intracranial hypertension has been 
reported by a number of researchers, including Ernst et al, and 
if the loss exists it appears to be a combination of conductive 
and sensorineural.59 Figure 17.22 shows a typical low-frequency 
hearing loss from a Southampton patient with BIH. Similar 
low-frequency and also fluctuating hearing losses have been 
found by Sismanis, and the loss will reduce or completely 
recover when cerebrospinal fluid is removed at the time of lum­
bar puncture.60 Most patients do not have such a marked hear­
ing loss, and in many cases no hearing loss exists or is perhaps 
subclinical.
The pathophysiology underlying the hearing loss is 
unclear. A conductive component should be expected, since 
increased perilymphatic pressure will reduce the compliance of 
the round and oval windows. Other postulates for the hearing 
loss include a masking effect of the low-frequency tinnitus and 
even endolymphatic hydrops, which has been proposed by 
Walsted in her studies of hearing loss in cases of intracranial 
hypotension.61,62
Problems using symptoms to 
differentiate intracranial 
hypertension and Meniere’s-like 
disorders
It is evident that the otolaryngological symptoms associ­
ated with intracranial hypertension may be confused with 
those of Meniere’s-like disorders.
25
HL dB
A
0 
50
Fr
i0 
11
equency H; 
K 
2K 
4K 
8K
U
in
IU
on
/  
\ s 
\ /
zu
s 
7 \  
Js
j U 
\  
>10 
5
50 
*
Figure 17.22 The audiogram for a 35-year old patient with intracranial 
hypertension, which shows a mild low frequency hearing loss.
Furthermore, although headaches are the most common symp­
tom found with intracranial hypertension, they are not infre­
quently absent, mild or non-specific. Also, headaches often 
accompany vertiginous episodes or tinnitus. Rassekh and 
Harker reported that 22% of Meniere’s patients suffer from 
migraine, and this increases to 81% for those with so-called 
vestibular Meniere’s.63
Visual problems and papilloedema are further important 
pointers to underlying intracranial hypertension.64 However, in 
one of the few otolaryngological clinics where BIH is regularly 
diagnosed, Sismanis found that only 4/20 (20%) patients 
reported actual visual problems.60 It is also recognized that the 
absence of papilloedema may not be taken to indicate the 
absence of raised intracranial pressure.65 It is reported that clin­
ically significant changes in the fundus which are recognizable 
as papilloedema are only apparent in a minority of patients 
(5-10%) with raised intracranial pressure, and then only after a 
prolonged period of several days or even weeks.65
This may leave the otolaryngological symptoms of intra­
cranial hypertension as the main reason for referrals from the 
general practitioner to the specialist consultant. Round and 
Keane studied a series of patients with confirmed intracranial 
hypertension.47 They concluded that, in some patients, symp­
toms such as joint pain, neck stiffness and tinnitus may be bet­
ter indications of increased intracranial pressure than the 
usually accepted headache or visual obscurities. Wang et al pre­
sented the results from a case-control study in a headache 
centre of idiopathic intracranial hypertension without papil­
loedema.66
Of all the neurological and audiological symptoms, 
they found that pulsatile tinnitus was the strongest 
indicator for idiopathic intracranial hypertension with­
out papilloedema and, furthermore, that pulsatile tinnitus 
was associated with the prognosis in terms of a poor 
outcome.
Milhorat et al, in their study of 364 symptomatic patients 
with Chiari I malformation, provided an intriguing insight 
into the underlying aetiology in some cases of idiopathic intra­
cranial hypertension and perhaps in some cases of Meniere’s- 
like disease.67 Of the 364 patients tested, a total of 269 patients 
(74%) 
experienced 
otoneurological 
disturbances 
which 
included one or more of the following symptoms: dizziness 
including vertigo, peripheral vestibular dysfunction and dis­
equilibrium, pressure in the ears, tinnitus, low-frequency hear­
ing loss or hyperacusis, vertigo, and oscillopsia. In their 
opinion, a significant proportion of their patients had a diag­
nosis which was fully consistent with Meniere’s disease and 
endolymphatic hydrops. They considered this to suggest that 
Chiari I malformation alters the cerebrospinal fluid hydrome­
chanics in such a manner as to cause disturbances of the 
cerbrospinal fluid-perilymph dynamics.
  

Measurements of inner ear fluid pressure 
301
Undiagnosed intracranial 
hypertension
The actual prevalence of undiagnosed intracranial hyperten­
sion existing in general medical practice or the otolaryngolog­
ical clinic is as yet unknown. The generally accepted low 
incidence of 1 case of BIH per 100000 population per year 
cited by Wall and George cannot be taken as representative of 
undiagnosed intracranial hypertension, which is likely to be 
significantly more common in certain groups of the popula­
tion, for a number of reasons.68 First, the condition mostly 
affects women within the age range of 14-45, and there will be 
a cohort of women patients in whom the condition is never 
correctly diagnosed. Second, the diagnosis of BIH largely 
depends on a referral for papilloedema. However, as described 
above, for each patient with papilloedema there could be 10 or 
more patients with intracranial hypertension without papil- 
loedema. Added to this, unless the visual condition is progres­
sive, detection of papilloedema may be a lucky event 
dependent on a visit to a vigilant optician—of the first 10 
patients seen in the latest BIH series at Southampton, half 
have been referred to neurology from opticians. Self-referral by 
the patient is also highly unlikely, because papilloedema nor­
mally goes unnoticed unless a significant visual deficit has 
developed.
It is now recognized that the misdiagnosis of intracranial 
hypertension is not just occurring in otolaryngology. Studies 
have shown that patients with intracranial hypertension are 
being referred to headache clinics, and the condition is being 
missed because of one of the key symptoms, papilloedema, is 
absent.66 In a study conducted at the Houston Headache Clinic, 
all patients with refractory chronic daily headache underwent 
lumbar puncture, even though they did not have papilloedema. 
Of the 85 patients, 12 (14%) were found to have raised cerebro­
spinal fluid pressure.69 Considering the difficulty of diagnosing 
ideopathic intracranial hypertension by symptoms alone, undi­
agnosed instances of this condition may be fairly common, par­
ticularly in specific patient populations such as women in the 
age range of 15-45 years.70
The existence of a cohort of mostly female patients with 
undiagnosed intracranial hypertension has a cost impli­
cation for the health service and is also a ‘quality of life’ 
issue for the individual.
It should be remembered that, besides the symptoms 
described above, intracranial hypertension is normally associ­
ated with a general feeling of malaise and dulling of memory. 
These are disabling conditions and are often described by the 
patient as ‘not feeling in this world’ or ‘feeling in a constant 
daze’. These symptoms alone may be so severe as to be incapac­
itating and to make it impossible for patients to continue with 
their occupation.
Current Southampton research aims to more clearly define 
the characteristics of the tinnitus, vertigo, aural fullness and 
hearing loss found with intracranial hypertension (Figure 
17.23). This allows questionnaires and an ‘at-risk profile’ to be 
developed to help identify patients with intracranial hyperten­
sion and to allow cross-referral to neurology.
Low-frequency tinnitus of a pulsatile and/or ‘whooshing’ 
‘sea-like’ nature appears to be the key symptom for diagnosing 
intracranial hypertension, and in many cases may be the only 
defining symptom. If present, gentle compression of the inter­
nal jugular vein will often reduce the intensity of the tinnitus 
or even cause a complete cessation. Likewise, in cases of unilat­
eral tinnitus, turning the head to the ipsilateral side will often 
reduce or abolish the tinnitus.
The value of the TMD technique in 
finding undiagnosed intracranial 
hypertension
The TMD technique is used to screen for raised or low 
cochlear fluid pressure (Figure 17.24). The technique can be 
used to establish whether or not there is an open connection 
between the intracranial fluids and the cochlear fluids. We do 
this simply by changing the posture of the person, which 
induces a change in intracranial pressure (Figure 17.1). If there 
is a corresponding change in cochlear pressure, it is assumed 
that a fluid connection exists. In this instance, a raised 
cochlear fluid pressure implies a raised intracranial fluid pres­
sure. The next step is to use the technique to establish associ­
ations between periods of low or high intracranial pressures 
and the audiovestibular symptomatology and neurological 
symptomatology. Finally, the technique is used to monitor the 
success of any treatment in terms of controlling the intracra­
nial pressure.38 It is appropriate both for surgical treatments 
such as cerebrospinal shunts and for drug treatments such as 
steroids or diuretics. Since patients with treated intracranial 
hypertension remain ‘at risk’ of further occurrences, the TMD 
technique is also proving valuable for providing pressure 
assessments with long-term patient reviews.
Treatment
Patients with intracranial hypertension typically report imme­
diate relief from the tinnitus on lumbar puncture. Long-term 
treatments include dietary management in terms of weight loss, 
if appropriate, and restricted salt intake. Medication includes 
diuretics such as acetazolamide, often in combination with a 
1-week course of a steroid such as prednisolone. If this fails, 
then surgical treatments have been used for treating the 
audiovestibular symptomatology, and include cerebrospinal 
fluid drainage by either repeated lumbar puncture 
or
  

302 
Audiology
Predominantly female: at least 4:1, (female/male) ratio. The patient may be 20°/o or more overweight.
Typical age range: 18-45 years
Likely to be suffering from a low-frequency tinnitus which will be described as 'hum', ‘roaring', 'whooshing' or perhaps 
'sea-like', with occasionally characteristics which are synchronous with the heart beat. About 60 %  of patients will report 
tinnitus, and of these about 6 0 -7 0 %  (36-42%  of total) will be of a low-frequency type. In cases of unilateral tinnitus, gentle 
compression of the internal jugular vein will often result in a reduction in the intensity of the tinnitus or even a complete 
cessation. Likewise turning the head to the ipsilateral side will often reduce the tinnitus.
M ost patients will report a mild imbalance or 'unsteadiness on their feet’. About 4 0 %  of those with tinnitus will be suffering 
some form of objective vertigo. This will be described as episodes when the ‘room appears to move' and this can last for 
several minutes and sometimes hours. This is often not fully developed rotary vertigo. The feeling is often associated with
nausea, but only infrequently vomiting.
The patient will be suffering from a malaise which will often be associated with a 'deterioration in memory', 'mental slowing' 
or 'dulling of mind'. The patient will commonly report headaches; however, in most cases these headaches will be mild, 
(sometimes described as a 'dull' headache). The headache may be associated with a pressure or fullness sensations in the
head, ears or behind the eyes.
If investigated, papilloedema will only probably be found in less than 10% of cases. Interestingly, although visual deficits are 
often found, these or visual disturbances frequently go unreported by the patient. If these occur, they may include 'greying' or 
'tunnelling' which may occur -  as with other symptoms -  with change of posture and subsequently last for several minutes.
Low-frequency and/or fluctuating hearing losses are also symptoms, but only rarely are significant enough to be noticed
by patients.
The most distinguishing associations of intracranial hypertension are probably 'female' and 'low-frequency and/or pulsatile 
tinnitus'. Nevertheless, if this latter symptom alone was taken for a clinical screen for this condition, then we would probably
miss over 5 0 %  of the patients.
Figure 17.23 Atypical profile for sub-clinical intracranial hypertension.
lumbar-peritoneal shunts.1,66,71 
As our understanding of 
intracranial-inner fluid interactions improves, we are begin­
ning to see the advent of new surgical treatments such as the 
posterior fossa cochlear aqueduct occlusion procedure, which 
appears to relieve certain forms of tinnitus and vertigo.2
TMD measurements and Meniere’s 
disease
The 
TMD 
analyser 
allows 
a 
fuller 
understanding 
of 
audiovestibular manifestations and consequences of intracra­
nial hyper/hypotension. This in turn allows for the differential 
diagnosis of Meniere’s-like diseases of the labyrinth from those 
in which a combination of tinnitus, vertigo and hearing loss is 
symptomatic of abnormal intracranial pressure and of a retro­
cochlear disorder.38,71
Use of the TMD technique on Meniere’s patients with 
the classical triad of symptoms appears to show normal peri­
lymphatic pressure.27,72,73 There may, however, be exceptions. 
Using the same technique, Ernst et al have observed marked
changes in pressure in a patient during a Meniere’s attack, 
and other studies suggest that there may be differences with 
the Meniere’s patient compared with the normal sub­
ject.72,74-78 Some of these differences appear to be associated 
with the pressure transfer between the intracranial and 
cochlear fluids.
Currently, the principle use of the TMD technique with 
Meniere’s patients is to indirectly support the diagnosis in terms 
of eliminating the possibility of intracranial hypertension as 
being the underlying cause for the symptoms.38 In the future, 
direct diagnostic TMD tests may be possible.77,78
Other applications of non-invasive 
intracranial pressure assessment
There are several other interesting applications for non- 
invasive intracranial pressure assessment. For example, research 
indicates that raised pressure is a factor in patients with X- 
linked progressive mixed deafness syndrome in association with 
perilymphatic gusher during stapes surgery.79
  

Measurements of inner ear fluid pressure 
303
Figure 17.24 Clinical use of the TMD technique for cerebral 
and cochlear pressure assessment
Intraventricular shunt assessment
The clinical signs and symptoms associated with abnormal 
intracranial pressure in patients with hydrocephalus and/or 
cerebrospinal shunts are often subtle and hard to diagnose. The 
difficulties of diagnosing shunt disorders are even greater in 
children, who are unable to describe symptoms clearly. Prior to 
the development of the TMD test, clinicians relied on the clin- 
ical history, presenting symptoms and pumping the shunt cham­
ber. CT scanning and MR imaging have not proved conclusive 
for detecting shunt disorders.80 The integrity of the shunt sys­
tem and intracranial pressure status are, therefore, often 
unknown unless invasive measurements are carried out. Inter­
mittent shunt blockages in a child, in particular, could go unde­
tected for months or years, but may nevertheless affect the 
social and educational welfare of the child.
Studies with the TMD test in hydrocephalus and shunted 
patients have shown that TMD results vary with symptoms
Patient Management
Inpatient observation changed to 
MRI scan and ICP monitoring
Inpatient observation changed to 
outpatient observation
planned surgery avoided 
surgery changed 
outpatient observation as planned
surgery as planned
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Number of TMD tests
Figure 17.25 Intraventricular shunt assessment: a comparison of the proposed 
patient management before TMD testing with actual management after TMD 
testing.
of shunt dysfunction and pre- and post-shunt revision 
surgery.15,81”83 The test has also been useful in tracking intracra­
nial pressure changes with fluctuating symptoms over periods of 
days or weeks.84
Overall, TMD was 93% accurate, and conventional clini­
cal assessment was 66% accurate. Additionally, the TMD test 
gave useful information where clinical suspicions were unclear. 
Figure 17.25 shows a comparison of proposed patient manage­
ment before TMD testing with actual management after TMD 
testing. The key benefits of TMD testing include: long-term 
management of a hydrocephalic patient, monitoring shunt 
function and shunt revision, and differentiating raised from low 
intracranial pressure.85
Currently, the TMD technique is not a replacement for the 
invasive pressure measurement methods, but it is complemen­
tary and has a number of important advantages. One advantage 
is that measurements can be made as often as required and these 
can normally be undertaken on an outpatient basis. Another 
important advantage is that it is possible to differentiate 
patients with intracranial hypotension from those with hyper­
tension. These conditions have similar symptom profiles, such 
as headaches, and it can be very difficult, looking at symptoms 
alone, to determine whether a person is suffering from low pres­
sure or high pressure, or indeed whether their pressure is normal 
and they are suffering headaches for other reasons. A typical 
pressure history for a patient with hydrocephalus is shown in 
Figure 17.26.
Another cost benefit of the CCFP analyser and the TMD 
technique is in reducing the need for inpatient observations 
and allowing earlier than usual surgical intervention or hospital 
discharge.
Altitude and aerospace applications
Other applications of the TMD technique include the following:
*  
The investigation of changes in intracranial fluid with alti­
tude. The objective of this study, which was undertaken on
  

304 
Audiology
Vm
nl
+ 100
0
-100
-200
-300
-400
MC (Age 13) Spina Bifida+V-A Shunt 
un revised
Shunt unshunted since babyhood
Recent onset headache +  personality change
PRE
2 MONTHS OF
HEADACHE + PERSONALITY 
CHANGE
SHUNTQGRAM:
BLOCKED DISTAL 
CATHETER 
_ ACTION: SHUNT REVISION
POST\
1 + 2 DAYS 
POST REPLACEMENT 
OF DISTAL CATHETER
TMD: ICP WAS NOT 
DECREASED 
ACTION: Nil
HEADACHES RESOLVED 
PERSONALITY MUCH 
BRIGHTER
TMD: ICP LOWER
RE-ADMITTED 3 WEEKS LATER 
-HEADACHES HAD NEVER RESOLVED
TMD: ICP HIGHER
ACTION: REPLACEMENT OP 
WHOLE SHUNT SYSTEM
Figure 17.26 A typical TMD pressure history for a patient with hydrocephalus
Mount Everest, was to see whether there is any relationship 
between intracranial pressure and acute mountain sickness. 
No change was found in this respect, perhaps due to the 
lack of subjects; however, a relationship existed between
the non-invasive measure of intracranial pressure and
i 
. 
86 
hypoxia.
m 
Measuring changes in intracranial pressure with ‘g’ force on 
a centrifuge. A feasibility study at the Famborough School 
of Aviation Medicine demonstrated that these measure­
ments are a practical proposition (Figure 17.27).
The future of TMD measurements in space
The CCFP analyser and TMD technique now form part of a 
NASA programme to monitor changes in intracranial pressure 
and intra-aural pressure waves in astronauts during space 
shuttle missions. The objectives are to assess in-flight hyperten-
300
200
100
0
-100
-200
-300
-400
Vm
nl
□ Subject 1 
B  Subject 2
i
1.0 
2.0
3.0f
Increasing 'G' force
Increasing
intracranial
pressure
Decreasing
intracranial
pressure
Figure 17.27 Changes in intracranial pressure expressed in terms of TMD (nl) 
with increasing g force on a centrifuge at the Farnborough School of Aviation 
Medicine.
sive intracranial pressure changes and the relationship with the 
symptomatology of space sickness. Further objectives are to 
monitor recovery from in-flight intracranial hypertension 
through immediate post-flight tests. Associations between the 
intracranial pressure and in-flight and post-flight headaches and 
vestibular dysfunction will be investigated.
Acknowledgements
I wish to thank ‘Defeating Deafness’, Hearing Research Trust 
for supporting this research.
Appendix 1: Principles of static and 
dynamic interactions between the 
middle ear, intracranial and 
intralabyrinthine fluids
On 
consideration 
of 
research 
into 
the 
intracranial- 
labyrinthine-middle ear mechanics and clinical research find­
ings, I have proposed the following theorems:-
Theorem 1
Given a patent cochlear aqueduct, the intracranial pressure will 
always provide the reference pressure for the endolymph and 
perilymph within the limits set by:
m 
dynamics properties of the cochlear aqueduct
■ 
resting tension of the Reissner’s membrane.
Theorem 2
Given a patent cochlear aqueduct, pressure waves of intra­
cranial origin will be transmitted to the labyrinth in a manner 
dependent on the:
m 
hydromechanical properties of the cochlear aqueduct 
» 
mechanical properties of the cochlear windows
■ 
middle ear pressure and any tension applied to the oval 
window via the ossicles.
Theorem 3
Direct stimulation of the vestibular system and manifestations 
of tinnitus can occur due to intra-aural amplitude and phase 
variations in transmitted intracranial pressure activity brought 
about by:
*  
raised intracranial pressure
« 
changes in the compliance of the cochlear windows such as 
those secondary to changes in middle ear pressure.
  

Measurements of inner ear fluid pressure 
305
Theorem 4
Intracranial-labyrinthine 
fluid 
impedance 
mismatch 
is 
important in limiting the degree of mechanical stress and 
therefore possible labyrinthine structural damage which may 
occur for given pressure pulses of intracranial or middle ear 
origins.
Theorem 5
Differential pressures may exist between the cerebral fluid, 
endolymph and perilymph due to:
■ 
the existence in some cases of a finite opening pressure 
across the lumen of the cochlear and vestibular aqueducts
n 
non-linear hydromechanical properties of the cochlear and 
vestibular aqueducts which allow pressure waves of 
intracranial origin to pass more readily to the labyrinth in 
one direction compared to the other direction.
Theorem 6
In consideration of the non-linear properties of the cochlear 
and vestibular aqueducts (Theorem 5), the perpetual pressure 
fluctuations within the cerebral fluid of cardiovascular and 
respiratory origins may produce sustainable pressure differences 
between the cerebral, endolymphatic and perilymphatic fluids 
which are important to:
m 
normal labyrinthine physiology and fluid homeostasis 
m 
the pathogenesis of conditions such as endolymphatic 
hydrops.
Theorem 7
The physiology and pathophysiology of the labyrinth will be 
dependent on changes in and interactions occurring between 
the mean intracranial pressure, and pressure waves of cardio­
vascular and respiratory origins, and also:
■ 
the substantial pressure increases which occur with intra­
cranial plateau waves
*  
airway flow restrictions and nasal obstruction.
References
1. Weider DJ, Saunders RL, Musiek FE. Repair of a cerebrospinal 
fluid perilymphatic fistula primary through the middle ear and sec­
ondarily by occluding the cochlear aqueduct. Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1991; 105:35-9.
2. Weider DJ, Saunders RL. Recurrent perilymphatic fistula as the 
initial and prime symptom of pseudotumour cerebri: diagnosis and 
management with lumbar-peritoneal shunt—Report of three 
cases. In: Ernst A, Marchbanks R, Samii R (eds). Intracranial and 
Intralabyrinthine Fluids: Basic Aspect and Clinical Applications. 
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, 1996.
3. Marchbanks RJ. MMS-10 Tympanic Displacement Analyser in 
Research and Clinical Practice: The Users Handbook. Lymington: 
Marchbanks Measurement Systems Ltd, 1993:
4. Moller AR. Effect of tympanic muscle activity on measurement of 
the ear drum, acoustic impedance and cochlear microphonics. 
Acta Otolaryngol 1964; 58: 525-9.
5. Casselbrant M, Ingelstedt S, Ivarsson A. Volume displacement of 
the tympanic membrane at stapedial reflex activity in different 
postures. Acta Otolaryngol 1977; 85: 1-9.
6. Yonowitz A, Harris JD. Ear drum displacement following stapedius 
muscle contraction. A eta Otolaryngol 1976; 81: 1-7.
7. Marchbanks RJ. A study of tympanic membrane displacement. 
PhD, Brunei University, 1980.
8. Brask T. Extratympanic manometry in man. Scand Audiol Suppl 
1978; 7.
9. Casselbrant M, Ingelstedt S, Ivarsson A. Volume displacement of 
the tympanic membrane in the sitting position as a function of 
middle ear muscle activity. A eta Otolaryngol 1977; 84: 402-13.
10. Tweed JJ. Development of a model of stapes motion during 
contraction of the stapedius muscle. MSc Dissertation, Institute 
of Sound and Vibration Research, Southampton University, 
1985.
11. Densert O, Ivarsson A, Pedersen K. The influence of perilym­
phatic pressure on the displacement of the tympanic membrane. 
A eta Otolaryngol 1977; 84: 220-6.
12. Wlodyka J. Studies on cochlear aqueduct patency. Ann Otolaryn­
gol 1978, 87: 22-7.
13. Marchbanks RJ, Reid A, Martin AM, Brightwell AP, Bateman D. 
The effect of raised intracranial pressure on intracochlear fluid 
pressure: three case studies. BrJ Audiol 1987; 21: 127-30.
14. Reid A, Marchbanks RJ, Burge DM et al. The relationship 
between intracranial pressure and tympanic membrane displace­
ment. BrJ Audiol 1990; 24: 123-9.
15. Samuel M, Marchbanks RJ, Burge DM. Tympanic membrane dis­
placement test in regular assessment in eight children with 
shunted hydrocephalus. J Neurosurg 1998; 88: 983-95.
16. Krast R. A new method for noninvasive measurement of short 
term cerebrospinal fluid pressure changes in humans. J Neurol 
1985; 232: 260-1.
17. Avan P, Buki B, Lemaire JJ, Dordain M, Chazal J. Otoacoustic 
emissions: a new tool for monitoring intracranial pressure. In: 
Ernst A, Marchbanks R, Samii M (eds). Intracranial and Intra­
labyrinthine Fluids: Basic Aspect and Clinical Applications. Springer 
Verlag, 1996.
18. Froehlich P, Ferber C, Remond J et al. Lack of association between 
transiently evoked otoacoustic emission amplitude and experi­
mentation linked'factors (repeat acoustic stimulation, cere­
brospinal fluid pressure, supine and sitting positions, alertness 
level). Hear Res 1994; 75: 184-90.
19. Marchbanks RJ. Implications of measuring intracranial pressure: 
emerging technology provides new challenges for audiological 
practice. Hear Instrum 1991; 42(9): 30-1.
20. Banister K, Chambers I, Mendelow D. Clinical evaluation of the 
MMS-10 Tympanic Membrane Displacement Analyser in the 
non-invasive assessment of raised intracranial pressure. In: Pro­
  

306 
Audiology
ceedings of the 11 th International Symposium of Intracranial Pressure, 
Cambridge 2000: 226.
21. Flynn S, Marchbanks RJ, Burge D. The application of the tym- 
panic membrane displacement (TMD) test as part of the clinical 
service for hydrocephalus patients. In: Reid A, Marchbanks R 
(eds). Intracranial and Inner Ear Physiology and Pathophysiology. 
Whurr Publishers, 1998.
22. Wunderlich K, Brinker T, Ernst A. The correlation of tympanic 
membrane displacement measurements to direct intracranial 
pressure recordings in cat. In: Ernst A, Marchbanks R, Samii M 
(eds). Intracranial and Intralabyrinthine Fluids: Basic Aspect and 
Clinical Applications. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, 1996.
23. Reid A, Marchbanks RJ, Bateman D, Martin AM, Brightwell AP, 
Pickard J. Mean intracranial pressure monitoring by a non-inva- 
sive audiological technique—a pilot study. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry 1989; 52: 610-12.
24. Moss SM, Marchbanks RJ, Reid A, Burge D, Martin AM. Com- 
parison of intracranial pressure between spina bifida patients and 
normal subjects using non-invasive pressure assessment technique. 
Kinderchirurg 1989; 44: (suppl I): 29-30.
25. Phillips AJ, Marchbanks RJ. Effects of posture and age on tym- 
panic membrane displacement. BrJ Audiol 1989; 23: 279-84.
26. Murthy G, Marchbanks RJ, Watenpaugh DE, Meyer U, Eliashberg 
N, Hargens AR. Increased intracranial pressure in humans during 
simulated microgravity. Physiologist 1992; 35(1 Suppl) S-184-5.
27. Rosingh HJ, Wit HP, Albers FWJ. Perilymphatic pressure dynam­
ics following posture change in patients with Meniere’s disease 
and in normal hearing subjects. A eta Otolaryngol Stockh 1998; 
118(1): 1-5.
28. Rosingh HJ, Wit HP, Albers FWJ. Non-invasive perilymphatic 
pressure measurement in normal hearing subjects using the MMS- 
10 Tympanic Displacement Analyser. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 
1996; 116: 382-7.
29. Marchbanks RJ, Reid A. Cochlear and cerebral fluid pressure: 
their interrelationships and control mechanisms. Br J Audiol 1990; 
24: 179-87.
30. S0rensen PS, Hammer M, Gjerris F, Lundberg J. 24-hour cere­
brospinal fluid levels of vasopressin in hydrocephalic patients. 
Regul Pept 1985, 10: 115-26.
31. Andreasson L, Harris S, Ivarsson A. Pulse volume recordings in 
outer ear canal in pulse synchronous tinnitus. A eta Otolaryngol 
1978; 86: 241-7.
32. Marchbanks RJ. Measurement of tympanic membrane displace­
ment arising from aural cardiovascular activity, swallowing and 
intra-aural muscle reflex. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1984; 98: 
119-29.
33. Evans MJ, Bryan ME, Tempest W. Clinical application of low fre­
quency sound. Sound 1971; 5: 47-51.
34. Erlich MA, Lawson W. The incidence and significance of the 
Tullio phenomenon in man. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1980; 88: 
630-5.
35. Kacker SK, Hinchcliffe R. Unusual Tullio phenomena. J Laryngol 
1970; 84: 155-66.
36. Hill Britton B. Vestibular responses to pressure variations: a 
review. Otolaryngol, Head Neck Surg 1986; 4: 516-22.
37. Parker DE, von Gierke HE, Reschke M. Studies of acoustical 
stimulation of the vestibular system. Aerospace Med 1968; 39: 
1321-25.
38. Marchbanks, RJ. Why monitor perilymphatic pressure in Meniere’s 
disease? A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) Suppl 1996; 526: 27-9.
39. Marchbanks RJ. Hydromechanical interactions of the intracranial 
and intralabyrinthine fluids: In: Ernst A, Marchbanks R, Samii M. 
(eds). Intracranial and Intralabyrinthine Fluids: Basic Aspect and 
Clinical Applications. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, 1996.
40. Epley JM. Aberrant coupling of otolithic receptors: manifestations 
and assessment. In: Kaufman Arenberg I (ed). Dizziness and 
Balance Disorders. Amsterdam: Kugler Publications. 1993: 183-99.
41. Hughes M, Marchbanks RJ. Characteristics of infrasonic otoa- 
coustics emissions generated by the cardiovascular system. In: 
Reid A, Marchbanks R (eds). Intracranial and Inner Ear Physiology 
and Pathophysiology. London: Whurr Publishers, 1998.
42. Davson H, Welch K, Segal MB. The Physiology and Pathophysiology 
of the Cerebrospinal Fluid. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1987.
43. Avezaat CJJ, Van Eijndhoven JHM, Wyper DJ. Cerebrospinal fluid 
pulse pressure and intracranial volume-pressure relationship. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1997; 42: 687-700.
44- Marchbanks, RJ. Aberrant intra-aural pressure waves: exciting 
developments in TMD research. Br Society of Audiology Annual 
Conference, Winchester 2001, abstracts, p. 14.
45. Sismanis A. Otologic manifestations of benign intracranial hyper­
tension syndrome: diagnosis and management. Laryngoscope 1987; 
97: 1-17.
46. Tandon PN, Sinha A, Kacker RK, Saxena RK, Singh K. Auditory 
function in raised intracranial pressure. J Neurol Sci 1973; 18:
455-67.
47. Round R, Keane JR. The minor symptoms of increased intracra­
nial pressure: 101 patients with benign intracranial hypertension. 
Neurology 1998; 38(9): 1461-4.
48. Bohmer A. Hydrostatic pressure in the inner ear fluid compart­
ments and its effects on inner ear pressure. A eta Otolaryngol 
(Stockh) Suppl 1993; 507: 1-24.
49. Beentjes BIJ. The cochlear aqueduct and the pressure of the cere­
brospinal and endolabyrinthine fluid Acta Otolaryngol 1972; 17: 
112 - 20.
50. Carlborg BIR, Konradsson KS, Carlborg AH, Farmer JC, Densert 
O. Pressure transfer between the perilymph and the cerebrospinal 
fluid compartments in cats. Am J Otol 1992; 13: 41-8.
51. Marchbanks RJ, Reid A. Cochlear and cerebrospinal fluid pres­
sure: their interrelationships and control mechanisms. Br J Audiol 
1990; 24: 179-87.
52. Carlborg B, Densert O, Densert B. Functional patency of the 
cochlear aquaeduct. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1982; 91: 202-15.
53. Marchbanks RJ. Principles of static and dynamic interactions 
between the middle ear, intracranial and intralabyrinthine fluids. 
First presented in entirety at the Irish Society of Audiology Meet­
ing, Mater Hospital, Dublin, November 1999.
54- Ingelstedt A, Ivarsson A, TjemstromO. Vertigo due to relative over­
pressure in the middle ear. A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1974; 78:1-14.
55. Tjemstrom O. Further studies on alternobaric vertigo. A eta Oto­
laryngol (Stockh) 1974; 78: 221-31.
  

Measurements of inner ear fluid pressure 
307
56. Ernst A, Marchbanks R, Samii M (eds.). Intracranial and Intra­
labyrinthine Fluids: Basic Aspect and Clinical Applications. Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, 1996.
57. Reid A, Marchbanks R (eds.). Intracranial and Inner ear physiology 
and pathophysiology. London: Whurr Publishers, 1998.
58. Sismanis A. Pulsatile tinnitus. Neurologist 1998; 4(2): 66-76.
59. Ernst A. Diagnostics of perilymphatic hypertension. In: Ernst A, 
Marchbanks R, Samii M (eds). Intracranial and Intralabyrinthine 
Fluids: Basic Aspect and Clinical Applications. Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer Verlag, 1996.
60. Sismanis A. Otologic manifestations of benign intracranial hyper- 
tension syndrome: diagnosis and management. Laryngoscope 1987; 
97: 1-17.
61. Walsted A, Salomon G, Thomsen ], Tos M. Hearing decrease after 
loss of cerebrospinal fluid. A new hydrops model? A eta Otolaryngol 
(Stockh) 1991; 111: 468-76.
62. Walsted A, Nielsen OA, Borum P. Hearing loss after neurosurgery. 
The influence of low cerebrospinal fluid pressure. J Laryngol Otol
1994; 108: 637-41.
63. Rassekh CH, Harker LA. The prevalence of migraine in Meniere’s 
disease. Laryngoscope 1992; 102(2): 135-8.
64. Pickard JD. Which patients with benign intracranial hypertension 
can we help? In: Warlow CP, Garfield JF (eds.). More Dilemmas in 
the Management of the Neurological Patients. Edinburgh: Churchill- 
Livingston; 1987: 156-70.
65. Eifert B, Steffen H, Ascoff A, Kolling GH. Papilledema in cases of 
acute elevated intracranial pressure. In: Ernst A, Marchbanks R, 
Samii M (eds). Intracranial and Intralabyrinthine Fluids: Basic Aspect 
and Clinical Applications. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, 
1996: 223-5.
66. Wang SJ, Silberstein SD, Patterson S, Young WB. Idiopathic 
intracranial hypertension without papilledema. Neurology 1998; 
51: 245-9.
67. Milhorat TH, Chou MW, Trinidad EM et al. Chiari I malforma­
tion redefined: clinical and radiographical findings for 364 symp­
tomatic patients. Neurosurgery 1999; 44(5): 1005-17.
68. Wall M, George D. Idiopathic intracranial hypertension, a 
prospective study of 50 patients. Brain 1991; 114: 155-64.
69. Mathew NT, Ravishankar K, Sanin LC. Coexistence of migraine 
and idiopathic intracranial hypertension without papilledema. 
Neurology 1996; 46: 1226-1230.
70. Reid A, Cottingham CA, Marchbanks RJ. The prevalence of 
perilymphatic hypertension in subjects with tinnitus: a pilot study. 
J Scand Audiol 1993; 22: 61-3.
71. Weider DJ, Musiek FE. Recurrent perilymphatic fistula in patients 
with possible patent cochlear aqueduct: role for cochlear aqueduct 
blockage—report of five cases. In: Reid A, Marchbanks R (eds.) 
Intracranial and Inner Ear Physiology and Pathophysiology. London: 
Whurr Publishers, 1998.
72. Gosepath K, Maurer J, Pelster H, Thews O, Mann W. Pressure 
relation between intracranial and intracochlear fluids in patients 
with disease of the inner ear. Laryngorhinootology. 1995; 74: 145-9.
73. Rosingh HJ, Wit HP, Albers FWJ. Non-invasive perilymphatic
pressure measurements in patients with Meniere’s disease. A eta 
Otolaryngol 1996; 21: 335-8.
74. Ernst A, Issing PR, Bohndorf M. The non-invasive assessment of 
intracochlear pressure—II: Findings in patients suffering from 
Meniere’s disease, fluctuating deep tone hearing and peripheral- 
vestibular attacks of vertigo. Laryngorhinootology. 1995; 74(1): 
13-20.
75. Marchbanks RJ, Martin AM. Infra-sonic measurement of human 
intra-cochlear hydrodynamics: variations with age, sex and 
audiovestibular 
pathology. 
ISVR 
Technical 
Report 
148 
Southampton: Institute of Sound and Vibration Research, 
Southampton University, 1986: 10-20.
76. Ernst A, Bohndorf M, Lenarz T. The non-invasive assessment of 
intracochlear pressure—III: Case reports on patients suffering 
from intracochlear hypertension and hypotension. Laryngorhi­
nootology. 1995; 74(1): 150-4.
77. Bouccara D, Ferrary E, El-Garem H, Couloigner V, Coudert C, 
Sterkers O. Inner ear pressure in Meniere’s disease and fluctuating 
hearing loss determined by tympanic membrane displacement 
analysis. Audiology. 1998; 37(5): 255-61.
78. Konradsson KS, Nielsen LH, Carlborg BIR, Borgkvist B. Pressure 
transfer between intracranial and cochlear fluids in patients with 
Meniere’s disease. Laryngoscope 2000; 110: 264-8.
79. Ernst A, Snik A, Mylanus I, Cremers C. Noninvasive assessment 
of the intralabyrinthine pressure: a new technique applied to 
patients with X-linked progressive mixed deafness syndrome with 
perilymphatic gusher during stapes surgery. Arch Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1995; 121: 926-929.
80. Watkins L, Hayward R, Andar U, Harkness W. The diagnosis of 
blocked cerebrospinal fluid shunts: a prospective study of a paedi­
atric neurological unit. Child Nervous System 1994; 10(2): 87-90.
81. Moss SM, Marchbanks RJ, Burge DM. Non-invasive assessment of 
ventricular shunt function using the tympanic membrane dis­
placement measurement technique. 
Z Kinderchirurg 1990; 
45(Suppl I): 26-8.
82. Samuel M, Marchbanks RJ, Burge DM. Tympanic membrane dis­
placement test in regular assessment of children with shunted 
hydrocephalus. Eur J Pediatr Surg 1996; I(suppl) 47-51.
83. Samuel M, Marchbanks RJ, Burge DM. Quantitative assessment 
of intracranial pressure by the tympanic membrane displacement 
audiometric technique in children with shunted hydrocephalus. 
EurJ Pediatr Surg 1998; 8: 1-9.
84. Moss SM, Marchbanks RJ, Burge DM. Long term assessment of 
intracranial pressure using the tympanic membrane displacement 
measurement technique. EurJ Paediatr Surg 1991; Supp I: 25-6.
85. Burge D, Flynn S, Marchbanks R. Assessment of the clinical value 
of the tympanic membrane displacement (TMD) test in children 
with shunted hydrocephalus. In: Ernst A, Marchbanks R, Samii M 
(eds.). Intracranial and Intralabyrinthine Fluids: Basic Aspect and 
Clinical Applications. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, 1996.
86. Wright AD, Imray CHE, Morrissey MSC, Marchbanks RJ, Brad- 
well AR. Intracranial pressure at high altitude and acute mountain 
sickness. Clin Sci 1995; 89: 201-4.
  

18 The auditory 
processing of speech
Andrew Faulkner
Aims
The aims of this chapter are
■ 
to outline the fundamental acoustic structures that convey 
meaning in speech and the wide variability in the acoustic 
realization of speech sounds that auditory processing of 
speech has to contend with;
*  
to give an overview of the auditory processing of speech 
by both people with normal hearing and those who are 
significantly affected by hearing impairment.
Introductory remarks
Speech is generated by coordinated motor activity that produces 
a stream of acoustic information to represent a meaningful mes­
sage. The task of speech reception is to analyse this acoustic 
information stream so as to decode the talker’s message, isolating 
it, if necessary, from other acoustic information (or noise). Visual 
cues from the movements of the speech articulators, and from 
facial expressions and gestures, also contribute. The extraction 
of meaning from speech is a complex and incompletely under­
stood process. The decoding of speech ultimately entails the 
identification of meaning in terms of words, syntactic structure, 
and other linguistic aspects. In audiology, however, the primary 
interest lies in the impact of damage to the auditory periphery 
on the decoding of speech, and the effects that this has on 
speech intelligibility. As Figure 18.1 shows, with more severe 
degrees of hearing loss, these effects are substantial.
It is conceptually convenient to consider the reception of 
speech in terms of the decoding of auditory information pro­
vided by the peripheral analysis of the acoustic input. Within 
this acoustic input, we can imagine segments of information 
that each broadly correspond to individual speech sounds. 
These segments are known as phonemes. This is not to assume 
that speech perception necessitates the isolation and decoding 
of each such segment. Rather, a partial decoding of phoneme 
segments is generally sufficient, given the high predictability of 
spoken messages, which allows imperfectly identified segments
Hearing loss (dB)
Figure 18.1 The impact of hearing impairment on speech recognition. The 
figure represents the number of words that can be recognized from simple 
sentences in the quiet by hearing-impaired adults using hearing aids. The solid 
curve shows the mean performance as a function of average hearing loss (at 
500, 1000 and 2000 Hz). The dashed lines show the expected statistical variation 
about the mean. Circles are scores from individual subjects. (After Boothroyd. 
Acta oto-laryngologica 1990; 469 (Suppl 1): 166-71.’).
to be filled in by the listener. Where hearing impairment devel­
ops after the process of language development is essentially 
complete (at around age 5), it is essentially only peripheral 
auditory analysis that is affected by hearing impairment, this 
analysis being a prerequisite for the phonemic decoding of 
speech (Figure 18.2). However, in children whose hearing is 
severely impaired during or prior to the completion of language 
development, the auditory processing of speech is further ham­
pered. This arises from the lack of a completely developed men­
tal representation of the language-specific mappings between 
auditory patterns of speech and meaningful linguistic elements.
The acoustic basis of speech: 
source-filter model
The patterns of sound that we recognize as speech are generated 
by two distinct component processes: the generation of an

310 
Audiology
Speech 
Peripheral auditory 
Feature 
Word 
Extraction of
production 
processing 
extraction 
recognition 
meaning
acoustic source, and the modulation of this source by changes 
in the configuration of the vocal tract.
There are two mechanisms that provide the acoustic 
excitation of speech. The primary source is due to quasi- 
periodic opening and closing of the vocal folds within the 
glottis, as for example, in the production of a vowel sound (see 
Figure 18.3).
Laryngeal (voiced) excitation
Here, air flow from the lungs is modulated by the opening and 
closing of the vocal folds, and enters the vocal tract bearing
Figure 18.2 Stages of auditory 
speech processing.
pressure variations whose frequency is directly controlled by the 
frequency of vocal fold closure. This quasi-periodic source is 
often termed ‘voice’, and speech sounds formed with this exci­
tation are classified as ‘voiced’.
The sound of the laryngeal source, if it could be heard, 
would not be recognized as speech, but as a buzzing tone. The 
generation of speech depends also on the shaping of the source 
by the vocal tract, which acts as a complex acoustic filter. The 
oral part of the vocal tract exhibits a series of resonant frequen­
cies known as formants. These resonances determine the fre­
quency components of the source that are allowed to pass into 
the air, while the remaining frequency components of the exci­
Figure 18.3 The left panel shows a schematic air flow wave from six cycles of vocal fold closure. Here the frequency of the wave is 100 Hz, i.e. each larynx cycle 
lasts 10 ms. Air flow is at its minimum at the point of vocal fold closure, and at its maximum when the vocal folds are fully open. The right panel shows the 
frequency components of the spectrum of this wave up to 2000 Hz. Components exist at the overall, or fundamental, frequency of 100 Hz, and at each harmonic 
frequency. The components above 100 Hz are all integral multiples of the fundamental frequency. As is typical for the periodic acoustic source of speech for normal 
levels of speech effort, the level of the components declines by about 6 dB for each octave (doubling of frequency). There will also be weaker higher-frequency 
harmonics present beyond those shown here.
  

The auditory processing of speech 
311
tation source are partially absorbed within the vocal tract. This 
process of shaping the speech spectrum from that of the voiced 
source is described by a source and filter model, which is illus­
trated in Figure 18.4.
The voiced source is not constant. Changes in vocal effort 
affect both the intensity of the source and its spectrum; the 
higher harmonics show a higher relative intensity as vocal 
effort increases. Changes in the rate of vibration of the vocal 
folds provide the basis for our perception of changes in the 
pitch of the voice, which is one important element in the per­
ception of spoken messages. Raised pitch can mark important 
information, and rising pitch in English is often used to indicate 
that a sentence is intended as a question rather than a state­
ment. The range of vocal fold vibration frequency varies with 
age and sex, and also between individuals (Table 18.1). The 
vocal fold vibration rate is termed voice fundamental frequency, 
which can be abbreviated as F0.
Aperiodic (‘voiceless’) excitation
A second acoustic source in speech production arises when 
the vocal tract is configured to form a narrow constriction, as 
when the tongue is placed close to the roof of the mouth to pro­
duce the sound of the first consonant in ‘she’ (Figure 18.5). 
Here, air is forced to rush through a constriction in the vocal 
tract. For a sufficiently small constriction and sufficiently high 
rate of air flow, turbulence develops in the flow, generating ran­
dom noise with substantial high-frequency energy. Much as 
with voiced excitation, the vocal tract shape modifies the spec­
trum of this noise, depending on the location of the constric­
tion in the vocal tract. The resonances of the cavity between
Glottal
source
spectrum
Vocal tract
Oral
+
frequency
=
output
response
spectrum
<
e>
/ V / 'V x  1
E<
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 18.4 The source-filter model for the production of a vowel. The three 
spectra shown here represent: on the left, a typical spectrum for the voiced 
source generated by vocal fold vibration; in the centre, a frequency response 
arising from the resonances of the vocal tract; and to the right, the resulting 
speech spectrum. The speech spectrum results from applying the frequency- 
dependent gain of the vocal tract to the glottal source. Here, four vocal tract 
resonances or formants are shown (F, to F4, covering a frequency range up to 
about 4000 Hz).
Table 18.1 Typical voice fundamental frequency ranges.
Talker 
Typical frequency range (Hz)
Adult mate 
Adult female 
Child (age 10) 
Infant (12 months)
85-155
165-255
208-259
247-410
Figure 18.5 Production of voiceless fricative /J/ as in ‘she’. The vocal tract 
configuration is shown in (a). The tongue is placed close to the roof of the 
mouth between the alveolar ridge and the soft palate. Air flowing from the 
lungs is forced through the narrow passages here and also further forward 
around the teeth, leading to turbulent air flow that generates noise. The 
spectrum of this noise source is shown in (b). In (c) is shown the vocal tract 
response, with one resonance at about 2.2 kHz, and another around 7 kHz. As in 
vowel production, the speech spectrum (d) is the result of the source spectrum 
being modified by the vocal tract response. (After Rosen and Howell. Signals and 
Systems for Speech and Hearing. London: Academic Press, 1991.3)
co 
0 
~o
c
S - 2 0
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Frequency (kHz)
  

312 
Audiology
the constriction and the lips primarily determine the prominent 
frequencies of the sound.
Patterns in spectral shape
The configuration of the articulating elements, the tongue, the 
lips, and the velar flap (which acts to open or close the nasal 
passages), controls the spectral shape of speech. It is the first 
three formants that change most significantly with changes of 
the position of the articulators. The values of these formants 
depend on vocal tract length as well as its configuration. The 
typical length of the vocal tract, from vocal folds to lips, is 14 
cm for women and 17 cm for men, and increases with age in 
children, with length at age 5 typically being 11 cm. Shorter 
vocal tracts result in proportionally higher formant values for a 
given vocal tract configuration. The nasal tract, when open, 
adds a further low-frequency resonance, the nasal formant.
Vowel production
Vowels are characterized by a slowly changing and open vocal 
tract configuration compared to the more rapid articulations in 
the production of consonants. Hence, vowels show a slowly 
changing formant structure. The vocal tract configurations for
Figure 18.6 Vocal tract configurations and spectra for three English vowels. 
Shown in (a) is the vowel in the word 'bee'. The tongue is in a high position 
towards the front of the mouth. The effect is that the lowest resonance, F1( is 
relatively low in frequency, while the next resonance, F2, is relatively high. Shown 
in (b) is the vowel in the word 'bar'. Here the tongue stays low and has a middle, 
rather than front or back position. F, is higher than for the vowel in 'bee', while F2 
is much lower. Finally, in (c) is shown the vowel in 'boo'. The tongue is high and 
has a back position in the mouth. Both F, and F2 are relatively low here. Notice 
that F, and F2 provide the main cues to vowel identity, while F3 has similar values 
in all three vowels. The absolute values of the formants will be higher for a 
woman than for a man, and higher still for a child. However, the relative values of 
the formants are determined by the vocal tract shape, and are unaffected by 
vocal tract length. The nasal tract is closed in all these vowels and is not shown.
three typical vowels, and the consequent speech spectra, are 
shown in Figure 18.6. Because of individual differences in 
vocal tract size, there are rather wide variations in the spectra 
of the same vowel produced by different talkers, as is shown in 
Figure 18.7. The English vowel system makes use only of oral 
tract resonances, with the velar flap normally being closed. 
Some languages, e.g. French, also make use of the nasal tract 
in the production of some ‘nasalized’ vowels.
Frequency of F, (kHz)
Figure 18.7 Each ellipse covers the range of typical values of F, and F2 for 
vowels in a sample of American English words. The enclosed areas show the 
range of these formant frequencies from a sample of 33 adult male, 28 adult 
female and 15 child talkers. Note that there is considerable variability, but only 
small areas of overlap. The higher extreme values of F, and F2 are attributable to 
the child talkers. (Redrawn from Peterson and Barney. J. Acoust Soc Am 1952;
24: 175-84.4)
Consonant production
Consonants involve relatively rapid movements of the articula­
tors. All consonants involve a short closure or constriction of 
the vocal tract, lasting for around 100-200 ms, at a characteris­
tic oral location. Consonants can be classified in terms of three 
articulatory features, place of articulation, voicing, and manner 
of articulation, which are sufficient to uniquely specify conso­
nant identity. The consonants of English are shown classified in 
this way in Table 18.2.
Place of articulation
The place of articulation of a consonant refers to the loca­
tion of the oral closure or constriction. Places of articulation 
that commonly occur in English consonants are set out in 
Table 18.3.
  

The auditory processing of speech 
313
Table 18.2 
The 24 consonants of standard British English. Example words are shown for each sound. The affricate consonants are 
essentially formed from a plosive followed by a fricative, e.g. /1/ followed by /J/t as the phonetic notation suggests.
Manner
Plosive
(obstruent)
Nasal stop
Fricative
Affricate
Voicing
+
+
Bilabial
b (by) 
p (pie)
m (my)
Labiodental 
Dental
v (vat) 
f (fct)
5 {this) 
0 (tfiin)
Place (from front to back) 
Alveolar 
Palatoalveolar
d (dip) 
t (tip)
n (nip)
z (zip) 
s (sip)
Palatal 
Velar 
Pharyngeal
g (gap) 
k (cap)
0 (sing)
3 (treasure) 
I (ship)
d3 (/udge) 
tj (chop)
h (/vip)
Approximant
w (war)
I (/awn) 
y (yawn)
r (raw)
Table 18.3 Places of articulation of English consonants.
Place of articulation 
Site of closure or constriction
Bilabial 
Upper and lower lip
Labiodental 
Upper incisors and lower lip
Dental 
Tongue tip and upper incisors
Alveolar 
Tongue tip and alveolar ridge
Palatoalveolar 
Tongue tip between alveolar ridge and 
palate
Palatal 
Tongue and soft palate
Velar 
Tongue and velum
Pharyngeal 
Constriction in the pharynx
Voicing and manner of articulation
All consonants are classified as either voiced ( + voicing in 
Table 18.2) or voiceless. Voiceless consonants are, throughout 
their duration, produced with only aperiodic voiceless excita­
tion. Voiced consonants involve primarily voiced excitation. 
Manner of articulation refers to the nature of the oral closure. 
This may be complete, as in the plosive consonants, or partial, 
as in the fricative and approximant manners. For the nasal 
manner, the oral tract is closed as for a plosive, but the nasal 
tract is opened by the raising of the velar flap. The patterning 
of voiced and voiceless excitation, and silence in the absence of 
excitation, play an important part in distinguishing consonants 
that differ in voicing and in manner of articulation. Further 
acoustic cues that distinguish between plosive, nasal and approx­
imant manners within the voiced consonants come from differ- 
ent characteristic patterns of vocal tract resonance associated 
with articulatory configuration during closure or constriction. 
Figure 18.8 shows spectrograms illustrating the acoustic differ­
ences that are associated with voicing and manner classes for 
six English alveolar consonants when these are produced 
between two vowels.
As the spectrogram shown in Figure 18.9 illustrates, speech 
is not delivered to the listener as a presegmented sequence of 
phonemes. The acoustic patterns in running speech are largely 
continuous. It is by no means clear that speech perception 
requires the listener to isolate each phonemic segment from the 
input. Rather, it may be that perceptual features of a sequence 
of phonemes are used to identify syllables or words.
Perceptual cues to the identity of the sounds making up 
the sequence are mostly contained in the dynamic changes in the 
acoustic signal. There are few invariant acoustic cues to the 
identity of consonants. Consonant manner and voicing features 
are broadly independent of context, and are conveyed by rela­
tively gross temporal and spectral features. However, the cues to 
consonant place of articulation are more subtle, and are pri­
marily carried in the context-dependent dynamic acoustic 
pattern of the transitions between consonants and surrounding 
vowels. Even in the case of isolated consonant-vowel sounds, 
the cues that identify consonants are context-dependent. 
Figure 18.10 illustrates the context-dependent acoustic cues 
that distinguish the place of articulation of the voiced plosive 
consonants of English when followed by a vowel. While the 
acoustic characteristics of the vocal tract at the time of the con­
sonant closure are closely tied to place of articulation, there is 
typically little or no acoustic energy generated at this time. This 
is due to the onset of voiced excitation in typical English pro­
ductions of these voiced stops commencing 20-40 ms after the 
release of the closure. It is not until voicing begins that the for­
mant resonances become audible, and at this point, the vocal 
tract configuration is already changing towards that required for 
the following vowel.
These context-dependent cues to consonant place of artic­
ulation represent the variability of acoustic cues within a single 
talker. Since talkers vary in vocal tract size, the typical formant 
frequencies for vowels and also the starting values of the second 
formant for the different voiced plosives will also vary between 
talkers. The task of identifying plosive place of articulation thus
  

314 
Audiology
....
«
r l >
:
J t
t 
I
J P
■Hr
_  8
NX c
£ 4 
flj
d- 2
LL.
0
1 
I
+thK  
i
I___I___I___I___L_1__ t___I__ I— I— I 
I 
I___I___|_
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Time (100-ms units)
Voiced stop /adu/: Voiced excitation continues after the closure, 
although acoustic energy is low fn fevelr since the mouth is 
dosed. At release, there is a very brief burst of voiceless 
excitation as air pressure is released, and voicing resumes shortly 
after the release
Voiceless stop /utu/: Voicing ceases at closure, and does not 
resume untif around 80 ms after the release. From the release 
point until voicing commences, there is voiceless excitation
Voiceless fricative jusal: Voicing stops at the formation of the 
constriction, and resumes when the constriction is released. 
During the constriction, only voiceless excitation occurs
Voiced 
fricative 
/ozti/: Voicing 
continues 
through 
the 
constriction. Air flow through the constriction leads to voiceless 
excitation simultaneous with voicing
Voiced nasal stop /unci/: Voicing continues through the oral 
closure. During the oral closure the nasal tract is opened at the 
velum. There is primarily low-frequency energy during the orai 
closure, reflecting the characteristic resonances of the nasal tract
Voiced approximant /u!u/: Voicing is continuous. The oral tract 
is not completely closed; rather, the tip of the tongue contacts 
only the central region of the alveolar ridge. Unlike /n/r vowel­
like formant patterns are evident during the partial closure
Figure 18.8 Acoustic correlates of 
manner and voicing for six consonants 
having an alveolar place of articulation. 
Each spectrogram shows an alveolar 
consonant and the spectral transitions 
from a preceding vowel and into a 
following vowel. The level of grey in 
each spectrogram represents the 
amplitude on frequency and time 
coordinates. The vowel in each case is 
/a/ as in 'bar'. These are more or less 
typical examples of slowly articulated 
speech. The presence of voiced and 
voiceless excitation is indicated by 
raised and lowered bars (respectively) 
under each spectrogram. The arrows at 
the top of each panel indicate the 
points in time at which the oral closure 
or constriction begins and ends.
involves dealing with this between'talker variability as well as 
the vowehdependent variability in formant transitions.
Auditory processing of speech
The perception of speech depends on the extraction of 
dynamic patterns of spectral and temporal information 
from the acoustical input. While speech perception is 
assisted by the application of contextual linguistic infor­
mation, and, in some situations, by visible speech cues 
from the talker's face, auditory processing has a key role 
and is the primary aspect of speech perception that is 
influenced by postlingual hearing impairment.
Perceptual cues to the identity of vowels, and to manner 
and voicing features of consonants, are relatively robust 
and also relatively invariant for a given talker. However, 
cues to the place of articulation of consonants depend 
strongly on the surrounding speech sounds, and are often 
relatively weak and hard for hearing-impaired listeners to 
discern. Variations of vocal tract size between talkers lead 
additionally to substantial between-talker variability of 
the spectral features of speech.
  

The auditory processing of speech 
315
Vocal fold closure markers
200 r 
£  
150
U  
100
50 
+
aj
I  0
i/I
■ w!
a  _
6000
Voicing and F0 pattern
4
Speech pressure waveform 
/ p / a e  
/ 
t / 
3 / 
n 
/ z / i / n / s 
/ 
p 
/ 
i 
/
llll
400 
600 
800 
1000
iii__ i______t____Li______t_
1200 
1400
1600
Figure 18.10 Schematic spectrograms showing first (FJ and second (F2) formant 
resonances and their transitions from the initial consonants /bdg/ into the 
vowels /aiu/. Formant values during closure are shown at 0 ms. F: always starts at 
a low frequency, because the oral tract is initially closed. The starting frequency 
of F2 depends on the place of the oral closure. The bilabial closure of/b/ results in 
a low initial F2. The closure between the tongue and the alveolar ridge in /d/ leads 
to a mid initial F2, while the tongue-to-velum contact in /g/ leads to a relatively 
high initial F2. Both Fy and F2 move during the transition to the formant values 
characteristic of the following vowel. Because voiced excitation typically begins 
20 ms or more after the release of the closure, the starting frequency of F2 is rarely 
prominent in speech. Hence the listener must derive cues to place of closure from 
the audible context-dependent form of the F2 transition after voicing onset.
Figure 18.9 Spectrogram 
showing the phrase ‘patterns in 
speech'. The top panel marks the 
instants in time of larynx closure. 
Repeated larynx vibration 
produces voicing, as shown in the 
second panel. The rate of larynx 
closure determines fundamental 
frequency, which leads to a 
perception of pitch that changes 
through the phrase. Syllables 
that are accented or stressed 
show a raised pitch except where 
speech is voiced. Here the initial 
syllable of 'patterns' and the 
word ‘speech’ are accented. The 
phonetic annotation 
/paet3nz//in//spity shows the 
sequence of sounds located in 
time with the associated acoustic 
information. The more rapid 
acoustic changes occur for the 
consonants.
The frequency analysis and neural transduction processes of 
the auditory periphery lead to a spatiotemporal neural repre­
sentation of the speech spectrum. This encodes the energy 
across frequency tonotopically as a result of cochlear filtering. 
Within each neural frequency channel, the time pattern of 
nerve firing also preserves temporal features of the acoustic sig­
nal up to rates of 1000-1500 Hz. The spectral shape of a vowel 
will thus be represented in terms of the distribution of neural 
activity across the tonotopically organized auditory nerve 
bundles. The fundamental frequency of the vowel, and the 
frequency of harmonic components of a vowel within the Fi 
region, will also be represented temporally in the rate of firing 
(Figure 18.11).
The spatiotemporal encoding performed by the human 
peripheral auditory system is exquisitely well adapted to extract 
information from a world of multiple sound sources. In the real 
world, the task of auditory processing is far more complex than 
simply to transmit to the brain a representation of the acoustic 
cues to the sounds of speech. We rarely listen to speech in the 
absence of any other sound. Hence, auditory processing must 
also segregate the acoustic components that are produced by 
multiple sounds.
Hearing impairment limits access to the full range of 
auditory speech information, both from limited audi­
bility, and because of the reduction in auditory fre­
quency resolution that is associated with cochlear 
hearing loss.
  

316 
Audiology
Filter bandwidths over frequency
Input spectrum
x
-<
Filter output
500 H z)
'm ]|
- f - f  
U
f
n ------------ 1------------ 1------------r------------r
Time: 10 ms intervals
Filter centre frequency (kHz) 
Probability of nerve firing
yjvjvjv
“ I---------- 1---------- 1----------T---------- 1
Time: 10 ms intervals
Figure 18.11 Temporal and spatial auditory analysis. The figure shows the responses of selected auditory filter channels to a periodic signal with a 100 Hz 
fundamental frequency. The input spectrum is shown at top left. The top right panels shows the normal auditory filter bandwidth as a function of filter centre 
frequency as estimated from a formula given by Moore and Glasberg.7 The shaded area of this graph shows the range of harmonic components that will be 
resolved by auditory frequency analysis (as referred to the center frequency axis) over the voice fundamental frequency range (as referred to the bandwidth axis).
The lower part of the figure shows on the left the output waveforms of auditory filters centred at 100, 500, 1000, 2000 and 3000 Hz. To the right are 
representations of the time-varying probability of firing in the auditory nerve for the corresponding filter outputs (the neural response at 2 kHz is omitted for 
clarity). These were calculated from a computational model of transduction on the inner hair-cell (Meddis, Hewitt and Shackleton).8
The output level of each filter provides a spatial representation of the spectrum in terms of level across frequency. Because the filter bandwidths are 
approximately proportional to filter centre frequency, at higher centre frequencies the 100 Hz spacing between harmonics becomes small compared to filter 
bandwidth. Here the filter at 100 Hz shows a response that is dominated by a single harmonic, and this periodicity is very clearly preserved in the neural response. At 
1000 Hz and above, the filters respond to several harmonics within their bandwidth, and the temporal pattern of the filter output and the neural response is strongly 
linked to the fundamental frequency. The response at 500 Hz is intermediate, with the periodicity of the 5th harmonic at 500 Hz being the major component, while 
modulation at the fundamental frequency is also evident.
The spatial aspect of auditory coding of frequency derives from the dependence of nerve firing rate on the level of the output of each auditory filter. Firing rate 
will be relatively low in frequency channels that are remote from harmonic components of the input, and relatively high in channels tuned to frequencies near to 
those of the harmonic components. The encoding of level by firing rate is, however, limited by saturation of neural firing rate, so that this spatial coding will break 
down at very high input levels.
The temporal properties of the outputs of each filter are preserved in the timing pattern of auditory nerve activity. This is possible because auditory nerve 
responses tend to be synchronized to peaks of one polarity in the output waveform of the auditory filter, even when the rate of firing is saturated. The timing of 
neural activity in the 100 Hz channel will represent the 10 ms period of the signal. The neural activity in the 500 Hz channel is dominated by the 2 ms period of the 
harmonic at 500 Hz. Up to rates of 1000-1500 Hz, nerve activity is able encode the fine temporal structure of the filter output, which is determined primarily by the 
harmonic of the signal nearest to the filter centre frequency. In the higher frequency channels, for example at 3 kHz, the neural responses are dominated by the 10 
ms periodicity of the complex filter output, both because of the interaction of harmonics in the 3 kHz filter and because the periodicity of the individual interacting 
components is higher than the maximum rate at which the auditory nerve can fire.
  

The auditory processing of speech 
317
Effects of hearing loss on peripheral auditory 
processing
The spatiotemporal representation of acoustic input that 
is provided by the peripheral auditory system is remark­
ably well adapted to providing an auditory representation 
of speech information, even in the presence of noise and 
competing speech inputs*
In cochlear hearing impairment, peripheral auditory processing 
is affected in several ways. Most obvious is the loss of sensitivity 
as reflected in the pure tone audiogram. Accompanying this sen­
sitivity loss are two other aspects of impairment. One is a reduced 
dynamic range, so that even with amplification, the range of 
sound intensities that can be heard is reduced. Speech has a 
dynamic range of around 50 dB. In more severe hearing loss, the 
auditory dynamic range is often reduced to less than that of 
speech. As a result, the full range of speech levels can only be 
audible if a hearing aid compresses the range of speech levels. 
Figure 18.12 illustrates the dynamic range of speech in relation 
to audibility and the frequency regions of speech where audibil­
ity is of the greatest importance.
Auditory frequency analysis is at least as significant as audi­
bility for the processing of speech in everyday situations. In 
cochlear hearing impairments, the acuity of this analysis is sig­
nificantly reduced. For frequencies where hearing loss is severe, 
the sharpness of auditory frequency analysis can be reduced by a 
factor of two or three,5 and where the loss is profound, this capa­
bility can be completely lost.6 The normal ear has the use of some 
25 auditory frequency channels over the frequency range up to
5 kHz, where the bulk of speech information lies. These filters are 
rather sharply tuned at lower frequencies, and become broader as 
frequency increases (Figure 18.11). This degree of auditory fre­
quency analysis allows the ear to resolve the spectral structures of 
speech that are associated with the first few formants. It also per­
mits representations of the temporal details within each fre­
quency channel of the acoustic input. For voiced speech, the 
temporal information conveyed depends on the relationship 
between the filter frequency and the voice fundamental 
frequency. Lower-frequency harmonic components of voiced 
speech in the quiet will be individually resolved, and the tem­
poral details will represent the frequency of the harmonic 
component. Higher-frequency harmonic components will lie at 
frequencies where the filter bandwidth is broad compared to the 
fundamental frequency, and hence two or more harmonic com­
ponents will pass through the filter. In this case, the temporal 
details will tend to follow the fundamental frequency.
The importance of auditory frequency 
resolution in speech perception
Understanding speech from one talker in the presence of a 
fairly constant background noise, e.g. from office machinery, or 
engine and road noise in a moving vehicle, makes considerable 
demands on auditory frequency resolution. The auditory filter­
ing of the normal ear is able to preserve important spectral 
features of speech in the presence of noise. With the broader 
filters associated with cochlear hearing loss, this ability is 
markedly impaired (Figure 18.13).
Impaired auditory filtering in itself has relatively modest 
effects on the perception of speech in ideal quiet conditions. 
However, it does lead to difficulties in the perception of conso­
nants, where the relatively subtle spectral cues to place of artic­
ulation become obscured, as do the frequencies of closely spaced 
vowel formants. Impaired frequency resolution leads to
Frequency (kHz)
Figure 18.12 The shaded area in the lower panel represents the dynamic range 
of speech over frequency. Levels are shown relative to the normal threshold of 
hearing. The area between the two curves in the lower panel represents the range 
of audible levels over frequency for a typical sloping hearing loss. The portion of 
the shaded area within this is the audible part of the dynamic range of speech 
given this hearing loss and without a hearing aid. One important objective of 
fitting a hearing aid is to adjust the gain and compression over frequency so as to 
maximize the audibility of speech over the widest possible frequency range. The 
upper panel shows weightings derived from Articulation Index theory. These 
'frequency importance functions' indicate the relative importance of the 
audibility of different frequency regions of speech for intelligibility. The symbols 
represent different types of speech materials (NU6 words, SPIN sentences and 
prose passages: ANSI).9 At frequencies of high importance, it is especially helpful 
to maximize the audibility of the full dynamic range of speech.
  

318 
Audiology
Impaired excitation pattern 
Normal excitation pattern 
...ill Acoustic spectrum
F\ 
F2 
F2
50
40
30
20
10
0
50
40
30
20
10
0
iL
0 
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
50
40
30
20
10
0
j
J
50 |
1
1 
40
W
L
m L
i n i l
L 
1 
, l l l l i  
3 0
k
i
I
b
u
 
2 0
™ 
’ r 
"I| P |
p
i
f
f
 
■
—
,—
L
 
o 
.
0 
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 
Frequency (Hz)
Vowel (if as in 'bee'
0 
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 
Frequency (Hz)
Vowel /a/ as in ’bar'
Figure 18.13 Acoustic spectra and auditory excitation patterns of two vowels 
in quiet and in noise. Excitation patterns are shown for the auditory filtering of 
normal hearing and for filtering with auditory filters three times broader than 
normal, such as might result from a severe hearing loss across all frequencies. 
The excitation pattern shows the output of a series of auditory filters, plotted 
against filter centre frequency. It shows the auditory representation of the 
spectrum on the basis of the spatial cochlear representation of level against 
frequency. The upper two panels represent the vowel in quiet; in the lower 
panels, the speech level is only 6 dB above that of the background noise. In 
quiet, the excitation pattern from normal filtering can be seen to resolve the 
lower harmonics of each vowel, and all three formants. The broader filters lead 
to an excitation pattern in quiet that blurs together closely spaced formants 
(F2 and F3 in /i/, and F] and F2 in /a/. In noise, the formants are still discernible 
from the normal excitation pattern, but with broadened filters, the higher 
formants are becoming obscured.
markedly greater disruption by noise than that seen with nor­
mal filtering. Several studies have examined the effects of noise 
and the reduction of spectral information that is a consequence 
of broader auditory filters (Figure 18.14).
Impaired frequency resolution has pronounced effects on 
the ability to process speech in the presence of other 
sounds, and also leads to difficulties in the perception of 
the more subtle and rapid spectral cues to consonant 
place of articulation.
Speech^like background noise
It is when background sounds have acoustic features similar to 
speech, or when the background sounds are themselves speech, 
that the full power of auditory processing comes into its own. 
Here, slowly changing characteristics of a sound source, such as 
the pitch of a talker’s voice, or the direction from which the 
voice comes, are key features that allow the listener to attach 
the acoustic components of the desired source to a single per- 
ceptual object.
The role of pitch in the segregation of multiple acoustic 
sources can be illustrated by the identification of two simulta- 
neously heard vowels.10 The spatiotemporal auditory represen­
tation of sound allows components that are evident in the 
auditory representation to be associated together by virtue of 
shared temporal characteristics. Here, auditory processing is 
able to group together harmonics that share a common funda- 
mental frequency. When two simultaneous vowels are produced 
with differing fundamental frequencies, they are heard as two 
distinct sounds with differing pitches, and at least one, and 
often both vowels can be identified. When two simultaneous 
vowels share the same fundamental frequency, a single sound is 
heard, and neither vowel can be identified (Figure 18.15).
Speech-processing prostheses
Hearing aids of the future are likely to incorporate far more 
intelligent processing than current aids. Most hearing aids of 
today are essentially amplifiers, with the degree of amplifica­
tion, and perhaps the compression of the signal, controlled over 
frequency. These aids can compensate for loss of sensitivity, and 
can accommodate the wide dynamic range of sounds to the 
limited range of sound levels that are audible for many impaired 
listeners. This can achieve a goal of maximizing the audibility 
of speech. But ensuring audibility over the widest possible range 
of frequency and intensity does not always ensure that speech 
information can be analysed; such prostheses cannot compen­
sate for the impairment of frequency-analysing ability that 
accompanies more severe hearing loss.
Research efforts have been directed at hearing aids that 
provide analysis within the prosthesis itself, so that the signal 
delivered to the impaired ear makes fewer demands on auditory 
processing. A number of approaches have been explored. All 
have the aim of selecting the desired information, that which 
carries cues to the wanted spoken message, and thus eliminat­
ing other sound that would interfere with the impaired listener’s 
perception. One of the major difficulties in such developments 
is to determine a heuristic or algorithm that can identify the 
desired information in real environments. This area of research 
has so far proved to have a rather low yield in the development 
of improved commercial hearing aids. A comprehensive review 
of this area in 1991 concluded that, despite many varied 
attempts, the conventional hearing aid was likely to be the 
most effective prosthesis for the foreseeable future.11 There has 
not been dramatic progress since then. However, our increasing
  

The auditory processing of speech 
319
18 
24 Quiet" 18 ~ 12 " 6
Quiet
Quiet
Speech-to-noise ratio (dB)
Accuracy of 
consonant recognition
♦ Speech
#  16 bands 
▲ 12 bands 
O  8 bands 
O 4 bands 
A  3 bands
Discourse rate
Accuracy of 
vowel recognition
Figure 18.14 Effects of reduced spectral resolution and speech-to-noise ratio on speech perception. All of these data are from studies in normally hearing listeners 
in conditions that simulate the limited spectral resolution of a cochlear implant. Here spectral resolution is reduced by presenting speech spectra processed through a 
small number of filter bands covering the speech frequency range. Within each band, all spectral detail is lost, and only the changes over time in speech level 
averaged over the whole of a given band are presented to the listener. The data here are for the identification of vowels and consonants,14 and for a task requiring 
the listener to repeat back correctly connected speech, and which measures rate of communication.15 One remarkable aspect of these data is the relatively good 
perception that is possible in quiet with only a small number of filter bands; the normal ear has approximately 25 auditory filter bands in the frequency range up to 
5 kHz. Increasing levels of background noise lead to poorer scores. With reduced spectral resolution, levels of noise that would be innocuous for unprocessed speech 
have severe effects on perception.
understanding of the human auditory processing of speech can 
be expected to lead to more sophisticated and ‘human-like’ pro­
cessing methods.
Directional aids
Directional hearing aids make use of single or multiple micro­
phones to selectively reduce the level of all sounds that do not 
come from a selected location. The aid user can select the 
desired sound source by head movement, most naturally by 
turning to face the source of the sound he wishes to listen to.
Noise-cancelling aids
These incorporate signal processing designed first to determine 
the characteristics of lower-level continuous sound, on the 
assumption that this is background noise. The second process­
ing stage shapes the frequency response of a filter to reduce the 
levels of those frequencies that predominate in this back­
ground. When the wanted signal has a sufficiently different 
spectrum to the continuous background, the signal-to-noise 
ratio can be significantly enhanced.
Speech-enhancing aids
A related approach to that used in noise-cancelling aids aims to 
enhance frequency regions where wanted information is 
assumed to lie. For example, Simpson et al12 described a form of 
processing modelled on the auditory frequency analysis of the 
ear. Here the processing involves analysis of the input through
a series of filter bands. Spectral peaks in the signal are identified 
from the output of these filters. Then, frequency regions where 
spectral peaks are absent are reduced in level. This can give sig­
nificant, although relatively small, advantages in intelligibility 
for speech in noise.13
Pattern-extracting aids
A more radical and forward-looking approach would be to 
identify acoustic features that are known to be important. 
Rather than filter the signal to reduce noise, a noise-free sig­
nal could be synthesized that contains only the selected infor­
mation. It is well beyond the capability of current computer 
speech recognition methods to recognize all of the auditory 
cues required to support the perception of speech. It has, how­
ever, proved possible to apply this approach to the special case 
of auditory-visual speech perception. Here, visible speech- 
reading information from the talker’s lips and face provides 
cues that are highly correlated with the spectral speech cues 
that are in accessible to listeners with more extreme hearing 
losses. Speech reading can be substantially supported by mini­
mal auditory information, representing invisible components 
of speech such as the presence of voicing and the pitch of the 
voice. Noise-resistant speech analysis methods are available 
that can detect voicing and measure the pitch of speech. By 
generating a simple acoustic tone containing this information, 
an experimental prosthesis has been shown to be more effec­
tive for the audiovisual perception of speech in noise than a
simple amplifying aid for some profoundly hearing impaired
16
persons.
  

320 
Audiology
Figure 18.15 (a) shows the spectral components present when two simplified 
vowel sounds are present together. The two vowels are /i/, with a fundamental 
frequency of 110 Hz, and /a/ with a 165-Hz fundamental frequency. The line 
drawn across the top of the higher-level spectral peaks represents the overall 
shape or 'envelope' of the spectrum. This spectral envelope cannot be readily 
recognized as the sum of two vowels; the two lower peaks could indicate a /u/ 
vowel, for example. In (b) the harmonic components are segregated by 
fundamental frequency (note that at some frequencies, 330, 660,990 and higher 
multiples of 330 Hz, harmonics of both vowels exist at the same frequency, and 
cannot be segregated in this way). The grey and black spectral envelopes, derived 
from the segregated harmonics, indicate clearly the characteristic formant peaks 
of the /i/ and /a/ vowels. It appears that it is the ability of the auditory system to 
derive pitch information from the temporal responses to different components of 
these two sounds across frequency that is crucial to the segregation of vowels 
according to pitch. The reader should note that this figure does not represent the 
spectral resolution limits of the ear. As is shown in Figure 18.13, the normal ear is 
able to resolve only the lower harmonics of a typical vowel, and an impaired ear 
will show still more limited spectral resolution.
Future developments
Digital technology in hearing aids brings with it the possibility 
of processing that is enormously more sophisticated than that 
possible in analogue hearing aids. The application of processing 
methods based on an understanding of normal auditory pro­
cessing, and of cues essential in speech perception, has great 
potential for providing prostheses that do much more than 
maximize audibility. Advances in our understanding of normal 
perceptual processes are still required to achieve this goal, and 
this will remain a vital area of research. In parallel, miniature 
signal processor units that can fit in a hearing aid are becoming
increasingly powerful and may in the near future be capable of 
performing ‘auditory’ processing similar to that carried out by 
the human auditory periphery.
Acknowledgements
The author wishes to thank Laryngograph Ltd for permission to 
reproduce stroboscopic images of the vocal folds, and Stuart 
Rosen for helpful suggestions on the manuscript.
References
1. Boothroyd A. Signal processing for the profoundly deaf. A eta Oto­
laryngol (Stockh) 1990; Suppl 469: 166-71.
2. Baken RJ. Clinical Measurement of Speech and Voice. London: 
Taylor & Francis, 1987.
3. Rosen S, Howell P. Signals and Systems for Speech and Hearing. 
London: Academic Press, 1991.
4. Peterson GE, Barney HL. Control methods used in a study of 
vowels. J Acoust Soc Am 1952; 24: 175-84.
5. Moore BCJ. Cochlear Hearing Loss. London: Whurr, 1998.
6. Faulkner A, Rosen S, Moore BCJ. Residual frequency selectivity 
in the profoundly hearing impaired listener. BrJ Audiol 1990; 24: 
381-92.
7. Moore BCJ, Glasberg BR. Suggested formulae for calculating 
auditory-filter bandwidths and excitation patterns. J Acoust Soc 
Am 1983; 74: 750-3.
8. Meddis R, Hewitt MJ, Shackleton TM. Implementation details of 
a computational model of the inner hair-cell auditory-nerve 
synapse. J Acoustic Soc Am 1990; 87: 1813-16.
9. ANSI. Draft ANSI standard for calculation of the Speech Intelli­
gibility Index 1511 formerly the Articulation Index (Al) Accred­
ited Standards Committee S3, Bioacoustics.
10. Assman PF, Summerfield Q. Modeling the perception of concur­
rent vowels: vowels with different fundamental frequencies. J 
Acoust Soc Am 1990; 88: 680-97.
11. Watson CS. Speech-perception aids for hearing-impaired peo­
ple—current status and needed research. J Acoust Soc Am 1991; 
90: 637-85.
12. Simpson AM, Moore BCJ, Glasberg BR. Spectral enhancement to 
improve the intelligibility of speech in noise for hearing-impaired 
listeners. Acta Oto-laryngol (Stockh), 1990: Suppl. 469; 101-7.
13. Baer T, Moore BCJ, Gatehouse S. Spectral contrast enhancement 
of speech in noise for listeners with sensorineural hearing impair­
ment—effects on intelligibility, quality, and response-times. J 
Rehabil Res Dev 1993; 30: 49-72.
14. Fu Q-J, Shannon RV, Wang X. Effects of noise and spectral reso­
lution on vowel and consonant recognition: acoustic and electric 
hearing. J A coust Soc Am 1998; 104: 3586-96.
15. Faulkner A, Rosen S, Wilkinson L. Effects of the number of chan­
nels and speech-to-noise ratio on rate of connected discourse 
tracking through a simulated cochlear implant speech processor. 
Ear Hear 2001; 22: 431-8.
  

The auditory processing of speech 
321
16. Faulkner A, van Son N, Beijk C. The TIDE project OSCAR. 
Scand Audiol 1997; 26(suppl 47): 38-44.
Further Reading
Moore BCJ. Cochlear Hearing Loss. London: Whurr, 1998.
Pickett JM. The Acoustics of Speech Communication: Fundamentals, 
Speech Perception Theory, and Technology. Boston: Allyn and 
Bacon, 1999.
Plant G, Spens KE (eds). Profound Deafness and Speech Communication.
London: Whurr, 1995.
Tyler RS (ed.). Cochlear Implants: Audiological Foundations. San Diego: 
Singular Publishing Group, 1993.
  

I
a  Speech and language
■ development in 
normally hearing and 
hearing-impaired 
children
Emily A Tobey, Beth Morchower Douek
Introduction
One of the first questions you will be asked by a parent whose 
child has been newly diagnosed with a hearing impairment is, 
‘Will my child be able to learn to talk or will my child need to 
learn sign language or another means of communicating?’ The 
objectives of this chapter are to provide a broad review of the 
processes involved in the development of normal speech and 
language and to highlight how these processes are influenced by 
the presence of a hearing impairment. The chapter is designed 
to provide you with information to recognize the speech and 
language patterns of a child with a hearing impairment, give 
you strategies to enhance the development of speech and lan­
guage skills, and provide advice you may give parents of chil­
dren with hearing impairments to involve them in developing 
the speech and language of their child.
Parental concern regarding the future communication status 
of their child with a hearing impairment must be addressed by 
professionals. Professionals should be prepared to discuss differ­
ent modes of communication and their outcomes on oral com­
munication. In addition, it will be important for professionals to 
recognize the patterns of development in speech and language 
for children with hearing impairment and provide suggestions to 
allow parents to enhance the opportunities for their child to 
develop language and oral speech skills. The following sections 
will review key aspects associated with the development of oral 
language skills in children with hearing impairments.
Early identification and later 
language development
Several investigators1 suggest that there is a critical or sensitive 
period when children are best able to learn language. The 
actual length of this critical period is controversial. Some indi­
viduals believe that the critical period starts at birth, and other 
individuals argue it starts some time within the first year of life. 
The conclusion of a critical period also is controversial, with 
some individuals suggesting that the period ends at a young age 
and other individuals suggesting that the period extends into 
puberty. A growing body of literature suggests that early and 
appropriate management of a hearing loss via conventional 
hearing aids or assistive sensory devices, such as cochlear 
implants, tactile aids, or frequency modulated (FM) systems, 
is essential if young children are to maximize their potential 
for developing language and communication skills during this 
critical period.
Available evidence suggests that early identification and 
amplification positively impacts on later language develop­
ment.2 As shown in Figure 19.1, children with normal cognitive 
abilities whose hearing losses are identified by 6 months of age 
demonstrate significantly higher language abilities at 30 and 36 
months of age than children whose hearing losses are identified 
after 6 months of age.2 By 36 months of age, children whose 
hearing losses are not identified until after 6 months of age

324 
Audiology
■ Identified by 6 months 
□ Identified after 6 months
13-18 
19-24 
25-30 
31-36
Age (Months)
Figure 19.1 Mean language quotients for children identified with a hearing 
loss before 6 months of age and after 6 months of age are shown when the 
children are tested at older chronological ages. Language scores are significantly 
higher in children who are identified with a hearing loss and habilitated during 
the first 6 months of age than for children identified between 6 months and 1 
year, suggesting that early identification and treatment of a hearing loss has a 
positive impact on language. (Adapted from Yoshinaga-ltano et al. Pediatrics 
1998; 120(5): 1161-71.2)
show significant gaps between their cognitive and language 
abilities.2 A cognitive-linguistic gap may affect later academic 
performance, since several studies demonstrate discrepancies 
between academic performance and verbal intelligence scores 
in hearing-impaired children whose hearing losses are not 
detected early. Figure 19.2 shows that even a mild hearing loss 
is a concern; children identified within the first 6 months of age 
demonstrate better language performance than children identi­
fied after 6 months, regardless of the severity level of hearing 
loss. Collectively, these findings suggest that the cognitive-lin­
guistic gaps seen in children of elementary school age with 
hearing losses may originate within the first year of life. More­
over, it appears that the size of the gap may be significantly 
reduced if identification and amplification occur in the first 6 
months of life.
Parental reports may be used to assist in the early detection 
of hearing loss. Table 19.1 provides examples of questions 
which may be asked to help determine how well young children 
are communicating and whether they are meeting important 
communication milestones. Failure to reach these milestones 
by the months indicated requires referral to ensure that the 
infant or young child does not have a hearing impairment 
which would adversely influence his ability to develop effective 
communication skills. It also requires follow-up to ensure that, 
if a hearing loss is detected, a child will receive the appropriate 
amplification as early as possible.
In addition to the age of identification and amplification, it 
appears that the severity of the hearing impairment also affects 
the development of speech and language. However, although 
many articles are available which describe the abnormal behav­
iors of profoundly hearing-impaired children, there are far fewer
■ Identified by 6 months 
□ Identified after 6 months
100
13-18 
19-24 
25-30 
31-36
Age (Months)
Figure 19.2 Mean language quotients for children identified with a hearing 
loss before 6 months of age and after 6 months of age are shown for children 
with differing degrees of hearing loss. It can be seen that significantly higher 
language scores are observed for children who are identified within the first 6 
months of life, regardless of the amount of loss experienced by the children. 
Differences in language performance are particularly evident for children who 
experience severe or profound hearing impairments. (Adapted from Yoshinaga- 
ltano et al. Pediatrics 1998; 120(5): 1161-71.2)
articles discussing the characteristics of children with mild, 
moderate or severe hearing losses. Therefore, this chapter pri­
marily refers to findings from studies which examine the devel­
opment of children with profound hearing losses. To 
understand how hearing impairment influences the develop­
ment of oral speech and language, normal development of com­
munication throughout childhood must be considered.
What is meant by communication?
Communication may take many forms, and human communi­
cation is particularly inventive. Even normally hearing individ­
uals convey important ideas from one person to another person 
in many different ways by using facial gestures, gestures of the 
body, and oral speech. Generally speaking, the role of a speaker 
is to generate an idea, determine the appropriate linguistic 
properties needed to convey the idea to a listener, marshal the 
requisite physiological entities to produce specific changes to 
the air-filled cavities of the vocal tract, and produce an acousti­
cal output. In addition, the speaker may accentuate the message 
with facial or body gestures. The listener, in turn, receives the 
visual and acoustical signals by transforming them into physio­
logical signals which may be interpreted by the brain to render 
the original idea intended by the speaker.
When children acquire a language, they acquire the ability 
to take an idea that is internal and private to them and make it 
external for others to share. Language has three components: 
form, content, and use.3 Language form refers to the shapes of 
words and sentences -  the way language sounds when it is spoken 
-o r the way it looks in sign languages or gestures. Content
  

Speech and language development in normally hearing and hearing-impaired children 
325
Table 19,1 
Key milestones of communication duing the first year of life: a guide for doctors
Age (months)
Question
1
When did your baby first startle to a sound?
1.5
When did your baby smile at you when you talked or played with them?
3
When did your baby start cooing and producing long vowels?
4
When did your baby turn to you when you spoke to them?
5
When did your baby start saying [goo, ah, goo]?
5
When did your baby give you a raspberry?
5
When did your baby start squealing and growling while talking?
11
When did your baby start saying [dadadad] or [mamamam]?
describes what the words and sentences mean, and use of lan­
guage refers to how we influence the thoughts and actions of 
other people. The uses of language are numerous and include: 
sending and receiving information, influencing the thoughts 
and actions of other people, and providing instructions regard­
ing how to accomplish something.
Language may be expressed and received in many different 
ways. These are referred to as modes, or forms of communica­
tion when talking about the expression of language in individ­
uals with hearing losses. Modes of communication fall into two 
broad categories: those which emphasize gestures/signs, and 
those which emphasize oral speech. Although these two broad 
classifications are most commonly used, each of the classifica­
tions has several different ways in which language may be 
expressed, as shown in Table 19.2.
Expression and reception of language through signs or ges­
tures may involve formal sign languages, such as American 
Sign Language (ASL) or French Sign Language (FSL). Differ­
ent countries and languages have different formal sign lan­
guages. In such instances, the formal sign language has 
vocabulary and grammatical features which are unique to it 
and do not follow the rules associated with the vocabulary and 
grammar of the spoken language. Conversely, simultaneous 
communication or total communication refers to a spoken lan­
guage accompanied by signs presented in the spoken word 
order. In some instances, speech may be emphasized in the 
message and in other instances, the sign may be emphasized. 
In the USA, these modes are referred to as manual coding of 
English, and may include a variety of methods, including the 
Rochester method, Seeing Essential English, and Signing 
Exact English.
Communication modes which focus more on conveying lan­
guage via listening and speaking are referred to as oral methods. 
There are several different modes of communicating via listen­
ing and talking. Individuals who express and receive language 
concepts via an auditory-verbal mode of communication are 
encouraged to listen and speak. Lipreading is not emphasized, in
Table 19.2 
Modes of communication for children with hear­
ing impairments
Auditory-verbal
Auditory-oral 
Cued speech
Total communication 
Sign language
Child taught to maximize and rely on 
the use of residual hearing. No 
additional gestural system used, 
Reading lips not taught.
Child taught to use residual hearing 
with visual cues such as lip reading.
A gestural system used to emphasize 
the oral movements involved in 
speech production.
Both sign language and speech are 
used in parallel
Primary mode of communication is 
sign language without oral speech.
order to encourage a reliance on listening. Auditory-oral modes 
of communication differ from auditory-verbal modes by encour­
aging lipreading, as well as listening and speaking, in order to 
convey language. Cued speech refers to a method of conveying 
language by speaking accompanied by hand signals near the face 
intended to aid in lipreading. The hand gestures provide cues 
regarding aspects of the oral signal which are not visible, e.g., 
when a sound is voiced (involving laryngeal vibration) versus 
unvoiced (not involving laryngeal vibration).
Parents will need to make decisions regarding how they 
wish to convey language to their child with a hearing loss and 
how the child will convey language to them. This important 
decision may be guided by professionals. In the USA, 41.1% of 
deaf children are addressed using auditory methods, 56.1% of 
deaf children are addressed with simultaneous communication 
methods (speaking and signing), 1.9% of deaf children are 
addressed primarily with formal sign languages, and 0.5% of 
deaf children are addressed using cued speech. Distributions of
  

326 
Audiology
communication modes differ in different countries and lan­
guages. The remainder of this chapter will focus on the spoken 
language of children using either auditory methods or simulta­
neous communication methods, since it appears that the major­
ity of children with hearing losses may use these modes.
Speech and language patterns 
during infancy
Normally hearing babies undergo several stages of speech-like 
development, as shown in Table 19.3.4-7 During the first 2 
months of life, babies produce ‘comfort sounds’. These sounds 
appear to be the precursors to vowel production. Between 2 and
3 months, infants enter a ‘gooing’ stage. During this stage, they 
learn to articulate in the back of the mouth and, therefore, 
acquire a repertoire of vowel-like and ‘g-like’ sounds. Between
4 and 6 months, babies begin the ‘expansion’ stage, when they 
produce growls, yells, whispers, squeals, and isolated vowel-like 
sounds. Well-formed syllables appear between 7 and 10 months 
during the ‘canonical babbling’ stage. During this stage, the use 
of reduplicated sequences such as [mamamama] or [dadadada] 
begins. Reduplicated babbling is particularly important, since it 
signals the first use of adult-like syllables, paving the way for a 
child to develop his first words.
Early communicative efforts of profoundly hearing-impaired 
or deaf infants parallel those of normally hearing infants in sev­
eral stages; however, deaf babies do not achieve the reduplicated 
or canonical babbling stage at the same time as normal babies. As 
shown in Figure 19.3, deaf babies do not approach the canonical 
babbling period until at least 11 months and some individuals do 
not obtain reduplicated syllables until 2.5 years of age or later.4 
Thus, all professionals should suspect that a baby may be deaf or 
have a significant hearing impairment if the parents report that 
their child is not trying to say vocal sequences like [mamama] or 
[dadada] by 11 months of age.
Early amplification appears to positively affect the develop­
ment of canonical babbling in infants with hearing impair­
ments, as shown in Figure 19.4. Placing hearing aids on young 
infants with hearing impairments increases the likelihood that 
they will begin the canonical babbling stage at an earlier age 
than if they remain unaided.4 Although these children still 
remain at risk for further delays in their communication devel­
opment, early amplification increases the likelihood of achiev­
ing the reduplicated sequences necessary to build the 
foundation of early words.
Speech and language patterns 
post-infancy
Speech and language developmental milestones after infancy 
are often described in terms of the following subcomponents: 
pragmatics, semantics, syntax, suprasegmentals, morphology, 
and phonology. These important language components are 
shown in Table 19.4. Pragmatics refers to the use of verbal and 
non-verbal language for a purpose or intention. Semantics 
examines the use of words to create a shared meaning at the 
level of a word, phrase, sentence, paragraph, or conversation.
Figure 19.3 The number of infants who begin canonical babbling at various 
ages. It is important to note that all of the normally hearing babies initiate 
canonical babbling between 4 and 10 months of age; however, deaf babies do 
not begin to produce canonical babbling until 11 months of age. Indeed, many 
deaf babies do not begin to produce canonical babbling until 2 or 3 years of 
life. (Adapted from Eilers and Oiler. J Paediatrics 1994; 124(2): 199-203.4)
Table 19,3 
Key milestones of communication during the first year of life: a guide for parents
Age (months)
0-2 months: Phonation Stage
2-3 months: Gooing Stage
4 -6  months: Expansion Stage
7-10 months: Canonical Stage 
11-12 months: Variegated Babbling
Communication activity
Baby should produce 'comfort* sounds and coo with normal sounding vocalizations. A few 
utterances may sound Jvowel-like'
Baby should produce 'vowel-like1 sounds and some ’consonant-like’ sounds made in the back 
of the mouth.
Baby produces a variety of sounds including raspberries (labial trills), squeals, growls, yells, 
whispers, isolated vowel-like syllables.
Baby will say [bababa], [dadada], [mamama] or other reduplicated syllabic sequences.
Baby will produce gibberish speech with a wide variety of sounds and sequences.
  

Speech and language development in normally hearing and hearing-impaired children 
327
40
r
♦ Severe
□ Severe to Profound
co
30
-
A  Profound
A
s
HE
A
Q.
E
20
-
A
A
A
o
fijcn
<
10
o
-
AA  A A  
A  
A  A  
A  
A  
,♦ 
♦ 
,
A
A
A
t
<3
10 
20
30 
40
50
Onset of Canonical Babbling (months)
Figure 19.4 The age of amplification following the identification of a hearing 
loss is also important for speech behaviors. Babies who receive their hearing 
aids at early ages begin to produce canonical babbling at earlier ages, regardless 
of the severity of the hearing loss. (Adapted from Eilers and Oiler. J Paediatrics 
1994; 124(2): 199-203.4)
Syntax deals with the order or arrangement of words in phrases 
and sentences. Suprasegmentals include the variations in vol­
ume, pitch and stress across phrases and sentences. Morphology 
represents the smallest parts of words that carry meaning. 
Phonology is the study of sound structures and rules governing 
the pronunciation of words in a language. Each of these com­
ponents is discussed below with regard to the development of 
children with and without hearing impairments.
Pragmatics
Young children with normal hearing use both verbal and non­
verbal language with the intention to communicate before they 
have 
fully 
developed 
all 
sub-components 
of language. 
Speech-language pathologists refer to these behaviors as 
pragmatics, or the social use of language. Pragmatic behaviors 
include: making and maintaining eye contact, sharing visual 
attention, taking turns communicating, responding to commu­
nication, requesting or asking for an object, repeating words or 
phrases, and negating (denying or resisting a statement, request, 
or question). Pragmatic behaviors do not require vocalizations: 
for example, a young child may reach for a mother’s hand and 
lead her to the refrigerator if it wants a drink of juice or milk, or 
an adult may indicate difficulty in comprehension by means of 
arm postures and head turning.
Communicative intent, as represented by pragmatic behav­
iors, marks the beginning of a transition to the use of symbolic 
language. Therefore, preverbal communicative behaviors may 
provide important information about the communicative abili­
ties of young infants and children with hearing losses.8-12 Typi­
cally, early pragmatic behaviors are measured by engaging the 
parent and child in a play situation. Activities are video 
recorded and transcribed to determine how the children take 
turns in communicating, maintaining eye contact, and respond­
ing to communication attempts from the parents.2,13 Pragmatic 
behaviors are observed early in a child’s communicative life and 
lead the way for the development of other language processes.
Table 19.4 
Language components
Component 
Definition
Phonology 
The sounds of a language
Morphology 
The meaningful component of language
Syntax 
The grammar of a language
Semantics 
The meaning of language
Pragmatics 
The social use of language
Both normally hearing and hearing-impaired children 
appear to move from non-communicative vocal behaviors to 
intentional (communicative) gestures or behaviors, and finally 
to vocal behaviors with communicative intent.14,15 As they 
move from non-communicative behaviors into communication 
with intent, young children, including those with hearing 
losses, appear to develop spontaneous non-verbal requests for 
information or objects.2,16,17 Young children learn to non­
verbally acknowledge or protest requests from others, e.g., by 
shaking their head ‘no’. At later ages, children use symbolic 
representations of actions or objects. Such symbolic representa­
tions are demonstrated when children pretend they are drink­
ing, sleeping or hammering.13 Finally, children will use verbal 
communicative intents to gain attention or actions from others. 
Children with hearing impairments who do not have intelligi­
ble verbal behaviors typically pair their unintelligible verbaliza­
tions with non-verbal behaviors to increase the likelihood of 
successful communication. Figure 19.5 illustrates the various 
stages of preverbal to verbal behaviors commonly observed in
Observed 
Approximate Age 
Estimated
Vocal
of
Vocabulary
Activity
Appearance
Size
Vocal Play
3-5 months
Babbling
Jargon
7-12 mo.
1-3 words
Imitation
v !2 -1 8 m o ^
22 words
Phrases
2 years
274 words
Sentences
3 years
896 words
Paragraphs
4 years
1870 words
Nearly
5 years
2289 words
Correct Grammar
Figure 19.5 Development of communication involves many activities which 
develop at different time periods. The left-hand column details the various 
types of vocal behavior which occur in communication development. The center 
column indicates the approximate ages at which these behaviors occur in 
normally hearing children. The right-hand column indicates the growth in 
vocabulary size in speakers of English associated with the changes in 
chronological age.
  

328 
Audiology
young infants and toddlers. It can be seen that, as young chil­
dren expand their communicative intention behaviors, they 
learn to take turns communicating, increase their conversa­
tional skills, and develop paralinguistic and extralinguistic 
aspects of communication. Examples of the types of behaviors 
that parents can watch for which indicate pragmatic develop­
ment in children are shown in Table 19.5. Children with hear­
ing impairments, however, often fail to master these skills as 
fully or as quickly as children with normal hearing. However, 
when young children with hearing impairments receive inter­
vention, pragmatic behaviors may be the first linguistic behav­
iors to show measurable improvement. Parents should be 
encouraged to watch for these important stages of language 
development and to enhance the development of these stages 
by responding to their child’s intentions and providing language 
models.
Children with hearing impairments typically produce fewer 
meaningful communication acts than children with normal 
hearing.18 Such observations suggest that hearing-impaired 
children lag significantly behind their normally hearing peers, 
not only in the types of communicative functions they use, but 
also in the frequency with which they use the functions. The 
order of emergence for key communicative functions appears to 
be similar between normally hearing and hearing-impaired 
children. Thus, parents of hearing-impaired children may 
enhance the development of communication by encouraging 
verbal and non-verbal pragmatic behaviors.
Syntax and semantics
Two language subcomponents examine the roles of words or 
vocabulary. The order or arrangement of words in a phrase or
sentences is called syntax. Syntax examines the relationships 
of meaning within a sentence and across a series of sentences. 
Semantics refers to the meaning in language. Language meaning 
or semantics occurs at many levels, within words themselves, 
or across phrases, sentences, paragraphs, or conversations. As 
children develop, their use of syntax and semantics increases in 
complexity, allowing them to express their ideas using novel 
forms. A progression of vocal behaviors occurs developmentally, 
leading to the advanced use of language and speech. Children 
with hearing impairments may exhibit both syntactical and 
semantic delays in their verbal language. Despite these delays, 
children with profound hearing impairments may spontaneously 
develop gestural systems which contain syntactic and semantic 
elements by inventing special signs to represent meaningful 
items in their environment.
Suprasegmentals
Suprasegmentals are the melodic modulations of speech carried 
across entire phrases. Children produce suprasegmentals by 
varying the duration, pitch and loudness of syllables. Supraseg­
mentals vary widely in their use and significance across lan­
guages. Typically, suprasegmentals develop without instruction 
and are used to express emotion, change stress patterns or pro­
vide emphasis. Abnormal suprasegmentals are observed for 
children with hearing impairments when the children are 
unable to carefully control their pitch, loudness, and durations. 
Children with hearing losses may demonstrate excessively high 
pitches, very loud or soft speech, and long durations. Poor 
suprasegmental productions contribute to the reduced speech 
intelligibility commonly observed in children with hearing 
losses.
Table 19.5 
Key examples of pragmatic communication behaviors: a guide for parents
Paralinguistic behaviors
Your child should use pitch and loudness variations to gain your attention.
Your child should have an ease of vocalizations,
Extralinguistic behaviors
Your child should closely watch your face when you engage in conversation.
Your child should remain close to you when you engage in conversation.
Linguistic behaviors
Your child should comment, request, warn, assert, promise, direct and acknowledge you during comversation. 
Your child should learn to initiate and maintain a conversation.
Your child should learn to take a turn during talking.
Your child should learn how to repair a conversation by repeating or rewording.
Your child should learn to use pronouns and other parts of speech.
  

Speech and language development in normally hearing and hearing-impaired children 
329
Morphology
Another feature of language commonly examined in young 
children is morphology. A morpheme is the smallest unit of 
speech that carries meaning. In some instances, the root or base 
word is held constant and additional morphemes are added to 
create plurality or verb tenses. In English, for example, the 
morpheme ‘s’ can be added to change a word to its plural form. 
In other instances, new words are constructed by adding addi- 
tional word parts to a base word: for example, the morpheme 
‘fine’ can be modified by adding the morpheme ‘re’ to form 
‘refine’. This can be further altered by adding the morpheme 
‘ment’ to from ‘refinement’. Children with hearing impairments 
often produce morpheme errors, such as leaving the endings off 
the end of a word, which makes it difficult to tell what tense 
(past, present, or future) they are intending to use.
Phonology
Phonology is the study of sound structures and the rules gov- 
eming the pronunciation of words in a language. Between the 
ages of 2 and 6 years, children with normal hearing acquire the 
sounds of speech (phonemes) and use them to make the mean­
ingful contrasts necessary to form different words. Typically, 
vowels are achieved between the ages of 2 and 4 years, while 
the acquisition of consonants extends through later ages. Young 
children learn to produce consonants accurately in the initial 
positions of words first, and later learn to produce consonants 
accurately in the middle and at the end of words. Nasal (i.e. m, 
n) and oral (i.e. p, t, k, b, d, g) consonants are among the first 
consonants correctly produced by children. Fricatives or sibi­
lants (i.e. s, z, sh, zh) tend to appear around 5 years of age. The 
correct use of consonant combinations also occurs when chil­
dren are 5 and 6 years of age. Examples of the age of acquisition 
for English consonant sounds are shown in Table 19.6.
A study by Miskiel et al investigated sound acquisition in 
young preschoolers with normal hearing.19 Data from this study 
indicated that the overall ability of young children with normal 
hearing to correctly imitate sounds increased from 3 to 5 years 
of age. Generally speaking, the normally hearing children were 
most accurate at repeating sounds that varied in duration, 
pitch, or loudness. Vowels and single, simple consonants were 
the next most accurately imitated sounds, while consonant 
blends (i.e. multiple consonants) in initial and final positions 
were the least accurately imitated sounds. Thus, children grad­
ually acquire the motor and linguistic skills necessary to cor­
rectly produce the consonants and vowels of their language 
over a critical period that spans several years.
The variety of consonant sounds produced by normally 
hearing children increases as their sound repertoires increase; 
however, young children with profound hearing impairments 
tend to either maintain or reduce the number of consonants 
that they use as they get older. Children with profound hearing 
impairments frequently produce vowels and consonants with a 
number of errors.20-24 Substitutions of one sound for another,
Table 19.6 
Earliest appearance of consonant sounds correctly 
produced in 7 5%  of 208 children
Consonant sounds 
Age of appearance 
Age of appearance 
in initial position 
in final position of 
of words (years) 
words (years)
p
2
4
b
2
3
t
2
3
d
2
4
k
3
4
9
3
4
m
2
3
n
2
3
ng
-
3
h
2
-
s
6
5
z
5
3
f
3
3
V
5
5
sh
5
5
}
4
4
r
5
4
w
2
-
j
4
6
ch
5
4
Adapted from: Powers MH. Functional disorders of articulation/symptomatology 
and etiology. In Travis LE (ed.) Handbook of Speech Pathology and Audiology. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentiee-Hall, 1971.
omissions of sounds, distortions of sound and reduction of mul­
tiple consonants to a single consonant are commonly 
observed.25-27 Sounds made in the front of the mouth, which are 
more visible, are used more frequently than sounds made in the 
back of the mouth, which are not as visible. Errors associated 
with laryngeal voicing also contribute to the abnormal patterns; 
sometimes children with hearing losses substitute voiced sounds 
for voiceless sounds, and at other times they make the opposite 
mistakes. Children with profound hearing losses also appear to 
have difficulty in regulating air flow. This leads them to make 
errors such as substitutions of nasal for oral consonants. Studies 
also show that they produce vowels in the back of the mouth 
more accurately than in the front of the mouth.27,28 Children 
with profound hearing losses also make frequent errors on vow­
els produced high in the mouth, suggesting difficulties with 
tongue positioning.
Children with severe or profound hearing losses who 
receive training that relies on listening and talking demonstrate 
similar speech patterns to other profoundly hearing-impaired 
children. They tend to produce consonants in initial positions 
in words more accurately than sounds in final positions.29 
Geffner30 noted that the phonological system for children with 
profound hearing losses is governed by features related to inten­
sity, visibility and frequency, as demonstrated in Table 19.7. In
  

330 
Audiology
Table 19.7 
Source structure based on acoustic cues of English
Acoustic cue 
Sounds
Greater intensity 
Vowels
Less intensity 
Consonants
Low frequency 
Vowels
High frequency 
Consonants
High visibility 
Sounds made with lips and teeth
Low visibility 
Sounds made in the back of the mouth
this model of sound structure, children with hearing losses dis- 
tinguish sounds by relying on differences in their loudness, 
where they are made in the mouth, and how often they are used 
in a given language. She suggests that vowels are produced more 
accurately because of their intensity and visibility cues. Sounds 
made with the lips are more visible than sounds made with the 
soft palate, and contribute to the accuracy of some consonants.
Table 19.8 
Factors influencing speech intelligibility
Factor 
Examples
High context 
vs
low context
Short sentence 
vs
long sentence
Familiar listener
vs
unfamiliar listener
Key word may be guessed in The flag is red, 
white and blue!
Key word may NOT be guessed J The fat baby 
is crying'.
It is easier to understand longer sentences 
because additional words provide context. 
When speaker intelligibility is an issue, it may 
be easier to understand The flag is red, white 
and blue' than 'Keep quiet’.
A familiar listener may be more likely to 
understand a speaker than an unfamiliar 
listener. For example, a child's mother may 
understand that ‘Dede wa baba' means that 
Jeffery wants his blanket. An unfamiliar 
listener may interpret this as 'dedewababa' a 
totally meaningless utterance.
Speech intelligibility
Accuracy of sound production appears to be related to overall 
speech intelligibility.31-36 The more complex the sound or word 
structures are, as in combinations of multiple consonants or 
polysyllabic words, the less understandable is a speaker with a 
profound hearing loss.37 Poor production of consonant glides 
(i.e. 1, r, w) and affricatives (i.e. ch) also appears to contribute 
to low speech intelligibility scores.38 Degree of hearing loss also 
appears to influence overall speech intelligibility: the more 
severe the hearing loss, the less intelligible is a speaker.27,38'41
Measures of speech intelligibility offer special challenges 
to parents and doctors, as shown in Table 19.8. Several 
studies indicate that a listener who is familiar with the 
speech of a child with a hearing loss tends to judge that 
child’s speech as more intelligible than a listener who is unfa­
miliar with the child.26,27,37,42 Parents are more likely to under­
stand their child speaking than a stranger or a less familiar 
listener. 
Another factor that appears to influence overall 
speech intelligibility is the length of the sentences.37 Speech 
intelligibility is rated more accurately if longer sentences 
rather than shorter sentences are used; thus, children who are 
older and use longer sentences are usually rated more intelli­
gible than younger children who use shorter sentences. The 
context of the sentence also plays an important role. Listen­
ers are able to guess what an unintelligible speaker is saying 
if the sentence provides sufficient context. In assessing 
speech intelligibility, it is important to recognize that tests 
do not always provide a complete picture. For example, 
many tests of speech intelligibility require that a child listen 
and repeat a sentence or read and say a sentence out loud.
Figure 19.6 Several central factors contribute to the overall communication 
skills of a child. These factors include how much a child relies on speech for 
communication, how appropriate is a child's social use of language, how 
intelligible is a child’s speech to another individual, and how well a child 
clarifies and repairs a situation when communication breaks down. (Adapted 
from Kent. In: Kasser and Grey, eds. Enhancing Children's Communication. 
Baltimore MD: Paul 4 Brooks 1993: 233-9.43)
Such procedures may underestimate overall speech intelligi­
bility, since the child may have difficulty hearing the stimu­
lus sentence or may not be able to read.
As Figure 19.6 illustrates, speech intelligibility is related to 
overall oral communication skills in children with hearing 
losses. Children who experience high levels of intelligibility are 
rarely poor oral communicators.43 Poor oral communicators
  

Speech and language development in normally hearing and hearing-impaired children 
331
appear to rely less on spoken speech than good oral communi­
cators. With poor oral communicators, listeners often need to 
implement communication repair strategies such as requesting 
clarification. When children with hearing losses fail to use 
appropriate oral communication and repair strategies, they 
reduce their success in social use of language. Overall speech 
intelligibility may be a key limiting factor, and thus must be 
addressed directly. This should be done through specific inter­
vention designed to improve the intelligibility deficits within 
the overall framework of the child’s social use of language.43
Expressive and receptive spoken 
language in children with hearing 
impairments
The consequence of poor use of oral language in children with 
hearing losses has been documented in several studies.36,44,57 
Children with hearing losses are delayed in expressive vocabu­
lary, syntax, and morphological skills.58 Combining signing with 
spoken language does not appear to significantly improve spon­
taneous or imitated expressive language.56,59 Although there is 
considerable individual variation in language performance, 
children with hearing losses tend to be delayed in their verbal 
skills, academic achievement, and social development.57 These 
studies highlight the importance of providing children with 
hearing losses with good language models and encouraging the 
children to use spoken and gestural language even if it is not 
understood by listeners all of the time.
Hearing loss also appears to influence reading and writing 
skills. In the USA, the average reading level of 18-year-old ado­
lescents with profound hearing losses ranges between third- and 
fourth-grade levels.60 Literacy development appears to be 
related to at least three factors: severity of the hearing loss, early 
intervention, and spoken language skills. Geers and Moog61 
reported profoundly hearing-impaired high-school seniors who 
had been enrolled in either oral or mainstream high schools had 
reading levels commensurate with those of their peers. They 
concluded that the high levels of reading abilities in these chil­
dren were related to their good use of residual hearing, early 
amplification, and strong oral language abilities, specifically 
vocabulary, grammar and conversational skills. Many investiga­
tors have proposed that the development of reading skills in 
individuals with profound hearing losses may be directly linked 
to the development of early communication skills. Extra efforts 
will be needed to fully develop reading and writing skills in 
children with hearing impairments, particularly if the hearing 
impairment is not identified early. Parents should be encour­
aged to serve as ‘coaches’ for their children in developing these 
important skills. For example, parents should be encouraged to 
provide quiet times where books or toys serve as the focus of 
developing communication skills in their children who have 
hearing impairments.
Effects of assistive sensory devices 
on speech and language 
development in children with 
hearing impairments
As discussed earlier, early identification and intervention is 
important for children with hearing impairments. Technical 
intervention may be achieved by conventional hearing aids, 
FM devices, tactile aids or multichannel cochlear implants. 
Several studies have examined the speech and language devel­
opment in children with hearing impairments using such 
devices.20,24,62-71 In addition to early detection and amplifica­
tion, these studies have identified several variables that influ­
ence speech and language performance, including the type of 
assistive sensory device used, the length of assistive device use, 
and the mode of communication.
Initial studies compared the speech and language perfor­
mance in children with hearing impairments who used either 
conventional 
hearing 
aids, 
tactile 
aids, 
or 
cochlear 
implants.24,39,40,66-68,70-76 In some of the earliest studies, Osberger 
et al74 examined speech samples from children who used 
single-channel cochlear implants, multichannel cochlear 
implants or tactile aids. Comparisons of speech inventories 
before device use and following 1 year of experience with the 
devices indicated that the greatest number of speech sounds 
were produced by the children using multichannel cochlear 
implants, although all devices appear to influence sound emer­
gence to some extent.
Geers and co-workers66,69-71,76,77 also conducted a carefully 
controlled study examining the speech and language develop­
ment in children using different types of devices when the 
children were enrolled in an auditory-oral educational pro­
gram. In this study, children were matched on variables such 
as chronological age, age of hearing loss identification, intelli­
gence quotient, family support, and hearing profiles. Perfor­
mance over a 3-year time period demonstrated significant 
improvements in performance for children using cochlear 
implants relative to children using either tactile or conven­
tional hearing aids on many measures of speech production 
and perception. Receptive language scores were also signifi­
cantly higher for the children with cochlear implants than for 
the children who used only conventional hearing aids or tac­
tile aids. These results were particularly interesting when the 
rate of receptive language of the cochlear-implanted children 
was compared to norms collected on other hearing-impaired 
children. The cochlear implant children demonstrated scores 
that progressed from slightly above average to the 86th per­
centile in only a 3-year time period. Accuracy of sound pro­
duction also reflected differences across the three devices. 
Children with cochlear implants had higher percentage- 
correct sounds than the children using hearing aids or tactile 
aids.67 Three examples of speech production measures acquired
  

332 
Audiology
in children with hearing aids, tactile aids and cochlear 
implants are shown in Figure 19.7. The left-hand panel 
demonstrates the accuracy of sound production for vowels 
which are visible (produced in the front of the mouth), the 
middle panel illustrates the accuracy for producing fricative 
consonants, such as ‘s’, and the right-hand panel depicts the 
accuracy of consonants produced in the back of the mouth, 
which are not visible. The important point to notice is that all 
three groups at the beginning of the study, before children 
received their cochlear implant or tactile aid, had similar per­
formance. Experience with the devices over time demon­
strated more accurate performance for the cochlear-implanted 
children, although all children demonstrated benefit from 
their auditory-oral education.
Language acquisition studies continue to suggest that chil­
dren with cochlear implants outpace children with comparable 
hearing losses who use other types of assistive listening device. 
Miyamoto and co-workers78”80 found that prelingually deaf chil­
dren using cochlear implants equaled or exceeded normal lan­
guage growth as shown on the Reynell Developmental 
Language Scales. Comparisons of language-age equivalent 
scores at 6 and 15 months postoperatively exceeded predicted 
language scores determined from pre-implant performance, sug­
gesting that faster rates of language acquisition occurred post­
implantation. In addition, differences in scores between the 
predicted and acquired language equivalent scores were greater 
at 15 months than at 6 months postoperatively, suggesting that 
significant gains were made in language performance. Tomblin 
et al81 tracked 29 children with cochlear implants and found
syntax scores post-implant which were 20 points higher and 
greater than one standard deviation higher than in children 
using hearing aids. Later analyses revealed that performance 
was related to years of experience with a cochlear implant 
rather than chronological age, per se. These data provide fur­
ther evidence that information provided by a cochlear implant 
assists young children in acquiring oral language skills.
Length of experience of using a cochlear implant appears to 
be an important variable in examining how language is 
acquired in these children. More than half of the children 
exceeded the 95% prediction interval for their syntactic perfor­
mance after only 2 years of experience. These data suggest that 
children will demonstrate rapid and significant changes in lan­
guage development in the very early years of cochlear implant 
use and that failures to observe such language increases may sig­
nal that additional efforts should be directed towards a given 
child. Figure 19.8 illustrates another approach for examining 
language acquisition in cochlear-implanted children.82 The 
diagonal line across the graph indicates the language growth 
that might be expected from a normally hearing child. This line 
indicates that as a child increases in chronological age, a con­
comitant increase in expressive language age occurs. The low­
est line indicates the rate of expressive language gains found in 
profoundly hearing-impaired children who use hearing aids. 
The slope of this line indicates that these children fail to 
demonstrate expressive language gains comparable to those of 
normally hearing children. The gap between the performance
Figure 19.7 Accuracy of sound production is shown for three different groups 
of children with hearing losses using different types of sensory aid devices 
(hearing aids, tactile aids, and cochlear implants). All the children show 
improvement in the accuracy of their sound production over time; however, the 
greatest gains are seen for the children with cochlear implants. Examples of 
sound production for vowels are shown in the left-hand panel, fricatives (such 
as 's') are shown in the middle panel, and velar consonants (sounds made in the 
back of the mouth, such as *g') are shown in the right panel. (Adapted from 
Tobey et al. Volta Rev 1994; 96(5): 109-31.67)
Figure 19.8 Expressive language scores achieved at various chronological ages 
in normally hearing and hearing-impaired children. The diagonal line refers to 
the predicted change in expressive language age for normally hearing children 
of various ages. Data are also given for children with hearing aids and cochlear 
implants. Note that expressive language scores are routinely higher for children 
who receive their cochlear implants at early ages relative to children who 
receive their implants at later ages. (Adapted from Svirsky. Psychological Science 
2000; 11(2): 153-8.82)
84 
-  
Normally Hearing
_  60
Hearing Aid
_i__________i____ _____ i_________ i------------- 1__________i__________i
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
84 
96 
Age [Months)
Early Implanted
Later implanted
  

Speech and language development in normally hearing and hearing-impaired children 
333
levels increases over time, with significant differences in perfor­
mance clearly evident. Note that the slopes of the performance 
for the cochlear-implanted children are similar to the slope of 
the normally hearing children, indicating that the cochlear- 
implanted children are making language gains comparable to 
language gains made by the normally hearing children. More­
over, the gap in performance between normally hearing chil­
dren and cochlear-implanted children does not increase over 
time. These data suggest that cochlear implants provide valu­
able information that children may use to develop expressive 
language skills.
Techniques for enhancing oral 
communication in children with 
hearing losses
Several curricula have been developed to enhance the acqui­
sition of auditory, speech and language skills in children using 
cochlear implants. Each of these curricula may be adapted for 
children with a range of hearing losses and different assistive 
sensory aids. Each of the curricula develops auditory skills 
through detection, discrimination and identification tasks. 
Children are taught to detect when a sound is present or 
absent. Discrimination training concentrates on teaching chil­
dren to determine if sounds are similar or different. Identifica­
tion tasks work on expanding sounds and words that a child 
understands. Speech production is incorporated as a necessary 
ingredient for associating speaking and listening. Thus, chil­
dren learn to monitor and adjust their own speech. As skills 
increase, stimuli are varied and increased in complexity, thus 
facilitating language development. Information on reference 
textbooks and curricula which develop communication skills 
are given in the Appendix.
One of the earliest stages involves training young children 
to be aware of sound and to be responsive to the voices of mem­
bers of their families. As young children become aware of 
sound, they will begin to recognize sounds that they produce 
and to explore how to vary these sounds. As children begin to 
associate sound with meaningful acts, they will turn and 
respond when their name is called. Children will also begin to 
listen to more complex sentences and begin to use oral language 
to express their ideas. These steps of receptive and expressive 
language acquisition occur for normally hearing children and 
serve as the model for training young hearing-impaired children 
to acquire language skills.
Parents should be encouraged to work on communication 
skills daily with their child. Time should be set aside each day 
for activities designed to encourage communication. Examples 
of activities which facilitate language development include 
playing with age-appropriate toys, looking at and reading books, 
taking walks and talking about what one sees on the walks, 
playing make-believe games, or participating in household
activities (e.g. making cookies or decorating a cake). Parents 
must expect their child to communicate and participate in 
activities designed to facilitate communication. Several tech­
niques may be used to stimulate language.83 One method is to 
describe a sequence of events using language that is more com­
plex than what their child typically uses. Using more complex 
language provides a model for a child to follow and encourages 
them to associate more advanced vocabulary and sounds. Par­
ents also may engage in ‘self-talk’, where the adults provide a 
running commentary on the event or situation they are sharing 
with the child. In other situations, parents may provide parallel 
talk by allowing the child to lead an activity and simply com­
menting on the activity. Such comments provide structure and 
language for the child’s activity. As children continue to 
develop communication skills, parents may engage in modeling 
and expansion techniques to further increase exposure to lan­
guage. Modeling and expanding on the child’s message rein­
force what the child has said, demonstrate that the child’s 
message was understood, and introduce new language struc­
tures. Parental involvement must continue as children enter 
school, in order to ensure facilitation of language and commu­
nication skills within the academic environment.
Summary
This chapter has reviewed key aspects of speech and language 
development in normally hearing and hearing-impaired chil­
dren. Early identification and treatment of hearing loss is 
important, since evidence suggests that delaying identification 
until after 6 months of age may result in reduced language abil­
ities. It is important to facilitate language development and 
communication skills, regardless of the mode of communication 
used. Parents are ideal facilitators for developing communica­
tion skills, and should be guided by professionals to be major 
contributors in facilitating communication.
References
1. 
Lenneberg EH. Biological Foundations of Language New York: 
Wiley, 1967.
2. 
Yoshinaga-ltano C, Sedey A, Coulter B, Mehl A, Language of 
early- and later-identified children with hearing loss. Pediatrics 
1998; 120(5): 1161-71.
3. 
Bloom L, Lahey P. Language Development and Language Disorders. 
New York: Wiley, 1978.
4. 
Eilers RE, Oiler DK. Infant vocalizations and the early diagnosis of 
severe hearing impairment. J Pediatrics 1994; 124(2): 199-203.
5. 
Eilers RE, Cobo-Lewis AB, Vergara KC, Oiler DK, Friedman KE. 
A longitudinal evaluation of the speech perception capabilities of 
children using multichannel tactile vocoders. J Speech Hear Res 
1996; 39(3): 518-33.
6. 
Kusko CW. Language and linguistic development. Otolaryngology 
Clinics of North America 1985; 18(2): 315-22.
  

334 
Audiology
7. Eilers RE, Gavin WJ, Oiler DK. Cross linguistic perception in 
infancy: early effects of linguistic experience. J Child Language 
1982; 9(2): 289-302.
8. Tait M, Lutman ME. The predictive value of measures of prever- 
bal communicative behaviors in young deaf children with 
cochlear implants. Ear Hear 1997; 18(6): 472-8.
9. Lutman ME, Tait DM. Early communicative behavior in young chil- 
dren receiving cochlear implants: factor analysis of turn-taking and 
gaze orientation. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol Suppl 1995; 166:397-99.
10. Tait DM, Wood DJ. From communication to speech in deaf chil- 
dren. Child Language Teaching Ther 1987; 3(1): 1-17.
11. Tait M, Lutman ME. Comparison of early communicative behav­
ior in young children with cochlear implants and with hearing 
aids. Ear Hear 1994; 15(5): 352-61.
12. Tait M. Making and monitoring progress in the pre-school years. J 
Br Assoc Teachers Deaf 1987; 11(5): 143-53.
13. Yoshinaga-ltano C, Stredler-Brown A. Learning to communicate: 
babies with hearing impairments make their needs known. Volta 
Rev 1992; 94(2): 107-129.
14. Robinshaw HM. Acquisition of speech, pre- and post-cochlear 
implantation: longitudinal studies of a congenitally deaf infant. 
EurJ Disord Commun 1996; 31(2): 121-39.
15. Robinshaw HM. The pattern of development from non-commu- 
nicative behaviour to language by hearing impaired and hearing 
infants. BrJ Audiol 1996; 30(2): 177-98.
16. Apuzzo ML, Yoshinaga-ltano C. Early identification of infants 
with significant hearing loss and the Minnesota Child Develop­
ment Inventory. Semin Hear 1995; 16(2): 124-39.
17. Yoshinaga-ltano C. Efficacy of early identification and early inter­
vention. Semin Hear 1995; 16(2): 115-23.
18. Nicholas JG, Geers AE. Communication of oral deaf and normally 
hearing children at 36 months of age. J Speech Language Hear Res 
1997; 40(6): 1314-27.
19. Miskiel LW, Carney AE, Johnson CJ, Carney E. An analysis of 
phonetic level evaluation: age and task factors. Language Speech 
Hear Services Schools 1994; 25: 165-73.
20. Tobey E. Auditory feedback delivered by electrical stimulation 
from a cochlear implant and speech production. In: Bell-Berti F, 
Raphael L, eds. Producing Speech: Contemporary Issues for Kather­
ine Safford Harris. New York: American Institute of Physics, 1995: 
455-69.
21. Tobey EA. Speech production considerations in the management 
of children receiving cochlear implants. Semin Hear 1986; 7(4): 
407-22.
22. Tobey EA. Stop Consonant Perception and Production in Cochlear 
Implant Users-Grant Application, 1989.
23. McGarr NS, Lofqvist A. Laryngeal kinematics in voiceless obstru­
ents produced by hearing-impaired speakers. J Speech Hear Res 
1988; 31(2): 234-9.
24. Geers AE, Moog JS. Assessing the benefits of cochlear implants in 
an oral education program. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1995; 50: 
119-24.
25. McGarr NS, Lofqvist A. Obstruent production by hearing- 
impaired speakers: interarticulator timing and acoustics. J Acoust 
Soc Am 1982; 72(1): 34-42.
26. Hanson VL, McGarr NS. Rhyme generation by deaf adults. J 
Speech Hear Res 1989; 32: 2-11.
27. Osberger MJ, McGarr N. Speech production characteristics of 
the hearing impaired. In: Lass N, ed. Speech and Language: 
Advances in Basic Research and Practice. New York: Academic 
Press, 1982: 221-283.
28. Tye-Murray N, Kirk KI. Vowel and dipthong production by young 
users of cochlear implants the relationship between the phonetic 
level evaluation and spontaneous speech. J Speech Hear Res 1993; 
36(3): 488-502.
29. Abraham S. Using a phonological framework to describe speech 
errors of orally trained, hearing-impaired school-agers. J Speech 
Hear Disord 1989; 54: 600-9.
30. Geffner D. Feature characteristics of spontaneous speech produc­
tion in young deaf children. J Commun Disord 1980; 13(6): 
443-54.
31. Miyamoto RT, Kirk KI, Robbins AM, Todd S, Riley A, Pisoni DB. 
Speech perception and speech intelligibility in children with 
multichannel cochlear implants. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1997; 52: 
198-203.
32. Kvam MH, Bredal UJ. Do we understand the speech of deaf adole- 
cents? An evaluation and comparison of the intelligibility in two 
similar research projects from 1979 and 1995. Logoped Phoniatr 
Vocol 2000; 25(2): 87-92.
33. Klimacka L, Patterson A, Patterson R. Listening to deaf speech: 
does experience count? Int J Lang Commun Disord 2001; 
36(Suppl): 210-5.
34. Monsen RB. A usable test for the speech intelligibility of deaf 
talkers. Am Annal Deaf 1981; 126(7): 845-52.
35. Monsen RB. Toward measuring how well hearing-impaired chil­
dren speak. J Speech Hear Res 1978; 21(2): 197-219.
36. Monsen RB. The oral speech intelligibility of hearing-impaired 
talkers. J Speech Hear Disord 1983; 48(3): 286-96.
37. McGarr N. The intelligibility of deaf speech to experienced and 
inexperienced listeners. J Speech Hear Res 1983; 26: 451-8.
38. Osberger MJ, Robbins AM, Todd S, Riley A. Speech intelligibil­
ity of children with cochlear implants. Volta Rev 1994; 96(5): 
169-80.
39. Osberger MJ, Maso M, Sam LK. Speech intelligibility of children 
with cochlear implants, tactile aids, or hearing aids. J Speech Hear 
Res 1993; 36(1): 186-203.
40. Osberger MJ. Speech intelligibility in the hearing impaired: 
research and clinical implications. In: Kent R, ed. Intelligibility in 
Speech Disorders. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1992: 233-64.
41. Elfenbein JL, Hardin-Jones MA, Davis JM. Oral communication 
skills of children who are hard of hearing. J Speech Hear Res 1994; 
37(1): 216-26.
42. McGarr NS. The effect of context on the intelligibility of hearing 
and deaf children’s speech. Language Speech 1981; 24(Pt 3): 
255-64.
43. Kent RD. Speech intelligibility and communicative competence 
in children. In: Kaiser AP, Gray DB, eds. Enhancing Children’s 
Communication. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brooks, 1993: 233-9.
44. Bouvet D. The speech of the deaf child: the role of sign language 
in the process of language acquisition by the deaf child; La Parole
  

Speech and language development in normally hearing and hearing-impaired children 
335
de l’enfant sourd: Papport de la langue des signes dans le processus 
d’appropriation du langage par l’enfant sourd. Langage I’Homme 
1982; 48: 47-52.
45. Arnold P. Teaching English to hearing-impaired children. J Br 
Assoc Teachers Deaf 1989; 13(4): 100-9.
46. Bernstein J, Boyce S, Bush MA et al. Studies of speech production 
and speech discrimination by children and by the hearing- 
impaired. RLE Prog Rep 1979; 121: 112-13.
47. Cavallazzi G, De Filipp is A. Severe hearing loss in early child­
hood: results of reeducation methods; La surdite profonde dans la 
premiere enfance: resultats des methodes de reeducation. Acta 
Otol Rhinol Laryngol Belg 1974; 28(1): 83-90.
48. Bakkum MJ, Plomp R, Pols LW. Objective analysis versus subjec­
tive assessment of vowels pronounced by deaf and normal-hearing 
children. J A coust Soc Am 1995; 98( 2Pt 1): 745-62.
49. Dagenais PA, Critz-Crosby P, Fletcher SG, McCutcheon MJ. 
Comparing abilities of children with profound hearing impair­
ments to learn consonants using electropalatography or traditional 
aural-oral techniques. J Speech Hear Res 1994; 37(3): 687-99.
50. Geers AE, Schick B. Acquisition of spoken and signed English by 
hearing-impaired children of hearing-impaired or hearing parents. 
J Speech Hear Disord 1988; 53(2): 136-43.
51. Gallaway C, Aplin DY, Newton VE, Hostler ME. The GMC pro­
ject: some linguistic and cognitive characteristics of a population 
of hearing-impaired children. Br J Audiol 1990; 24(1): 17-27.
52. Geers AE, Moog JS. Predicting spoken language acquisition of 
profoundly hearing-impaired children. J Speech Hear Disord 1987; 
52(1): 84-94.
53. Geers A, Moog J. Spoken language results: vocabulary, syntax, and 
communication. Volta Rev 1994; 96(5): 131-48.
54. Geers AE, Lagati S. Recent studies that show the validity of the 
oral method in teaching hearing-impaired children; Una ricerca 
recente che mette in evidenza la validita del metodo orale nell’in- 
segnamento dei bambini audiolesi. Effeta 1989; 82(5): 84-7.
55. Geers A, Moog J, Schick B. Acquisition of spoken and signed Eng­
lish by profoundly deaf children. ] Speech Hear Disord 1984; 49(4): 
378-88.
56. Geers AE, Moog JS. Syntactic maturity of spontaneous speech and 
elicited imitations of hearing-impaired children. J Speech Hear 
Disord 1978; 43(3): 380-91.
57. Davis JM, Elfenbein J, Schum R, Bentler RA. Effects of mild and 
moderate hearing impairments on language, educational, and psy­
chosocial behavior of children. J Speech Hear Disord 1986; 51(1): 
53-62.
58. Moeller MP, Osberger MJ, Eccarius M et al. Receptive language 
skills/expressive language skills/academic skills/visual processing, 
short-term memory, and visual-motor coordination skills. ASHA 
Monogr 1986; 23: 41-83.
59. Brentari D, Wolk SJ. The relative effects of three expressive meth­
ods upon the speech intelligibility of profoundly deaf speakers. 
Commun Disord 1986; 19(3): 209-18.
60. LaSasso CJ, Mobley RT. National survey of reading instruction for 
deaf or hard-of-hearing students in the US. Volta Rev 1997; 99(1): 
31-58.
61. Geers EA, Moog JS. Speech perception and production skills of
students with impaired hearing from oral and total communication 
education settings. J Speech Hear Res 1992; 35(6): 1384-93.
62. Serry T, Blarney P, Grogan M. Phoneme acquisition in the first 4 
years of implant use. Am] Otol 1997; 18(6 Suppl): S122-4.
63. Tye-Murray N, Spencer L, Bedia EG, Woodworth G. Differences 
in children’s sound production when speaking with a cochlear 
implant turned on and turned off. J Speech Hear Res 1996; 39(3): 
604-10.
64. Miyamoto RT, Kirk KI, Svirsky MA Sehgal ST. Communication 
skills in pediatric cochlear implant recipients. A eta Otolaryngol 
1999; 119(2): 219-24.
65. Waltzman SP, Cohen NLM, Pivak LP, et al. Improvement in speech 
perception and production abilities in children using a multichan­
nel cochlear implant. Laryngoscope 1990; 100(3): 240-3.
66. Boothroyd A, Geers AE, Moog JS. Practical implications of 
cochlear implants in children [published erratum appears in Ear 
Hear 1991; 12(6): 442]. Ear Hear 1991; 12(4 Suppl): 81S-9S.
67. Tobey EA, Geers A, Brenner C. Speech production results: speech 
feature acquisition. Volta Rev 1994; 96(5): 109-31.
68. Tobey EA, Geers AE. Speech production benefits of cochlear 
implants. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1995; 50: 146-53.
69. Geers AE. Comparing implants with hearing aids in profoundly 
deaf children. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1997; 117(3 Pt 1):
150-4.
70. Geers AE, Tobey EA. Longitudinal comparison of the benefits of 
cochlear implants and tactile aids in a controlled educational set­
ting. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol Suppl 1995; 166: 328-9.
71. Geers AE, Moog JS. Evaluating the benefits of cochlear implants 
in an educational setting. Am J Otol 1991; 12(Suppl): 116-25.
72. Osberger MJ. Audiological rehabilitation with cochlear implants 
and tactile aids. ASHA 1990; 32(4): 43-8.
73. Carney AE, Osberger MJ, Carney E, Robbins AM, Renshaw J, 
Miyamoto RT. A comparison of speech discrimination with 
cochlear implants and tactile aids. J Acoust Soc Am 1993; 94(4): 
2036-49.
74. Osberger MJ, Robbins AM, Berry SW, Todd SL, Hesketh LJ, 
Sedey A. Analysis of the spontaneous speech samples of children 
with cochlear implants or tactile aids. Am J Otol 1991; 12(suppl):
151-64.
75. Geers A, Moog J. Effectiveness of Cochlear Implants and Tactile 
Aids for Deaf Children: The Sensory Aids Study at the Central 
Institute for the Deaf. Volta Rev 1994; 96(5): 109-31.
76. Geers AE. Speech and language evaluation in aided and 
implanted children. Scand Audiol Suppl 1997; 46: 72-5.
77. Moog JS, Geers AE. Impact of the cochlear implant on the edu­
cational setting. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1995; 50: 174-6.
78. Carney AE, Kienle M, Miyamoto RT. Speech perception with a 
single-channel cochlear implant: a comparison with a single­
channel tactile device. J Speech Hear Res 1990; 33: 229-37.
79. Miyamoto RT, Svirsky MA, Robbins AM. Enhancement of 
expressive language in prelingually deaf children with cochlear 
implants. Acta Otolaryngol 1997; 117(2): 154-7.
80. Robbins AM, Osberger MJ, Miyamoto RT, Kessler KS. Language 
development in young children with cochlear implants. Adv 
Otorhinolaryngol 1995; 50: 160-6.
  

336 
Audiology
81. Tomblin J, Spencer L, Flock S, Tyler R, Gantz B. A comparison of 
language achievement in children with cochlear implants and chil- 
dren using hearing aids. J Speech Language Hear Res 1999; 42(2): 
497-509.
82. Svirsky. Language development in early implanted, prelingually deaf 
children. Paper presented at Iowa Conference on Implantable 
Prostheses, Psychological Science 2000; 11(2): 153-8.
83. Tye-Murray N. Lets Converse: A ‘How-to’ Guide to Develop and 
Expand Conversational Skills of Children and Teenagers Who Are 
Hearing Impaired. Washington, DC: Alexander Graham Bell 
Association for the Deaf, 1994.
Appendix: resource for professionals working with children with hearing 
losses
Curricula for training communication skills
Koch ME. Bringing Sound to Life: Principles and Practices of Cochlear Implant Rehabilitation. Timonium, Maryland: The Advisory Board Foundation, 
York Press, 1999.
Moog JS, Biedenstein JJ, Davidson LS. SPICE: Speech Perception Instructional Curriculum and Evaluation. St Louis, Missouri: Central Institute for 
the Deaf, 1995.
Vergara KC, Miskiel LW. CHATS: The Miami Cochlear Implant, Auditory and Tactile Skills Curriculum. Miami, Florida: Intelligent Hearing Sys­
tems, 1994.
Wayner D, Abrhamson JE, Casterton J. Learning to Hear Again with a Cochlear Implant. Better Communication and Cochlear Implants: A User’s 
Guide. Washington, DC: Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf, 1995.
Examples of resource materials
Deconde Johnson C, Benson P, Seaton J. Educational Audiology Handbook. San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing Group, Inc. 1997.
Estabrooks W. Cochlear Implants for Kids. Washington DC: Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf, 1998.
Hull R. Aural Rehabilitation Serving Children and Adults, 3rd edn. San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing Group, Inc. 1997.
Luterman D. Counseling Persons with Communication Disorders and Their Families, 3rd edn. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed, 1996.
Me Anally P, Rose S, Quigley S. Language Learning Practices with Deaf Children 2nd edn. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed, 1994.
Nevins ME, Chute PM. Children with Cochlear Implants in Educational Settings. Washington DC: Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf, 
1996.
Tye-Murray N. Children with Cochlear Implants: A Handbook for Parents, Teachers, and Speech and Hearing Professionals. Washington DC: Alexan­
der Graham Bell Association for the Deaf, 1992.
Tye-Murray N. Let’s Converse: A ‘How-To’ Guide to Develop and Expand Conversational Skills of Children and Teenagers who are Hearing-Impaired.’ 
Washington, DC: Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf, 1994.
Tye-Murray N. Foundations of Aural Rehabilitation: Children, Adults, and their Family Members. Washington, DC: Alexander Graham Bell Associ­
ation for the Deaf, 1998.
  

Section III
Auditory disorders and 
their management

20 Screening programs 
for hearing loss
Karl R White
The need for identifying hearing loss during the first few months 
of life was advocated in Great Britain more than 50 years ago, 
when Ewing and Ewing noted ‘an urgent need to study further 
and more critically methods of testing hearing in young children 
. . . During this first year the existence of deafness needs to be 
ascertained... Training needs to be begun at the earliest age that 
the diagnosis of deafness can be established.’1
Since that time, a variety of procedures have been tried 
to identify babies with congenital hearing loss during the first 
few months of life. The latest approach, being advocated by 
many in Europe and the USA, is the measurement of oto­
acoustical emissions (OAE) or automated auditory brainstem 
response (AABR) for hearing screening for all newborns prior 
to the time they are discharged from the hospital. Such uni­
versal newborn hearing screening (UNHS) has been recom­
mended by such influential groups as the National Institutes 
of Health2 and the American Academy of Pediatrics3 in the 
USA and 1998 European Consensus Development Conference 
attended by representatives from most western European 
countries.4
All hearing impaired infants should be identified and treat­
ment initiated by 6 months of age . . . The consensus panel 
recommends screening of all newborns . . .  for hearing 
impairment prior to discharge.2
The American Academy of Pediatrics . . .  endorses the goal 
of universal detection of hearing loss in infants before 3 
months of age . . .  [which] requires universal screening of all 
infants.3
Identification by screening at or shortly after birth has the 
potential to improve quality of life and opportunities for 
those affected . . . Implementation of neonatal screening 
programs should not be delayed.4
Given such positive support from authoritative groups, it is not 
surprising that the implementation of universal newborn hear­
ing screening programs continues to grow. For example, more 
than two thirds of all babies born in the USA are now screened 
for hearing loss prior to hospital discharge, and there has been
a dramatic growth in the number of birthing hospitals with 
UNHS programs (Figures 20.1 and 20.2).
Not everyone is convinced that UNHS is feasible, effec­
tive, or beneficial. For example, even though they recognize
Year
Figure 20.1 Number of hospitals in the USA with universal newborn hearing 
screening programs. (Adapted from Hyde et al. J Am Acad Audiol 1990;
1: 59—66.28)
Figure 20.2 Percentage of newborns in the USA screened for hearing prior to 
hospital discharge.

340 
Auditory disorders and their management
o
4 , 0
3 . 5
s
3 . 0
(J
2 . 5
Q_
<U
2 , 0
c
1 . 5
—
CO
>
o
1 , 0
Q .
* 5
o - 
^
___ I________ I________ I________ f________ L_______ I________ I________ I
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
dB threshold level (loss criterion)
Study/subject ages sample size/prevalence per 1,000; Loss threshold
1. Barr7; 1980; 2-5 year olds [n = 65,000); 0.9 per 1000; 45 dB HL
2. Feinmesser et al&; 1986; infants born between 1967 and 1978 (n = 62r000); 
1*7 per 1rQ00; 40 dB HL
3. Fitzland9; 1985; 6-month-olds (mean) (n =30,890); 1,9 per 1,000; 25 dB HL
4. Kankkunen10; 1982; 6-year-olds (n =31,280); 1.3 per 1,000:40 dB HL
5. Martin11; 1982; 8-year-olds [n =4,126,268); 0.9 per 1,000; 50 dB HL
6. Parving12; 1985; 8-year-old (median) [n = 82,265): 1.4 per 1r000; 35 dB HL
7. Sehlin etal13; 1990; 2-12-year-olds [n = 63,463); 2.4 per 1,000; 30 dB HL
8. Sorri Et Rantakallio14; 1985; 15-year-olds (n = 11.780); 2.1 per 1,000;
30 dB HL
9. Davis Et Wood15; 1992; 2-6 year-olds [n = 29,317); 1.1 per 1,000; 50 dB HL
that ‘congenital hearing loss is a serious health problem associ- 
ated with developmental delay in speech and language 
function’, the 1996 recommendations of the prestigious US 
Preventive Services Task Force concluded that ‘there is little 
evidence to support the use of routine, universal screening for 
all neonates’.5 Similarly, a 1999 article in Pediatrics concluded:6
universal newborn hearing screening in our present state of 
knowledge is not necessarily the only, or the best, or the 
most cost-effective way to achieve [early identification of 
hearing loss], and more importantly, that the benefits of 
universal newborn hearing screening may be outweighed by 
its risks.6
The rapid growth of UNHS programs over the last 5 years, jux­
taposed with the concerns about the effectiveness and value of 
UNHS programs, emphasizes the need to examine whether 
hospital-based UNHS programs should become the standard of 
care throughout the world. This chapter will summarize the evi­
dence related to the following issues:
* 
Are there a sufficient number of babies with congenital 
hearing loss to justify UNHS?
» 
How accurate and efficient are various newborn hearing 
screening techniques?
9 
Are there negative ‘side-effects’ for families? 
m 
Are there positive benefits associated with early identifica­
tion of hearing loss?
Prevalence of congenital hearing loss
The prevalence of permanent congenital hearing loss (PCHL) 
depends on the definition. For example, Figure 20.3 shows the 
results of nine different studies7-15 to determine the number of 
children with bilateral PCHL in cohorts ranging in size from 
30000 to over 4 million children. Not surprisingly, the preva­
lence of bilateral PCHL is substantially higher when milder 
hearing loss is included. If the analysis is limited to children 
with 50-dB or greater bilateral loss, the prevalence is about 
1/1000. However, when children with 30-dB bilateral losses are 
included, the prevalence is more than 2.0/1000.
Each of the studies in Figure 20.2 only included children 
with bilateral hearing losses. If children with unilateral losses 
had been included, the prevalence would increase by one-third 
to one-half, as shown by the data in Table 20.1.16-18 Taken 
together, these data suggest that we should expect to find 3 or 4 
children per 1000 with PCHL from well-run, hospital-based, 
UNHS programs. As shown in Table 20.2, this is what is being 
reported in published reports of large-scale UNHS programs.19”26
It is important to note that the numbers reported from the 
retrospective studies listed in Table 20.1 could have included 
children with acquired, instead of congenital, hearing losses. It 
is often assumed that there are about as many infants and tod­
dlers with acquired losses as with congenital losses. However, 
geographical areas with long-established UNHS programs in
Figure 20.3 Reported prevalence rates of sensorineural and mixed hearing 
losses.
Table 20.1 Percentage of sensorineural hearing losses which 
are unilateral.
Number of hearing 
impaired children
Author (year)
in sample
% Unilateral
Kinney (1953)16
1307
48%
Brookhauser et si (1991)'7
1829
37%
Watkin et al (1990)18
171
35%
Table 20.2 Prevalence of PCHL 
programs with large samples.
in published reports of UNHS
Location
Number
screened
Prevalence 
per 1000
Hospital-based
screening
method
Rhode Island13
3,300
4.0
OAE
Rhode Island20
52,695
2.1
OAE
Colorado21
41,796
2.6
AABR
Wessex2^
7,593
2.6
OAE
Texas23
54,228
2.1
OAE a AABR
New York24
43,004
1.9
OAE et AABR
Hawaii^
9,605
4.2
OAE
New Jersey2*5
15,749
3.3
ABR
  

Screening programs for hearing loss 
341
the USA, where tens of thousands of infants have now been 
screened, are finding very few children with acquired losses. For 
example, in Rhode Island, Hawaii, and Colorado, hundreds of 
children have now been identified with PCHL. These programs 
have been operating long enough that there are thousands of 
7-, 8- and 9-year-olds who were screened as infants. If acquired 
hearing loss were as frequent as is often assumed, we should now 
be discovering dozens of children with acquired losses as they 
enter school. In fact, very few of such children have been iden­
tified.27 A more reasonable hypothesis is that many children 
who were previously thought to have acquired losses really had 
congenital mild or moderate PCHL, which may have been pro­
gressive. As infants, they had enough hearing to babble, acquire 
some speech, or turn to loud noises. Later, because of delayed 
speech, hearing loss was diagnosed and it was assumed that it 
was an acquired loss. In fact, many of these cases probably 
represented mild or moderate progressive congenital losses.
Accuracy of newborn hearing 
screening methods
THE FOLLOWING FIVE METHODS HAVE BEEN 
USED FREQUENTLY TO DETECT HEARING 
LOSS IN INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN
Behavioral evaluations at 7-9 months 
Auditory brainstem response (ABR)
High-risk indicators 
Otoacoustical emissions 
Automated ABR
How much is known about the accuracy of those methods? 
Even though the terms ‘sensitivity’ and ‘specificity’ are often 
used with regard to these techniques, there are no population- 
based studies of universal newborn hearing screening where 
there are sufficiently large sample sizes and sufficently good 
follow-up to definitively establish the sensitivity and specificity
of any of these techniques. Most studies which refer to sensitiv­
ity and specificity have used very small sample sizes, have 
focused only on high-risk babies, or have not followed all of the 
babies who passed the screening test to determine their true 
hearing status. A frequent problem is that studies that have 
allegedly examined the sensitivity and specificity of a particular 
screening technique have really only compared one screening 
technique with another screening technique. Thus, data are not 
available to definitively establish the sensitivity and specificity 
of any of the techniques. As summarized below, however, infor­
mation is available that provides reasonably good evidence 
about the accuracy of each of these screening techniques.
Auditory brainstem response (ABR)
Many different studies have examined the use of ABR to 
detected hearing losses among young children. For example; 
Hyde et al28 evaluated 713 high-risk babies who were screened 
with ABR prior to hospital discharge, and then were assessed by 
diagnosticians who did not know the screening results when the 
children were an average of almost 4 years old (Figure 20.4). 
The behaviorally confirmed hearing status was compared to the 
results of the hearing screening test. For this high-risk popula­
tion, the sensitivity and specificity were 98% and 96% when 
the ABR screening threshold was set at 40dBHL, and 100% 
and 91% when the ABR screening threshold level was set at 30 
dB HL. Additional data about the accuracy of ABR as a hearing 
screening tool were reported by Barsky-Firkser and Sun,26 who 
screened more than 5000 newborns over a 3-year period. An 
average of 3.3 infants per 1000 were identified with a congeni­
tal hearing loss and referred to intervention programs. In spite 
of abundant evidence about the accuracy of ABR as a screening 
tool for hearing loss in young children, 
it is seldom advocated 
for UNHS programs, because it is relatively expensive.
High-risk indicators
Until the early 1990s, the most frequent method used in the 
USA to identify hearing loss in very young children was based 
on the high-risk indicators recommended by the Joint 
Committee on Infant Hearing (JCIH).30 About 10% of all
Hearing status 
Hearing status
Impaired 
Normal 
Impaired 
Normal
Refer
44
57
Refer
45
125
ABR screen
ABR screen
(40 dBHL)
(30 dBHL)
Pass
1
1265
Pass
0
1197
Sensitivity = 9 8 %  
Sensitivity = 100%
Specificity = 9 6 %  
Specificity -  9 1 %
Figure 20.4 Accuracy of ABR for UNHS. NB: Results based on 1367 cases with reliable ABR and puretone results. (Adapted from Hyde et al. J Am Acad Audiol 1990; 
1: 59—66.28)
  

342 
Auditory disorders and their management
children bom will exhibit one or more of these indicators, 
including family history of congenital hearing loss, very low 
birthweight, congenital malformations of the head and neck, 
and hyperbilirubinemia. The JCIH recommendation was that 
infants with one of these risk indicators be screened for hearing 
loss using ABR. The rationale for this approach was that by 
focusing on a subset of the population which was at higher risk, 
hospitals could afford to use ABR because a smaller number of 
children would require testing.
Very few hospitals are currently using this approach, for two 
reasons. First, as shown in Figure 20.5, even though children 
with risk factors are more likely to have hearing loss, only about 
half of all children with congenital hearing loss will exhibit one 
or more of these indicators.8,18,31-33 Thus, even if a high-risk- 
based screening program were to work perfectly, about half of all 
children with PCHL would be missed.
More importantly, high-risk-based screening programs have 
found it difficult to get parents to return for the diagnostic eval­
uations. For example, Mahoney and Eichwald11 reported the 
results of a high-risk based screening program over a 7-year 
period (1978-84). During that time, the JCIH indicators were 
incorporated into the legally required birth certificate, so they 
were reported for every child. The program included computer­
ized mailings and follow-up, free diagnostic assessments at 
regional offices, and/or a mobile van that went to parents’ homes. 
As summarized in Figure 20.6, only about one-third of parents 
whose children had a high-risk indicator ever made an appoint­
ment for a diagnostic evaluation, and only about three-quarters 
of those parents completed the evaluation. Only 0.36 children 
per 1000 were identified with sensorineural hearing loss. Other 
high-risk-indicator-based programs experienced similar difficul­
ties, and such programs have very low sensitivity and specificity.
Behavioral evaluations at 7-9 months of age
Another alternative for early identification of hearing loss that 
has been used extensively in Western Europe is to do behavioral 
assessments of children when they are 7-9 months old.35-37 
Most of these programs include hearing screening as a part of 
the work done by home visitors who are already making routine
Feinmesser et al 19828
Pappas Et Schaibly 198431 
Elssmann et a( 198732 
Watkin et al 199118 
Mauk et al 199133
0
Figure 20.5 Percentage of hearing-impaired children who were high risk as 
infants.
100
visits as a part of the well-child healthcare system. The data on 
the success of such home-based behavioral screening programs 
are very disappointing. For example, Watkin et al. did a retro­
spective analysis of over 55000 children in one geographical 
district in England.18 For each of the 171 2-15-year-old chil­
dren who had a hearing loss, a determination was made of 
whether the child was first identified through a home visitor or 
school-age screening program, a parent, or someone else, such 
as a doctor or teacher. Of the 39 children with severe/profound 
bilateral losses, only 44% were identified based on the behav­
ioral evaluation during the home visit. For children with mild 
moderate bilateral losses and children with unilateral losses, the 
behavioral evaluation identified only 25% and less than 10%, 
respectively. Thus, even with home visitors who were specifi­
cally trained to do behavioral assessments in a home setting, 
most of the young children with hearing loss are missed.
Otoacoustic emissions (OAE)
A more recent addition to the repertoire of newborn hearing 
screening tools is the use of otoacoustical emissions. Numerous 
small-scale studies have demonstrated that otoacoustical emis­
sions have a very high rate of agreement with ABR.38-41 The 
first large-scale evaluation of otoacoustical emissions in a 
UNHS program was the Rhode Island Hearing Assessment 
Program (RIHAP) conducted between 1990 and 1994.42 Of the 
first cohort of 1850 infants from well-baby and special-care 
nurseries, 11 were identified with sensorineural hearing loss. 
Based on the ABR screening done with all infants as a part of
‘Adapted from Mahoney Et Eichwald. Semin Hearing 1987; 8 : 155-63.34
Figure 20.6 Results of birth certificate-based high-risk registry to identify 
hearing loss in Utah (1978-84).
  

Screening programs for hearing loss 
343
the study, there was very high agreement betwen otoacoustical 
emissions screening and ABR. Furthermore, four of the babies 
would have been missed if screening had only been done with 
high-risk infants or with babies in the NICU. A summary of the 
results of OAE screening compared to hearing status (based on 
the generous assumption that babies who passed the initial 
screening have normal hearing) is shown in Figure 20.7.19 Since 
the Rhode Island study, many others have demonstrated the 
feasibility and accuracy of using otoacoustical emissions in 
UNHS programs.19,20,22-25 Although follow-up studies have not 
been done which enable the determination of sensitivity, it is 
clear from the data in Table 20.2 that many infants are being 
identified based on the use of otoacoustical emissions.
Automated auditory brainstem response 
(AABR)
Another widely used technique for UNHS programs is AABR. 
Although several such units are now available, the most widely 
used is the Algo manufactured by Natus Medical. In addition to 
the data reported earlier in Table 20.2 from the Colorado study, 
there are numerous smaller studies which have examined the 
accuracy of the Algo equipment. For example, Hermann et al43
Hearing status 
Impaired 
Normal
Refer
11
79
OAE
Screen
Pass
0
1643
Sensitivity — 100%  
Specificity = 95%
Figure 20.7 Accuracy of OAE two-stage screen. NB: Analysis is based on heads. 
Infants initially screened but lost to follow-up or rescreen because of parent 
refusal, lost contact, or repeated broken appointments (>3) are not included. 
(From White et al. Int J Paediatric Otorhinolaryngol 1994; 29: 203-17.19)
Conventional ABR
Refer 
Pass
Refer
101
38
AABR
screen
Pass
2
1046 !
Sensitivity = 9 6 %  
Specificity = 9 8 %
Figure 20.8 Accuracy of AABR: summary of four studies. (Adapted from 
Hermann et al. Am J Audiol 1995; 4: 6-14.43)
summarized the results of four studies43^6 which compared the 
screening results of AABR with conventional ABR. Although 
this is not a true test of sensitivity, because the comparison is to 
another screening technique, based on what is known about the 
accuracy of ABR,28,29 the results of Hermann’s analysis shown in 
Figure 20.8 provide convincing evidence that AABR is an 
accurate tool for newborn hearing screening.
Summary: accuracy of screening techniques
It is important to note that newborn hearing screening equip­
ment continues to evolve rapidly and is becoming less expen­
sive, faster, and more accurate. The last 5 years have seen 
dramatic changes in both AABR and OAE equipment, and it is 
safe to predict that similar advances will happen during the 
next five years.
Although many articles refer to the sensitivity of various 
newborn hearing screening methods, definitive information 
about the sensitivity compared to behaviorally confirmed con­
genital PCHL is not available for any of the methods. This is 
because studies reporting sensitivity have assumed that all 
babies who pass the initial screen have normal hearing, have 
only followed a small percentage of the babies who passed the 
initial screen, have compared one screening technique with 
another screening technique to derive sensitivity figures, or 
were based on samples of only high-risk babies or unacceptably 
small samples.
The lack of data on sensitivity with behaviorally con­
firmed PCHL for ABR, OAE and AABR is a concern, but 
understandable given the high expense of following all children 
who pass the initial screening with behavioral evaluations and 
the fact that other data provide good evidence that most chil­
dren with congenital PCHL are being identified in these 
screening programs. Rigorous studies of sensitivity/specificity 
for universal newborn hearing screening programs using these 
techniques would certainly be useful, but very expensive to 
conduct.
Even though definitive studies of sensitivity are not avail­
able, there is substantial evidence for the accuracy of several of 
the techniques, as described below.
Accuracy of ABR
There is good evidence that ABR is effective in identifying 
PCHL in newborns as long as it is used appropriately. Reports of 
sensitivity for identifying hearing loss among small samples of 
high risk infants are very good (97-100%), and there is at least 
one study in which ABR was used successfully in a universal 
newborn hearing screening programme.26 Because of the expense 
and time involved in doing ABR, it is generally not considered 
a tool for universal newborn hearing screening programmes, but 
is used in some cases to screen high-risk infants.
Accuracy of high-risk indicators followed by ABR
Until the early 1990s, the most frequent technique for early 
identification of congenital PCHL in the USA was to identify
  

344 
Auditory disorders and their management
children who exhibited one of the high-risk indicators specified 
by the JCIH, or to target all children in the neonatal intensive 
care unit (since a large percentage of these will have one of the 
JCIH high-risk indicators), and to screen those children with 
ABR. By targeting screening to this approximately 10% subset 
of the population, it was possible to keep the cost of screening 
lower and still identify a substantial number of children. How­
ever, because approximately half of the children with congeni­
tal PCHL do not exhibit any of the risk indicators, many 
children are missed when using this technique. Furthermore, 
programs have experienced substantial difficulty in getting fam­
ilies of children with high-risk indicators to come back for diag­
nostic evaluations, and consequently, the sensitivity of such 
programs is very low. If the presence of a high-risk indicator is 
considered to be a positive screen, the specificity is also very 
low. With the advent of new screening techniques (OAE and 
AABR), most high-risk-based early hearing detection programs 
in the United States have been discontinued.
Accuracy of behavioral evaluation at 7-9 months of age
Such programs are used primarily in countries where a home 
health visitor program is already in place. However, some peo­
ple have generalized from this model and suggested that such 
techniques could be used to do screening as a part of well-baby 
care at the doctor’s office. Data from well-established programs 
which rely on behavioral evaluations at 7-9 months indicate 
unacceptably low sensitivity. Such programs report missing 
more than half of the children with bilateral sensorineural hear­
ing loss and even higher numbers of children with mild to 
moderate and unilateral losses.
Accuracy of OAE
Reported agreement between OAE and ABR testing is high, 
but there are no studies with operational UNHS programs in 
which the sensitivity related to behaviorally confirmed hearing 
loss can be determined. Early reports of OAE-based newborn 
hearing screening programs had unacceptably high referral rates 
for inpatient screening (> 25%). Numerous, more recent, 
reports, however, report inpatient referral rates of 2-8% .20-24 
There are now hundreds of hospital-based UNHS programs 
using OAEs. These programs report identifying 2-4 PCHL chil­
dren per 1000 (programs unable to track a substantial number 
of referred children are at the lower end of that range, and pro­
grams with the most successful follow-up are near the upper 
range).
Accuracy of AABR
Hundreds of hospital-based UNHS programs are using AABR 
to identify children with congenital PCHL. Although there are 
no data on the sensitivity of this technique with behaviorally 
confirmed PCHL, the vast majority of reports which have 
examined the agreement between AABR and ABR find very 
high agreement (sensitivity and specificity greater than 95%). 
AABR-based programs report identifying 2-4 PCHL children 
per 1000 with referral rates of 2-4% at discharge.
Effects of newborn hearing 
screening on families
A number of people have raised concerns about whether 
UNHS programs may have negative psychological and emo­
tional impact on the infant’s family. 
For example, it has 
been suggested that parents of children who have false-positive 
screening results may experience unacceptable levels of 
parental stress, fear and anxiety, and damage to the 
infant-mother bond. The concerns about hearing screening are 
based, in part, on the literature concerning the psychological 
effects of screening for other disorders. For example, shortly 
after screening for phenylketonuria (PKU) became widespread 
in the USA, Rothenburg and Sills50 observed a number of fam­
ilies whose babies had false-positive results suffering from what 
they called PKU anxiety syndrome, a ‘chronic anxiety, ranging 
in degree from mild, periodic bouts to acute anxiety hysteria’.
More substantial and convincing empirical studies of other 
newborn screening techniques have corroborated these obser­
vations. For example, in their study of the psychological effects 
of screening for congenital hypothyroidism, Bodegard et al51 
found that the majority of parents whose children had false- 
positive results reported shock, sleep disturbances, and infant 
feeding problems. Similarly, Tluczek et al52 found that most 
parents reported reacting with anxiety, shock, denial, depres­
sion and anger in response to their infants’ false-positive test for 
cystic fibrosis (CF).
Because there is evidence that neonatal screening for dis­
eases, such as PKU, CF, and hyperthyroidism, can have both 
initial and long-term adverse psychological effects on some 
families, critics of newborn hearing screening programs6,47^9 
have raised questions about whether newborn hearing screen­
ing could be having similar effects. Several studies investigating 
adverse psychological effects of infant hearing screening suggest 
that the assumption that hearing screening will result in similar 
adverse psychological effects is unfounded.
For example, in interviews with 26 couples whose children 
had been screened for hearing impairment, Magnuson and 
Hergils53 found that all of the couples had a positive attitude 
towards the screening and that all would do the test again if 
they had another child. Similarly, Vohr et al54 questioned 157 
mothers from Rhode Island at the time of the initial screening 
and found that the vast majority of the mothers (88%) reported 
that they felt little or no stress. An evaluation of Ohio’s infant 
hearing screening program found that the majority of parents 
whose children were screened thought that the screening 
process was excellent.
Similarly, Watkin et al56 found that only 2 of the 57 (3.5%) 
mothers whose children were retested after failing a screen prior 
to hospital discharge were very worried. They also did not find 
a significant difference in anxiety (as measured by Spielberger’s 
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory) between the retest group and a 
control group. Even in light of the possibility of additional stress 
and anxiety resulting from rescreening, most parents recognize
  

Screening programs for hearing loss 
345
the importance of the rescreening process. When Barringer and 
Mauk asked parents whether the additional anxiety that they 
were experiencing would be outweighed by the benefits of early 
detection, 84.9% said yes.
Parents whose children’s hearing loss was not detected very 
early also recognize the importance of infant hearing screening. 
A 1995 study42 questioned 208 children and young adults with 
hearing loss and their parents about the need for neonatal hear- 
ing screening. Only 28% of the parents reported that they were 
reasonably satisfied with the age at which their child’s hearing 
loss was confirmed, and 80% would have welcomed neonatal 
screening had it been available, even when the child had only 
mild or unilateral loss.
Contrary to the findings of screening programs for diseases, 
such as for PKU, CF, and hypothyroidism, which have found 
long-term negative effects, 
research on hearing screening 
suggests that additional stress and anxiety resulting from 
rescreening may be only temporary. For example, Magnuson 
and Hergils53 found that, although parents reported increased 
anxiety if their child was referred for rescreening, the anxiety 
dissipated when parents were informed and developed a plan for 
the future. Also, the anxiety appears to have had little or no 
long-term negative effects on the children or their parents. Of 
the 26 couples, only one reported that they were still anxious 
after their child’s hearing loss was detected and that this anxiety 
might have had a negative influence on the child.
In summary, critics of UNHS have argued that negative 
effects for families, such as increased levels of anxiety, fear, and 
stress, may outweigh the benefits of UNHS. These conclusions 
appear to be based, in large part, on a literature that may not be 
relevant to newborn hearing screening. It appears that families’ 
reactions to screening for diseases, such as CF and PKU, are 
more intense than reactions to screening for a hearing loss. The 
studies conducted so far have not found serious negative effects 
for families participating in UNHS.
Effects of earlier identification and 
intervention
A key question about UNHS is whether babies who are identi­
fied earlier do better than those who are identified later. For 
obvious reasons, it is not practical to identify hearing-impaired 
children early and randomly assign them to receive interven­
tion or not. Thus, there are no prospective clinical trials which 
can be used to address this question. There are a number of ret­
rospective studies, however, in which children have been cate­
gorized into groups who were identified early or identified later, 
matched on relevant variables, and assessed on developmental 
outcomes and success in school-related areas. All of this 
research can be criticized because there is potential for selection 
bias, most studies do not include long-term follow-up, sample 
sizes are generally quite small, and, in some of the studies, the 
types of outcome assessed were somewhat subjective.
In spite of those weaknesses, the evidence is quite convinc­
ing that there are benefits associated with earlier identification 
and intervention. For example, a study reported by Yoshinaga- 
ltano et al59 compared the language abilities of 46 children with 
bilateral hearing loss identified before 6 months of age with 
those of 63 similar children identified after 6 months of age. 
Language abilities were measured by parent report using a cross- 
sectional assessment design in which children were categorized 
into four different age groups. As can be seen in Figure 20.9, the 
23 children assessed when they were 13-18 months old already 
showed a clear advantage for the earlier-identified group. This 
advantage for the earlier-identified group becomes larger for the 
28 children assessed when they were 19-24 months of age, 
larger still for the 31 children assessed when they were 25-30 
months of age, and even larger for the 27 children assessed 
when they were 31-36 months of age. Other studies by this 
group have shown similar results.60-63
Another study conducted by Watkins66 also supports the 
conclusion that earlier intervention is more beneficial. The 
design for this study is stronger, because all of the children 
were assessed at the same time, sample sizes were larger for 
each group, and there was more extensive matching and 
statistical adjustment for potential confounding variables. 
However, the ‘earlier’ group was substantially older than in the 
Yoshinaga-ltano studies. In the Watkins study, there were 
three groups of 23 children who had been matched or the 
scores were statistically adjusted for a variety of variables, 
including severity of hearing loss, age, presence of other hand­
icap, age of mother, SES indicators, and number of childhood 
middle ear infections. The first group received an average of 
9 months of home intervention, beginning at 21 months of
30 r
13-18 mos 
19-24 mos 
25-30 mos 
31-36 mos 
(n = 15/8) 
(n =12/16) 
{n = 11/20) 
(rt = 8/19)
Chronological age (months)
Figure 20.9 Language comprehensive scores for hearing-impaired children iden­
tified before and after 6 months of age. (Adapted from Yoshinaga-ltano et al. 
The effect of early identification on the development of deaf and hard-of 
hearing infants and toddlers.59)
  

346 
Auditory disorders and their management
■ Mo El or preschool □ Preschool □ El < 9 months + preschool
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100
Percentile scores
Figure 20.10 Effects of earlier intervention for children with hearing loss. 
(Adapted from Watkins. Work Scope of the Early Intervention Research Institute. 
Logan, Utah: Utah State University, 1983.66)
age, and then received preschool intervention until they 
were enrolled in public school. The second group of children 
received no home intervention, but began a preschool 
intervention program at 36 months of age. The third group 
received no home intervention or preschool intervention.
A wide variety of measures were collected by trained diag­
nosticians who were unaware of the group to which the chil­
dren belonged. As shown in Figure 20.10, it is clear that those 
who received both home-based intervention and preschool 
intervention did substantially better than those who received 
only preschool intervention or did not receive any intervention 
prior to beginning public school. The effects for reading, arith­
metic, vocabulary, articulation, percentage of the child’s 
communication understood by non-family members, percent­
age of non-family communication understood by the child, 
social adjustment and behavior show that children who 
received the most intensive early intervention perform 20-45 
percentile points higher than children who do not receive such 
intervention.
Even though results of randomized clinical trials are not 
available to address the question of whether earlier intervention 
is better than later intervention for children with hearing loss, 
the consistency of findings from a number of quasi-experimental 
studies provides consistent and convincing evidence about the 
benefits of earlier intervention. As more and more children are 
identified at earlier ages, it is expected that more data about the 
benefits of early intervention will become available.
Conclusion
Much of the recent expansion in UNHS programs can be 
traced to the recommendation in 1993 by the United States 
National Institutes of Health that all babies be screened for 
hearing loss prior to hospital discharge.2 The controversy 
caused by this recommendation47 is not surprising in light of 
how little evidence existed at the time regarding the feasibility 
and effectiveness of UNHS programs. Since then, dozens of 
studies have been reported, and thousands of successful UNHS 
programs are operating in many countries of the world. The 
data and experiences of these programs now provide convinc­
ing evidence that UNHS programs can be operated with exist­
ing technology effectively, cost-effeciently, and successfully. As 
a result of such programs, infants with congenital hearing loss 
are being identified younger than ever before.
Clearly, there are important challenges that must still be 
addressed, but many of the concerns people had in the mid- 
1990s about UNHS programs have been resolved. Although 
more research would be helpful, there is a growing body of 
evidence demonstrating substantial benefits associated with 
earlier identification and services and an absence of significant 
negative effects for families. It is important to continue to sys­
tematically collect data that will lead to further improvements, 
but it is just as important to build on the knowledge that has 
accumulated over the last decade to ensure that babies with 
congenital hearing loss are identified and provided with 
appropriate services during the first few months of life.
References
1. Ewing IR, Ewing AWG. The ascertainment of deafness in infancy 
and early childhood. J Laryngol Otol 1944; 59: 309-33.
2. National Institutes of Health. Early Identification of Hearing 
Impairment in Infants and Young Children NIH consensus state­
ment. United States Department of Health & Human Services 
Publications, 1993: Vol. 11.
3. Erenberg A, Lemons ], Sia C et al. Newborn and infant hearing 
loss: detection and intervention. American Academy of Pedi­
atrics Task Force on Newborn and Infant Hearing, 1998-1999. 
Pediatrics 1999; 103: 527-30.
4. Grandori F. The European Consensus Development Conference 
on Neonatal Hearing Screening. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck, 
Surgery 1999; 125: 118.
5. US Preventive Services Task Force Guide to Clinical Preventive 
Services. Screening for hearing impairment. Baltimore: Williams & 
Wilkins, 1996; pp. 393-405.
6. Paradise JL. Universal newborn hearing screening: should we leap 
before we look? Pediatrics 1999; 103: 670-2.
7. Barr B. Early detection of hearing impairment. In: Taylor IG, 
Markides A, eds. Disorders of Auditory Function, Vol. III. New 
York: Academic Press, 1980; Vol. III. New York: Academic Press, 
pp. 33-42.
8. Feinmesser M, Tell L, Levi H. Etiology of childhood deafness with 
reference to the group of unknown cause. Audiology 1986; 25:65-9.
  

Screening programs for hearing loss 
347
9. Fitzaland RE. Identification of hearing loss in newborns: results of 
eight years’ experience with a high risk hearing register. The Volta 
Review 1985; 87: 195-203.
10. Kankkunen A. Preschool children with impaired hearing. A eta 
Otolaryngolica Suppl 1982; 391: 1-124.
11. Martin JAM. Atiological factors relating to childhood deafness in 
the European community. Audiology 1982; 21: 149-58.
12. Parving A. Hearing disorders in childhood, some procedures for 
detection, identification and diagnostic evaluation. Int J Pediatr 
Otorhinolaryngol 1985; 9: 31-57.
13. Sehlin P, Holmgren G, Zakrisson J. Incidence, prevalence and 
etiology of hearing impairment in children in the county of 
Vasterbotten, Sweden. Scand Audiol 1990; 19: 193-200.
14. Sorri M, Rantakallio P. Prevalence of hearing loss at the age of 15 
in a birth cohort of 12,000 children from northern Finland. Scand 
Audiol 1985; 14: 203-7.
15. Davis AC, Wood S. The epidemiology of childhood hearing 
impairment: factors relevant to planning of services. B J Audiol 
1992; 26: 77-90.
16. Kinney C. Hearing impairments in children. Laryngoscope 1953; 
63: 220-6.
17. Brookhouser PE, Worthington DW, Kelly WJ. Unilateral hearing 
loss in children. Laryngoscope 1991; 101: 1264-72.
18. Watkin PM, Baldwin M, Laoide S. Parental suspicion and identi­
fication of hearing impairment. Arch Dis Child 1990; 65: 
846-50.
19. White KR, Vohr BR, Maxon AB et al. Screening all newborns for 
hearing loss using transient evoked otoacoustic emissions. Int J 
Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1994; 29: 203-17.
20. Vohr BR, Carty LM, Moore PE, Letoumeau K. The Rhode Island 
Hearing Assessment Program: experience with statewide hearing 
screening (1993-1996). J Pediatric 1998; 133: 353-7.
21. Mehl AL, Thomson V. Newborn hearing screening: the great 
omission. Pediatrics 1998; 101: E4.
22. Wessex Universal Neonatal Hearing Screening Trial Group. 
Controlled trial of universal neonatal screening for early identifi­
cation of permanent childhood hearing impairment. Lancet 1998; 
352: 1957-64.
23. Finitzo T, Albright K, O’Neal J. The newborn with hearing loss: 
detection in the nursery. Pediatrics. 1998; 102: 1452-60.
24. Prieve BA, Stevens F. The New York State Universal Newborn 
Hearing Screening Demonstration Project: Introduction and 
Overview. Ear Hear 2000; 21: 85-91.
25. Johnson JL, Kuntz NL, Sia CC et al. Newborn hearing screening 
in Hawaii. Hawaii Med] 1997; 56: 352-5.
26. Barsky-Firkser L, Sun S. Universal newborn hearing screenings: a 
three-year experience. Pediatrics 1997; 99: E4.
27. Personal communication with Y Weirather, B Vohr, and 
V Thomson. 1999.
28. Hyde ML, Riko K, Malizia K. Audiometric accuracy of the click 
ABR in infants at risk for hearing loss. J Am Acad Audiol 1990; 
1: 59-66.
29. Murray A, Javel E, Watson C. Prognostic validity of auditory 
brainstem evoked response screening in newborn infants. Am J 
Otolaryngol 1985; 6: 120-31.
30. Joint Committee on Infant Hearing 2000 Position Statement: 
Principles and guidelines for early hearing detection and inter­
vention programs. Am J Audiology. 2000; 9: 9-29.
31. Pappas DB, Schaibly M. A two-year diagnostic report on bilateral 
sensorineural hearing loss in infants and children. Am] Otol 1984; 
5: 339-42.
32. Elssmann SF, Matkin ND, Sabo MP. Early identification of 
congenital sensorineural hearing impairment. Hear J 1987; 40: 
13-17.
33. Mauk GW, White KR, Mortensen LB, Behrens TR. The effec­
tiveness of screening programs based on high-risk characteristics 
in early identification of hearing impairment. Ear Hear 1991; 12: 
312-19.
34. Mahoney TM, Eichwald JG. The ‘ups and downs’ of high-risk 
hearing screening: the Utah statewide program. Semin Hear 1987; 
8: 155-63.
35. McClelland RJ, Watson DR, Lawless V et al. Reliability and effec­
tiveness of screening for hearing loss in high-risk neonates. BMJ 
1992; 304: 806-9.
36. Haggard MP. Hearing screening in children—state of the art(s). 
Arch Dis Child 1990; 65: 1193-8.
37. Scanlon PE, Bamford JM. Early identification of hearing loss: 
screening and surveillance methods. Arch Dis Child 1990; 65: 
479-85.
38. Bonfils P, Uziel A, Pujol R. Screening for auditory dysfunction in 
infants by evoked oto-acoustic emissions. Arch Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1988; 114: 887-90.
39. Stevens JC, Webb HD, Hutchinson J et al. Click evoked oto­
acoustic emissions compared with brainstem electric response. 
Arch Dis Child 1989; 64: 1105-11.
40. Stevens JC, Webb HD, Hutchinson J et al. Click evoked oto­
acoustic emissions in neonatal screening. Ear Hear 1990; 11: 
128-33.
41. Plinkert PK, Sesterhenn G, Arold R, Zenner HP. Evaluation of 
otoacoustic emissions in high-risk infants by using an easy and 
rapid objective auditory screening method. Eur Arch Otorhino­
laryngol 1990; 247: 356-60.
42. White KR, Behrens TR, eds. The Rhode Island Hearing Assess­
ment Project: Implications for universal newborn hearing screen­
ing. Semin Hear 1993; 14(1).
43. Herrmann BS, Thornton AR, Joseph JM. Automated infant hear­
ing screening using the ABR: Development and validation. Am J 
Audiol 1995; 4: 6-14.
44. Hall JW, Kileny PR, Ruth RA, Kripal JP. Newborn auditory 
screening with ALGO-1 vs. conventional auditory brainstem 
response. Asha 1987; 29: 120.
45. Jacobson JT, Jacobson CA, Spahr RC. Automated and conven­
tional ABR screening techniques in high-risk infants. ] Am Acad 
Audiol 1990; 1: 187-95.
46. Von Wedel H, Schauseil-Zipf U, Doring WH. Horscreening bei 
Neugeborenen and Sauglingen. Laryngol Rhinol Otol 1988; 67: 
307-11.
47. Bess FH, Paradise JL. Universal screening for infant hearing 
impairment: not simple, not risk-free, not necessarily beneficial, 
and not presently justified. Pediatrics 1994; 93: 330-4.
  

348 
Auditory disorders and their management
48. Luterman D, Kurtzer-White E. Identifying hearing loss: parents’ 
needs. Am J Audiology. 1999; 8: 13-18.
49. Tharpe AM, Clayton EW. Newborn hearing screening: issues in 
legal liability and quality assurance. Am] Audiol 1997; 6: 5-12.
50. Rothenberg MB, Sills EM. Latrogenesis: the PKU anxiety syn­
drome. J Am Acad Child Psychiatry 1968; 7: 689-92.
51. Bodegard G, Fyro K, Larsson A. Psychological reactions in families 
with a newborn who has a falsely positive screening test for con­
genital hypothyroidism. Acta Paediatr Scand Suppl 1983; 304: 1-2.
52. Tluczek A, Mischier EH, Farrell PM et al. Parents’ knowledge of 
neonatal screening and response to false-positive cystic fibrosis 
testing. Dev Behav Pediatrics 1992; 13: 181-6.
53. Magnuson M, Hergils L. The parent’s view on hearing screening 
in newborns. Scand Audiol 1999; 28: 47-56.
54. Vohr BR, Letoumeau KS, McDermott C. Maternal worry about 
neonatal hearing screening. J Perinatol 2001; 21: 15-20.
55. White KR, Shalala M. A sound beginning: Ohio’s Infant Hearing 
Screening and Assessment Program. National Center for Hearing 
Assessment and Management, Utah State University, Logan, 
Utah. 1998.
56. Watkin PM, Baldwin M, Dixon R, Beckman A. Maternal anxiety 
and attitudes to universal neonatal hearing screening. Br J Audiol 
1998; 32: 27-37.
57. Barringer DG, Mauk GW. Survey of parents perceptions regarding 
hospital-based newborn hearing screening. Audiol Today 1997; 9: 
18-19.
58. Watkin PM, Beckman A, Baldwin M. The views of parents of
hearing impaired children on the need for neonatal hearing 
screening. BrJ Audiol 1995; 29: 259-62.
59. Yoshinaga-ltano C, Sedey A, Apuzzo M et al. The effect of early 
identification on the development of deaf and hard-of-hearing infants 
and toddlers. Paper presented at the Joint Committee on Infant 
Hearing Meeting, Austin, TX. July 1996.
60. Yoshinaga-ltano C, Coulter DK, Thomson V. The Colorado New­
born Hearing Screening Project: Effects on speech and language 
development for children with hearing loss. J Perinatol 2000; 
20(suppl 8): S132-S137.
61. Yoshinaga-ltano C, Sedey AL, Coulter DK, Mehl AL. Language of 
early- and later-identified children with hearing loss. Pediatrics 
1998; 102: 1161-71.
62. Apuzzo ML, Yoshinaga-ltano C. Early identification of infants 
with significant hearing loss and the Minnesota child develop­
ment inventory. Seminars in Hearing. 1995; 16: 124-39.
63. Yoshinaga-ltano C, Sedey AL, Coulter DK, Mehl AL. Language of 
early- and later-identified children with hearing loss. Pediatrics 
1998; 102: 1161-71.
64. Calderon R, Naidu S. Further support of the benefits of early iden­
tification and intervention with children with hearing loss. Volta 
Rev 2000; 100: 53-84.
65. Moeller MP. Early intervention and language development in 
children who are deaf and hard of hearing. Pediatrics 2000; 106: 
E43.
66. Watkins S. Final Report: 1982-83 Work scope of the Early Interven­
tion Research Institute. Logan, Utah: Utah State University. 198
  

■
Clinical and audiometric 
assessment of hearing
Rosalyn A Davies
An accurate assessment of hearing is best made using both oto- 
logical and audiological information. This is because of the 
complex inter-relationship between structure and function in 
the auditory system— one aspect cannot be considered without 
the other. Hearing impairment implies a lesion somewhere in 
the auditory pathway: the sound wave arrives at the pinna, is 
conducted through the middle ear, is transduced into electrical 
energy in the inner ear, is relayed through the brainstem and 
finally projected to the auditory cortex. Occasionally there may 
also be a psychological component to the hearing loss, which 
only rarely is the entire basis of the hearing loss.
Thus the aim of this chapter is to describe the clinical assess­
ment of hearing, referring both to the structure of the auditory 
system (the otological perspective) and to the functional aspects 
as assessed by auditory testing (the audiological perspective).
The anamnesis
The history of auditory symptoms should be used to guide the 
examination.
HEARING LOSS
Date of onset.
Gradual or sudden.
Progressive, stable or fluctuating.
Unilateral or bilateral*
ASSOCIATED SYMPTOMS
Aural fullness, discharge, pain, vertigo.
Tinnitus (pitch, pulsatile or clicking).
Diplacusis, hyperacusis, distortion.
Any difficulties in localizing sound.
Past medical history: noise exposure (occupational, 
social or gunfire), ear/head trauma, use of ototoxic 
drugs, allergies, previous surgery to ear(s), infections
(mumps, measles, meningitis), cardiovascular risk 
factors.
Birth and neonatal history
Family history: family pedigree, syndromal or non- 
syndromal hearing loss.
It is also important to ask about more general points, e.g. the 
effect of the hearing loss on the patient, the social situation of 
the patient and any past attempts at rehabilitation, i.e. assistive 
listening devices and communication training.
Clinical examination
From the moment the patient steps through the door, information 
can be collected about the patient’s hearing status. Do they com­
municate easily? Do they have to face the examiner to hear them? 
Are there any general medical or neurological features that can be 
picked up from observation, e.g. tremor or abnormal gait?
In general, the medical examination will be guided by the 
anamnesis. It should include:
appearance of the facies: xanthelasma, plethora, syn­
dromal features (see below)
tenderness of the superficial temporal and facial 
arteries
auscultation of the supraclavicular fossae and carotid
arteries in the neck
blood pressure measurement
evidence of thyroid dysfunction, i,e, exophthalmos, 
tremor, enlargement of the thyroid in the neck 
assessment of the patient’s affect, intellectual perfor­
mance and memory capabilities (important for assessing 
the patient’s ability to understand the diagnosis and its 
implications and to follow a rehabilitative programme) 
assessment of central language functions.

350 
Auditory disorders and their management
Neurological examination will again be guided by the anamnesis.
CRANIAL NERVE EXAMINATION
Olfactory (I): sense of smell as tested using aromatic 
substances such as oil of cloves, peppermint 
Optic nerve (II): pupil size and ipsilateral and con­
sensual reactivity to light and accommodation; 
examination of fundi; visual acuity tested using 
Snellen charts; assessment of visual fields 
Oculomotor (III), trochlear (IV) and abducens (VI): 
assessment of full range and conjugacy of eye move­
ments, identification of ptosis
Trigeminal (V): ipsilateral and consensual corneal 
reflexes, facial sensation to light touch, pinprick and 
temperature, assessment of jaw muscles 
Facial (VII): facial asymmetry and assessment of 
muscles of facial expression, including orbicularis 
oculi; assessment of taste using sugar, salt, quinine 
and acid
Cochleovestibular (VIII): tested using Rinne and 
Weber tuning fork tests; vestibular component tested 
using caloric stimulation
Glossopharyngeal (IX) and vagus (X): observation of 
palatal movement and symmetry; swallowing and 
eliciting gag reflex
Accessory (XI): movement of head to right and left 
against resistance; shrugging shoulders 
Hypoglossal (XII): observing the tongue at rest and 
then 
protruded, 
looking for 
fasciculation 
and 
asymmetry.
If central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction is suspected, a full 
CNS examination will be helpful and should include assess­
ment of power, sensation, coordination and reflexes in all four 
limbs in addition to the cranial nerve examination.
Clinical speech tests
These tests, using the human voice over a range of intensities, can 
be used to give an estimation of auditory threshold and help to 
detect non-organic hearing loss. Three intensities of the human 
voice are used to assess hearing: a whisper, a conversational voice 
and a loud voice. It is useful for testers to calibrate themselves 
against a sound level meter as they learn to use speech tests:
Whispered voice (WV)— this should be a forced whis­
per, i.e. the loudest whisper that the tester can produce. 
The vocal chords should be abducted throughout. 
Conversational voice (CV)—the intensity used 
when conversing in a quiet room.
Loud voice (LV)— the loudest shout that the tester 
can produce.
Swan1 determined the equivalent pure tone audiometric 
thresholds for a range of voice tests delivered by two otologists 
to 101 patients, showing a mean of WV at 60 cm of 51 dBA, a 
mean of CV at 60 cm of 73 dBA, and a mean of LV at 60 cm of 
92 dBA. Browning et al2 evaluated the sensitivity and speci­
ficity of a whispered voice test at 60 cm for detection of a speech 
frequency impairment greater than 30 dB as 96% and 91% 
respectively.
The tester should position himself to one side of the patient 
in such a way that visual clues are excluded, and that he is 
standing either at 15 cm or 60 cm from the test ear. 60 cm is 
arm’s length and allows the tester to mask the non-test ear 
throughout testing. Masking is achieved by tragal rubbing, i.e. 
occlusion of the external auditory meatus by fingertip pressure 
on the tragus and gentle rubbing, to produce broadband noise, 
or the use of a Barany noise box (but only when the test stimu­
lus is delivered using a loud voice). The stimulus typically used 
is a series of three numbers, e.g. 3-6-2. A positive test is correct 
identification of >50% of the numbers presented.
Speech tests are limited and not a substitute for audiome­
try. They have a role in estimating auditory thresholds and are 
valuable in the identification of non-organic hearing loss and 
where the patient cannot be relied on to give accurate pure 
tone audiometric thresholds e.g. the mentally handicapped. It 
should be remembered when diagnosing a non-organic hearing 
loss that exaggeration of a mild hearing loss is more common 
than a total non-organic hearing loss. Other methods of esti­
mating auditory thresholds, e.g. finger friction tests, are now 
largely obsolete because of the difficulties of standardizing the 
stimulus.
Clinical examination of the ear
Careful inspection of the ear is essential. It includes examina­
tion of the auricle (pinna), the external auditory meatus and the 
middle ear as far as can be assessed by the examination of 
the tympanic membrane (TM). The TM offers a window into 
the middle ear cleft and is affected by most of the changes that 
can take place in the middle ear.
Before the otologist can proceed further with the evalua­
tion, two common problems must be ruled out, both of which 
can cause spurious conductive hearing loss.
Presence of a collapsing external acoustic meatus
The pressure of a test earphone can be sufficient to produce a 
valve-like closing of the external acoustic meatus, such that a 
conductive hearing loss can be simulated (Figure 21.1). This 
can occur as a result of loss of the elasticity of the cartilage. To 
determine if a collapse is likely to occur during testing, pressure 
should be exerted on the auricle, pressing it in towards the head. 
If the opening of the meatus closes, a device should be entered 
into the opening to prevent it collapsing when the test earphone 
is in place, e.g. a piece of small-diameter tubing or an impedance 
probe tip. Alternatively, an MC41 ear cushion may be used.
  

Clinical and audiometric assessment of hearing 
351
jy
c
X
80 -
90 -
100 
-
no -
120 ____ 1_______ 1_______ 1_______ 1_______ 1_______ 1_______ 1___
125 
250 
500 
1000 
2000 
4000 
8000
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 21.1 Pure tone audiometry: collapsed external auditory meatus.
By comparison with left-ear thresholds, the auditory thresholds from the right 
ear are raised by an average of 12.5 dB as a result of a collapsed auditory meatus.
Presence of obstructing wax (cerumen) or debris
A large amount of hardened wax in the external acoustic meatus 
may become impacted and lead to a conductive hearing loss (Fig' 
ure 21.2). If impacted, the wax must be removed carefully with­
out causing pain to the patient. Hard lumps can be removed 
using the Jobson Home probe or a Cawthome wax hook. Mate­
rial can be removed with forceps, e.g. Tilley’s dressing forceps 
(large blades) or smaller forceps, although they tend to tear the 
debris, making it more difficult to remove. Cotton wool may be
125 
250 
500 
1000 
2000 
4000 
8000 
Frequency (Hz)
twisted onto the carrier end of the Jobson Home probe to mop out 
wet material. A sterile swab may be used to sample infected mate­
rial for fungal and bacteria culture and for antibiotic sensitivity.
An alternative method for removing wax is by syringing.
If the wax seems very hard, it can be softened over a period 
of a week using warm olive oil drops administered nightly. 
Alternatively, 5% sodium bicarbonate drops may be used, or a 
ceruminolytic preparation, which is available commercially.
ABSOLUTE CONTRADICTIONS TO 
SYRINGING
in the presence of an infection 
when the ear is known to have a perforation 
if, from the history, the ear is suspected to have a vul­
nerable tympanic membrane.
The method of syringing is as follows (Figure 21.3):
Ask the patient to sit in a chair and protect them with 
a plastic cape and towel.
Ask the patient to hold a kidney dish receiver on the 
shoulder.
Draw up a solution of sterile water at 37°C in a metal 
or rubber syringe {any variation from this temperature 
will cause the patient to experience vertigo),
Draw the pinna upwards and backwards.
Place the nozzle a few millimetres into the canal, 
pointing it upwards and backwards.
Direct the stream along the roof of the canal between 
the skin and wax.
Figure 21.2 Pure tone audiometry, (a) Impacted wax, before removal: by comparison with the right ear, auditory thresholds are raised on the left by an average of 
24dB. (b) Impacted wax, after removal: following wax removal, auditory thresholds have improved on the left by an average of 32 dB.
  

352 
Auditory disorders and their management
Figure 21.3 Ear syringing (see text).
Syringing should not be painful, and must be stopped if the 
patient complains of pain. Dedicated syringing machines are 
available to deliver mechanically a stream of water at body 
temperature.
The external ear 
The auricle
The auricle (Figure 21.4) is essentially vestigial, contributing 
only to the collection of sound, slightly enhancing the efficacy 
of the ear, and to conducting the sound towards the TM and the 
middle ear .
The pinna and postaural area should be inspected for signs 
of inflammation, trauma (specifically looking for evidence of a 
surgical operation, e.g. a postaural incision or an end-aural inci­
sion between the tragus and rest of helix), or haematoma auris 
following a blow to the ear, and importantly, deformities.
Figure 21.4 Auricle.
Congenital
Most developmental deformities are fairly obvious, but must be 
carefully identified because of the likely associated findings of 
middle and inner ear abnormalities and consequent hearing 
impairment (see below).
m 
Anotia: the absence of an auricle. It may be completely 
absent or there may be rudimentary tubercles. The external 
auditory meatus is likely to be absent.
■ 
Microtia: a smaller than normal and probably misshapen 
auricle. The external auditory meatus is likely to be 
absent and there are often abnormalities of the ossicular 
chain. Three types exist: grade 1—malformed pinna, but 
with most of the features; grade 2—rudimentary pinna 
with cylindrical bar of tissue curved at the cranial end; 
grade 3— more severe with only a malformed nodule 
present.
m 
Macrotia: an excessively large auricle, often with no other 
associated abnormalities of structure or function.
■ 
Polyotia: very rarely found; a typical abnormality would be 
two auricles facing each other on one side of the head.
■ 
Synotia and melotia: misplaced auricle; synotia is when it 
is placed posteriorly in the cervical part of the neck, and 
melotia when it is placed anteriorly.
m 
Abnormalities of the helix: a cat’s ear describes a down- 
ward-folded auricle; a cup ear is a hollow ear; a Mozart ear 
has an enlarged antihelix continuous with the helix. 
m 
Pre-auricular appendages: may represent accessory and 
rudimentary auricles and are found in 1.5% of the popula­
tion. Normally found anterior to the tragus, the auricular 
appendage contains cartilage which extends medially.
& 
Fistula auris: a small blind pit seen commonly anterior to 
the tragus (i.e. pre-auricular sinus Figure 21.5). It results 
from incomplete fusion of the auricular tubercles. It can 
become infected.
Acquired
m 
Haematoma: may follow a blow on the ear and is com­
monly found in boxers and rugby players. Bleeding occurs 
between the cartilage and covering layers of perichon­
drium. The whole auricle may become involved, appearing 
as a bluish shapeless mass. If left untreated, the cartilage 
necroses and the auricle becomes a shrivelled appendage— 
a cauliflower ear. 
m 
Acute dermatitis: may occur as an extension of the meatal 
infection in otitis externa. The oedematous red auricle 
desquamates, with the copious production of serous fluid— 
‘weeping eczema’. 
m 
Chondrodermatitis chronicus helicus: most often occurs 
in elderly males, presenting with a nodular and exquisitely 
tender swelling of the helix which may be ulcerated. 
m 
Squamous cell and basal cell carcinomas may be sited 
on the auricle, tending to occur on the upper edge, and 
examination 
will 
require 
a 
search 
for 
associated 
lymphadenopathy.
  

Clinical and audiometric assessment of hearing 
353
Figure 21.5 Pre-auricular sinus and branchial cyst in a baby with 
branchio-oto-renal syndrome. (Courtesy of Dr Tony Sirimanna.)
External acoustic meatus
Congenital
s 
Narrowed external acoustic meatus (EAM): a patent 
EAM, but narrowed along the whole length. May require 
microsuction to prevent occlusion by keratin.
9 
Stenosed EAM: the EAM is narrowed at the junction of 
the cartilaginous and bony part of the EAM. It can be bi- or 
unilateral, can be familial, and can be associated with other 
abnormalities.
i 
Atretic EAM: this is closed over with a membranous 
and/or bony wall across the canal. It is caused by a failure of 
the ectodermal cord to canalize and is frequently associated 
with other abnormalities, being found in 1-2/100000 
births. One in four are bilateral. Atretic EAMs are graded 
according to severity:
(a) Grade 1 (mild)—part of the external canal is present, 
the TM is present, but may be smaller than normal. The 
middle ear cavity is of a normal or slightly reduced size.
(b) Grade 2 (moderate)— the external canal is completely 
absent, the TM is diminished and the ossicles 
deformed. The atretic plate is partly or completely 
ossified.
(c) Grade 3 (severe)— the external ear canal is completely 
absent, the middle ear cavity is markedly smaller and 
the atretic plate completely ossified.
Audiometry and immittance testing on these children, if possi­
ble, has prognostic value for hearing improvement as far as 
surgery is concerned and the following tests are recommended: 
pure tone audiometry, tympanometry, and stapedial reflex test­
ing. Radiological investigation needs to be pursued if atresia is 
identified. The prospect of improving the likely associated con­
ductive deafness with surgical intervention is very dependent 
on the size and shape of the middle ear cavity, which can best 
be assessed by CT scanning. Ideally base CT scans and coronal 
2-mm sections should be performed. Phelps and Lloyd3 recom­
mend that all neonates with atretic meati should be imaged 
before the baby is discharged following birth. This is for reasons 
of ease of investigation and to identify any surgically cor­
rectable associated abnormalities early.
For example, where unilateral atresia is found associated 
with a deformity of the pinna, often a normally formed mastoid 
is seen and there is good pneumatization of the middle ear. This 
again has implications for the surgical prognosis. An air-con- 
taining middle ear is likely to be associated with a good surgical 
outcome, whereas if the middle ear is filled with undifferenti­
ated embryological mesenchyme, indistinguishable from glue 
on imaging, then surgical results are poor. This is because of 
persistence of tubal dysfunction and the possibility of thin bony 
septa dividing the middle ear into several different compart­
ments, all of which may not have been identified by the sur­
geon.
Additionally, with the dramatic developments in localizing 
and identifying genes responsible for both syndromal and non- 
syndromal hearing impairment, the diagnostic protocol for 
abnormalities of the outer and middle ear should include clini­
cal genetics assessment.4
Acquired
m 
Otitis externa: bacterial infection of the skin of the EAM 
resulting in tissue oedema and swelling so as to obstruct the 
canal and produce a conductive hearing loss. The most 
common bacterial infections are those with Staphylococcus, 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and diphtheroids; fungal infections 
include Aspergillus niger and Candida albicans, and the vesic­
ular eruptions of Herpes zoster virus may also be seen in the 
distribution of the auriculotemporal division of the trigem­
inal nerve in the Ramsay Hunt syndrome.
Furunculosis: infection of the hair follicles with Staphylo­
coccus is limited to the outer part of the meatus.
- 
Foreign body obstruction: examples are small objects, such 
as beads or pips, inserted into the EAM often by young chil­
dren. Other foreign bodies include insects such as the com­
mon fly, which on entering the EAM may produce an 
irritation due to the flapping of its wings. 
u 
Osteoma: discrete, rounded, white excrescences of bone. 
Can be confused with cholesteatoma.
  

354 
Auditory disorders and their management
f§ 
Exostoses, or small osteomata, are quite common and usu- 
ally bilateral. They are often found in people who swim or 
dive regularly and are thought to be due to prolonged expo­
sure to cold water. They are hard and smooth, covered with 
canal skin, hard to palpation, and exquisitely sensitive. 
m 
Hyperostosis: A diffuse bony narrowing of the canal.
Tympanic membrane and middle ear
Examination of the tympanic membrane and middle ear
Inspection of the ear may be carried out either with the use of 
an otoscope, or with a head-worn light source whereby the 
hands are free to remove wax or discharge. Alternatively, the 
light source can be a separate lamp with the light reflected by a 
head-worn mirror and directed coaxially to the line of vision 
and down the hand-held speculum.
A binocular microscope for inspection and manipulation of 
the ear canal is also an essential tool for inspection of the ear 
canal. It is used optimally with the patient lying on a couch, but 
can also be used with the patient sitting close to horizontal. The 
objective should have a focal length of between 200 and 250 
mm, and the range of magnification should be between 6X and 
25X. A Seigle’s (or pneumatic) speculum with clear glass is a 
valuable adjunct to the microscope, as it allows assessment of 
the mobility of the TM.
The largest speculum that can be comfortably fitted into 
the canal should be chosen and introduced carefully into the 
canal, with the pinna held between the thumb and forefinger of 
the examiner’s hand and gently retracted backwards to 
straighten out the curve in the cartilaginous meatus. The specu­
lum should then be directed around the complete circumfer­
ence of the canal, looking for debris or foreign bodies, 
inflammation, and in particular defects of the posterior or attic 
wall. To identify the TM the floor of the meatus should be fol­
lowed, as it makes a sharp angle with the TM.
The magnifying lens of the Siegle’s speculum can be fitted 
into the speculum and the bulb squeezed to raise intrameatal 
pressure, and then relaxed, sucking the membrane outwards. In 
the presence of a middle ear effusion, the membrane is immobile; 
however, a very flaccid TM may have been sucked back onto the 
middle ear mucosa, and lowering the pressure may suck it out 
again, allowing a retraction pocket to be distinguished from a 
perforation. Alternatively, the Valsalva manoeuvre (which is the 
standard method of auto-inflation of the ear) can be employed to 
raise middle ear pressure and to observe these changes: the 
patient is asked to pinch the nostrils between the forefinger and 
thumb and then, with lips closed, blow out their cheeks while 
trying to blow down the nose. If successful, the patient will expe­
rience a sensation of fullness in the ears.
Fistula sign
This sign is elicited in those patients where there is a transmis­
sion of air pressure changes from the external auditory meatus 
via a fistula to the labyrinth causing endolymph movement and 
resulting in nystagmus. Raised pressure causes a conjugate devi­
ation of the eyes towards the opposite ear, and with mainte­
nance of pressure, a corrective fast eye movement will be intro­
duced and the nystagmus will beat towards the affected ear. The 
direction of nystagmus will depend on where the fistula has 
developed, but most commonly, the site is the horizontal semi­
circular canal, and the nystagmus is horizontal; if in the ante­
rior canal, the nystagmus is torsional and toward the affected 
ear, and if in the posterior canal, it is vertical.
The pressure may be raised by finger pressure on the tragus, 
but more accurately by tympanometry to induce a precise 
increase in pressure. This sign should be sought in all dizzy 
patients and particularly in those with chronic middle ear dis­
ease. False negative signs may be found when cholesteatoma- 
tous disease is well advanced and the labyrinth has become 
unresponsive. Hennebert’s sign is a positive fistula sign in the 
presence of an intact TM, and is classically attributed to 
syphilitic otitis.
The tympanic membrane
The standard landmarks and features of the TM should be iden­
tified: i.e. the central portion and the handle of the malleus, 
which are the most consistent features; distinction between the 
pars flaccida and the pars tensa of the drum; and identification 
of the long process of the incus and the stapedius tendon, which 
may be visible in transparent membranes.
Perforations
Those of the pars tensa are classified as marginal or central, 
according to whether the rim of the tympanic membrane forms 
part of the circumference of the perforation. Defects of the epi- 
tympanic recess are described as attic perforations and qualified 
as small or large (Figure 21.6). The position of the perforation 
is then defined as anterior, inferior or posterior if it is marginal. 
Very large central perforations are described as subtotal, and 
very large marginal perforations as total.
Colour
Normally, the TM has the appearance of mother of pearl. The 
light reflex is found anteroinferiorly, where reflection of the
Figure 21.6 Small central perforation of the left tympanic membrane. 
(Courtesy of Mr Gerald Brookes.)
  

Clinical and audiometric assessment of hearing 
355
examining light occurs. Where the membrane is thickened, the 
reflex may be lost. Hyaline degeneration may occur when the 
middle layer of fibrous tissue undergoes hyaline degeneration, 
and may become impregnated with deposits of calcium, i.e. 
tympanosclerosis (Figure 21.7).
Position of the membrane
Retraction of the membrane may result when there is a 
chronic lowering of pressure in the middle ear, such as is seen 
when there is chronic obstruction of the Eustachian tube. The 
handle of the malleus is drawn inward, and there is retraction 
of the TM towards the medial wall of the middle ear. In severe 
cases, the membrane is stretched around the long process of 
the incus and head of the stapes. At worst, the membrane is 
plastered against the promontory. A fluid level may be visible 
if secretory otitis media has resulted from the reduction of 
middle ear pressure. If air bubbles are seen, middle ear fluid is 
confirmed.
The TM may bulge outwards into the meatus as a result of 
raised middle ear pressure. This increased middle ear pressure 
may be due to acute suppurative otitis media (the bulge show­
ing the pus) when the colour is a bright cherry red. A yellow 
nipple may be a sign that the membrane is about to give way. 
Alternatively, if the colour is normal, the bulge is due to alter­
ation in raised air pressure in the middle ear alone. If the TM 
has been weakened by loss of the connective tissue middle layer 
by repeated large pressure changes in the middle ear, e.g. in 
wind instrument players, or where a perforation has healed 
over, the bulge may be restricted.
Abnormalities of the tympanic membrane and 
middle ear
fused malleus and incus
incus fixed to posterior bony annulus
congenital stapes fixation (+grossly deformed stapes)
absent stapedius tendon
uncovered VIIth nerve
aberrant Vlkh nerve
partial bony plate formation.
The clinical signs of common syndromes and conigental 
presentations are outlined in detail in the Overview sec­
tion beginning p. 366 in this chapter.
Audiological abnormalities may include the following:
m 
audiometry— air-bone gaps of <60 dB
■ 
tympanometry—flattened tympanogram
■ 
stapedius reflexes— absent.
Note that the hearing loss depends on the degree of abnormal­
ity of ossicular transmission.
Acquired 
Acute otitis media
Acute otitis media (Figure 21.8) is frequently associated with 
upper respiratory tract infections. The most common causative 
organisms are pneumococcus, Haemophilus influenzae and 
Moraxella catarrhalis, and all can be treated with amoxycillin 
(paediatric dose: 125 mg three times daily; or 750 mg twice daily 
for adults for 2 days).5 There is an exudative phase with an asso­
ciated conductive hearing loss, and a recovery phase when
Congenital
In general, the following abnormalities can occur:
Figure 21.7 A right tympanic membrane showing a patch of tympanosclerosis 
posteriorly. (Courtesy of Institute of Laryngology and Otology, London.)
Figure 21.8 Swollen, hyperaemic tympanic membrane in a patient with acute 
otitis media. (Courtesy of Mr Gerald Brookes.)
  

356 
Auditory disorders and their management
the middle ear becomes well ventilated again. On occasion, 
resolution is not complete and the conductive loss may persist.
m 
Pure tone audiogram: may be normal or may show conduc­
tive hearing loss. 
m 
Tympanometry: negative middle ear pressure, may be 
abnormal even with normal pure tone audiogram.
Chronic otitis media
Acute otitis media can lead to chronic otitis media (COM), 
and in association with COM a variety of other pathologies can 
be seen: TM perforation, incus necrosis, myringostapediopexy, 
malleus head fixation and cholesteatoma and tubo-tympanic 
disease.
Perforation
The drum can be destroyed in some cases of long-standing low- 
grade infection, or in incompletely treated acute otitis media. 
The size and location of the perforation determines the degree 
of conductive hearing loss. A large perforation, in general, is 
associated with a greater loss of sound pressure, but even a small 
perforation sited over the round window can produce a severe 
loss. If the perforation is associated with dislocation of the ossic­
ular chain, when the advancing sound front strikes the mobile 
stapes directly, the loss is approximately 30-40 dB.
Ossicular abnormalities
The ossicular chain may be damaged in long-standing infec­
tion, with the lenticular process and lower half of the long 
process of the incus being most frequently involved. Even with 
an intact drum, a discontinuous ossicular chain can lead to a 
60-dB loss.
The drum remnant may occasionally attach itself to the 
stapes head, leading to a myringostapedopexy. The hearing loss 
may be negligible, despite a very damaged drum. Alternatively, 
the malleus head may fix to the attic wall, producing a clinical 
picture similar to otosclerosis.
Tympanosclerosis
Tympanosclerosis is not infrequently found with long-standing 
infection, and indicates hyaline degeneration of the TM and 
impregnation with calcium. Large masses of tympanosclerosis 
may grow anywhere, producing fixation of the malleus, incus 
and stapes. A large conductive loss may be seen despite an 
intact TM.
Cholesteatoma
Cholesteatoma is a cyst lined with squamous epithelium which 
can arise in ears undergoing long periods of negative middle ear 
pressure and recurring middle ear infection. Cholesteatomatous 
cysts are likely to begin in the attic of the ear and extend into 
the mastoid antrum. They are filled with cast-off epithelial cell 
debris and slowly increase in size. They can erode the bone with 
which they come into contact and produce intracranial com­
plications by eroding through the dura of the middle or poste- 
rior fosssa, through the lateral sinus or into the lateral
semicircular canal (Figure 21.9). The facial nerve may be 
eroded in the middle ear or mastoid.
Cholesteatoma can be diagnosed from an attic or marginal 
(‘unsafe’) perforation, chronic foul-smelling discharge from the 
ear and keratin debris in the pars flaccida area on otoscopic 
examination. Cholesteatoma is potentially serious, and requires 
surgical removal. Cholesteatoma in the attic area may be 
removed by atticotomy, but usually mastoid tympanoplasty is 
required. Even following surgery, the patient must be followed 
for many years to be certain there is no recurrence of the cyst.
Tubo-tympanic disease
Chronic active otitis media unassociated with cholesteatoma is 
known as tubo-tympanic disease, it is characterized by recurrent 
infections rather than persistent infections, and by odourless 
and profuse mucoid discharge rather than offensive discharge. 
A central TM perforation and a break in the ossicular chain or 
malleus fixation are regarded as ‘safe’ and unlikely to be associ­
ated with cholesteatoma. A variety of bacterial species have 
been cultured from chronically draining ears: Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, Streptococcus, Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus 
aureuSy with Gram-negative organisms predominating. Manage­
ment includes periodic cleaning of the ear to remove keratin 
debris and the use of antibiotic steroid drops. If the ear becomes 
dry with this treatment, the patient may be suitable for 
myringoplasty or ossiculoplasty to repair the drum and ossicular 
chain. Otherwise, mastoid tympanoplasty may be required to 
remove chronic infection from mastoid air cells.
Polyp formation
Polyp formation may occur in chronic otitis media with perfo­
ration, when the mucosa hypertrophies and polypoid changes 
occur. They are identified by their soft shiny appearance, cov­
ered with mucosa.
Figure 21.9 Attic defect in the right ear of a patient (Courtesy of Institute of 
Laryngology and Otology, London.)
  

Clinical and audiometric assessment of hearing 
357
Otitis media with effusion (OME)
OME is recognized by the presence of an air-fluid level in the 
middle ear or a bluish discoloration of the TM, and lack of 
compliance of the drum as tested by pneumo-otoscopy or tym­
panometry. It is the most common cause of conductive hearing 
loss in children (see Chapter 23). In the adult, the presence of 
OME must initiate a search for neoplastic obstruction of the 
nasopharyngeal end of the Eustachian tube by indirect or 
direct nasopharyngoscopy and radiological imaging of the 
nasopharynx.
In children, the search should be for a medically treatable 
cause of Eustachian tube dysfunction, e.g. allergy, adenoidal 
hypertrophy, or craniofacial abnormalities. Palatal abnormali­
ties, particularly cleft palate, may be associated with OME 
because of the compromised mechanism for opening and clos­
ing the Eustachian tubes. These children may require long-term 
otological management of recurrent OME (Figure 21.10).
Management, in general, includes a trial of decongestants, 
auto-inflation through a modified Valsalva manoeuvre (or 
Politzer bag) or, eventually, myringotomy and insertion of a 
ventilating tube (normally in place for 8-12 months). For chil­
dren with recurrent OME, myringotomy may be combined with 
adenoidectomy. Aural amplification in children with recurrent 
OME is now being evaluated.6
Other effusions include blood (i.e. haemotympanum) or 
cerebrospinal fluid within the middle ear space. Haemo tympa­
num following head injury suggests a basal skull fracture, but 
haemo tympanum may also result from barotrauma, e.g. scuba 
diving.
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 21.10 Pure tone audiometry in a 6-year-old with serous otitis media 
with effusion, showing an air-bone gap of between 25 and 40 dB.
Otosclerosis
Typically, in the early osteoblastic phase of this autosomal dom­
inantly inherited condition, the appearance of the tympanic 
membrane is of hyperaemia of the malleus i.e. Schwartze’s sign.
m 
Pure tone audiometry: typically a conductive hearing loss is 
seen early in the condition with a reduced air-bone gap at
2 
kHz,7 but later a sensorineural loss may be seen as well. 
m 
Tympanometry: low tympanic compliance peak.
Head/ear trauma
A variety of outer and middle ear abnormalities can arise as a 
result of head trauma. If bloody otorrhoea is identified, there is 
a possibility that a longitudinal fracture of the petrous temporal 
bone has occurred and there has been perforation of the TM 
and possible dislocation of the ossicular chain. Audiometry is 
mandatory.8
■ 
Pure tone audiometry: may identify a conductive hearing 
loss, but a variety of configurations of sensorineural hearing 
loss may also be seen associated with labyrinthine concus­
sion. A total hearing loss is suggestive of a transverse frac­
ture of the petrous temporal bone.
■ 
Radiology: skull X-ray and CT scanning to exclude a 
temporal bone fracture.
Glomus tumours
A glomus tympanicum tumour may be identified as a vascular 
mass behind the tympanic membrane (also described as the ‘set­
ting sun’ sign), and the patient may describe pulsatile tinnitus.
m 
Pure tone audiometry: may identify a conductive hearing 
loss.
■ 
Tympanometry: may identify a pulsatile tympanogram.
m 
Radiology: erosion of the middle ear cavity by space- 
occupying lesion.
The clinical value of tuning fork 
tests
Tuning fork tests have been traditionally used to distinguish 
conductive from sensorineural hearing loss and identify func­
tional hearing loss. With the advent of pure tone audiometry, 
only a few have withstood the test of time and are still used 
clinically. A full account of the history of tuning fork tests has 
been given by Hinchcliffe.9
They rely on two general principles: (1) that the inner ear 
is more is more sensitive to sound conducted by air than by 
bone; and (2) in a pure conductive hearing loss, the affected ear 
is subject to less environmental noise and is more sensitive to 
bone-conducted sound.
The most commonly used tuning forks are those tuned to 
256 and 512 Hz, lower frequencies than 256 Hz producing a 
vibrotactile stimulus which causes misleading thresholds. The 
256 Hz tuning fork has been shown in clinical practice to
  

358 
Auditory disorders and their management
distinguish air-bone gaps more effectively than the 512-Hz 
fork.10 In general, when carrying out tuning fork tests:
m 
They should be performed in a quiet room. 
m 
The prong should be struck against a hard but elastic mass, 
e.g. a rubber pad, as otherwise overtones may be produced. 
m 
The fork should be struck two-thirds of the way along its 
tines, to minimize distortion products.
Differentiation of conductive and 
sensorineural impairment
Rinne’s tuning fork test
Heinrich Rinne described his eponymous tuning fork test in 
1855.11,12 The following is the loudness comparison method 
(Figure 21.11):
m 
The fork is struck and held with the tines perpendicular to 
the long axis of the EAM, with the closest tine within 1 cm 
of the entrance to the meatus.
*  
The patient is asked to report if he can hear the sound. 
m 
The fork is then immediately transferred behind the ear, 
with the base soundly pressed to the bone overlying the 
mastoid.
m 
The patient is asked which sound is louder: that ‘in front of 
the ear’ or that ‘behind the ear’. 
m 
If the sound in front of the ear is reported as louder (i.e. air- 
conducted (or AC) sound) than that behind the ear (i.e. 
bone-conducted (or BC) sound), the Rinne test is described 
as being positive. The test is described as negative if the 
sound in front of the ear is reported as quieter.
Positive test (AC >  BC)
In an ear with a normal conductive mechanism, air-conducted 
sound will be perceived as louder than bone-conducted sound. 
A positive test indicates either a normal hearing ear or an ear 
with a sensorineural hearing loss.
Negative test (AC <  BC)
If, however, the test is negative, this indicates a significant con­
ductive component to the hearing loss, i.e. of > 1 5 dBHL. A 
false negative Rinne can occur if there is a severe sensorineural 
hearing loss in the tested ear. In this situation, the bone con­
duction stimulus is heard in the non-tested ear because of trans- 
cranial transmission and will be louder than the air conduction 
stimulus. Masking of the non-affected ear can be carried out 
using a Barany noise box (this emits white noise and raises the 
threshold of hearing such that intracranial transmission of the 
bone-conducted sound cannot be heard). Results should, how­
ever, be interpreted with caution, as the loudness of sound 
heard by bone conduction is very dependent on the pressure 
with which the fork is held against the bone.
In the threshold comparison method, the fork is pressed against 
the bone over the mastoid and the patient is asked to say when 
the tone disappears. When this occurs, the fork is immediately 
placed in front of the ear and the patient is asked if they can 
still hear the tone. If not, this would suggest that there is a con­
ductive hearing component to the hearing loss.
The Rinne is best used as a test for a significant conductive 
component to the hearing loss. It has a high specificity but a 
low sensitivity,13 with the sensitivity not reaching 90% until the 
air-bone gap exceeded 30 dB in a typical series.14 The crossover 
point at which the Rinne test is likely to become negative is at 
an air-bone gap of around 18dB.
Figure 21.11 Rinne's tuning fork test (see text), (a) The tuning fork is held 1 cm away from the orifice of the external auditory meatus until the sound has 
disappeared, (b) The tuning fork is then applied to the mastoid process behind the ear, and the patient is asked to say if he can still hear the sound.
  

Clinical and audiometric assessment of hearing 
359
Weber’s tuning fork test
The Weber test is used in conjunction with the Rinne test and 
is of most use in patients with unilateral hearing loss. The aim 
is to identify the better-hearing cochlea.
Ernst Weber described the test in 1834:15
■ 
The 512 Hz tuning fork is struck and placed to the head in 
the mid-line (vertex or forehead).
■ 
The patient is asked whether the sound is heard better in 
one ear or equally in both ears.
In a normally hearing patient, the tone is heard centrally. Other­
wise, the tone is heard on the side of the better-hearing cochlea, 
except if there is a conductive component to the hearing loss, 
in which case the tone may be heard in the poorer-hearing ear.
The results need to be interpreted with caution and only in 
conjunction with the remaining battery of hearing tests. This 
test is best reserved for cases of unilateral hearing impairment.
Tuning fork tests can also be used to identify a cochlear com­
ponent to a hearing loss:
*  
A vibrating tuning fork is presented to one ear.
■ 
The patient is asked if the musical note sounds the same in 
the two ears.
Dysacusis is present if the patient describes the sound as being 
distorted or rough; diplacusis describes the phenomenon when 
a patient hears a single tone as two different pitches. It may be 
monaural or binaural, i.e. the two different pitches are heard as 
if coming from the same ear or from the two ears separately, 
respectively. Both these phenomena are features of cochlear 
hearing loss and are not uncommon in Meniere’s disease. They 
can also be heard in noise-induced temporary threshold shift.
Identification of non-organic hearing loss
Clinical suspicion is probably the strongest pointer to further 
investigation for a non-organic hearing loss. Throughout the 
examination, the clinician needs to be making an assessment as 
to whether the history and the hearing behaviour of the patient 
are compatible. Quite often, normal conversation can be 
achieved with a patient with a non-organic hearing loss, but as 
soon as voice tests or subjective hearing tests are carried out, 
thresholds are exaggerated. However, most patients with non- 
organic hearing loss do have some degree of hearing loss, and 
this must be borne in mind.
Stenger test
The aim of the Stenger test is to identify patients who feign a 
unilateral hearing loss. If pure tones of the same frequency but 
of different intensities are presented simultaneously to each ear, 
the normal subject will only be aware of the louder stimulus.
m 
Two tuning fork tests of the same frequency are presented 
simultaneously, one to each ear of the patient. 
m 
The fork presented to the ‘deaf’ ear is held close to the ear, 
while the other fork is held at a distance from the other ear.
In a patient with a genuine hearing loss, the patient will hear 
the fork in the good ear. However, the patient with a non- 
organic hearing loss will only be aware of the fork in the ‘deaf’ 
ear and will therefore deny the fork. When the test is performed 
as a tuning fork test, it can be difficult to judge the relative 
intensity of the two forks. For this reason, it is better that the 
test is performed with an audiometer, where the exact intensi­
ties of the stimuli are known and can be varied.
Diagnostic test procedures
Pure tone audiometry
Accurate air and bone conduction audiometry (carefully masked 
where necessary) shows the existence and extent of hearing loss 
and allows determination of whether the loss is conductive or 
sensorineural or both. It requires the cooperation of the subject 
and, as such, is a subjective estimate of hearing threshold. If the 
patient is unwilling or unable to cooperate with pure tone 
audiometry, additional electrophysiological investigation will 
be necessary to provide objective measures of threshold.
The technique involves measurement of the threshold of 
hearing, i.e. the lowest intensity at which a sound can still just 
be heard. There are two methods which can be used: manual 
audiometry and self-recording audiometry. As a psychoacousti­
cal measurement, the results of audiometry may be biased by 
particular methods of conducting the test, and so a well-defined 
procedure must be adopted.
Manual audiometry
An audiometer consists of a pure tone oscillator which may be 
set to one of several frequencies; a stepped attenuator to adjust 
the level of the signal according to a calibrated scale over a 
range from — lOdB to +90dB hearing level; an amplifier; ear­
phones (and, for bone conduction, a vibrator) and a power sup­
ply. The British Standard BS 596616 specifies the characteristics 
for these instruments.
A quiet test environment is required to obtain the subject’s 
true threshold. Audiometric booths are specifically designed to 
eliminate external noise, particularly sound at low noise levels. 
The International Standardization Organization 618917 gives 
limiting noise levels for threshold measurements down to —10 
dBHTL.
The threshold of hearing for a pure tone at a particular fre­
quency is defined as the lowest level of the tone which still can 
be heard on at least 50% of its presentations. This level is influ­
enced by the manner in which the level of tones is presented; 
that is, in manual audiometry with 5-dB steps, the apparent 
threshold is lower if approached from above (descending 
threshold) than if approached from below (ascending thresh­
old). The reference intensity level, which is designated OdB at 
each frequency, is the mean value of the minimal audible inten­
sity of pure tones in a group of healthy, normally hearing young 
male adults and corresponds to sound pressure levels set by the 
International Standards Organization.17
  

360 
Auditory disorders and their management
Table 21.1 indicates the loudness of different intensities of 
sound in terms of everyday sounds and as magnitudes of ampli­
fication of sound pressure levels.
Testing at the frequencies 250, 500 1000, 2000, 4000 and 
8000 Hz is recommended. Where abnormalities are detected 
adjacent additional frequencies may also be tested, i.e. 1500, 
3000 and 6000 Hz. The frequency to be tested first should be 
1000 Hz, as this is often the easiest frequency for the subject to 
hear; one should then progress to the higher frequencies in 
ascending order before dropping to the lower frequencies and 
then retesting at 1000 Hz. A disparity of greater than 5 dB sug­
gests that further repeats are necessary. It is important that the 
subject is instructed to respond to even the faintest sound, by 
pressing the button for the duration of the sound. A recom­
mended protocol has been described.18 Figure 21.12 shows the 
pure tone audiometry of a patient with mixed hearing loss.
Table 21.1 Decibel levels of sounds
Decibels
Sound
Magnitudes of amplification
140 dB
Jet engine
100000000000000
120 dB
Propeller aircraft
1 000000000000
tOOdB
Rock drill
10000000000
90 dB
Heavy vehicle
1 000000000
70 dB
Private car
10000000
60 dB
Conversation
1000000
30dB
Soft music
1000
10 dB
Leaf rustle
10
OdB
Barely audible
1
The results of measurement should be plotted on an audio­
gram chart in standard format:
*  
X = left air conduction
m 
O = right air-conduction
*  
A = unmasked bone conduction (identify on which mas­
toid the bone conductor was used)
■ 
[ = right masked bone conduction 
m 
] = left masked bone conduction
Self-recording audiometry (see Chapter......)
Most of the considerations applicable to manual audiometry are 
applicable to self-recording audiometry. However, the subject 
has a different task. The Rudemose self-recording audiometer 
uses a regularly pulsed tone (between 2 and 2.5 pulses/s) as the 
stimulus, and the apparatus automatically changes from one fre­
quency to another and from one ear to the other according to a 
preset programme. The level of the signal is controlled by the 
subject, who has a press-button which he depresses when he can 
hear the pulsing tone. When the button is pressed, the stimulus 
is altered at a preset rate to reduce the signal level until the sub­
ject ceases to press the button because the pulsed tone has 
become inaudible. The attenuator drive is then automatically 
reversed and the level increases at a similar rate until the sub­
ject presses the button again.
The subject thereby causes the signal level to bracket his 
threshold, and the audiometer plots this tracking with time 
on an audiogram chart. Thus the threshold may be deter­
mined from the chart for each frequency, and a permanent 
record is produced. Figure 21.13 demonstrates self-recording 
audiometry.
Right 
Left
Frequency (Hz) 
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 21.12 Pure tone audiometry from a patient with otosclerosis affecting the right ear and showing a mixed hearing loss with an air-bone gap varying 
between 25 and 50 dB on this side.
  

Clinical and audiometric assessment of hearing 
361
100 ---------- 1----------- 1----------- >-----------1----------- 1------------ ■
125 
250 
500 
1K 
2K 
4K 
8K
Frequency in Hz
1 0 0 ----------- ■------------ 1------------ 1----------- 1------------ 1------------- «
125 
250 
500 
IK 
2K 
4K 
8K
Frequency in Hz
Type III
100
125 
250 
500 
1K 
2K 
4K 
8K
Frequency in Hz
Type IV
IK 
2K 
Frequency in Hz
40 f-
Interrupted
Continuous
Figure 21.13 Self-recording audiometry. Dotted line, interrupted tone; continuous line, continuous tone. Type I: expected primarily from normal ears or those with 
a conductive hearing loss. Type II: typical of a cochlear loss. Type III and type IV: possible presentations of patient with retrocochlear loss or sudden hearing loss. 
(Adapted from Bekesy. Acta oto-laryngol 1947; 35: 411-22.40)
Masking
The amount of sound lost in crossing the head, the transcranial 
transmission loss, varies from person to person: for air-con' 
ducted sound, the range of attenuation is 40-85 dB, and for 
bone conduction it is 5-15 dB. Masking is the noise applied to 
the non-test ear to ensure that the threshold obtained using 
pure tone audiometry is from the test ear and not from the non­
test ear. In air conduction audiometry, the masking noise is pre­
sented through the earphone opposite to the one providing the 
test tones. In bone conduction audiometry, the usual procedure 
is to deliver the masking noise via an insert earphone.
Narrow bands of noise (lA to Vi octave wide) centred on the 
frequency of the test tone are most effective, but wide-band 
noise can be used.
Masking (Figure 21.14) is used to establish the pure tone 
threshold in the following situations.
  

362 
Auditory disorders and their management
Figure 21.14 Masking chart (see text).
m 
Air conduction: (a) the difference between the left and 
right non-masked air conduction thresholds is 40 dB or 
more; (b) the air conduction threshold is 40 dB or more 
worse than the non-masked binaural threshold, 
ft 
Bone conduction: the air-conduction threshold is 10 dB or 
more worse than the non-masked bone conduction thresh­
old at two or more adjacent frequencies.
The ‘shadowing’ technique of determining the true audi­
tory threshold is the most commonly used masking technique. 
Starting from a low noise level, the unmasked threshold is ele­
vated dB for dB, by masking noise in the non-test ear. Beyond 
a certain level, further additions of masking noise to the non-test 
ear cause no further dB for dB elevation in threshold, and the test 
ear must then be able to hear the tone. The level of the test tone 
at this plateau is the true, masked threshold of the test ear.
Acoustic immitance measurement
Measurement of the acoustical immitance of the ear, or tympa­
nometry, is a technique for obtaining information about the 
state of the middle ear as a function of ear canal pressure. The 
graph produced is an expression of how the immitance of the 
ear is altered when the external ear canal is pressurized above 
(positive pressure) and below (negative pressure) atmospheric 
pressure.
Aural impedance represents the difficulty encountered by 
acoustical energy as it is transmitted through the ear. The reci­
procal of impedance is admittance, which represents the ease of 
energy flow through the system. Stiffness is the characteristic of 
the ear which maintains its shape and brings about restoration 
after a force has been applied. Compliance of the auditory sys­
tem is the reciprocal of stiffness and represents the mobility of
the middle ear system. Stiffness is the major contributor to the 
impedance of the auditory system, and compliance measure­
ments can justifiably be used as a close approximation to 
impedance.
Aural immittance has an important clinical use in identify­
ing high-impedance middle ear abnormalities, i.e. otitis media 
and otosclerosis, and low-impedance abnormalities such as 
ossicular interruption.
Advantages of tympanometry
■ 
Objective— requires no behavioural response. 
m 
Non-invasive.
■ 
Well tolerated and quick.
■ 
Inexpensive.
Principles of acoustic immittance 
measurements
A variable-intensity, low-frequency, pure tone (usually 220 or 
226Hz, but can also be 660 or 678 Hz), generated by a minia­
ture sound source, is delivered to the EAM by means of a flexi­
ble tube connected to one of three orifices in a probe tip 
assembly. The other two components fitting into the probe are 
(1) a tube connected to a pump which alters the ear pressure in 
the EAM, measuring the pressure manometrically; and (2) a 
tube which transmits sound waves from the EAM to a micro­
phone for transduction to electrical activity. The electrical sig­
nal is amplified and rectified to direct current and represents the 
sound pressure level. It is compared with a reference voltage 
delivered by the impedance meter and the comparison regis­
tered on a balance meter (Figure 21.15).
The probe assembly is inserted into the EAM to make an 
airtight seal.
Middle ear pressure
In normal ears, the middle ear pressure will range from +50 to 
—50mmH20  (or +50 to — 100mmH20  for children).
  

Clinical and audiometric assessment of hearing 
363
Middle ear compliance
With the EAM pressure at middle ear pressure (MEP), the mea­
sured compliance is primarily that of the air in the external 
meatus plus that of the middle ear structures. If the EAM air 
pressure is increased considerably above MEP, e.g. MEP + 200 
mmH20 , the compliance of the middle ear structures becomes 
very small in comparison to the compliance of the air in the 
EAM, and the measured compliance is approximately equal to 
that of the air in the EAM. If this value is subtracted from the 
maximum compliance obtained with EAM pressure equal to 
MEP, this difference will be approximately equal to the compli­
ance of the middle ear (MEC).
In normal ears measured in this way, the MEC shows large 
variations, depending on the physical quality of the TM, the 
degree of pneumatization of the temporal bone, and many other 
factors. Normal values range from 0.3 to 1.5 ml of equivalent air 
volume.
The tympanogram
The tympanogram is obtained by varying the external meatus 
pressure from —600 to +200daPa (decapascal) (or mmH20 ). 
In the past, the procedure was carried out manually, measuring 
the compliance at a few specific pressures, but for speed, and 
production of a plot of an entire tympanogram, the recordings 
are now made automatically. This can also give hard copy evi­
dence of rhythmic fluctuation in compliance due to conditions 
such as a patulous Eustachian tube, glomus tumour or tensor 
tympani myoclonus.
Purpose of acoustic immittance
■ 
Method for objective determination of middle ear pressure.
■ 
Measurement of ‘static’ acoustic impedance.
■ 
Tympanometric shapes.
Middle ear pressure
If the Eustachian tube fails to ventilate the middle ear ade­
quately, negative air pressure develops in the air spaces of the 
temporal bone. This is thought to happen as a result of:
m 
gases diffusing from the air into the cells because of the 
unequal concentration of gases in the air and in the middle
19
ear tissues
m 
the movement of fluid by cilia out of the closed Eustachian 
tube, thereby increasing the effective middle ear volume 
and leading to a negative MEP.20
The early proponents of middle ear tympanometry21 suggested 
that the tympanometric peak pressure occurs when the differ­
ence between the different sides of the eardrum is zero. When 
the tympanometric peak pressure is negative, the MEP must be 
negative as well. However, the tympanometric peak pressure is 
not exactly equal to MEP, for several reasons:
m 
Instrumental lag: the automatic gain control systems used to 
keep the probe sound pressure level constant in the EAM as 
the air pressure is varied may not be able to keep up with
the rapid immitance changes encountered when recording 
tympanograms with high pressure peaks, causing the peak 
to be reduced and shifted on the pressure axis. 
m 
Hysteresis: this is the displacement of the pressure peak in 
the direction of the pressure sweep, that is, when the sweep 
is from positive to negative, the displacement is in a nega­
tive direction and vice versa. 
s 
MEP changes: there is a change in MEP as a result of move­
ment of the TM during tympanometry which is normally 
<30daPa, but can be much greater in inflammatory middle 
ear conditions, the direction of the error always being an 
overestimate of the MEP. Nonetheless, although the tym­
panic peak pressure is not a measure of MEP, it is an impor­
tant indicator of the pressure status of the middle ear.
Static acoustical immittance at the tympanic membrane
Measurement of acoustical immittance is in the plane of the 
probe tip rather than at the surface of the TM, and thus 
includes the effects of the ear canal as well as the middle ear 
transmission system. A mathematical correction needs to be 
applied to the immittance measurements to calculate the 
acoustical immittance attributable to the ear canal volume. 
Quantitative measurement requires frequent calibration, with 
corrections made for elevation and atmospheric pressure.
Static acoustical immittance measurements are controver­
sial. This is in part due to the overlap in static immittance val­
ues between normal and pathological middle ears.22 Many of 
the published data have been obtained with instruments that 
measure only the magnitude of the acoustical immittance vec­
tor with one low-frequency probe tone. When instruments 
measuring both components of acoustic impedance or admit­
tance have been used, investigators have found static acoustical 
immittance measurements to be useful in the differential diag­
nosis of middle ear pathologies, i.e. distinguishing otosclerosis 
from normal middle ears, and evaluating progress in patients 
who have undergone stapedectomy.23,24 Several factors influ­
ence static acoustical immittance:
m 
Instruments without automatic gain control circuits require 
a manual balancing procedure to make measurements in 
absolute physical units. 
m 
Measurement of static immittance at the tympanic peak 
with specification of the tympanic peak pressure is the opti­
mum method for reporting the immittance at the TM. 
m 
The best pressure for estimating ear canal volume is the one 
that results in the minimum admittance (maximum imped­
ance). Measurement at —400daPa provides the best aver­
age estimate of ear canal volume. 
m 
Low-frequency probe tone may not be optimal for the dif­
ferential diagnosis of some middle ear pathologies; that is, 
middle ear disease may shift the resonant frequency of the 
middle ear transmission system. A probe tone frequency 
close to the resonant frequency of the normal human 
middle ear, i.e. 800-1200 Hz, may provide the maximum 
information in the detection of pathologies such as ossicu­
lar discontinuity.
  

364 
Auditory disorders and their management
m 
Most instruments measure only the magnitude of the 
admittance vector, although the acoustical admittance and 
impedance are complex issues requiring two values for their 
complete description. Measurement of the two immittance 
components facilitates both the evaluation of tympanomet­
ric shape and the calculation of static immittance. 
m 
Guidelines are available for calculating static immittance 
based on available data and clinical efficiency.25
Tympanometric shapes
The most commonly used classification system was introduced 
by Liden26 and modified by Jerger.22 (Figure 21.16):
* 
Type A is a normal tympanogram—the peak immittance is 
at or near 0 daPa. This type is consistent with a normal, air- 
filled middle ear. 
m Type AD is a tympanogram with an unusually high peak
pressure, e.g. a flaccid tympanic membrane or ossicular 
discontinuity.
■ Type As is a tympanogram with a reduced pressure peak, as can 
be found with ossicular fixation and some forms of otitis media.
m Type B shows a flat pressure peak. This can be found with 
middle ear effusions or other space-occupying lesions of the 
middle ear. Alternative explanations for this shape include 
impacted wax or poor placement of the immittance probe 
against the ear wall canal.
m Type C has a negative peak pressure and indicates negative 
middle ear pressure.
■ Type D shows sharp notching characteristic of scarred 
eardrums or hypermobile TM.
m Type E is characterized by broad smooth notching and is 
most commonly found in cases of partial or complete ossic­
ular discontinuity.
-300 -200 -100 
0 
+100 +200 
-300 -200 -100 
0 
+100 +200 
-300 -200 -100 
0 
+100 +200 
-*— —  Air pressure ----- ► 
------Air pressure -------► 
------Air pressure —— *-
Type A
Type B
-300 -200 -100 
0 
+100 +200 
-300 -200 -100 
0 
+100 +200 
-300 -200 -100 
0 
+100 +200 
----- Air pressure------- ► 
-*------Air pressure------- ► 
*+------Air pressure -------►
Tympanogram 
-300 -200 -100 
0
Tympanogram 
-300 -200 -100 
0 
+100
Type Ad
Tympanogram 
-300 -200 -100 
0
Tympanogram 
Tympanogram
-300 -200 -100 
0 
+100 +200 
-300 -200 -100 
0 
+100 +200
Tympanogram
+100 +200
10
10
9
9
8
t
8
7
I
7
6 ac
6
5
“5. 5
4
Eo
4
3
C_J 3
+200
+ 100
10
10
9
9
8
t
8
7
1 7
6
<u
uc
6
5 ro
H
5
4
Eo
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
0
0
+200
Figure 21.16 Liden-Jerger classification of tympanogram shapes. (After Feldman. In Feldman and Wilbur, eds. Acoustic Impedance and Admittance-the Measurement 
of Middle Ear Function. Baltimore: Williams and Williams, 1985: 423-37.27)
  

Clinical and audiometric assessment of hearing 
365
Feldman27 described an analytical approach to tympanometric 
shapes based on three features (Figure 21.17):
*  
Tympanometric peak pressure: normal, negative, positive or 
absent.
• 
Amplitude: normal, increased or decreased, 
a 
Shape: normal, flat, peaked or notched.
Vanhuyse et al28 developed a conceptual model for understand­
ing all tympanograms, based on assumptions about the nature of 
acoustical resistance and reactance tympanograms, which pre­
dicts the measured conductance, susceptance and admittance 
tympanograms. The model assumes a basic understanding of the 
principles of acoustic immittance.29
High-impedance abnormalities
Middle ear conditions that produce abnormally high acoustical 
impedance results may have the following tympanograms: normal 
single peaks with reduced amplitude; abnormal tympanometric 
shapes; or flat tympanograms. Some examples are as follows.
Perforated tympanic membrane
■ 
Flat tympanogram.
■ 
Volume estimate of >2.5 ml for adults (may be as high as 
4*5 ml in patients with no evidence of disease of the middle 
ear mucosa).
Patients with larger middle ear volumes tend to have better 
long-term surgical results than patients with smaller volumes.
Middle ear effusion
* 
High impedance.
* 
Flat tympanogram.
■ 
May be positive or negative tympanometric peak (has low 
gradient).
■ 
Tympanic peak amplitude inversely correlated with amount 
of middle ear effusion.
Retracted tympanic membrane
m 
Rounded tympanograms.
■ 
May have increased ear canal volume.
Ossicular fixation
m 
Shallow tympanic peak.
*  
Middle ear pressure around 0 daPa.
Dual lesions
m 
The more lateral pathology generally dominates the tympa­
nometric findings.
Pressure in daPa
Figure 21.17 Feldman’s descriptive analysis of tympanometric shapes. (From Feldman. Audiology 1977; 16: 294-306.41)
  

366 
Auditory disorders and their management
Low-impedance abnormalities
Two types of middle ear pathology result in abnormally low 
impedance at the TM—thin atrophic TMs and ossicular 
disruptions.
Thin, atrophic tympanic membranes
During the healing of a tympanic perforation (i.e. secondary to 
traumatic injury, necrosis, rupture from raised middle ear pres­
sure and barotrauma), there may be incomplete regeneration of 
the connective tissue layer of the TM, producing a region of the 
membrane that is thin and flaccid. These scars do not cause mea­
surable hearing loss but do produce distinctive abnormalities:
* 
low static immittance values
* 
high tympanic pressure peak
m 
may have deep susceptance notch.
Ossicular disruption
This may follow trauma or be associated with congenital 
defects, e.g. osteogenesis imperfecta. It lowers the primary reso­
nant frequency of the middle ear.
* 
Low static impedance measurements. 
m 
High tympanic pressure peak.
Summary
In conclusion, a full clinical assessment of hearing requires both 
an understanding of the underlying process of audition and the 
ways in which patho-physiological mechanisms can impact 
on this, as well as a comprehensive knowledge of the clinical 
methods available to detect hearing. In this way, structural 
abnormalities can be married to functional abnormalities and a 
full diagnosis made, allowing appropriate treatment/rehabilita- 
tion to be initiated. Currently available methodology dictates 
that, at a minimum, investigation of a patient with hearing loss 
requires pure tone audiometry, and that frequently this will 
need to be supplemented by other tests from the audiological 
test battery. Nonetheless, much can be learnt by a thorough 
clinical appraisal of the patient as described in the preceding 
pages, before proceeding to both audiological and actiological 
investigations.
Overview of developmental 
anomalies
A very brief description of the embryonic phase of the develop­
ment in utero of the outer and middle ears is given for a fuller 
appreciation of the anatomy of the human ear and associated 
abnormalities.
During early embryonic life, the mesenchyme surrounding 
the primitive foregut and pharynx differentiates into a maxil­
lary and mandibular swelling on each side of the mid-line just 
above and below the buccopharyngeal membrane. This mem­
brane then breaks down and and a cavity is formed which will 
become the nasal and buccal cavities. In the mesenchyme sur­
rounding the pharynx, five parallel thickenings develop as 
bands that surround the pharynx. These are the branchial 
arches, which are numbered 1 to 5 caudorostrally. On the exter­
nal surface, a groove develops between each branchial arch and 
this is matched by a cleft on the inner pharyngeal surface.
Occasionally, there is a failure of this system and the differ­
ent branchial arch defects can occur as sinuses when a cleft or 
groove fails to regress, or less commonly as fistulae when the 
ectodermal-endodermal junction breaks down. The first pha­
ryngeal pouch expands to become the Eustachian tube, middle 
ear and mastoid antrum. The endoderm lying against the ecto­
derm of the first pharyngeal pouch is the precursor of the mid­
dle ear. The ossicles develop from the outer ends of the first arch 
(Meckel’s) and the second arch (Reichert’s) cartilages, which 
lie above and below the first pharyngeal pouches. The external 
ear canal develops from the small cartilaginous tubercles that 
surround the first pharyngeal groove (Fig. 21.18).
Congenital hearing loss can be associated with a variety of 
syndromes. Because of the specific clustering of characteristic 
features, a short synopsis of the different syndromes is given 
here with particular reference to the type of hearing loss seen, 
the underlying pathomechanism where known, and with guid­
ance for the appropriate tools for further investigation. Accu­
rate characterization of syndromal hearing loss has great 
importance for further management, which may in some cases 
be surgical, as well as for aural rehabilitation, and also for prog­
nosis and genetic counselling.
Most attempts at classification are incomplete because of 
the limited understanding of the pathogenesis of many of these 
conditions, but, for simplicity, syndromes have been classified 
here as follows:
Figure 21.18 Schematic diagram of 16-28-somite embryo. (From Wright, 
with permission. In: Ludman and Wright, eds. Diseases of the Ear. London: 
Arnold 1998: 3-31.42)
  

Clinical and audiometric assessment of hearing 
367
nk Otocraniofacial (ear, face and skull).
mi Otocervical (ear, face and shoulder).
■ 
Otoskeletal (bone dysplasias).
*  Chromosomal abnormalities.
■ 
Miscellaneous.
Otocraniofacial syndromes
These syndromes comprise anomalies of the first and second 
branchial arch derivatives.
Craniofacial microsomia
Hemifacial microsomia is the commonest of these syndromes, 
with 1/3500 live births. In this condition, there is under-devel­
opment of one half of the face, with mandibular and maxillary 
hypoplasia, macrostromia, microtia and atresia of the external 
auditory meatus (EAM). A suggested pathomechanism is embry­
onic haematoma formation. Only 20% of all patients have bilat­
eral abnormalities, and when present these are asymmetrical.
Where these findings are seen in association with abnor­
malities of the eye and vertebral column, this is known as 
‘Goldenhar’s syndrome’ or oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia 
(Figure 21.19). Temporal bone studies in Goldenhar’s syndrome
have been reported by Mafee and Valvasorri30 among others. 
The following features were reported by Phelps and Lloyd3 in a 
study of the examination of 61 affected temporal bones, includ­
ing CT studies.
External ear: Pinna— deformity ranging from complete absence 
to only one lobule present in some cases.
EAM— normal to complete atresia, low anterior 
position, gross descent of tegmen.
Middle ear: 
Middle 
ear 
cavity—very 
small 
with 
poor 
pneumatization.
Ossicles—frequently absent, otherwise abnormal 
in size, shape and situation, sometimes fused.
Vllth nerve—partial palsies in some.
± Patulous Eustachian tube.
± Cleft palate.
Inner ear: 
Cochlea—normal function.
Vestibular end organ— lateral semicircular canal 
commonly dysplastic.
Mandibulofacial dysotosis
Possible pathomechanisms include deficient neural crest cell 
migration into the first and second branchial arches.31
The syndrome known as Treacher Collins syndrome (Fig­
ure 21.20) is inherited with an autosomal dominant pattern of 
variable expressivity. The facies are very characteristic:
Figure 21.19 Craniofacial microsomia-Goldenhar's syndrome (with permission 
Figure 21.20 Mandibulofacial dysostosis-Treacher Collins syndrome (with 
from Professor Dafydd Stephens). 
permission from Dafydd Stephens).
  

368 
Auditory disorders and their management
* 
antimongoloid slanting of the palpebral fissures 
n 
malar and mandibular bone hypoplasia with or without 
cleft palate
■ 
coloboma of the lower eyelid in 75%.
External ear: Pinna—always malformed, often hypoplastic and 
cupped, pre-auricular tags and sinuses seen. 
Abnormalities tend to be bilateral and symmetrical. 
EAM— atresia, microtia common.
Middle ear: 
Mastoid—deficient and unpneumatized.
Ossicles— abnormalities common.
Internal ear: Cochlea—normal function.
Vestibular end organ—dysplastic semicircular lat­
eral canal.
m 
Pure tone audiometry: conductive hearing loss. 
m 
Radiology: a thorough radiological assessment is required 
because of the wide range of severity of ear lesions.
Pierre-Robin
This syndrome is thought to result from arrested development 
of the first and second branchial arch derivatives and is charac­
terized by the following:
m 
micrognathia 
m 
glossoptosis
■ 
cleft palate.
Outer ear: Pinnae— low slung, may also be deformed.
EAMs—may be atretic.
Middle ear: Ossicles—may be deformed.
Craniofacial dysostoses
These conditions are characterized by premature closure of skull 
sutures, which leads to a sagittal shortening of the skull base. 
Otopathology is less frequent than in the mandibulofacial 
dysostoses. There are four craniofacial dysostosis syndromes 
associated with deafness which have an autosomal dominant 
pattern of inheritance.
Acrocephalosyndactyly 1: Apert’s syndrome
u 
Turret skull as a result of irregular craniostenosis.
■ 
Facial asymmetry.
■ 
Hypertelorism.
m 
Dental malocclusion.
■ 
High arched palate.
■ 
Syndactyly and partial webbing of fingers.
■ 
Mental retardation.
External ear: Pinna—normal.
EAM—normal.
Middle ear: 
Middle ear cavity—filled with gelatinous fluid.
Ossicles—fixation of stapes, may be deformed and 
ankylosed.
Inner ear: 
Dilated horizontal lateral semicircular canal.
■ 
Pure tone audiometry: conductive deafness.32
» 
Tympanometry: decreased compliance—no drum move­
ment, no ossicular movement.
Acrocephalosyndactyly 2: Pfeiffer syndrome
This is very similar to Apert’s syndrome, and may be a milder
variant.
Acrocephalosyndactyly 3: Saethre-Chotzen syndrome 
A minor degree of hearing loss has been reported.
Crouzon’s syndrome
This is the commonest of the craniofacial dysostoses, and the 
abnormalities are confined to the cranium and the face.
■ 
beak nose
■ 
hypertelorism
■ 
hypoplastic maxillae
■ 
mandibular prognathism 
» 
proptosis.
Outer ear: 
EAMs— atretic.
Middle ear: 
Eustachian tube dysfunction.
Otitis media with effusion.
Ossicles— may be fused with fixation of the stapes.
■ 
Pure tone audiometry: conductive hearing loss.
■ 
CT scanning: tilting of the petrous pyramids, poorly pneu- 
matized mastoids.
Cryptophthalmos
This condition is identified when the skin of the forehead com­
pletely covers one or both eyes. It is associated with multiple 
congenital abnormalities:31
■ 
urogenital system abnormalities 
m 
syndactyly of the fingers
■ 
abnormalities of the nose (50%)
* 
meningoencephalocoele (10%).
Outer ear: Pinnae—small and poorly modelled (30%).
EAM—narrowed and atretic.
Middle ear: Ossicles—may be malformed.
m 
Pure tone audiometry: conductive hearing loss.
Waardenberg’s syndrome (Figure 21.21)
This syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. 
It is characterized by:
» 
hypoplasia of the base of the nose
■ 
lateral displacement of the middle canthi
*  
underdeveloped orbits
■ 
heterochromia iridium 
it 
white forelock.
Inner ear: Organ of Corti— absent.
Vestibular end organ— anomalies, e.g. aplasia of the 
semicircular canal.
VUIth nerve—spiral ganglion atrophied.
■ 
Pure tone audiometry: sensorineural hearing loss
■ 
Vestibular function: abnormal— more common than hear­
ing loss.
  

Clinical and audiometric assessment of hearing 
369
Figure 21.21 Patient with Waardenburg's syndrome demonstrating the typical 
white forelock seen in this syndrome. (Courtesy of Dr Maria Bitner-Glindzicz, 
Institute of Child Health, London, UK.)
Familial mixed deafness with branchial arch defects— 
earpits deafness syndrome
This is an autosomal dominant disorder, which may be associ­
ated with lacrimal duct aplasia and urinary tract abnormalities,
i.e. branchio-oto-renal syndrome (see Figure 21.5).
Outer ear: Pinnae— auricular deformities, pre-auricular pits 
and sinuses, branchial fistulae/ clefts/ cysts.
EAM— atresia (75%).
Middle ear: Ossicles—minor abnormalities, mainly of stapes, 
with fixation.
Inner ear: Dysplastic lateral semi-circular canal 
Cochlear hypoplasia
si 
Pure tone audiometry: 
conductive or mixed hearing loss. 
m 
Distortion of base of skull and petrous pyramids, 
a 
Internal auditory meatus slants upwards and backwards. 
m 
Small cochlea (decreased number of turns—but not a 
Mondini-type deformity).
Otocervical syndromes 
Klippel-Feil syndrome
Inheritance of this condition is autosomal dominant. It is typi­
fied by:
■ 
characteristic fusion of several cervical vertebrae
■ 
high-arched or cleft palate
■ 
severe sensorineural deafness.
Middle ear: Ossicles—stapes gusher, incudostapedial junction 
abnormalities.
Inner ear: 
Cochlea— Mondini type defects.
Internal acoustic meatus—narrow
■ 
Sensorineural and conductive hearing losses.
■ 
Internal ear dysplasia with deficiencies of central bony 
spiral.
Wildervanke’s syndrome (cervical oculoacousticus) is an associ­
ation of Klippel-Feil syndrome with deafness and Duane’s syn­
drome (limited abduction and adduction of the eye with 
retraction when lateral deviation of the eyes is attempted, due 
to fibrous displacement of the appropriate rectus muscles).
Cleidocranial dysostosis
m 
Dominant pattern of inheritance. 
m 
Variable deficiency/absence of the clavicles. 
n 
Abnormalities of the skull.
Outer ear: EAM— atresia.
Middle ear: Ossicles—ossicular chain malformations.
Otofacial*cervical syndrome
m 
Dominant pattern of inheritance.
■ 
Narrowing and flattening of the face.
■ 
Cervical and shoulder abnormalities.
External ear: Pinna— always deformed. 
m 
Conductive hearing loss.
Sprengel’s syndrome
This is a dominantly inherited syndrome with an association of 
hearing loss with a high, malformed and malrotated atresia of 
the shoulder capsule. It is often associated with narrow middle 
ear and absent stapes.
Otoskeletal syndromes
The main disorders of bone affecting ears are otosclerosis, 
fibrous dysplasia and Paget’s disease, and tend to present in 
adult life, 
Generalized bone dysplasia commonly manifests 
with Eustachian tube obstruction and otitis media. Sensori­
neural hearing loss may occur as a result of compression of the 
middle ear structure by fibrous dysplasia.
  

370 
Auditory disorders and their management
Osteogenesis imperfecta
This is an inborn error of osteoblasts or osteoclasts. There is an 
incidence of 20-60% of associated otopathology and hearing 
loss.34 Only one-third present with a complete syndrome:
m 
large skull 
m 
bowing of legs
» 
multiple fractures of the long bones
■ 
laxity of ligaments 
n 
atrophic skin
m 
blue sclera
■ 
abnormal tooth dentine.
Two forms of the disease are recognized: the lethal form (pre­
sent at birth), and the tarda form, which has a dominant mode 
of inheritance.
Middle ear: Ossicles—stapedial crura are often fragile, while 
footplate is heavy, but not significantly fixed.
m 
Pure tone audiometry, conductive deafness predominantly, 
but mixed and pure sensorineural hearing loss also. 
m 
Deficient ossification; changes in otic capsule indistinguish­
able from those of labyrinthine otospongiosis. Appearances 
of ‘cochlea within a cochlea’, i.e. thick demineralized bone 
replacing the otic capsule but sparing the modiolus.
Osteopetroses
These comprise a group of uncommon disorders characterised 
by increased skeletal density and abnormalities of bone model­
ling and associated with hearing loss: Albers-Schonberg disease, 
Van Buchem’s disease, Gorlin-Hart syndrome and Engelman’s 
disease. Typically, the skull base and calvaria are involved, 
resulting in cranial nerve palsies, i.e. optic nerve and 
audiovestibular nerve as well as the mandibular portion of the 
trigeminal and facial nerve. Recurrent facial nerve palsies are 
not uncommon.
Outer ear: EAM—narrowed.
Middle ear: Encroachment of the bony walls of the attic on the 
ossicles.
Narrowing of the oval and round windows.
Inner ear: Interior auditory meatus: 
bony constriction.
* 
Pure tone audiometry: conductive hearing loss, sensori­
neural hearing loss.
m 
Tympanometry: low impedance
■ 
Generalized sclerosis and expasion of the petrous pyramid.
* 
Narrowing of the interior auditory meatus. Increased bulk 
of ossicles.
Kniest syndrome
m 
Autosomal dominant inheritance.
■ 
Round, flat mid-face. 
m 
Short neck.
m 
Waddling gait. 
m 
Club feet.
■ 
Basilar impression of skull/cleft palate (in 50%).
at 
Shallow orbits with myopia, retinal detatchment and 
cataracts.
n 
Conductive or mixed type hearing loss, 
it 
Tilting and shortening of petrous pyramids and squat thick­
ened ossicles.
Mohr syndrome (orofacial digital syndrome type II)
NB: In the much commoner orofacial digital syndrome type I, 
hearing is normal.
■ 
Polydactyly.
■ 
Metaphyseal irregularity and flaring.
■ 
Hypoplasia of the mandible, cleft lip and lobulated tongue.
■ 
Conductive hearing loss.
* 
Malformed ossicles.
Other dysplasias with ossicular abnormalities and conductive 
deafness include otopalatodigital syndrome, multiple synostosis, 
Cockayne syndrome and achondroplasia.
Chromosome abnormalities with ear 
malformations
Autosomal trisomy
13-15 or Trisomy D
m 
Cardiac abnormalities. 
m 
Neurological abnormalities.
■ 
Cleft palate and lip.
Outer ear: Pinnae— low-set and deformed.
Inner ear: Cochlea and semicircular canal abnormalities.
18 or Trisomy E
The majority are non-familial and chromosomal deletions. The 
long-arm and ring types (18g and 18r) are associated with struc­
tural deformities of the ear.
m cardiac abnormalities
■ 
elfin face
■ 
ptosis, comeal opacities and glaucoma 
m mental deficiency.
Outer ear: EAM—atresia.
Middle ear: Ossicles—ossicular abnormalities.
21 Trisomy
Chronic otitis media is a common feature of Down’s syndrome. 
Comprehensive audiological assessment35 identified 64% of 
patients with hearing loss, of which 83% had conductive hear­
ing loss. Of these, middle ear effusion or TM perforation 
accounted for only 60%, with the remainder being due to con­
genital anomalies of the auditory ossicles, especially the stapes.
Middle ear: Ossicles—fixation and superstructure deformity of 
the stapes.
  

Clinical and audiometric assessment of hearing 
371
Dehiscence of the Eustachiuan tube.
Middle ear cavity—erosive lesions caused by 
cholesteatoma.
■ 
Pure tone audiometry: conductive hearing loss, sensori­
neural high-frequency loss.
Sex trisomy—Turner’s syndrome
m 
Webbing of the neck. 
m 
Multiple eye abnormalities.
■ 
Micrognathia.
■ 
Infertile.
Outer ear: 
Low-set pinna.
Middle ear: Middle ear cleft— abnormal orientation with fre­
quent otitis media.
Ossicles— fixation of the stapes.
Ear abnormalities with endocrine disorders
Pendred syndrome
This has a recessive mode of inheritance. There is a partial 
block in the synthesis of thyroxine.
■ 
Goitre—presenting in puberty.
■ 
Positive perchlorate test, but euthyroid.
■ 
Congenital sensorineural deafness.
* 
Severe sensorineural hearing loss.
■ 
Mondini type defects of the cochlea with deficiency of the 
modiolus.36
m 
Widened vestibular aqueduct (WVA) and/or hypoplastic 
semicircular canals.
Drug-induced ear malformations
Thalidomide embryopathy:
Ten per cent of the patients affected in utero by thalidomide, 
administered between 1959 and 1962, have ear lesions:37
m 
bilateral, severe
■ 
external, middle and inner ears involved
■ 
partial or complete, unilateral or bilateral facial palsy.
Phelps38 found that all but one of 19 cases of Vlth and 
Vllth nerve palsies (Moebius syndrome) accompanying con­
genital ear deformities were bom within the thalidomide 
era.
■ 
Complete absence of tympanic bone, middle ear cavity flat­
tened, distorted and opaque due to glue-like mesenchyme.
Note that there is an operative finding of hyperplastic ossicular 
mass.
Miscellaneous
Neurofibromatosis—von Recklinghausen’s disease
This syndrome with neurocutaneous manifestations follows an 
autosomal dominant transmission (see Chapter 4).
CHARGE association
Pagon and coworkers38 applied the acronym CHARGE to an 
association of congenital defects:
■ 
coloboma
■ 
heart disease
*  atresia of the nasal choanae,
■ 
retarded development
■ 
central nervous system abnormalities
■ 
genital hypoplasia
■ 
ear anomalies.
To be classified as the CHARGE syndrome, patients must 
have choanal atresia and coloboma and a total of at least four 
of seven of the attributes.
■ 
Sensorineural hearing loss— mild to moderate.
m 
Absence of semicircular canals. Oval window may be absent.
References
1. Swan IRC. Clinical aspects of hearing aid provision. MD thesis, 
University of Glasgow, 1984.
2. Browning GG, Swan IRC, Chew KK. Clinical role of informal 
tests of hearing. J Laryngol Otol 1989; 1033: 7-11.
3. Phelps PD, Lloyd GAS. Syndromes with congenital hearing loss. 
In: Phelps PD, Lloyd GAS, eds. Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear, 2nd 
edn. London: Springer-Verlag, 1990: 67-93.
4. Calzolari F, Garani G, Sensi A, Martini A. Clinical and radiolog­
ical evaluation in children with microtia. Br J Radiol 1999; 33: 
303-12.
5. Anon. Tackling antimicrobial resistance. Drug Ther Bull 1999; 37: 
9-16.
6. Ahmmed AK, Curley JA, Newton VE, Muhkerjce D. Hearing aids 
versus ventilation tubes in persistent otitis media with effusion: a 
survey of clinical practice. J Laryngol Otol 2001; 115: 274-9.
7. Carhart R. Clinical application of bone conduction audiometry. 
Arch Otolaryngol 1950; 51: 798-807.
8. Davies RA, Luxon LM. Dizziness following head injury—a neuro- 
otological study. J. Neurol 1995; 242: 222-30.
9. Hinchcliffe R. The clinical examination of aural function. In: 
Stephens SDG, ed. Scott-Broum’s Otolaryngology, 5th edn, Vol 2. 
London: Butterworths, 1987: 203-43.
10. Stankiewicz JA, Mowry HJ. Clinical accuracy of tuning fork tests. 
Laryngoscope 1979; 89: 1956-63.
11. Rinne HA. Beitrage zur Physiologie des menschlichen Ohres. 
Vjschr Prakt Heilkunde Med Fak Prag 1855; 12: 71-123.
12. Huizing EH. The early descriptions of the so-called tuning fork 
tests of Weber and Rinne, Schwabach and Bing. II. The ‘Rinne 
Test’ and its first description by Polansky. J Otorhinolaryngol 
Borderlands 1975; 35: 278-82.
13. Browning GG, Swan IRC. Sensitivity and specificity of the Rinne 
tuning fork test. BMJ 1988; 297: 1381-2.
14. Capper JWR, Slack RWT, Maw AR. Tuning fork test in children 
(an evaluation of their usefulness). J Laryngol Otol 1987; 1011: 
780-3.
  

372 
Auditory disorders and their management
15. Weber EH. De pulse, resoptione, auditu et tactu. In: De Utilitate 
Cochleae in Organo Auditus. Leipzig; 1834: 25-44.
16. British Standards Institution. Specification for Audiometers. BS 
5966. 1980.
17. International Standards Organization. Limiting Noise Levels for 
Threshold Measurements Down to -10 dB HTL. ISO 6189, ISO, 
1983.
18. Anon. Recommended procedures for pure-tone audiometry using 
a manually operated instrument. Br J Audiology 1981; 15(3): 
213-16.
19. Ingelstedt S, Jonson B. Mechanisms of gas exchange in the normal 
middle ear. Acta Otolaryngol (Suppl) 1966; 224: 452-61.
20. Hilding AG. Summary of some known facts concerning the com­
mon cold. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1944; 53: 444-60.
21. Terkildsen K, Thomsen KA. The influence of pressure variations 
on the impedance of the human eardrum. J Laryngol Otol 1959; 
73: 409-18.
22. Jerger J. Clinical experience with impedance audiometry. Arch 
Otolaryngol 1970; 92: 311-24.
23. Burke K, Nilges T. A comparison of three middle ear impedance 
norms as predictors of otosclerosis. J Audiol Res 1970; 10: 52-8.
24. Margolis RH, Osguthorpe JD, Popelka GR. The effects of experi- 
mentally-produced middle-ear lesions on tympanometry in cats. 
Acta Otolaryngol 1978; 86: 428-36.
25. Margolis RH, Shanks JE. Tympanometry. In: Katz J, ed. Handbook 
of Clinical Audiology, 3rd edn. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 
1985: 438-75.
26. Liden G. The scope and application of current audiometric tests. 
J Laryngol Otol 1969; 83: 507-20.
27. Feldman AS. Tympanometry—procedures, interpretation and 
variables. In: Feldman AS, Wilbur LA, eds. Acoustic Impedance 
and Admittance—the Measurement of Middle Ear Function. 
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1976; 103-55.
28. Vanhuyse VJ, Creten WL, Van Camp KJ. On the W-notching of 
tympanograms. Scand Audiol 1975; 4: 45-50.
29. Wiley TL, Block MG. Overview and basic principles of acoustic 
immittance measurements. In: Katz J, ed. Handbook of Clinical 
Audiology, 3rd edn. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1985: 
423-37.
30. Mafee MF, Valvassori GE. Radiology of the craniofacial anomalies. 
Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1981; 14: 939-88.
31. Poswillo PD. The pathogenesis of the Treacher Collins syndrome 
(mandibulo-facial dysostosis). BrJ Oral Surg 1975; 13: 1-26.
32. Konigsmark B, Gorlin RJ. Genetic and Metabolic Deafness. Apert 
Syndrome 194. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co., 1976.
33. Booth JR. Medical management of sensorineural hearing loss. J 
Laryngol Otol 1982; 96: 773-95.
34. Bergstrom LA. Osteogenesis imperfecta: otologic and maxillo­
facial aspects. Laryngoscope 1977; 87/9(2 suppl 6).
35. Balkany TJ, Mischke RE, Downs MP, Jafek BW. Ossicular abnor­
malities in Down’s syndrome. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1979; 
87: 372-84.
36. Phelps PD, Coffey RA, Trembath RC et al. Radiological malfor­
mations of the ear in Pendred syndrome. Clin Radiol 1998; 53: 
268-73.
37. Phelps PD, Roland PE. Thalidomide and cranial nerve abnormal­
ities. BMJ 1977; ii: 1672.
38. Phelps PD. Congenital lesions of the inner ear, demonstrated by 
tomography. Arch Otolaryngol 1974; 100: 11-18.
39. Pagon RA, Graham JM, Zonana J, Young SL. Coloboma, congen­
ital heart disease and choanal atresia with multiple abnormalities. 
CHARGE association. J Paediatrics 1981; 99: 223-7.
40. Bekesy GV. A new audiometer. Acta Otolaryngol 1947; 35: 
411-22.
41. Feldman AS. Diagnostic applications and interpretation of 
tympanometry and the acoustic reflex. Audiology 1977; 16: 
294-306.
42. Wright A. Anatomy and development of the ear and hearing. In: 
Ludman H, Wright A, eds. Diseases of the Ear. London: Arnold, 
1998: 3-31.
  

Assessment of 
hearing-impaired 
children
Agnete Parving
Introduction
Within audiological medicine, hearing impairment (HI) in 
children is defined as a sign or symptom (in older children) 
resulting from any damaging factor(s) affecting the hearing 
organ, in the periphery and/or in the central auditory pathways. 
This implies that the assessment of the hearing-impaired child 
consists of two major steps: identification and/or confirmation 
of the HI, including determination of both the hearing thresh­
olds and the site of the lesion (i.e. classification) by means of 
current test procedures; and evaluation of the causative fac­
tor (s) of the hearing disorder, based on an appropriate protocol 
with respect to the individual child.
behaviour and reaction to sounds in daily life, speech and 
language development, and psychomotor development, with 
information on important developmental milestones (i.e. sitting, 
standing, walking, etc.). It should be noted that, in infancy, con­
tinuous babbling after the age of 6-8 months is especially impor­
tant and may preclude the presence of severe/profound hearing 
loss in an infant. The social situation of the child and informa­
tion on its daily care (i.e. nursery, kindergarten) is important. In 
general, the parents should be asked explicitly about the relevant 
information at the clinical examination, or they should com­
plete a questionnaire before the examination, with the responses 
confirmed by dialogue at the appointment in the clinic.
The physical examination should note specific features of 
the child, such as low-set ears, ear pits and fistulas, cranial 
morphology and malformations, not only in the head and 
neck region, but also elsewhere. The otoscopic findings 
should be noted, and a drawing of the tympanic membrane 
may give valuable information concerning abnormal 
findings. In some cases, records on a child from other 
physicians, e.g. paediatricians, geneticists, ear, nose and 
throat (ENT) physicians, ophthalmologists, and neurolo­
gists, are available, and these should be consulted, as the 
assessment of the hearing-impaired child often requires 
an interdisciplinary team approach.
Clinical examination
Before any assessment of the hearing level, a physical examina­
tion is necessary, including history-taking (anamnesis) and clin­
ical examination, in this context focusing on the ears, including 
meticulous otoscopy, and preferably also an examination of the 
nose and throat. In most cases, a complete physical evaluation 
is appropriate.
Most parents give highly valuable information on their child 
concerning the general development and behaviour. In order to 
obtain relevant specific information concerning a child suspected 
or detected (by hearing screening) as being hearing impaired, 
questions should be asked about any hearing-impaired family 
members and the cause of any identified HI, about delivery and 
the condition of the child at birth, including progress during the 
neonatal period. Information on the necessity for admission to a 
NICU is especially important, and also information on the 
progress there. The infant/child history should concentrate on: 
ear diseases, such as otitis media (recurrent, acute, or chronic), 
previous meningitis, and/or encephalitis, severe head injuries, 
and completion of any vaccination programme(s); and the child’s
Determination of the hearing level
Psychometric procedures
Until the age of 6 months, formal behavioural testing of a child 
is so difficult that electrophysiological procedures, such as audi­
tory brainstem evoked response audiometry (ABR), is preferred

374 
Auditory disorders and their management
for threshold determination. Until the child is able to cooper­
ate in pure tone audiometry (at around 3-4 years of age), vari­
ous types of behavioural audiometry can be performed, 
indicating HI graded according to various scales, such as mild, 
moderate, severe, and profound, as shown in Table 22.1.3 Other 
descriptors may be used and should be defined, as no uniform 
worldwide accepted criteria for description of the degree of 
hearing level exist.
AUDiOMETRIC THRESHOLD TESTS IN 
CHILDREN
0-6 months 
Otoacoustic emissions
Auditory brainstem evoked 
responses
6 months-2/3 years 
Behavioural observational
audiometry/distraction testing 
6 months-3 years 
Conditioned orientation reflex
audiometry
Visual reinformcement 
audiometry
Objective tests for difficult test children;
Otoacoustic emissions 
Auditory brainstem responses 
Electrocochleography (rare)
The hearing level can be determined by behavioural obser­
vation audiometry (BOA),4 conditioned orientation reflex 
audiometry (COR),5’6 and visual reinforcement audiometry 
(VRA).7,8 The BOA includes stimulation with different sound 
sources, with a more or less well-defined frequency content, and 
a relatively well-defined stimulus intensity, which may be var­
ied by distance and force applied to provide the sound. In 
general, the specificity and sensitivity of this testing are poor,
with a high proportion (approximately 10%) of false negatives 
(i.e. false recognition of normal or better hearing) as the worst 
outcome for the child. However, it should be noted that the 
sensitivity/specificity is highly dependent on the experience of 
the tester, and also on the condition of the child. Thus, this 
testing procedure may offer valuable information on the hear­
ing level in a child who is uncooperative with pure tone 
audiometry due to age, but in infants suffering from, for example, 
mental retardation or autistic behaviour, it should be considered 
highly unreliable.
The distraction test, which was first described by Ewing and 
Ewing in 1944,9 is a specific form of BOA, often used by health 
visitors as a screening test at the age of 6-7 months.9,10 The dis­
traction test or modifications of the distraction test are widely 
used also for hearing level assessment in non-cooperative chil­
dren up to the age of 2-3 years. The COR and VRA are impor­
tant techniques, resulting in fairly reliable auditory hearing 
levels between the ages of 6 months and 3 years, with no major 
differences between the two techniques.7 The principle in VRA 
is to visually reward and reinforce a head turn to locate a fre- 
quency-specific sound. On turning to locate the sound source, 
the child receives a visual reward, e.g. light on a toy. This princi­
ple has recently been used for hearing threshold determination 
in infants, giving reliable air and bone conduction thresholds.11
The final assessment of hearing ability in children depends 
on the psychoacoustical determination of hearing thresholds by 
means of pure tone audiometry. From the ages of 2-3 years up 
to 6 years, pure tone auditory thresholds for at least three fre­
quencies may be obtained by play-conditioning techniques. 
These comprise a variety of motivational games, ranging from 
peep shows through ring-towers to finger-raising techniques.12
It is well known that the behavioural thresholds improve in 
children with increasing age, and it has been argued that 
younger children have poorer auditory sensitivity than older 
children. However, several explanations for the apparent age- 
related differences in auditory sensitivity may be considered: 
difficulties in concentrating; learning effects; poor fitting of ear-
Table 22.1 Hearing impairment graded according to various scales (descriptors) such as mild, moderate, severe and profound HI 
according to the HEAR Project and WHO
Grade of impairment
HEAR2
Hearing level (dBHLf
Grade of impairment
WHO3 
Hearing level (dBHL)8
Normal
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Profound
<20
20-39
40-69
70-94
> 95
None
Slight
Moderate
Severe
Profound
<25
26-40
41-60
61-80
>81
Better ear pure tone average across the frequencies 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 kHz.
  

Assessment of hearing-impaired children 
375
phones; middle ear effusion in younger children; varying test 
procedures for threshold determination with poor test-retest 
reliability; and a true difference in auditory sensitivity as a func­
tion of age, owing to developmental changes. Moreover, a trend 
towards better mean auditory thresholds and less variation in 
thresholds has been reported in girls, which may be ascribed to 
an earlier maturation of the auditory system in females. In con­
trast, tests on normal children, in whom thresholds were 
obtained by a forced choice adaptive procedure, revealed no 
systematic differences in thresholds as a function of age, and no 
significant differences from thresholds in adults were present.13 
From studies using electrocochleography (ECoG) for hearing 
threshold determination where the true cochlear sensitivity is 
assessed, only minor differences between the psychoacoustical 
hearing threshold and the threshold obtained by ECoG have 
been found.1,14
Thus it can be stated that hearing thresholds in young 
children depend on the measurement procedure, and, if this is 
optimal, the thresholds indicate the true hearing sensitivity.
In uncooperative children, various electrophysiological 
methods can be used for hearing threshold determination. 
Among these techniques, ABR is usually preferred, due to its 
non-invasive nature, and a high hearing threshold diagnostic 
sensitivity/specificity. In addition, the method can be used for 
the evaluation of paediatric neurological disorders, but, due to 
abnormalities in the EEG caused by the neurological disease, 
hearing threshold identification by ABR may be difficult or 
impossible. In such children, otoacoustical emissions (OAEs) 
may be helpful in the identification of a hearing level/thresh- 
old. At present, OAEs are predominantly used for neonatal 
hearing screening. However, it may be expected that the 
recording of both transient and distortion product OAEs will be 
more frequently implemented as a test procedure for hearing 
sensitivity in the clinic, as OAEs are useful in the confirmation 
and classification of HI, not least in combination with ABR15,16 
(see Chapters 15 and 16).
Besides determination of hearing thresholds, assessment 
of speech recognition in children is important.
Procedures independent of speech and language production 
ability have been developed, whereby the perception of specific 
speech features in both normally hearing and hearing-impaired 
infants can be discriminated.17,18 Some tests—or modifications of 
tests—use target words or real objects to measure speech recog­
nition in 2-4-year-old children;19-21 in older children, word 
recognition tests or word recognition scores as part of a play sit­
uation can be used.21 In general, the older the child, the better is 
the opportunity to perform speech recognition tasks, giving 
important information on the hearing capacity and also having 
the potential to distinguish between peripheral and central 
auditory disorders.
Classification of the hearing loss, i.e. 
topical site of lesion
In combination with otoscopy, impedance audiometry indicat­
ing middle ear pressure and compliance is essential in children 
showing a high prevalence of recurrent or chronic otitis media 
with effusion (OME), at least under the age of 5.22 The method 
has a diagnostic sensitivity/specificity of >90%, which is even 
higher in combination with tympanic membrane movement 
examination. The HI diagnosed in OME is typically moderate 
and conductive, and may in chronic or recurrent OME result in 
adverse effects on speech and language development.23,24 In 
children with an existing permanent HI, OME may cause fur­
ther deterioration in hearing sensitivity, a condition that should 
be treated vigorously.
Recording of stapedial reflexes, ipsi- and/or contralateral 
thresholds, gives important information in relation to the clas­
sification of an HI in children, and the interpretation and diag­
nostic validity are similar to the findings in adults (see Chapter 
14). It should, however, be noted that impedance audiometry is 
dependent on the cooperation of the child, and thus may be dif­
ficult or impossible to perform in young children and infants.
Valuable information on the site-of-lesion diagnosis may be 
obtained by electrophysiological procedures (Chapter 16). 
Besides threshold determination, ECoG gives information on a 
conductive component by a parallel shift in the input/output 
latency function and may also differentiate between a pre- or 
postsynaptic lesion.25 As ABR is a non-invasive technique, 
which also offers a differentiation between conductive, sensori­
neural and mixed hearing loss in children, this recording 
method is preferable and will, in combination with the record­
ing of evoked otoacoustic emissions, indicate a cochlear or 
retrocochlear lesion. Recordings of longer-latency responses are 
necessary when non-organic or central auditory lesions in chil­
dren are suspected (see Chapter 16).
Additional tests for site of lesion diagnostic purposes are 
available, and can be performed in children as well as in adults. 
However, the majority of auditory testing requires some coop­
eration by the subject which, in children, results in limitations.
Vestibular investigation
Owing to the close anatomical relationship between the cochlea 
and the vestibular system, hearing-impaired children should 
undergo vestibular examination, including caloric testing. How­
ever, the majority of young children (i.e. ^4 years of age) cannot 
cooperate with a caloric test, but questions (preferably to the 
mother) concerning milestones for sitting, standing and walking 
give essential information on the vestibular system in a young 
child. About 30% of hearing-impaired children are clumsy and 
uncoordinated, which points towards involvement of also the 
vestibular system, giving important information on the aetiology 
of the hearing disorder. In older children complete vestibular test­
ing, based on an appropriate test protocol, can be performed.26
  

376 
Auditory disorders and their management
Assessment of the causative factor(s)
Whenever the identification and classification of HI in a child 
has been established, efforts should be directed towards finding 
the causative factor(s). This challenge demands interdiscipli­
nary cooperation, on the basis of which valuable information 
can be offered to the physician who is in charge of the sur­
veillance programme of the hearing-impaired child, e.g. an 
audiological physician, paediatrician, ENT physician, or other 
clinician, depending on the variety of paediatric hearing ser­
vices available throughout the world. It should be mentioned 
that although audiological methods may be insufficient for an 
aetiological diagnosis, they provide supplementary informa­
tion, both because of their potential to establish the site of the 
lesion, and because of specific patterns relating to the cause(s) 
of the HI.1,27
The aetiological evaluation of a hearing-impaired child is 
an ongoing process, and should be based on a protocol per­
formed systematically (Table 22.2). As the aetiology of HI in 
childhood may differ as a function of country or local area,28 the 
protocol for aetiological evaluation should reflect the causative 
factors in the specific geographical region. Although no 
regional surveys directed towards the aetiological evaluation 
have been performed, numerous data on the aetiology of hear­
ing disorders in children have been reported from various coun­
tries and areas within the last 20 years.27,2SM3 In Table 22.3, the 
proportions of various factors causing permanent HI in some 
cohort studies are shown. It should be noted that the propor­
tions indicated represent different cohorts, varying hearing 
level definitions, and some uncertainties in the categories as the 
various authors use different categorization systems.
Table 22.2 Protocol for routine diagnostic evaluation
1. Thorough clinical examination
2. Hearing threshold determination (including parents, siblings)
3. Classification of the HI (i.e. site of lesion)
4. Vestibular testing
5. Ophthalmological assessment
6. CT/MRI scanning
7. Blood testing: e.g
Viral antibodies (rubella, CMV, HIV and others)
Bacterial antibodies (syphilis, toxoplasmosis, others)
Thyroid function (T3, T4, thyroid-stimulating hormone, others) 
Cytogenetic testing (chromosomal abnormalities)
8. Urine analysis
9. Electrocardiogram
10, Mutation analysis in connexin 26
Specific tests:
Perchlorate discharge test
Thus, it is important to understand that major differences 
in the inclusion criteria, definition of samples, age of the chil­
dren, and definition of hearing levels are often present in stud­
ies concerning the aetiology of permanent HI in children, and 
preclude comparative analyses and aggregation of data. How­
ever, it can adequately be stated that in children with perma­
nent HI, inheritance comprises the major proportion (about 
50%), and that this nosology should be further subdivided into 
non-syndromal and syndromal genetic HI, and described 
according to the mode of transmission of the mutant gene in 
question (i.e. autosomal dominant/recessive, X-linked or mito­
chondrial).44 A varying proportion of 18-41% of unknown 
cause is also indicated in the various samples (Table 22.2), 
reflecting important quality aspects of the available services and 
surveillance programmes offered.28 The rapid development 
within the field of molecular genetics may, in the future, pro­
vide clinicians with additional valuable information, which will 
probably result in a reduction of the proportion of unknown 
cause and in improved counselling and, thus, in prevention of 
genetic HI.45
In surveillance programmes, a constant clinical awareness 
of the factor(s) causing a HI may yield additional or new infor­
mation on diseases causing HI in children. Through such 
awareness, a relationship between fetal infections and congeni­
tal HI has been demonstrated (see below), and a relationship 
between HI and fetal alcohol syndrome has been reported.46 
The ototoxic and teratogenic effects of drugs have long been 
established,47-49 and noise exposure even from infant toys50 or 
from the general environment may represent a hazard to the 
hearing of children. In fact, fetal noise exposure has been sug­
gested as a causative factor,51 however, the supportive evidence 
is scarce and fairly speculative.
Some causes of HI relating to specific examination proce­
dures, which should be part of a protocol, are mentioned below.
HI caused by fetal infections
Since 1944, fetal rubella infection has been recognized as a 
causative factor in congenital HI,52’53 and the risk of defects has 
been demonstrated to be very high, predominantly affecting the 
eyes, ears, and heart.54 Among samples of hearing-impaired 
children, it has previously been estimated that approximately 
15-30% of cases can be ascribed to fetal rubella infection,27’55-57 
and a reduction in the proportion of children with congenital 
HI has been found after introduction of rubella vaccination 
(Table 22.2).58,59 In countries where rubella vaccination does 
not form part of the child health surveillance programme fetal 
rubella infection still results in a high proportion of congenital 
HI.60 The causative diagnosis may be obtained from additional 
information in the clinical record, but ultimately depends on 
the demonstration of IgM or IgG rubella antibodies (before 6 
months of age). However, as IgG rubella antibodies are present 
in approximately 5-10% of children aged 6 months to 4 years, 
due to postnatal infection,61 the detection of IgG rubella anti­
bodies in the individual child cannot be conclusive, but may be
  

Assessment of hearing-impaired children 
377
Table 22.3 Proportion of some factors causing permanent HI in children reported in various cohort studies
ParvingJ/
1993
(°/o)
France and Stephens^ 
1995m
Fortnum and Davis39 
1997 
(%)
Maki-Torkko et a!*1 
1998m
Billings and Kenna42 
1999
M
Inheritance
46
50
40
46
25
Fetal infections
5
3
3
0.9
1.4
Craniofacial malformations
3
-
1
6
-
Perinatal complications
9
1
7
8
19
Meningitis/encephalitis
3
8
5
0.9
6
Chronic otitis media
12
2
1
-
24
Ototoxic drugs
-
-
-
0.9
-
Trauma
-
-
-
-
-
Various
-
-
2
-
-
Unknown cause
20
31
41
38
25
used to estimate a retrospective diagnosis- Thus, serological 
testing indicating the presence of rubella antibodies may sup­
port a diagnosis of HI caused by congenital rubella.62
Another important viral fetal infection causing congenital 
HI is cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection.63-65 The diagnosis of 
congenital CMV infection cannot be made on clinical grounds 
alone, and must be based on isolation of the virus from fresh 
urine or tissue during the first week of life, with a variety of sero­
logical tests available to detect CMV and thus document the 
presence of the infection. It is likely that many cases of con­
genital HI due to CMV infection remain undiagnosed, due to 
the limited period during which a proper diagnosis can be 
made.63 However, the potential to establish CMV as the 
causative factor of HI may be improved by the introduction of 
universal neonatal hearing screening.
A causal relationship between fetal infection with human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and HI may exist, and as the 
virus is neurotropic, a central auditory dysfunction may be the 
result.66-68 In this context, it should also be mentioned that a 
permanent HI in HIV-infected subjects may be caused by other 
infectious agents or by sequelae of encephalitis/meningitis.
Apart from viral infections, other infections, e.g. toxoplas­
mosis and syphilis, may cause congenital HI, and when these 
infections are suspected, appropriate serological testing should 
take place.49
Ophthalmological investigation
In the individual child, the detection of rubella antibodies may 
support the diagnosis of rubella embryopathy, but supplementary 
diagnostic information should be obtained by ophthalmological 
examination. Thereby, the visual acuity can be assessed, which
is of utmost importance for the further rehabilitation and train­
ing of a hearing-impaired child. The most frequent ophthalmo­
logical manifestation of fetal rubella infection—and many other 
fetal infections—is retinopathy, which occurs with an incidence 
of 20-50%. The retinal changes are characteristically located in 
the macular area or fundus periphery, mainly taking the form 
of a fine or coarse pepper and salt configuration. The retinal 
changes are highly specific for fetal viral infections and are not 
seen in normal children. It should be noted that the retinal 
changes found in rubella embryopathy should be distinguished 
from retinitis pigmentosa developing as part of Usher’s syndrome.
Ophthalmological examination should be part of a routine 
evaluation protocol in hearing-impaired children, because 
it offers important information on the visual acuity and on 
the differential diagnosis of a large number of syndromes 
which involve both the aural and visual systems/
Genetic factors
In children with congenital or acquired HI, genetic factors are 
most prevalent (Table 22.2). Although a thorough family his­
tory may raise suspicion of a genetic factor causing the HI, the 
protocol directed towards aetiological assessment should also 
include audiometric testing of the parents/siblings and, if possi­
ble, of other family members. In autosomal dominant inheri­
tance, traditional audiometry is often sufficient; however, a 
carrier state in recessive inherited HI may be revealed only by 
specific test procedures.
  

378 
Auditory disorders and their management
Thus, unusual dips in the threshold tracings have been 
demonstrated in Bekesy audiograms from heterozygote carriers 
of recessive deafness, and in addition elevated acoustical reflex 
thresholds have been found.70,71 However, the sensitivity of the 
method is poor in relation to the identification of carriers of 
genetic HI, ’ but more recent studies based on the Audio scan 
have shown a higher reliability,74-76 and the method may prove 
useful in appropriate samples. In addition, heterozygote carriers 
may be revealed by the recording of distortion product oto- 
acoustical emissions, having a significantly lower amplitude 
than in controls.77,78 In combination with DNA analysis, vari­
ous mutations in carriers may be identified, and the assessment 
of recessive non-syndromal inherited HI in children be 
improved. Thus, mutations in the gene (GJB2) encoding the 
connexin 26 molecule, which is a component of gap junctions, 
i.e. links allowing small molecules to pass between cells, have 
been found in non-syndromal recessive inherited HI79-83 and 
been reported with a high prevalence of 0.58-4.03% in various 
populations.82 In this context, it should be mentioned that con- 
nexin 26 has also been linked to dominantly inherited HI.84
Thus, a combination of acoustic carrier testing and devel­
opments within molecular genetics, with the identification of 
gene loci, positional cloning, and assessment of the biological 
function of the mutant gene, may in the future improve the 
assessment of inherited HI in children.
Imaging of the inner ear
Modem imaging techniques offer valuable information con­
cerning malformations of the inner ear in hearing-impaired 
children.85 (See Chapter 6) Although a malformation of the 
inner ear does not allow assessment of the aetiology, it should 
form part of the evaluation protocol, as it offers supplementary 
information. It is, however, important to inform both the child 
and the parents that the imaging of the inner ears cannot cure 
or improve the HI, which is sometimes anticipated, due to the 
radiation.
Table 22.2 lists the minimum requirements for a routine 
diagnostic evaluation of a hearing-impaired child. In this con­
text, it should be emphasized that no false expectations con­
cerning improvements in a permanent HI should emerge from 
the evaluation protocol in any of the examined subjects or the 
family. Specific tests, such as the perchlorate discharge test, 
should be performed when suspicion of Pendred syndrome is 
raised, and testing for mutations in connexin 26 should be 
performed routinely as part of an aetiological assesment.
Concluding comments
The assessment of a hearing-impaired child is a long-term, 
ongoing process, which should be performed as part of a sur­
veillance program. Audiological as well as non-audiological test 
procedures are of importance for the aetiological diagnostic
evaluation. An examination protocol should be performed, 
appropriately tailored to the individual child, and can only be 
realized by means of broad interdisciplinary cooperation, prefer­
ably established as diagnostic assessment teams. By these means 
the aetiology of HI in the individual child can be identified, 
also providing precise epidemiological data on the distribution 
of various aetiological categories of HI in well-defined samples. 
Thereby, primary prevention of permanent HI in children can 
be achieved, which is the ultimate goal of the assessment of the 
hearing-impaired child.
References
1. Parving A. Hearing disorders in childhood, some procedures for 
detection, identification and diagnostic evaluation. Int J Pediatr 
Otorhinol 1985; 9: 31-57.
2. Luxon L, Moller C. HEAR: European workgroup on genetics of 
hearing impairment. Infoletter 1996; 2: November.
3. WHO International classification of impairments, disabilities, and 
handicaps. Geneva: World Health Organization; 1980.
4. Thompson G, Weber BA. Responses of infants and young chil­
dren to behavioural observation audiometry (BOA). J Speech Dis­
ord 1974; 39: 140-7.
5. Suzuki T, Ogiba Y. Conditioned orientation reflex audiometry. A 
new technique for pure tone audiometry in young children under 
3 years of age. Arch Otolaryngol 1961; 84: 84-90.
6. Johansson RK, Salmivalli A. Arousing effect of sounds for testing 
infants’ hearing ability. Audiology 1983; 22: 417-20.
7. Liden G, Kankkunen A. Visual reinforcement audiometry. Acta 
Otolaryngol 1969; 67: 281-92.
8. Widen JE, Folsom RC, Cone-Wesson B, Carty L, Dunnell JJ, 
Koebsell K, Levi A, Mancl L, Ohlrich B, Trouba S, et al. Identifi­
cation of neonatal hearing impairment: Hearing status at 8 to 12 
months corrected age using a visual reinforcement audiometry 
protocol. Ear & Hear 2000; 21: 471-85.
9. Ewing IR, Ewing AWG. The ascertainment of deafness in infancy 
and early childhood. J Laryngol Otol 1944; 59: 309-38.
10. McCormick B. The Medical Practitioner's Guide to Paediatric 
Audiology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
11. Gravel JS, Traquina DN. Experience with the audiologic assess­
ment of infants and toddlers. Int ] Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1992; 
23: 59-71.
12. Hodgson WR. Evaluation of infants and young children. In: Katz 
DR, ed. Handbook of Clinical Audiology, 4th edn. Baltimore: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1994: 465-76.
13. Yost AW. A forced-choice adaptive procedure for measuring audi­
tory thresholds in children. Behav Res Meth Instrument 1978; 10: 
671-7.
14. Parving A, Elberling C, Salomon G. ECoG and psychoacoustic 
tests compared in identification of hearing loss in young children. 
Audiology 1981; 20: 365-81.
15. Bonfils P, Uziel A. Clinical applications of evoked acoustic emis­
sions: results in normally hearing and hearing-impaired subjects. 
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1989; 98: 326-31.
  

Assessment of hearing-impaired children 
379
16. Sun X-M, Jung MD, Kim DO, Randolph KJ. Distortion product 
otoacoustic emission test of sensorineural hearing loss in humans: 
comparison of unequal' and equal-level stimuli. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1996; 105: 982-90.
17. Kuhl PK. Perceptual constancy for speech sound categories in 
early infancy. In: Yeni-Komshian G, Kavanagh J, Fergusson C, eds. 
Child Phonology: Perception and Production. New York: Academic 
Press, 1980: 41-66.
18. Kuhl PK, Williams KA, Lacerda F, Stevens KN, Lindblom B. 
Linguistic experience alters phonetic perception in infants by six 
months of age. Science 1992; 255: 606-8.
19. Dawson PW, Nott PE, Clark GM, Cowan RSC. A modification of 
play audiometry to assess speech discrimination ability in severe to 
profoundly deaf 2-4 year old children. Ear Hear 1998; 19: 371-84.
20. Osberger MJ, Miyamoto RT, Zimmerman-Phillips S et al. 
Independent evaluation with speech perception abilities of chil- 
dren with a Nucleus 22 channel cochlear implant system. Ear 
Hear 1991; 12(suppl): 66-84.
21. Robbins AM, Kirk KI. Speech perception assessment and perform 
mance in paediatric cochlear implant users. Semin Hear 1996; 17: 
353-66.
22. Bluestone CD. Epidemiology and pathogenesis of chronic suppu- 
rative otitis media: implications for prevention and treatment. Int 
J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1998; 42: 207-33.
23. Chalmers D, Stewart E, Silva P, Mulvena A. Otitis media with 
effusion in children— the Dunedin Study. Clin Dev Med 1989; 
108: 1-108.
24. Gravel JS, Wallace IF, Ruben RJ. Auditory consequences of early 
mild hearing loss associated with otitis media. A eta Otolaryngol 
(Stockh) 1996; 116: 219-21.
25. Salomon G, Elberling C. Estimation of inner ear function and 
conductive hearing loss based on electrocochleography. Adv 
Audiol 1989; 5: 46-55.
26. Luxon L, Moller C. HEAR: European workgroup on genetics of 
hearing impairment. Infoletter. 1996.
27. Parving A. Hearing disability in childhood —  a cross-sectional 
and longitudinal investigation of causative factors. Int ] Pediatr 
Otorhinolaryngol 1993; 27: 101-11.
28. Parving A. Factors causing hearing impairment: some perspectives 
from Europe. J Am Acad Audiol 1995; 6: 387-95.
29. France EA, Stephens SDG. All Wales audiology and genetic service 
for hearing impaired young adults. J Audiol Med 1995; 4: 67-84.
30. Parving A, France EA, Stephens SDG. Factors causing hearing 
impairment in identical birth-cohorts in Denmark and Wales. J 
Audiol Med 1996; 5:67-72.
31. Kankkunen A. Pre-school children with impaired hearing. Acta 
Otolaryngol 1982; 391(suppl): 59-99.
32. Newton WE. Aetiology of bilateral sensorineural hearing loss in 
young children. J Otolaryngol 1985; lO(suppl): 1-57.
33. Hirsch A. Hearing loss and associated handicaps in pre-school 
children. Scand Audiol 1988; 30: 61-4.
34. Lenzi A, Zaghis A. Incidence of genetic factors in the causation of 
deafness in childhood. Scand Audiol 1988; 30: 37-41.
35. Davidson J, Hyde ML, Alberti PW. Epidemiology of hearing 
impairment in childhood. Scand Audiol 1988; 30(suppl): 13-20.
36. Dias O, Andrea M. Childhood deafness in Portugal— aetiological 
factors and diagnosis of hearing loss. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 
1990; 18: 247-55.
37. van Rijn PM, Cremers CWRJ. Causes of childhood deafness at a 
Dutch school for the hearing impaired. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1991; 100: 903-8.
38. Vanniasegaram I, Tungland OP, Bellmann S. A five year review of 
children with deafness in a multi-ethnic community. J Audiol Med 
1993; 2: 9-19.
39. Fortnum H, Davis A. Epidemiology of permanent childhood hear­
ing impairment in Trent Region 1985-1993. Br J Audiol 1997; 
31:409-46.
40. McPherson B, Swart SM. Childhood hearing loss in sub-Saharan 
Africa: a review and recommendations. J Pediatr Otorhinol 1997; 
40:1-18.
41. Maki-Torkko EM, Lindholm PK, Vayrynen MRH, Leisti JT, Sorri 
MJ. Epidemiology of moderate to profound childhood hearing 
impairments in northern Finland. Any changes in ten years? 
Scand Audiol 1998; 27: 95-103.
42. Billings KR, Kenna MA. Causes of pediatric sensorineural hearing 
loss. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1999; 125: 517-21.
43. Streppel M, Richling F, Roth B, Walger M, von Wedel H, Echel E. 
Epidemiology and aetiology of acquired hearing disorders in 
childhood in the Cologne area. J Pediatr Otorhinol 1998; 44: 
235-43.
44. Parving A, Newton V. Guidelines for description of inherited 
hearing loss. J Audiol Med 1995; 2: ii-v.
45. Resendes BL, Williamson RE, Morton CC. Review article: At the 
speed of sound: gene discovery in the auditory system. Am ] Hum 
Genet 2001; 69: 923-35.
46. Church MW, Gerkin KP. Hearing disorders in children with foetal 
alcohol syndrome: findings from case reports. Paediatrics 1988; 
82/2: 147-54.
47. Barr B. Teratogenic hearing loss. Audiology 1982; 21: 111-17.
48. Gerber SE, Epstein L, Mencher L. Recent changes in the aetiol­
ogy of hearing disorders: perinatal drug exposure. J Am Acad 
Audiol 1995; 6: 371-7.
49. Strasnick B, Jacobson JT. Teratogenic hearing loss. J Am A cad 
Audiol 1995; 6: 28-38.
50. Jerger J. Hazardous toys. J Am A cad Audiol 1994; 5: 76.
51. Lalande NM, Hetu R, Lampers J. Is occupational noise exposure 
during pregnancy a risk factor of damage to the auditory system of 
the foetus? Am J Ind Med 1986; 10: 427-35.
52. Swan C, Torstevin AL, Moore B, Maj H, Black GHB. Congenital 
defects in infants following infectious diseases during pregnancy. 
M edJ Austr 1943; 2: 201-10.
53. Gregg NMA. Further observations on congenital defects in 
infants following maternal rubella. Trans Ophthal Soc Aust 1944; 4: 
119-31.
54. Miller GW, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of 
confirmed maternal rubella at successive stages of pregnancy. 
Lancet 1982; 1: 781-4.
55. Barr B. Early identification of hearing impairment. In: Taylor IG, 
Markides A, eds. Disorders of Auditory Function, III. London: 
Academic Press, 1980: 33-42.
  

380 
Auditory disorders and their management
56. Martin JAM, Bentzen O, Colley JRT et al. Childhood deafness in 
the European community. Scand Audiol 1981; 10: 165-74.
57. Taylor IG. The prevention of congenital sensorineural deafness. 
In: Taylor IG, Markiedes A, eds. Disorders of auditory function, III. 
London: Academic Press, 1980: 25-31.
58. Upfold LJ. Children with hearing AIDS in the 1980s: aetiologies 
and severity of impairment. Ear Hear 1988; 9/2: 75-80.
59. Davis A, Wood S, Healy R, Webb H, Rowe S. Risk factors for 
hearing disorders: Epidemiological evidence of change over time 
in the UK. J Am A cad Audiol 1995; 6: 365-70.
60. Prasansuk S. Incidence/prevalence of sensorineural hearing 
impairment in Thailand and South East Asia. Audiology 2000; 39: 
207-11.
61. Peckham GS, Martin JAM, Marshall WS, Dudgeon JA. Con- 
genital rubella deafness: a preventable disease. Lancet 1979; 1: 
258-61.
62. Parving A, Vejtorp M, M0ller K, Jensen JH. Congenital hearing 
loss and rubella infection. Acta Otolaryngol 1980; 90: 262-6.
63. Reynolds DW, Stagno S, Stubbs KG et al. Inapparent congenital 
cytomegalovirus infection with elevated cord IgM levels. Cause 
and relationship with auditory and mental deficiency. N Engl J 
Med 1974; 290: 291-6.
64. Stagno S, Reynolds DW, Ana CS, Darle AJ. Auditory and visual 
defects resulting from symptomatic and sub-clinical congenital 
cytomegalovirus and toxoplasmal infections. Pediatrics 1977; 59: 
669-77.
65. Dahle AJ, Fowler KB, Wright JD, Boppana SB, Britt WJ, Pass RF. 
Longitudinal investigation of hearing disorders in children with 
congenital cytomegalovirus. J Am Acad Audiol 2000; 11: 283-90.
66. Real R, Thomas M, Gerwins JM. Sudden hearing loss and 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1987; 97: 409-12.
67. Birchall MA, White RG, French PD, Cockbanes Z, Smith SJM. 
Auditory function in patients infected with the human immuno­
deficiency virus. Clin Otolaryngol 1992; 17: 117-21.
68. Madriz JJ, Herrera G. Human immune deficiency virus and 
acquired immune deficiency syndrome age related hearing disor­
ders. J Am A cad Audiol 1995; 6: 358-64.
69. Gorlin RJ. Genetic hearing loss with no associated abnormalities. 
In Gorlin RJ, Toriello HV, Cohen MM, eds. Hereditary Hearing 
Loss and its Syndromes. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995; 
pp. 43-61.
70. Andersen H, Wedenberg E. Audiometric identification of normal 
hearing carriers of genes for deafness. Acta Otolaryngol 1968; 65: 
535-54.
71. Andersen H, Wedenberg E. Identification of normal hearing car­
riers of genes for deafness. Acta Otolaryngol 1976; 82: 245-8.
72. Parving A. Reliability of Bekesy threshold tracing in identification 
of carriers of genes for an X-linked disease with deafness. Acta 
Otolaryngol 1978; 85: 40-4.
73. Parving A, Schwartz M. Audiometric tests in gene carriers of 
Norrie’s disease. IntJ Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1991; 21: 103-11.
74. Meredith R, Stephens D, Sirimanna T, Meyer-Bisch C, Reardon 
W. Audiometric detection of carriers of Usher’s syndrome type II. 
J Audiol Med 1992; 1: 11-19.
75. Meyer-Bisch C. Audioscan: a high-definition audiometry tech­
nique based on constant-level frequency sweeps— a new method 
with new hearing indicators. Audiology 1996; 35: 63-72.
76. Laroche C, Hetu R. A study of the reliability of automatic 
audiometry by the frequency scanning method (Audioscan). Audi­
ology 1997; 36: 1-18.
77. Cohen M, Francis M, Coffey R, Pembrey ME, Luxon LM. 
Abnormal audiograms and elevated acoustic reflex thresholds in 
obligate carriers of autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing 
loss. Acta Otolaryngol 1997; 117: 337-42.
78. Liu XZ, Newton VE. Distortion product emissions in normal- 
hearing and low-frequency hearing loss carriers of genes for 
Waardenburg’s syndrome. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1997; 106: 
220-5.
79. Morrell RJ, Kim HJ, Hood LJ et al. Mutations in the Connexin 26 
gene (GJB2) among ashkenazi jews with nonsyndromic recessive 
deafness. N EnglJ Med 1998; 359: 1500-5.
80. Kelsell DP, Ldunlop J, Stevens HP et al. Connexin 26 mutations 
in hereditary non-syndromic sensorineural deafness. Nature 1997; 
387: 80-3.
81. Zelante L, Gasparini P, Estivill X et al. Connexin 26 mutations 
associated with the most common form of a non-syndromic 
neurosensory 
autosomal 
recessive 
deafness 
(DFNB1) 
in 
Mediterraneans. Hum MoJ Genet 1997; 6: 1605-9.
82. Kenna MA, Wu B-L, Cotanche DA, Korf BR, Rehm HL. 
Connexin 26 studies in patients with sensorineural hearing loss. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2001; 127: 1037-42.
83. Estivill X, Foritna P, Surrey S et al. Connexin 26 mutations in 
sporadic and inherited sensorineural deafness. Lancet 1998; 351:
394-8.
84- Denoyelle F, Lina-Granade G, Plauchu H et al. Connexin 26 gene 
linked to a dominant deafness. Nature 1998; 393: 319-20.
85. Harcourt JP, Lennox P, Phips PD, Brooks GB. CT-screening for 
temporal bone abnormalities in idiopathic bilateral sensorineural 
hearing loss. J Laryngol Otol 1997; 111: 117-21.
  

Otitis media with 
effusion in children 
(Glue ear)
Ewa Raglan
Introduction
Otitis media with effusion (OME) is a very common recurrent 
condition in children, being most prevalent in children below 
the age of 2 years, and becoming less frequent and of shorter 
duration with increasing age.1 It frequently follows an episode 
of acute otitis media (AOM) or an upper respiratory tract infec" 
tion. The duration of the effusion varies, but it resolves sponta- 
neously in most children. In 40-56% of children, resolution 
occurs within 2 weeks,2 in 60-94% it will resolve within 
3 months,3-5 but in approximately 10% it persists for more than 
one year.6 There is some evidence that the duration of OME 
effusion may be longer in younger children.7
Cases of OME peak around the age of 2 and 5 years and 
they occur most commonly in winter, with the lowest 
prevalence in summer.3,8
Figure 23.1 shows the combined results of the prevalence of 
OME with 95% confidence limits in selected studies.9 Around 
the age of 2 years the prevalence is about 20%, then it falls off 
to peak again to about 15% at the age of 5, the age of school 
entry, when there is more contact with other children.
There are a number of reasons including anatomical, 
functional (position of Eustachian tube impeding drainage of 
middle ear effusion (MEE) caused by inflammation)10,11 and 
immunological factors (development of protective antibodies 
to invading bacteria),12 for the increased prevalence of OME 
below 2 years of age. In some young infants, OME may be 
asymptomatic.2
Children who suffer a first episode of AOM at an early age 
are at a much greater risk of developing chronic OME.2,13
The early onset of OME is related to the early onset of 
AOM, which, in turn, may be the result of a combination of an 
innate predisposition (differences in anatomy/function of 
Eustachian tube) and decreased ability to produce antibodies 
against common bacterial/viral pathogens. The latter factor is
associated with specific risk factors, including a shorter duration 
of breast feeding,14 feeding in a supine position,15 Owen et al,16 
and attendance at a nursery, with increased exposure to various 
upper respiratory tract pathogens.17,18
Age (months)
Figure 23.1 Combined results of selected studies on the prevalence of OME with 
95% confidence limit. (From Zielhuis et al. Clin Otolaryngol 1990; 15: 283-8.9)

382 
Auditory disorders and their management
Diagnosis
Otitis media reflects inflammation of the middle ear system. 
The terminology of the condition has been defined by the 4th 
Research Conference on Recent Advances in Otitis Media,19 
and clinical criteria are used as the basis for classification.
dition becomes chronic, may present with a hearing impair­
ment or secondary sequelae such as tinnitus, dizziness, imbal­
ance, speech, language and developmental delay or behavioural 
problems. The tympanic membrane may be opaque and
TYPES OF OTITIS MEDIA
Acute suppurative otitis media* 
Otitis media with effusion. 
Chronic suppurative otitis media.
Acute suppurative otitis media (AOM)
This condition presents as sudden, short infection of the 
middle ear, characterized by otalgia, hearing impairment and 
an opaque, red, pink or yellow looking drum, which is often 
bulging. The child may, additionally, have non-specific symp­
toms such as irritability, headache, apathy, anorexia, vomiting, 
diarrhoea and fever. The typical otoscopic picture (Figure 
23.2)20 and poor drum mobility on tympanometry will reveal 
the diagnosis.
Otitis media with effusion (OME)
This condition is characterized by the presence of an effusion in 
the middle ear cleft, which may be asymptomatic or, if the con-
Figure 23.2 Acute otitis media. There is redness of the drum and, laterally, a 
bulging large segment of the drum, filled with mucopurulent exudates. (From 
Hawke and McCombe. Diseases o f the Ear Pocket Atlas. Austin IX: Manticore 
Communications Inc, 1995.20)
Figure 23.3 Secretory otitis media (a) with effusion (Glue ear). Dull appearance 
of the tympanic membrane, indicative of the presence of fluid in the middle ear, 
retraction of the drum is shown by a more horizontal position of the handle of 
the malleus, (b) Presence of serous fluid in the ear. (From Hawke and McCombe. 
Diseases o f the Ear Pocket Atlas. Austin TX: Manticore Communications Inc, 
1995.20)
  

Otitis media with effusion in children (Glue ear) 
383
retracted, with reduced mobility, or the presence of fluid 
bubbles, behind the drum (Figure 23.3a,b),20 may be observed. 
The effusion may be serous or mucoid (thick and sticky and 
referred to as ‘glue ear’) or a combination of both.21,22 The dis­
tinction between acute and chronic is based on the duration of 
the effusion: less than 3 months will denote an acute condition, 
whereas more than 3 months is regarded as chronic.21
Chronic suppurative otitis media
This condition is characterized by chronic purulent discharge, 
through a perforated tympanic membrane. The pathological 
drum may be in a neutral or retracted position, discoloured 
(usually opaque) and with no mobility. (Figure 23.4)*20
Diagnosis of the specific condition is made by otoscopy and 
confirmed by tympanometry, with audiometric evidence of a 
conductive hearing impairment. A type B tympanogram, 
indicative of poor middle ear compliance, would be found in 
otitis media, or when a middle ear effusion is present. A type C 
tympanogram, with a rising curve, indicative of negative mid­
dle ear pressure will be found in early cases of OME (Figure 
23.5).23,24
Audiometric testing demonstrates a conductive hearing 
loss, and may be bilateral or unilateral. In early cases of OME, 
the loss may be present only at low frequencies (0.5 and 
1.0kHz), while in advanced cases of longer duration, the loss 
may span the whole range of frequencies leading to a pantonal 
moderate degree of hearing impairment (Figure 23.6).25 In such 
cases, the correction of the conductive component by treat-
(a)
Compliance
Type A
Type B
Type C
Pressure
Figure 23.5 Classification of shapes of tympanograms, Type A -  normal middle 
ear pressure. Type B -  presence of ME effusion. Type C - rising curve indicative 
of presence of negative pressure in the ME cleft. (From Browning, ed. Clinical 
Otology and AudUogy 2nd Edition. Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann, 1998: 
185-9024 with further details in Jerger et al. Arch Otolaryngol 1974; 99:
165-71,23)
ment of the glue ear allows the evaluation of the possibility of 
an underlying sensorineural hearing component.
Figure 23.4 Chronic suppurative otitis media. Perforation of the tympanic 
membrane with granulomatous edges and mucopurulent discharge. (From 
Hawke and McCombe. Diseases o f the Ear Pocket Atlas. Austin TX: Manticore 
Communications Inc, 1995.20)
Pathophysiology/a etiology
A number of factors leading to the development of OME have 
been postulated, and it is possible that in any individual case all 
the different mechanisms may be involved.
  

384 
Auditory disorders and their management
Hearing level percentages for type B tymps
0-4 
5-9 
10-14 
15-19 
20-24 
25-29 
30-34 
35-39 
40-44 
45-49 
50-54 
55-59 
60-64 
65-69
Hearing levels in 5dB ranges
Figure 23.6 Histogram of hearing level (pure tone average/0.5, 1 and 2 kHz) in children's ears with OME confirmed by Type B tympanogram.
FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF OME
Eustachian tube dysfunction/occlusion^
Unresolved infection with continued inflammation, 
in the nasopharynx/middle ear (cleft)
Allergy
Immature or impaired immunological systems in 
infants
Craniofacial abnormalities
Social factors such as passive smoking, lack of breast 
feeding and attendance at nursery,2'
Eustachian tube dysfunction/occlusion
The Eustachian tube is the part of the middle ear system posi­
tioned between the nasopharynx and the middle ear cavity, and 
mastoid air cells system. The entire surface is covered by 
mucous membrane. The Eustachian tube in infancy and child­
hood differs from that of an adult, in that it is more horizontal 
and shorter, about 18mm long10 compared with 31-38mm in 
the adult.11 In addition, the ostium lies in the lower part of the 
nasopharynx and the isthmus is narrower (Figure 23.7).28
The Eustachian tube allows equalisation of the pressure in 
the middle ear with atmospheric pressure, enabling free move­
ment of the tympanic membrane. The Eustachian tube can 
become blocked internally by swelling of the mucous mem­
brane due to the infection (upper respiratory tract infection) or 
allergy, or externally by compression due to enlarged adenoids. 
The air in the middle ear cavity is then absorbed into the blood 
vessels of the mucous membrane, causing a reduction of middle
Figure 23.7 Diagram showing the difference in position and configuration of 
eustachain tubes in infants and adults. (From Bluestone and Klein. In: Wu, ed. 
Otitis Media in Infants and Children 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Co, 2001: 
58—78.28)
ear pressure, leading to retraction and restriction of movement 
of the tympanic membrane.
The anatomical configuration of the Eustachian tube in the 
infant allows for easy access to the middle ear from the 
nasopharynx predisposing to more frequent episodes of glue ear. 
Gross negative pressure, within the middle ear cleft, may lead to 
aspiration of secretions from the nasopharynx, with the 
development of acute bacterial otitis media.
  

Otitis media with effusion in children (Glue ear) 
385
Nasopharyngeal infection
Nasopharyngeal infection may spread along the mucous mem- 
brane of the Eustachian tube into the middle ear cleft.29 An 
effusion in the middle ear may also result from incomplete 
resolution of an acute middle ear infection.30
Allergy
The role of allergy in the formation of OME has been postu­
lated for many years.31 34 However, the mechanism of its asso­
ciation has remained unclear,35 but more recently, it has been 
proposed that the middle ear mucosa may be functioning as a 
target organ. Allergy may lead to inflammatory swelling of the 
mucosal lining of the Eustachian tube, or bacteria and allergens 
may be aspirated from the nasopharynx into middle ear
Immunological status
It has been observed that children with a defective or immature 
immunological status have a higher incidence of OME,39 and 
Sigurdardottir et al reported that children aged 3 years or above, 
with chronic middle ear effusion, may have a functional 
antibody deficiency to Streptococcus pneumoniae.40
Craniofacial abnormalities
Nearly all infants with unrepaired cleft palate present with 
MEE,41 but surgical repair of the cleft improves Eustachian tube 
function and, thus, diminishes the occurrence of MEE.42
In children with Down’s syndrome, Eustachian tube posi­
tion is such that it facilitates access of secretions from the 
nasopharynx into the middle ear cleft, resulting in chronic 
MEE.43
Genetics
Epidemiological and anatomical information suggests that the 
predisposition to chronic MEE may be of genetic origin. The 
pneumatisation of mastoid air cells linked causally to otitis 
media was found to be greater in monozygotic than dizygotic 
twins.44 Moreover, the position of the Eustachian tube leading 
to an increased incidence of MEE may also be genetically 
determined.45
Social and environmental factors
Children’s attendance at nursery leads to an increased occur­
rence of repeated upper respiratory tract infections and, hence, 
persistent OME. Rassmussen46 and Casselbrant and co­
workers47 found that first-born children were less affected by 
MEE during the first 2 years of life, than were their siblings.
A strong positive association between MEE and passive 
smoking has been recognised by some48-49 but not other 
researchers.50 A metabolite of nicotine (cotinine), which serves
as a marker of passive smoking, has been measured in the saliva 
of children aged 6-7 years and its value correlated with tympa- 
nometric findings of middle ear status. Abnormal tympan- 
ograms, and the number of smokers in a house correlated with 
increased cotinine concentrations.51
In a further study, children in a nursery, who were shown to 
have elevated cotinine concentration, demonstrated a higher 
rate of both new and longer episodes of MEE.52
SEQUELAE OF OME
Functional.
Structural.
Chronic OME may lead to a range of functional sequelae, 
which broadly can be subdivided into those associated with 
vestibular dysfunction, leading to imbalance, and those associ­
ated with auditory dysfunction, leading to speech and language 
impairments, with subsequent communication and behaviour 
problems.
FUNCTIONAL SEQUELAE OF OME
Hearing impairment.
Speech <Si language delay.
Behavioural problems.
Balance dysfunction.
Hearing, speech, language development and 
behaviour
OME, especially of prolonged duration or recurrent nature may 
lead to long lasting or fluctuating hearing impairment, which in 
turn may have consequences upon speech and language devel­
opment, with secondary communication and behaviour diffi­
culties. The complexity of this relationship depends upon the 
degree and duration of the impairment and the child’s stage of 
development, at the time of the condition. Early history of 
OME leading to hearing impairment in the first and second year 
of life may result in a delay in expressive more than repetitive 
development.53
A young child, in the early critical period for language 
development, requires acute hearing to be able to distinguish 
the important auditory signals of speech and to filter speech 
signals from the background noise.54 The presence of middle ear 
effusion, resulting in a conductive hearing impairment of 
various degrees and of various duration impairs the perfect 
acquisition of sounds and semantic, syntactic, and pragmatic 
rules of language. Instead, the received signal is partial or 
incomplete, which leads to false coding in a child’s language 
database. Moreover, the child’s interaction with the care-giver 
may be diminished because of the effects of the chronic con­
dition. These impairments may lead to the child’s withdrawal,
  

386 
Auditory disorders and their management
lack of interest and concentration, frustration or clinging 
behaviour.
At a later stage, during school, the child may present with 
problems in listening in background noise, poor academic 
achievement, and attention and behavioural problems. With­
drawal, in a school setting, leads to the report that ‘the child is 
in a world of his own’, day dreaming and, thus, attracting less 
attention from the teacher and consequently, falling behind 
academically.
A child with hearing impairment due to OME will fre­
quently ignore the attenuated auditory input, and this is exac­
erbated situations where he has to listen against background 
noise. The child, who does not have a well established auditory 
base for language, struggles when addressed by further fluctuat­
ing hearing impairment, because he is not able to refer to an 
established language code when further auditory messages are 
incomplete.54
A younger child, in this situation, with a history of con­
ductive hearing loss, who has not developed a language data­
base, is unable to use contextual cues or previous experience to 
decipher a new auditory message. He will frequently ask for the 
question to be repeated and will mishear or provide an incorrect 
reply. He will also ask for the volume of the television to be 
increased and he may shout or be reported to lip read. He may 
manifest learning difficulties such as slowness to learn, inatten­
tion and poor concentration. Additionally, he may have poor 
pronunciation or, indeed, may not be understood by strangers, 
as his words may be incomplete.55
It has been shown in human and animal studies of pro­
longed MEE56 that the attenuated or delayed auditory inputs57 
lead to impairment of binaural hearing and of other elements of 
central auditory processing, such as temporal resolution and 
sensitivity to short tones in the presence of background noise,58 
which underlie important aspects of language listening. 
However, with training, the animals regain normal temporal 
resolution.58 Similarly, some aspects of disordered central audi­
tory processing, associated with recurrent MEE in infancy, such 
as binaural masking level difference, recover spontaneously in 
teenagers, once MEE has resolved.59
The long-term effects of fluctuating hearing impairment, 
associated with middle ear effusion, during the early period of 
the development of language are not clear.60 The result of 
prospective studies on this topic are difficult to interpret, as 
there are no standard inclusion and outcome criteria and many 
of the studies are poorly designed.54
Moreover, retrospective studies are difficult to evaluate, as 
the data are often not precise. The history of OME for example 
is subjectively elicited from the parents, rather than objectively 
based on otoscopy, tympanometry and audiometry. However, 
there is sufficient data to establish that there is an effect of 
OME on auditory perception,61 speech, language development, 
cognition and behaviour.62
Balance
Children who present with chronic middle ear effusion can 
experience symptoms of dizziness and imbalance.63-64 However, 
the symptoms frequently reported by parents are clumsiness and 
frequent falls.65 A number of authors found, using a balance 
platform system, that children with chronic OME demon­
strated greater sway than a control group.66-68 It has also been 
demonstrated that resolution of the middle ear effusion led to 
improvement of the associated balance dysfunction.63,69,70,71 
Three mechanisms to explain vestibular involvement in OME 
have been proposed. One school of thought states that negative 
middle ear pressure changes are transmitted through the 
labyrinthine windows and cause secondary movement of the 
inner ear fluids.65,69,67,72,73 The second school of thought pro­
poses that the symptoms are caused by serous labyrinthitis, as a 
result of superadded infection of the middle ear effusion.69,67,72,74 
It had been found that bacteria can be cultured from 20% to 
77% of chronic middle ear effusions.75,76 A third mechanism has 
been suggested by Jones,68 who has postulated a transfer of ions 
through the semi-permeable round window membrane, leading 
to a change in the chemical composition of the endolymph via 
the perilymph. This in turn, would lead to changes in the ionic 
channels of the kinocilia and stereocilia leading to a disturbance 
of balance.
Children with balance problems, as a result of chronic 
middle ear effusion, especially those with additional problems 
(such as speech and language delay, or behaviour problems) 
may not recover spontaneously and, therefore, should be 
referred for early surgical intervention.77,78
Other possible structural sequelae to chronic OME are tym­
panic membrane perforation, chronic suppurative otitis media, 
formation of cholesteatoma, retraction pockets of the tympanic 
membrane (Figure 23.8), patches of tympanosclerosis, mas­
toiditis, labyrinthitis, or facial paralysis. Many of these require 
surgical intervention (see Chapter 36).79
Management
Treatment of AOM and OME falls into three categories:
TREATMENT OF AOM AND OME
Medical and preventative.
Surgical.
Rehabilitative.
Medical treatment of AOM
The first line of management of AOM is with an antibiotic 
agent sensitive to the most common pathogens, causing middle 
ear infection, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus 
influenzae and Moraxella catarrhalis. The recommended drug
  

Otitis media with effusion in children (Glue ear) 
387
Figure 23.8 Retraction pockets.20 The sequelaed negative middle ear pressure 
due to Eustachian tube dysfunction. (From Hawke and McCombe. Diseases o f 
the Ear Pocket Atlas. Austin TX: Manticore Communications Inc, 1995.20)
of choice is amoxycillin, which is effective, safe and inexpen­
sive. A combination of amoxycillin and clavulanate is recom­
mended as the second line treatment in North America, if 
amoxycillin alone is ineffective. A 10-14 day course is 
recommended.80, 81 If the infection continues a change of 
antibiotics is advised, e.g. erythromycin or trimethoprim, 
together with a detailed examination to identify other foci of 
infection and tympanocentesis (incision and drainage of middle 
ear abscess). Culture and sensitivity of the causative pathogen, 
obtained from the middle ear fluid, will allow the use of the 
appropriate most sensitive antibiotic.
In parallel to antibiotic therapy, AOM could be treated 
symptomatically with analgesic, antipyretics, antihistamines 
and decongestants, although their efficacy has not been proven. 
Severe recurrent attacks of AOM should be investigated to 
exclude underlying conditions, such as an allergy or an 
immunological defect, which should be treated appropriately.82 
Environmental factors, predisposing to recurrent infection, 
should be excluded, such as passive smoking,83 while atten­
dance at the day nursery should be raised with the parents as a 
relevant predisposing factor.
Children with a history of recurrent otitis media (more 
than 6 attacks per year) and impaired immune responses, should 
be offered 7 valent type of conjugate pneumococcal vaccine84 or 
influenza virus vaccine, or indeed long-term antimicrobial 
prophylaxis with amoxycillin or sulphonamide.85
If, despite prophylaxic treatment, the child continues to 
have episodes of otitis media, other options of treatment should 
be considered, such as the insertion of grommets (ventilation
tube) alone, or in combination with adenoidectomy, if indi­
cated by the symptoms of hypertrophied adenoids, obstructing 
the ostium of the Eustachian tube.
AOM may be followed by persistent OME, which should be 
kept under observation (‘watchful waiting’ before surgery), 
together with placement of the child on a provisional surgical 
waiting list. From this position, repeated assessments allow the 
child to be transferred for surgery as soon as required.85,86 How­
ever, if the OME resolves, this approach allows removal from 
the surgical list, with effective and economic management of 
healthcare resources.
Medical treatment of OME
Chronic OME has been treated with a variety of agents, such as 
systemic and intranasal decongestants and, antihistamine/- 
decongestant combinations, but clinical trials have not proven 
their efficacy.80 Systemic corticosteroids have been used, but 
with uncertain effectiveness, and potential side effects, particu­
larly in children, reduce their usefulness in the management 
of OME.87
Other methods, such as mucolytics and otovent autoinfla­
tion of the middle ear88 have also proven of little benefit. In the 
case of usage of the otovent, there is the practical problem of 
poor compliance in children, and the theoretical risk of forcing 
infecting nasopharyngeal secretions into the middle ear.
An alternative approach has been the use of xylitol sugar 
chewing gum, which has been shown in a study of five-year-old 
children in day care to prevent AOM. Some success has been 
registered, as compared with children using sucrose gum.89 
Xylitol can be produced from birch tree, and is also found in 
raspberries and plums. It inhibits the growth of Streptococcus 
mu tans, and is therefore, widely used in toothpaste to prevent 
dental caries. However, it has been shown, in vitro, to inhibit 
the growth of Streptococcus pneumoniae,90 and these initial 
observations deserve further investigation.
Surgical management
Several different modalities of surgical intervention are of value 
in the management of OME (see Chapter 36).
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
Insertion of a ventilation tube (grommet) (Figure 
23.9)^L which maintains ambient pressure within the 
middle ear cleft and provides adequate draining 
through the grommet and Eustachian tube into the 
nasopharynx.
Adenoidectomy (= the removal of hypertrophied 
lymphoid tissue from the ostium of the Eustachian 
tube and nasopharynx).
  

388 
Auditory disorders and their management
Figure 23.9 Ventilation tube (grommet). The tube is inserted in the 
anteriorinferior quadrant of the tympanic membrane, which allows the aeration 
of the middle ear bypassing the dysfunctional Eustachian tube. (From Hawke 
and McCombe. Diseases o f the Ear Pocket Atlas. Austin TX: Manticore 
Communications Inc, 1995.20)
A combination of insertion of a grommet and 
adenoidectomy.
Adenotonsillectomy.
The indications for surgical management are:
a) Chronic middle ear effusion of longer than 3 months’ dura­
tion and occurring in both ears, leading to secondary 
sequelae such as:
-  
Conductive hearing impairment of 20dB or more.
-  
Speech and language delay associated with hearing 
impairment
-  
Communication, behaviour difficulties
-  
Balance problems, clumsiness, frequent falling.
-  
Pathology of tympanic membrane such as the presence 
of retraction pockets (Figure 23.8).20
-  
Middle ear changes arising from long term effects of 
negative middle ear pressure such as adhesions, 
ossicular involvement.
b) Recurrent episodes of AOM, superimposed on chronic 
otitis media.
c) Recurrent episodes of AOM without effusion between 
attacks, in which the medical treatment with antibiotics for 
each episode and prophylactic antibiotics have failed.80
The aim of treatment of OME is four-fold:
i t  
To relieve the symptoms caused by middle ear 
conditions
m 
To resolve the underlying pathological abnormalities 
m 
To prevent the development of sequelae 
■ 
To treat coexistent infections of the nose, sinuses and 
allergy.
The efficacy of the various modalities of surgical management 
of chronic OME has been widely studied.91,92 The insertion of a 
grommet provides an immediate, however short term, hearing 
improvement up to 20dB. Longer term studies have shown the 
improvement only of 12dB or less per year post surgery.88 The 
benefit of combined adenoidectomy with grommet insertion 
and tonsillectomy has been assessed by various authors.93-95
Maw reported a prospective controlled study of adenoidec­
tomy and adenotonsillectomy on chronic OME in 322 children 
aged 2-11 years.96,97 He found that the children treated with 
the combination of adenoidectomy and insertion of grommet 
had the shortest duration of OME (Figures 23.10 and 23.II).97
Time (years)
Figure 23.10 The rate of clearance of MEE after treatment by 
adenotonsillectomy, adenoidectomy, compared with the control (untreated) ears. 
(From Maw and Parker. Acta Otolaryngol 1988; 454 (suppl): 202-7.96)
■ Otoscopy □Tympanometry
No surgery
|  6.08
7.75
-
Tube only
]  4.92
-
Adenoidectomy only
]  4.00
-
Adenoidectomy + tube
^
 2.25
1 
1 2-75
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
t 
1 
1 
1
3
1
 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 
Median duration (years)
Figure 23.11 Median duration of chronic OME in ears treated with 
adenoidectomy and grommet, with adenoidectomy or, grommet (tube) insertion 
only, and in the ears without any treatment, as shown by otoscopy and 
tympanometry.96
  

Otitis media with effusion in children (Glue ear) 
389
There was no overall difference between the group with inser­
tion of grommet or adenoidectomy only, but significant differ­
ences were shown when the two modalities of treatment were 
combined.
The recent UK Target (Trial of alternative regimes of glue 
ear treatment) multi-centre, randomized, controlled trial to 
determine the effectiveness of surgery in OME has established 
that in children with chronic OME, aged 3-7 years, the benefit 
of insertion of a grommet is only mildly successful, and up to 
70% of such children would be better treated by a combination 
of grommet insertion and adenoidectomy.98
Rehabilitative management
OME is generally a self-limiting condition, the alternative to 
surgical management is temporary amplification. This should 
reduce the child’s disability arising from hearing impairment 
associated with OME. The studies showed children’s satisfac­
tion with this type of management, and a reduction in disabil­
ity."’100 However, this type of management requires very careful 
monitoring, such that the sequelae of OME leading to 
permanent damage of the middle ear do not occur.
Summary and conclusion
OME is one of the most common conditions in children, and 
may lead to fluctuating or stable conductive hearing impairment. 
The sequelae may not only affect the structure of the ME, but 
also lead to expressive more than receptive language, com­
munication difficulties, disturbed behaviour and imbalance.
The treatment is in the first instance medical. However, 
chronic presentation of OME, with any sequelae, point to 
surgical management, which optimally is a combination of 
adenoidectomy and insertion of grommet.
References
1. 
Casselbrandt ML, Mandel EM, Rosenfeld RM, Bluestone CD, ed. 
Epidemiology. In: Evidence Based Otitis Media. Hamilton BC 
Decker Inc. 1999; 124.
2. 
Marchant CD, Shurin PA, Turozyk VA, Wasikowski DE, Tutihasi 
MA, Kinney SE. Course and outcome of otitis media in early 
infancy, a prospective study. J Paediatr Child Health 1984; 104: 
826-31.
3. 
Bartalozzi G, Sacchetti A, Scarane P & Becherucci P. Natural his­
tory of otitis media with effusion in children under six years of age. 
Advances in Otolaryngology 1992; 47: 281-3.
4. 
Casselbrandt ML, Okeowo PA, Flaherty MR, Feldmann RH, 
Doyle W], Bluestone CD, Rogers KD & Hanley T. Prevalence and 
incidence of otitis media in a group of pre-school children in the 
United States. In: Lim DJ, Bluestone JO, Klein and Nelson JD,
eds. Recent Advances in Otitis Media with Effusion. Philadelphia: 
Decker BL, 1984; 16-19.
5. Zielhuis GA, Straatman H, Rach GH and Van der Broek P. 
Analysis and presentation of data on the natural time course of 
otitis media with effusion in children. Int J Epidemiol 1990; 19: 
1037-44.
6. Zielhuis GA, Heuvelmans-Heinen EW, Rach GH & Van der 
Broek P. Environmental risk factors for otitis media with effusion 
in pre-school children. Scand J Prim Health Care 1987; 7: 33-8.
7. Pelton SL, Shurin PA, Klein JO. Persistence of middle ear effusion 
after otitis media. Paediatr Res 1977; 11: 504.
8. Casselbrant ML, Bros toff LH, Cantekin El, Flaherty MR, Doyle 
WJ, Bluestone CD & Fria TJ. Otitis media with effusion in 
pre-school children. Laryngoscope 1985; 95: 428-36.
9. Zielhuis GA, Roch GH, Van Der Bosch A, Van der Broek P. The 
prevalence of otitis media with effusion: a critical review of the 
literature. Clin Otolaryngol 1990; 15: 283-8.
10. Sadler-Kimes D, Siegel MJ, Todhunter JS. Age related morpho­
logical difference in the components of the eustachian tube/mid­
dle ear system. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1989; 98: 854-8.
11. Proctor B. Embryology and anatomy of eustachian tube. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head and Neck Surg 1967; 86: 503-26.
12. Giebink GS. Preventing otitis media. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
Suppl 1994; 163: 20-3.
13. Kraemer MJ, Richardson MA, Weiss NS, Furukuwa CT, Shapiro 
GG, Pierson WE & Bierman W. Risk factors for persistent middle- 
ear effusions: otitis media, catarrh, cigarette smoke exposure and 
atopy. JAMA 1983; 249: 1022-5.
14. Aniansson G, Aim B, Andersson B, Hakansson A, Larsson P, 
Nylen O, Peterson H, Rigner P, Svanborg, Sabharwal H & 
Svanborg C. A prospective cohort study on breast feeding and oti­
tis media in Swedish children. Pediatr Infect Dis] 1994; 13: 183-8.
15. Teele DW, Klein JO, Rosner B & Hue. Greater Boston Otitis 
Media Study Group. Epidemiology of otitis media during the first 
seven years of life in children in Greater Boston: A prospective 
cohort study. J Infectious Diseases 160: 83-94.
16. Owen MJ, Boldwin CD, Swank PR, Pannu AK, Johnson DL, 
Howie VM. Relation of infant feeding practice, cigarette smoke 
exposure and group child care to the onset and duration of otitis 
media with effusion in the first two years of life. J Paediatr Child 
Health 1993; 123: 702-11.
17. Alho OP, Kilkku O, Oja H, Koivu H, & Sorri M. Control of the 
temporal aspect when considering risk factors for acute otitis 
media. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993; 119: 444-9.
18. Hardy AM, Fowler HG. Child care arrangements and repeated ear 
infections in young children. Am] Public Health 1993; 83: 1321-5.
19. Klein JO, Naunton RF, Tos H, Ohyama M, Hussl B & Van 
Cauwenberge PB. Definitions and classification panel reports. Ann 
Otol Rhinol Laryngol Suppl 1989; 139: 10.
20. Hawke M, McCombe A. Diseases of the Ear Pocket Atlas. Austin 
TX: Manticore communications Inc. 1995.
21. Bluestone CHD, Klein JO. Definitions, terminology and classify 
cations. In: Ju Bluestone CHD, Klein JO, eds. Otitis Media in 
Infants and Children. 2nd Edition, Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co. 
1995; 1-3.
  

390 
Auditory disorders and their management
22. Henderson FW, Roush J. Diagnosis of otitis media. Otitis Media in 
Young Children. In: Roberts JE, Wallace I F, Henderson FW, Paul H 
Brookes, eds. Baltimore: Baltimore Publishing Co., 1997; 43-60.
23. Jerger I, Jerger S, Mauldin L. Studies in impedance audiometry in 
middle ear disorders. Arch Otolaryngol 1974; 99:165-71.
24- Browning GG, Acoustic impedance. In: Browning GG, ed. 
Clinical Otology and Audiology 2n edition. Oxford: Butterworth- 
Heinemann, 1998: 185-90.
25. Medical Research Council Multi-Centre Target Report: The role 
of tympanometry in predicting associated hearing impairment in 
children with otitis media with effusion. Clin Otolaryngol 1998.
26. Politzer A. Uber die willkurlichen Bewegungen des Trommelfells. 
Wiener Med Halle Nr1862; 18:103.
27. Bluestone CHD, Klein JO. Epidemiology. In: Bluestone CHD, 
Klein JO, eds. Otitis Media in Infants and Children, 3rd ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co., 2001; 58-78.
28. Bluestone CD, Klein JO. Anatomy. In: Ju WB, ed. Otitis Media in 
Infants and Children 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Co. 1995; 5-15.
29. Bluestone CD, Berry QC, Andrew W. Mechanics of the 
eustachian tube as it influences susceptibility to and persistence of 
middle ear effusions in children Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1974; 
83(11): 27-34.
30. Mills R Uttley A, McIntyre M. Relationship between acute sup­
purative otitis media and chronic suppurative otitis media: role of 
antibiotics. J R Soc Med 1984; 77: 754-7.
31. Lewis ER. Otitis media and allergy. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1929; 
38: 185-8.
32. Jordan R. Chronic secretory otitis media Laryngoscope 1949; 59: 
1002-15.
33. Draper WL. Secretory otitis media in children: A study of 540 
children. Laryngoscope 1967; 77:636-53.
34. McMahan JT, Calenoft E, Croft J, Barenholtz L, Weber LD. 
Chronic otitis media with effusion and allergy. Modified RAST 
analysis of 119 cases. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1981; 
89:427-31.
35. Mogi G. Immunologic and allergic aspects of otitis media. In: Lim 
DJ, Bluestone CD Klein JO, Nelson JD, eds. Recent Advances in 
Otitis 
Media 
with 
Effusion. 
Burlington, 
Ontario; 
Decker 
Periodicals, 1993; 145-51.
36. Bluestone CD. Eustachian tube function and allergy in otitis 
media. Paediatrics 1978; 61:753-60.
37. Bluestone CD. Eustachian tube function, physiology, pathophysi- 
ology and role of allergy in pathogenesis of otitis media. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol 1983; 72:242-51
38. Scadding GK. The pathogenesis of otitis media with effusion- 
allergy revisited. J Audiological Medicine 1995; 4(3): 173-81.
39. Rynnel-Dagoo B, Freijd A. Immunodeficiency. In: Bernstein J, 
Ogra. P, eds. Otitis Media in Immunology of the Ear. New York: 
Raven Press, 1987; 363-80.
40. Sigurdardottir S, Otte W, Casselbrandt M, Fireman P. Abnormal 
immune responsiveness in older children with chronic otitis 
media with effusion. Paediatric Res 1991; 29:163a.
41. Paradise JL, Bluestone CD, Felder H. The universality of otitis 
media in 50 infants with cleft palate. Paediatrics 1969; 44: 
35-42.
42. Paradise JL, Bluestone CD. Early treatment of the universal otitis 
media of infants with cleft palate. Paediatrics 1974; 53:48-54.
43. White BL, Doyle WJ, Bluestone CD. Eustachian tube function in 
infants and children with Down’s Syndrome. In: Lim DY, 
Bluestone CD, Klein JO, et al. (eds.) Recent Advances in Otitis 
Media with Effusion: Proceedings of the Third International 
Symposium. Philadelphia: BC Decker 1984; 62-6.
44. Diamant H, Diamant M. The mastoid air cells. In: McCabe BF, 
Sade J, Abramson M, eds. Choleastatoma First International 
Conference Birmingham: Aesculapius Publishing Co., 
1977; 
319-23.
45. Berry QC, Doyle WJ, Bluestone CD, Cantekin El, Wiet RJ. 
Eustachian tube function in an American Indian population. Otol 
Rhinol Laryngol 1980; 89:28-33.
46. Rasmussen F. Protracted secretory otitis media: The impact of 
familial factors and day-care centre attendance. Int J of Paediatr 
Otorhinolaryngol 1993; 26:29-37.
47. Casselbrandt ML, Mandel EM, Kurs-Lasky H, Rockette HE, 
Bluestone CD. Otitis media in a population of black American 
and white American infants 0-2 years of age. Int J Paediatr 
Otorhinolaryngol 1995; 33: 1-16.
48. Stenstrom R, Bernard PAM, Ben-Simon H. Exposure to environ­
mental tobacco smoke as a risk factor for recurrent acute otitis 
media in children under the age of five years. Int. J Paediatr 
Otorhinolaryngol 1993; 27:127-36.
49. Blakely JE. Smoking and middle ear diseases, are they related? A 
review article. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995; 112: 441-6.
50. Zielhuis GA, Heuvelmans-Heinen EW, Rach GH, Broeck PVD. 
Environmental risk factors for otitis media with effusion in 
pre-school children. Scand J Prim Health Care 1989; 7: 33-8.
51. Strachan DP, Jarvis MJ, Feyerabend C. Passive smoking, salivary 
cotinine concentrations and middle ear effusion in 7 year old 
children. BMJ 1989; 298: 1549-52.
52. Etzel RA, Pattishall EN, Haley NJ, Fletcher RH, Henderson FW. 
Passive smoking and middle ear effusion among children in day 
care. Paediatrics 1992; 90: 228-32.
53. Friel-Patti, Finitzo T. Language learning in a prospective study of 
otitis media with effusion in the first two yeaers of life. J Speech 
Hearing Res 1990; 33: 188-94.
54. Roberts JE, Wallace JF. Language and Otitis Media. In: Roberts JE, 
Wallace JF, Hendersson FW, eds. Otitis Media in Young Children. 
Medical Developmental and Educational Considerations.. Baltimore: 
Paul Brookes Publishing Co., 1997: 133-61.
55. Maw AR. Presentation and diagnosis. In: Maw AR. Glue Ear in 
Childhood, A Prospective Study of Otitis Media with Effusion. 
London: Mackeith Press, 1995; 47-60.
56. Moore DR, Hogan SC, Kecelnik O, Parsons CH, Rose MM, Klug 
AJ. Auditory Learning as a cause and treatment of central 
dysfunction. Audiol Neurootol 2001; 6(4): 216-20.
57. Hogan SC, Moore DR. Impaired binaural hearing in children pro­
duced by a threshold level of middle ear disease. J Assoc Res 
Otolaryngol 2002; Sept 23.
58. Moore DR, Hogan SC. Effects of OME on central auditory func­
tion. The ESPO 2002 Book of Abstracts. 8th International congress 
of paediatric otorhinolaryngology,Oxford, 2002; 11-14 Sept.
  

Otitis media with effusion in children (Glue ear) 
391
59. Hogan SC, Meyer SE, Moore DR. Binaural unmasking returns to 
normal in teenagers who had otitis media in infancy. Audiol 
Neruootol 1996; 1(2): 104-11.
60. Bluestone CHD, Klein JO. Complication and sequelae: Intratem- 
poral. In: Bluestone CHD, Klein JO. Otitis Media in infants and 
children 3rd edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co. 2001; 
299-309.
61. Mandell JR. Impact of otitis media on auditory function. In: 
Rosenfeld RM, Bluestone CHD. Evidence-Based Otitis Media. DC: 
Decker Hamilton, 1999; 337-51.
62. Vemon-Feagaus L. Impact of Otitis Media on speech, language, 
cognition & behaviour. In: Rosenfeld RM, Bluestone CHD. 
Evidence Based Otitis Media. DC: Decker, Hamilton, 1999; 353-73
63. Bower CM, Cotton RT. The spectrum of vertigo in children. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995; 121: 911-5.
64. Casselbrant ML, Furman JM, Rubenstein E, Mandel EM. Effect of 
otitis media on the vestibular system in children. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1995; 104: 620-4
65. Busis SN. Dizziness in children. Paediatr Ann. 1988; 17: 648-55.
66. Casselbrant ML, Black FO, Nashner L, Panion R. Vestibular func- 
tion assessment in children with otitis media with effusion. Ann 
Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1983; 92 (Suppl 107): 46-7
67. Grace ARH, Pfleiderer AG. Dysequilibrium and otitis media with 
effusion: what is the association? J Laryngol Otol 1990; 104: 682-4.
68. Jones NS, Radomski P, Prichard AJN, Snashall SE. Imbalance and 
chronic secretory otitis media in children: effect of myringotomy 
and insertion of ventilation tubes on body sway. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1990; 105: 987-9.
69. Blayney AW, Colman BH. Dizziness in childhood. Clin Otolaryngol 
1984; 9: 77-85.
70. Fried MP. The evaluation of dizziness in children. Laryngoscope 
1980; 9: 1548-60.
71. Golz A, Westerman ST, Gilbert LM, Joachims HZ, Netzer A. 
Effect of middle ear effusion on the vestibular labyrinth. J Laryngol 
Otol 1991; 105: 987-9.
72. Ben-David J, Podoshin L, Fradis M, Faraggi D,. Is the vestibular 
system affected by middle ear effusion? Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1993; 109: 421-6.
73. Flisberg K. The effects of vacuum on the tympanic cavity. 
Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1970; 3: 3-13.
74. Golz A, Netzer A, Angel-Yeger B, Westerman T, Gilbert LM, 
Joachims HZ. Effects of middle ear effusion on the vestibular 
system in children. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 695-9.
75. Calhoun KH, Norris WB, Hokanson JA, Stiernberg CM, Moore 
Quinn FB. Bacteriology of middle ear effusions. South Med J 1988; 
81:332-6.
76. Post JC, Preston RA, Aul JJ, et al. Molecular analysis of bacterial 
pathogens in otitis media with effusion. JAMA 1995; 273: 
1598-604.
77. Cohen H, Friedman EM, Lai D, Pellicer M, Duncan N, Sulek M. 
Balance in Children with otitis media with effusion. Int J Paediatr 
Oto Rhino Laryngol 1997; 42: 107-15.
78. Snashall S. Vestibular disorders. In: Kerr AG, Groves J, eds. Scott- 
Brown's Otolaryngology. 5th ed. London: Butterworths; 1987; 
194-217.
79. Kenne MA, Diagnosis & management of acute otitis media & oti- 
tis media with effusion. In: Wetmore RF, Muntz HR, McGill TJ. 
Paediatric Otolaryngology, Principles and Practice Pathways. New 
York: Thieme, 2000; 263-79.
80. Bluestone CHD, Klein JO. Management. In: Bluestone CHD, 
Klein JO, eds. Otitis Media in Infants and Children 3rd ed. 2001; 
180-298.
81. US Department of Health and Human Services. Otitis media in 
young children. In: AHCPR Publication number 94-0622, (Clinical 
Practice Guidline; no 12). 1994.
82. Bernstein JH. Role of allergy in eustachian tube blockage and oti- 
tis media with effusion, a review. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1996; 
114: 562-8.
83. Maw AR, Parker AJ, Lauce GN, Dilkes ME. The effect of parental 
smoking on outcomes after treatement for glue ear in children. 
Clin Otolaryngol 1992; 17: 411-14.
84. Block S, Shinefield H, Fireman B et al. Efficacy of heptavolent 
pneumococcal conjugate vaccine in children. Northern California 
Kaiser permaeunte cavvince study group. Paedr Infect Dis J 2000; 
19: 187-95.
85. Berman S, Nuss R, Roark R, Huber-Navin C, Grose K, Herrera M. 
Effectiveness of continuous vs intermittent amoxycillin to prevent 
episodes of otitis media. Paedtr Infect Dis J 1992; 11: 63-7.
86. Effective Health Care Bulletin. School of Public Health, 
University of Leeds, Centre for Health Economics, University of 
York; Research Unit, Royal College of Physicians. The treatment 
of persistent glue ear in children. 1992, 4.
87. Rosenfeld RM. What to expect from clinical treatment of otitis 
media. Paedtre Inf Dis J 1995; 14: 731-37.
88. Maw AR. Treatment. In: Maw RD, ed. Glue ear in Childhood -  A 
Prospective study of otitis media with effusion. Cambridge: Mac 
Keiten Press, 1995; 61-102.
89. Uhari M, Kontiokani T, Koskela M et al. Xylitol chewing gum in 
prevention of acute otitis media a double blind randomised trial.- 
BMJ 1996; 313: 1180-4.
90. Kontiokari T, Uhari K, Koskela M. Effect of Xylitol on growth of 
nasopharyngeal bacteria in vitro. Antimicide Agents Cheurother 
1995; 39: 1820-3.
91. Maw AR, Bowden R. Spontaneous solution of severe chronic glue 
ear in children and the effect of adenoidectomy, tonsillectomy and 
insertion ventilation tubes. BMJ 1993; 306: 256-60.
92. Todd DH, Stool SE. Surgical management of otitis media with 
effusion. In: Roberts JE, Wallace JF, Hendersson EW, eds. Otitis 
media in young children. Baltimore: Paul Brookes, 1997; 245-64.
93. QGates GA, Avery CA, Prihode TJ, Cooper JC. Effectiveness of 
adenoidectomy and tympanostomy tubes in the treatment of 
chronic media with effusion. New Zealand J Med 1987; 317: 
1444-51.
94. Paradise JC, Bluestone CD, Rogers KD, et al. Efficacy of ade­
noidectomy for recurrent otitis media in children previously 
treated with tympanostomy tube placement. Results of parallel 
randomised and non-randomised trials. J Am Med Assoc 1990; 
263: 2066-73.
95. Dempster JH, Browning CE, Gatehouse SG. A randomised study 
of the surgical management of children with persistent otitis
  

392 
Auditory disorders and their management
media with effusion associated with a hearing impairment. J 
Laryngol Otolaryngol 1993; 107: 284-9.
96. Maw RD, Parker A. Surgery of the tonsils and adenoids in relation 
to secretory otitis media in children. A eta Otolaryngol 1988; 454 
(suppl): 202-7.
97. Haggard M. The magnitude of developmental outcomes from 
surgery in OME. In: ESPO 2002, Book of Abstracts 8th International 
Compass of Paediatrics. Otorhinolaryngology, Sept 2002.
98. Flanagan PM, Knight LC, Thomas A, Browning S, August A & 
Clayton MJ. Hearing aids and glue ear. Clin Otolaryngol 1996; 21: 
297-300.
99. Jardine AH, Griffiths MV, Midgley E. The acceptance of hearing 
aids for children with otitis media with effusion. The J Laryngol 
Otol 1999; 113:314-17.
100. Bower CM, Cotton RT. The spectrum of vertigo in children. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995; 121: 911-15.
  

24 Disorders of the inner 
ear in children
Valerie Newton
Introduction
The reported prevalence of sensorineural hearing impairment 
in children has varied depending upon such factors as the 
country involved, the age of the children and the criteria for 
defining a hearing impairment. In the Trent region of the UK 
a prevalence of 1.2 per 1000 live births per annum was 
reported for children bom between 1983 and 1988 and having 
a bilateral hearing impairment of at least 40 dB HL. Fifty per 
cent had a moderate hearing impairment (40-69 dB HL), 23% 
a severe impairment (70-94dB HL), and 27% a profound 
hearing impairment (greater than 95 dB HL1. In developing 
countries, the prevalence of hearing impairment is greater. 
Mencher and Madriz Alfaro2 found the prevalence in Costa 
Rica to be between 1.5 and 1.63 per 1000 live births, whereas 
Prasansuk3 reported the prevalence to be between 3.5% and 
5% in Thailand.
Conditions which affect the inner ear are the main causes 
of congenital hearing impairment in children and contribute 
significantly, but to a lesser degree, to hearing disability 
acquired during infancy and childhood. Studies indicate that in 
developed countries about half of the congenital causes are 
genetic in origin, whereas most of the acquired conditions are 
the result of infectious processes. In the developing economies 
of the south, infections cause a higher proportion of hearing 
impairment than in the countries of the north.
As sensorineural hearing impairment can have marked 
effects upon a child’s emotional, social and educational devel- 
opment, it is of paramount importance that a hearing loss is 
detected as early as possible after the causative event and the 
child be habilitated or rehabilitated.
Genetic hearing impairment
It has been estimated that genetic hearing impairment is 70% 
autosomal recessive, 25% autosomal dominant and approxima- 
tely 5% X-linked. Most genetic impairment is non-syndromal, 
and inheritance is mainly autosomal recessive.
Non-syndromic hearing impairment
Currently, more than 60 gene locations causing non-syndromic 
hearing impairment have been found. Several genes have been 
identified, and it has been shown that, in some instances, the 
same gene can cause both syndromal and non-syndromal hear­
ing impairment. Lalwani and Castelein4 described the general 
features of each type of hearing impairment. Non-syndromal 
autosomal recessive hearing impairment tends to be prelingual 
in onset, severe to profound in severity, and non-progressive, 
and involves all frequencies. Non-syndromal autosomal domi­
nant hearing impairment is more variable, with a late onset, 
and progression, and is often in the high frequencies. In X- 
linked hearing loss, the onset is usually prelingual, but the clin­
ical phenotype is too variable for generalization.
CAUSES OF HEARING IMPAIRMENT
Genetic
Syndromal
Non-syndromal
Genetic/sporadic
Chromosomal
Infections
Congenital disorders/defects 
Perinatal factors 
Ototoxicity 
Unknown
Syndromal hearing impairment
Autosomal dominant conditions
Waardenburg syndromes (WS) (Figures 24.1 and 24.2)
The syndrome described by Waardenburg5 was believed to 
occur in 1 in 42000 of the population, or 1.43% of the con­
genitally deaf. Four types have subsequently been reported:

394 
Auditory disorders and their management
I
Figure 24.1 The typical eyelid appearance and lateral displacement of the inner 
canthi seen in Waardenburg syndrome type 1.
WS1-3 is autosomal dominantly inherited, whereas WS4 fol­
lows an autosomal recessive pattern.
Clinical features include: a white forelock, rarely one 
which is black or red; complete or partial iris heterochromia— 
the different-coloured segments are sharply demarcated and 
usually wedge-shaped; early greying of the hair, which may be 
poorer in texture; and the eyebrows bushy medially and conflu­
ent over the nose. An eyelid anomaly, with lateral displace­
ment of the inner canthi (dystopia canthorum), is a feature of 
WS1 and WS3, and is associated with a high nasal root and 
nostrils with reduced flaring. Expressivity of the genes shows 
considerable inter- and intrafamilial variation.
Figure 24.2 A sharply demarcated segment of the iris as found in the 
Waardenburg syndromes, mainly in type 2.
Balance disorders have been described occasionally.6 
There are radiological studies which indicate that whereas the 
commonest pathological defect 
is of the Scheibe 
or 
cochleosaccular type, more major defects affecting the vestibu­
lar apparatus may occasionally be found. Sprengel’s shoulder, 
cleft palate and spina bifida have been described in association 
with the syndrome.
WS1 is caused by mutations in the PAX3 gene on chromo­
some 2 which encodes a DNA-binding transcription factor. The 
effect of the mutations is to reduce the amount of protein pro­
duced. Expression of PAX3 is switched on early in development 
and affects cells of the neural crest. Dystopia canthorum is the 
most prevalent feature of WS1 and is present in 99% of those 
affected. Whereas this may be evident clinically, in doubtful 
cases eye measurements can be used to calculate the W index.7
Hearing impairment is found in about 69% of those 
affected, and profound bilateral hearing impairment is the most 
common. Occasionally, an ascending audiogram or one depict­
ing a mid-frequency hearing loss may be found, or a unilateral 
hearing impairment.8 Pigmentation abnormalities are corre­
lated with the degree of hearing loss, occuring more frequently 
in those with a severe or profound hearing impairment than in 
those with normal hearing.9 Having more than one pigmenta­
tion defect increases the likelihood that an affected person will 
have a severe hearing impairment.
WS2 is a heterogeneous group, a proportion of which have 
been found to have mutations in the MITF gene on chromo­
some 3. The gene encodes a DNA-binding transcription factor 
which is believed to influence the pigmentary system. Hearing 
impairment is commoner in WS2, occuring in 87%, and there 
is a greater likelihood of asymmetrical hearing loss than in 
WS1. Partial heterochromia of the iris is more prevalent in 
WS2 than in WS1.10
WS3 is rare and is associated with upper-limb abnormali­
ties in addition to features of WS1. It has been shown to be 
caused by mutations in PAX3, and the label WS3 is now 
largely redundant.
EXAMPLES OF INHERITED CONDITIONS 
WITH HEARING IMPAIRMENT
Autosomal dominant 
Waardenburg syndrome 
Marshall-Stickier syndrome 
Branch io-oto-renal syndrome 
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Autosomal recessive 
Usher syndrome 
Pendred syndrome
Jervell and Lange-Neilsen syndrome 
Mucopolysaccharidoses 
Refsum syndrome 
Cockayne syndrome
X-Linked 
Alport syndrome 
Norrie s syndrome 
Perilymphatic gusher
Mitochondria!
Kearns-Sayre syndrome 
MELAS
  

Disorders of the inner ear in children 
395
WS4, or Shah-Waardenburg syndrome, is an autosomal 
recessive condition consisting of Hirschsprung’s disease associ- 
ated with features of WS2, but is much less common. Patients 
with mutations in endothelin 3 or the gene for its receptor show 
this phenotype.
No relationships have been found between particular muta- 
tions in any of the genes identified and the phenotypes.
Stickler or Marshall syndrome
These syndromes overlap phenotypically and are often com­
bined as the Marshall-Stickier syndrome. This is a connective 
tissue disorder with highly variable clinical manifestations.10 
Sensorineural or mixed hearing impairment is associated with 
various eye, skeletal and facial defects. Hearing impairment is 
not invariable but, when present, affects particularly the high 
frequencies and is progressive.
Myopia is the commonest eye defect, with retinal detach­
ment being one of the associated risks. Whereas eye abnormali­
ties are considered to be a main component of the syndrome, 
families without eye involvement have been reported. 
Mid­
facial structures are undeveloped, giving rise to a flattened 
appearance. The nose is short and saddle-shaped, with ante- 
verted nostrils. The philtrum may be extended. A cleft palate may 
be present, associated with underdevelopment of the lower jaw.
Arthropathy occurs with radiological signs. Mitral valve 
prolapse is found in 45% of affected individuals.12 Genes 
identified are a type II procollagen gene (COLIIAJ) on 
chromosome 12q and the collagen XI gene (COL11A2) on 
chromosome 6.
Branchkvoto-renal syndrome
This syndrome involves the first and second branchial arches 
and the renal tract. Prevalence is estimated to be 1 in 40000. 
Congenital hearing impairment is the feature found most fre­
quently. In the study of Chen et al,13 93% had a hearing impair­
ment. A mixed hearing impairment was the most common type 
(52%), with conductive (33%) and sensorineural (29%) hear­
ing impairment also found. Different types of hearing impair­
ment may be found in each ear. Hearing loss is usually severe, 
but can vary from mild to profound and may be either progres­
sive or stable.
There is considerable inter-individual variation in physical 
signs.14,15 Pre-auricular pits are the commonest external feature. 
The pinna is frequently cup-shaped, and there may be stenosis 
or atresia of the external auditory canal. Approximately half of 
those affected have branchial fistulae, which may be unilateral 
or bilateral. Renal abnormalities vary in severity from mild 
defects to complete renal aplasia. Branchio-otic syndrome has a 
similar phenotype to branchio-oto-renal syndrome, but differs 
in that there is no renal dysplasia.16
Pathological defects include cochlear hypoplasia, dilated 
cochlear and vestibular aqueducts, and hypoplasia of the lateral 
semicircular canal.13
Mutations in EYAJ are one cause of the syndrome, and a 
further gene has been localized to lq31.
Osteogenesis imperfecta
This condition has been divided into four main categories on 
the basis of the mode of inheritance and the phenotypic appear­
ance. The autosomal dominant type 1 is the most common type 
encountered.17 The clinical features include bone fragility, blue 
sclerae, dentigenous imperfecta and a hearing impairment, and 
these vary in degree between affected individuals. The basic 
defect is in collagen type I, and causative genes have been 
found on chromosomes 7q and 17q.
The pathological defect is a softening of bone leading to 
ossicular fixation. Whereas initially a conductive hearing 
impairment is found, this progresses to a mixed hearing loss.
Autosomal recessive conditions 
Usher syndromes
Three types have been described (Table 24.1). In type I, the 
hearing impairment is very severe or profound, and retinitis pig­
mentosa appears before adolescence. There is absent vestibular 
function, and children are late at sitting and walking.18,19 Six 
loci have been found, and four gene’s—myosin VIIA USHlc 
or Harmonin, cadherin 23 and Proto cadherin 15.20 Mutations 
in myosin VIIA cause USH1B. The protein encoded is present 
in the stereocilia, the cuticular plate and the synaptic region. It 
is believed that the protein has an important role in the mor­
phogenesis of stereocilia and in their positional organization.21
In type 2, hearing impairment is moderate to severe, 
with an audiogram which slopes towards the higher frequen­
cies (Figure 24.3). Vestibular function is normal. Retinitis 
pigmentosa generally appears after adolescence, but there is 
overlap between types 1 and 2 in this respect. At least two 
genes are involved in causing USH2, 
and a gene has been 
found for USH2a on chromosome l.23
Type 3 appears to be much less common than the other 
two types. It shows a progressive sensorineural hearing impair­
ment with retinitis pigmentosa and either normal or subnor­
mal vestibular function. The time of onset of retinitis 
pigmentosa is variable. USH3 in a Finnish family has been 
localized to chromosome 3q.24
An atypical form of Usher syndrome, which has features 
of USH3, has been found to be caused by a mutation in 
myosin VIIA.25 In the 1990s, the genetic heterogeneity of 
Usher syndrome has begun to be unravelled26 allowing clarifi­
cation of phenotype expression.27
Table 24*1 Clinical features of the Usher syndromes
Type 
Hearing loss
Vestibular 
RP Onset 
function
USH1 
Profound 
Absent 
1st decade
USH2 
Moderate to severe 
Normal 
2nd-3rd decades 
U5H3 
Progressive 
Variable 
1st or 2nd decade
  

396 
Auditory disorders and their management
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 24.3 An audiometric configuration found frequently in Usher 
syndrome type 2.
Pendred syndrome
Congenital sensorineural hearing loss is associated with an 
organization defect of the thyroid gland. The defect is in the 
incorporation of iodide into the thyroxine molecule.
Hearing impairment is usually severe to profound, and 
vestibular function may be affected unilaterally or bilater- 
ally. Patients are usually euthyroid, but may be hypothyroid. 
A goitre tends to appear after the age of 8 years but may 
be present in infancy. Thirty-six familial cases with linkage 
to the locus for the Pendred syndrome locus on chromo­
some 7q were investigated by Reardon et al,28 and 73% 
had goitre. The perchlorate discharge test was negative in 
one instance. The perchlorate test is not always positive in 
Pendred’s syndrome and is positive in other conditions, e.g. 
Hashimoto’s disease.
Radiological abnormalities are found in 86% of affected 
individuals. Manifestations include Mondini cochleae and a 
dilated vestibular aqueduct.29,30 The latter is almost a constant 
feature. 
Enlargement of the endolymphatic sac and duct in 
association with a dilated vestibular aqueduct was found in all 
20 patients described by Phelps et al.30
A gene has been found on chromosome 7 which encodes 
a protein, pendrin, which is believed to be involved in ion 
transportation.
Jervell and Lange-Neilsen syndrome
In 1957, Jervell and Lange-Neilsen described a condition in 
which hearing impairment is associated with electrocardio­
graphic changes. The prevalence of this condition is believed to 
be 1 in 100000, and it involves congenital sensorineural hear­
ing loss with a conduction defect of the heart. Typical electro­
cardiographic findings are a prolongation of the QT interval 
and inversion of the T wave.
Affected individuals have a bradycardia and this can be 
present in utero.31 They are prone to develop arrhythmias in
conditions of stress or exercise. There may be a history of syn­
copal attacks, usually lasting 3-5 min, or there may just be brief 
periods of altered consciousness. During these episodes, ven­
tricular fibrillation or asystole may occur. These syncopal 
attacks may appear in infancy or later. Heterozygotes may also 
be prone to changes in heart rhythm.
It has been discovered that homozygous KVLQT1 mutations 
cause the hearing impairment in this condition as a result of caus­
ing a truncated protein. The KVLQT I gene has been shown to be 
expressed in the stria vascularis in mice.32 Autosomal dominant 
long-QT syndrome results from a mutation in KVLQT I in which 
affected individuals are heterozygous. KVLQT 1 protein joins 
with minK protein to form cardiac Iks potassium channels, and it 
is known that the gene encoding minK is expressed in the inner 
ear and that the protein affects the production of endolymph.31
Mucopolysaccharidoses (Figure 24 4)
These are a group of lysosomal storage diseases caused by an 
enzyme deficiency. The most common of these, Hurler’s disease 
(MPS1), is due to an a-L-iduronidase deficiency. This results in 
an accumulation of glycosamines in the tissues and excretion of 
these in the urine. Hunter’s disease (MPS 11) is the only one of 
these conditions which is X-linked, all others being inherited as 
autosomal recessive disorders.
Figure 24.4 The typical facies of Hurler's syndrome.
  

Disorders of the inner ear in children 
397
Hearing impairment in the mucopolysaccharidoses is not 
invariable but, when it occurs, it is usually mixed.33 There is 
evidence to indicate that bone marrow transplantation can 
result in stabilization of hearing or, in some instances, an
„ 34, 35
improvement.
Refsum syndrome
This is a phytanic acid storage disease with peripheral neuropa­
thy, cerebellar ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa, cardiac defects, and 
sensorineural hearing impairment.36,37 Treatment is with a diet 
low in phytol and phytanic acid.38
Cockayne syndrome
This premature ageing disorder is believed to be a form of 
leukodystrophy. The condition is characterized clinically by 
short stature, mental retardation, ataxia, retinal pigmentation 
and sensorineural hearing impairment. Hearing is normal ini­
tially and then deteriorates as the condition progresses. It has 
been suggested that the site of lesion is both peripheral and also 
involves the brainstem.39
X-linked conditions 
Alport syndrome
Glomerulonephritis is associated with an acquired sensorineural 
hearing loss. About 85% of cases show an X-linked dominant 
inheritance, and about 10% autosomal recessive inheritance; a 
few cases of autosomal dominant transmission have also been 
described.40 In the X-linked form, males are more severely 
affected than females; this is thought to be due to different pat­
terns of X-chromosome inactivation in females.41 In the auto­
somal recessive and autosomal dominant forms, males and 
females are equally affected.
In a study of 30 patients, Sirimanna and Stephens42 found 
that 87% had a symmetrical hearing loss and 53% of the audio­
grams had a ‘trough’configuration. Hearing loss was progressive, 
with the higher frequencies becoming involved after the middle 
frequencies. Hearing impairment was not necessarily correlated 
with severity of the renal involvement. Carriers have either a 
sensorineural hearing loss or dips in audiometric thresholds 
determined using the Audioscan method.43
Norrie’s syndrome
Progressive sensorineural hearing loss is associated with optic 
atrophy and neurological deficits. The onset may be in 
childhood.
X-linked hearing impairment with perilymphatic gusher
This condition may become evident in the first years of life and 
is associated with progressive hearing impairment. Either a sen­
sorineural or mixed hearing impairment may be found.44 A CT 
scan may show a bulbous internal auditory meatus, deficient 
bone at the fundus of the internal auditory meatus, and a 
dilated facial canal.45 The perilymphatic gusher becomes appar­
ent if the stapes footplate is disturbed during surgery.
The condition has been found to be the result of mutations 
in POU3F4y which encodes a transcription factor. Fifty per cent 
of carrier females are reported to have abnormal audiograms, 
and affected males have vestibular abnormalities.46
Mitochondrial conditions
Mitochondrial mutations give rise to syndromal and non- 
syndromal sensorineural hearing impairment. Syndromal con­
ditions include Kearns-Sayre syndrome, in which there is a 
progressive high-frequency sensorineural hearing loss, and 
MELAS 
(myoclonus, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and 
stroke-like episodes), in which a high-frequency hearing loss 
may start in the second decade.
Mitochondrial mutations are believed to account for at 
least 2% of non-syndromal sensorineural hearing impairment of 
childhood origin.47 One of the earliest mutations to be 
described was the A1555G mutation, which conveys a suscep­
tibility to develop a sensorineural hearing impairment after the 
administration of aminoglycosides.48 The hearing loss is non- 
syndromal and will develop eventually even if aminoglycosides 
are not given.
Hutchin et al47 described mtDNA mutations—A7445G, 
T7510, and A3243G—in subjects with a family history of hear­
ing impairment. The age of onset of the sensorineural hearing 
loss and severity varied widely in the families although the loss 
was always progressive. In a further article, Hutchin et al49 
described six families in which the heteroplasmic 7472insC 
mutation in the TRNA2ser(UCN) gene was present. This mutation 
causes sensorineural hearing impairment associated with vari­
ous neurological abnormalities, including ataxia and progres­
sive myoclonic epilepsy.
Genetic/sporadic
Some conditions usually occur sporadically, but occasionally an 
inherited pattern is described.
Wildervanck syndrome
This syndrome is characterized by the Klippel-Feil anomalad, 
Duane retraction syndrome and congenital hearing impair­
ment. Wildervanck specified sensorineural hearing impairment 
when defining the syndrome, but since then conductive and 
mixed hearing impairment has been described.50,51 The syn­
drome is found with a 10 to 1 female preponderance.
The Klippel-Feil anomalad consists of variable degrees of 
fusion of the spine occuring in the cervical, thoracic and 
sometimes the lumbar regions, associated with congenital 
hearing loss. The typical clinical appearance is of a short neck 
and a low posterior hairline. Associated features include 
SprengePs shoulder. Hearing impairment may be mixed, sen­
sorineural or conductive and unilateral as well as bilateral
  

398 
Auditory disorders and their management
EXAMPLES OF GENETIC/SPORADIC 
SYNDROMES AND ASSOCIATIONS
Wildervanck syndrome 
Cornelia-de-Lange syndrome 
Noonan syndrome 
CHARGE association
hearing impairment has been described. Conductive hearing 
impairment is due to ossicular abnormalities.
Duane syndrome consists of lateral rectus palsy, with the 
globe of the affected eye being retracted on adduction. Sen­
sorineural hearing impairment was found in 12 of 176 patients 
described by Kirkham.52
Radiological abnormalities of the inner ear in Wildervanck 
syndrome have shown a variety of abnormalitites, including 
Mondini deformities, absent modioli, and dilated vestibules.53
Cornelia de Lange syndrome (Figure 24-5)
The syndrome, also known as Brachmann de Lange syn­
drome, is characterized by multiple congenital malformations, 
otolaryngological abnormalities and intellectual disability. 
The otological abnormalities include external canal stenosis
and cleft palate. Upper-limb abnormalities occur, and slight, 
moderate or severe sensorineural hearing impairment may be 
found.54 The syndrome is often sporadic, but may be domi­
nantly inherited.55
Noonan syndrome (Figure 24 6)
This syndrome was first described in 1963, and it is estimated 
that the prevalence is between 1 in 1000 and 1 in 2500 live 
births. Characteristic facies are found and cardiac defects, the 
most frequent of which is pulmonary valve stenosis due to a dys- 
plastic or thickened valve. Aortic valve involvement can occur, 
and also dysplasia of other valves. Short stature, undescended 
testes, and intellectual disability may be present. Ocular mani­
festations include epicanthal folds, ptosis, hypertelorism, 
downward-slanting palpebral fissures and ocular proptosis. 
Hearing impairment may be progressive.
CHARGE association (Figure 24*7)
This represents a spectrum of defects, the name being an 
acronym for Coloboma, Heart, Atretic choanae, Retarded 
growth, Genital hypoplasia and Ear abnormalities. Additional
Figure 24.5 Cornelia-de-Lange syndrome, showing the typical facies and low 
hairline. 
Figure 24.6 A child with Noonan's syndrome showing low-set ears.
  

Disorders of the inner ear in children 
399
Figure 24.7 The cup-shaped pinna frequently found in CHARGE association.
abnormalities include facial weakness and orofacial clefting. 
The condition is usually sporadic but has been reported to be 
familial.56
The external ear is affected frequently, the ears being typi- 
cally low set and cup-shaped. Hearing impairment is common 
and is usually severe. In a study described by Edwards et al,57 
5 of 21 children had a sensorineural hearing impairment, four a 
bilateral mixed hearing impairment, and two a mixed hearing 
impairment in one ear and a conductive hearing loss in the 
other. Two of the children had cochlear dysplasias.
On the whole, a mixed hearing impairment is the most 
common type of hearing impairment, but sensorineural and 
conductive hearing impairment have been described. A char­
acteristic radiological feature is absence of the semicircular 
canals.58
Chromosomal abnormalities
A number of chromosomal abnormalities are associated with 
sensorineural or mixed hearing impairment. Some of these are 
unique, e.g. as a result of rearrangements of chromosomes, dele­
tions or extra chromosomal material. Examples of conditions 
associated with hearing loss of inner ear origin are as follows.
CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES WITH 
HEARING IMPAIRMENT
Down’s syndrome 
Turner’s syndrome 
Trisomy 13 
Trisomy 18
Down’s syndrome
Congenital sensorineural hearing impairment is found in about 
5% of children born with Down’s syndrome. Bilgin et al59 found 
that those with Down’s syndrome had a shorter cochlea than 
controls. A Mondini defect was identified in some, and a 
reduced number of spiral ganglion cells.
In a larger proportion, the hearing impairment is conduc­
tive, mainly as a result of otitis media with effusion, but also due 
to congenital ossicular abnormalities, usually affecting the 
stapes. Affected individuals may have pinna abnormalities and 
a narrow external auditory canal.
Turner’s syndrome
The XO phenotype typically has low-set ears with rotation, a 
webbed neck, nuchal lymphoedema, short stature, shield­
shaped chest, cubitus valgus, ovarian dysgenesis, congenital 
heart disease (coarctation of the aorta), and renal abnormali­
ties, including horseshoe kidney. Various mosaics have been 
described.
There is a predisposition to otitis media. A history of oti­
tis media was found in 21 of 24 patients, and sensorineural 
hearing impairment is progressive. Progression began in late 
childhood or early adulthood in 7 of 24 patients described by 
Sculerati et al.60 Auricular abnormalitites and hearing loss due 
to otitis media are reported to occur more frequently in those 
with a total deletion of the p-arm of the chromosome rather 
than a partial deletion, possibly as a result of a loss of growth- 
regulating genes, e.g SHOX.61
Benazzo et al62 examined 62 patients with Turner’s syn­
drome aged 5-32 years, and found 13 to have a bilateral sym­
metrical sensorineural hearing loss; nine of these had a 
progressive high-frequency impairment, and the remaining four 
a dip in the mid-frequency range. In eight cases, the hearing 
loss was thought to be cochlear, and in five retrocochlear.
Radiological abnormalities have been found in the exter­
nal ear and in the internal auditory meatus. An abnormal 
downward slope was seen in the external auditory canals, and 
the internal auditory meati were short, wide and sometimes 
asymmetrical.62
Trisomy 13
This is also known as Patau syndrome. Inner ear abnormalities 
are associated with middle ear and external ear malformations. 
Multiple abnormalities occur, including cardiac defects. Partial 
trisomies are more likely to survive into childhood. More than 
50% of cases have a hearing impairment.
Trisomy 18
Edward’s syndrome is found in about 0.3% of newborn babies. 
Multiple abnormalitites occur, including cardiac and renal
  

400 
Auditory disorders and their management
defects. Ears may be low set, with deformed pinnae, and hear- 
ing impairment can be profound.
Infections
Infections are the cause of both congenital and acquired hear­
ing impairment. The main infections giving rise to congenital 
hearing impairment are rubella, cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis 
and herpes simplex. Postnatal hearing impairment is mainly the 
result of organisms giving rise to meningitis or measles and 
mumps. In some countries in the northern hemisphere rubella, 
measles and mumps have been almost eliminated as a result of 
immunization programmes. The introduction of the HIB vac­
cine has also been effective in reducing this type of meningitis.
INFECTIONS
Prenatal
Rubella
Cytomegalovirus 
Toxoplasmosis 
Syphilis 
Herpes simplex
Postnatal
Meningitis
Measles
Mumps
Prenatal
Rubella
The risk of fetal infection is estimated as 75-90% after primary 
maternal infection in the first trimester, 25-39% in the second 
trimester, and 24-53% in the third trimester.56
There may be a history of contact, and the mother may 
develop a rash associated with cervical lymphadenopathy, or 
the infection could be subclinical.
Fetal infections in the first trimester usually result in eye, 
heart and ear defects, whereas sensorineural hearing impair­
ment and pigmentary retinopathy are the only accompanying 
sequelae to infections in the middle or even the last trimester of 
pregnancy.63 Hearing impairment is mainly sensorineural and 
bilateral, but unilateral hearing impairment may occur. Progres­
sion of hearing impairment is not infrequent.
Diabetes mellitus was found to be overt or latent in 20% of 
young adults with conigental rubella syndrome (CRS).64
Cytomegalovirus
Congenital infection of the fetus occurs mainly after a primary 
infection, but can occur after a secondary infection. The trans­
mission rate is 20-50% after a primary maternal infection.65 It 
is estimated that 1% of newborns are congenitally infected.66
The majority of congenital infections are asymptomatic. Hear­
ing impairment is more likely to follow a symptomatic rather 
than an asymptomatic infection. Periventricular radiolucencies 
or calcifications seen on a CT scan indicate an increased risk for 
hearing impairment.67
Fetal damage can occur in all three trimesters with appar­
ently equal frequency.66 Symptomatic infections are more likely 
to occur when infections occur in the first half of pregnancy. 
Hearing loss is more likely to follow a primary infection. Hear­
ing impairment is found in about 10% of those affected and is 
most commonly bilateral but can be unilateral. It is frequently 
progressive.
Deterioration has been documented up to the age of 4 
years.67 Other associated defects include language disorders and 
intellectual disability.
Toxoplasmosis
This is a protozoal infection, and primary infections occur 
with a frequency of 0.1-1%. Fetal infection occurs in 40% of 
cases.69 Most infections are asymptomatic but, after a period, 
choroidoretinitis can develop, together with other neurologi­
cal signs.70 Hearing impairment is sensorineural, is usually 
bilateral, and may be mild, or more severe and profound. 
Toxoplasmosis has also been implicated in acquired hearing 
impairment.
Detection of infections is important, as treatment is possi­
ble. Early treatment and/or prolonged antimicrobial therapy 
were considered to be the possible reasons why none of the 30 
children with congenital infections investigated by McGee et 
al71 had a sensorineural hearing impairment.
Syphilis
Congenital syphilis is a cause of potentially reversible sen­
sorineural hearing impairment. Ampicillin combined with 
steroids is effective in preventing hearing from becoming 
progressively worse.72 Pathologically, endolymphatic hydrops 
occurs, together with degeneration of the organ of Corti and of 
the spiral ganglion.73 Karmody and Schukneckt found that 
hearing impairment in childhood usually presented with a sud­
den onset of profound bilateral symmetrical hearing impair­
ment without symptoms of vestibular disturbance.73
Herpes simplex
Sensorineural hearing impairment has been described after 
symptomatic neonatal herpes infection.
Postnatal
Meningitis
Meningitis is the main cause of acquired sensorineural hearing 
loss in children. It has been estimated that about 10% of chil­
dren having a bacterial meningitis develop a hearing impair­
ment. Bacterial meningitis is more likely than viral meningitis 
to result in hearing impairment. It is the most common single 
defect following meningitis, but may be associated with other
  

Disorders of the inner ear in children 
401
neurological sequelae. Hearing loss is present early in the infec­
tion.74 Given early in Haemophilus influenzae infections, dexa- 
methasone may prevent a hearing impairment or cause a 
hearing impairment to be less severe than it might otherwise 
have been. In pneumococcal meningitis, dexamethasone was 
effective if given before or concomitantly with antibiotics.75
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae; 
Neisseria 
meningitidis 
and 
Haemophilus influenzae are the most common organisms 
involved. They are believed to cause a labyrinthitis which, if 
septic, may lead to a permanent hearing impairment. An asep­
tic labyrinthitis is thought to account for cases of temporary 
hearing loss.
Hearing loss is usually bilateral but may be unilateral. It is 
often profound. Occasionally, the high frequencies are pre­
served and a low-frequency ascending audiogram is obtained. 
Occasionally, there is progression of the hearing loss as a result 
of ossification of the lumen of the cochlea or fibrosis around 
blood vessels. Ossification of the lumen of the cochlea has 
important consequences for cochlear implantation (Figure 
24.8). The time of onset is variable, and so children with a pro­
found hearing impairment following meningitis should be 
referred early to cochlear implant programmes. Delay may 
result in full insertion of the implant device not being possible.
Loss of balance is usually associated with hearing loss as a 
result of meningitis, and may be present early in the course of 
the infection.
Measles
Hearing impairment after measles is usually bilateral and can be 
moderate or profound. A temporal bone study of hamster 
cochleae showed atrophy of the stria vascularis, loss of the 
organ of Cortia, ‘rolled-up’ tectorial membrane and cell infil­
tration into the scala media.76
Mumps
There is an acute onset of sensorineural hearing loss, usually 
unilateral but sometimes bilateral.77 Hearing loss is usually pro-
Figure 24.8 Surface shaded rendering MRI image of labyrinth with oclusive 
changes post meningitis.
found and can be reversible. Disequilibrium can develop as a 
result of vestibular involvement.
Some children have developed a sensorineural hearing loss 
after mumps, measles and rubella vaccination (MMR), and this 
is thought to be related to the mumps component.78
Congenital disorders/defects
These account for a very small proportion of cases of hearing 
impairment.
Congenital hypothyroidism
The prevalence of primary congenital hypothyroidism is esti­
mated as being between 1 in 3000 and 4000 live births. Unilat­
eral or bilateral sensorineural hearing impairment may be found, 
mainly affecting the higher frequencies.79 Mild impairment of 
auditory and vestibular function may be found in children, in 
spite of early treatment with thyroxine.80 In this study, the 
severity of the abnormalities was related to the degree of 
hypothyroidism prior to treatment. In the study described by 
Rovet et al,79 the age of onset of the hearing impairment was 
related to the presence of hearing impairment but not to disease 
severity or duration.
Perilymphatic fistula
This is an abnormal communication between the perilymphatic 
space and the middle ear. Perilymphatic fistulae may be con­
genital and associated with abnormalities of the inner ear, or 
they may be acquired, e.g. as a result of trauma. A retrospective 
study of 94 children (117 ears) by Weber et al81 found that the 
majority had middle ear abnormalities but 16 (17%) children 
had inner ear abnormalities. Of the 25 ears with abnormalities 
of the inner ear, 14 had a dilated vestibular aqueduct, 7 had 
Mondini defects and 3 had ‘Mondini-like’ deformities.
Children present with a fluctuating progressive or sudden 
sensorineural hearing loss accompanied by tinnitus and with or
without vertigo. Vertigo may be present with or without loss of
i 
. 
81,82 
hearing.
The degree of trauma needed to produce a fistula is not nec­
essarily severe, and coughing, sneezing or straining may be 
sufficient.
Perinatal causes
There are several factors surrounding births which have the 
potential for causing a hearing impairment. Hypoxia may 
result from birth asphyxia or from recurrent episodes of apnoea 
and cause a sensorineural hearing impairment. Prolonged 
pre-peri- and postnatal hypoxia-ischaemia is a more important 
factor than pure hypoxia as a cause of both brain and ear 
damage during delivery.83 Hearing impairment is found more
  

402 
Auditory disorders and their management
frequently in children who have neurodevelopmental deficits 
after perinatal asphyxia than in those without such defects.84
PERINATAL FACTORS
Lo w gestation/birth we ight 
H y pox ia-ischaem i a 
Hyperbilirubinaemia 
Sepsis
Ototoxic drugs
Hyperbilirubinaemia may result in the deposition of biliru­
bin in the cochlear nuclei and cause a sensorineural hearing 
loss. The level of hyperbilirubinaemia which is potentially dam­
aging depends upon the age of gestation of the baby. Those 
babies with sufficiently high levels to warrant exchange trans­
fusion are considered to be at risk for developing sensorineural 
hearing impairment.
Low-gestation babies may be exposed to a number of 
potentially damaging factors. They have a greater vulnerabil­
ity to the effects of hypoxia-ischaemia than full-term babies. 
They are more prone to hyperbilirubinaemia and more 
susceptible to its effects. In addition, they may develop sepsis 
around the time of birth, and this can potentiate the effects 
of hyperbilirubinaemia. Treatment of the infections with 
aminoglycosides presents an additional risk for sensorineural 
hearing impairment.
In spite of the occurrence of sensorineural hearing 
impairment after perinatal trauma, many babies emerge 
unscathed.85, 86 It is, therefore, possible that babies who 
develop a hearing impairment may do so as a result of other 
causations, and the birth history may be a result of these con­
ditions or be unrelated to the hearing impairment.
Ototoxicity
Children may be exposed to potentially ototoxic drugs in utero, 
in the perinatal period or postnatally, in particular, drugs for the 
treatment of severe sepsis, drugs which are used to control fluid 
and electrolyte balance and cytotoxic agents.
Aminoglycosides are bacteriocidal agents which are effec­
tive against Gram-negative infections. They are both ototoxic 
and nephrotoxic. Hypersensitivity to aminoglycosides occurs 
during the period of development of the inner ear. This is also 
a period when there is hypersensitivity to loop diuretics and 
especially to the combination of these with aminoglycosides.87
The aminoglycosides differ with regard to the degree to 
which they affect the cochlea or the vestibular apparatus. The 
mechanisms involved in causing ototoxicity are not fully under­
stood, but it is believed that the ototoxic effects of gentamicin 
are caused by a metabolized form of the drug via an iron-gen- 
tamicin complex which produces free radicals.88 Outer hair cells
are destroyed preferentially in the basal turn and then extend 
towards the apex. Later, there is damage to the inner hair cells. 
Children with renal disease are at greater risk of ototoxic 
side-effects, as the drugs are excreted via the renal tract. Care­
ful monitoring of the peak and trough levels is necessary to pre­
vent potentially harmful serum levels.
Unknown
In spite of aetiological investigations, a definite cause for a 
hearing impairment may not be identified. In these instances, 
the cause is believed in most cases to be genetic. Lench et al89 
reported finding connexin 26 mutations in isolated cases of 
hearing impairment. With the rapid advances being made in 
molecular genetics, the ‘unknown’ causation group will, in 
time, increasingly diminish in numbers. Parker et al,90 in a 
population-based investigation, found that 10% of those with 
a non-syndromal hearing loss had a connexin 26 35 delG 
mutation.
Conclusion
There are many potential causes of a sensorineural hearing 
impairment in childhood, and children found to be hearing 
impaired should have the causation of their hearing loss inves­
tigated as soon as possible after detection. Identification of the 
cause is becoming increasingly possible, and clinicians need to 
keep abreast of new developments, particularly in the field of 
medical genetics.
References
1. 
Davis A, Wood S, Healy R, Webb H, Rowe S. Risk factors for 
hearing disorders: epidemiological evidence of change over time 
in the UK. J Am A cad Audiol 1995; 6: 365-70.
2. 
Mencher GT, Madriz Alfaro JJ. Prevalence of sensorineural 
hearing loss in children in Costa Rica. Audiology 2000; 39: 
278-83.
3. 
Prasansuk S. Incidence/prevalence of sensorineural hearing 
impairment in Thailand and Southeast Asia. 39: 207-11.
4. 
Lalwani AK, Castelein CM. Cracking the genetic code: non- 
syndromic hereditary hearing impairment. Am J Otol 1999; 20: 
115-32.
5 
Waardenburg PJ. A new syndrome combining developmental 
anomalies of the eyelids, eyebrows and nose root with pigmentary 
defects of the iris and head hair and with congenital deafness. Am 
J Med Genet 1951; 3: 195-253.
6. 
Hageman M, Oosteveld WJ. Vestibular findings in 23 patients 
with Waardenburg syndrome. Acta Otolaryngol 1977; 
103: 
648-52.
7. 
Read AP, Newton VE. Waardenburg syndrome. J Med Genet 1997; 
34: 656-65.
  

Disorders of the inner ear in children 
403
8. Newton VE. Hearing loss in Waardenburg syndrome. J Laryngol 
Otol 1990; 104: 97-103.
9. Newton VE, Liu X, Read A. The association of sensorineural hear- 
ing loss and pigmentation abnormalities in Waardenburg syn­
drome. J Audiol Med 1994; 3: 69-77.
10. Zlogotora J, Sagi M, Schuper A et al. Variability of Stickler syn­
drome. Am J Med Genet 1992; 42: 337-9.
11. Sirko-Osadsa D, Murray MA, Scott JA et al. Stickler syndrome 
without eye involvement is caused by mutations in COL11A2, the 
gene encoding the a2 (XI) chain of type XI collagen. J Pediatrics 
1996; 132: 368-71.
12. Liberfarb RM, Goldblatt A. Prevalence of mitral valve prolapse in 
the Stickler syndrome. Am J Med Genet 1986; 24: 387-92.
13. Chen A, Francis M, Ni L et al. Phenotypic manifestations of bran- 
chio-oto-renal syndrome. Am J Med Genet 1995; 58: 365-70.
14- Smith PG, Dyches T, Loomis RA. Clinical aspects of branchio-oto- 
renal syndrome. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1984; 92: 468-75.
15. Smith RJH, Kimberling WJ. Branchio-oto-renal syndrome. In: 
Martini A, Read A, Stephens D, eds. Genetics and Hearing Impair­
ment. London: Whurr Publishers. 1996: 180-4.
16. Kumar S, Marres HA, Cremers CW et al. Autosomal-dominant 
branchio-otic (BO) syndrome is not allelic to the branchio- 
oto-renal (BOR) gene at 8ql3. Am J Med Genet 1998; 76:
395-401.
17. Beighton P. Auditory dysfunction in genetic disorders of the skele­
ton. In: Martini A, Read A, Stephens D, eds. Genetics and Hearing 
Impairment. London: Whurr Publishers, 1996: 130-40
18. Smith RJH, Peliaz MZ, Daiger S et al. Clinical variability and 
genetic heterogeneity within the Arcadian Usher Population. Am 
J Med Genet 1992; 43: 964-9.
19. Smith RJH, Berlin Cl, Hejtmancik JF et al. Clinical diagnosis of 
the Usher syndromes, Usher Syndrome Consortium. Am J Med 
Genet 1994; 50: 32-8.
20. Astuto LM, Weston MD, Carney CA et al. Genetic heterogeneity 
of Usher syndrome: analysis of 151 families with Usher syndrome 
type 1. Am J Hum Genet 2002; 67: 1569-74.
21. El-Amraoui A, Petit C. Towards a molecular understanding of the 
pathophysiology of Usher syndrome. J Audiol Med 1997; 6: 
170-84.
22. Eudy JD, Weston MD, Yao S et al. Mutation of a gene encoding a 
protein with extracellular matrix motifs in Ushers Syndrome type 
Ila. Science 1998; 280: 1753-7.
23. Leroy BP et al. Spectrum of mutations in USH2A in British 
patients with Usher syndrome type II. Exp Eye Res 2001; 72: 
503-9.
24. Pakarinen L, Karjalainen S, Smola KOJ et al. Usher’s syndrome 
type 3 in Finland. Laryngoscope 1995; 105: 613-17.
25. Liu XZ, Hope C, Walsh J et al. Mutations in the myosin VII A 
gene causing a wide phenotypic spectrum including atypical Usher 
syndrome. Am J Med Genet 1998; 63: 909-12.
26. Petit C. Usher syndrome: from genetics to pathogenesis. Annu Rev 
Genomics Hum Genet 2001; 2: 271-97.
27. Otterstedde et al. A new clinical classification for Usher’s 
syndrome based on a new subtype of Usher’s syndrome type 1. 
Laryngoscope 2001; 111: 84-6.
28. Reardon W, Coffey R, Phelps PD et al. Pendred syndrome— 100 
years of underascertainment. Q ] Med 1997; 90: 443-7.
29. Cremers WR, Bolder C, Admiraal RJ et al. Progressive sen­
sorineural hearing loss and a widened vestibular aqueduct in 
Pendred syndrome. Arch Otolaryngol Head and Neck Surg 1998; 
124: 501-5.
30. Phelps PD, Coffey RA, Trembath RC et al. Radiological manifes­
tations of the ear in Pendred’s syndrome. Clin Radiol 1998; 53: 
268-73.
31. Splawski I, Timothy KW, Vincent GM et al. Molecular basis of the 
long-QT syndrome associated with deafness. N Engl J Med 1997; 
336: 1562-7.
32. Neyroud N, Tesson F, Denjoy I et al. A novel mutation in the 
potassium channel gene causes the Jervell and Lange-Neilsen 
cardio-auditory syndrome. Nature Genet 1997; 15: 186-9.
33. Briedenkamp JK, Smith ME, Dudley JP et al. Otolaryngologic 
manifestations of the mucopolysaccharidoses. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1992; 101: 472-8.
34. Griffon N, Souillet G, Maire I et al. Follow up of nine patients 
with Hurler syndrome after bone marrow transplantation. J Pedi­
atrics 1998; 133: 119-25.
35. Papsin BC, Vellodi A, Bailey CM et al. Otologic and laryngologic 
manifestations of mucopolysaccharidoses after bone marrow trans­
plantations. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 118: 30-6.
36. Refsum S. Heredopathia atactica polyneuritiformis phytanic-acid 
storage disease, Refsum’s disease: a biochemically well-defined dis­
ease with a specific dietary treatment. Arch Neurol 1981; 38:605-6.
37. Wierzbicki AS, Lloyd MD, Schofield CJ, Feher MD, Gibberd FB. 
Refsum’s disease: a peroxisomal disorder affecting phytanic acid 
alpha-oxidation. J Neurochem 2002; 80: 727-35.
38. Brown PJ, Mei G, Gibberd FB, Burston D, Mayne PD, McClinchy 
JE, Sidey M. Diet and Refsum’s disease. The determination of phy­
tanic acid and phytol in certain foods and the application of this 
knowledge to the choice of suitable convenience foods for patients 
with Refsum’s disease. ] Hum Nut Diet 1993; 6: 295-305.
39. Iwisake S, Kaga K. Chronological changes of brainstem responses 
in Cockayne’s syndrome. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1994; 30: 
211- 21.
40. Brunner HG. Alport syndrome. In: Martini A, Read A, Stephens 
D, eds. Genetics and Hearing Impairment. London: Whurr Publish­
ers, 1996: 166-71.
41. Vetrie D, Flinter F, Bobrow M, Harris A. X inactivation patterns 
in females with Alport syndrome: a means of selecting against a 
deleterious gene? J Med Genet 1992; 29: 663-6.
42. Sirimanna T, Stephens D. Hearing loss in Alport’s syndrome. J 
Audiol Med 1997; 6 :71-8.
43. Sirimanna T, France L, Stephens D. Alport’s syndrome: can the 
carriers be identified by audiometry? Clin Otolaryngol 1995; 20: 
158-63.
44. Nance WE. Genetic counselling for the hearing impaired. Audiol­
ogy 1971; 222-3.
45. Reardon W, Bellman S, Phelps P, Pembrey M, Luxon L. Neuro- 
otological function in X-linked hearing loss: a multipedigree 
assessment and correlation with other clinical parameters. Acta 
Otolaryngol 1993; 113: 706-14.
  

404 
Auditory disorders and their management
46. Brunner HG. X-linked hearing loss. In: Martini A, Read A, 
Stephens D, eds. Genetics of Hearing Impairment. London: Whurr 
Publishers, 1996: 231-5.
47. Hutchin TP, Thompson KR, Parker M, Newton V, Bitner- 
Glindzicx M, Mueller RE Prevalence of mitochondrial DNA 
mutations in childhood/congenital onset non-syndromal sensori­
neural hearing impairment. J Med Genet 2000; 38: 3-5.
48. Prezant TR, Agapian JV, Bohlmann MC et al. Mitochondrial ribo- 
somal RNA mutation associated with both antibiotic-induced and 
non-syndromic deafness. Nature Genet 4: 289-94.
49. Hutchin TP, Navarro-Coy NC, Van Camp G et al. Multiple origins 
of the mtDNA 7472insC mutation associated with hearing loss and 
neurological dysfunction. Eur J Hum Genet 2001; 9: 385-7.
50. Wildervanke. The cervico-oculo-acousticus syndrome. In: Vinken 
PJ, Bruyn GW, Myranthopoulos NC, eds. Handbook of Clinical 
Neurology. Amsterdam: North'Holland, 1978: 123-30.
51. Cremers CWRJ, Hoogland GA, Kuypers W. Hearing loss in the 
cervico-oculoacoustic (Wildervanck) syndrome. Arch Otolaryngol
1984; 110: 54-7.
52. Kirkham TH. Inheritance of Duane’s syndrome. Br J Opthalmol 
1970; 54: 323-9.
53. West PDB, Gholkar A, Ramsden RT. Wildervanck’s syndrome— 
unilateral Mondini dysplasia identified by computed tomography. 
J Laryngol Otol 1989; 103: 408-11.
54. Marres HAM, Cremers CWRJ, Jongbloet PH. Hearing levels in 
the Cornelia de Lange syndrome. A report of seven cases. Int J 
Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1989; 18: 31-7.
55. Robinson LK, Wolfsberg E, Lyons Jones K. Brachmann de Lange 
syndrome: evidence for autosomal dominant inheritance. Am J 
Med Genet 1985; 22: 109-15.
56. Metlay LA, Smythe PS, Miller ME. Familial CHARGE syndrome: 
clinical report with autopsy findings. Am J Med Genet 1987; 26: 
577-81.
57. Edwards BM, van Riper LA, Kileny PR. Clinical manifestations of 
CHARGE Association. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1995; 33: 
23-42.
58. Morgan D, Bailey M, Phelps P et al. Ear nose-throat abnormali- 
ties in the CHARGE Association. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 1993; 119: 49-54.
59. Bilgin H, Kasemsuwan L, Schachem PA et al. Temporal bone 
study of Down’s syndrome. Arch Laryngol Head Neck Surg 1996; 
122: 271-5.
60. Sculerati N, Oddoux C, Clayton CM et al. Hearing loss in Turner 
syndrome. Laryngoscope 1996; 106: 992-7.
61. Barrenas M-L, Nylen O, Hansen C. The influence of karyotype on 
the auricle, otitis media and hearing in Turner syndrome. Hear Res 
1999; 138: 163-70.
62. Benazzo M, Lanza L, Cemiglia M et al. Otological and audiologi- 
cal aspects in Turner syndrome. J Audiol Med 1997; 6: 147-59.
63. Griffiths KH. In: Kerr AG, Stephens D, eds. Scott Brown's 
Otolaryngology, Vol. 2, 6th edn. London: Butterworths, 1997: 
7- 12.
64. Wolinsky JS. Rubella. In: Fields BN, Knipe DM, Howley PM et al, 
eds. Field’s Virology. Philadelphia: Lippincott'Raven Publishers, 
1996: 899-921.
65. Marres HAM. Congenital abnormalities of the inner ear. In: 
Ludman H, Wright T, eds. Diseases of the Ear. London: Arnold, 
288-9.
66. Nelson CT, Demmler GJ. Cytomegalovirus infection in the preg- 
nant mother, foetus and newborn infant. Clin Perinatol 1997; 24: 
151-60.
67. Williamson WD, Demmler GJ, Percy AK et al. Progressive hear- 
ing loss in infants with asymptomatic congenital cytomegalovirus 
infection. Pediatrics 1992; 90: 862-6.
68. Jones CA, Isaacs D. Predicting the outcome of symptomatic con- 
genital cytomegalovirus infection. J Paediatr Child Health 1995; 
31: 70-1.
69. Stray-Pedersen B. Toxoplasmosis in pregnancy. Clin Obstet 
Gynaecol 1993; 7: 107-37.
70. Stem H, Booth JC, Elek SD. Microbial causes of mental retarda- 
tion. The role of prenatal infections with cytomegalovirus, rubella 
virus and toxoplasma. Lancet 1969; 2: 443-8.
71. McGee T, Wolters C, Stein L et al. Absence of sensorineural hear­
ing loss in treated infants and children with congenital toxoplas- 
mosis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992; 106: 75-80.
72. Adams DA, Kerr AG, Smyth GD et al. Congenital syphilitic 
deafness. J Laryngol Otol 1983; 97: 399-404.
73. Karmody CS, Schuknecht HF. Deafness in congenital syphilis. 
Arch Otolaryngol 1966; 83: 18-27.
74. Richardson MP, Reid A, Tarlow MJ et al. Hearing loss during bac­
terial meningitis. Arch Dis Child 1997; 76: 134-8.
75. McIntyre PB, Berkey CS, King SM et al. Dexamethasone as 
adjunctive therapy in bacterial meningitis. A meta-analysis of 
randomised clinical trials since 1988. JAMA 1997; 278: 925-31.
76. Fukuda S, Ishikawa K, Inuyama Y. Acute measles infection in the 
hamster cochlea. Acta Otolaryngol 1994; 514: 111-16.
77. Fuse T, Inamura H, Nakamura T et al. Bilateral hearing loss due to 
viral infection. J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Specialties 1996; 58: 175-7.
78. Steward BJA, Prabhu PU. Reports of sensorineural deafness after 
measles, mumps and rubella immunisation. Arch Dis Child 1993; 
69: 153-4.
79. Rovet J, Walker W, Bliss B et al. Long term sequelae of hearing 
impairment in congenital hypothyroidism. J Pediatrics 1996; 128: 
776-83.
80. Bellman SC, Davies A, Fuggle PW et al. Mild impairment of 
neuro-otological function in early treated congenital hypothy­
roidism. Arch Dis Child 1996; 74: 215-18.
81. Weber PC, Perez BA, Bluestone CD. Congenital perilymphatic 
fistula and associated middle ear abnormalities. Laryngoscope 1993; 
103: 160-4.
82. Pappas DG, Schneiderman TS. Perilymphatic fistula in pediatric 
patients with a pre-existing sensorineural loss. Am J Otol 1989; 10: 
499-501.
83. Borg E. Perinatal asphyxia, hypoxia, ischaemia and hearing loss. 
An overview. Scan Audiol 1999; 19: 77-91.
84. Jiang ZD. Long term effect of perinatal and postnatal asphyxia on 
developing human auditory brainstem responses: peripheral hear­
ing loss. IntJ Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1995; 33: 225-38.
85. Newton VE. Aetiology of bilateral sensorineural hearing loss in 
young children. J Laryngol Otol 1985; Suppl 10.
  

Disorders o f the inner ear in children 
405
86. Das VK. Adverse perinatal factors in the causation of sen- 
sorineural hearing impairment in young children. Int J Pediatr 
Otorhinolaryngol 1991; 21: 121-5.
87. Henley CM, Rybak. Developmental ototoxicity. Otolaryngol Clin 
North Am 1993; 26: 857-71.
88. Song BB, Schacht JB. Variable efficacy of radical scavengers and 
iron chelators to attenuate gentamycin ototoxicity in guinea pigs 
in vivo. Hear Res 1996; 94: 87-93.
89. Lench L, Houseman M, Newton V et al. Connexin-26 mutations 
in sporadic non-syndromal deafness. Lancet 351: 415.
90. Parker MJ, Fortnum HM, Young ID, Davis AC, Mueller RF. Pop- 
ulation-based genetic study of childhood hearing impairment in 
the Trent Region of the United Kingdom. Audiology 2000; 39: 
226-31.
  

Management of the 
hearing-impaired child
Cliodna OMahoney
The detection of hearing loss, including via screening pro- 
grammes, and the subsequent assessment and investigation of 
the nature (i.e. conductive or sensory, neural or central), degree 
and cause of the loss are addressed elsewhere (Chapters 20 and 
22) and w ill only be briefly mentioned in this chapter, where 
appropriate.
The emphasis in this chapter is mainly on the management 
of permanent hearing impairment, including sensory (cochlear), 
neural, central and permanent conductive losses. Although 
common conductive hearing losses such as glue ear and ear 
infection are more common, they also often resolve sponta­
neously or are amenable to medical or surgical management. 
On the other hand, sensory/neural/central and long-term con­
ductive problems usually demand more complex, long-term, 
multidisciplinary, rehabilitative rather than curative manage­
ment strategies.
General principles of management
For a child with any form of hearing loss, addressing the broad 
areas outlined in Table 26.1 provides a useful framework on 
which to base a management plan for that particular child. In 
many instances, particularly in cases of temporary conductive 
hearing loss, some of these w ill not be problem areas for a given 
individual, and thus need only to be considered briefly.
Reduce/abolish the hearing impairment
Curing hearing loss is more likely to be a feasible option 
in the case of conductive hearing losses or for the 
conductive component of a mixed loss.
Removal of a foreign body from the ear canal, antibiotics for 
outer or middle ear infection, and measures to combat allergic 
rhinitis (e.g. avoidance of dust mite, anti-allergic nasal sprays) 
in order to improve Eustachian tube function and so abolish
Table 25.1 Summary of the principles of management of
bilateral permanent hearing loss
1. Reduce/abolish hearing impairment
2. Minimize the degree of handicap (habilitation/rehabilitation)
Amplification-various hearing aids available 
Vibrotactile and electrotactile aids 
Assistive listening devices 
Environmental modifications 
Speech/language/communication support 
Educational support 
Psychological/emotional issues
3. Identify the cause of hearing loss
4. Identify and manage associated vestibular pathology
5. Identify and manage associated pathology
6. investigate other family members for similar
auditory/associated pathology and refer for genetic advice 
as appropriate
7. Advise on hearing preservation measures
8. Practical information on grants/allowances/self-help
organizations etc.
‘glue ear’ are relatively easy measures which may improve or 
normalize hearing. Insertion of grommets, reconstruction of 
ossicles in the case of trauma or congenital deformity, or 
stapedectomy for otosclerosis, are some of the surgical inter­
ventions which may be appropriate in order to restore hearing.
Sensorineural loss is rarely amenable to cure. However, 
there are some circumstances where the possibility of at least 
reducing the loss should be considered. For example, patients 
with hearing loss associated with widened vestibular aqueducts 
(e.g. Pendred syndrome) may have a fluctuating sensory hearing 
loss. In such children, there is evidence that head trauma or 
changes in pressure, such as during air travel or deep sea diving, 
can precipitate a deterioration in hearing. Advice about avoid­
ing contact sports or other precipitating activities may be 
appropriate. Sim ilarly, Meniere’s disease is associated with a

408 
Auditory disorders and their management
fluctuating sensorineural loss which often responds to salt- 
reducing diet and diuretic therapy. However, Meniere’s disease, 
although common in adults, 
accounts for a very small 
proportion of hearing loss in children. Claims have also been 
made for the efficacy of steroids in reducing hearing loss in var­
ious conditions, e.g. autoimmune hearing loss, however, this 
remains to be proven conclusively.
Minimize the degree of handicap 
(habilitation/rehabilitation)
W here abolition of the hearing loss is not a possibility, or where 
it is likely to be delayed for a significant time, e.g. long waiting 
lists for grommet insertion, assessing the nature and degree of 
disabilities caused and how they affect, i.e. handicap, the indi­
vidual child is necessary. The common, inter-related areas of 
life which are likely to be adversely affected include communi­
cation, education, social and emotional development, family 
relationships and, in the older child, vocational opportunities.
(Re)habilitation of a child with hearing loss is an on­
going dynamic process, needing a coordinated team 
approach with input from a wide variety of professionals, 
including audiological physician, audiologist, speech and 
language therapist, social worker, ear, nose and throat 
(E N T ) surgeon, psychologist and teachers.
One or more of the interventions below may be appropriate 
for a particular child.
Amplification
A ir conduction hearing aids
The range of hearing aids currently available is vast. The most 
common type worn is the conventional behind-the-ear air con­
duction aid. These come in a variety of sizes to fit comfortably 
behind different-sized ears, colours to suit different hair/skin 
colours, and technical specifications to accommodate different 
degrees and shapes of hearing loss.
Binaural fitting of aids is usually considered preferable to 
monaural (for bilateral loss, of course), as it gives rise to 
better localization skills, and the degree of amplification 
needed in each ear in order to achieve the same benefit is 
less in binaural than in monaural amplification.
Exceptions to binaural fitting include the following: where 
there is a ‘dead ear’ on one side, amplification on that side w ill 
be of no benefit, or when the degree of asymmetry of the hear­
ing loss is such that each ear requires very different amplifica­
tion. Binaural fitting in this latter case may give rise to different 
sound qualities and so confusion of the sound input, which is
clearly undesirable. However, in most cases when an older child 
wears only one aid, it is most commonly the child’s choice for 
cosmetic rather than acoustical reasons.
Other types of air conduction hearing aids include in-the- 
ear- and in-the-canal-type aids. A t this point in time, the power 
and flexibility of these aids is limited relative to the conven­
tional behind-the-ear aids. In-the-ear aids are most suitable for 
mild to moderate flat hearing losses, and in such situations are 
often the aid of choice of older children and adolescents, on 
account of their cosmetic acceptability. In addition, children 
with pinna deformities may be unable to retain a behind-the- 
ear aid in place, and an in-the-ear aid may be the most appro­
priate. In the young child, up until around the age of 12 or 13 
years, the pinna and ear canal are changing shape and size. 
W ith  a conventional behind-the-ear aid, this means that the 
moulds need to be changed frequently— three, four or even more 
times a year. As the mould encases the aid itself in the in-the-ear- 
type aid, a change of ‘mould’ means an entire change of casing, 
which is more expensive. Thus, in the current climate of bud­
getary constraints, many centres restrict the prescription of in- 
the-ear aids for cosmetic reasons to the over-12-year age group.
W ith  the increasing range of powerful and yet very small 
behind-the-ear aids, the role of the body-worn hearing aid—  
apart from ‘radio aids’ (see below)— has become very much 
reduced. In the very young, profoundly deaf, child, acoustical 
feedback and whistling may be a problem with postaural aids, 
because of the small size of the ear canals and the difficulty in 
getting earmoulds to fit very accurately. In addition, the larger 
body-worn aid is less likely to get lost. Previously, body-worn 
aids had greater low-frequency amplification than postaural 
aids, and for the profoundly deaf this was an advantage, as it 
improved their chances of utilizing their minimal, residual, usu­
ally low-frequency, hearing. However, nowadays, many postau­
ral aids have similar potential and tend to be the aid of choice.
Bone conduction hearing aids
Normally, sound is conducted to the inner ear through air-filled 
cavities, the outer and middle ears, and, when possible, air con­
duction is also the method of choice of delivery of amplified 
sound. However, there are circumstances under which this is 
not possible. For a child with recurrent ear infections giving rise 
to persistently discharging ears, having the mould of a hearing 
aid or a hearing aid itself occluding the ear canal may exacer­
bate the infections and, in addition, render the aid less effective 
if the canal is fluid/discharge filled. Also, external or middle ear 
anomalies such as atresia may give rise to a conductive hearing 
loss where a conventional air conduction aid cannot be fitted.
INDICATIONS FOR BONE CONDUCTION AID
Persistently discharging ear 
External ear anomalies 
Middle ear anomalies
  

Management of the hearing-impaired child 
409
In such circumstances, bone conduction hearing aids provide 
the solution. Sound energy is converted to electrical energy and 
amplified in the usual way by a postaural aid fixed at one end of 
a headband. This electrical energy is conducted to an electro- 
magnetic vibrator situated at the other end of the headband 
and held tightly against the opposite mastoid process. The 
vibrations are then conducted to the inner ear from the mastoid 
process across the skull bones and, to a lesser extent, the ossi­
cles. This is obviously more cumbersome and less cosmetically 
appealing than a conventional postaural aid. Also, as the head­
band needs to fit tightly in order for the vibrator to make good 
contact with the mastoid area, some children find this uncom­
fortable and thus may lim it the amount of time for which they 
w ill wear it. In addition, the presence of soft tissue and skin 
between the vibrator and the skull leads to loss of power and 
poorer quality of sound. However, for those children needing 
long-term bone conduction aiding, the advent of the bone- 
anchored hearing aid (B A H A ) has greatly improved the situa­
tion. Briefly the bone B A H A  consists of a small box, which 
contains a microphone, the circuitry to convert sound to electro­
magnetic vibration, and the vibrator itself or piston. The 
vibrator is coupled via a screw to a titanium implant surgically 
fixed into the underlying skull, usually placed behind the ear. 
This process of osseointegration means that vibrations are 
transferred more efficiently to the skull without the loss of 
power due to the interposition of skin and soft tissue, and clar­
ity and sound quality are improved. It is also a more cosmeti­
cally acceptable (the box being almost completely hidden by 
hair) and comfortable option than the headband-type aid. The 
B A H A  is a feasible option from the age of 5 years. If the child 
is younger than this, the skull bone is unlikely to be thick 
enough for the stable insertion of the osseointegrated screw.
Cochlear implants
Since the 1980s, when the first cochlear implants were inserted 
in children in the U S A , France and U K , cochlear implantation 
has become well established in the repertoire of ‘hearing aids’ 
used in the management of childhood profound hearing loss, 
both congenital and acquired.
As this is the subject of a separate chapter, the various 
issues w ill only be mentioned here, and dealt with in greater 
detail in Chapter 26.
Several companies 
are 
now manufacturing cochlear 
implant systems with different specifications. Essentially, all 
devices consist of a receiving microphone connected to a signal 
processor, which in turn leads to a transmitter coil. This trans­
mitter is bound magnetically to a receiver implanted under the 
skin postaurally. The signal passes from the receiver along the 
stimulating electrodes to the cochlea. The most commonly used 
devices nowadays are intracochlear and multichannel, i.e. 
multiple electrodes are implanted into the scala tympani along 
the length of the basilar membrane. In extracochlear devices, 
the single stimulating electrode (single channel) is placed at the 
round window.
The decision that a cochlear implant is a suitable form of 
amplification for a given child is a complex one based on many 
factors. Also, as local and worldwide experience grows, the indi­
cations for cochlear implantation change. However, the general 
rule is that cochlear implantation should be chosen when it is 
predicted that it w ill be more beneficial than conventional aids. 
Some of the various factors that need to be taken into account 
include: present age, age of onset of hearing loss, whether the 
loss is stable or progressive, aided thresholds with conventional 
aids, presence of an eighth nerve and whether the cochlear 
anatomy w ill permit the insertion of electrodes (e.g. dysplastic 
or ossified), presence of other disabilities which may lim it the 
effectiveness of rehabilitation post-implantation (e.g. learning 
difficulties, primary speech/language problems), previous com­
pliance with conventional hearing aids, medical fitness for 
surgery, social support and psychological factors. As successful 
habilitation requires a huge commitment from both the child 
and parent, realistic expectations of the likely outcome, cultural 
issues regarding whether the child w ill grow up in a hearing 
world or in a deaf culture, and the different ways in which 
cochlear implantation is often viewed by both communities, are 
also very important issues.
This is by no means an exhaustive list of the important 
issues, but highlights the importance of a team approach, men­
tioned above, to the management of children with profound 
hearing loss, in order to make the decision as to whether to 
implant or not. For those implanted, ‘switching on’ the 
implant, ‘mapping’ of the electrodes, and subsequent (reh ab il­
itation are intensive, and also demand ongoing input from all 
members of the team.
Radio aids
Radio aid systems are systems where the transmitter and 
receiver are separated, the transmitter being close to or worn by 
the speaker, the receiver worn by the child and the two ‘con­
nected’ via radio waves. Such a system improves the signal-to- 
noise ratio and is used when it is desirable that a child listen to 
speech from one source to the exclusion of other sounds (e.g. 
background noise). This situation arises most commonly in the 
classroom, where the aim is that the teacher’s voice be ampli­
fied with as little interference as possible from background 
noise, e.g. from other children.
The basic system consists of an FM radio transmitter 
worn by the teacher and a radio receiver and amplifier 
contained in a box worn by the child. The amplified sig­
nal is then conducted to the child’s ears, and is nowadays 
usually routed directly into his or her postaural hearing 
aids, if the latter are suitable (i.e, have a socket into 
which the radio aid plugs).
W hile this kind of system improves the signal-to-noise ratio for 
the teacher’s voice, the child can become isolated, unable to
  

410 
Auditory disorders and their management
participate in group discussions. However, it operates over long 
distances and is suitable for outdoor use. The use of different 
frequencies of transmission in different classrooms overcomes 
the problem of interference from nearby classrooms.
Alternatives to this system of radio wave transmission (and 
so, strictly speaking, not radio aids) include the use of electro­
magnetic waves with a loop system— either where an electro- 
magnetic loop is placed around the room, or the child wears an 
individual loop around his neck. The amplified output from the 
speaker induces an electromagnetic signal in the loop— either 
the room or the neck loop— which is then detected by the tele­
coil in the child’s own hearing aid (‘T ’ switch). Interference 
from electromagnetic transmission in nearby rooms can be a 
problem.
Other systems employ infrared waves for the transmission 
and detection of signals. Infrared has an advantage over elec­
tromagnetic transmission, in that infrared waves w ill not pass 
through walls, and this solves the problem of interference from 
adjacent classrooms seen with electromagnetic systems. How­
ever, it is not a suitable system for outdoor use, as sunlight 
interferes with the signal.
Vibrotactile and electrotactile aids
These devices, which are usually worn on the wrist, con­
vert acoustical signals to tactile signals, the tactile system 
being simulated either by small electrical stimuli (electro- 
tactile) or vibration (vibrotactile).
The range of frequencies (below 1000 H Z) and intensities 
(above 55-60dB), as well as the ability to detect timing and 
intensity differences, are much more limited in the tactile than 
in the auditory system. Thus, tactile aids have only been used 
in profoundly deaf children (and adults), often as an alternative 
to cochlear implants.
A  very basic vibrotactile device was first introduced for pro­
foundly deaf adults in 1924 by Gault.1 Since then, many new 
devices have been developed, both single channel and multi­
channel. In multichannel systems, the speech signal is split into 
its component frequencies and the different frequencies routed 
to separate vibrators or electrical stimulators, e.g. on different 
fingers, using the principle of place coding for frequency as 
in the cochlea.2 Thornton and Philips,3 Philips et al4 and 
Waldstein and Boothroyd5 describe and compare some of the 
more well-known devices.
As ‘hearing’ through touch is a different skill from hearing 
through the auditory system, considerable training is necessary 
if the patient is to derive optimal benefit from these devices, 
in much the same way as intensive (re)habilitation is needed 
after cochlear implantation. If such training is provided, there 
is much evidence that tactile aids are effective, in terms of
both the child’s performance6, 7 and electrophysiological
8
measures.
Although some workers have claimed that aspects of per­
formance were similar when using an electrotactile aid as when 
using a cochlear implant,9 and Brooks et al10 reported a patient 
who had developed an extensive vocabulary using only a tactile 
aid, this has not been universally the case.7 Generally, the use 
of vibrotactile and electrotactile aids tends to be limited to 
those patients who are unwilling or unable to have a cochlear 
implant, with the expectation that the chief benefit of tactile 
aids is improved lipreading skills11 and awareness of environ­
mental/alerting sounds.
Assistive listening devices
These are devices which are not worn by the hearing-impaired 
child, but help to make acoustical signals more accessible. They 
include doorbells with a ring that is louder or at a frequency 
which is easier for the individual to hear and doorbells which, 
when activated, cause the lights in the house to flash. Other 
devices include vibrating or flashing alarm clocks, flashing light 
smoke alarms, amplifiers for the telephone, or loop systems for 
the television, to mention just some of the devices available, 
often at no cost to the patient, through social services.
W hile such devices are routinely discussed with adult or 
adolescent patients, they are rarely mentioned to parents of 
young hearing-impaired children or infants, on the grounds 
that the infant/young child w ill not need to use the telephone 
or alarm clock, answer the door, etc. However, it is through 
watching others use these everyday objects that all children 
learn about the world around them. If the hearing-impaired 
child sees his parents/siblings run to pick up the telephone/ 
answer the door randomly, as it seems to him, it makes no sense. 
But if he sees that every time the light flashes, the door or tele­
phone is answered, he understands the association, and learns 
these important social skills, in the same way as a normally 
hearing child.
Assistive listening devices are discussed in greater detail in 
Chapter 30.
Environmental changes
Identifying where a child experiences greatest handi­
cap— often in school— and improving the acoustical 
environment in that place can be of great benefit.
Simple measures, such as moving the child’s desk to the front of 
the class, or the side further away from outside traffic, play­
ground noise, corridors etc., are simple but often very effective 
measures. Strategies which decrease reverberation can be more 
difficult to achieve, but very desirable, such as the use of soft 
furnishings, carpets and curtains.
Speech/language/communication
One of the main concerns of parents when their infant has been 
diagnosed as having a hearing loss is whether or not the child
  

Management of the hearing-impaired child 
411
w ill learn to speak. Although it is not always easy to give the 
answer to this question, particularly in children with severe and 
profound loss, it may be appropriate that the issue be broadened 
into language and communication, rather than focusing solely 
on one form of communication, i.e. speech, and that the parents 
be made aware of other forms of communication, including the 
various signed languages. Access to a specialist speech and 
language therapist with particular expertise in problems associ- 
ated with hearing loss, often in conjunction with a peripatetic 
teacher of the deaf, is an invaluable resource for parents. In the 
early months, advice to the parents/carers about how to stimu­
late and develop language skills in the hearing-impaired child is 
the main benefit, with more structured sessions with the 
therapist being appropriate later on.
The decision about whether the child ‘should sign or 
speak' is not made at one point in time, but gradually 
evolves over months and years.
Many factors need to be taken into account, including parental 
choice, the mode of communication within the family/commu­
nity in which the child lives, and audiological factors. The most 
important concept to keep sight of while thinking about such 
problems is that communication, rather than any one parties 
lar form of language, is the key issue, and whatever method 
enhances the child’s communication is probably the best 
method for that child at that particular point in time.
Educational support
The impact of hearing loss on a child’s education is another of 
the major concerns of parents. Just as with speech, language and 
communication, the educational services should be informed 
and involved with a hearing-impaired child and his family as 
soon as possible after diagnosis. As mentioned above, the peri­
patetic teacher for the deaf is a useful resource for advice about 
promoting language development. This teacher w ill also be able 
to help parents come to a decision about what kind of school is 
right for their child, e.g. integrated in the local mainstream 
school, partially integrated into mainstream education with 
support from an attached unit for the hearing impaired or a spe­
cial school for the deaf, day or boarding. In the case of a school 
for the deaf, the policies on communication differ in different 
schools; for example, some have a clear demarcation between 
aural/oral or signing traditions while others subscribe to a total 
communication policy, where both speech and signing are 
encouraged.
In the U K , the strengths and weaknesses of any child with 
a disability can be assessed and a statement of special educa­
tional needs drawn up, if appropriate; parents can have a large 
input into this. The kind of support needed, and which school 
can provide such support, can then be decided upon. The state­
ment is subject to regular review, and the child’s progress is 
monitored to ensure that he is achieving his potential.
Psychological/emotional issues in child and family
The news that their child has a permanent hearing loss is usu­
ally devastating for parents, and they need time to be able to 
grieve, express their fears and ask whatever questions they like. 
The issues mentioned above and below, such as communica­
tion, education, aetiology and the likelihood of recurrence, 
almost invariably arise sooner or later with every family. Parents 
find it easier to accept their child’s hearing loss and get on with 
dealing with it and their lives in general if these issues can be 
tackled in a sensitive, well-informed and honest way as soon as 
they arise. Meeting other parents who have been in similar sit­
uations is also helpful for many families.
The psychological and emotional issues for the child vary 
greatly with age of the child and the age of onset of hearing loss. 
Inability to communicate effectively, feelings of being differ­
ent, of never being part of ‘normal life’ and fears about the 
future, can be very frustrating and cause great sadness, even to 
the point of clinical depression in children/young adults— par­
ticularly in the teenage years. Counselling, psychological and 
psychiatric services specifically for the hearing impaired, or 
even voluntary social organizations where hearing-impaired 
children/adolescents can meet each other, can be of great ben­
efit at such times.
Identify the cause of hearing loss
This area of the management of hearing loss is often neglected, 
as when the diagnosis of hearing loss is confirmed, attention 
often focuses on habilitation/rehabilitation, and aetiology is 
often presumed rather than proven. There are many reasons 
why the cause of hearing loss should always be sought. If the 
cause is not sought and identified, or at least certain causes 
excluded, parents may be given inaccurate information about 
recurrence risks or the existence of significant associated 
pathology, including vestibular pathology (see below). This 
may lead to mismanagement of the child. In addition, parents, 
especially mothers, often have their own ideas about the cause 
of the hearing loss, and quite often wrongly blame themselves, 
thinking that something they did during pregnancy has led to 
the hearing loss. If the issue of aetiology is not addressed, many 
of these parents harbour guilt feelings for many years which 
adversely affect their lives.
As the assessment of the hearing-impaired child is covered 
in Chapter 22, the details of investigation w ill not be discussed 
further here.
Identify and manage associated vestibular 
pathology
As there are close associaions, both anatomically and physio­
logically, between the auditory and vestibular systems at the 
level of the inner ear, eighth nerve and central connections, 
pathology which affects the auditory system may also give rise 
to vestibular dysfunction. Apart from academic interest, there 
are three important reasons why vestibular pathology should be
  

412 
Auditory disorders and their management
sought in any child with sensorineural hearing loss, and perhaps 
also in patients with long-term conductive losses:
L  The presence or absence of vestibular involvement may be 
one of the distinguishing features in the diagnosis of a syn­
drome associated with hearing loss. For example, in making 
the distinction between Usher’s type I and type II, the prog­
nosis being very different for the two types, vestibular func­
tion is normal in type I but abnormal in type II.
2. 
Vestibular dysfunction, in particular congenital bilateral or 
insidious-onset bilateral symmetrical dysfunction, may, 
under most circumstances, be asymptomatic. However, the 
loss of vestibular function can become life-threatening in 
certain situations; for example, while swimming under­
water, orientation relies largely on an intact vestibular 
system; when standing at the edge of a train platform, 
balance may be lost as a train flashes by and vision is thus 
compromised if the vestibular system is dysfunctional. Both 
these situations w ill be more dangerous for a child who, in 
addition to their orientation/ balance being compromised, 
also has a hearing loss and may not hear alerting sounds, 
e.g. the train approaching.
3. 
In the young child, vestibular dysfunction may present as 
delayed motor milestones. Particularly where there have 
been perinatal problems, it may be presumed that these 
problems have given rise on the one hand to hearing loss 
and on the other hand to global developmental delay, if it 
is not appreciated that vestibular pathology exists. Clearly, 
the management of a child with hearing loss and vestibular 
pathology is different to that of a child with hearing loss 
and developmental delay.
VALUE OF VESTIBULAR INVESTIGATION OF 
HEARING-IMPAIRED CHILD
Facilitates aetiological diagnosis
Defines vestibular failure and accompanying changes
Allows appropriate management of condition
The management of vestibular dysfunction is dealt with in 
detail elsewhere, but interventions such as vestibular exer­
cises— Cawthome-Cooksey, Brandt-Daroff— and appropriate 
advice as regards safety need to be considered.
Identify and manage other associated 
pathology
In more than 30% of cases of childhood sensorineural hearing 
loss, the hearing problem is part of a syndrome. The actual 
figure is probably even higher, as in many cases children have 
not been investigated. In some cases, this is widely recognized 
and the hearing loss may be sought as a result of other features, 
e.g. Down’s syndrome. However, the opposite is often the case, 
where the hearing loss is the first feature identified and no other 
abnormality is immediately obvious. Nevertheless, it behoves
the physician to thoroughly investigate the cause of the hearing 
loss and refer to other specialties as appropriate, and in so doing 
to identify pathology elsewhere—  such as in the eye (e.g. 
Usher’s syndrome), thyroid gland (e.g. Pendred syndrome), 
kidneys 
(e.g. 
branchio-oto-renal 
syndrome), 
and 
heart 
(Jervell-Lange-Nielsen syndrome).
Failure to identify this pathology w ill lead to serious mis­
management of the child— with, for example, progressive renal 
failure or potentially fatal but treatable cardiac arrhythmias 
going undetected. In additon, the prognosis and genetic advice 
given w ill clearly be very different for a child with isolated hear­
ing loss than where there is coexistent significant disease.
Investigate other family members for similar 
pathology
In all cases of childhood permanent hearing loss, first-degree 
relatives (siblings and parents), as well as any family member 
with a suspicious history, should have their hearing tested by 
whatever method is appropriate to their age. In addition, a his­
tory of associated pathology, including vestibular pathology, in 
the family members should be sought, whether or not the index 
case was found to have associated abnormalities. Two family 
members with the same condition may not necessarily have 
exactly the same manifestations or to the same degree.
W here parents have one child with a significant disability, 
almost invariably they are anxious to know what the chances are 
that a future child or grandchild w ill have the same condition 
and to what degree. Referral for genetic advice may be appropri­
ate. In addition, informing parents of the availability of neonatal 
hearing screening (see Chapter 24) for the early detection of 
congenital loss is often very reassuring for parents, especially 
where a previous child’s hearing loss has been diagnosed late.
Advice on hearing preservation measures
W hatever the cause of a child’s hearing loss, even if, despite 
investigation, this remains unknown, part of the management 
strategy should include advice about preserving whatever hear­
ing is left. Such advice should include information about the 
risks to hearing associated with leisure or occupational noise, 
and appropriate ways of protecting against such damage. In 
addition, as mentioned above, children with the abnormality of 
widened vestibular aqueduct seen on C T  scan of the inner ear 
should be advised of the risks of hearing deteriorating further in 
association with head injuries, deep sea diving, etc.
Practical help and information
W hen a child has been diagnosed as having a permanent hear­
ing impairment, as well as the medical, educational, psycholog­
ical and emotional issues, practical problems arise within that 
family. These can include: financial problems, perhaps due to a 
parent needing time off work to attend appointments, arranging 
care for other siblings, etc.; logistical problems, such as getting
  

Management of the hearing-impaired child 
413
the hearing-impaired child to a suitable school, which may be 
some distance away; finding social outlets for the child; meeting 
parents of other hearing-impaired children; getting advice 
about vocational opportunities for the older child; or just find­
ing the extra time needed to support the child with a hearing 
disability. A  social worker or a liaison worker with an interest 
in the problems surrounding hearing loss and a knowledge of 
the various allowances, organizations etc. is an invaluable 
resource for parents who often feel very isolated when they 
leave the hospital clinic and go back to their own communities.
Unilateral hearing loss
The prevelance of unilateral hearing loss among school-age 
children has been variously reported as being from 0.6 to 1.7 per 
1000 live births.12-14
It is often thought that unilateral impairment causes only 
minor, irritating problems, e.g. with localization of sound, or use 
of the telephone, but no significant disability/handicap in the 
areas of speech/communication and learning. However, this is 
still an area of controversy, with many reports, particularly since 
the 1980s,15”20 claiming that such children have language, edu­
cational and behavioural difficulties attributable to their hear­
ing loss. O n the other hand, Klee and Davis-Dansky21 and 
Hallm o et al22 found no such language or educational difficul­
ties in their studies. Ito23 also refuted the claim that unilateral 
hearing loss was a handicap to academic achievement, as he 
found a similar prevalence of unilateral hearing loss among the 
students in the very high-achieving University of Tokyo as in 
preschool and elementary schools.
The use of hearing aids for amplification of unilateral hear­
ing loss is also somewhat controversial. W here there is residual 
hearing in the affected ear, the use of a postaural aid may be 
beneficial, assuming that the pinna and ear canals are suitable, 
e.g. not atretic. Many children find the difference in the quality 
of sound between the aided and non-aided ears confusing, how­
ever, and reject the aid. However, there is an argument, as yet 
unproven, that aiding the impaired side promotes auditory 
development, particularly in the young child, where there is a 
great deal of neural plasticity. The Contralateral routing of 
sound (CRO S)-type aid, where sound is detected by a postaural 
microphone on the impaired side but routed to the good ear, is 
one option, especially where the loss is profound. However, 
nowadays few children w ill wear such an aid, their real benefit 
being in situations such as large meetings, where the listener 
has to be able to hear speakers from both sides, e.g. around a 
table. Generally, even in these circumstances, and certainly 
with children, strategies such as appropriate placement with 
respect to the speaker(s) are usually preferred.
M any or all of the management strategies discussed above, 
such as environmental modifications, educational support, and 
speech and language therapy, are appropriate to a greater or 
lesser extent in the child with a unilateral loss. The situation 
should be reassessed regularly, even if the hearing itself has not
changed, as the effect of the loss w ill be different at different 
times in the child’s life, and support which was not previously 
needed may become necessary as demands on hearing increase.
Central auditory dysfunction
The central auditory system denotes those pathways involved 
in auditory perception from the brainstem at the level of entry 
of the eighth nerve, up to and including the cerebral cortex.
Previously in this chapter, attention has been focused on 
the relatively well understood dysfunction of the peripheral 
auditory system. Functionally, the peripheral auditory system is 
comparatively simple, being involved in the detection, amplifi­
cation and conversion of sound (acoustical energy) to neural 
impulses (electrical energy). Relatively little processing of the 
speech signal occurs at the peripheral level, although the nature 
of the response of the peripheral system to sound gives some 
information about basic frequency and intensity characteristics 
of the incoming signal. However, it is the function of the cen­
tral auditory system to further analyse these complex signals at 
a more sophisticated level. The integration of different signals 
from each ear, the correct localization or temporal sequencing 
of sound, the ability to selectively attend to one signal over 
another (e.g. speech in background noise), and the attribution 
of meaning to perceived sounds, are just some of the complex 
functions of the central auditory system. This complexity of 
sound-processing function is reflected in the structure of the 
central auditory pathways, with each nerve fibre from the 
eighth nerve synapsing with several neurones in the brainstem, 
and the number of synapses further increasing between the 
brainstem and the auditory cortex.
It is only relatively recently that the nature and extent of 
disability associated with central auditory dysfunction has been 
recognized, and in the case of children, much of the impetus to 
understand and manage these conditions better has come from 
the educational rather than health fields.
T Y P IC A L  IN T E R - R E L A T E D  P R E S E N T A T IO N S  
O F C E N T R A L  A U D IT O R Y  D Y S F U N C T IO N
difficulty in hearing in background noise, although 
hearing ability when in optimal conditions may be 
totally unimpaired.
general complaints of bilateral hearing impairment 
despite normal standard audiometry 
poor school performance
distractibility/poor attention— especially in situa­
tions of background noise, e.g. school 
poor behaviour— particularly in a crowded/noisy 
environment, e.g. school 
difficulty with multistep instructions 
poor music skills
discrepancy between verbal and performance skills 
(verbal being lower) on psychological testing.
  

414 
Auditory disorders and their management
The details of the causes and assessment of central auditory 
function are beyond the remit of this chapter and are dealt with 
elsewhere (Chapter 29). Briefly, the assessment of a child sus- 
pected of having a central auditory processing disorder includes 
history (not forgetting an educational history/report), clinical 
examination, with particular emphasis on neurological exami­
nation to exclude a neurological deficit, standard audiological 
tests appropriate for the age of the child (which typically w ill 
show no abnormality), followed by specific tests of central audi­
tory function.
As there is a great deal of redundancy in both normal speech 
and the central auditory system, in order to detect the often very 
subtle processing problems, most workers in this field suggest that 
several tests of central auditory function be applied to assess 
different aspects of central processing, i.e. a test battery.
These latter include:
m 
Behavioural tests of central auditory function. These may be 
monaural (stimulus presented to one ear only during any one 
test) or binaural, where different stimuli are presented to 
both ears either simultaneously (dichotic tests) or sequen­
tially. In the monaural, the speech stimulus is modified (e.g. 
filtered or time compressed) in order to decrease the degree 
of redundancy and increase the difficulty of the task of 
understanding speech. Alternatively, the speech signal is 
presented in background noise. In binaural tests, where each 
ear only gets part of the test signal, the ability to fuse infor­
mation (binaural integration) from each ear or to selectively 
attend (binaural separation) to one ear only is assessed.
■ 
Objective tests, including electrophysiological tests (e.g. 
auditory evoked brainstem responses, middle latency res­
ponse, mismatch negativity), ipsilateral and contralateral 
stapedial reflex threshold, and suppression of otoacoustical 
emissions via the poorly understood efferent auditory system.
As ‘central auditory dysfunction’ is an umbrella term for a 
wide range of pathologies— often unknown— which affect any 
parts of the central auditory pathways, and give rise to very vari­
able symptoms and degrees of disability in different children, 
there can be no one management plan which w ill be appropri­
ate for all affected children. In addition, high-quality, long-term 
research into the outcomes of different interventions is still rel­
atively scarce. Therefore, many of the strategies used in these 
conditions remain empirical.
A  multidisciplinary approach, including audiological physi­
cian, neurologist, speech and language therapist, psychologist, 
and specialist teacher, w ill be required to address the primary 
auditory problem as well as any secondary problems— educa­
tional, behavioural, emotional, psychological— which may 
have arisen as a result of perhaps long-standing, previously 
unrecognized, central auditory processing problems.
Strategies of management include:24,25
1. 
full neurological assessment and appropriate neuroimaging 
to identify associated neurological disorders which may 
need specific intervention
2. 
alteration of the listening environment(s) in which the
child is experiencing difficulty
3. 
auditory training
4. 
compensatory non-acoustical strategies to be developed in
tandem with (2) and (3) above.
The most common situation in which children with central 
auditory dysfunction experience difficulty is in school. Apart 
from amplification, many of the general principles of manage­
ment of the hearing-impaired child discussed above apply as 
much to children with central as with peripheral auditory prob­
lems. Awareness of the nature of the problem by sympathetic 
teachers, positioning near the teacher to improve attention, 
decreasing sound reverberation by the introduction of soft fur­
nishings, (carpets, curtains, etc.), smaller group teaching, and 
use of a non-amplified FM  system to cut down background 
noise, are some of the strategies which may improve the child’s 
detection of speech.
A n  auditory training programme needs to be tailored to the 
requirements of the individual child, working on the specific skills 
where problems have been demonstrated. 
For example, diffi­
culty in extracting the signal from background noise means that 
the child is left having to guess missed words from the context. In 
such a case, improving the child’s vocabulary may mean that he at 
least is not further disadvantaged by not understanding words 
which he has heard. For others, practising localization or sequenc­
ing skills may be the key to improved understanding. Much has 
been written about the plasticity of the central nervous system, 
and the effect of learning on stimulating new ‘wiring’ patterns in 
the central nervous system, including the central auditory 
system.26-31 It is suggested that such auditory training operates 
by functionally altering the auditory pathways in this way.
There are many compensatory strategies which w ill lim it 
the disability associated with central auditory dysfunction, 
although not directly addressing the pathology. Provision of 
written notes prior to teaching, note-takers during classes, and 
presentation of new material other than verbally, e.g. pictures, 
practical demonstrations, videos or computer programs, are just 
some of the non-auditory compensatory strategies that are 
commonly found to be beneficial.
Despite the fact that the management of central auditory 
dysfunction is still in its infancy, with few data as yet on efficacy, 
often the most therapeutic aspect for the child and his family is 
the objective demonstration of the problem in the first place. 
Many of these children w ill in retrospect have been experienc­
ing problems and perhaps struggling in school years, being 
labelled as badly behaved, disruptive and/or of low intelligence. 
Being able to ascribe a diagnosis and draw up a management 
plan shifts the emphasis from a punitive, negative way of hand­
ling the problem to a positive, confidence-building approach.
Noivorganic hearing loss
Non-organic hearing loss, also called functional hearing loss, 
pseudohypacusis or psychogenic hearing loss, describes a
  

Management of the hearing-impaired child 
415
condition where a patient presents complaining of hearing loss 
but with objective evidence of normal hearing and where no 
organic pathology to account for a hearing deficit can be found. 
Its prevalence is thought to be underestimated, the condition 
often being misdiagnosed.32
In adults, this condition most commonly occurs where 
there is a compensation claim for injury pending and the hear­
ing loss is consciously faked for financial gain.33
However, the situation is very different in children, where 
such malingering for financial gain is almost never the under­
lying motivation.34
It is now generally accepted that non-organic hearing 
loss in children is a cry for help,”  
a manifestation of 
an underlying psychological, emotional or educational*7 
problem, although not invariably a serious or long-term 
problem.
Most studies have reported that non-organic hearing loss 
occurs more frequently in females than in males, in a ratio of 
2:1 or 3 :1, and it has been described from as young as 6 years 
of age, although it more typically presents between the ages of 
10 and 14 years. Children with a wide range of IQ  scores pre­
sent, but with a preponderance in the low average to low range. 
Characteristically, affected children w ill have had a past history 
of transient hearing loss, e.g. due to glue ear, at which time the 
hearing loss may have given rise to secondary gain such as an 
excuse for poor school performance, or increased attention from 
parents or teachers.
The onset of the non-organic loss may be sudden and pre­
cipitated by some stress/conflict at home, school or elsewhere 
e.g. examinations, bereavement, or family problems, or may be 
insidious in onset with no obvious precipitating factors. The 
severity of impairment ranges from mild impairment to com­
plete loss, and it has been suggested that the greater the degree 
of hearing loss, the more likely there is to be a significant under­
lying psychological/psychiatric problem.36 Premorbid personali­
ties of these children suggest a high level of anxiety and 
‘neuroticism’, sometimes with evidence of other psychosomatic 
disorders, e.g. non-organic visual problems.
Non-organic hearing loss is a diagnosis of exclusion; that is, 
true hearing loss including central auditory problems must first 
be excluded. There are many strategies which can be used dur­
ing behavioural testing which highlight the inconsistencies of 
responses and point to a non-organic cause. If there is still 
doubt, objective tests such as otoacoustic emissions and electro- 
physiological tests, including auditory brainstem evoked poten­
tials and cortical evoked potentials, w ill help clinch the 
diagnosis.
W hen the diagnosis of non-organic hearing loss has been 
confirmed, nowadays most of the literature recommends a non- 
confrontational approach— i.e. not to confront the child or
parents with the false nature of the abnormal hearing test. 
W hile this may force the child to retract the symptom of hear­
ing loss, if there is a significant underlying problem, this may be 
further exacerbated by the parents’ perception of their child’s 
bad behaviour in pretending to have a hearing loss and/or it is 
likely that the child w ill somatize his problem in a different way 
e.g. develop recurrent abdominal pains or headaches. The 
recommended course of action is to accept that there is a hear­
ing lass at present, but reassure all concerned that it is expected 
that it w ill be short-lived, w ill resolve spontaneously and w ill 
not need intervention in the form of amplification. This gives 
the child a ‘face-saving’ device, and some authors suggest that 
this is as far as management should go,32 as to intervene further 
w ill only consolidate the loss.
However, others report that failure to address underlying 
problems leads to incomplete or only temporary resolution of 
the hearing problem, or, even if the hearing loss is ‘cured’, many 
of these patients go on to have persistent pyschological, psychi­
atric, learning and communication disorders, even into 
adulthood.38
Thus, although there is not as yet universal agreement, a 
pragmatic approach to management should probably comprise 
non-confrontation, reassurance vis-a-vis the prognosis for reso­
lution of the hearing loss, and a screening assessment for under­
lying psychological, educational or communication problems. 
For those children in whom there is evidence of dysfunction in 
any of the above areas, appropriate medication, psychotherapy, 
counselling, speech and language therapy or remedial teaching 
should be instigated, while recognizing that not all children w ill 
require such input.
Finally, it is important to distinguish between non-organic 
hearing loss and spurious hearing loss. In the latter, an abnor­
mal hearing test may be found, often in a school screening sit­
uation, but where, at least prior to this finding, there is no 
complaint of hearing problems. This is most commonly due to 
the inadequate acoustical environment in which many school 
tests are conducted, or, as Coles39 pointed out, to poor attention 
on the child’s behalf during testing giving rise to minor degrees 
of abnormality on the audiogram/hearing test.
References
1. 
Gault RH. Progress in experiments on tactual interpretation of 
oral speech. J Abnorm Social Psychol 1924; 19: 294-9.
2. 
Mason JL, Frost BJ. Signal processing strategies for multichannel 
systems. In: Summers IR ed. Tactile Aids for the Hearing Impaired. 
London: Whurr, 1992: 128-45.
3. 
Thornton ARD, Philips AJ. A comparative trial of four vibrotac­
tile aids. In: Summers IR, ed. Tactile Aids for the Hearing Impaired. 
London: Whurr, 1992: 231-52.
4. 
Philips A], Thornton ARD, Worsfold S, Downie A, Milligan J. 
Experience of using vibrotactile aids with the profoundly deaf­
ened. Eur J Disord Commun 1994; 29(1): 17-26.
  

416 
Auditory disorders and their management
5. Waldstein RS, Boothroyd A. Comparison of two multichannel 
tactile devices as supplements to speechreading in a postlingually 
deafened adult. Ear Hear 1995; 16(2): 198-208.
6. Kishon-Rabin L, Haras N, Berman M. Multisensory speech per- 
ception of young children with profound hearing loss. J Speech 
Language Hear Res 1997; 40(5): 1135-50.
7. Sehgal ST, Kirk KI, Svirsky M, Ertmer DJ, Osberger MJ. Imitative 
consonant feature production by children with multichannel sen­
sory aids. Ear Hear 1998; 19(1): 72-84.
8. Suarez H, Cibils D, Caffa C, Silveira A, Basalo S, Svirsky M. 
Vibrotactile aid and brain cortical activity. A eta Otolaryngol 1997; 
117(2): 208-10.
9. Blarney P], Cowan RSC. The potential benefit and cost effectiveness 
of tactile devices in comparison to implants. In: Summers IR, ed. 
Tactile Aids for the Hearing Impaired. London: Whurr, 1992:187-217.
10. Brooks PL, Frost BJ, Mason JL, Gibson DM. Continuing evalua­
tion of the Queen’s University tactile vocoder I: identification of 
open-set words. J Rehabil Res Dev 1986; 23: 119-28.
11. Plant G. Training in the use of a tactile supplement to lipreading: 
a long-term case study. Ear Hear 1998; 19(5): 394-406.
12. Kankkunen A. Pre-school children with impaired hearing. Acta 
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1982; Suppl 391: 1-124.
13. Tarkkanen ], Aho ]. Unilateral deafness in children. A eta 
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1966; 61: 270-8.
14. Vartianinen E, Karjalainen S. Prevalence and etiology of unilat­
eral sensorineural hearing impairment in a Finnish childhood pop­
ulation. IntJ Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1998; 43: 253-9.
15. Bess FH. Children with unilateral hearing loss. J  A cad Rehabil 
A  udiol 1982; 15: 131-44.
16. Bess FH, Tharpe SM, Gibler AM. Auditory performance of children 
with unilateral sensorineural hearing loss. Ear Hear 1986; 7:20-6.
17. Culbertson JL, Gilbert LE. Children with unilateral sensorineural 
hearing loss: cognitive, academic and social development. Ear 
Hear 1986; 7: 38-42.
18. Brookhouser PE, Worthington DW, Kelly WJ. Unilateral hearing 
loss in children. Laryngoscope 1991; 101: 1264-72.
19. Dancer J, Burl NT, Waters S. Effects of unilateral hearing loss on 
teacher responses to the SIFTER. Am Ann Deaf 1995; 140(3): 
291-4.
20. English K, Church G. Unilateral hearing loss in children: an 
update for the 1990’s. Language, Speech Hear Services Schools 1999; 
30(1): 26-31.
21. Klee TM, Davis-Dansky E. A comparison of unilaterally hearing- 
impaired children and normal-hearing children on a battery of 
standardised language tests. Ear Hear 1986; 7: 27-37.
22. Hallmo P, Moller P, Lind O, Tonning FM. Unilateral sensorineural 
hearing loss in children less than 15 years of age. Scand A  udiol 
1986; 15: 131-7.
23. I to K. Can unilateral hearing loss be a handicap in learning? Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 124: 1389-90.
24. Chermak GD, Musiek FE. Managing central auditory processing 
disorders in children and youth. Am j Audiol 1992; 1(3): 61-5.
25. Musiek FE, Chermak GD. Three commonly asked questions about 
central auditory processing disorders: management. Am J Audiol 
1995; 4: 15-18.
26. Hebb DO. The Organization of Behaviour. New York: Wiley, 1949.
27. Knudsen E, Knudsen P. Vision guides the adjustment of auditory 
localisation in young bam owls. Science 1985; 230: 545-8.
28. Knudsden EJ. Early auditory experience shapes auditory localisa­
tion behavior in the spatial tuning of auditory units in the bam 
owl. In Raushecher J, and Marler P eds. Imprinting and Cortical 
Plasticity New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1987: 7-23.
29. Hall JW, Grose JH, Pillsbury HC. Predicting binaural hearing after 
stapedectomy from pre-surgery results. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 1990; 116: 946-50.
30. Hall JW, Grose JH. The effect of otitis media with effusion on the 
masking-level difference and the auditory brainstem response. J 
Speech Hear Res 1993; 36: 210-17.
31. Irvine DRF, Raj an R, Wize LZ, Heil P. Reorganisation in auditory 
cortex of adult cats with unilateral restricted cochlear lesions. Soc 
Neurosci 1991; 17: 1485.
32. Pracy JP, Bowdler DA. Pseudohypacusis in children Clin 
Otolaryngol 1996; 21: 383-4.
33. Noble W. The conceptual problem of ‘functional hearing loss’. Br 
J Audiol 1987; 21: 1-3.
34. Brockman SJ, Hoversten GH. Pseudoneural hypacusis in children. 
Laryngoscope 1960; 70: 825-39.
35. Northern JL, Downs MP Hearing in Children. Baltimore: Williams 
and Wilkins, 1974: 158-9.
36. Aplin DY, Rowson VJ. Psychological characteristics of children 
with functional hearing loss. BrJ Audiol 1990; 24: 77-87.
37. Barr B. Psychogenic deafness in school children. Int Audiol 1963; 
2: 125-8.
38. Brooks DN, Geoghegan PM. Non-organic hearing loss in young 
persons: transient episode or indicator of deep-seated difficulty. Br 
J A udiol 1992; 26: 347-50.
39. Coles RRA. Non-organic hearing loss. In: Gibb AG, Smith MFW, 
eds. International Medical Reviews Otolaryngology: I Otology. 
London: Butterworth Scientific, 1982: 150-76.
  

Cochlear implants for 
adults and children
Graeme M Clark
Introduction
Scope of chapter
Cochlear implants which use multiple-electrode speech-pro- 
cessing strategies are now an established clinical entity for 
children and adults, and, as a result, preoperative selection and 
(re)habilitation are key issues- It is now hard to realize that it 
was only in the 1960s and 1970s that many scientists and clin i­
cians said that successful cochlear implants were not possible in 
the foreseeable future. The questions that had to be addressed 
by a multi-disciplinary research effort are discussed, and the 
solutions achieved from the University of Melbourne’s perspec­
tive are presented. However, the main aim of this chapter is to 
focus on preoperative selection, and (re)habilitation, including 
the results obtained. These issues are discussed primarily with 
reference to data from the University of Melbourne’s Cochlear 
Implant C lin ic at the Royal Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital. As 
this is a book on audiological medicine, only an overview of sur­
gical principles is presented. The surgical management of the 
patient is, of course, very important, so for more details the 
reader is referred elsewhere.1-4 Cochlear implantation has also 
been the subject of quite intense ethical debate, particularly 
over its use for children. For this reason, a discussion of ethical 
issues is included. Finally, the chapter concludes with a vision 
of research in the new Millennium .
The need for cochlear implants
The cochlear implant is of benefit to many severely- 
to-profoundly deaf people. These people cannot use 
powerful or speech-processing hearing aids to adequately 
communicate with normally hearing people.
Severely-to-profoundly deaf children also have more difficulty 
in learning written language than their normally hearing 
peers. For example, research at The University of Melbourne
has 
shown 
that 
severely-to-profoundly 
hearing-impaired 
schoolchildren do not reach as high a level of basic literacy 
as their normally hearing peers. For example, an ‘average’ 
normally hearing child at grade level 8 would have a reading 
level of grade 8; that is their reading is age-appropriate. A n  
average deaf child at grade 8 would only be reading at a grade 
equivalent of 4.8, and the difference increases as the child 
gets older. A t the age of 17, when normally hearing children 
are entering the workforce or university, an average deaf child 
has a reading age equivalent to a 12-year-old (a grade equiv­
alent of 7.5). In addition, profound and total deafness pre­
vents the development of normal speech and expressive 
language. The numbers of people likely to benefit from 
cochlear implants have not been clearly established. How­
ever, in Australia, 1 in every 2000 children bom is severely 
or profoundly deaf.
Concept of the cochlear implant
The cochlear implant is an electronic device that replaces 
the inner ear when it does not function in severely-to-pro- 
foundly deaf people. It consists of a directional microphone 
which sends information to a small speech processor behind 
the ear or to a larger, more versatile, one attached to a belt 
(Figure 26.1). The speech processor extracts information of 
importance to speech understanding, produces a code for 
the signal, and transmits it by inductive coupling to the 
receiver-stimulator implanted in the mastoid bone. The 
receiver-stimulator decodes the signal and produces a pattern 
of electrical stimulus currents in an array of electrodes inserted 
around the basal turn of the cochlea.
Objections and solutions
W hen the idea of restoring hearing by electrical stimulation of 
the cochlear nerve was conceived, a number of objections were

418 
Auditory disorders and their management
Figure 26.1 The Nucleus-24 multiple-channel cochlear prosthesis: (a) 
microphone; (b) behind-the-ear speech processor (ESPrit); (c) body-worn speech 
processor (SPrint); (d) transmitter coil; (e) receiver-stimulator; (f) electrode 
array; (g) cochlea; (h) cochlear nerve. This prosthesis was developed by 
Cochlear Limited in association with the Cooperative Research Centre for 
Cochlear Implant Speech and Hearing Reasearch.
raised by scientists and clinicians. These objections were rea­
sonable in the light of the knowledge at the time. They had, 
however, to be answered before cochlear implants could be 
established as safe and effective.
First objection and solution
The first objection was: a cochlear implant would destroy the very 
nerves it was hoped to stimulate. This was overcome, first, by 
showing that the gentle insertion of electrodes, with the right 
biomechanical properties, would not lead to loss of ganglion 
cells. Second, it was found that biphasic, charge-balanced 
pulses did not cause long-term damage to the cochlea or audi­
tory nerve. It was also necessary to keep the charge density below 
approximately 32 |iC/cm2 geom. per phase. The geometric 
(geom.) area is less than the ‘real’ area where electrochemical 
charge takes place.
Second objection and solution
In developing cochlear implants, another main objection was: 
the cochlear hair cells and their nerve connections were too complex 
and numerous to be replaced by a small number of electrodes for the 
coding of sound.6 This was answered in part by research to see 
how well electrical stimulation could reproduce the coding of 
sound. Normally, the frequency of a sound is coded by the brain 
as both a timing and a place code. Furthermore, the coding of 
frequency correlates with pitch perception.
Reproduction of the temporal coding of frequency
The temporal coding of frequency is illustrated in Figure 26.2. 
On the left, it can be seen that brainstem action potentials 
occur in phase with the sound waves. The intervals between the 
action potentials can be plotted as a histogram, shown on the
Figure 26.2 (a) The brainstem action potentials in response to a 500 Hz sine 
wave, (b) The interspike interval histogram of the responses to a 500 Hz tone. 
(Reprinted with permission from Clark. J  Clin Physiol Pharmacol Res 1996; 23: 
766-76.108)
right. The intervals are multiples of the period of the sound 
wave. Up to 600 Hz, the first or predominant interval is the 
same as the period of the wave, but not at higher frequencies.
The temporal coding of frequency with electrical stimula­
tion was studied in the experimental animal by examining the 
suppression of brainstem field potentials, and by measuring 
the frequency discrimination for different rates of electrical 
stimulation. It was also studied in the human by measuring fre­
quency discrimination and pitch perception. Figure 26.3 shows 
that field potentials in the brainstem of the cat were markedly 
suppressed at 100 pulses/s, presumably due to inhibition.7
Figure 26.3 The brainstem field potentials in the cat in response to different 
rates of electrical stimulation. (From Clark. Exp Neurol 1969; 24: 124-36.)7
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
419
10.0
ra
E
trt
X>
o 
1.0
0,1
*
□ Reference rate
0 50 
100 
200
Repetition rate
500
1000
(a)
(b)
Tuning curves
Frequency (kHz)
Figure 26.5 (a) The tonotopic organization from the cochlea to the auditory 
cortex in the human, (b) The turning curves for different frequencies 
stimulating the cochlea. (Reprinted with permission from Clark. J  Clin Physiol 
Pharmacol Res 1996; 23: 766-76.'08)
Figure 26.4 The pitch ratios for variations in rate of stimulation in the first 
multiple-channel cochlear implant patient in Melbourne. (From Tong et al. 
JAcoustSoc Am 1983; 74: 73-80.19)
Behavioural studies in the experimental animal demonstrated 
that rate difference limens were more comparable to those for 
sound at 100 and 200 pulses/s than at higher rates.8,9
Furthermore, psychophysical research on temporal coding 
in the human showed that rate of electrical stimulation approx­
imate normal frequency discrimination and pitch perception up 
to about 300 pulses/s, but not up to the 3000 pulses/s needed for 
speech understanding. Figure 26.4 shows that pitch ratios for test 
and reference rates in the human increased linearly up to 300 
pulses/s and then reached a plateau.10 Furthermore, as electrical 
stimulation separates the rate of stimulation from the place of 
stimulation, it has helped establish the importance of timing 
information in the coding of sound, at least for low frequencies.
The place coding of frequency
The place coding of frequency is illustrated in Figure 26.5. 
According to the place code, the pitch of a sound depends on
the place of stimulation within the brain. This is illustrated by 
the fact that the cochlea, and the auditory pathways, are 
arranged tonotopically so that a frequency scale is preserved. 
Further evidence is that the cochlea also filters the sound, so 
that the responses from different places in the cochlea are 
sharply tuned.
Research to simulate place coding showed that electrical 
currents could be localized to discrete groups of nerve fibres 
within the cochlea.11-13 In Figure 26.6, the neural threshold of 
units in the inferior colliculus is plotted against distance along 
the basilar membrane as determined for their bipolar and 
monopolar stimulation. It can be seen that there is much less 
spread for the bipolar pulses. These results were in the acute 
animal with fluid in the scalae. It has also been shown in the 
acute animal that if the electrodes are placed close to the neu­
rones, localized stimulation may be achieved with monopolar 
stimulation.14 Furthermore, in an implanted patient, where pre­
sumably fibrous tissue or bone had surrounded the array, 
monopolar stimuli with the banded array could give localized 
stimulation comparable to that for bipolar stimuli.15 It was also 
established16 that electrical currents should not be presented 
simultaneously to electrodes, as otherwise there would be an 
interaction of electrical fields, as shown in Figure 26.7. This 
interaction produced unpredictable variations in loudness.
Place coding studies on patients showed that, with localized 
electrical stimulation, they could rank the percepts for each 
electrode on the basis of timbre, but not true pitch. In the high- 
frequency areas of the cochlea, the percept was sharper (S ), and 
on the lower-frequency side it was duller (D ). The percept at 
each electrode was compared with the percepts at each of the
Figure 26.6 Inferior colliculus unit thresholds versus distance along the cochlea 
for bipolar and monpolar electrical stimulation in the acute cat experiments. 
(Reprinted with permission from Clark et al. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1987; 38: 
1-181 (review).110)
  

420 
Auditory disorders and their management
(b)
Monopolar
Bipolar
Ground
electrode
Figure 26.7 The electrical fields for (a) bipolar and (b) monopolar electrical 
stimulation, and the interaction of the fields with simultaneous stimulation.
other electrodes to produce a ranking of timbre or place pitch. 
Figure 26.8 shows the percept for the comparison electrode 
when compared with the standard or reference electrode.The 
electrodes are numbered from low to high, according to their 
placement in the lower- or higher-frequency areas of the 
cochlea. In general, the sharp and dull percepts lie on either 
side of the diagonal, indicating that there was good ranking of 
place pitch.
Reproduction of the intensity code
Variations in the amplitude of the speech signal also convey 
essential information. Initial research on patients in Melbourne 
using electrical stimulation,17 illustrated in Figure 26.9 and con­
firming the findings of Simmons,18 showed a steep linear func­
tion between the logarithm of current amplitude, plotted in 
decibels, versus loudness. The dynamic range for electrical stim­
ulation was 5-10 dB, and is smaller than the 30-40-dB range for 
speech sounds or the more than 100-dB dynamic range for 
sound. However, the number of discriminable steps in loudness 
over the narrow dynamic range for electrical stimulation (5-10 
dB) is greater than for sound over the same range. It can be cal­
culated from the degree of overlap in the standard deviations 
and the d' values in the data shown in Figure 2 of Tong et al19 
that the just-discriminable steps in loudness for electrical stim­
ulation were 0.3 dB. Therefore, the just-discriminable steps for 
electrical stimulation over a dynamic range of 5-10 dB are 
15-30. For sound, the loudness difference limens vary with 
intensity from 0.7 dB at 40 dB to 0.3 dB at 80 dB.20 Conse­
quently, with an average difference limen of 0.5 dB, the number 
of discriminable steps for sound over the speech intensity range 
is approximately 60-80. The data thus indicated that if the 
amplitude variations of speech were also compressed into a nar­
rower dynamic range, there would be enough loudness steps for 
electrical current to convey essential information.
Third objection and solution
The third objection was that speech was too complex to be pre­
sented to the nervous system by electrical stimulation.
Figure 26.8 The ranking of timbre for different electrodes in the first 
Melbourne cochlear implant patient. (From Tong et al. J  AcoustSoc Am 1982; 
71: 153-60.10)
Figure 26.9 Loudness growth for electrical stimulation of the cochlea in our 
first patient on two representative electrodes stimulated at 200 pulses/s, 
compared to loudness growth for sound. (From Tong et al. JLaryngol Otol 1979; 
93: 679-95.17)
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
421
Electroneural bottleneck
Although the experimental animal and human psychophysical 
data showed that the coding of the frequencies and intensities 
of speech sounds could be partially reproduced with electrical 
stimulation, there was still an ‘electroneural bottleneck’ 
between the world of sound and the central auditory nervous 
system for high-fidelity sound perception. The objection was 
resolved when it was found that the selection of important 
speech information and its appropriate presentation to the ner­
vous system was required for optimal speech recognition. The 
selection of important speech information was necessary 
because of the ‘electroneural bottleneck’. Then the most impor­
tant questions became: what speech information should be 
selected, and how should the selected speech elements be trans­
mitted by a multiple-channel cochlear implant system?
Selection of speech information
The answer to the question ‘what speech information should be 
selected?’ came when it was noted that the first Melbourne 
patient reported vowel sounds rather than simple sounds when 
each electrode was stimulated, and the vowels varied according 
to the site of stimulation. This is illustrated in Figure 26.10. It 
was realized that single formant vowels were perceived when 
similar locations in normally hearing people were excited.21 In 
particular, /I/ and its longer-duration equivalent /i/ were per­
ceived for a high-frequency area of the cochlea, /A/ and /a/ at a 
mid- to low-frequency area, and /a/ and /D/ at a lower-fre- 
quency region induced by extra-cochlear current flow.
Figure 26.10 The vowels perceived when stimulating different sites within the 
cochlea in our first patient (From Tong et al. J Laryngol Otol 1979; 93: 679-95.17)
As a result of these findings, it was decided to extract a 
single formant; however, it was considered that this should be 
the second formant frequency, as acoustically it carries the
most information.22 In addition, it was important to select the 
voicing frequency so that a distinction could be made, in par­
ticular, between the voiced and unvoiced speech sounds. 
Intensity was extracted, as it also carries important speech 
information.
Transmission of information to the auditory nervous 
system
Not only was it necessary to determine the key elements to be 
selected from speech, but it was also important to determine 
how to transmit the information through the ‘electroneural 
bottleneck’ to the central auditory pathways. As the second for­
mant is high in frequency, it seemed appropriate to code it as 
place of stimulation, even though it was perceived as timbre. 
The amplitude of the second formant would be suitably coded 
as current level. On the other hand, the voicing frequency, 
which is a low frequency, was thought to be best coded as rate 
of stimulation, as the psychophysical studies had shown that 
only low rates could be discriminated.
Furthermore, speech is a complex and dynamic signal, and 
it was necessary to determine whether changes in place or rate 
of stimulation could be discriminated over durations of 25 ms, 
which are required for consonant recognition. A  psychophysi­
cal study, to study the perception of time-varying place infor­
mation, showed that the ability to discriminate a shift in the 
site of electrode stimulation was the same for durations of 25, 
50 and 100 ms (Figure 26.11).10 The first part of the test stimu­
lus produced a shift in electrode stimulated from either elec­
trode 4, 3, or 2 to electrode 1 over durations of 25, 50 and 100 
ms. It then remained steady on electrode 1 for 100 ms. The
Figure 26.11 (a) Discrimination of changes in place of stimulation versus 
stimulus duration, (b) Discrimination of changes in rate of stimulation versus 
stimulus duration. (From Tong et al. J  Acoust Soc Am 1982; 71: 153-60.10)
  

422 
Auditory disorders and their management
standard comparison stimulus remained steady on electrode 1. 
As can be seen, the percentage judgements called different 
reached 100%, whether the initial electrode was close (no. 2) 
or further away (no. 4) from the standard electrode (no. 1). 
There was also no difference in the discrimination ability, 
whether the duration was 25 ms as required for consonant 
recognition, or longer, at 100 ms.
These research findings were thus in support of a speech- 
processing strategy which used place of stimulation to code the 
rapid changes in formant frequencies of importance to speech. 
They also suggested that change in place of stimulation was a 
key coding mechanism for frequency-modulated signals.
A  similar study to the above was undertaken using rate of 
stimulation. In Figure 26.11 the initial pulse rate at the begin­
ning of a frequency ramp was plotted against percentage judge­
ments called different. Note that for a duration of 25 ms, which 
is required for consonant identification, the performance was 
poor, but for the longer durations of 50 and 100 ms for vowels, 
the results were good.
Speech consists not only of segmental information repre­
sented by consonants, but suprasegmental or prosodic informa­
tion conveyed by slow changes in the voicing frequency over 
time. The voicing frequency ranges on average from 120 Hz for 
men, to 225 Hz for women. It was essential to transmit this 
information as well as segmental information. Rate of stimula­
tion was thus shown to be appropriate to code voicing.
The next question to be answered was, could rate not only 
be discriminated, but perceived as voicing or questions and 
statements? Furthermore, as place of stimulation would vary 
with the presentation of segmental speech frequencies, it was 
also desirable to see if rate changes would convey prosody not 
only on a particular electrode but also across electrodes. 
Selected data from one of these studies are illustrated in Figure 
26.12.19 The trajectories for rate are numbered from 1 to 6. The 
stimuli were categorized as questions if the subject thought that 
the trajectory was rising in pitch, or as a statement if it was 
falling. The results for a single electrode show a high success 
rate. This is also shown when the change in rate is shifted across 
electrode sites.
The results presented above thus supported the rationale of 
using rate of stimulation to convey voicing information with a 
cochlear implant speech-processing strategy. They also demon­
strated that pitch from rate of stimulation is integrated into the 
one speech percept across different sites within the brain.
O n the basis of the above psychophysical data and ratio­
nale, the inaugural speech-processing strategy extracted the 
second formant frequency, and stimulated an electrode on a fre­
quency place coding basis. The current level was made propor­
tional to the intensity of the formant frequency. The 
fundamental frequency or voicing was coded as rate of stimula­
tion across electrodes. This strategy enabled patients to under­
stand running speech when combined with lipreading, and 
some speech using electrical stimulation alone, as illustrated in 
Figure 26.13. It can also be seen, e.g. with electrical stimulation 
alone, that the scores improved over time.
(a)
Electrodes
(b)
4-8
8—4
9
_ l__ I__ I__ I__!_
Rate trajectory
Trajectory
1 2 3 4 5 6  
1 2 3 4 5 6  
Rate trajectory
160 
£ 140 
120 
£ 100 
80
X
13001 
1 ms I'
Electrode shift
300 k  
ms I
Figure 26.12 Percentage questions and statements for rising and falling pulse 
rates (a) on single electrodes and (b) across electrodes. (From Tong et al. J  Acoust 
Soc Am 1983; 74: 73-80.19)
After establishing the concept of selecting maximal speech 
information and using the right coding strategy for the trans­
mission of the second formant and voicing frequency through 
the ‘electroneural bottleneck’, further research was undertaken 
to expand the concept. This required examining whether 
improved speech recognition could be obtained by selecting the 
first and/or the third formants, as well as the second formant, 
and transmitting these on a place coding basis through the ‘bot­
tleneck’. For this reason, a psychophysical study was first under­
taken to see if stimulating two sites within the cochlea for two 
formants would produce a percept with perceptual space that 
resulted from the two sites of stimulation. This in fact occurred, 
as shown in Figure 26.14, where it can be seen that, with multi­
dimensional scaling, the result is best satisfied with two 
dimensions.23 This result provided the psychophysical basis for 
more advanced speech-processing strategies which presented 
additional formant and other spectral information on a place 
coding basis.
Research then focused on which further speech elements to 
extract. It was first found that picking the energy in the first (F x) 
as well as second formant (F 2) peaks, and presenting these on a 
place coding basis, gave improved results (F0/FJF2 strategy). It 
was then discovered that selecting energy in the high-frequency 
bands in the third formant region as well as the first and second 
formant gave even better results (‘Multipeak’ strategy). Most 
recently, it has been found that selecting 6-8 frequency bands 
with the greatest energy from a 16-20 bandpass filter bank, and 
presenting the information as a place code, results in a further
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
423
(a)
□ Lipreading and hearing
□ Lipreading alone
100
— 
80
60
40
20
n-40
Pre-op,
Post-op. 
3 months
(b)
100
•s- 
80 
oJU
!  
60
Q
CJ
40
20
Hearing alone
n~ 23
Pre-op.
1
Post-op. 
3 months
Post-op. 
12 months
Figure 26.13 (a) The improvements in 
open-set Central Institute for the Deaf (CID) 
sentence scores 3 months postoperatively for 
the inaugural second formant/voicing speech 
processor for lipreading combined with 
electrical stimulation compared to lipreading 
alone, (b) The open-set CID sentence scores 
for electrical stimulation alone at 3 and 12 
months postoperatively.
Apical electrode
Two Dimensions
1
2
 
4 
6
8
A 
B 
C 
D
A 
B
<u
-a
c 0
i  
e
E 
F 
G 
Stress = 8*4%
E
F 
a
-  
4
H 
I
ro
i/i
H 
i
“  
2
J
j
Minkowski coefficient = 0.5
Figure 26.14 Multidimensional scaling of the percept from dual electrode 
stimulation. (Reprinted with permission from Science 1983; 219: 993-4. © 1983 
American Association for the Advancement of Science.23)
improvement in speech recognition (S P E A K  strategy). In this 
case, rate of stimulation is not used to convey voicing, but a 
constant rate of stimulation is produced, and voicing is con­
veyed through the amplitude variations in the signal. A  con­
stant rate of stimulation is used to avoid the interactions that 
take place in the electrical fields when neighbouring electrodes 
are excited. The improved results obtained by progressively 
increasing the amount of information presented on a place cod­
ing basis, as well as the way in which the information is 
extracted from speech, are shown in Figure 26.15.
Fourth objection and solution
The fourth objection was that there would not be enough residual 
hearing nerves in the cochlea after die-back due to deafness for speech 
understanding. This was partly answered in studies on experi­
mental animals in which it was found that varying populations 
of spiral ganglion cells had no significant effect on discrimina­
tion of the rate of stimulation.24 However, ultimately the ques-
□ CNC Word Score
□ CID Sentences - Keywords Correct
n = 45
n = 22
n = 16
Strategy: 
F0/F2
Processor: 
WSPII 
Year: 
1982
F0/F1/F2 
Multipeak 
SPEAK 
WSP III 
MSP 
SPECTRA 22
1986 
1989 
1991
Figure 26.15 The average open-set word and sentence results for four speech- 
processing strategies which select progressively increasing spectral information 
for coding on a place basis. CNC, consonant-nucleus-consonant. (From Clark.
Cochl Implants Int 2000; 1: 1-17.113)
tion of nerve survival and speech understanding had to be 
resolved in patients. For this reason, speech recognition results 
have been compared for different aetiologies as they are 
thought to affect the auditory nerve and ganglion cell numbers.
Figure 26.16 shows the ranking of speech recognition ver­
sus aetiology for 808 subjects,25 and the ranking of ganglion cell 
count versus aetiology for 66 subjects, based on the results of 
Nadol et al.26 The ranking of speech recognition does not cor­
respond with the ranking for ganglion cell counts, and this sug­
gests that there is no significant relationship between spiral 
ganglion cell numbers and speech recognition for the present 
multiple-electrode system.
Fifth objection and solution
The fifth objection was: children born deaf or deafened early in 
life would not develop the right neural connections for speech
  

424 
Auditory disorders and their management
(a)
(b)
Aetiology
Meniere's Disease
r
l----0----1
r 
1—
*1 ■— i
Viral Labyrinthitis
l— — ■----1
- 
1--- IB--- 1
Otosclerosis
j-—o— 1
h----» ---- 1
Unknown
H H
-
Trauma
1-- E -- 1
- 1-------- ■-- -------1
Congenital/Genetic
h— a ---1
i---- a—
-i
Congenital Syphilis
i------a ----- 1
- 1----■----1
Ototoxicity
h---Q——i
-
i—
m—
i
Bact. Labyrinthitis
1--0--1
1—B—1
Sudden Idiopathic
1 
1
n=808 
i 
i 
i
1 
1
n-66
i
i
 
i 
i 
i
30 
-20 
-10 
() 
10 
20 
30
3 
5 
10
15 
20 
25 
30 
35
Speech Perception Rank (%)
Ganglion cell count (x10J)
understanding. This objection could not be answered until chil­
dren who were bom deaf or deafened early in life were 
implanted. In Melbourne, the first three children were 
implanted in 1985 and 1986 after establishing the benefits of 
the cochlear implant for adults. This was the start of an inter­
national trial for the U S  Food &  Drug Administration (FD A ).
The trial showed that 60% of children born deaf were able 
to understand some open-set speech, and the majority of the 
others had significant help in lipreading. Figure 26.17 shows the 
pre- and post- operative speech perception levels in children 
who were prelinguistically or postlinguistically deaf.27 In both 
groups, closed-set and open-set speech perception was signifi­
cantly better after the operation. The open-set score, however, 
was better for the postlinguistic group. Nevertheless, the results 
suggest that children born deaf (i.e. without exposure to sound) 
have or can develop the right neural connections for processing 
speech sounds presented through electrical stimulation.
The FD A  approved the device as safe and effective for chil­
dren 2 years of age and above in 1990. Furthermore, a subse­
quent analysis of our data on children has shown (Figure 26.18) 
that, although there is considerable variability in results, the 
younger the child, the better the speech perception, and, if 
extrapolated back, speech perception may be better if the child 
is younger than 2 years of age. These results indicate that age is a 
factor in children born deaf being able to develop the right 
neural connections for speech recognition.
Figure 26.16 (a) Comparison 
between speech recognition 
scores and aetiology.25 (b) 
Comparison between aetiology 
and ganglion cell numbers. 
(Reprinted with permission 
from Blarney et al. AudioI 
Neurootot 1996; 1: 296-30625 
and Nadol et al. Ann Otol 
Rhino! Laryngol 1989; 98: 
411-16.26)
To determine why speech recognition is better for younger 
children, the development of frequency discrimination and 
pitch perception with age, and their relationship to speech 
recognition, have been studied. Children’s ability to discrimi­
nate electrode place of stimulation, in particular, has been 
investigated because of the importance of place coding in speech 
understanding. As shown in Figure 26.19, the younger the child, 
the better the discrimination of electrode place of stimulation. 
This suggests that there is a critical period of time over which the 
neural connectivity for place discrimination can occur.28
To help confirm the relationship between electrode place 
discrimination and speech perception, a comparison was made 
using a closed-set speech test. The findings in Figure 26.20 show 
that the smaller the separation between electrodes that could 
be detected, the better the speech perception. This supports the 
view that if the neural connections required for place coding 
are created during the critical period, then speech perception 
w ill be enhanced.28
On the other hand, when the ability of children to rank 
pitch tonotopically (i.e. whether it is higher or lower in pitch) 
rather than simply discriminate electrode place was compared 
with their speech perception scores, it can be seen, as shown in 
Figure 26.21, that not all children who could rank pitch had 
good speech recognition. For three-quarters of the 16 children 
in the study, a tonotopic ordering of pitch percepts was found. 
However, only 58% of these children with good ability to rank
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
425
(a)
80
5 
60 
2 
IE0
*5 
40
1  
20
(b)
80
60
40
20
Prelinguistic subjects
n = 91
l
H
Pre-operative 
Post-operative
Postlinguistic subjects
n = 51
Pre-operative 
Post-operative
□ Detection 
□ Pattern 
□ Closed-set 
□ Open-set
Figure 26.17 Pre- and postoperative highest communication categories 
achieved for children from 2 to 18 years of age using the Nucleus F0/F2 and 
Fo/Fj/Fj speech processors 3 months postoperatively. The categories were sound 
detection, pattern recognition, closed-set word recognition, and open-set word 
recognition. The children were divided into (a) prelinguistic (deaf before speech 
developed) and (b) postlinguistic (deaf after speech developed) groups. The data 
were presented to the US FDA, and approval was given in 1990 for the use of 
the multiple-channel implant in children. The data for the construction of the 
graphs are from Staller et al. Am J  Otol 1991; 12: 126-36.27
o
Age at implantation (years)
Figure 26.19 The discrimination of place of stimulation versus age at 
implantation in children. (Reproduced with permission from Clark. In: Perpetual 
Learning. Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2002.90)
Age at implantation (years)
Figure 26.18 BKB open-set sentence scores for electrical stimulation alone 
versus age at implantation.
Figure 26.20 Monosyllable word scores versus electrode place discrimination 
recorded as difference limens. (Reproduced with permission from Clark. In: 
Perpetual Learning. Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2002.90)
pitch had satisfactory speech perception of 30% or more. 
Because the ability to rank pitch was not always associated with 
good speech perception, this suggests that a factor other than 
the neural connectivity associated with place discrimination is 
required for speech recognition.28 Other studies have shown 
that this other factor is most probably language.29
Finally, as the data from the study on speech recognition 
versus age showed that extrapolation of results back to earlier 
than 2 years of age could lead to better results, operations on 
very young children were planned. However, before carrying 
out the operations, it was necessary to undertake and complete 
a series of biological studies to ensure that operating on a child 
of this age was safe. Young children have special problems. 
These are: first, the effects of head growth on the lead wire
  

426 
Auditory disorders and their management
Figure 26.21 Open-set BKB sentence scores for children where tonotopic 
pitch-ordering ability is either absent or present. (Reproduced with permission 
from Clark. In: Perpetual Learning. Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2002.90)
assembly; second, any inner ear complications from otitis 
media leading to an extension of the infection around the 
electrode entry point; and third, the effects of electrical stim­
ulation on the developing nervous system. This research was 
part of a special 5-year contract to the U S National Institutes 
of Health14 (Studies on Pediatric Auditory Prosthesis Implants, 
Contract NO-NS-7-2342/1987-1992). This research showed 
no cause for concern with regard to operations on young 
children.
Preoperative selection
The selection of a person for a cochlear implant requires a num­
ber of interviews, special tests, and counselling. This process 
must be undertaken by a number of professionals, and progress 
should be reviewed at appropriate stages by a clinical team 
headed by an audiological physician or otolaryngologist.
Medical
A t the first consultation, a preliminary medical history should 
be taken, and an otological examination performed. The details 
of the hearing loss should be clarified, particularly its time and 
speed of onset, precipitating factors, severity, previous treat­
ment, disability caused, and associated symptoms such as ear 
discharge, tinnitus, and disequilibrium. Any general medical 
and surgical issues that are relevant to the aetiology of the con­
dition and its management need to be explored and corrected.
As otitis media and middle ear effusion are common in 
young children, they are frequently seen in many in this age 
group when being assessed for cochlear implantation. Previous 
animal experimental studies have shown that implantation 
with overt or incipient infection in the middle ear at the time 
of surgery is likely to produce suppurative labyrinthitis with 
marked loss of spiral ganglion cells. ’ 
Therefore, preoperative 
selection and management should ensure that there is no active 
ear disease at the time of surgery. The otitis media should have
completely resolved. On the other hand, middle ear effusions 
are usually sterile, and implantation can proceed more readily 
once the condition has been controlled with grommets and, 
when necessary, adenoidectomy.
The medical consultation w ill provide an opportunity to 
assess the expectations of the person, or the parents in the case 
of a young child. It is also desirable to discuss the communica­
tion options available for children, and find out whether the 
parents have adequately explored these.
Hearing, speech and language
In selecting children and adults for surgery, it is important to 
ensure that their hearing status is such that they would do bet­
ter with an implant rather than a hearing aid.
Hearing status in adults
In the case of adults, it is necessary to carry out not only pure 
tone audiometry in unaided and aided conditions, but also 
extensive speech testing. As shown by the work of Flynn et al,32 
there is not always good agreement between audiometric 
thresholds and speech recognition results. Ultim ately, the 
speech recognition scores are the most critical in determining 
suitability for an implant with an adult. As the mean C ID  sen­
tence scores for electrical stimulation alone for the SP EA K  
strategy are now 80%, the University of Melbourne Cochlear 
Implant C linic patients are considered for surgery when the 
hearing in the better ear is poorer than 40-50%. On particular 
occasions, patients may be considered with higher scores. The 
ability to communicate in noisy surroundings and the need for 
this skill is becoming an important issue in patient selection.
Hearing status in infants and young children
The hearing status in infants and young children needs to be 
accurately determined by both behavioural and objective tests. 
The tests should also elucidate the status of the central auditory 
pathways, and their ability to process information. There is still 
a long way to go to achieve this second goal.
Hearing loss in young children from 6 to 18 months of age, 
when this is considered as developmental age, can be assessed 
using visual reinforcement audiometry (or V R A ). W ith  nor­
mally hearing children, the test yields thresholds within lO dB 
of thresholds obtained later with standard audiometry. A  review 
of the literature shows that there are no satisfactory studies 
indicating how well it correlates for deaf children or the false- 
positive rates. Research is needed to clarify these questions, and 
the situation only serves to emphasize the need to use behav­
ioural tests in conjunction with objective tests. Similarly, with 
play audiometry, which is applicable from 18 months and 
above, there are no comparisons of thresholds for deaf children 
with later results for standard audiometry.
A n  accurate objective threshold in infants and young chil­
dren over the speech frequency range can be obtained using 
tone-burst evoked auditory brainstem responses (A B R s) with a 
‘notched-noise’ masker. Stapells et al33 showed that there was
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
427
excellent correspondence between A B R  with a ‘notched-noise’ 
masker and behavioural thresholds for the 500-Hz to 4-kHz 
range. However, the recording of steady-state evoked potentials 
(referred to as SSEPs)34 is preferred for the objective assessment 
of children, as it is just as accurate as the A B R  with ‘notched- 
noise’ for the severe-to-profound hearing losses, and has an 
automatic detection algorithm for judging when an A B R  is pre­
sent or absent.35 W ith SSEPs, the auditory evoked potentials 
are recorded from the scalp in response to amplitude-modulated 
sound frequencies. A  Fourier analysis of the evoked potentials 
is carried out to determine the amplitude and phase spectra of 
the waveform. The relationship between SSEPs and behav­
ioural thresholds is shown in Figure 26.22.36 Notice the partic­
ularly good correlation for the severe-to-profound losses.
Cochlear microphonics and summating potentials should 
also be recorded from children who are prospective cochlear 
implant recipients. Recent studies have shown that a small pro­
portion of children with absent or elevated A B R  or SSEP 
thresholds may have cochlear microphonics present. Some of 
these children may have normal hearing. On the other hand, 
those with a profound loss may do poorly with a cochlear 
implant. The cochlear microphonic can be recorded using 
click-evoked A BR s to rarefaction and condensation clicks, and 
a typical result is shown in Figure 26.23.
In Melbourne, 5199 children were screened with click 
ABRs, and 109 were found with raised thresholds. Thirty-seven 
had no ABRs. O f the 37 with no ABRs, there were 25 who also 
had no cochlear microphonics and they were severely-to-pro- 
foundly deaf. On the other hand, 12 had cochlear microphon­
ics and hearing which ranged from normal to total loss. Those 
children with a severe loss were thought to have a neuropathy, 
and possibly should not be implanted. In this series, the major­
ity had anoxia or kernicterus at birth.37
The recording of cochlear microphonics and slower poten­
tials can also be done using transtympanic electrodes, and they 
may also play an important role in the preoperative assessment 
of children for a cochlear implant. It has been found that a 
small proportion of children with a severe-to-profound hearing 
loss have an abnormal positive potential, referred to as an 
A P P 38. The origin of this potential is not clear. It may reflect a 
retrocochlear as well as cochlear pathology. If a cochlear 
implant operation is carried out on children with abnormal 
potential, a proportion could have poor auditory perception 
postoperatively. These children would have little neural activ­
ity when electrically evoked potentials were recorded with their 
implants. The recording of otoacoustic emissions (O A Es) is not 
central to the assessment of hearing thresholds in the child, as 
it only correlates with thresholds up to 45 dB H L. However, as 
it is a measure of outer hair cell integrity, it should be used to 
study children where a neuropathy is suspected.
Figure 26.22 The relationship between steady-state evoked potentials (SSEPs) 
and behavioural thresholds for the frequencies (a) 500, (b) 2000 and (c) 4000 Hz. 
(From Ranee et al. Ear Hear 1995; 16: 499-507.36)
Figure 26.23 Click-evoked ABRs and cochlear microphonics (CM). (From Ranee 
et al. Ear Hear 1995; 16: 499-507.36)
  

428 
Auditory disorders and their management
The relationship of the pure tone audiogram to 
expected speech perception with an implant
Hearing thresholds are very important in selecting infants and 
young children for implantation. The thresholds are required to 
determine whether the child has sufficient hearing to do better 
with a hearing aid rather than an implant. Hearing thresholds 
are important, as speech tests are not effective, due to their lim- 
ited language. Multiple-channel implants can provide spectral 
information in the mid- to high-frequency range when this is 
not possible through amplification of sound with an aid. For this 
reason, pay particular attention to the thresholds for the fre­
quencies above 1 kHz. As shown in Figure 26.24, if the unaided 
thresholds are greater than 90 dB for the frequencies 1.5, 2.0,
3.0 and 4.0kHz, the child is a likely candidate. Furthermore, 
the aided thresholds for the above hearing losses when using a 
powerful hearing aid w ill just enter the speech spectrum for 70- 
dB speech presented at a distance of 1 m, as shown in Figure 
26.25. Consequently, a child with an aided threshold at 2 kHz 
greater than 60 dB SP L is a likely recipient.
Family support and education
In addition to the medical as well as hearing, speech and lan­
guage assessments, it is important to determine the level of fam­
ily support and educational management of children. Family 
support is required for both adults and children. W ith  adults, 
the family is needed, in particular, to help in the social adjust­
ments required in adopting new modes of communication, such 
as answering the telephone. W ith  children, parents play a cru­
cial role in their child’s education, especially at the preschool 
stage. The parents w ill need to understand how best to com­
municate with their child, be knowledgeable about the 
cochlear implant, and support their child socially and emotion­
ally. If the child is at school level, the teacher’s appraisal is 
essential. Before embarking on an implant, it it important to be
Figure 26.24 Unaided audiogram as a selection criterion for cochlear 
implantation. When thresholds are greater than the demarcated level, 
implantation can be considered.
Figure 26.25 Aided audiogram showing the usual minimum threshold level 
required for selection for implantation
sure that there w ill be optimal support for an auditory/oral edu­
cation to achieve best results with the implant.
Predictive factors
The factors that predict successful outcomes are important in 
helping to select patients for surgery. People, and in the case of 
children their parents, wish to know how well they are likely to 
perform after surgery. A  better knowledge of the preoperative 
factors predicting outcomes w ill help answer their questions. 
Two studies on adults have shown that approximately 20% and 
40% of the variance in the results can be accounted for by the 
predictive factors,39’40 and one study on children has shown that 
50% of the variance can be accounted for this way.41 Thus, it is 
still not possible to confidently tell a prospective patient or par­
ent how well they or their child w ill perform, but in assessing 
the suitability of each person, the preoperative predictive fac­
tors are still quite important.
Preoperative predictive factors for adults and children
The preoperative predictive factors that are common to both 
the adult and child are: (1) aetiology; (2) age at implantation 
and duration of deafness; (3) progressive hearing loss; (4) 
length of insertion of the electrode array; (5) electrical stimu­
lation of the promontory results; and (6) speech processing 
strategy.
W ith  aetiology, Meniere’s disease correlates positively and 
meningitis negatively with results in the adult. In children, 
meningitis also correlates negatively with results. This may be 
due to a reduced number of electrodes which can be inserted 
because of labyrinthitis ossificans.25
Age at implantation and duration of deafness are both 
inter-related. In the adult, however, they can both be separated 
and both correlate negatively with results. W ith  age, however, 
results are only poorer if the patient is over 60 years of age. In
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
429
children, age at implantation and duration of deafness cannot 
be separated, as most children are congenitally deaf. Age at 
implantation probably has its effects because perceptual learn­
ing is more difficult the older the child or adult. O n the other 
hand, with duration of deafness, it may have its effect because 
the longer the duration of the hearing loss, the greater the loss 
of the neurones and their connections.
The effect of a progressive hearing loss has not been deter­
mined, but it appears to correlate with good results in the clinic 
patients in Melbourne. This is probably due to the time 
required to learn how to process a degraded signal.
A  positive relationship has been seen between the length 
of insertion or the number of electrodes in use and speech per­
ception. Two studies have been carried out on adults and one 
on children,39^ 1 and have shown that there is increasing bene­
fit in having additional electrodes from 9 up to 21 (9 being the 
minimum number inserted in the patients in the study). These 
results highlight the importance of multiple-electrode stimula­
tion, which is needed for the spectral information in speech.
There has been a positive correlation between preoperative 
tests of temporal processing via promontory stimulation of the 
auditory nerve and speech perception results. Discriminating 
gaps smaller than 50 ms for low rates of stimulation, and pitch 
changes for rates of 100 and 200 pulses/s, suggest a good result. 
The ability to detect changes in rate of stimulation and gaps 
between stimuli appears to be a more central function, and is 
important for segmenting speech and processing the slow fre­
quency changes occuring in voicing.
The speech-processing strategy affects results in both chil­
dren and adults. Improvements have primarily been seen by 
presenting additional frequency information on a place coding 
basis.42
Preoperative predictive factors relevant to children
There are additional preoperative predictive factors that are 
especially relevant to children. These factors are: (1) prelinguis­
tic versus postlinguistic hearing loss; (2) language development; 
(3) communication strategy and mode of education; and (4) 
delayed cognitive and motor milestones.
The effects of prelingual (bom deaf or lost hearing before 
learning language) versus postlingual hearing loss (lost hearing 
after learning language) on results were assessed for the F 0/F2 
and F q/Fj^  speech-processing strategies. This was done by 
analysing data from the international trial for the U S  FD A  to 
determine whether the multiple-electrode cochlear implant 
would benefit both prelinguistic and postlinguistically deaf 
children. As discussed above, the trial showed that 60% of the 
children were able to understand some open-set speech, and the 
majority of the others had significant help in lipreading. The 
results were broken down into the pre- and postoperative high­
est speech perception categories achieved in children who were 
prelinguistically or postlinguistically deaf, and are shown in Fig­
ure 26.17.27 In both groups, closed-set and open-set speech 
recognition was markedly better after operation. The open-set 
score, however, was better for the postlinguistic group.
In studying the relation between speech recognition and 
language, results have been analysed for 57 children with a 
bilateral severe or profound hearing loss.29 O f these children, 33 
were hearing aid users and 24 implant users. They attended 
deaf/oral schools or preschools, and the data are from a 4^year 
longitudinal study. The speech recognition results were compa­
rable for the aided and implanted children. For the hearing aid 
children, the mean loss was 81 dB (averaged over 0.5, 1.0 and
2.0 kHz). For the implanted children, the mean preoperative 
loss in the better ear was greater than 100 dB H L. This indicates 
that the implanted children with thresholds of lO O dBH L were 
performing at a comparable level to children who had thresh­
olds of 81 d B H L, and used a powerful hearing aid. As an 81 dB 
H L threshold at the frequencies of 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 kHz equates 
with a hearing loss at 2.0kHz of 90d BH L, these data help con­
firm one of the University of Melbourne’s criteria for selection 
of children. This criterion is that they are suitable for implan­
tation if their thresholds are greater than 90 dB H L for frequen­
cies above 1.0 kHz.
The receptive language for the aided and implanted group 
of children was also compared with their speech perception 
scores. The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (P P V T )43 and 
Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals (C E L F )44 tests 
were used. The PP V T  is for children from 2 years and above, 
and the C ELF is designed for children over 6 years. The recep­
tive language results were slightly better for the aided children, 
but this was probably due to the fact they were older on average. 
W hen speech recognition (Figure 26.26) and receptive language 
(Figure 26.27) scores were both plotted against chronological 
age, there was a gradual increase in performance, but the increase 
did not keep up with that seen with normally hearing children.29
On the other hand, when speech recognition (word and 
sentence scores) was compared with receptive language (P P V T  
or C ELF equivalent ages), there was a very close relationship 
between the two. For example, the auditory/visual word score
Chronological age (years)
Figure 26.26 Speech recognition results in linear regression for hearing-aided 
and implanted children using the BKB sentences with audition and lipreading 
versus chronological age.
  

430 
Auditory disorders and their management
Chronological age (years)
Figure 26.27 Receptive language results and linear regression for hearing- 
aided and implanted children using the PPVT as age-appropriate test versus 
chronological age. (From Blarney et al. Ann Otol Rhino! Laryngol 1992; 107:
342—8.39)
reached 100% at a P P V T  or C ELF age of 8-10 years (Figure 
26.28). However, for audition alone, the slope was less steep, 
and a 100% score was reached later at 10-11 years. These 
results demonstrate the important relationship between speech 
recognition and language.
The communication strategy adopted before surgery influ­
ences results, and children do better if they have had an audi­
tory-oral education.41 The mode of education after surgery is 
important, and an auditory-oral education is required for best 
results. However, it has been said that the results for mode of 
education are subject to selection; that is, children who have 
poor speech perception may require total communication, or 
children who have the potential to do better are being selected 
for the auditory-oral programme. It is relevant, however, that 
the data from Melbourne, although there is a wide spread of
Figure 26.28 Auditory/visual speech recognition (BKB sentences) versus 
receptive language (PPVT). (From Blarney et al. Ann Otol Rhino! Laryngol 1992; 
107: 342—8.39)
performance for both groups, show that children with open-set 
scores of 50% or more are only seen in the auditory-oral group.
To see if delayed motor and cognitive milestones affect the 
cochlear implant results, the perfomances for children with and 
without these disabilities have been compared. As some aeti­
ologies (rubella, cytomegalovirus, meningitis, anoxia, prematu­
rity, kemicterus, and certain syndromes) are likely to affect the 
central nervous system and so cause delayed motor and cogni­
tive milestones, the study also compared performance across 
these aetiologies.45 The results showed that the occurrence of 
motor and cognitive delays was fairly evenly spread across aeti­
ologies, with the exception of cytomegalovirus, which had a 
higher than average prevalence in the delayed group. However, 
aetiology did not have a significant effect on speech recogni­
tion. On the other hand, children with delayed cognitive and 
motor milestones did significantly worse on both an analysis of 
variance and general linear model, as they had poorer speech 
recognition.
The percentages of normal and delayed children reaching 
five different speech recognition categories over time are shown 
in Figure 26.29. The categories are maximum performance lev­
els of: 1— sound identification; 2— syllabic pattern recognition; 
3— vowel identification; 4— consonant identification; and 5—  
varying degrees of open-set recognition. The data show that it 
takes much longer for children with developmental delays to 
reach targets, and this applies in particular for open-set recog­
nition. Although the benefits are not as good in children with 
developmental delays, they may receive a greater relative ben­
efit because of their handicap. A  child has to have a very severe 
disability and not be able to follow instructions before the 
Melbourne clinic w ill advise against surgery. If the child’s habil- 
itation is slow, the staff of the clinic sometimes recommend that 
they have complementary signing help.
Technological features of selected 
multiple-ehannel cochlear implant 
systems
The findings discussed in this chapter apply to multiple-chan- 
nel implants in general. However, the performance of an 
implant system not only depends on the underlying concept, 
but is inextricably linked to the engineering of the device. For 
this reason, it is important to understand how the variations in 
the technological features for the most commonly used products 
impact on present and future results. The technological details 
referred to are for the Cochlear Limited (Nucleus-24), Med-El 
(Combi-40), and Advanced Bionics (Clarion-S) devices (Table 
26.1). The details are those available from the manufacturer’s 
manuals, websites, patents and scientific papers. However, the 
rationale for the features is not in every case substantiated. The 
features to be discussed in particular are for the devices in regu­
lar clinical use in early 1999.
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
431
(a)
Non-detayed children
(b)
Time post-operatively (months) 
Delayed children
Time post-operatively (months)
Figure 26.29 Speech recognition categories for children with (a) normal and 
(b) delayed motor and cognitive milestones. The categories are maximum 
performance levels of: 1-sound identification; 2—syllabic pattern recognition; 
3-vowel identification; 4-consonant identification; and 5—varying degrees of 
open-set recognition. (Reprinted with permission from Pyman et al. Am J  Otol 
2000;21:57-61.45)
Standard speech-processing strategy 
SPEAK
The S P E A K  (Spectral Maxima Sound Processor) strategy 
used by the Nucleus system selects the 6-8 spectral maxima 
from the outputs of 16-20 bandpass filters, and presents the 
voltage outputs non-simultaneously on a place coding basis. 
A  constant rate of stimulation is used to reduce channel 
interactions (250 Hz, and voicing is conveyed by variations in 
the amplitude of the signal. Variations of this strategy have 
been tested in pilot studies at the Cooperative Research Cen­
tre for Cochlear Implant Speech and Hearing Research in 
Melbourne. These include order of presentation of the stim­
uli, and the use of fundamental frequency or random rate 
instead of a constant rate. The present device allows for these 
and other variations to be used.
SAS
The SA S (Simultaneous Analogue Stim ulation) strategy used 
by Clarion is a derivative of the strategy developed by both the 
Salt Lake C ity46,47 group and implemented as the Symbion or 
InnerAid device, and the University of San Francisco group,48 
and implemented as the Storz or M iniM ed device. The 
InnerAid device presented the outputs of four fixed filters to the 
auditory nerve by simultaneous monopolar stimulation, and the 
Storz device used bipolar stimulation.This analog scheme was 
subsequently used with eight filters in the Clarion49 processor.
Simultaneous stimulation was shown early in cochlear 
implant research to produce unpredictable variations in loud­
ness, due to interactions in current flow. 
To control loudness, 
an algorithm is needed to predict the voltage fields from two or 
more electrodes at all intensity levels. This has not been 
achieved. The only way to avoid the problem of channel inter­
action is to separate the stimulus channels so that the voltage 
fields do not overlap. A n  adequate separation of stimulus chan­
nels may be achieved if a curved electrode array is placed close 
to the spiral ganglion cells so that either monopolar or bipolar 
stimulation can produce localized neural excitation.
Analogue stimulation of the nervous system was evaluated 
by the pioneering neurophysiologists in the 1940s and 1950s, 
and found to be less suitable than pulsatile stimulation. The 
neurone integrates current to produce an action potential, 
whether the stimulus is analogue or pulsatile. W ith  a pulse, the 
current can be more precisely controlled. However, a prelimi­
nary study by Clark7 was undertaken to compare analogue and 
pulsatile stimuli and their effects on synchrony of firing, but 
with inconclusive results. A  more detailed neurophysiological 
evaluation of the effects of both biphasic current pulses and 
sinusoidal current waveforms showed no significant differences 
in the temporal properties of the responses.50,51 There are, how­
ever, differences in synchrony of response, depending on pulse 
width and frequency.
The Symbion/InnerAid four fixed filter system, which used 
analogue waveforms, was compared with the Nucleus Multipeak- 
M SP system. The Multipeak-MSP was an earlier version of 
Nucleus systems extracting two formant peaks, and the energy 
in three high-frequency bands.52 The well-controlled study53 
showed that there were better mean speech scores for the M ulti­
peak-MSP system 
(75% ) 
compared with the Symbion/ 
InnerAid system (42% ).
CIS
The C IS  (Continuous Interleaved Sampler) strategy, like 
SPEA K , stimulates multiple channels non-simultaneously to 
reduce channel interactions, but does so at a higher rate. The 
outputs of six or more filters are sampled, and used to stimulate 
corresponding numbers of electrodes on a place coding basis. 
Various studies have been done to optimize the number of fil­
ters and stimulus rate.54,55 A  constant stimulus rate between 833 
and 1111 pulses/s per channel has been recommended.49
A  comparison of the S P EA K  and C IS  strategies was first 
possible from data for comparable groups of patients using the
  

432 
Auditory disorders and their management
Table 26.1 Comparative Technology, March 1999-Nucleus-24, Combi-40, Ciarion-S implant systems.
Nucleus-24
Combi-40
Clarion-S
Standard speech-processing
SPEAK
CIS
CIS
strategies
CIS
SAS
Maximum pulse rates: non-
14493
12 120
6500
simultaneous stimulation
Maximum sample rates
Not applicable
Not applicable
104000 samples/s
simultaneous stimulation
Maximum number of 
stimulus channels
22
8
8 (CIS) 
7 (SAS)
Mode of stimulation
Monopolar 
Common ground 
Bipolar
Monopolar
Monopolar (CIS) 
Bipolar (SAS)
Speech strategies under
ACE, ADR0,
CIS+ 4 Jitter—
SPS, HAP, PPS,
investigation or proposed
TESM
CIS
Behind-the-ear speech 
processor
In regular use
In regular 
use
In regular use
Telemetry
CAP
Impedance
Compliance
Impedance
Impedance
Implant casing
Titanium
Ceramic
Ceramic
Reliability
99,6% adults at 
1 year 
987% chldren at 
1 year
N/A
N/A
Number of years
>3000
N/A
N/A
contributing to observed 
reliability
N/A, not available.
six-channel (electrode) S P EA K  and six-channel C IS  strategies 
in 1995 and 1996. S P EA K  presented essentially six maxima, 
but this could be up to 9 or 10. The open-set C ID  sentence 
scores for electrical stimulation alone for the CIS-Clarion sys- 
tem (on 64 patients 6 months postoperatively)56 and the 
SPEAK-Spectra-22 system (on 51 unselected patients tested 
from 2 weeks to 6 months after the start-up time) (data pre- 
sented to the FD A, January 1996) were compared. The results 
showed that the performance for S P E A K  was at least as good or 
possibly better.57
For more details of these strategies and their comparative 
results, see Clark.57
Maximum rates: non*simultaneous pulsatile 
stimulation
The manufacturers offer the C IS  stategies at rates even higher 
than 800 pulses/s. Communication engineers can sample 
speech much more rapidly than can be processed through each 
nerve fibre. For example, an audio C D  samples the sound wave
at 44 100 samples/s. However, the cochlear nerve fibres have 
an absolute refractory period of approximately 0.5 ms, and a 
relative refractory period of approximately 2 ms. This refrac­
toriness affects the ability of nerve fibres to respond to each 
pulse, and has been studied by Paolini &  Clark. 
Figure 26.30 
shows the number of intervals between action potentials from 
cells in the cochlear nucleus for stimuli at 200, 800, 1200 and 
1800 pulses/s. The duration of the relative refractory period is 
marked. A t 200 pulses/s, the firing interval between action 
potentials is the same as the period of the stimulus, which is 5 
ms. The firing is also very precise in time (determ inistic). A t 
the higher rate of 800 pulses/s, there are multiple firing inter­
vals as occurs with sound; these are the first, second and third 
multiples of the period. The firing is less precise in time (sto­
chastic), which is also seen with sound. This pattern in the 
intervals at 800 pulses/s is more similar to sound due to 
reduced responsiveness of the stimuli as they occur within the 
relative refractory period. A t an even higher rate of 1200 
pulses/s, the separateness of the interval peaks is markedly 
reduced. This suggests that at this frequency and above there
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
433
(a)
-O£
(c)
(b)
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
(d)
20
15
10
5
0
RRP
RRP
i Ull
1200 pulse/s 
(1/f = 0.83 ms)
mL J ____uL_
0.00 
1.66 
3.32 
4.98 
6.64 
8.30 
9.96
1800 putse/s 
(1/f = 0.55ms)
till! 
I 
t______ L_
0.0 
1.1 
2.2 
3.3 
4.4 
5.6 
6.7 
7,8 
8.9 10.0 
Interspike Interval (ms)
Figure 26.30 The intervals between the action potentials from the globular bushy cochlear nucleus neurones in the cat for stimulus rates of (a) 200, (b) 800, (c) 
1200 and (d) 1800 pulses/s. The stimulus period and relative refractory period (RRP) are indicated.
is a progressive loss in the transmission of temporal informa­
tion as the intervals between the electrical stimuli become less 
than the relative refractory period and enter the absolute 
refractory period.
Temporal information can also be conveyed by amplitude 
variations at high rates of stimulation through altering the pop­
ulation of nerves excited. Psychophysical studies, however, 
show that only low rates of modulation (100-200 Hz) can be 
adequately detected.59-61
W hile high stimulus rates used within clinically acceptable 
intensity levels are usually safe,62 the high rate itself, especially 
at current levels and charge densities above those normally used 
clinically, may damage auditory neurones.63,64 Furthermore, the 
devices must be engineered so that charge recovery occurs 
between each pulse at the electrode-tissue interface. If this does 
not happen, a D C  current w ill build up, and this too can, at cer­
tain levels (> 2|iA ), damage nervous and cochlear tissue.65
A ll the past neurobiological studies on safety emphasize the 
importance of evaluating in animal experimental studies the 
effects of any significantly altered rate of stimulation. The elec­
tronics to be used in patients to deliver the high pulse rates 
must also be included in the experimental trials. This safety 
information is important for patient management. W ith  the 
Nucleus system, all significant changes in stimulus parameters 
and electrode geometry have been accompanied by experimen­
tal animal studies. There are very few detailed studies on the
effects on safety of the use of increasingly higher rates of stimu­
lation with the other systems.
A  second reason for experimental animal safety studies 
with each device is that the charge density at the electrode- 
tissue interface may exceed acceptable levels. Studies66-69 have 
demonstrated 
that stimuli 
with charge 
densities below 
32|iC/cm2 geom. per phase are safe. The upper lim it for safety 
has not been established. The Nucleus banded-array has a large 
surface area for each electrode band (0.44-0.66 mm2), and 
hence low charge density. The pulse width normally used in 
patients is 25 jlls, but 50 jus may be needed. For the maximum 
current level that can be delivered (1.75 m A), the maximum 
charge density for the largest band on the Nucleus array is 
19.9 jiC/cm2 per phase. The surface area of the Nucleus electrode 
is up to five times greater than the electrode areas of the Med El 
and Clarion devices, which are approximately 0.14 mm2 for both 
(Med-El Combi-40 Manual; Clarion Device Description, 
Advanced Bionics Corporation). The Med El Combi-40 can 
deliver a maximum current of 2 m A for pulse widths varying 
from 40 jis to 640 |is, and so the maximum charge density could 
vary from 80|iC to 914|nC/cm2 per phase. The Advanced 
Bionics Clarion system can produce a maximum current of 
2.5 m A, and at its minimum pulse width of 77 jus, the charge den­
sity would be 137.5 |as/cm2 per phase. The pulse width can be 
increased, and the charge density would become greater. The 
maximum charge densities possible with the Combi-40 and
  

434 
Auditory disorders and their management
C larion'S devices are well in excess of the level that is known to 
be safe (32 jnC/cm2 geom. per phase). It is important to establish 
the upper safe levels for charge density, and in particular for the 
operating range of Combi-40 and Clarion-S.
Although the benefits of high rates of stimulation have not 
been established, companies emphasize the importance of the 
maximum rates that their devices can achieve. Clarion-S is 
reported to produce 104000 samples/s, but this is only for one 
electrode (Clarion Device Description: Advanced Bionics Cor- 
poration). The term sample rate is ambiguous, and is not the 
same as biphasic pulse rate. They are the voltages used to rep­
resent simultaneous analogue/stimulation alone. Furthermore, 
seven and not eight electrodes are used for the bipolar stimula­
tion required for SA S. Radial stimulation cannot always reach 
the dynamic ranges required on eight electrode pairs, so seven 
are placed longitudinally. Consequently, 91 000 samples/s are 
available to stimulate all seven electrodes. Furthermore, for 
simultaneous pulsatile stimulation (S P S ), two output samples 
are required to produce one biphasic pulse, so that 45500 
pulses/s are available for distribution to stimulate the nerves. 
The sample rate is also confusing, as all the seven electrodes can 
only be updated every 77 |us, whether this be individual voltages 
or biphasic pulses. In other words, all seven electrodes can be 
stimulated at 12 987 samples or pulses/s. This w ill only produce 
quasi-stochastic responses conveying amplitude envelope infor­
mation, as it is an impossibly fast rate to stimulate the nerves. 
For non-simultaneous stimulation, the Clarion-S device is sub­
ject to similar limitations in information transfer as the 
Nucleus-24 and Combi-40/40+ systems. In this case, only one 
electrode is stimulated at a time. As stated for the Clarion-S, 
the data update interval is 77 jis. This means a maximum rate 
of 12987 samples or 6494 pulses/s for distribution across eight 
electrodes (i.e. approximately 812 pulses/s for each electrode) 
(Patent # 5,522,865).70
The Combi-40 stimulates non-simultaneously at up to 12 120 
pulses/s and a newer version, the Combi-40+, at 18 180 pulses/s 
(I. Hochmair, personal communication). The Combi-40+, 
when using 12 electrodes, can stimulate at up to 1515 pulses/s 
on each electrode. W ith  Nucleus-24 there is 25|is for each 
phase of the pulse, an interphase gap of 7 |is for more efficient 
stimulation, and a shorting period of 12jis between pulses to 
ensure no D C  build-up and biological safety. The maximum 
rate of 14400 pulses/s resulting can be applied to one electrode 
or divided across electrodes. There could be 1440 pulses/s on 
each of 10 electrodes, or 720 pulses/s on each of 20 electrodes.
Maximum number of stimulus channels
The number of stimulus channels (electrodes) is another impor­
tant issue in speech processing for cochlear implants. The place 
coding of frequency achieved with multiple-electrode implants 
is the main reason why results with multiple-electrode systems 
are superior to those of single-electrode systems. The optimal 
number of channels for stimulation with the Nucleus-24, 
Combi-40 and Clarion-S systems has not been fully established.
Our studies39 have shown, however, that for the Nucleus system 
and the F 0/F1/F2 speech-processing strategy, the results are pro­
gressively better for electrode numbers greater than nine, the 
minimum number in the study being nine. A n  additional 
advantage for the Nucleus system in having 22 electrodes is 
that there are more electrodes available for stimulating areas of 
the cochlea where place of stimulation is more effective. This 
could be due to pathology causing variations in the density of 
the auditory neurones.
The mode of stimulation and the electrode geometry are 
relevant to channel separation and the number of channels to 
be used. Initial research11-13,71 showed that bipolar and common 
ground stimulation would localize current to discrete groups of 
neurones, without it short-circuiting along the fluid compart­
ments of the cochlea. W ith  bipolar stimulation, the current 
passes between neighbouring electrodes, and with common 
ground stimulation, between an active electrode and the others 
on the cochlear array connected together electronically. It has 
subsequently been shown72 that if the electrodes are placed 
close to neurones, then monopolar stimulation between an 
active and distant electrode may also allow localized stimula­
tion. There is thus an interaction between stimulus mode, elec­
trode geometry and cochlear anatomy for the optimal place 
coding of speech frequencies. Furthermore, if the electrodes are 
small, and not adjacent to the spiral ganglion cells, high current 
levels w ill be required with bipolar stimulation to cover the 
dynamic range. In this case, the implant may not be able to 
deliver the current required. The electrode separation for the 
biopolar stimulation w ill need to be increased, and this in turn 
w ill reduce channel separation.
Placement of electrodes close to spiral ganglion cells should 
reduce channel interaction, and permit more stimulus channels 
to be used. There has been debate73 about the merit of using a 
moulded array to achieve placement close to the ganglion cells 
(e.g. the array developed at San Francisco).74 This array was 
designed in particular to produce radial bipolar stimulation of 
the peripheral processes of the spiral ganglion cells, and because 
effective stimulation is not tolerant to small variations in elec­
trode placement.75 A  comparison of the histological effects of a 
free fitting versus a moulded array was undertaken by Sutton et 
al,76 and showed significantly more trauma for the moulded 
array. A  number of studies31,77,78 have established that this 
trauma can lead to the loss of spiral ganglion cells. As illustrated 
in Figure 26.31, a Teflon strip cutting the basilar membrane can 
lead to a marked loss of spiral ganglion cells in the hearing ani­
mal. Fractures of the osseous spiral lamina have also been 
shown to produce loss of the spiral ganglion cells in the deaf­
ened animal.79 W ith  electrodes now being inserted to lie close 
to spiral ganglion cells for improved information transfer, it is 
even more imperative that trauma be kept to a minimum to 
preserve adequate spiral ganglion cell numbers.
Recently, the safety of using a Teflon ‘former’ to push a 
Nucleus free-fitting banded array close to the modiolus after it 
has been inserted has been studied in the human temporal 
bone.80 Furthermore, a wire former has been attached to the tip
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
435
Figure 26.31 A photomicrograph of the cat cochlea after tearing of the 
basilar membrane with a Teflon strip, showing the marked loss of spiral 
ganglion cells. (Reprinted with permission from Clark and Lawrence. AustJ 
Otolaryngol 2000; 3(5): 516-22.114)
of the Combi-40+ array to force it close to the inner spiral. A  
silicone plug attached to the Clarion-S array is also being tri­
aled. A ll these formers are likely to produce significant trauma, 
as was seen in the earlier study of Sutton et al.76
The Nucleus array with a Teflon ‘former’ has been com­
pared with a pre-curved array without ‘former’ in a number of 
human temporal bones subsequently sectioned to evaluate dam­
age.80 This ‘former’ was shown in a significant proportion of 
insertions to buckle, and to tear the basilar membrane, and 
enter the scala vestibuli, as illustrated in Figure 26.32. For this 
reason, an electrode with ‘former’ w ill not be used for advanced 
Nucleus systems. Sections of the human temporal bone have 
shown that a pre-curved array held straight before insertion is 
much less traumatic than an array with ‘former’.80
Speech-processing strategies under 
investigation
Each manufacturer offers a number of variations of their stan­
dard speech-processing strategies. These variations are all at dif­
ferent stages of evaluation.
Figure 26.32 A photomicrograph of the human cochlea after the insertion of 
free-fitting electrode and Teflon 'former', showing them penetrating into the 
scala vestibuli. (Reprinted with permission from Clark and Lawrence. AustJ 
Otolaryngol 2000; 3(5): 516-22.114)
Nucleus-24 system
The A C E  strategy is being trialed with the Nucleus-24 system. 
A C E  is a modification of SPEA K , with stimuli presented at 
high rates and/or with more channels of stimulation. This 
gives the clinician the opportunity to optimize the speech 
processor to obtain maximum benefit for individual subjects. 
The effect of a higher rate of stimulation (in  particular 800 
pulses/s) with Advanced Combination Encoder (A C E ) has 
been compared with the S P E A K  strategy, which uses a rate of 
250 pulses/s. The study on a small group of subjects81 showed 
that the average results did not improve for rates higher than 
250 pulses/s. There was, however, patient variability, and so 
rate of stimulation could be varied to suit performance. A  sec­
ond strategy being trialed with S P EA K  is one which optimizes 
the dynamic range for each frequency band by an adaptive 
dynamic range optimization mechanism (A D R O ). Initial 
results indicate that it can give improved speech perception at 
low signal levels.82 A  third strategy emphasizes the transient 
information 
in 
speech 
of importance 
for 
intelligibility 
(T E S M ),83 and may lead to advances in speech perception.
Combi-40 system
It has been proposed that the Combi-40 system use a high-rate 
C IS, C IS+ , jitter C IS, variable-rate C IS, and ‘n of m’. The 
C IS+  strategy uses the Hilbert transform for envelope extrac­
tion. The Hilbert transform (a 90° phase shifter) is an efficient 
technique for detecting the speech wave envelope from each fil­
ter. The transform was first described by Hilbert early in the 
20th century, and has been in regular use in communications 
engineering since the 1970s.84 Jitter C IS  means the addition of 
a random rather than a constant-rate stimulus. This is also 
available with the S P E A K  strategy, and for some subjects it can 
make the sound more natural, ‘n of m’ means the selection of n 
stimulus channels from m filter outputs. This is essentially the 
principle underlying all the Nucleus speech-processing strate­
gies (F 0/F2), (F 0/F1/F2), M U LT IP EA K , and SPEA K . Studies 
undertaken at Melbourne University, including those under an 
N IH  contract (Speech Processors for Auditory Prostheses: Con­
tract N01-DC-9-2400), have shown that SP E A K  is the opti­
mum ‘n of m’ strategy.
Clarion system
Clarion offers the possibility of simultaneous analogue as 
well as pulsatile stimuli through SPS. The issues relating to 
simultaneous stimulation are discussed above. Partial simul­
taneous strategies that have been proposed are H A P  (hybrid 
analogue pulsatile processor), Q PS (quadruple pulsatile sam­
pler), and PPS (paired pulsatile sampler).
H A P  would use simultaneous analogue stimulation for the 
lower frequencies, and non-simultaneous pulsatile stimulation 
in the higher frequencies. This may lead to speech-processing 
improvements. This type of strategy was initially described by 
von Wallenberg et al. 
They compared the results for a four- 
channel system in which a broadband analogue signal was pre­
sented on the most apical electrode, and the second formant as
  

436 
Auditory disorders and their management
pulsatile stimuli to one of the three more basal electrodes. 
Vowel identification was significantly better for the hybrid than 
for the single-channel system. Furthermore, a hybrid speech 
processor has been developed in the Human Communication 
Research Centre, Melbourne (A M A  ‘Hear-Say’, Australian 
Provisional Patent PN  3133, 18 M ay 1995). This strategy 
encoded voicing information on a separate apical electrode, 
and constant-rate spectral maxima information on the other 
electrodes. It was compared with a standard spectral maxima 
processor. The study86 showed no difference in the scores for the 
hybrid scheme presenting suprasegmental information on a sep­
arate electrode. Another version of the hybrid strategy has been 
developed at the Cooperative Research Centre for Cochlear 
Implant Speech and Hearing Research in Melbourne. This uses 
single-channel stimulation on an apical electrode to provide 
temporal information for excitation of residual low-frequency 
hearing electrophonically, and electrical stimulation of the 
auditory nerves for high-frequency 
spectral 
information 
(Cochlear implant system for residual hearing stimulation, Aus­
tralian Provisional Patent 8016, M arch 1993).
The PPS and Q PS are systems for stimulating either two or 
four electrodes simultaneously with a C IS  strategy. The elec­
trodes are selected so that they are at a distance from each other 
to reduce interactions from overlapping electrical fields. A t pre­
sent this is an untested variation.
Behind-the-ear speech processor
A  behind-the-ear speech processor is very desirable for a num­
ber of patients, particularly children older than about 4 years as 
well as adults. They find that it is more convenient to dispense 
with the leads passing from the microphone to the body-worn 
device, and it is more aesthetic, especially for teenagers. Keep­
ing it small requires high-powered zinc-air batteries, and a low 
power consumption. This is easier to achieve for strategies that 
stimulate at low rates. S P EA K  has been used with the Nucleus 
behind-the-ear speech processor, ESPrit, since 1997. It now uses 
A C E  and C IS  as well as SPEA K . It also has a whisper setting 
(A D R O ) which improves understanding in quiet, and an integral 
telecoil for loop systems and the telephone. The zinc air batter­
ies last for up to 3 days. A  behind-the-ear speech processor was 
used with the Med-El device (Tempo+) in 1999. It provides the 
C IS  coding strategy and uses zinc air batteries. Advanced Bionics 
commenced using one in 2001. It provides C IS  and S A S  strate­
gies, but the rechargeable lithium ion batteries require a recharge 
every 4-8 hours of usage. There is also no on/off switch.
Telemetry
Telemetry transmits information from the implant to the exter­
nal programming system, such as the voltages from electrodes 
on the array in response to a stimulus pulse. The transmitted 
voltages can be used to determine the tissue impedance around 
the array, and so assess pathological changes. The Nucleus sys­
tem can also measure the very small voltages from the auditory
nerve, referred to as the compound action potential (C A P ). 
The C A P  can help determine stimulus thresholds and dynamic 
ranges. Like all objective audiological procedures, it should be 
accompanied by behavioural measures. The C A P  has advan­
tages over the electrically evoked brainstem response (E A B R ) 
procedure, which is done using surface electrodes, as it can be 
made rapidly, and a child does not require an anaesthetic. The 
Nucleus 24 system also has an additional feature which can 
determine whether the stimulus has exceeded the voltage com­
pliance, and hence whether a programming change is required.
Reliability
Reliability is an important issue for the surgeon when deciding 
how to best advise a prospective patient. It is essential to know 
the overall reliability of the different products, as well as the 
reliability of the most recent models. It takes time to accumu­
late meaningful statistics, and short-term estimates for recent 
models can be very misleading. The past history is important, as 
reliability depends on accumulated manufacturing experience. 
Specific information is also needed on the incidence of package 
failures, sealing leaks, cracks to the case, fractures of the elec­
trodes or transmitting coil, and electronic failures. For children, 
in particular, it is important that the implant is resistant to 
blows to the head. Implant design should evolve to the point 
where all sporting activities are not contraindicated. Reliability 
data have been reported in the literature by Cochlear Limited, 
but at this point in time not to a similar extent by the other 
manufacturers. Uniform  procedures and meaningful reporting 
are essential for the clinician.
Surgery
Surgery for cochlear implants is primarily carried out in the fol­
lowing stages.
Incision
Skin preparation for the incision requires shaving the hair so 
that there is sufficient room between the incision and the edge 
of the hair to prevent wound infection. The incision should be 
placed 45 mm behind the external osseous auditory meatus so 
that it does not overlie the implanted device. The direction of 
the incision for the Nucleus CI-24 receiver-stimulator device is 
different from that for the CI-22 system. As shown in Figure 
26.33, it still remains within the postauricular sulcus, but then 
extends more vertically, as the Nucleus CI-24 can be placed at 
a greater angle to the horizontal (Frankfurt’s plane).
Exposure of the middle ear and round window
The deep fascia and periosteum should be elevated to make an 
anteriorly based flap, so that the incision does not directly over­
lie the device or lead-wire assembly. This reduces the risk of the 
device being exposed to the exterior if there is wound infection
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
437
Figure 26.33 The incision for the implantation of the Nucleus CI-24 system.
or breakdown. A  mastoid air cell exenteration is performed. 
This does not need to be complete, but sufficient to safely allow 
the completion of the posterior tympanotomy. The posterior 
tympanotomy is carried out with care, to avoid damaging the 
vertical section of the facial nerve. Once the middle ear is 
entered, the round window niche is identified.
Creation of bed for the receiver-stimulator
After the middle ear has been exposed and the round window 
identified, a bed is created in the mastoid bone to take the small 
flat stimulator section of the implant device. This may need to 
be drilled down to the underlying dura so that it fits comfortably 
in the skull. As stated above, it is important to ensure that the 
anterior margin of the receiver-stimulator lies sufficiently far 
behind the postauricular sulcus to ensure that the behind-the- 
ear speech processor does not rub any elevated skin over the 
anterior edge of the package.
Insertion of the electrode array and placement 
of the receiver-stimulator
After restraining ties for the lead wire are placed (platinum wires 
around the floor of the mastoid antrum), the opening into the 
cochlea is made for the insertion of the electrode bundle. The 
cochleostomy opening is sited approximately 1-2 mm antero­
inferior to the round window niche. The package is opened, and 
the array inserted gently around the basal turn of the cochlea 
with the aid of a claw,2,87 until minimal resistance is felt. If an 
adequate depth of insertion is not achieved, this may be facili­
tated by withdrawing the electrode a little, and rotating it 90° 
clockwise in the case of the left cochlea, and anticlockwise for 
the right cochlea. It is then reintroduced. After insertion, the 
ties are tightened around the lead wire, which is protected by a 
Silastic sleeve. The package is placed in its bed and two sutures 
are inserted into the fascia surrounding the receiver-stimulator, 
and tied over it to prevent it from moving forward. Fascia is 
placed around the electrode entry to minimize the ingress of any 
infection at a later stage and to help establish a seal. After final 
haemostasis, the wound is closed in layers.
Postoperative management
Postoperatively, the wound needs to be inspected for pain, 
bleeding or discharge. Otherwise, in the usual uneventful 
recovery, the patient can be discharged from hospital after 
3-4 days. The postoperative complications are minimal, the 
most common one being wound infection. This is usually 
treated 
conservatively 
with 
antibiotics. 
A  
haematoma 
requires needle aspiration. Sometimes, air is forced up the 
Eustachian tube and creates a pneumatocoele under the flap. 
This responds to a pressure dressing for a few days. More 
details of the surgery and the management of any complica­
tions can be found in Clark et al,2 Webb et al.3 Clark et al.73 
Cohen et al88 and Clark et al.89
(Re)habilitation
It is important to know not only when to select adults and chil­
dren for cochlear implantation, but how best to (re)habilitate 
them. (Re)habilitating a child, in particular, with a cochlear 
implant w ill depend in part on the plasticity of the central audi­
tory nervous system, and how responsive it is to new informa­
tion. (Re)habilitation w ill also depend on the cognitive 
processes required for speech perception, speech production, 
and the acquisition of language.
Mapping
After surgery, the device is switched on 2 or 3 weeks postoper­
atively, subject to the healing of the incision. (Re)habilitation 
requires establishing the intensity of the stimuli for the loudness 
thresholds, maximum comfortable levels, and dynamic ranges 
for each electrode. These levels are mapped into the person’s 
speech processor so that the electrical representation of the 
acoustical signals remains within the operating range. The 
stimulus parameter responsible for neural excitation is electrical 
charge. This can be controlled by varying either the pulse 
amplitude or width.
The thresholds (T  level) can be obtained by averaging a 
number of responses to an ascending and descending procedure. 
W hen ascending from no signal to the electrically induced per­
cept, the threshold w ill be higher than when descending in 
amplitude. A  more stable threshold can be obtained by also 
averaging the results for the two procedures. The maximum 
comfortable level (M C  level) is the highest stimulus intensity 
that can be used without causing discomfort. The level is lower 
for an initial rather than a continuous presentation, as habitu­
ation occurs. As speech is a dynamic signal, often with short 
bursts to individual electrodes, the lower or more conservative 
value should be adopted to ensure that there are no unpleasant 
side-effects. Setting the M C  level correctly is also important, as 
the greater part of the speech signal is mapped to the top 20% 
of the dynamic range. If the T  levels and M C  levels are high for 
bipolar stimulation, they can be brought more into the current 
output range of the receiver-stimulator by stimulating a greater
  

438 
Auditory disorders and their management
area of the cochlea or number of neurones. This is achieved by 
stimulating between more widely separated electrodes.
Once the T  and M C  levels are set, it is important to deter- 
mine whether the loudness percepts are comparable across 
electrodes at these intensities. This is done by sweeping the 
stimuli across the electrodes to see if the loudness is balanced. 
It is also necessary to evaluate the loudness growth function for 
increases in intensity at each electrode, as this may vary, and 
lead to unpleasant or non-optimal speech perception if it is not 
taken into consideration. The shape of the function can be 
roughly assessed by sweeping across electrodes at an intensity 
50% between the T  and M C  levels. If an electrode sounds softer 
at this level, this may be because the loudness growth function 
is flat near threshold, so that the 50% level is too low on the 
normal steep section of the curve. Owing to changing pathol­
ogy in the inner ear following implantation, especially during 
the early postoperative phase, repeated measurements of 
thresholds and comfortable levels are required.
In (re)habilitating children in the use of the cochlear 
implant, special care must be taken in establishing thresholds 
and maximum comfortable levels. If a stimulus is unpleasant 
and too loud, it w ill delay the child’s confidence and learning. 
The procedure is carried out by the audiologist observing the 
behavioural responses to the stimuli, particularly an aversive or 
withdrawal reaction.90 Assessment w ill also be improved with 
receiver-stimulators such as the Nucleus CI-24 system, which 
have telemetry. They can signal externally by radio waves the 
voltages in the auditory nerve, and these can be correlated with 
thresholds and comfortable levels.90
Speech recognition over time in adults
In (re)habilitating children and adults, it is necessary to know 
not only what changes in speech perception can occur, but also 
the time-course of these changes and the factors affecting this 
time-course. The degree of learning over 12 months for adults 
who have previously had hearing before going deaf and who 
used the inaugural F0/F2 strategy is shown in Figure 26.34. As 
can be seen, the mean open-set C ID  sentence score for electri­
cal stimulation alone increased by 145% from 3 to 12 months 
postoperatively. The learning rate for speech perception with 
the SP EA K  strategy on postlingually deaf adults is also shown 
in Figure 26.34. From this it can be seen that the scores arise to 
a plateau much more quickly. This suggests that the signal con­
tains more information that is similar to natural speech, and less 
rehabilitation is required.
Speech recognition over time in children
The rate of learning over time has been examined for three 
groups of implanted children: those implanted under 3 years, 
from 3 to 5 years, and over 5 years. The results are shown in Fig­
ure 26.35. As can be seen with these preliminary data, the rate 
of learning for all three groups increases at the same rate for 2 
years postoperatively, and only then starts to plateau for the
Figure 26.34 The open-set speech scores for electrical stimulation alone for 
adults using the inaugural FJF2 and the recent 'SPEAK' cochlear implant 
strategies. (From Clark. In: Fahle and Poggio, eds. Perceptual Learning. Cambridge 
Mass: MIT Press, 2002: 147-60.90)
Figure 26.35 The phonetically balanced kindergarten (PBK) phoneme score or 
estimate plotted over time in children implanted under 3, 3-5 and over 5 years 
of age. (From Clark. In: Fahle and Poggio, eds. Perceptual Learning. Cambridge 
Mass: MIT Press, 2002: 147-60.90)
over 5 age group (Dowell, personal com munication).Why this 
occurs is not clear.
Speech production over time in children
In (re)habilitating children, it is important to know their rate 
of learning not only for speech perception but also for speech 
production. The two are inter-related, and any particular delays 
may be correctable. To help in monitoring speech production in 
particular, a computer-aided speech and language assessment 
procedure (C A S A L A ) has been developed.91 The conversation 
is transcribed by a clinician into the appropriate written sym­
bols, and the computer transcribes the written word into the 
correct phonetic representation of what was spoken. The pro­
gram then analyses the data and produces an inventory of the 
vowels and consonants being used, the percentage of correctly
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
Experience with cochlear implants (years)
Age at implantation
♦ under 3 
□ 3 to 5 
A over 5
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
439
identified phonemes, and the abnormal phonological processes 
being used by the child.
This information can then be used to monitor the progress 
of (re)habilitation, and identify where special help is needed. 
Progress in speech production versus receptive language has 
been plotted in a number of children. Its use in four children is 
demonstrated in Figure 26.36. This shows a plot over time of 
the percentage of phonemes produced correctly, and a measure 
of receptive language, PPVT, in equivalent age. The two chil­
dren with auditory/oral skills (children 1 and 9) show the two 
curves parallel to each other. On the other hand, for the menin- 
gitic child (child 7), there is a loss of speech production before 
this catches up with language.
Changes in speech perceptual space in adults 
post-implantation
(Re)habilitation with electrical stimulation requires plasticity 
and adaptability of the neural pathways and perceptual 
processes. Evidence for adaptability in speech perception has 
been seen in a pilot study in an adult postlingually deaf cochlear 
implant patient. In this patient, the vowel spaces were mapped 
at two short intervals after implantation. W ith  the normal two- 
formant vowel space, there is a limited range or grouping of fre­
quencies required for the perception of each vowel. The study 
was undertaken by presenting 64 two-formant synthesized 
sounds to the subject via appropriately place-coded electrodes. 
He was then asked to identify which vowels he heard. If, for 
example, he heard vowels that had a higher second-formant fre­
quency than the frequency of the stimulated electrode, the
vowel centre was shown as moved upwards in frequency 
(Blarney and Dooley, personal communication). W ith  electrical 
stimulation, it was found that at the end of the second week 
there was a wider range of electrodes contributing to the per­
ception of each vowel. However, after the subject had learned 
to use the implant for a further week, the range of electrodes 
contributing to the perception of the vowels became more 
restricted, and the vowel spaces came to more closely resemble 
those for normal hearing. This result suggests that perceptual 
changes for vowel formant identification can occur quickly, but, 
as referred to above, the higher-level ‘top-down’ changes 
required for speech perception take longer.
Changes in speech recognition in children 
with ‘bottom-up’ or perceptual training
In (re)habilitating children, it is necessary not only to under­
stand plasticity and perceptual learning with electrical stimula­
tion, but to train them in using ‘bottom-up’ and ‘top-down’ 
information. The central processing for speech recognition is 
both ‘bottom-up’ and ‘top-down’, and both may be trained to 
improve speech recognition. W ith  regard to ‘bottom-up’ pro­
cessing, specific training in vowel formant discrimination has 
been undertaken in a group of five children with poor speech 
recognition.92 In these children, vowel formant discrimination 
was worse than their ability to discriminate electrodes.
W ith  speech-processing strategies, the formants are repre­
sented by place of electrode stimulation, and an index for 
assessing the spatial separation of electrodes representing the 
formants in vowel pairs was developed. This index is calculated
CQ 5
<L>
<u 4
cnra
I 3 
>
i
2
i
1 
a.
0
ra 5
OJ>■
u 4
r-ri 
^
I
 
1
1“
100
100 r
90
-
• Phonemes
90 -
u4J
80
-
g PPVT
80 -
- 
O
70
70 -
u
£
Vi
GO
-
60 -
50
-
50 -
£
_ 
<U 
t  
O
40
30
_
£ 
0
40 -
-
30 -
JZ
Q-
20
-
/ 
Child 3
20 -
10
0
-
/ 
Unknown aetiology
p i 4 
i 
----- 1------- 1------- 1
10 - 
o L
• Phonemes 
o PPVT
12 
24 
36 
Time post implant (months)
48
12 
24 
36 
Time post implant (months)
Figure 26.36 Plot of speech production over time with CASALA (Blarney, personal communication).
  

440 
Auditory disorders and their management
as the lengths of vectors in a Euclidean space. The distance 
between a pair of vowels is the square root of the sum of squares 
of the first and second formant electrode separations. The 
indices for some selected vowel pairs are shown in Figure 26.37. 
W ith  four of the five children in the group, the perceptual space 
for the vowel formants that they could discriminate was much 
greater than their ability to discriminate electrode place. After 
training, two children (3 and 4) showed significant improve­
ments in speech recognition which were more consistent with 
their electrode difference limens. This is illustrated for child 3 
in Figure 26.38. Child 3 could discriminate 1.8 electrodes apart, 
which was sufficient for vowel discrimination down to a separa­
tion index of 2.8. As can be seen, the discrimination of 
head/hood, had/hod, had/hud and hud/hod could not be made 
pre-training. The training was carried out first to achieve dis­
crimination of the vowel pairs where the formants were most 
widely separated. It was argued that this would result in the 
changes required for learning to discriminate more closely sep­
arated vowel pairs.
F2 electrode 
* Formant (F1 - F2) electrode separation index
Figure 26.37 Formant separation indices for selected vowels. (From Clark. Am J 
Otol 1999; 20: 4-8.109)
Figure 26.38 Specific training of vowels in child 3. (From Clark. Am J Otol 1999; 
20: 4-8.109)
Child 3, and a second one, child 4, improved in their abili­
ties to distinguish vowel pairs. In the child shown, gains in min­
imal vowel pair recognition carried over to improved speech 
recognition. In child 3, the gains in vowel perception generalized 
to consonants, as demonstrated by improvements in a monosyl­
lable word test. In child 5, the overall speech perception was 
poorer than that of the other children pre- and post-training, and 
this was consistent with her wider apical electrode difference 
limens, which were 5.5-5.8. This child had deafness of genetic 
origin and was not implanted until 13 years of age. These results 
suggest that training to distinguish vowels with widely separated 
formant frequencies, and then carrying this over to more closely 
separated formants, can be effective, with the benefits being 
retained and extended to the perception of speech.
Changes in speech recognition in children 
with ‘top-down* or language training
W ith  regard to ‘top-down’ processing, the effects of language 
training on speech perception have been investigated in three 
implanted children.93 They were trained in the use of tense and 
other grammatical concepts. The data showed a significant 
training effect. In another study, the children were educated in 
the meaning of words that they did not understand and then 
tested to find the effects of understanding on speech perception. 
The mean results showed that there was a very significant 
improvement for the unknown words compared with the 
known words when meaning was provided.
Ethics
Introduction
M edical ethics is generally considered in terms of beneficence, 
non-maleficence, and autonomy. Beneficence is defined as the 
duty to do the best for the individual patient,94 non-maleficence 
is the duty to do no harm, and autonomy is the right of indi­
viduals to make decisions on their own behalf. The cochlear 
implant should be used clinically in accord with these guiding 
principles.
It is also ethically correct for cochlear implant research to 
be carried out in accordance with the principles laid down by 
the Helsinki Declaration on Biomedical Research adopted by 
the 18th W orld Medical Assembly, Finland 1969, and revised 
by the 29th W orld M edical Assembly in Tokyo in 1975. 
Research on children should also be in accordance with the 
convention of the Rights of the Child adopted by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations on 20 November 1989.
Beneficence
The need for beneficence is implied in the Helsinki declara­
tion, where it states that: ‘biomedical research involving 
human subjects cannot legitimately be carried out unless the
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
441
importance of the object is in proportion to the inherent risk 
to a subject.’
Cochlear implantation complies with this requirement, as 
it has now been clearly shown that severely and profoundly deaf 
adults and children receive significant help with a cochlear 
implant, and this is better than they would get with the most 
powerful optimally fitted hearing aid or a tactile vocoder. The 
beneficial results have been reported in a number of studies.95-97 
The U S  National Institutes of Health Consensus statement 
concluded that: ‘using tests commonly applied to children and 
adults with hearing impairments the perceptual performance 
with an implant increases with each succeeding year post-oper- 
atively. Furthermore, the performance may improve to match 
that of children who have residual hearing and are highly suc­
cessful hearing aid users.97 The outcomes, complications and 
cost-effectiveness of cochlear implants in the U K  from 1990 to 
1994 have also been documented by Summerfield et al98 from 
the M R C  Institute of Hearing Research University of Notting­
ham.
Non-maleficence
Non-maleficence is implied by the Helsinki Declaration that: 
‘every biomedical research project involving human subjects 
should be preceded by careful assessment of predictable risks in 
comparison with foreseeable benefits to the subject or to others. 
Concern for the interest of the subject must always prevail over 
the interests of science and society.’
The principle of doing no harm has always been central to 
the research conducted by the University of Melbourne and the 
Bionic Ear Institute. In Melbourne, a significant number of 
studies have been undertaken over the last two decades to 
ensure in the first instance that cochlear implants in adults and 
children from 2 to 18 years of age were safe as well as effective. 
These involved studies to determine the placement of the elec­
trode array at an appropriate location in the cochlea so that the 
cochlear nerve would not be damaged, and there would be no 
adverse pathological changes in the cochlea.31,69,99,100The stud­
ies also helped establish the electrical stimulus parameters that 
were required for continuous long-term stimulation without loss 
of neural elements.101-103 The research undertaken by the 
Deparment of Otolaryngology at the University of Melbourne 
was crucial in the acceptance of the first multiple-channel 
cochlear implant to be approved by the U S  FD A  in August 
1985. Furthermore, as there was evidence to indicate that oper­
ating on children under 2 years of age is important, the U n i­
versity of Melbourne and the University of San Francisco were 
both awarded in 1987 U S  National Institutes of Health (N IH ) 
contracts to study the safety of auditory prosthesis implants for 
paediatric patients.
As a result of the studies at the University of Melbourne, it 
was clearly shown that head growth had no effect on the elec­
trode lead-wire assembly and that the implantation itself had 
no effect on head growth. Infection entering the inner ear from 
otitis media, common in young children, was investigated and
was shown to be no greater a risk than if there was no implan­
tation. These studies were undertaken in particular at the U n i­
versity of Melbourne under a 5-year contract.14 The effect of 
electrical stimulation on the maturing nervous system was also 
investigated, and shown to be no different to that of an adult. 
In summary, the N IH  studies demonstrated that cochlear 
implantation of children under 2 years of age was safe.
Autonomy
As far as autonomy is concerned, this is embodied in the state­
ment of the Helsinki Declaration that:
In any research on human beings, each potential subject 
must be adequately informed of the aims, methods, antici­
pated benefits and potential hazards of the study and the 
discomfort it may entail. He or she should be informed that 
he or she is at liberty to abstain from participation in the 
study and that he or she is free to withdraw his or her con­
sent to paricipation at any time. The physician should then 
obtain the subject’s freely-given informed consent, prefer­
ably in writing.
The advantages and disadvantages of a cochlear implant 
operation are always raised and discussed with prospective 
adult patients or parents of a young child at the University of 
Melbourne’s C lin ic at the Royal Victorian Eye &  Ear Hospi­
tal. It is also the policy of the Cochlear Implant C linic to 
make sure that children who are of an age when they can 
clearly understand the implications of the procedure and its 
benefits and risks are involved in the decision-making process 
concerning the operation.
Autonomy is also embodied in the statements of the con­
vention of the Rights of the Child adopted by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations on 20 November 1989. Rele­
vant ones are:
Article 5
State Parties shall respect the responsibilities, rights and 
duties of parents or, where applicable, the members of the 
extended family or community as provided for by local cus­
tom, legal guardians or other persons legally responsible for 
the child, to provide, in a manner consistent with the 
evolving capacities of the child, appropriate direction and 
guidance in the exercise by the child of the rights recog­
nised in the present Convention.
Article 12.1
States Parties shall assure to the child who is capable of 
forming his or her own views the right to express those 
views freely in all matters affecting the child, the views of 
the child being given due weight in accordance with the 
age and maturity of the child.
It is important to recognize not only that parents have the 
right to decide the care needed for their child on the basis of 
the future needs of the child to fit into society, but also the
  

442 
Auditory disorders and their management
communication needed at home. Parents with hearing w ill 
usually prefer their children to be able to communicate with 
them in an auditory-oral mode. Approximately 85-90% of 
deaf children are in families with normally hearing parents. 
On the other hand, if two deaf parents have a deaf or hearing 
child, there may be a need for the child to learn to sign. In 
both cases, the two educational modes should not be initially 
exclusive, provided that the cochlear implant is carried out at 
an early age during the child’s critical period for speech and 
language development.104
Highest standard of clinical and scientific 
practice
The clinical use of cochlear implants as well as research studies 
should also only be considered ethical if the clinical, scientific 
and industrial management is carried out in accordance with 
the highest standards of practice. These are laid down by the 
Helsinki Declaration and its amendments, and the guidelines 
adopted by recognized bodies such as the U S  N IH  and the 
National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia.
Summary
The ethical issues of importance for cochlear implantation are 
presented in more detail by Clark et al.104
The question of cochlear implantation in children needs to 
be presented sensitively, with due consideration for other com­
munication options, in particular sign language of the deaf. It is 
important that people do not gain the impression that sign lan­
guage leads to lives that are not worthwhile or fulfilled. It is eth­
ical to only present the facts regarding the benefits and risks of 
a cochlear implant providing different levels of hearing.
Research directions
There are a number of challenges for the cochlear implant of 
the future with regard to further improvements in its perfor­
mance. The first challenge is to provide a better reproduction of 
the coding of sound. Already, research is contributing answers 
to these questions. Research to improve the place coding of fre­
quency is being undertaken by developing an array which w ill 
lie closer to the neural elements in the cochlea.105 The present 
array lies peripherally, and needs to be placed close to the cen­
tral axis of the cochlear spiral where the ganglion cells are 
located. To do this, an electrode array has been developed 
which is pre-curved and held straight before insertion and then 
released once inside the cochlea.106 This array comes to lie close 
to the spiral ganglion cells in the central axis, as shown in the 
X-ray in Figure 26.39.
A n  initial group of patients have been implanted with this 
pre-curved array, and a masking study has been undertaken to 
evaluate the spread of current to the cochlear nerve fibres to see 
if better place coding could be achieved.105 In these patients,
Figure 26.39 X-ray of the cochlea and pre-curved electrode.
the array was closer to the central axis at some points, and fur­
ther away at other points. This enabled a comparison of current 
spread with distance from the central axis to be made in the one 
subject. In the study, a masking stimulus on a certain electrode 
was followed by probe stimuli on different electrodes. The 
intensity of the probes required for masking enabled a masking 
curve to be plotted, and this determined the spread of current 
around the masker electrode.
A n  example of the results is shown in Figure 26.40 for 
patient 1. For the basal electrode 10, which was at some distance 
from the inner wall, the masking curve is broad. O n the other 
hand, where the apical electrode 18 lies very close to the inner 
wall, the masking curve is much narrower, indicating a discrete 
area of neural stimulation. The results from this preliminary 
study showed that, for the pre-curved array, electrode discrimi­
nation was better and neural excitation sharper with the 
electrodes close to the spiral ganglion cells.
Research into better reproduction of the temporal coding 
of frequency has first compared the pattern of interspike inter­
vals from brainstem cells for acoustical and electrical stimula­
tion in the experimental animal with frequency discrimination 
in both the experimental animal and human subject. Figure 
26.41 shows the interspike interval histograms for units in the 
cochlear nucleus for acoustical and electrical stimulation at 400 
Hz and 800 Hz. The patterns of these intervals are important in 
encoding frequency, but how the brain decodes this temporal 
information is not known.
For acoustical stimuli, the action potentials are phase- 
locked to the sound at both low and high frequencies, and there 
is some jitter in the phase locking referred to as stochastic fir­
ing. O n the other hand, with electrical stimulation there is lit­
tle jitter at low stimulus rates, and this is referred to as 
deterministic firing. A t higher rates of 800 Hz and above, elec­
trical stimulation produces stochastic firing similar to that of
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
443
4 
8 
12 
16 
50 
Electrode
Figure 26.40 Masking of current spread using the 
pre-curved array; patient 1. Stimulation was bipolar 
with one intervening electrode. (Reprinted with 
permission from Shepherd et al. In: Clark, ed. 
Cochlear Implants. Bologna: Monduzzi Editore, 1997: 
205-9.1'5)
Acoustic
Electric
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Time (ms)
416 Hz
a.
l/V
o
Time (ms)
Figure 26.41 The interval histograms from cochlear nucleus cells in the cat for (a) acoustical and (b) electrical stimulation at low and high pulse rates. (From Clark. 
In: Greenberg and Ainsworth, eds. Springer Handbook of Auditory Research: Speech Processing in the Auditory System. Berkeley MA: Springer Verlag.57)
  

444 
Auditory disorders and their management
sound. For acoustical stimulation, there are also a number of 
intervals, which are multiples of the period of the sound wave. 
For electrical stimulation at low rates, there is usually only one 
interval, which is the same as the period of the stimulus. A t 
high rates there are a number of intervals, as seen with sound.
In summary, the pattern of interspike intervals for low rates 
of electrical stimulation is different from that of sound. It is, 
however, similar at high stimulus rates. On the other hand, 
frequency discrimination for low rates of electrical stimulation 
is similar to that for sound, but the discrimination of high 
stimulus rates is poor. If this discrepancy between the physiol- 
ogy and the psychophysics can be better understood, it may be 
possible to better reproduce frequency information with 
advanced cochlear implants.
The discrepancy may result from the fact that coding is not 
due primarily to the pattern of spikes in individual fibres in an 
ensemble, but to timing differences across the fibres due to the 
fact that sound induces a travelling wave along the basilar mem­
brane, as illustrated in Figure 26.42. Temporal information across 
fibres could also be produced for acoustical stimuli through the 
rapid phase changes occurring in the area of maximum vibration, 
which are shown in Figure 26.43. To achieve this fine temporal 
and spatial pattern of responses for temporal coding, a new elec­
trode array w ill be required, with many more electrodes to stim­
ulate small groups of auditory nerve fibres, as illustrated in Figure 
26.44. This array should also improve place coding.
The second important area of research for the future is to 
make the cochlear implant invisible. Teenagers, for example, 
are very sensitive about their deafness, and may not use their 
device in company. A  total implant means implanting the 
speech processor as well as the microphone inside the body. 
There are a number of approaches to the problem (Figure 
26.45). Sound vibrations may be detected with a piezoelectric 
microphone under the skin of the ear canal, and the electrical 
signal sent to the implanted electronics unit. Alternatively, the 
vibrations of the middle ear bones may be sensed by an inertia 
mass transducer or accelerometer, reflected light waves, and a 
cantilever. The electronics unit would be powered by an 
implanted rechargeable battery.
The inertia mass transducer responds to acceleration, and, 
as shown in Figure 26.46, movement is converted into electri­
cal signals through the bending of a piezoelectric beam.
Another important area of research for the future is the use 
of nerve growth factors or neurotrophins to protect the cochlear 
nerve from die-back after deafness. This research may lead to 
better results with the cochlear implant, with more nerves to 
stimulate, and ultimately the pharmacological cure of a sen­
sorineural hearing loss. Nerve growth factors can prevent nerve 
die-back and cause regeneration by activating the appropriate 
gene in the spiral ganglion cell. Nerve growth factors released 
into the inner ear are either actively transported back to the 
nucleus, or stimulate a signalling cascade of proteins. The acti-
(a)
Cochlea
(b)
Acoustic
Action potentials 
in nerve fibres
Interval
histogram
1
m
\ / W
y> !
1
, i
1
TTTTTTTT 
tH 11 i
f t I i f /
A / ft / / -,/LJ
/ / / / / /  4-4-
-Hr
i
r,
\
\
(1
■
i
i*
\
\
I\
.1
— v —
1\
•
i,
1u
_ j \ _
\
A
h
u
p
s
u
p
l L
L
Figure 26.42 Temporal firing in an ensemble of fibres for (a) acoustical and (b) electrical stimulation and interspike interval histograms. P = period of stimulus. 
(From Clark. Cochl Implants Int 2000; 2: 75-97.116)
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
445
Normalised distance from stapes
Figure 26.43 The basilar membrane phase changes at the maximum. (From 
Clark. Am J  Otol 1999; 20: 4-8.109)
Figure 26.44 Advanced electrode array lying close to the spiral ganglion cells 
with increased number and density of electrode pads. (From Clark. Am J  Otol 
1999; 20: 4-8.109)
Figure 26.46 Inertia mass transducer (accelerometer): piezoelectric beam.112
vated gene then expresses the proteins required for neuronal 
health and regeneration (Figure 26.47).
Research has commenced to determine the best combina- 
tions of nerve growth factors to use. Results of studies by 
Marzella et al107 on cultures of rat spiral ganglion cells are 
shown in Figure 26.48. This figure shows the ganglion cell 
counts for a constant dose of neurotrophin NT-3 with increas­
ing concentrations of neuronal cytokine transforming growth 
factor TGF-(33. There is considerable facilitation in survival 
when the two drugs are used in combination. Possible ways of 
delivering the neutrophin to the site of action include a 
micropump, slow release from polymers, and viral vectors.
Finally, another application for neurotrophins w ill be the 
restoration of auditory plasticity in older children in whom the 
critical period has passed. Neurotrophins could facilitate a 
return of the plasticity required to develop the neural connec­
tions for coding speech frequencies. The release of neuro­
trophins into the inner ear of deaf children could not only 
improve nerve survival, but also facilitate synaptic transmis­
sion, as well as neuronal sprouting and connectivity. This could 
lead to improved cochlear implant results (Figure 26.49).
In summary, improved cochlear implant results are likely in 
the future, with a better understanding of how the brain codes 
sound as an electrical network, and an increased knowledge of 
molecular biology and how neurones respond to sound.
Neurotrophin 
Signal cascade
@ Q  
'© ft--—
Retrograde transport
°  Endocytosis
Accelerometer 
Reflected light 
Cochlea
Implant electronics and 
rechargeable battery
Cantilever 
Electrode
Eardrum
Microphone
Figure 26.45 Implanted microphone, and vibration sensors for a totally 
implantable cochlear implant.
Figure 26.47 Neurotrophin transport along the axon to the nucleus and 
excitation of the appropriate gene.
  

446 
Auditory disorders and their management
200
150
■2 100
50
□ TGF-B3
□ TGF-133 + NT-3 (350 ng/ml)
□ NT-3 (50ng/ml)
X
I I
T
I
X
I
0.01 
0.1 
1 
TGF-133 (ng/ml)
100
Figure 26.48 Combinations of neurotrophins to maximize the preservation of 
cultures of spiral ganglion cells. TGF, transforming growth factor; NT, 
neurotrophin. (Reprinted from Marzella et al. Neuro Sci Letter 1998; 240: 77-80 
with permission frm Elsevier Science.107)
Figure 26.49 Action of neurotrophins on the higher auditory pathways, 
showing release from a cochlear implant electrode, anterograde and retrograde 
transport to the presynaptic region of the neurone, facilitation of transmitter 
release, excitation of the neurotrophin gene with protein production and 
release, and further facilitation of transmitter release and neural sprouting.
(From Clark. Am J  Otol 1999; 20: 4-8.109)
Ackn o wl ed g eni en ts
I would especially like to acknowledge Mrs Sue Davine, Dr 
David Lawrence, Mrs Helen Ried for their considerable help in 
the preparation of this chapter and also the many colleagues 
from the Department of Otolaryngology and The Bionic Ear 
Institute who have contributed to the research work over the 
last 30 years, as well as the bio-engineering achievements of 
Cochlear Limited. I would also like to thank M r J.F. Patrick for 
reading the technology chapter section on comparative tech­
nology and for his helpful comments.
References
1. Clark GM, Pyman BC, Bailey QR. The surgery for multiple- 
electrode cochlear implantations. J Laryngol Otol 1979; 93: 
215-23.
2. Clark GM, Pyman BC, Webb RL, Bailey QR, Shepherd RK. 
Surgery for an improved multiple-channel cochlear implant. Ann 
Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1984; 93: 204-7.
3. Webb RL, Pyman BC, Franz BK-HG, Clark GM. The surgery of 
cochlear prostheses. In: Clark GM, Tong YC, Patrick JF, eds. 
Cochlear Prostheses. London: Churchill Livingstone, 
1990: 
153-80.
4. Clark GM, Pyman BC, Webb RL. Surgery. In: Clark GM, 
Cowan RSC, Dowell RC, eds. Cochlear Implantation for Infants 
and Children— Advances. San Diego: Singular Publishing, 1997: 
111-24.
5. Walker L, Rickards F. Reading comprehension levels of pro­
foundly, prelingually deaf students in Victoria. The Australian 
Teacher of the Deaf 1993; 32: 32-47.
6. Lawrence M. Direct stimulation of auditory nerve fibres. J Arch 
Otolaryngol 1964; 80: 367-8.
7. Clark GM. Responses of cells in the superior olivary complex of 
the cat to electrical stimulation of the auditory nerve. Exp Neurol 
1969; 24: 124-36.
8. Clark GM, Nathar JM, Kranz HG, Maritz JS. A behavioral study 
on electrical stimulation of the cochlea and central auditory path­
ways of the cat. Exp Neurol 1972; 36(2): 350-61.
9. Clark GM, Kranz HG, Minas H. Behavioral thresholds in the cat 
to frequency modulated sound and electrical stimulation of the 
auditory nerve. Exp Neurol 1973; 41: 190-200.
10. Tong YC, Clark GM, Blarney PJ et al. Psychophysical studies for 
two multiple-channel cochlear implant patients. J Acoust Soc Am 
1982; 71: 153-60.
11. Merzenich MM. Studies on electrical stimulation of the auditory 
nerve in animals and man: cochlear implants. In: The Nervous Sys­
tem, 3, Human Communication and its Disorders. New York: Raven 
Press, 1974: 537-48.
12. Black RC, Clark GM. Electrical network properties and distribu­
tion of potentials in the cat cochlea. Proc Aust Physiol Pharmacol 
Soc 1978; 9: 71.
13. Black RC, Clark GM. Differential electrical excitation of the 
auditory nerve. J Acoust Soc Am 1980; 67: 868-74.
14- Studies on Pediatric Auditory Prosthesis Implants. NIH Contract 
NOl-NS-7-2342/1987-1992.
15. Cohen LT, Busby PA, Clark GM, Cochlear implant place psycho­
physics 2. Comparison of forward masking and pitch estimation 
data. Audiol Neurootal 1996; 1: 278-92.
16. Laird RK. The bioengineering development of a sound encoder for 
an implantable hearing prosthesis for the profoundly deaf. MEng 
Sc Thesis, University of Melbourne, 1979.
17. Tong YC, Black RC, Clark GM et al. A preliminary report on a 
multiple-channel cochlear implant operation. J Laryngol Otol 
1979; 93: 679-95.
18. Simmons FB. Electrical stimulation of the auditory nerve in man. 
Arch Otolaryngol 1966; 84: 2-54.
Extracellular
transport
Signal
cascade
Neural
sprouting
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
447
19. Tong YC, Blarney P], Dowell RC, Clark GM, Psychophysical studies 
evaluating the feasibility of a speech processing strategy for a multi- 
ple-channel cochlear implant. J Acoust Soc Am 1983; 74: 73-80.
20. Riesz RR. Differential intensity sensitivity of the ear for pure 
tones. Phys Rev 1928; 31 series 2: 867-75.
21. Delattre P, Liberman AM, Cooper FS. An experimental study of 
the acoustic determinants of vowel color observations on one and 
two formant vowels synthesised from spectrographic patterns. 
Word 1952; 8(3): 195-210.
22. Fant G. On the predictability of formant levels and spectrum 
envelopes from formant frequencies. In: Halle H, Lumt M, 
Maclean H, eds. For Roman Jakobson The Hague: Mounton, 1956: 
109-120.
23. Tong YC, Dowell RC, Blarney PJ, Clark GM. Two-component 
hearing sensations produced by two-electrode stimulation in the 
cochlea of a deaf patient. Science 1983; 219: 993-4.
24. Black RC, Steel AC, Clark GM. Amplitude and pulse rate differ­
ence limens for electrical stimulation of the cochlea following 
graded degeneration of the auditory nerve. Acta Otolaryngol 1983; 
95: 27-33.
25. Blarney P, Arndt P, Bergeron S et al. Factors affecting auditory per­
formance of postlinguistically deaf adults using cochlear implants. 
Audiol Neurootol 1996; 1: 293-306.
26. Nadol JB, Young Y, Glynn RJ. Survival of spiral ganglion cells in 
profound sensory neural hearing loss: implications for cochlear 
implantation. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1989; 98: 411-16.
27. Staller S], Beiter AL, Brimacombe JA, Arndt P. Paediatric perfor­
mance with the nucleus 22-channel cochlear implant system. Am 
JOtol 1991; 12: 126-36.
28. Busby PA, Clark GM. Pitch estimation by early deafened subject 
using a multiple electrode cochlear implant. ] Acoust Soc Am 
2000; 107: 547-58.
29. Blarney PJ, Sarant JZ, Serry TA et al. Speech perception and 
spoken language in children with impaired hearing. In Proceedings 
of the 5 th International Conference on Spoken Language Processing, 
Sydney, 30 November-4 December 1998; 1: 288.
30. Clark GM, Knight L], Stanley GV. Auditory evoked potentials 
and auditory sequential memory. Proc Aust Physiol Pharmacol Soc
1974; 5(2): 185.
31. Clark GM. An evaluation of per-scalar cochlear electrode implan­
tation techniques. A histopathogical study in cats. J Laryngol Otol 
1977; 91: 185-99.
32. Flynn MC, Dowell RC, Clark GM. Speech perception of hearing 
aid users versus cochlear implantees. In: Clark GM, ed. Cochlear 
Implants. Bologna: Monduzzi Editore, 1997: 261-5.
33. Stapells DR, Gravel JS, Martin BA. Thresholds for auditory brain­
stem responses to tones in notched noise from infants and young 
children with normal hearing or sensorineural hearing loss. Ear 
Hear 1995; 16: 361-71.
34. Rickards FW, Clark GM. Steady-state evoked potentials to ampli- 
tude-modulated tones. In: Nodar RH, Barber C, eds. Evoked Poten­
tials II. Boston: Butterworths, 1984: 163-8.
35. Cohen LT, Rickards FW, Clark GM. A comparison of steady-state 
evoked potentials to modulated tones in awake and sleeping 
humans. J Acoust Soc Am 1991; 90: 2467-79.
36. Ranee G, Rickards FW, Cohen LT, De Vidi S, Clark GM. The 
automated prediction of hearing thresholds in sleeping subjects 
using auditory steady-state evoked potentials. Ear Hear 1995; 16: 
499-507.
37. Ranee G, Beer De, Cone-Wesson BK, Shepherd RK, Dowell RC, 
King A, Rickards FW, Clark GM. Clinical findings for a group of 
infants and young children with auditory neuropathy. Ear Hear 
1999; 20: 238-52.
38. O’Leary S], Mitchell TE, Gibson WP, Sanli H. Abnormal positive 
potentials in transtympanic electrocochleography. Am ] Otol 
2000; 21: 813-18.
39. Blarney P], Pyman BC, Gordon M et al. Factors predicting post­
operative sentence scores in postlinguistically deaf adult 
cochlear implant patients. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1992; 101: 
342-8.
40. Blarney PJ. Factors affecting auditory performance of postlinguisti­
cally deaf adults using cochlear implants: etiology, age, and dura­
tion of deafness. In: 100th NIH Consensus Development Conference 
on Cochlear Implants in Adults and Children, Bethesda, Maryland, 
1995, 1996: 15-20.
41. Dowell RC, Blarney PJ, Clark GM. Rehabilitation strategies for 
adult cochlear implant users. In: Clark GM ed. Cochlear Implants. 
Bologna: Monduzzi Editore, 1997: 35-40.
42. Clark GM. Cochlear implant research directions. In: Clark GM, 
ed. Cochlear Implants. Bologna: Monduzzi Editore, 1997: 55-60.
43. Dunn LM, Dunn LM. PPVT-III Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, 
3rd edn. Circle Pines, Minnesota: American Guidance Service, 
1997.
44. Semel E, Wiig EH, Secord WA. CELF 3— Clinical Evaluation of 
Language Fundamentals, 3rd edn. San Antonio: Harcourt Brace,
1995.
45. Pyman BC, Blarney PJ, Clark GM. Development of speech per­
ception in children using cochlear implants: effects of etiology and 
delayed milestones. Am J Otol 2000; 21: 57-61.
46. Eddington DK. Speech discrimination in deaf subjects with 
cochlear implants. J Acoust Soc Am 1980; 68: 886-91.
47. Eddington DK. Speech recognition in deaf subjects with multi­
channel intracochlear electrodes. Ann NY Acad Sci 1983; 405: 
241-58.
48. Merzenich M, Byers C, White M. Scala tympani electrode arrays. 
Fifth Q Prog Rep. NIH Contract NOl-59-2353 USCF San 
Francisco. 1984: 1-11.
49. Battmer R-D, Gnadeberg D, Allum-Mecklenburg DJ, Lenarz T. 
Matched-pair comparisons for adults using the Clarion or 
Nucleus devices. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1994; 104(suppl 166): 
251-4.
50. Hartmann R, Topp G, Klinke R. Discharge patterns of cat primary 
auditory fibers with electrical stimulation of the cochlea. Hear Res 
1984; 13: 47-62.
51. Hartmann R, Topp G, Klinke R. Electrical stimulation of the cat 
cochlea—discharge pattern of single auditory fibres. Adv Audiol
1984; 1: 18-29.
52. Dowell RC, Whitford LA, Seligman PM, Franz BK-HG, Clark 
GM. Preliminary results with a miniature speech processor for the 
22-electrode/cochlear hearing prosthesis. In: Sacristan T, ed.
  

448 
Auditory disorders and their management
Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery (XIV World Congress 
of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Madrid, 1990). 
Amsterdam: Kugler & Ghedini, 1990: 1167-73.
53. Cohen NL, Waltzman SB, Fisher SG. A prospective, randomised 
study of cochlear implants. N  Engl J Med 1993; 328: 233-82.
54. Wilson BS, Lawson DT, Zerbi M, Finley CC. Twelfth Quarterly 
Progress Report—Speech Processors for Auditory Prostheses, 
April 1992. NIH contract N01-DC-9-2401. Research Triangle 
Institute, North Carolina, 1992.
55. Wilson BS, Lawson DT, Zerbi M, Finley CC. Fifth Quarterly 
Progress Report—Speech processors for Auditory Prostheses, 
October 1993. NIH contract N01-DC-2-2401. Research Triangle 
Institute, North Carolina, 1993.
56. Kessler DK, Loeb GE, Barker MJ. Distribution of speech recogni- 
tion results with the Clarion cochlear prosthesis. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1995; 104(suppl 166): 283-5.
57. Clark GM. Speech processing for cochlear implants. In: Green- 
berg S, Ainsworth W, eds. Springer Handbook of Auditory Research: 
Speech Processing in the Auditory System. Berkeley, MA: Springer 
Verlag, in press.
58. Paolini AG, Clark GM. The effect of pulsatile intracochlear elec­
trical stimulation on intracellularly recorded cochlear nucleus 
neurons. In: Clark GM, ed. Cochlear Implants. Bologna: Monduzzi 
Editore, 1997: 119-24.
59. Viemeister NF. Temporal modulation transfer functions based upon 
modulation thresholds. ] Acoust Soc Am 1979; 66(5): 1364-80.
60. Shannon RV. Temporal modulation transfer functions in patients 
with cochlear implants. J Acoust Soc Am 1992; 91: 2156-64.
61. Busby PA, Tong YC, Clark GM. The perception of temporal mod- 
ulations by cochlear implant patients. J Acoust Soc Am 1993; 97: 
124-31.
62. Xu ], Shepherd RK, Millard RE, Clark GM. Chronic electrical 
stimulation of the auditory nerve at high stimulus rates: a physio- 
logical and histological study. Hear Res 1997; 105: 1-29.
63. Huang CQ, Shepherd RK, Seligman PM, Clark GM. Reduction in 
excitability of the auditory nerve in guinea pigs following acute 
high rate electrical stimulation. Proc 16th Annu Meeting Aust Neu- 
rosci Soc 1996; 7: 227.
64. Huang CQ, Shepherd RK, Seligman PM, Clark GM. Reduction in 
excitability of the auditory nerve following electrical stimulation 
at high stimulus rates: III Capacitive versus non-capacitive cou­
pling of the stimulating electrodes. Hear Res 1998; 116: 55-64.
65. Tykocinski M, Shepherd RK, Clark GM. Reduction in excitabil­
ity of the auditory nerve following electrical stimulation at high 
stimulus rates. II. Comparison of fixed amplitude with amplitude 
modulated stimuli. Hear Res 1997; 112: 147-57.
66. Brummer SB, Turner MJ. Electrical stimulation with Pt electrodes.
I—A method for determination of ‘real’ electrode areas. IEEE 
Trans Biomed Engng 1977; 24(5): 436-9.
67. Brummer SB, Turner MJ. Electrical stimulation with Pt electrodes:
II—estimation of maximum surface redox (theoretical non­
gassing) limits. IEEE Trans Biomed Engng 1977; 24(5): 440-3.
68. Brummer SB, Turner MJ. Electrochemical considerations for safe 
electrical stimulation of the nervous system with platinum elec­
trodes. IEEE Trans Biomed Engng 1977; 24(1): 59-63.
69. Shepherd RK, Clark GM, Black RC. Chronic electrical stimula­
tion of the auditory nerve in cats, physiological and histopatho- 
logical results. Acta Otolaryngol 1983(suppl 399): 19-31.
70. Schulman JH, Gord JC, Strojnik P, Whitmoyer DI, Wolfe JH. 
Voltage/current control system for a human tissue stimulator,
1996. US Patent 5,522,865.
71. Black RC, Clark GM. Electrical transmission line properties in 
the cat cochlea. Proc Aust Physiol Pharmacol Soc 1977; 8: 137.
72. Leake PA, Snyder RL, Hradek GT. Spatial organization of inner 
hair cell synapses and cochlear spiral ganglion neurons. J Comp 
Neurol 1993; 333: 257-70.
73. Clark GM, Blarney PJH, Busby PA et al. A multiple-electrode 
intracochlear implant for children. Arch Otolaryngol 1987; 113: 
825-8.
74. Michelson RP, Schindler RA. Multichannel cochlear implant pre­
liminary results in man. Laryngoscope 1981; 91: 38-42.
75. Clark GM, Busby PA, Roberts SA et al. Preliminary results for 
the 
Cochlear 
Corporation 
Multi-Electrode 
intracochlear 
implants on six prelingually deaf patients. Am J Otol 1987; 8(3): 
234-9.
76. Sutton D, Miller JM, Pfingst BE. Comparison of cochlear 
histopathology following two implant designs for use in scala tym- 
pani. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1980; 89: 11.
77. Simmons FB, Glattke TJ. Comparison of electrical and acoustical 
stimulation of the cat ear. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1970; 81: 
731-8.
78. Schindler RA, Kessler DK, Barker MA. Clarion patient perfor­
mance: an update on the clinical trials. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1995; 104(suppl 166): 269-72.
79. Shepherd RK, Matsushima J, Martin RL, Clark GM. Cochlear 
pathology following chronic electrical stimulation of the auditory 
nerve: II Deafened kittens. Hear Res 1994; 81: 150-66.
80. Tykocinski M, Cohen LT, Pyman BC et al. Comparison of elec­
trode position in the human cochlea using various peri-modiolar 
electrode arrays. Am J Otol 2000; 21: 205-11.
81. Vandali AE, Whitford LA, Plant KL, Clark GM. Speech percep­
tion as a function of electrical stimulation rate using the Nucleus 
24 cochlear implant system. Ear Hear 2000; 21: 608-24.
82. Blarney PJ, Sarant JZ, Serry TA et al. Speech perception and spo­
ken language in children with impaired hearing. Proc 5 th Int Conf 
Spoken Language Processing 1998 6: 2615-18.
83. Vandali A, Harrison JM, Huigen J, Plant K, Clark GM. Multi­
channel cochlear implant speech processing: further variations of 
the Spectral Maxima sound processor strategy. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1995; 104(suppl 166): 378-81.
84. Stark H, Tuteur FB. In: Modern Electrical Communications: theory 
and systems. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1979.
85. Von Wallenberg EL, Hochmair ES, Hochmari-Desoyer IJ. Initial 
results with simultaneous analog and pulsatile stimulation of the 
cochlea. Acta Otolaryngol 1990; 469: 140-9.
86. Jones OA, McDermott HJ, Seligman PM, Millar JB. Coding of 
voice source information in the Nucleus cochlear implant system. 
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1995; 104(suppl 166): 363-5.
87. Clark GM, Patrick JF, Bailey QR. A cochlear implant round win­
dow electrode array. J Laryngol Otol 1979; 93: 107-9.
  

Cochlear implants for adults and children 
449
88. Cohen NL, Hoffman RA, Stroschein M. Medical or surgical 
complications related to the Nucleus multichannel cochlear 
implant. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1988; 97(suppl 135): 8-13.
89. Clark GM, Cohen LT, Shepherd RK. Surgical and safety consid­
erations of multi-channel cochlear implants in children. Ear 
Hear 1991; 12(suppl): 15-24.
90. Clark GM. Learning to understand speech with the cochlear 
implant. In: Fahle M, Poggio T, eds. Perceptual Learning. 
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 2002: 147-60.
91. Serry TA, Blarney PJ, Spain P, James C. CAS ALA: Computer 
aided speech and language analysis. Aust Commun Q 1997; 
Spring: 27-8.
92. Dawson PW, Clark GM. Changes in synthetic and natural vowel 
perception after specific training for congenitally deafened 
patients using a multichannel cochlear implant. Ear Hear 1997; 
18: 488-501.
93. Sarant JZ, Blarney PJ, Cowan RS, Clark GM. The effect of lan­
guage knowledge on speech perception: what are we really assess­
ing? Am J Otol 1997; 18: S135-7.
94. Breen KJ, Plueckhahn VD, Cordner SM. Ethics, Law and Medical 
Practice. St Leonards NSW: Allen & Unwin, 1997.
95. Skinner MW, Clark GM, Whitford L et al. Evaluation of a new 
Spectral Peak coding strategy for the Nucleus 22 channels 
cochlear implant system. Am J Otol 1994; 15(suppl 2): 15-27.
96. Geers AE, Moog JS. Effectiveness of cochlear implants and tac­
tile aids for deaf children. Volta Rev 1994; 96(5): 1-198.
97. US National Institutes of Health. Cochlear implants in children. 
NIH Consensus statement, Bethesda, Maryland, 1995; 13(2): 
1-30.
98. Summerfield AQ, Marshall DH, Davis AC. Cochlear implanta­
tion: demand, costs, and utility. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1994; 
104: 245-8.
99. Clark GM. A hearing prosthesis for severe perceptive deafness— 
experimental studies. ] Laryngol Otol 1973; 87: 929-45.
100. Clark GM, Kranz HG, Minas H, Nather JM. Histopathological 
findings in cochlear implants in cats. J Laryngol Otol 1975; 8: 
495-504.
101. Agnew, WF, Yuen TGH, Pudenz RH, Bullara LA. Neuropatho- 
logical effects of intracerebral platinum salt injections. J Neu- 
ropathol Exp Neurol 1977; 36: 533-46.
102. Black RC, Hannakeer P. Dissolution of smooth platinum elec­
trodes in biological fluids. Appl Neurophysiol 1979; 42: 366-74.
103. Shepherd RK, Murray MT, Houghton ME, Clark GM. Scanning 
electron microscopy of chronically stimulated platinum intra­
cochlear electrodes. Biomaterials 1985; 6: 237-42.
104. Clark GM, Cowan RSC, Dowell RC. Ethical issues. In: Clark 
GM, Cowan RSC, Dowell RC, eds. Cochlear Implantation for 
Infants and Children. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, 
1997: 241-9.
105. Cohen LT, Saunders E, Clark GM. Psychophysics of a prototype 
peri-modiolar cochlear implant electrode array. Hear Res 2001; 
155: 63-81.
106. Treaba C, Xu J, Xu SA, Clark GM. Precurved electrode array and 
insertion tool. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1995; 104(suppl 166): 
438-41.
107. Marzella PL, Clark GM, Shepherd RK, Bartlett PF, Kilpatrick 
TJ. Synergy between TGF-B3 and NT-3 to promote the survival 
of spiral ganglia neurones in vitro. Neurosci Lett 1998; 240: 
77-80.
108. Clark GM. Electrical stimulation of the auditory nerve: the cod­
ing of frequency, the perception of pitch, and the development of 
cochlear implant speech processing strategies for profoundly deaf 
people. J Clin Physiol Pharmacol Res 1996; 23: 766-76.
109. Clark GM. Cochlear implants in the third millenium. Am J Otol 
1999; 20: 4-8.
110. Clark GM, Blarney PJ, Brown AM et al. The University of Mel­
bourne—Nucleus multi-electrode cochlear implant. Adv Otorhi- 
nolaryngol 1987; 38: 1-181 (review).
111. Clark GM. Auditory central nervous system plasticity: applica­
tion to cochlear implantation. In: Clark GM, ed. Cochlear 
Implants. Bologna: Monduzzi Editore, 1997: 19-23.
112. Roylance LM, Angell JB. A batch fabricated silicon accelerome­
ter. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 1979; ED-26(12): 1911-17.
113. Clark GM. The cochlear implant: A search for answers. Cochl 
Implants Int 2000; 1: 1-17.
114. Clark GM, Lawrence D. Technical features of the Nucleus, med- 
E1 and Clarion cochlear implants. AustJ Otolaryngol 2000; 3(5): 
516-22.
115. Shepherd R, Treaba C, Cohen L, Pyman B, Huigen J, Xu J, Clark 
GM. Peri-modiolar electrode arrays: A comparison of electrode 
position in the human temporal lobe, In: Clark GM, ed. Cochlear 
Implants. Bologna: Monduzzi Editore, 1997: 205-9.
116. Clark GM. The cochlear implants: Climbing new mountains. 
Cochl Implants Int 2000; 2: 75-97.
  

27 Disorders of the inner 
ear in adults
Alessandro Martini, Silvano Prosser
This chapter deals with inner ear disorders in adults. Rather 
than an extensive disease listing, we have attempted to provide 
a review oriented towards possible aetiological and patho­
genetic mechanisms.
Epidemiological studies have pointed out that the percent­
ages of the general population having a hearing loss exceeding 
45 d B H L and 65 d B H L are around 1.3% and 0.3% respectively 
between ages 30 and 50, and 2.3% and 7.4% between ages 60 
and 70.1
The auditory cells have a life cycle which is different from 
that of the cells of other sensory organs. Gustatory cells survive 
for 14-21 days, and olfactory cells survive for 30-90 days. Audi­
tory cells have a lifespan of 70-100 years, but their number is 
less than 20000, instead of 137 000000 retina cells.
Loss of hearing has long been considered a permanent and 
untreatable consequence of ototoxicity, trauma, ageing, etc. 
Moreover, the biochemical mechanisms by which the hair cells 
are lost are partially known, and different pathways have been 
discovered.
Advances in molecular biology and molecular genetics 
have made a major contribution to the understanding of inner 
ear disease states.
This applies not only to congenital profound hearing losses: 
note the roles of connexin 26,2-4 myosin V II,5’6 pendrin7 and 
usherin;8 but also to late-onset/progressive hearing impair­
ments: note the roles of COL4A genes in the basilar membrane 
in Alport syndrome,9 the Mpv 17 glomerulosclerosis gene, defi­
ciency of which leads to significant abnormalities of the inner 
ear structures,10 and the COCH  gene (in patients with muta­
tion in the COCH  gene, inner ear deposition of acidophilic 
ground substance, which can cause degeneration of cochlear 
and vestibular sensory axons and dendrites, probably due to 
strangulation, has been reported).11
Anatom ical structures within the cochlea are relatively 
inaccessible to fluid and tissue sampling, and this has limited 
our understanding of many pathological states of the cochlea, 
which are frequently described not in terms of the actual 
causative abnormality but rather in terms of audiometric find­
ings, i.e. threshold asymmetries, recruitment, threshold profile,
hearing loss changes over time (sudden, progressive, fluctuat­
ing), or concomitant symptoms, e.g. vertigo or tinnitus. Cer­
tainly, some forms of cochlear hearing loss which show common 
symptoms and audiometric changes have different causative 
agents. The prototype of this is the hearing impairment found 
in Meniere’s syndrome, in which essentially all pathogenic 
mechanisms have been postulated to play a role, with the pos­
sible exception of neoplastic processes. In fact, the clinical 
definition of Meniere’s syndrome is still problematic.12
The rapid advances in the understanding of physiological 
and biochemical peculiarities of the cochlea rendered it a 
complex procedure for the association of deafness with any 
specific causative agents, i.e. the nosological classification of 
cochleopathies. The integrity of the structures contained in the 
cochlear duct largely depends on a locally controlled delicate 
homeostatic equilibrium.13 The metabolism of hair cells, which 
are an extremely specialized form of neuroepithelium, depends 
on endolymph composition and on biochemical information 
exchanges with supporting cells. In turn, endolymph secretion 
and maintenance depend on the stria vascularis, itself a struc­
ture highly specialized in dealing with high metabolic cycling 
rates. Toxic substances can gain access to the cochlea through 
the bloodstream and cause abnormalities of either the neu- 
roephithelial apparatus responsible for electromechanical trans­
duction or of the vascular structure responsible for endolymph 
homeostasis. Moreover, the inner ear is capable of immune 
responses to invading viral or bacterial antigens, and can itself 
be the target of autoimmune diseases.
G iven these assumptions, acquired disorders developing 
inside the cochlea can be classified on the basis of current 
knowledge as local effects of numerous factors which can be 
vascular, dysmetabolic, toxic, inflammatory or immune-medi- 
ated. Genetic as well as traumatic or neoplastic causes may also 
be involved. The effects of normal ageing are discussed in 
Chapter 3.

452 
Auditory disorders and their management
Cochleopathies of genetic origin
Although many kindreds with autosomal dominant (A D ) pro­
gressive hereditary hearing impairment have been reported in 
the literature, no epidemiological information exists on the 
prevalence of genetic hearing impairment in the adult popula­
tion.14 The majority of these adult-onset forms are due to the 
interaction of environmental and genetic factors.15 Anim al 
studies have given valuable information on the degenerative 
processes developing in the auditory system as a function of 
age,16 and a number of syndromes are recognized both in 
humans and mice in which hearing loss presents with a late 
onset.17 In the ‘neuroepithelial defects’ group, the primary 
defect lies in the neuroepithelia of the inner ear: the auditory 
cells ultimately degenerate, but some developmental defects 
can be detected long before the onset of degeneration.18 
Cosgrove et al,9 have reported that in a gene-knockout mouse 
model for Alport syndrome, mutagenesis of the CO L4A3 gene 
produces changes throughout the basement membranes of the 
cochlea and thickening of the basement membranes surround­
ing the vessels of the stria vascularis.
Genetically determined hearing impairments may develop 
at any age throughout life, either as the sole manifestation of 
the mutant gene, as part of an inherited syndrome, or as a result 
of the interaction with exogenous factors;14 in fact, it is possible 
that mutations in some genes render the ear more susceptible to 
environmental factors causing inner ear damage (i.e. noise 
exposure, infection, injury and ototoxic drugs).19
A  genetically determined hearing loss, independently 
from onset-age and temporal progression, may develop as 
a result of:
occasional gene mutation 
inherited gene alteration
interaction between gene alteration and exogenous 
factors
Even if many (and usually the most severe) forms of genetic 
sensorineural hearing losses (SN H Ls) are congenital, a number 
of hearing impairments appear during or after the first decade of 
life and are progressive. The majority of postlingual non-syn- 
dromic sensorineural hearing impairments (N S-SN H Is) are 
A d  20 7ypical is the DFNA1 form (‘Monge’ hearing loss), in 
which low frequencies are involved during the early years, pro­
gressing to hearing impairment involving high frequencies in 
later years. Older individuals with this condition exhibit a loss 
involving all frequencies.21,22 This is also true for some other 
non-syndromic hearing disorders which may initially have dif­
ferent audiometric patterns (e.g. involving medium or high fre­
quencies) that become superimposable during adulthood, e.g.
severe pantonal hypoacusis with possible high-frequency decap­
itation, (Figure 27.1, Table 27.1).23’24
The progression of the hearing impairment is typical of A D  
forms, as stressed by Van Egmond:25 ‘Dominant inner-ear deaf­
ness is rarely congenital. It develops in middle age, has a strong 
progression with frequent lengthy pauses, and loss of hearing for 
all frequencies’. A  ‘progressive hearing impairment’ is an 
impairment of PT A  >15dB in a 10-year period, as defined by 
the European W ork Group on Genetic Hearing Impairment.26 
Subjects over the age of 50 have to be analysed according to 
other criteria to allow for the possible overlapping of normal 
ageing effects27,28 (Figure 27.2).
Even though a genetic cause is recognized, the underlying 
pathogenetic mechanism might be quite different (the most 
well-recognized example being represented by congenital 
abnormalities such as the hearing impairment associated with 
connexin 26). Various pathogenetic mechanisms are suggested 
by the different histopathological findings (see Figure 4.4). In 
some instances, a marked loss of ganglion cells, atrophy of stria 
vascularis, and degeneration of the organ of Corti (Paparella et 
al,29 in A D  mid-frequency S N H L) have been described; in A D  
progressive SN H L, Khetarpal et al11 reported acidophilic 
deposits in the spiral ligament, spiral limbus and spiral lamina 
of all three turns of the cochlea.
Table 27.1 Genetic hearing loss with no associated
abnormalities.
Autosomal dominant inheritance 
AD congenital severe SNHL 
AD congenital low-frequency SNHL 
AD progressive low-frequency SNHL with childhood onset 
(Monge type)
AD mid-frequency SNHL 
AD progressive low-frequency SNHL 
AD progressive low-frequency mixed HL 
AD unilateral SNHL
AD progressive vestibulocochlear dysfunction and SNHL
Autosomal recessive inheritance 
AR congenital severe-to-profound SNHL 
AR congenital retrocochlear HL 
AR congenital moderate SNHL 
AR early-onset progressive SNHL 
AR progressive high-frequency SNHL
X-linked inheritance 
X-linked congenital SNHL 
X-linked early-onset SNHL 
X-linked moderate SNHL 
X-linked high-frequency SNHL 
X-linked progressive mixed HL with perilymphatic gusher
Other forms of HL 
Hereditary Meniere syndrome
  

Disorders of the inner ear in adults 
453
Figure 27.1 The most common audiogram shapes in hereditary non-syndromal sensorineural hearing impairments (From Martini et al. Audiology 1997; 36: 
228-36.142). AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive.
Syndromic hearing impairments
Evidence of hearing impairment progression was found in the 
C H A R G E  association30 (Figure 27.3) and in several forms asso­
ciated with eye disorders, apart from Usher syndrome. Namely, 
hearing loss is progressive in Alstrom, Refsum and Norrie syn­
dromes (Figure 27.4), ocular albinism, some types of otic
atrophy and ‘cataracts and progressive SN H L’. In the latter 
hereditary condition, histopathological findings of severe 
cochleosaccular degeneration have been reported.31
Also, 
in 
Stickler 
syndrome 
(or 
hereditary 
arthro- 
ophthalmopathy), progressive sensorineural high-tone hearing 
loss has been reported in 80% of cases.32
  

454 
Auditory disorders and their management
Typically progressive is the hearing impairment in Alport 
syndrome (nephritis and SN H L), Epstein syndrome (macro­
thrombocytopenia, nephritis and SN H L), Lemieux-Neemeh 
syndrome (nephritis, motor and sensory neuropathy and
(a) 
HL
125
100
HF
75
^  
Lf>
50
HF
25
- - LF
0 ^
 
' i 
<
0 
40 
BO Age
Cb) 
HL
125
/ 
/
100
JL /
HF / 
/
75
/  /
 LF
50
/
25
0
. //V? : - 1 ~ ~J___________I
{) 
40 
80 
Age
(0 
HL
125
100
HF
75
50
LF
>K----- -- 
---
25 -—
------
0
1 -~ ~ ’ 
J
{3 
40 
80 
Age
Figure 27.2 Three main possible patterns of evolution of a hereditary hearing 
impairment can be defined: (a) the hearing level may be relatively stable 
throughout adult life, and hence resistant to the typical age-dependent 
deterioration; (b) the hearing level may deteriorate progressively with an age- 
dependent rate parallel to that of a normally hearing population, hence showing 
a simple additional effect of hereditary hearing loss and age-related hearing 
loss; (c) the hearing level deteriorates from an early age, at a faster rate than 
that of the normally hearing population, hence showing an interaction between 
age-related hearing loss and hereditary hearing loss. (After Martini et al.
J Audiol Med 1996; 6: 141-56.27). HF, high frequency; LF low frequency.
S N H L), and Muckle-Wells syndrome (nephritis, urticaria, amy­
loidosis and SN H L); generally, hearing loss severity and its rate 
of progression is unrelated to the degree of the associated renal 
involvement.33
In Alport s. the human temporal bone studies have reported 
a wide range of features, including collapse of the Reissner’s 
membrane, severe degeneration of the Organ of Corti, loss of 
cochlear neurons and defects in the stria vascularis.34,35
The majority of genetic hearing abnormalities associated 
with nervous system disorders are progressive.36 This is the case
Figure 27.3 MR of the left temporal bone of a patient with a CHARGE 
association: the semicircular canals are severely malformed: lateral is absent, the 
superior and posterior are hypoplastic.
(b)
RE
LE
AC
•
BC
>
AC mask
■
A
BC mask
►
<J
Figure 27.4 Norrie syndrome (oculoacousticocerebral dysplasia), (a) Eyes are 
deep-set and phthisic; the corneas are hazy, (b) Audiogram of the patient, 35 
years old, showing moderate-to-severe bilateral mixed hearing loss. RE, right 
ear; LE, left ear; AC, air conduction; BC, bone conduction.
  

Disorders of the inner ear in adults 
455
for syndromes associated with ataxia (Cockayne syndrome, 
KlippehDurante syndrome, Hallgren syndrome, Richards- 
Rundle syndrome, etc.) (Figure 27.5), with neuromuscular 
disorders (Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome, A D  Charcot- 
Marie-Tooth syndrome, Hagemoser syndrome, Pauli syndrome, 
etc.), and with sensory and autonomic neuropathies (Hicks syn­
drome, etc.), or mitochondrial syndromes such as Keams-Sayre 
syndrome (ophthalmoplegia plus), M E LA S (mitochondrial 
encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, stroke-like episodes and 
S N H L), or other forms such as W ells-Jankovic syndrome 
(spastic paraplegia, hypogonadism and SN H L). Few inner ear 
histopathological abnormalities have been reported: atrophy of 
the neuroepithelium, hair cell degeneration, prominent vessels 
with haemorrhage,37 severe cochleosaccular degeneration and 
almost complete degeneration of spiral lamina nerve fibres,38 
gliosis of ventral cochlear nuclei, and degeneration of 
cochleovestibular nerves.36
S N H L especially involving high frequencies is a common 
finding in early adulthood in metabolic disorders such as alpha- 
D-mannosidosis,39 
Fabry disease,40 Krabbe 
disease,39 
and 
adrenoleukodystrophy.41 Mucopolysaccharidoses (M P S) are a 
group of metabolic disorders which involve heteroglycan 
metabolism, and each has a specific enzymatic deficiency. M PS 
are mainly paediatric diseases. M PS II (Hunter disease) mild 
form is compatible with survival to adulthood, and some degree 
of hearing loss develops in the majority of affected persons; the 
hearing impairment is usually mixed and results from a combi­
nation of middle ear infection and glycosaminoglycan infiltra­
tion of the otic ganglion.42,43 M PS IV  (Morquio syndrome) 
presents progressive sensorineural or mixed hearing loss which 
develops in late childhood.44
Also in the D ID M O A D  syndrome (diabetes insipidus, dia­
betes mellitus, otic atrophy, sensorineural deafness or W olfran 
syndrome), SN H L involving initially high frequencies progres­
sively extends to lower frequencies and is probably related to 
atrophy of the stria vascularis.45,46
RE 
LE
AC 
•
BC 
>
AC mask 
B
BC mask 
►
A
<
Figure 27.5 Audiogram of a 24-year-old woman with a Klippel-Durante 
syndrome (ataxia and SNHL); stapedial reflexes (SN) present only at 0.5 kHz; 
DPOAE absent; no auditory evolved brainstem response (ABR); normal saccades; 
smooth pursuit showed a reduced gain and optokinetic nystagmus (OKN) was 
dysrhythmic.
The majority of genetic hearing loss forms associated with 
integumentary or with oral-dental disorders are congenital and 
profound, but some present with progressive hearing loss, such 
as type II Waardenburg syndromes47 ‘multiple pigmented naevi 
and SN H L’48 (Figure 27.6), Crandall syndrome,49 otodental 
syndrome, 
and, in some cases, ichthyosis 
(Figure 27.7).
Auditory impairment in genetic disorders of the skeleton is 
dealt with later in the chapter.
The majority of X-linked hearing impairments are due to 
mutations in the POU3F4 gene which cause either progressive 
mixed hearing loss or severe congenital S N H L.52”54
The 
SN H L 
associated with 
aminoglycoside 
therapy 
initially reported by Horiguchi in Japan in 195755 and later well 
characterized by Hu in 199156 is a peculiar situation and is dealt 
with later in the chapter.
Vascular factors
Sudden hearing loss and presbyacusis are generally considered to 
be due to vascular events. In fact, microthrombi, red cell slugging 
or spontaneous haemorrhages may cause rapid local perfusion 
defects which result in sudden hearing impairment. Such situa­
tions may typically occur in atherosclerotic disease, but also in 
haematological disorders such as leukaemia, macroglobuli- 
naemia, polycythaemia, sickle cell disease, and systemic immune 
disorders with antiendothelial cell antibodies.57 Even infectious 
processes such as syphilis may cause local bloodflow defects 
secondary to arteritis obliterans concomitantly with endolymph 
reabsorption defects.58 Vasospasms have been postulated as being 
the cause of sudden deafness occurring in patients suffering from 
headaches.59 The arteries involved in cochlear ischaemic phe­
nomena are the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (A IC A ), the 
internal auditory artery, the main cochlear artery (common 
cochlear artery) with its vestibulocochlear branch, and the net­
work of spiral and radial arteries which follow the conformation 
of the cochlea (Figure 27.8). Different degrees and types of hear­
ing losses may occur, depending on the level of obstruction, e.g. 
low- and high-frequency deafness, and may be associated with 
other signs and symptoms due to ischaemia of contiguous struc­
tures, e.g. vertigo or facial palsy. Cochlear anoxia accounts for 
changes of microphonic potential and V U Ith  nerve action 
potential that ensue over a few minutes.60 If anoxia persists, per­
manent damage to hair cells occurs and the hearing deficit 
becomes irreversible. A  slowly progressive vasculopathy has 
been associated with varying degrees of atrophy of the stria vas­
cularis leading to degenerative processes of the organ or Corti. 
These events, occurring mostly in the elderly, define a ‘vascular’ 
form of presbyacusis that is identifiable pathologically.61
Anoxia consequent to vascular diseases affecting the inner 
ear blood supply leads to a damage of the hair cells. The 
resulting hearing loss may often be permanent, due to the 
cochlear vessel distribution, which is mostly terminal
  

456 
Auditory disorders and their management
(a)
79
IV
X  30 ___ 
i
31 X  20^ L t8 ^ _ L i0 1  :
T
l  
^  
2 ^
3
 ^
4
 *
5
 ^ - * 6
~ T ~  
^
c t n !
*
•
” 
a '  
o '
D 
q 
in 
L_M 11
a
 
3
 
Multiple compound i 
E
 
€
 
Hearing loss
Figure 27.6 Multiple pigmented naevi and SNHL syndrome: (a) pedigree of family with multiple pigmented naevi and SNHL; (b) audiograms of patients;
  

Disorders of the inner ear in adults 
457
Figure 27.6 cont. Multiple pigmented naevi and SNHL syndrome: (c) 
photograph of the proband showing numerous pigmented naevi. (From Peserieo 
et al. IntJPediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1981; 3: 269-72.48)
Immune and inflammatory factors
Inflammatory disorders
Middle ear or meningeal inflammatory processes may extend to 
the cochlea (Table 27.2), the former through the fenestra 
vestibuli or fenestra cochlea or via fistular tracts, so-called 
‘otogenous labyrinthitis’ (Figures 27.9 and 27.10), and the 
latter by continuity through the cochlear aqueduct,54 or via the 
internal auditory meatus, so-called ‘meningogenic labyrinthi­
tis’. The inflammatory response of the cochlea can be classified 
clinically as serous or purulent. The serous form, characterized 
by endolymphatic hydrops and increased protein concentration 
in the perilymph, is believed to be due to bacterial, viral or 
toxin antigens. It manifests itself as rapid-onset hearing loss, 
frequently associated with tinnitus and vertigo, and is generally 
reversible unless there has been permanent damage to cochlear 
membranous structures. The purulent form, due to pyogenic 
organisms gaining access to the labyrinth, is characterized by 
massive neutrophil infiltration of the perilymphatic spaces and,
Figure 27.7 Extensive ichthyosiform dermatosis in a young female (a).Extensive ichthyosiform dermatosis in a young male (b), unrelated to the female in (a), 
presenting moderate SNHL (Courtesy of Professor Andrea Peserieo.)
  

458 
Auditory disorders and their management
Posterior
vestibular
vein
Vestibular
branch
Basilar artery
Vertebral artery
Vestibulo - cochlear vein
Vein of the cochlear aqueduct
Common modiolar vein
Vein of the 
round window
Cochlear
branch
Vein of 
the scala 
vestibuli
Vein of 
the scala 
tympani
Spiral 
modiolar artery
Common-cochlear artery
Vestibulo-cochlear
artery
Anterior 
vestibular vein
Anterior
vestibular artery
Labyrinthine artery
Anterior inferior 
cerebellar artery
Table 27,2 Bacterial and viral agents most commonly
associated with internal ear infections (see Figures 27.11
and 27,12),
Bacterial agents primarily acting in the middle ear 
Streptococcus pneumoniae 
Haemophilus influenzae 
Staphylococcus aureus 
Moraxella catarrhalis
Group A haemolytic streptococcus (Streptococcus pyogenes)
Bacterial agents primarily acting in the meningeal spaces 
Haemophilus influenzae 
Streptococcus pneumoniae 
Neisseria meningitidis 
Listeria monocytogenes
Bacterial agent acting through late endoarteritis 
Treponema pallidum
Viral agents
Influenzae viruses 
Measles virus 
Rubella virus
Mumps virus 
Cytomegalovirus 
Varicella-zoster virus
subsequently, of the membranous portion, which undergoes 
proteolytic necrotic changes followed by ossification. In this sit­
uation, auditory function is permanently suppressed. The 
above-described events are due to an internal ear immune 
response,63 made possible by the presence of antibodies in the 
perilymph and of immunocompetent cells in the endolym­
phatic sac. The former, probably deriving from blood or
(b)
Main vascular diseases involved in sudden hearing loss
1. Atherosclerotic disease
2. Haematological disorders (leukaemia, macroglobulinaemia, 
polycythaemia, sickle cell disease)
3. Systemic immune disorders (autoimmune vasculitis)
4. Otosyphilis (vasculitis)
(c)
Local vascular mechanisms in sudden hearing loss
1. Occlusion
2. Haemorrhage
3. Vasospasm
Figure 27.8 (a) Cochlear blood supply, (b) Main vascular diseases involved in 
sudden hearing loss, (c) Local vascular mechanisms in hearing loss. (Part (a) is 
reproduced from Audiologists' Desk Reference Volume 1. Diagnostic Audiology 
Principles, Procedures and Protocols. 1st edition by Hall. © 1997. Reprinted 
with permission of Delmar Learning, a division of Thomson Learning: 
www.thomsonrights.com. Fax 800 730-2215.)
cerebrospinal 
fluid 
(C SF), 
participate 
in 
neutralization, 
opsonization and complement fixation. The latter may oppose 
bacterial or viral antigens directly or by eliminating infected 
cells, and by subsequently giving rise to local antibody produc­
tion. The endolymphatic sac, which is considered to be crucial 
in internal ear immune function,64 is capable of the production 
of cytokines such as interleukin-2 (IL-2), the early release of 
which may induce rapid immunocompetent cell recruitment 
from the bloodstream. Local neutrophil migration occurs 
initially, followed by T  and B lymphocytes, while in situ anti­
body production occurs later. Concomitantly with the appear­
ance of these immunocompetent cell populations, a dense 
extracellular matrix is formed which is tightly adherent to bone 
and provides a support for ossification.65 The osteoblasts neces­
sary for ossification processes may differentiate from mesenchy­
mal cells dispersed in the extensive microvascular mesh of the 
cochlea.66
The severe hearing losses resulting from such situations are 
a consequence of degenerative processes involving the whole 
organ of Corti, the stria vascularis, and the spiral ganglion, at 
the completion of the inflammatory reaction.
The inner ear is the site of immune-mediated responses. 
They can be secondary to local inflammation (middle ear, 
temporal bone), or can be part of a more generalised 
immunity disorder. The consequences on the cochlea 
include vasculitis, Cortfs organ atrophy, otospongiosis, 
ossification, 
hydrops, spireal 
ganglion degeneration. 
Hearing impairment may be either sudden or progressive, 
from a slight high frequency loss, to anacusis.
  

Disorders of the inner ear in adults 
459
Figure 27.9 Male, 49 years old, complaining of moderate conductive right-ear 
hearing loss (a), with no dizziness, and presenting a fistula of the lateral 
semicircular canal (CT scan) (b) due to cholesteatoma.
Immune-mediated internal ear disorders
These are due to an ‘uncontrolled’ immune response, which in 
autoimmune disease is directed towards self-antigens. The 
internal ear may not be the primary target, but may rather be 
involved as an ‘innocent bystander’ by immunocomplex depo­
sition59 or by other mechanisms, whereas the inner ear is 
involved as part of a systemic autoimmune disease, e.g. relaps­
ing polychondritis (Figure 27.13), systemic lupus erythemato­
sus, 
rheumatoid 
arthritis, 
systemic 
vasculitis, 
Wegener 
syndrome (Figure 27.14), myasthenia gravis, systemic sclerosis, 
or Cogan’s syndrome (Figure 27.15).
Immune-mediated cochlear disorders have variable clinical 
pictures. Most commonly, there is progressive bilateral hearing 
loss ensuing over a few months, but a Meniere-type picture, as 
well as sudden uni- or bilateral deafness67 or otosclerosis, can 
also occur. This clinical variability may be related to the differ­
ent immune mechanisms underlying these disorders.68 Cochlear 
pathological changes include cochlear vasculitis,69 atrophy of 
the organ of Corti, otospongiosis of the otic capsule, endolym­
phatic hydrops, and spiral ganglion degeneration. Establishing a 
diagnosis can be difficult, since laboratory test results are not 
generally specific enough. The response to steroids or immuno­
suppressive drugs may contribute to the confirmation of a diag­
nostic suspicion.
Even though the autoimmune mechanisms acting in the 
cochlea are still unclear, auto immunity directed towards type II 
collagen has been reported in patients with relapsing polychon­
dritis, and antibodies specifically reacting with type II collagen 
have also been detected in patients with otosclerosis and 
M eniere’s syndrome.70 This type of collagen is present in the 
membranous structures of the cochlea, the enchondral bushel, 
the interosseus corpuscles of the otic capsule, the spiral liga­
ment, the limbus, and Rosenthal’s channel. Laboratory evalua­
tions may or may not be specific. The potentially diagnostic 
tests most commonly employed for initial screening71 are: 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (E S R ), autoantibody screening 
(i.e. rheumatoid factor, antinuclear and antithyroglobulin anti­
bodies), IgG, IgM, IgA, and complement (CH50, C3, C4, 
C lq ). Other tests, the diagnostic applicability of which is 
incompletely defined, are: lymphocyte transformation and 
migration inhibition assays, indirect immunofluorescence, and 
Western blot analysis for cochlear antigens.72
Meniere’s disease
M eniere’s disease is defined as the idiopatic syndrome of 
endolymphatic hydrops. The condition of a hydropic distension 
of the endolymphatic system is thought to be responsible of the 
the clinical signs the disease more often displays: bounds of 
rotational vertigo, unilateral hearing loss with tinnitus and full­
ness. However, the clinical picture may be multiform, both in 
the consistency of the main symptoms, and in their temporal 
evolution. C linical terms like ‘cochlear Meniere’ or ‘vestibular 
Meniere’ might express two extreme forms of the disease, with
  

460 
Auditory disorders and their management
AC
BC
RE 
LE 
«
> 
<
AC mask 
m 
BC mask
Figure 27.10 Male, 52 years old, complaining of severe mixed right-ear hearing 
loss (a) due to intralabyrinthic chronic cholesteatomatous otitis media (CTscan) (b).
Figure 27.12 A woman, 72 years old, complaining of sudden severe SNHL and 
vertigo, and right facial palsy (a), and presenting the typical vesicles involving 
the pinna (b).
RE 
LE
AC 
e
BC 
>
AC mask 
■
BC mask 
►
A
<1
Figure 27.11 A woman, 76 years old, admitted to the hospital for sudden left 
hearing loss (see audiogram) and vertigo due to acute haemorrhagic otitis media.
only auditory or vestibular sympthoms respectively. A  diagnos­
tic scale for Meniere disease has been proposed73 providing use­
ful criteria to help the clinician in staging the disease from 
‘possible’ to ‘probable’, ‘definite’ to ‘certain’.
According to the classical theory, the typical recurrencies of 
Meniere disease are due to the increase of endolymph volume,
distension of the whole endolymphatic system, and final ruptures 
in the membranes which separate the endo-perilymphatic com­
partments. A  consequent concentration of potassium in peri­
lymph space would inhibit the bio-electric activity of the 
labyrinthine receptors. It has been recognized that Meniere dis­
ease has not a single causative factor. Rather, many pathological 
conditions could trigger the endolymphatic hydrop, even 
though such conditions are quite differing and uncorrelated to 
each other (endocrine disorders, unbalance of autonomic 
nervous system, allergy, infections, vascular disorders, auto­
immune disorders). Recently, theories pointing to immuno- 
mediated 
events 
primarly 
taking 
place 
within 
the 
endolymphatic have been proposed. Results from several labora­
tories suggest that specific H LA  antigen haplotypes could be 
associated to increased risk of developing inner-ear disorders as 
Meniere.74 Infectious diseases sustained by ototropic viruses (the 
more frequent could be C M V 75 could enter the endolymph, har­
bouring in a latent state within the endolymphatic sac. The con­
sequent immune-mediated response could explain the temporal 
course of the disease, at least in a major proportion of cases.
The diagnostic key of Meniere disease remains so far 
based on clinical observation. Instrumental (audiometry, A BR ,
  

Disorders of the inner ear in adults 
461
Figure 27.13 Relapsing polychondritis involving the auricle in a 58-year-old 
man.
Figure 27.15 (a), Temporal bone CT scan of a 48-year-old woman who 
presented a rapidly bilateral progressive profound SNHL, due to Cogan's 
syndrome: the cochlear duct is partially occluded by fibrotic and bone tissue. 
The patient underwent cochlear implant surgery (postsurgery CT scan) (b).
RE 
LE
A
<
Figure 27.14 A man, 41 years old, who presented as first localization of 
Wegener left otitis; audiogram (a) before and (b) after cortisone treatment.
electrocochleography, vestibular investigation) and imaging 
results (CT, M R I) serve to confirm a peripheral origin of the 
sympthoms, by excluding any kind of retrocochlear involve­
ment. C linical investigations concerning with endocrine, 
metabolic, cardiovascular, renal conditions are aimed to find 
out whether other factors may contribute to precipitate the 
disease.
For the medical treatment of Meniere disease acute attack 
antihistamines are used for their anti-hemetic and vestibular 
sedative effect, or diazepam for its tranquilizing effect. 
Neuroleptic drugs are valid vestibular suppressor although they 
may have anticholinergic and extrapyramidal side-effects. For 
the long term treatment of Meniere’s disease a great number of
  

462 
Auditory disorders and their management
medical and surgical remedies have been proposed, according to 
the belief of its pathogenesis. The medical therapy includes 
other than a dietary salt restriction (intake < 1 g/day), betahis- 
tine, diuretics (glycerol, hydrochlorothiazyde), vaso-active 
drugs (trimetazidine), cynarizine), steroids and amynoglyco- 
sides (streptomycin, gentamicin). These two latter classes of 
drugs can be administred via intratympanic injection.76,77 W hile 
aminoglycosides may effectively control vertigo because of their 
destructive action on sensory vestibular cells, they may also be 
active on cochlear hair cells with a consequent severe-profound 
hearing loss. Among the surgical treatments the efficacy of 
endolymphatic sac surgery is controversial, while vestibular 
neurectomy can be an ultimate option for a little proportion of 
otherwise untreatable cases.78
Metabolic factors
Oxidative metabolism supplies the necessary energy to hair cells 
for neuroelectric transduction. High A T P concentrations favour 
those active ionic transport mechanisms performed by the stria 
vascularis on which endocochlear electrical potentials are 
dependent. Any metabolic derangement capable of interfering 
with such processes can result in hearing loss, e.g. diabetes mel- 
litus, renal insufficiency, or hypothyroidism. The hearing defect 
is generally bilateral, initially involves high-pitch frequencies 
and later extends to middle-low frequencies. However, since 
metabolic diseases have generalized effects, this type of hearing 
problem may also depend on extracochlear lesions involving the 
V U Ith  nerve or the central auditory pathways.
The cochlear homeostasis is highly sensitive to disorders 
of general metabolism, which are mainly directed to the 
cochlear vascular supply and stria vascularis. As a conse­
quence, hair cells and spiral ganglion degenerate with the 
functional result of a progressive bilateral hearing loss.
Acquired hypothyroidism occurs most frequently as a con­
sequence of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Even though the relation­
ship between thyroid hormone levels and hearing loss is 
unclear, it has been postulated that a deficiency of these hor­
mones may impair the oxidative phosphorylation leading to 
A T P synthesis and result in cellular dysfunction. This would in 
turn lead to atrophy of the stria vascularis, and hair cell and spi­
ral ganglion degeneration.79 Moderate hearing loss has been 
observed in 25-50% of patients with severe hypothyroidism. 
This finding, however, was not confirmed by studies in which 
advanced age was taken into consideration as an independent 
cofactor potentially accounting for hearing deficits.80 W hether
thyroid hormone replacement is able to restore hearing is also
i 
81,82 
unclear.
Type II and IV  hyperlipidaemias may be responsible for 
some forms of hearing impairment83 which frequently have a
tendency to fluctuate. High blood lipids would result in hyper­
viscosity with the potential for partial or complete obstruction 
of the vascular network and hence for temporary or permanent 
cochlear function impairment. The reduction of blood lipid 
levels, and an appropriate diet, especially in younger patients, 
may improve hearing threshold. 
This may be less likely to 
occur in the elderly, in whom other factors concomitant with 
dyslipidaemia, such as hypertension and excessive noise expo­
sure, may have a synergistic effect and contribute to more 
permanent cochlear damage. However, studies have failed to 
show a straightforward relationship between hearing threshold 
and blood levels of serum lipids. ’
Microangiopathies and polyneuropathies are typical of dia­
betes mellitus. The hearing loss frequently observed in patients 
with diabetes mellitus has been attributed to lesions of the 
cochlear vascular supply87 consisting of endothelial prolifera­
tion and lipid deposition, or to degeneration of V U Ith  nerve 
neural elements (Figures 27.16 and 27.17). However, it is still 
unclear whether the vascular cochlear lesions are specific to
Figure 27.16 Diabetic patient with normal pure tone audiogram and with (a) a 
pathological ABR and (b) a normal MLR pattern.
  

Disorders of the inner ear in adults 
463
diabetes mellitus88 or rather a consequence of its associated 
complications, i.e. atherosclerosis, hypertension,89 renal failure, 
and dyslipidaemia.
The association of renal failure and hearing loss has been 
frequently observed. This may be related to the many ionic 
transport function similarities between nephron and cochlea.
Latency (ms)
Latency (ms)
Figure 27.17 Diabetic patient with a normal audiogram showing a 
pathological ABR (a) and MLR pattern (b).
In addition, some drugs have been shown to be toxic to both 
organs. Cochlear lesions characterized by basophilic depositions 
in the stria vascularis and by varying degrees of hair cell degen­
eration have been reported.90 It is still controversial, however, 
whether cochlear lesions are due to the same causative agents 
responsible for renal failure or whether they are the conse­
quence of electrolyte disturbances, drug administration (e.g. 
aminoglycoside antibiotics, loop diuretics), haemodialysis, or 
concurrent hypertension.91
Ototoxic factors
A  number of drugs have been recognized to potentially damage 
the inner ear,92 and can be classified into four groups: amino­
glycoside antibiotics, chemotherapeutic agents, anti-inflamma­
tory drugs and quinine, and loop diuretics (Table 27.3). A  
continuous high-pitch tinnitus 
is frequently the 
initial 
complaint, and this may be related to basal turn hair cells being 
affected first. Threshold elevation is generally bilateral and 
begins for high frequencies. The severity of hearing loss depends 
on the offending drug plasma levels, renal function, and general 
clinical conditions. Hearing problems may ensue from a few 
minutes to several days after drug administration; however, late 
and slowly progressive hearing loss occurring several years later 
is possible, through synergistic effects between drugs and other
93
noxious agents.
Ototoxic agents, such as aminoglycosides and platinum 
compounds, exert their adverse effect on the hair cells, by 
interfering with membrane permeability, and mitochon­
drial, D N A , R N A  systems. The resulting hearing loss is 
dose-dependent and permanent,
Aminoglycoside antibiotics
These bactericidal drugs act by inhibiting protein synthesis at 
the bacterial ribosome level. They are excreted unaltered in 
the urinary tract and tend to be tissue bound. Streptomycin,
Table 27.3 Common ototoxic drugs.
Antibiotics
Chemotherapies
Diuretics
Anti-inflammatory
Anti-malarial
Streptomycin
Kanamicin
Amikacin
Gentamicin
Tobramycin
Netilmicin
Neomycin
Cis-platinum 
Dichloromethothrexate 
Nitrogen mustard
Ethacrynie acid
Furosemide
Bumetanide
Salicylates
Naproxen(?)
Quinine
Chloroquine
  

464 
Auditory disorders and their management
gentamicin, kanamycin, amikacin, and tobramycin have a 
two-stage toxicity for hair cells.94 Initially, after the antibiotic 
has penetrated the endolymph, there is a reversible blockade 
of ionic channels. In the second stage, the drug becomes more 
strongly bound to cellular phospholipids and proteins, and cell 
permeability increases, causing a depletion of magnesium ions, 
which are present in particularly high amounts in the mito- 
chondrial apparatus. This results in blockage of many enzy- 
matic reactions, especially oxidative phosphorylation, leading 
to cell death.95 Some studies suggest that the cytotoxicity of 
these antibiotics may be mediated by iron-antibiotic com­
plexes with free radical production.96 Other mechanisms possi­
bly involving cellular D N A  and R N A  have been postulated in 
order to account for the different aspects relating to the degree 
of hearing loss and to its time-course. The incidence of amin- 
ioglycoside-related hearing loss occurring with therapeutic 
doses has been estimated to be from 2.5% to 14%.97
Several reports suggest a genetic component influencing 
the susceptibility to normal doses of aminoglycosides with vari­
able penetrance, with a typically maternal inheritance pattern 
in most kindres.56,98,99 Mitochondrial D N A  mutations have 
been implicated in both syndromal and nonsyndromal sen­
sorineural hearing loss;100 the np 1555 mutation clearly inter­
acts with aminoglycosides in causing SN H I in humans.99 
However, in other cases a need for co-operation between 
nuclear and mitochondrial D N A  in the expression of the 
pathological phenotype has also been inferred.101,102
Chemotherapeutic agents
Platinum compounds (cisplatin and carboplatin), nitrogen mus­
tards, amino-nicotinamide and dichloromethotrexate are well 
known to be ototoxic. Among these, cisplatin is the one most 
toxic to the cochlea, being associated with dose-dependent 
extensive and permanent damage (Figure 27.18). Functional 
and structural alterations are similar to those induced by amino­
glycosides,103-105 and may be related to cellular calcium channel 
blockage,106 and to damage of the stria vascularis107 resulting 
from inhibition of an important enzyme function, i.e. adenylate 
cyclase. Hearing loss may initially be for high frequencies, and 
occasionally a limited defect from frequencies above 8 kHz has 
been observed. The incidence of cisplatin-associated hearing 
problems has been estimated to be in the range of 17% with vari­
ations relating to both single dose levels and cumulative drug 
exposure,108-110 or to additive toxicity with other drugs. In paedi­
atric patients treated for brain tumours,111 moderate-to-severe 
hearing loss may occur in up to half of the cases, most likely 
because of concomitant radiotherapy.
Diuretics
The most commonly employed loop diuretics are furosemide 
and bumetanide. Ethacrynic acid is used less frequently. They 
act by inhibition of chloride and hence sodium reabsorption in 
the loop of Henle. These drugs cause a generally reversible
Figure 27.18 (a) Outer hair cell damage in a rat treated with cis-platinum 
(SEM); (b) magnification showing fusion of the cilia. (From Hatzopovlos et al. 
Audiology 200]] 40: 253-64.143)
hearing loss. This toxicity is most frequently of rapid onset, and 
resolution occurs when furosemide is discontinued, while 
ethacrynic acid ototoxicity is associated with a slower course 
and delayed recovery. Permanent hearing loss has been reported 
in patients with renal insufficiency treated with both loop 
diuretics and aminoglycoside antibiotics, which may have syn­
ergistic ototoxicity. Cochlear damage is most frequently at the 
level of the stria vascularis, with oedema of the marginal por­
tion and endothelial rupture, followed by damage to the outer 
hair cell stereocilia, mostly of the basal turn of the cochlea. 
Adenylate cyclase enzyme complex abnormalities may be 
responsible for damage to the stria vascularis.112 The latter 
results in ionic imbalance of endocochlear fluids and hair cell
  

Disorders of the inner ear in adults 
465
electromechanical transduction impairment.113 More recently, 
studies of molecular biology applied to the electroneutral 
Na-K-2C1 cotransporter system within the cochlea revealed 
that this system is inhibited by loop diuretics, accounting for 
the different sensitivity of diuretic potency and ototoxicity 
often reported in clinical and experimental studies.114
Salicylates, NSAIDs and quinine
A t high doses (4-5g/day for acetylsalicylic acid), both salicy- 
lates and some of the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(N SA ID s) may cause moderate hearing loss which is generally 
reversible.115 The ototoxicity mechanism may involve the outer 
hair cells; however, a reduced blood supply to the cochlea has 
also been postulated. Increased prostaglandin and decreased 
leukotriene synthesis and their effect on inflammatory processes 
may also be related to ototoxicity.
Quinine has been substituted by newer and less toxic anti- 
malarial drugs. Its cochlear toxicity is similar to that of salicy­
lates, i.e. dose dependent and generally reversible, while its 
labyrinth toxicity is more severe and permanent.116 Even 
though quinine effects are less well understood than the effects 
of salicylates, they seem to be related to vasoconstrictive 
phenomena and to abnormalities of potassium-dependent 
channels of the stria vascularis and of the surface of the outer 
hair cells.
Trauma
A  trauma can produce hearing (and vestibular) impairment in 
different ways: (1) ossicular chain injuries (Figure 27.19), (2) 
perilymphatic fistulae, (3) labyrinthine concussion, (4) baro­
trauma, (5) temporal bone fractures and (6) penetrating wounds 
(Figure 27.20). W e w ill discuss here hearing impairments due 
only to labyrinthine concussion, barotrauma and temporal bone 
fractures. Noise trauma is discussed in Chapter 17.
(c) dB HL 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
SO 
90 
100 
110 
120
_L_
_L_
.125 
.25 
.5
AC
BC
RE 
LE 
m
>
AC mask 
H 
BC mask 
►
A
< 1
8 
kHz
Labyrinthine concussion
Balance and hearing loss may follow a blow to the head, even 
in the absence of radiologically evident labyrinth fractures.117 
Even if brain and brainstem haemorrhages have been reported,
the principal mechanism involved is a concussion injury to
118
inner ear structures.
According to Schuknecht,117 two possible mechanisms are 
involved: a pressure wave transmitted through bone to the 
cochlea, or a sudden movement of the stapes footplate due to 
the inertia of the tympanic membrane and ossicles when a sud­
den acceleration or deceleration is applied.
Regarding the severity of the head trauma, this usually must 
be enough to produce loss of consciousness; less severe trauma, 
however, can cause permanent S N H L.117 The most frequent 
vestibular consequence is benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
or cupulolithiasis.119
Figure 27.19 Temporal bone CT scan of a 34-year-old man, showing ossicular 
chain injuries with rotation of the incus ((a) b1 coronal and (b) b2 axial views) 
and (c) audiogram.
  

466 
Auditory disorders and their management
(a)
d8 HL
0
10
► 
► 
►
20
30
*
RE
LE
40
50
AC
•
60
BC
>
70
80
AC mask
■
A
90
BC mask
►
<
100
no
-
120
l
i
t
 
I
I
 
1
i i
.125 .25 
.5 
1 
2 
4
8 
kHz
Figure 27.20 Audiogram of a patient demonstrating a small posterosuperior 
tympanic membrane perforation and left-beating spontaneous nystagmus after 
a toothpick trauma, presenting a right mixed hearing loss (a), and a bubble of 
blood inside the vestibule ((b), CT scan).
Toglia et al120 reported that after whiplash injuries, vestibu- 
lar abnormalities are present in 50% of patients, stressing the 
importance of electronystagmography.
Barotrauma
Aural barotrauma is caused by damage to the ear due to a sud­
den and significant change of air pressure at the level of the 
drum, as may occur in flying and diving, forced sniffing or a slap 
involving the ear. The acute change of pressure in the middle 
ear which is not equalized by the Eustachian tube may result in 
rupture of the oval or round window membranes with perilym­
phatic fistula and/or breaks of the cochlear membranes (in  par­
ticular, Reissner’s membrane). The symptoms of inner ear 
barotrauma include SN H L, tinnitus and persistent vertigo. In 
cases of persistent symptoms or worsening of inner ear func­
tions, an exploratory tympanotomy may be warranted (Figure 
27.21).
Temporal bone fractures
Temporal bone fractures have been classified as:
it 
longitudinal (i.e. linear breaks through the floor of the 
middle cranial fossa passing parallel and adjacent to the 
anterior margin of the petrous pyramid)
• 
transverse (i.e. perpendicular to the long axis of the petrous
pyramid)
i 121,122 
■ 
mixed.
A  longitudinal temporal bone fracture usually results in SN H L 
limited to high frequencies and most severe at 4 kHz, similar to 
an acoustical trauma.123
A  transverse fracture usually results in a complete loss of 
cochlear and vestibular function as it passes through the 
vestibule of the inner ear, causing extensive destruction of the 
membranous labyrinth117 (Figures 27.22 and 27.23).
Possible complications of a temporal bone fracture are: endo­
lymphatic hydrops,124’125 perilymph fistula of the opposite ear,117 
delayed meningitis,126 cholesteatoma,127 and facial nerve palsy.
Disorders of bone
Many disorders of the temporal bone may produce impairment 
of audiovestibular function. Otosclerosis is the most common of 
these disorders, but osteogenesis imperfecta, Paget’s disease and 
fibrous dysplasia can also be observed in clinical practice.
Bone diseases involving the temporal bone, some of them 
having a genetic origin, as well as traumatic discontinu­
ities of the otic capsule may damage the inner ear mem­
branous structures. Hearing impairment strictly depends 
on the extent of the local lesion* Otosclerosis represents a 
bone disease limited to otic capsule. Although it becomes 
auditorily evident with a conductive loss due to the stape 
fixation, its long term effects may progressively involve the 
inner ear.
Otosclerosis
Otosclerosis is a disorder of the bony labyrinth which becomes 
clinically evident when the stapes footplate is involved by the 
disease. The aetiology of otosclerosis is not clear, and although 
the presence of siblings with otosclerosis in certain families has 
been described, the genetics remain poorly understood.128 The 
majority of most recent studies indicate an A D  mode of inher­
itance with incomplete penetrance. Multifactorial inheritance 
is likely to play a role in the expressivity or penetrance of oto­
sclerosis. Recently, linkage studies of a family with otosclerosis 
have led to the localization of a gene for otosclerosis to chro­
mosome 15q25-q26.129
  

Disorders of the inner ear in adults 
467
Figure 27.21 Audiograms of patients who presented with various degrees of 
SNHL due to barotrauma: MA, female aged 37, referred with a sudden hearing 
loss during diving: (a) before explorative tympanotomy; (b) some days after 
the closure of a round window fistula, (c) PA, male aged 22, referred sudden 
left hearing loss after diving; explorative tympanotomy showed a rupture of 
the round window membrane, (d) BL, male aged 31, referred a right sudden 
hearing loss after diving; an explorative tympanotomy was performed 10 days 
later for persisting severe dizziness and showed a fracture of the right 
footplate; patient referred after the closure of the fistula immediate 
improvement of the dizziness but the hearing did not improve, (e) NA, female 
aged 40, presented a sudden SNHL after a basketball ear trauma. Audiogram.
Otosclerosis can involve the inner ear and produce pro­
gressive S N H L.130
It is a common clinical practice observation that otosclero­
sis tends to progress with time to neurosensory involvement and 
that the operated ear worsens less than the contralateral non- 
operated ear. (Figures 27.24 and 27.25).
There is no agreement as to the relationship between 
otosclerotic foci and hearing impairment. Keleman and 
Linthicum 131 showed a positive correlation between the magni- 
tude of SN H L and the severity of atrophic change in the spiral 
ligament, while Schuknecht and Barber132 found no significant 
correlation between the extent of endosteal involvement and 
the bone conduction threshold abnormality. The concept of 
cochlear otosclerosis itself has been questioned.133,134
Sclerosing bone dysplasias
The sclerosing bone dysplasias are a group of genetic disorders 
characterized by overgrowth and increased radiological density 
of the skeleton.135 Severe auditory impairment is a consistent 
feature of many conditions in this group; it is progressive and 
mainly the result of the entrapment of the acoustical nerves by 
the bone overgrowth in the cranial foramina136 (Figure 27.26).
In craniometaphyseal dysplasia, there are a number of pro­
gressive changes that impact on communicative impairment. 
The hearing loss, both conductive and sensorineural, becomes 
progressive in the second decade of life. However, the natural 
history also involves a progressive change in speech resonance, 
and the compression of the cranial nerves usually produces 
facial paresis and may impair articulation and oral resonance.137
  

468 
Auditory disorders and their management
AC
BC
AC mask 
BC mask
RE 
LE
Figure 27.22 Male, 33 
years old, complaining 
of a left SNHL (a) after 
a car accident with no 
evidence of a temporal 
bone fracture (CT scan, 
(b))
RE 
LE
AC 
#
BC 
>
AC mask 
e
BC mask 
&
RE
LE
AC
BC
>
AC mask
■
A
RC mask
<1
(b) dBHL 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
120
>< >
RE
LE
AC
•
BC
>
AC mask
El
A
BC mask
>
<
J25 ,25 
.5
-i__i
8 
kHz
Figure 27.24 (a) and (b) Different degrees of hearing loss in otosclerotic 
subjects.
Paget's disease
This disorder, also known as osteitis deformans, may involve 
the skull, sacrum, pelvis, femur, and tibia. The neurocranium is 
commonly involved in this disease of unknown origin (autoso- 
mal dominant? due to viral infection?), and when the temporal 
bone is involved, it results in a thickening of the petrous pyra­
mid with important structural deformity (i.e. displacement of 
the internal carotid artery, mastoid enlargement with cellular 
obliteration, narrowing of the internal auditory canal, fixation 
of the stapes, obliteration of the round window and cochlear 
duct, etc.) (Figure 27.27). The hearing loss is usually mixed 
conductive and sensorineural,138 the latter generally being more 
sensorial than neuronal.139 According to Khetarpal and 
Schuknecht,140 the hearing loss is caused by changes in bone 
density, mass and shape that dampen the motion mechanics of 
the middle and inner ear.
Figure 27.23 Male, 55 years old, complaining of a bilateral SNHL (a) after a car 
accident with severe left temporal bone fracture (CT scan, (b)).
Osteogenesis imperfecta (van de Hoeve's 
syndrome)
In this syndrome, hearing impairment (usually of the mixed 
type) is associated with blue sclerae and fragile bones. Type I is 
A D , and types II and III are A R ; type IV  may have both domi­
nant and recessive inheritance. The main characteristic
  

Disorders of the inner ear in adults 
469
Figure 27.25 Temporal bone CT scan in a case of otosclerosis with cochlear 
involvement: in both the right (a) and left (b) axial images, the high degree of 
bone demineralization is evident.
histopathological findings are large remnants of cartilage in the 
enchondral bone, enchondral layer ossification delay, and 
periosteal bone formation.117 Even if stapedectomy/stapedo- 
tomy can improve the conductive component of the hearing 
loss, the obliteration of the oval and round windows and the 
sensorineural component may eventually compromise the 
success of surgery141 (Figure 27.28).
Conclusions
The inner ear is extremely complicated in its functioning 
mechanisms. In fact it has to ensure an astonishing sensitivity
Figure 27.26 Fibrotic dysplasia; 33-year-old woman presenting a severe 
rearrangement of the left facial bones and skull involving the labyrinth: (a) CT 
scan; (b) MR scan.
in coding the very rapid changes of frequency, amplitude and 
temporal features of sounds. This could perhaps explain the 
high incidence of hearing impairment on the whole population, 
and also the scarce potential of therapy resources. Among the 
causative factors of cochlear pathology, it seems today difficult 
to propose a nosographic classification. A  rather broad distinc­
tion could be done between pathologies which result from 
the action of environmental factors (trauma, noise ototoxic 
substances) and others from internal factors (inflammatory,
MflSSICCIO FACC .ASSIfiLE
  

470 
Auditory disorders and their management
(a) dBHL 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
120
AC mask 
□ 
A 
BC mask 
► 
<
Figure 27.27 Paget’s disease of bone (osteitis deformans), (a) Photomicrograph 
of the cochlear duct of a patient with Paget's disease. The labyrinthine capsule 
is extensively replaced by Paget bone, and the footplate is blocked in the oval 
window; (b) detail shows the Paget bone close to the stria vascularis. (Courtesy 
of Professor George Keleman.)
metabolic, vascular, genetic.) However, as molecular biology 
and genetics advance, it’s clear that the majority of hearing 
impairments have a genetic basis. Even the susceptibility to 
noise or ototoxic effects may be to some extent genetically 
determined. As more is learned, this is likely to be also applied 
to the immune response the inner ear may develop against any 
factor which sets out of balance its homeostatis. The construc­
tion of cD N A  libraries of the inner ear components w ill be a 
major step in the diagnosis of cochlear diseases. The identifica­
tion of proteins unique to these structures w ill contribute to the 
knowledge of intimate molecular events underlying audition, 
and the modalities by which they could also be altered in the 
case of disease affecting other organs and systems. New thera­
pies w ill soon be available for inner ear diseases, mainly acting 
on the defective genes responsible for the disorder. W ith  such a 
perspective the ability of the clinician in correctly classifying 
the possible causative factor of a patient’s sensorineural hearing 
loss w ill be more crucial than in the past.
POSTERIOR
U 4094 
C 
52
  

Disorders of the inner ear in adults 
471
Figure 27.28 Mixed hearing loss: findings in a 21-year-old woman with osteo­
genesis imperfecta (van der Hoewe syndrome): (a) pure tone audiogram-mixed 
hearing loss; (b) CT scan, right coronal, and (c) left coronal views, which show 
diffuse demineralization of the bony labyrinth with a fluffy 'cotton wool' 
appearance, both at chochlear and vestibular level; (d) bone densitometry of 
lumbar vertebral tract, showing severe demineralization.
References
1. 
Davis A. The prevalence of hearing impairment and reported 
hearing disability among adults in Great Britain. Int J Epidemiol 
1989; 18:911-17.
2. 
Kikuchi T, Kimura RS, Raul DL, Adams JC. Gap junctions in the 
rate cochlea: immunohistochemical and ultrastructural analysis. 
Anat Embryol 1995; 191: 101-18.
3. 
Kelsell DP, Dunlop J, Stevens HP et al. Connexin 26 mutation in 
hereditary non-syndromic sensorineural deafness. Nature 1997; 
387: 80-3.
4. 
Steel KP. A new ear in the genetics of deafness. N  Engl J Med 
1998; 339: 1545-7.
5. 
Gibson F, Walsh ], Mburu P et al. A type VII myosin encoded by 
the mouse deafness gene shaker-1. Nature 1995; 374: 62-4.
6. 
Weil D, Blanchard S, Kaplan J. Defective myosin Vila gene 
responsible for Usher syndrome type IB. Nature 1995; 374: 60-1.
7. Everett LA, Glaser B, Beck JK et al. Pendred syndrome is caused 
by mutation in a putative sulphate transporter gene (PDS). Nat 
Genet 1997; 17:411-22.
8. Eudy JD, Weston MD, Yao S et al. Mutation of a gene encoding a 
protein with extarcellular matrix motifs in Usher syndrome type 
lia. Science 1998; 12: 1753-7.
9. Cosgrove D, Samuelson G, Meehan DT et al. Ultrastructural, 
physiological, and molecular defects in the inner ear of a gene- 
knockout mouse for autosomal Alport syndrome. Hear Res 1998; 
121: 84-98.
10. Meyer zum Gottesberge AM, Eschen B, Reuter A, Kintrup L, 
Weiher H. Mpv 17-glomerulosclerosis gene is essential for inner ear 
function. In: Stephens D, Read A, Martini A, eds. Developments in 
Genetic Hearing Impairment. London: Whurr, 1998: 148-55.
11. Khetarpal U, Schuknecht HF, Gacek RR, Holmes LB. Autosomal 
dominant sensorineural hearing loss. Pedigrees, audiological 
findings, and temporal bone findings in two kindreds. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1991; 117: 1032-41.
12. Committee on Hearing and Equilibrium. Meniere’s disease: criteria 
for diagnosis and evaluation of therapy for reporting. Bull Am Acad 
Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1985; 4: 6-7.
13. Wangemann P, Schacht J. Homeostatic mechanisms in the 
cochlea: In: Dallos P, Popper A, Fay RR, eds. The Cochlea. 
Springer-Verlag, 1996: 30-85.
14. Parving A. Epidemiology of genetic hearing impairment. In: 
Martini A, Read A, Stephens D, eds. Genetics and Hearing Impair­
ment. London: Whurr, 1996: 73-81.
15. Sill AM, Stick M], Prenger VL, Phillips SL, Boughman JA, Amos 
KS Genetic epidemiologic study of hearing impairment. Am J 
Hum Genet 1994; 54: 149-53.
16. Steel KP. Similarities between mice and humans with hereditary 
deafness. Ann NY A cad Sci 1991; 630: 68-79.
17. Brown SDM, Steel KP. Mouse models for human hearing impair­
ment. In: Martini A, Read A, Stephens D, eds. Genetics and Hear- 
ing Impairment. London: Whurr, 1996: 53-63.
18. Steel KP, Palmer A. Basic mechanisms of hearing impairment. In: 
Martini A, Read A, Stephens D, eds. Genetics and Hearing Impair­
ment. London: Whurr, 1996: 73-81.
19. van Camp G, Coucke P, Willems PJ. Autosomal dominant non- 
syndromal hearing loss. In: Martini A, Read A, Stephens D, eds. 
Genetics and Hearing Impairment. London: Whurr, 1996: 213-20.
20. Gorlin RJ. Genetic hearing loss with no associated abnormalities. 
In: Gorlin RJ, Toriello HV, Cohen MM, eds. Hereditary Hearing 
Loss and its Syndromes. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995: 
42-61.
21. Konigsmark BW, Mengel M, Berlin Cl. Familial low frequency 
hearing loss. Laryngoscope 1971; 81: 759-71.
22. Leon PE, Bonilla JA, Sanchez JR et al. Low frequency hereditary 
deafness in man with childhood onset. Am J Hum Genet 1981; 33: 
209-14.
23. Liu X, Xu L, Newton V. Audiometric configuration in non-syn- 
dromal genetic hearing loss. J Audiol Med 1994; 3: 99-106.
24. Martini A, Prosser S. Audiometric patterns of genetic hearing loss. 
In: Martini A, Read A, Stephens D, eds. Genetics and Hearing 
Impairment. London: Whurr, 1996: 92-9.
  

472 
Auditory disorders and their management
25. Van Egmond AAJ. Congenital deafness. J. Laryng. Otol. 1954; 68: 
429-43.
26. Martini A, Mazzoli M, Read A, Stephens D. Definitions and Guide­
lines in Genetic Hearing Impairment. London: Whurr, 2001.
27. Martini A, Prosser S, Mazzoli M, Rosignoli M. Contribution of 
age-related factors to the progression of non-syndromic hereditary 
hearing impairment. J Audiol Med 1996; 6: 141-56.
28. Martini A. lpoacusie progressive di tipo genetico. A eta Otorhino- 
laryngol ltal Suppl 1998; 59: 21-7.
29. Paparella MM et al. Familial progressive sensorineural deafness. 
Arch Otolaryngol 1969; 90: 44-51.
30. Thelin JW, Mitchell JA, Hefner MA, Davenport SL. CHARGE 
syndrome. Part II, hearing loss. Int] Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1986; 
12: 145-63.
31. Nadol JB, Burgess B. Cochleosaccular degeneration of the inner 
ear and progressive cataracts inherited as a dominant trait. Laryn­
goscope 1982; 92: 1028-31.
32. Gorlin RJ. Genetic hearing loss associated with eye disorders. In: 
Gorlin RJ, Toriello HV, Cohen MM, eds. Hereditary Hearing Loss 
and its Syndromes. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995: 
105-40.
33. Gorlin RJ, Wester DC, Carey JC. Genetic hearing loss associated 
with renal disorders. In: Gorlin RJ, Toriello HV, Cohen MM, eds. 
Hereditary Hearing Loss and its Syndromes. Oxford: Oxford Univer­
sity Press, 1995: 234-56.
34. Arnold W. Inner ear and renal diseases. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1984; 112: 119-24.
35. Smith RJH, Steel KP, Barkway C, Soucek S, Michaels L. A histo­
logic study of nonmorphogenetic forms of hereditary hearing 
impairment. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992; 118:1085-94.
36. Dobyns WB. Genetic hearing loss associated with nervous system 
disorders. In: Gorlin RJ, Toriello HV, Cohen MM, eds. Hereditary 
Hearing Loss and its Syndromes. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1995: 257-317.
37. Sylvester PE. Spino-cerebellar degeneration, hormonal disorder, 
hypogonadism, deaf mutism and mental deficiency. J Ment Defic 
Res 1972; 16: 203-14.
38. Lyndsay JR, Hinojosa R. Histopathologic features of the inner ear 
associated with Kearns-Sayre syndrome. Arch Otolaryngol 1976; 
102: 747-52.
39. Gorlin RJ. Genetic hearing loss associated with endocrine and 
metabolic disorders. In: Gorlin RJ, Toriello HV, Cohen MM, eds. 
Hereditary Hearing Loss and its Syndromes. Oxford: Oxford Univer­
sity Press, 1995: 318-54.
40. Morgon SH et al. The neurological complications of Anderson- 
Fabry disease (alfa-galactosidase A deficiency)—investigation of symp­
tomatic and presymptomatic patients. QJ Med 1990; 75: 491-504.
41. Cotrufo R, Melone MA, Monsurro MR et al. Phenotype hetero­
geneity among hemizygotes in a family biochemically screened for 
adrenoleukodystrophy. Am J Med Genet 1987; 26: 833-8.
42. Shapiro J, Stome M, Crocker A. Airway obstruction and sleep 
apnea in Hurler and Hunter syndrome. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1985; 94: 458-61.
43. Zecner G, Moser M. Otosclerosis and mucopolysaccharidosis. Acta 
Otolaryngol 1987; 103: 384-6.
44. Sataloff RT, Schiebel BR, Spiegel JR. Morquio’s syndrome. Am J 
Otolaryngol 1987; 8: 443-9.
45. Wolfram DJ, Wagener HP. Diabetes mellitus and simple optic 
atrophy among siblings: report of four cases. Proc Mayo Clin 1938; 
13: 715-18.
46. Cremers CWRJ, Wijdenveld PG, Pinkers AJ. Juvenile diabetes 
mellitus, optic atrophy, hearing loss, diabetes insipidus, atonia of 
the urinary tract and bladder, and other abnormalities (Wolfran 
syndrome). A review of 88 cases from the literature and personal 
observation on 3 patients. Acta Paediatr Scand Suppl 1977; 264: 
3-16.
47. Hildesheimer M, Maayan Z, Muchnik C. Auditory and vestibular 
findings in Waardenburg syndrome type II. J Laryngol Otol 1989; 
103:1130-33.
48. Peserieo A, Martini A, Tenconi R. Familial multiple pigmented 
naevi and sensorineural deafness. A new autosomal dominant 
syndrome? Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1981; 3: 269-72.
49. Crandall B, Samec L, Sparkes RS, Wright SW. A familial syn­
drome of deafness, alopecia, and hypogonadism. J Pediatr 1973; 82: 
461-5.
50. Cook RA, Cox JR, Jorgensen, RJ. Otodental dysplasia: a five year 
study. Ear Hear 1981; 2: 90-4.
51. Torriello HV. Genetic hearing loss associated with integumentary 
disorders. In: Gorlin RJ, Toriello HV, Cohen MM, eds. Hereditary 
Hearing Loss and its Syndromes. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1995:355-412.
52. Brunner HG. X-linked hearing loss. In: Martini A, Read A, 
Stephens D, eds. Genetics and Hearing Impairment. London: 
Whurr, 1996: 231-5.
53. Cremers CWRJ. The X-linked recessive progressive mixed hear­
ing loss syndrome with perilymphatic gusher during stapes surgery 
(DFN3). In: Martini A, Read A, Stephens D, eds. Genetics and 
Hearing Impairment. London: Whurr, 1996: 236-43.
54. de Kok YJM, van der Maarel SM, Bitner-Glindewiez M et al. 
Association between X-linked mixed deafness and mutations in 
the POU domain gene POU3F4. Science 1995; 267: 685-8.
55. Horiguchi I. Familial streptomycin-induced hearing loss. Jap J 
Otorhinolaryngol 1957; 29: 1396.
56. Hu DN, Oui WO, Wu BT et al. Genetic aspects of antibiotic 
induced deafness: mitochondrial inheritance. J Med Genet 1991; 
28: 79-83.
57. Ottaviani F, Cadoni G, Marinelli L et al. Anti-endothelial auto­
antibodies in patients with sudden hearing loss. Laryngoscope 
1999; 109: 1084-7.
58. Linthicum FH, El-Rahman AGA. Hydrops due to syphilitic 
endolymphatic duct obliteration. Laryngoscope 1987; 97: 568-74.
59. Viirre ES, Baloh RW. Migraine as a cause of sudden hearing loss. 
Headache 1996; 36: 24-8.
60. Mattox D, Simmons FB. Natural history of sensorineural hearing 
loss. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1977; 86: 463-80.
61. Schucknecht HF, Gacek CW. Cochlear pathology in presbycusis. 
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol Suppl 1993; 102 (158): 1-16.
62. Schucknecht HF, Montandon P. Pathology of the ear in pneumo­
coccal meningitis. Arch Klin Exp Ohr Nas Kehlkheilk 1970; 195: 
207-25.
  

Disorders of the inner ear in adults 
473
63. Harris JP, Heydt J, Keithley EM, Chen MC. Immunopathology 
of the inner ear: an update. Ann NY Acad Sci 1997; 830: 
166-78.
64. Tomiyama S, Harris jP. The role of endolymphatic sac in inner ear 
immunity. Acta Otolaryngol 1987; 103: 182-8.
65. Chen MC, Harris JP, Keithley EM. Immunohistochemical analy- 
sis of proliferating cells in a sterile labyrinthitis animal model. 
Laryngoscope 1998; 108: 651-6.
66. Paparella MM, Sugiura S. The pathology of suppurative 
labyrinthitis. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1967; 76: 554-86.
67. Dereby MJ, Rao VS, Siglok TJ, Linthicum FH, Nelson RA. 
Meniere’s disease: an immune mediated illness? Laryngoscope
1991; 103: 1027-34.
68. Garcia Berrocal JR, Vargas JA, Ramirez Camacho RA et al. 
Deficiency of naive T cells in patients with sudden deafness. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1997; 123: 712-17.
69. Domhoffer JL, Arenberg JG, Arenberg IK, Shambaugh Jr GE. 
Pathophysiological mechanisms in immune inner ear disease. Acta 
Otolaryngol Suppl 1997; 526: 30-6.
70. Yoo TJ, Tomoda K, Stuart JM, Kang AH, Townes AS. Type II 
collagen autoimmunity in otosclerosis and Meniere’s disease. 
Science 1982; 17: 1153-5.
71. Hughes GB, Bama BP, Kinney SE, Calabrese LH, Nalepa NL. Pre- 
dictive value of laboratory tests in ‘autoimmune’ inner ear disease: 
preliminary report. Laryngoscope 1986; 96: 502-5.
72. Harris JP, Sharp P. Inner ear autoantibodies in patients with rapid 
progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Laryngoscope 1990; 97: 
63-76.
73. Commitee on hearing and equilibrium of the American Academy 
of Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery. Commitee on hear­
ing and equilibrium gidelines for the diagnosis and evaluation of 
therapy in Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995; 
113: 181-5.
74. Melchiorri L, Martini A, Rizzo R, Berto A, Adinolfi E, Baricordi 
OR. HLA-A,B,C, DR antigens and soluble HSA-class I serum 
level in Meniere’s disease. Acta Otolaryngol 2002 (accepted).
75. Arenberg IK, Lemke C, Shambaugh GE Jr. Viral theory for 
Meniere’s disease and endolymphatic hydrops: overview and new 
therapeutic options for viral labyrinthitis. Ann NY Acad Sci 1997; 
830: 306-13.
76. Schuknecht H. Ablation therapy in the management of Meniere’s 
disease. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl 1957; 132: 1-41.
77. Blakley BW. Update on intratympanic gentamicin for Meniere’s 
disease. Laryngoscope 2000; 110: 236-40.
78. van de Heyning PA, Verlooy J, Schatteman I et al. Selective 
vestibual neurectomy in Meniere’s disease: A review. Acta Oto­
laryngol Suppl 1997; 526: 58-66.
79. Kohonen A, Jauhiainen T, Liewendahl K, Tarkkanen J, Kaimio M. 
Deafness in experimental hypo- and hyperthyroidism. Laryngo­
scope 1971; 81: 947-56.
80. Parving A. 
Hearing sensitivity in elderly patients with 
mixoedema. Adv Audiol 1985; 3: 147-51.
81. Ritter FN. The effects of hypothyroidism upon the ear, nose and 
throat. Laryngoscope 1967; 77: 1427-79.
82. Post JT. Hypothyroid deafness. Laryngoscope 1964; 74: 221-32.
83. 
Spencer JT. Hyperlipoproteinemias in the etiology of inner ear 
disease. Laryngoscope 1973; 83: 639-78.
84. 
Strome M, Toff P, Vemick DM. Hyperlipidemia in association 
with childhood sensorineural hearing loss. Laryngoscope 1988; 
98: 165-9.
85. 
Lee FS, Matthews LJ, Mills JH, Dubno JR, Adkins WY. Analysis 
of blood chemistry and hearing levels in a sample of older per- 
sons. Ear Hear 1998; 19: 180-90.
86. Jones NS, Davis A. A prospective case-controlled study of 
patients presenting with idiopathic sensorineural hearing loss to 
examine the relationship between hyperlipidaemia and sensori- 
neural hearing loss. Clin Otolaryngol 1999; 24: 531-6.
87. Jorgensen MB. The inner ear in diabetes mellitus. Arch Otolaryn­
gol 1961; 74:31-9.
88. 
Harner SG. Hearing in adult-onset diabetes mellitus. Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1981; 89: 322-7.
89. 
Duck SW, Prazma J, Bennett PS, Pillsbury HC. Interaction 
between hypertension and diabetes mellitus in the pathogenesis 
of sensorineural hearing loss. Laryngoscope 1997; 107: 1596-605.
90. 
Oda M, Preciado MC, Quick CA, Paparella MM. Labyrinthine 
pathology of chronic renal failure patients treated with hemo­
dialysis and kidney transplantation. Laryngoscope 1974; 84: 
1489-506.
91. 
Bergstrom LV, Thompson P, Sando I et al. Renal disease: its 
pathology, treatment, and effects on the ear. Arch Otolaryngol 
1980; 106: 567-72.
92. 
Aran JM. Current perspective on inner ear toxicity. Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1995; 112: 133-44.
93. 
Aran JM, Hiel H, Hayashida T et al. Noise, aminoglycosides and 
diuretics. In: Dancer A, Henderson D, Salvi RJ, Hamenrik RP, 
eds. Noise Induced Hearing Loss. Philadephia: BC Decker, 1991: 
188-95.
94. 
Lim DJ. Effect of noise and ototoxic drugs at the cellular level in 
the cochlea: a review. Am J Otol 1986; 7: 73-98.
95. 
Schacht J. Biochemical basis of aminoglycoside ototoxicity. 
Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1993; 26: 845-856.
96. 
Priuska EM, Shacht J. Formation of free radicals by gentamicin 
and iron and evidence for an iron/gentamicin complex. Biochem 
Pharmacol 1995; 50: 1749-52.
97. 
Kahlmeter G, Dalager J. Aminoglycoside toxicity and review of 
medical studies published between 1975 and 1982. J Antimicrob 
Chemother 1984; 13: 9-22.
98. Higashi K. Unique inheritance of streptomycin-induced deaf­
ness. Clin Genet 1989; 35: 433-36.
99. Prezant TR, Agapian JV, Bohlman MC, Bu X, Otzas S, Qui 
W-Q, Amos KS, Cortopassi GA, Jaber L, Rotter JI, Shohat M, 
Fischel-Ghodsian N. Mitochondrial ribosomal RNA mutation 
associated with both antibiotic-induced and non-syndromic deaf­
ness. Nature and Genetics 1993; 4: 289-94.
100. Jacobs HT, Shah ZH, Migliosi V, Lehtinen SK, Rovio A, O’Dell 
K. Nuclear canditates genes for ‘mitochondrial deafness’. In 
Stephens D, Read A, Martini A, eds. Developments in Genetic 
Hearing Impairments, London: Whurr, 1998; 104-15.
101. Braverman I, Jaber L, Levi H et al. Audiovestibular findings in 
patients with deafness caused by a mitochondrial susceptibility
  

474 
Auditory disorders and their management
mutation and precipitated by an inherited nuclear mutation or 
aminoglycosides. Arch Otolaryngol-Head and Neck Surgery 1996; 
122:1001-4.
102. Jacobs HT. Phenotype/genotype correlation of hearing impair­
ment associated with mitochondrial DNA mutations. In Martini 
A, Mazzoli M, Read A, Stephens D, eds. Definitions, Protocols and 
Guidelines in Genetic Hearing Impairment, London: Whurr, 2001: 
152-6.
103. Chapman P. Rapid onset hearing loss after cysplatia therapy: 
case report and literature review. J Laryngol Otol 1982; 96: 
159-62.
104. Evans WE, Yee GC, Crom WR et al. Clinical pharmacology of 
bleomycin and cisplatin. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1981; 4: 
98-110.
105. Helson L, Okonkwo E, Anton L et al. Cisplatinum ototoxicity. 
Clin Toxicol 1978; 13: 469-78.
106. Saito T, Moataz R, Dulon D. Cisplatin blocks depolarization 
induced calcium entry in isolated cochlear outer hair cells. Hear 
Res 1991; 56: 143-7.
107. MacAlpine D, Johnstone BM. The ototoxic mechanisms of cis­
platin. Hear Res 1990; 47: 191-204.
108. Kopelman E Ototoxicity of high dose cisplatin by bolus adminis­
tration in patients with advanced cancers and normal hearing. 
Laryngoscope 1988; 98: 858-63.
109. Pollera C. Very high dose of cisplatin-induced ototoxicity: Pre­
liminary report on early and long term effects. Cancer Chemother 
Pharmacol 1988; 21: 61-4.
110. Waters RA, Ahmad M, Katsarkas A et al. Ototoxicity due to cis- 
diaminedichloroplatinum in the treatment of ovarian cancer: 
influence of dosage and schedule of administration. Ear Hear 
1991; 12: 91-102.
111. Pasic TR, Dobie RA. Cis-platinum ototoxicity in children. 
Laryngoscope 1991; 101: 985-91.
112. Paloheimo S, Thalmann R. Influence of ‘loop’ diuretics upon 
Na+ K+-ATPase and adenlate cyclase of the stria vascularis. Arch 
Otorhinolaryngol 1977; 17: 347-59.
113. Bosher SK. The nature of otoxic actions of ethacrynic acid upon 
the mammalian endolymph system. I. Functional aspects. A eta 
Otolaryngol 1980; 89: 407-18.
114. Ikeda K, Oshima T, Hidaka H, Takasaka T. Molecular and clini­
cal implications of loop diuretic ototoxicity. Hear Res 1997; 7: 
1- 8.
115. Jung TTK, Rhee CK, Lee CS, Park YS, Choi DC. Otoxicity of 
salicylate, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and quinine. 
Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1993; 26: 791-809.
116. Claessen FA, vanBoxtel CJ, Perenboom RM, Tange RA, 
Wetsteijn JC, Kager PA. Quinine pharmacokinetics: ototoxic and 
cardiotoxic effects in healthy Caucasian subjects and in patients 
with falciparum malaria. Trop Med Int Health 1998; 3(6): 482-9.
117. Schuknecht HF. Pathology of the Ear, 2nd edn. Phildelphia: Lea 
and Febiger, 1993.
118. Schuknecht HF. Mechanisms of inner ear injury from blows to 
the head. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1969; 78: 253-62.
119. Schuknecht HF. Cupulolithiasis. Arch Otolaryngol 1969; 90: 
765-78.
120. Toglia JU, Rosenberg PE, Ronis ML. Posttraumatic dizziness. 
Vestibular, audiologic, and medicolegal aspects. Arch Otolaryngol 
1970; 92: 485-92.
121. McHugh HE. The surgical treatment of facial paralysis and trau­
matic conductive deafness in fractures of the temporal bone. Ann 
Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1959; 68: 855-89.
122. Khan AA, Marion M, Hinojosa R. Temporal bone fractures: a 
histopathologic study. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1985; 93: 
177-86.
123. Schuknecht HF, Davison RC. Deafness and vertigo from head 
injury. Arch Otolaryngol 1956; 63: 513-28.
124- Pulec JL. Symposium on Meniere’s disease. I. Meniere’s 
disease: results of a two and one-half-year study of etiology, 
natural history and results of treatment. Laryngoscope 1972; 82: 
1703-15.
125. Clark SK, Rees TS. Posttraumatic endolymphatic hydrops. Arch 
Otolaryngol 1977; 103: 725-6.
126. Applebaum E. Meningitis following trauma to the head and face. 
JAMA 1960; 173: 1818-22.
127. Freeman J. Temporal bone fractures and cholesteatoma. Ann Otol 
Rhinol Laryngol 1983; 92: 558-60.
128. Mazzoli M, Rosignoli M, Martini A. Otosclerosis: are familial 
and isolated cases different disorders? J Audio Med 2001; 10: 
49-59.
129. Tomek MS, Brown MR, Sabitha RM et al. Localization of a gene 
for otosclerosis to chromosome 15q25-q26. Hum Mol Genet 1998; 
7: 285-90.
130. Linthicum FH, Neely JG. Unrelated sensorineural hearing loss in 
patients with otosclerosis. A report of three cases. Laryngoscope 
1977; 87: 1746-52.
131. Kelemen G, Linthicum FH Jr. Labyrinthine otosclerosis. Acta 
Otolaryngol Suppl 1969; 253: 1-68.
132. Schuknecht HF, Barber W. Histologic variants in otosclerosis. 
Laryngoscope 1985; 95: 1307-17.
133. Shambaugh GE Jr. Clinical diagnosis of cochlear (labyrinthine) 
otosclerosis. Laryngoscope 1965; 75: 1558-62.
134. Schuknecht HF. Cochlear otosclerosis. An intractable absurdity. 
J Laryngol Otol Suppl 1983; 8: 81-3.
135. Beighton P, Cremin B. Sclerosing Bone Dysplasias. Berlin: Springer 
Verlag, 1980.
136. Beighton P. Auditory dysfunction in genetic disorders of the 
skeleton. In: Martini A, Read A, Stephens D, eds. Genetics and 
Hearing Impairment. London: Whurr, 1996: 130-40.
137. Shprintzen RJ. Genetics, Syndromes, and Communication Disor­
ders. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, 1997.
138. Lindsay JR, Suga F. Paget’s disease and sensori-neural deafness: 
temporal bone histopathology of Paget’s disease. Laryngoscope 
1976; 86: 1029-42.
139. Clemis JD, Boyles J, Harford ER, Petasnick JP. The clinical diag­
nosis of Paget’s disease of the temporal bone. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1967; 76: 611-23.
140. Khetarpal U, Schuknecht HF. In search of pathologic correlates 
for hearing loss and vertigo in Paget’s disease. A clinical and 
histopathologic study of 26 temporal bones. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol Suppl 1990; 145(99): 1-16.
  

Disorders of the inner ear in adults 
475
141. Garretsen TJTM, Cremers CWRJ. Stapes surgery in osteogenesis 
imperfecta: analysis of postoperative hearing loss. Ann Otol Rhi­
nol Laryngol 1991; 100: 120-30.
142. Martini A, Milani M, Rosignoli M, Mazzoli M, Prosser S. Audio- 
metric patterns of genetic non-syndromal sensorineural hearing 
loss. Audiology 1997; 36: 228-36.
143. Hatzopoulos S, Di Stefano M, Campbell KCM, Falgione D, Ricci 
D, Rosignoli M, Finesso M, Albertin A, Previati M, Captani S, 
Martini A. Cisplatin ototoxicity in the Sprague Dawley rat eval­
uated by distortion product otoacoustic emissions. Audiology 
2001; 40: 253-64.
  

Noise-induced 
hearing loss
llmari Pyykko, Jukka Starck, Esko Toppila, Mats Ulfendahl
Introduction
Although the severity of hearing loss has decreased in the last 
decades in industrialized countries, the total number of cases of 
noise-induced hearing loss (N1HL) has declined only slightly.1,2 
In population studies, risk analysis for NIHL is well estab­
lished.3,4 In individual cases, confounding factors make exact 
risk prediction for NIHL difficult.5”7 The shortage of well eval- 
uated databases containing information on individual exposure, 
the use of hearing protective devices (HPDs), social noise expo­
sure and various biological confounding factors may explain the 
inaccuracy in risk evaluation.8 Problems arise also from sam­
pling techniques, and the selection and duration of samples.9 A 
common database including all the confounding factors and 
exposure-linked variables could provide a base of knowledge 
from which individual noise susceptibility could be determined. 
Further, a database is important in the identification of adverse 
phases of work and in monitoring the hearing of workers.
In the present chapter, we will focus on the vulnerability of 
the inner ear to noise, the evaluation of hazardous limits for 
environmental noise, and on prevention of NIHL by using 
database-based programs.
Current databases used in the risk 
assessment of NIHL
CURRENT DATABASES USED IN DIFFERENT 
NORMS
Kryter (1967)10
Baughn (1973)IZ
Burns and Robinson(1970)"
Passchier-Vermeer (1974)1'
Johnson (1973)''
Kryter10 proposed one of the first databases used in risk estima­
tion. The damage risk criteria were presented as a group of 
curves based on laboratory experiments on temporary threshold 
shift (TTS). Also, some data collected in 1955-56 on perma­
nent threshold shifts (PTS) in workers exposed to industrial 
noise were included. The Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics 
and Biomechanics (CHABA)10 used these data in establishing 
the first norm for noise damage assessment. Recently, Melnick11 
has criticized this approach.
Baughn12 published the first epidemiological database. He 
studied a large (6835) population working in stable locations 
and with known noise exposure.12 The exposure durations 
extended up to 45 years, with average noise exposure levels of 
78, 86 and 92 dB. Baughn recommended that the hearing loss 
of subjects exposed to the 78 dB (A) noise would be considered 
as representative of typical non-noise-exposed males.
Bums and Robinson established their database by studying 
759 otologically normal workers. Based on the noise exposure, 
422 males were classified into four exposure groups, ranging 
from 87dB(A) to 97dB(A).13 The maximum length of expo­
sure was 49 years. As controls, 97 subjects not exposed to noise 
were used. The authors developed a mathematical model for 
the prediction of hearing loss.14,15 The model introduced the 
equal-energy principle, which enabled the combination of dif­
ferent sound levels.16 The hearing loss was divided into two 
parts: age-dependent hearing loss (presbyacusis) and NIHL. 
After correcting for age and gender, the distribution of NIHL 
was calculated by using the specified formulae. The separation 
of presbyacusis and NIHL resulted in a smaller NIHL compo­
nent than in other models.
Passchier-Vermeer17 collected a database including 19 stud­
ies, each consisting of a limited number of cases; 12 studies had 
50 cases or less. The data agreed well with the data of Robin­
son4 at most frequencies, but large differences were found at 
some frequencies. One reason was in the definition of the 
audiometer zero level used in some of the studies.18

478 
Auditory disorders and their management
STANDARDS AND NORMS BASED ON 
DATABASES:
CHABA lgGe11’
EPA 19741’2 
> 
NIOSH 197420 
ISO 19752'
■ 
ISO 1990”
Johnson19 collected a database for the US Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA), to be used to predict noise-induced 
permanent theshold shift (NIPTS) for exposure to continuous 
noise. The report was based on the data of Bums and Robin­
son13 and Passchier-Vermeer.17 The data of Baughn12 were also 
used in the evaluation of the hearing loss of the non-exposed 
population. For this reason, the hearing loss of the non-exposed 
population is somewhat less than that of Bums and Robinson13 
and Passhier-Vermeer.17
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) collected a database from industrial workers exposed 
to noise levels of 85, 90 and 95dB(A) and control subjects 
exposed to noise at levels less than 80dB(A).20 The study con­
sisted of 792 otologically screened noise exposed subjects and 
380 controls. The NIHL was determined as a function of expo­
sure level and duration.
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
published in 1975 a standard for assessing occupational noise 
exposure for hearing conservation.21 The database on which 
this standard was based is not evident, but according to Suter,22 
the norm is based on the data of Baughn.12 The standard 
adopted the equal-energy principle for the calculation of differ­
ent sound exposures from the Robinson model. According to 
ISO tables, 50% of non-noise-exposed people will have a hear­
ing loss, whereas the respective figure in Robinson and Sutton’s 
model23 was 10% and that in the US public health services 
study24,25 was 20%. A mathematical form for the hearing loss 
was given in order to produce the present standard model.3
System approach for hearing 
protection programmes
KEY AREAS IN HEARING CONSERVATION 
PROGRAMME
Usage rate of HPD 
Identification of noise source 
Free-time noise exposure 
Combination of different types of noise
The approach to protecting workers against noise (described in 
the directive 86/188/EC) is based on the identification of the
Figure 28.1 The general approach to the hearing conservation programme. 
PPE, personal protective equipment.
risks in the workplace (Figure 28.1). If there is a risk for NIHL, 
the employer must establish a hearing conservation programme 
(HCP). Qualified personnel should carry out the risk assess­
ment. The first task is to evaluate the sources of noise and the 
possibilities of reducing the levels of noise by technical means. 
If reduction of the noise source is not possible, the workers 
should be provided with HPDs and should be informed about 
the risks and the correct use of the selected HPDs in an appro­
priate manner.
These guidelines alone, however, may not be sufficient to 
ensure an effective HCP in practice. The following problems 
must be solved:
1. How to guarantee that the hearing protection devices 
(HPDs) are used properly.
2. How to identify risky workplaces or tasks.
3. How to address all aspects of protection against noise emis­
sion, especially if the greatest exposure occurs in leisure 
time.
4. How to collect and combine various exposures with differ­
ent physical characteristics.
By solving these questions, the minimal legal requirements of 
an HCP will be achieved. A good HCP contains additional ele­
ments, which are included to increase the power of the HCP.
The contents of a good HCP will be discussed in the fol­
lowing section.
Risk assessment of NIHL based on 
ISO 1999-1990
The ISO model3 uses three input parameters in the evaluation 
of NIHL: age, exposure to noise, and gender. Exposure to noise 
is evaluated using the equal-energy principle. Age is corrected 
in a dichotomized way. Different correction factors for gender
  

Noise-induced hearing loss 
479
Exposure time (years)
Figure 28.2 The mean hearing loss with 10% and 90% confidence limits of a 
male worker exposed to 100-dB(A) noise as a function of time.
are given. Based on these parameters, the distribution of NIHL 
can be calculated. The variation is large; the difference between 
the 10% and 90% percentiles is 60 dB when subjects are 
exposed to a noise of 100dB(A) after 30 years (for males see 
Figure 28.2).
According to the standard ISO 1999-1990, PTS is due to a 
combination of ageing and noise effects. It is used for the esti­
mation of the hearing impairment due to noise in a population 
free from hearing loss due to other causes. The standard may 
also be used for estimating the permanent effects of noise on the 
perception of everyday acoustical signals. The appreciation of 
music or the effect of one specific frequency on hearing is not 
addressed by the standard. Although the standard is intended 
for population studies and should not be applied to individuals, 
it has been used to evaluate the probability of NIHL in indi­
vidual subjects, particularly in medico-legal cases.
Factors to be controlled in 
establishing a database for NIHL
The factors influencing the degree of hearing loss in noise- 
exposed subjects are shown in Figure 28.3. To increase the effi­
ciency of an HCP, it would be very profitable to be able to 
predict NIHL more accurately than shown in Figure 28.2.
The first section identifies exposure variables important in 
the aetiology of NIHL from the exposure point of view. The first 
element shows work noise variables and protection provided by 
individual HPDs. The second element consists of leisure time 
and military service noise. The third element controls the expo­
sure to ototoxic solvents and drugs. The harmful effects of noise 
on hearing depend on the energy content of the noise trans­
mitted to the ear. The energy content of noise—comprising the 
level of noise exposure, the frequency of noise, and the duration 
of exposure—is determined by means of the A-weighted equiv­
alent sound pressure level. This principle is well suited for 
determining risk in the case of steady-state constant noise, but 
it underestimates risk in the case of impulsive noise.
The second section shows confounding factors used to 
explain individual susceptibility to noise. These factors include 
cholesterol level, blood pressure and smoking, and may explain 
the large variation in the individual development of NIHL.
The third section shows the results of otological examina­
tion and describes the effects on the inner ear that are measured 
or considered.
Impulse noise
Impulse noise differs from steady-state noise in time-domain 
properties. Impulse noise contains rapid pressure transients,
Noxious agents:
Exposure to noise, drugs and 
Confounding factors 
Otological examinations
solvents
Figure 28.3 Factors known or suspected 
to contribute to the development of 
hearing loss.
  

480 
Auditory disorders and their management
(a)
Sound pressure (Pa)
70 
80 
90 
100 
Time (ms)
(b)
200
Sound pressure (Pa)
200
200
350 
Time (ms)
which do not always give a fully audible response but can reach 
the sensory hair cells located in the inner ear (Figure 28.4). The 
criteria presented for impulse noise are based on the repetition 
rate of peaks of sound pressures. Impulse noise has also been 
defined as noise consisting of single bursts with duration of less 
than Is and with peak levels 15dB higher than background 
noise. Several parameters can be measured and displayed to 
describe the impulse properties in time domain: peak level, rise 
time, decay time, repetition rate and frequency content.
In industrial workplaces, impulses are seldom identical 
(even repetitive) and are not produced regularly. Several 
machines producing impulses may be used at the same time, and 
the workers often move around at different distances from noise 
sources. Generally, workers’ exposure to noise consists of 
impulses spaced randomly in time and mixed with steady-state 
noise. Thus, the acoustical evaluation will require statistical 
analyses for impulse noise parameters. Recently, a statistical dis­
tribution for crest factor has been proposed to determine the 
impulsiveness of industrial impulse noise.26
Impulse noise and hearing
Properties of impulse noise can be described by the instanta- 
neous time function. The parameters generally used are the 
peak level, rise time and duration of the impulse. In peak level 
measurements, the time constant of the measuring device has to
Figure 28.4 Impulses from (a) chisel hammer 
and (b) hammer blow.
be less than 50 jus, preferably 20 |lis. The duration of an impulse 
can be determined in at least four different way: the effective 
impulse duration, or the A- , B- or C-duration.27,28 Physically, 
the effective duration is uniformly defined, as it is the length of 
a rectangular impulse with the same energy as the actual 
impulse. Duration A is determined for an idealized gunshot, in 
which the duration is defined as the time of the first positive 
transient. B- and C- duration are idealized hammer blows on a 
piece of metal. These noise peaks can be very intensive but 
extremely short, and therefore do not contribute significantly to 
the measuring result of Leq or the total noise dose.
The risk of NIHL is higher in occupations where workers 
are exposed to impulse noise. In many occupations, the impulses 
are so brief that they contribute only a small increase to the 
energy content of noise. Comparative studies showed that, for 
example, shipyard workers who are exposed to impulse noise 
had 10 dB greater hearing loss than was predicted by the ISO 
1999 model. In forest workers who are exposed to steady-state 
noise, the observed and predicted hearing threshold levels were 
consistent.26,29 Target shooting and hunting constitute a risk for 
hearing loss.30 Forest workers exposed to shooting noise demon- 
strate an approximately 10-dB greater NIHL than those with 
only occupational exposure to chainsaw noise.31 The NIHL 
appears at a younger age in military personnel than in other 
groups of workers exposed to noise.30 Soldiers exposed to large- 
calibre weapons have a higher risk of NIHL, as HPDs are less
  

Noise-induced hearing loss 
481
effective in this situation, due to the non-linear attenuation 
against very high peak levels and the low-frequency compo­
nents of large-calibre weapons.26’32-35
It is therefore important that any database on NIHL con­
tains information on impulsiveness of noise. As the method of 
quantification of impulsiveness is not yet standardized, the 
impulsiveness should be indicated with no/yes questions.
Hearing protectors
HPDs used in a noisy working environment must meet the 
specified minimum requirements for attenuation. The test 
method is standardized by ISO36,37 and CEN.38,39 The attenua­
tion of an HPD will be measured as a difference between hear­
ing thresholds without and with hearing protector using 16 test 
persons. The mean value (My) and standard deviation (Sy) will 
be calculated. The assumed protection value (APV^) can then 
be calculated by the formula
APV/x = Mf -aS ^ d B )
where the subscript x is the percentage of users who will obtain 
at least the attenuation APVfx. The percentage x depends on 
the factor a. In the CEN standard, x is 84% and the respective 
a value is 1.
Minimum attenuation in accordance with the APV^84 val­
ues should not be less than those given in Table 34.1 The test­
ing house has to identify the parameters presented above. 
Moreover, the indices denoted H, M, L (used in HML methods) 
and SNR are defined and used for selection purposes. H is the 
HPD attenuation against high-frequency noise, M against 
medium-frequency noise, and L against low frequency noise. 
SNR is overall attenuation against typical industrial noise.
Effect of the usage rate
Figure 28.5 shows the importance of usage rate when hearing 
protectors are worn. If a 30-dB hearing protector is used for only 
4 h out of 8 h a day, the effectiveness of HPDs is not more than 
3dB.
The best HPD is one with a usage rate of 100%. This 
emphasizes the importance of comfort of HPDs. Relatively low 
minimum requirements for attenuation may allow for the man­
ufacturers to develop more lightweight and, especially, more 
comfortable devices according to the new standards.38,40
Table 28.1 Attenuation requirements (APV,) for hearing 
protectors at octave bands
Frequency (Hz) 
125 
250 
500 
1000 
2000 
4000 
8000 
APVfe4(dB) 
5 
8 
10 
12 
12 
12 
12
Effective Protection (dB)
Wearing period (h)
Figure 28.5 Reduction of effectiveness of hearing protectors with decreased 
usage rate.
User education and training for the 
development of HCPs
The use of HPDs has a significant impact on protection against 
environmental noise.34,41 In a database, attenuation of an HPD 
is retrieved from the result of the type tests. However, even with 
the most sophisticated protectors, the average noise attenua­
tion in practice may not be more than 17dB when measured 
with the miniature microphone method.42,43 In 10% of the 
workers examined, the attenuation of HPDs was less than 5 
dB.44 The same studies indicated that HPDs attenuate industrial 
impulse noise even more effectively than steady-state noise. 
This is due to the high-frequency content of the impulses, 
which are attenuated effectively by earmuffs. The efficiency of 
the attenuation also depends on environmental factors. Thus in 
a cold environment, as in forest work in Nordic countries, the 
stiffening of the cushion rings causes a slight but systematic 
worsening in the attenuation.45 The deterioration of the cush­
ions and the reduction in their spring force also affects attenu­
ation. In the winter, northern forest workers use helmet liners, 
which in some cases nullify the attenuation of the hearing pro­
tectors.33 All of these factors tend to reduce the protection effi­
ciency of HPDs. Thus, the values provided for the HPDs are 
frequently overestimations of the attenuation in actual working 
conditions and reduce the efficacy of HCPs.
ATTENUATION OF HPDs (MEAN 17dB)
Education
■ 
Usage rate
Condition of cushion rings
■ 
Shape of the skull
  

482 
Auditory disorders and their management
The reduction of noise exposure by HPDs is most effective 
in motivated users. Low motivation to wear HPDs is seen as low 
usage rate and respectively as low attenuation values.46 Motiva­
tion to use HPDs can be obtained via appropriate education 
and training. Users need training on maintenance, installation 
and use of HPDs. The attenuation of protectors remains good 
only if they are well maintained.40 Good maintenance consists 
of cleaning, changing of replaceable parts like cushions, and 
overall monitoring of the state of the HPD. Usage must be 
established before entering the noisy area.40 If earplugs are used, 
special attention to the proper installation technique must be 
paid.46,47 According to recommendations, the users must be 
informed about the effects of noise and the risks in their work­
place (89/188/EC). The most informative approach is to use 
personal audiometric data.48
Other noise exposure
Military service and noise exposure
Exposure to assault rifle noise and bazookas often damages the 
hearing of conscripts. It is noteworthy that a single shot at a 
noise level exceeding 140dB can have a measurable effect on 
hearing.49 Even a few shots with bazookas or artillery, when the 
immission noise level exceeds 170dB (for heavy bazookas, 184 
dB), may be detrimental to hearing.32 The military noise expo­
sure of conscripts, especially during the handling of heavy 
weapons, causes an average of 5-dB hearing loss at 4000 Hz.31 
Thus exposure to military noise in humans may cause a signifi­
cant threshold shift in hearing that is commonly disregarded 
when occupational NIHL is evaluated. At present, military 
noise causes hearing loss in 10% of conscripts. This is mainly 
due to shooting with blanks in forest rehearsals, when HPDs are 
not worn.
Exposure to leisure time noise
The most frequent leisure time hazard is exposure to music. The 
highest music exposure rates are from rock music. The noise 
level in a concert or a disco exceeds, in general, 100dB(A). 
Thus only one attendance in a week causes an exposure that 
exceeds the occupational action limit. Similar levels are 
reported in the users of portable cassette recorders (for review 
see Clarck50). With classical music the levels are lower, but the 
musicians still have a risk of hearing loss. Among musicians, the 
use of HPDs is low, but is increasing, notably during 
rehearsals.41 The role of music in NIHL is not well understood. 
In many studies conducted among young people, no changes in 
the audiogram have been found.51 It has been suggested that the 
effect of music exposure would show up later. This is in accor­
dance with a study in which people attending discotheques 
were three times more likely to complain of tinnitus than those 
who seldom visited discotheques. The severity of tinnitus was 
shown to correlate with hearing loss.51
Other exposures
Smoking
Tobacco smoking has been linked to hearing loss in population 
studies.52 Thus, it could be expected that smoking acts as a risk 
factor for NIHL. Smoking in combination with noise exposure 
or other risk factors has been shown to significantly aggravate 
NIHL.53 However, some authors54"56 were not able to demon­
strate that smoking was a risk factor for NIHL. This may be due 
to the fact that the effect of smoking may be confounded by 
other risk factors, e.g. ageing, elevated blood pressure and 
vibration-induced white finger disease (VWF), and therefore 
remains silent in the statistical analysis.56
Analgesics
The effect of indomethacin-type pain-alleviating drugs on hear­
ing loss, as regards acute, toxic effects, is well documented in 
the literature, but little is known about long-term effects. The 
same is true for salicylates. After high doses of salicylates, very 
few morphological changes occur in the inner ear.57 Hawkins 8 
was one of the first workers to demonstrate that salicylates 
reduce cochlear bloodflow by causing capillary narrowing. The 
narrowing of vessels appears to be caused by swollen endothe­
lial cells and possibly pericyte contraction.59 In humans, the 
critical ototoxic salicylate level is high,60 corresponding to the 
ingestion of 10-15 g salicylic acid a day.61 The acute effect on 
hearing is characterized by a sudden onset, but is reversed 
within 1-10 days.57
Acute exposure to noise seems to increase the hearing loss 
induced by salicylates. Eddy et al.62 demonstrated in acute 
experiments on chinchillas that a TTS produced by combined 
noise (85 dB) and salicylates (20-40 mg/100 mg) was signifi­
cantly greater (55 dB) than that produced by noise (35 dB) or 
salicylates (30 dB) alone. So far, it is not known whether sali­
cylates in combination with environmental noise would 
increase the likelihood of a permanent NIHL. Miller et al.63 
showed that salicylates, in very low doses, may act as free oxy­
gen scavengers and protect hearing from noise damage. The 
exclusion of salicylate consumers from the rest of the forest 
workers in one study improved the average hearing level by 0.9 
dB.64 Such an increase may be substantial, though not statisti­
cally significant, and supports the theory that even moderate 
use of salicylates in conjunction with environmental noise may 
be hazardous to cochlear function.
Organic solvents
Exposure to organic solvents and noise has a synergistic damag­
ing effect on hearing. In a paper mill, workers in the chemical 
section (exposed to organic solvents) showed a pronounced 
NIHL in spite of lower noise levels (80-90 dB) that was in con­
trast to the workers in a non-chemical section, who had higher 
noise levels of 95-100 dB.65 According to Morata et al,66expo-
  

Noise-induced hearing loss 
483
sure to toluene and noise increased the relative risk of hearing 
loss by 11 times among rotogravure printing workers. Exposure 
to noise or toluene increased the risk of NIHL by four and by 
five times, respectively.66 The effect of solvents seems to depend 
on the solvent concentration. In the glass-fibre reinforced plas- 
tic industry in the Netherlands, Muijser et al.67 found that with 
higher levels of styrene there was a significant change in hear­
ing threshold at high frequencies. In animal experiments, noise 
combined with a high level of styrene (600 ppm/m2) caused a 
threshold shift in hearing of 25 dB.68 When the animals were 
exposed to noise or styrene alone, the respective hearing losses 
were 3 and 5 dB, respectively. Such a high level of styrene is sel­
dom encountered in industry, and the solvent-linked NIHL 
must be less than 25 dB in humans.
Risk factor combination
Figure 28.6 Age-corrected hearing level among forest workers due to various 
risk factors separately and in combination. NON, no risk factors; SMO, smoking; 
EXP, exposure; VWF, vibration white finger.
Individual risk factors
Individual susceptibility to NIHL seems also to depend on bio­
logical factors (for a review see Ward69). The findings of Rosen 
et al.70 and Rosen and Olin71 suggested that major cardiovascu­
lar risk factors, such as elevated total cholesterol, promote hear­
ing loss. The factors discussed most commonly are cholesterol 
level, blood pressure, and presence of VWF. 
Any database 
should contain information on these factors. The cholesterol 
level is correlated with hearing loss, and when combined with 
noise exposure and hypertension, produces more prominent 
hearing loss than each factor alone. We have calculated that 
an elevated cholesterol level alone explains about 2-4 dB of 
hearing loss at a frequency of 4 kHz.64 This cholesterol-linked 
hearing loss is age-dependent and is observed in subjects aged 
40 years or over. The effect of total cholesterol on hearing may 
be mediated as a ‘small vessel disease’, as indicated by 
Pillsbury,73 but may also be a direct effect on outer hair cells in 
the cochlea. Oghalai et al74 demonstrated cholesterol in the lat­
eral wall of the outer hair cells, and Nguyen and Brownell75 
observed that elevated total cholesterol reduces the stiffness of 
the outer hair cells leading to deterioration of hearing.
Hypertension significantly reduces hearing,76,77 especially at 
4 kHz. The effect of hypertension on hearing is still under dis­
cussion as some researchers find that noise is the reason for 
hypertension, and these factors jointly cause the adverse effects 
on hearing.78 The other possibility is that noise and hyperten­
sion independently or in combination cause hearing loss. 
Animal studies have indicated that hypertension accelerates 
age-related hearing loss.76,79 In epidemiological studies, the 
antihypertensive medication may partly mask the effect of ele­
vated blood pressure on NIHL, as antihypertensive subjects 
under medication have normal or near normal blood pressure.64
Smoking together with hypertension increases NIHL.7 The 
connection between smoking and hearing level may be con­
founded by cessation of smoking.80 Smoking together with 
hypertension heightens the role of smoking in causing NIHL.80 
At present, there is not sufficient evidence to show whether the 
effects of noise and hypertension are additive or synergistic.
60 h
50 -
O
O
 
—  
'
-
O
O
 
<-  
<-
u
o
o
o
u
o
o
u
o  
o  
o  
o
■ ■ I 
Ii I 
I I t 
L1 I 
LI I 
Il I 
1 l 1 
I I I
Figure 28.7 Effect of exposure to cholesterol and systolic blood pressure on 
hearing. E, exposure; C, cholesterol; Sy, systolic blood pressure; 0, below median; 
1, above median.
VWF syndrome is a risk factor that causes about lOdB 
greater hearing loss than if this syndrome were not present.7,55,80 
The effect of VWF and noise seems to be synergistic (Figure
28.6). Also the effects of cholesterol and hypertension are syn­
ergistic when the exposure to noise is long duration (Figure
28.7).
Genetic factors
Genetically induced hearing loss may occur in a hereditary or 
sporadic form.81 In syndromic form it is relatively easy to detect, 
but in non-syndromic form it is often difficult to separate from 
NIHL. It is often age-dependent and increases with ageing. In 
the extension of the Framingham study, a good correlation was 
found with early onset of hearing loss and extent of presbyacu­
sis within the family.82 In men, the relationship was not as 
evident as in females, possibly because environmental noise 
was a confounding factor.82 The genetic background of non- 
syndromic hearing loss is heterogeneous, and to date 33 differ­
ent gene loci for non-syndromic hearing loss have been defined
  

484 
Auditory disorders and their management
(13 autosomal recessive hearing loss, 13 autosomal dominant 
hearing loss, 5 X-linked HL and two mitochondrial muta­
tions). Of these gene mutations, the connexin 26 (Cx26) 
mutation is most frequent and can be observed in 3% of the 
population.83 In recessive form, the Cx26 mutation is observed 
in 50% of the population.83
There are insufficient data available on the relationship 
between NIHL and genetic background. One study indicated 
that analgesics and military noise exposure aggravated the hear­
ing loss but the connection is not evident in occupational noise 
exposure.84 Such data are urgently needed, as they could 
explain the great variability in noise vulnerability in population 
studies. The results of the Framingham study indicate that 
genetic factors play a significant role in the development of age- 
dependent hearing loss and consequently in NIHL. In future, 
subjects with indications of genetically induced hearing loss 
might be tested for a possible defect in the Cx26 gene and pos- 
sibly also for some mitochondrial defects. The number of new 
known gene mutations is constantly increasing, and the readers 
are advised to look at the home page for genetic hearing loss.2
Hearing measurements
TO CONTROL IN AUDIOLOGICAL 
EVALUATION:
Type of audiometry
Annual calibration of audiometry
Sound isolation of booth
Audiometry
Such technical factors as measurements of hearing threshold level 
with clinical, automatic or screening audiometer may cause con­
siderable differences in HCP between various work plants. Mel- 
nick11 proposed that in clinical audiometry a 10-dB hearing level 
(HL) shift at any frequency is significant but in screening audiom­
etry, a 15-dB HL shift should be considered significant. The auto­
matic audiometer using 1 -dB HL steps maybe more accurate than 
the clinical audiometer, which uses 5-dB HL steps,85 since greater 
variability was found in clinical audiometry than in automatic 
audiometers. They consequently proposed the use of automatic 
audiometry in screening hearing in industry. Nevertheless, the 
automatic audiometer, using 1-dB steps, is not inherently more 
accurate than clinical audiometry, provided that in routine use 
the standardized procedure is strictly followed.86
The background noise of a soundproof room is seldom mea­
sured, and in many cases hearing is measured in non-isolated but 
quiet rooms. These do not allow the measurement of hearing 
threshold levels down to OdB. Automatic audiometers may 
introduce another error in the measurement if the test environ­
ment does not fulfil the requirements for ambient noise. At 
frequencies where thresholds exceed the screening level, they
are measured with essentially the same accuracy and reliability as 
in a clinical procedure. Moreover, Royster and Royster87 pointed 
out that audiometer calibration should be adequately carried out, 
as otherwise the audiometry results may be biased. In addition to 
relevant calibration, these authors proposed that normal con­
trols with normal hearing be mixed with the noise-exposed pop­
ulation. Finally, the quality of audiometric data is dependent on 
training, education and attention, of both subject and tester. A 
shortage of information on the purpose of the test, and careless 
recording of threshold values and control of background noise, 
may severely reduce the value of the audiometric data.
Any database should include data on the type and calibra­
tion of the audiometer and the quality of the soundproof room 
where the tests took place.
HEARING MEASUREMENT:
Audiometry
Clinical audiometry 
Screening audiometry
■ 
Automatic audiometry
Otoacoustic emissions
Spontaneous
Transient
■ 
Distortion product 
Contralateral inhibition
High-frequency audiometry
Otoacoustic emission
The term otoacoustic emission (OAE) refers to sounds emitted 
by the ear.88 The emitted sounds originate from the outer hair 
cells and may be helpful in the early identification of sen­
sorineural hearing loss (SNHL) caused by occupational noise 
exposure. Three OAE forms exist, all of which are evoked by 
particular stimuli. In the normal ear, spontaneous otoacoustic 
emissions (SOAEs) are present in the absence of acoustical 
stimulation among 70% of the subjects. After even subtle 
lesion, the SPOAEs seem to disappear.89 Transient evoked otoa­
coustic emissions (TEOAEs) are elicited by brief stimuli, such 
as clicks or tone pips. Distortion-product otoacoustic emissions 
(DPOAEs) are elicited by the non-linear interaction of two 
simultaneous, long-lasting pure tones.90 The evoking tones are 
referred to as the fl and f2 primaries in humans, the largest 
DPOAE occurs at the frequency equivalent to 2fl-f2.
Contralateral inhibition of distortion product (DPI) is rec­
ognized by the reduction in the amplitude of evoked OAE upon 
stimulation of the opposite ear. The OAE is vulnerable to nox­
ious stimuli, such as ototoxic drugs, intense noise and hypoxia, 
which are all known to affect the cochlea. They are absent with 
cochlear hearing loss greater than 35 dB. The type of OAE most 
commonly used for clinical purposes is TEOAE. TEOAEs are 
attractive for use as a screening procedure, as the test procedure 
is short and no cooperation of the subject is needed. DPOAEs
  

Noise-induced hearing loss 
485
may be more sensitive than TEOAEs in discriminating subjects 
with NIHL.91 However, an analysis of the efficacy of OAEs in 
assessing NIHL is not yet available. So far, few databases exist 
with data on OAE.
High-frequency audiometry
High-frequency audiometry refers to threshold testing at fre­
quencies from 8 kHz to 20 kHz. It is assumed that high- 
frequency audiometry assists in the early detection of NIHL, 
revealing hearing impairment before it is detectable at the fre­
quencies normally measured. In NIHL, improvement in hearing 
may be seen at 10 kHz, 12 kHz and 14 kHz. In age-related hear­
ing loss, this may not be observed.41
In high-frequency audiometry, thresholds tend to deterio­
rate after the age of 18-24 years.92 High-frequency audiometry 
seems to be of value among young subjects with normal hearing 
before any noise-induced alteration in hearing. The use of high- 
frequency audiometry is limited by the reliability and repeata­
bility of such audiometers,93 and, so far, few databases exist with 
data on high-frequency audiometry.
Construction of a database
Interface
The interface between the computer program and the user must 
satisfy several demands: it must be user-friendly, i.e. the content 
of the questions and input data must be easy to comprehend, 
and it must be self-controlling for input errors. It must be self- 
explanatory and, when needed, provide help for inputting or
s s e
He 
Data Estmabon Export 
Help
Objective findings
Risk anamnesis
Work exposure
Military exposure
M
—
S
Audiometry
Otoacoustic
WtMU I kl&IKWEMI
I ?  F1 for help I
using the interface. Recently, the graphical display has sur­
passed the traditional string commands. The advantage of the 
graphical display is that the item can be selected easily by one 
hand, and interest can be focused constantly on the item on the 
screen. The objects on the screen can be self-explanatory and, 
accordingly, easy to understand.
An example of the interface for entering data or evaluating 
data on the expert program ‘NoiseScan’ is provided in Figure 
28.8. In the program, several buttons are provided on the com­
puter screen. However, only those that are relevant for the cur­
rent tasks are activated, and, when selected, the explanatory 
text is displayed in red at the bottom of the screen.
Work noise
An unlimited number of exposure periods can be entered, with 
data on the possible impulsiveness, usage of HPDs and fre­
quency content of noise (Figure 28.9). The program calculates 
the total occupational exposure to noise, considering the pro­
tection efficiency of HPDs and the usage rate. In the case of 
missing exposure data, the program helps to make an estimate 
from the results in the register of employment measurements. 
The attenuation of HPDs is evaluated using the HML-check 
method of the standard EN 458.40
Other exposure
Information regarding smoking, the use of analgesics and expo­
sure to solvents is entered with respect to time periods. Smok­
ers are divided into non-smokers, smokers and heavy smokers. 
A similar division is made for the use of analgesics. Exposure to 
solvents is indicated with a yes/no answer.
*101 *}
NoiseScan
f'toteeSc*! 4.0
CO Firrwn M ttu t*  of Occupational Health
Figure 28.8 Main screen of the 
database for the expert 
programme 'NoiseScan'.
  

486 
Auditory disorders and their management
Other noise exposure
The recorded non-occupational noise exposures include music, 
shooting, use of power tools and exposure during military ser­
vice. All these exposures are collected in periods. The form 
used for the collection of military service exposure is also used 
to collect exposure data for professional soldiers.
Music exposure is considered in detail. Rock playing, clas­
sical playing, use of portable stereos and visits to discos are iden­
tified separately. For each activity, evaluations of the loudness 
and the use of HPDs are sought (Figure 28.10). On the same 
form, there are questions about the use of power tools, public 
noise events and shooting. Some questions are also added about 
leisure time exposure to solvents.
Work eKpuvurr
mm
Job
E metayer
Y e * 
North 
Start 
|T970 p3
End 
I 2® 1 
& Ongong
Noise exposure
Nptse level
|i
| Rules oi (hurt)
Frequency cortert ol noise 
C  HM Nflht-mffigm 
<* LH SwHnedwro
Noise impufcrverwH 
r  Not known 
G Notmoulsrv*
C  Impiitive 
r  Impulsive orJy
fot dllerent 
job.
Waking lims in noise
fr
"3
ZJ Hours
r  M i
E*  
.1
£)alele 
I
X £***< 1 
^  $*** |
|St«tYeai lEndfeef 
lEmptoyei
H e arin g  protectors
Use of prrtectott 
f* Always 
C  Often 
r Seldom
r  Neva
Type ol piaieelor
f? Eai muffs
C  E * plugs
«  
1
r  Acirve piotecicr
?
r  Unknown
AHerejanton of
Mode*
fi^om FM Rack) 797
Are you exposed to 
solvents at work ?
dHlaert pigtedor
r  Mo a Yet r  ?
Solvent expoiuic
Agyd 
Levef 
Unit 
Meas
Ixytene 
3  I 
m |rng/m3^J [aT"
^3 | 
112 | ppm zi
|0thef
n r
j 3
J
n r
~n
"3
“3
Figure 28.9 Data sheet for work noise.
Free time exposure
MB
Playing rock etc. in a band
________ 
Frequency-----------------------Loudnets
—, 
f' Often 
r  ftotvnybud 
0 
(* 
C  Uud 
r  Y«, bu m* any rnoce 
r  Wm^  
& Vwyloud 
* Yet 
C Mae than one# 4 week 
Erttwn^loud
Use ol protectors 
r  AJwayi 
C Olten 
(S' S«Wwn 
r  Never
YftMt
r  0 
2
r  z 4 
r  4 8 
e ie 
[ r  > is
Visiting discotheques, concerts
Useofpoleetott 
C AJw«y; 
r  Qlten 
C Seldom 
Never
TOill
r  o 
2 
r  2. 4 
r  4 
s 
r? 8 16 
r  > ie
___________ , 
FrcQjeocy 
Loufcnss
>■. u 
■*'*' Oft an, 
C  Not very loud 
° 
r  Months 
(* Loud 
^  Yet, bdn* anytime 
Weekly 
r  Very loud 
f  Yet 
C  More lh«i once a week 
C Et4ret%loud
Use of powertools
_______________________  
rFm pncy-----------------------|
Offer
£  
0 
r  Months
r  Yet.U*notarymoie 
r
Yet 
C  More than once a week
• U se ol protector* 
C Alwsys 
r  Olten 
C Sekfcwv 
G Nev*
Yeats
r  o 2 
*  jF~3 
r  r  s 
r  8 ie 
r  >i6
Shooting, hunting etc. 
rTSS?*****
r  t io
T N O  
r  11.100
r u  
r  itn i ooo
« 
Yes. bJ not tny more 
^  1001 
10000 
| ** Vft*________________ J 
f~ More than 10000
Use ol protactos 
C ai vmir, 
iff Olten 
r  Seldom 
r  Never
Qriete
✓ <* I
Figure 28.10 Questionnaire screen for free 
time exposure.
  

Noise-induced hearing loss 
487
Control parameters
Hereditary factors are identified on a separate sheet for those 
people having an early hearing loss or relatives with early hear­
ing loss. Skin sensitivity to sun is also identified, as subjects sen­
sitive to sunburn are reported to develop greater NIHL.94,95
The individual susceptibility factors consist of blood pres­
sure readings and cholesterol level. These factors are collected 
during each study occasion for each employee.
In addition to the above factors, other health-related 
symptoms or factors which may explain hearing loss are col­
lected. Such factors include ear infections, ear surgery, skull 
and head trauma, vertigo, ototoxic drugs, central nervous sys­
tem disorders, migraine and possible central nervous system 
infections.
Prediction of hearing level
NoiseScan provides two models for hearing level prediction, 
the ISO 1999-1990 model and the NoiseScan model.
The ISO 1999 model takes as input the work noise level 
outside the HPD.3 Based on this figure, the ISO 1999 model 
gives the distribution of hearing losses. NoiseScan provides the 
prediction based on population A (screened population) of ISO 
1999.21 NoiseScan prints the latest audiogram on top of these 
statistical curves. In addition, NoiseScan evaluates on the 
same screen the possible other sources of exposure, i.e. free-time 
noise and military noise.
Unlike the ISO 1999 model, the NoiseScan model tries to 
predict the NIHL at an individual level. For this purpose the 
NoiseScan model utilizes as input the individual risk factors
(Figure 28.11). In distinction to the ISO 1999 model, the Noise­
Scan models use the total noise exposure to the ear as the input
96
parameter.
Finally, NoiseScan calculates a prediction of the likely pro­
gression of the NIHL based on the assumption that the present 
exposure with the present use of HPDs continues. For simula­
tion purposes, NoiseScan provides the possibility of predicting 
the effect of full-time use of protectors.
Mechanism for cellular vulnerability 
to noise
So far, no database has collected systematic information on pos­
sible preventive agents of NIHL, such as dietary antioxidants, 
dietary supplements competing with calcium homeostasis or 
drugs effective in blocking the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptors.
In the Israeli army, Attias et al.97 have successfully given Mg2+ 
ions as a dietary supplement to prevent the accumulation of Ca2+ 
in hair cells and reduce NIHL. Small doses of acetylsalicylic acid 
may rescue hair cells from noise damage.98 Other drugs that may 
be used to rescue hair cells are melatonin," iron chelators,100 
dietary glutathione,100 and NMDA antagonists.98 Therefore, var­
ious drugs and dietary supplements are constitute relevant infor­
mation to include in a database.
In the following, a short summary of the postulated mech­
anisms leading to NIHL is given. Most research has focused on 
the structural results of noise exposure and has correlated dam­
aged stereocilia bundles or missing hair cells with hearing dys­
function. However, information on the cellular and subcellular
Figure 28.11 NoiseScan model. NoiseScan 
displays the latest audiogram for right and left 
ears and predicts the development of NIHL in 
5-year intervals. Exposure data are summarized 
and the comparison of the configuration forms 
of audiograms is made.
» High 
( LelTfc
!>httw t irm ly nir,
Present Use
t-sptisure (lulu
nni_oui ‘ l??1 
Lani.in 
102.1 
Muuir: uxpusurct 
Not fnunri
Mililoiy exposure
I r n v y  w r n p o n r .  s h u ts  II
Mu 11s nlwnys Plijifs nlwnyn 
land weapons shots: I Uu 10UU 
mutln never pluqs 
never
hree tjme
bill mill hl) ('‘rut > 'JU %
Starts HIM 100
Auditigrums are nat 
symmetric in Kpuitf .h ritrjmri 
Aiiriioqrom shop** correct for N IH I
NoiseScan Model
kite
  

488 
Auditory disorders and their management
processes involved is sparse. In addition, as the importance of 
the ‘cochlear amplifier’ for auditory performance is now gener­
ally accepted, injury processes related to the outer hair cell body 
must be recognized as being as significant as those of the sensory 
hair bundles.
Normal auditory stimulation elicits pressure differences 
across the cochlear partition, causing a number of mechanical 
events within the organ of Corti: vibrations, shearing motion, 
and stereocilia deflection (for a review see Ulfendahl101). The 
end-result is excitation of the outer and inner hair cells, and, 
following release of transmitter substances, increased activity in 
the auditory nerve. Obviously, noise or excessive auditory stim­
ulation will elicit similar events but at much larger amplitudes. 
There are two fundamentally different ways in which overstim­
ulation may lead to cochlear injury: mechanical or metabolic.102 
Large-amplitude motion may mechanically alter or disrupt 
cochlear structures. Cellular distortion, disorganization of stere­
ocilia and possible ruptures of cell membranes disable the 
cochlear fluid barriers and cause immediate reduction of audi-
. . 
• 
103-110
tory sensitivity.
On the other hand, sound-induced overstimulation and 
overactivity of the cochlea can result in disturbed cochlear 
homeostasis and subsequent functional impairment, in the 
absence of direct and immediate mechanical damage. Experi­
mental evidence suggests a critical level around 125 dB SPL,111 
at which the cause of damage changes from predominantly 
metabolic to mechanical. Thus, at moderate sound pressure lev­
els, damage would mainly be caused by metabolic mechanisms, 
while at higher levels, mechanical mechanisms would domi­
nate. As changes in homeostasis will occur also after mechani­
cal trauma, and the effects of metabolic stress are also likely to
be expressed as mechanical damage, it is not meaningful to 
make a strict separation between metabolic and mechanical 
causes of NIHL.
There are several steps leading from acoustical overstimula­
tion to cellular damage (Figure 28.12). Some of the mechanisms 
are mainly related to metabolic changes, e.g. oxidative stress, 
synaptic hyperactivity and altered cochlear bloodflow, while 
others are predominantly mechanical. It is likely, however, that 
the resulting damage to the auditory system is partly mediated by 
similar mechanisms, irrespective of the cause. Although definite 
evidence of a ‘common final pathway’ is missing, experimental 
data suggest that free radicals and other highly reactive endoge­
nous substances play a significant role in NIHL.
PROTECTION AGAINST NOISE:
Antioxidants 
Ca 
antagonists 
NMDA receptor blockers 
Growth factors
It is well known from other biological systems that reactive 
oxygen metabolites (ROMs) are important mediators of cell 
injury. ROMs are free radicals or other molecules which have a 
chemical structure that makes them extremely reactive. As 
they react very easily with cellular components such as lipids, 
proteins and DNA, they are potentially cytotoxic. ROMs are 
produced continuously as part of normally occurring reactions, 
e.g. in the mitochondria. However, protection is offered by 
several endogenous antioxidants. These are either enzymes
Figure 28.12 Pathways for noise-induced injury 
to the peripheral auditory system. ROM, reactive 
oxygen metabolites; Ca, calcium. (Modified after 
J.M. Miller, personal communication.)
  

Noise-induced hearing loss 
489
catalysing reactions neutralizing the ROMs, or scavengers bind­
ing them. When there is an imbalance between the production 
of ROMs and the endogenous protective mechanisms, the tis­
sue is under oxidative stress. Increased ROM production can 
cause cell death, whereas overactive protective mechanisms 
may lead to tumour growth. In the auditory system there are 
several reports demonstrating elevated levels of either ROMs or 
antioxidants following noise exposure,8’112,113 and reduced hear­
ing loss after treatments increasing antioxidant levels.100,114,115
During intense sound exposure, the inner hair cells are 
overstimulated, resulting in synaptic hyperactivity and an 
excessive release of transmitter substance. The afferent neuro­
transmitter is most likely glutamate, which, like other excita­
tory amino acids, has toxic effects when released in large 
amounts. The resulting overstimulation of the glutamate recep­
tors elicits inflow of calcium ions, which in combination with 
other ions bring about the entry of water and subsequent 
swelling of the nerve endings. The result may be a total disrup­
tion of the synapses between the inner hair cells and the affer­
ent nerve fibres in the auditory nerve.116
POSSIBLE ROM SCAVENGERS;
Glutathione 
N-acetylcysteine 
Ascorbic acid 
Salicylic acid 
Melatonin 
a-Tocopherol
Iron chelator (desferrioxamine)
Mannitol
Changes in cochlear bloodflow have generally been sug­
gested to contribute to NIHL.63,117-119 Recent findings have 
clearly demonstrated noise-induced alterations in cochlear 
microcirculation causing local ischaemia.120,121 The effect varies 
with intensity and duration of the exposure, but when vascular 
insufficiency is manifest, the reduced oxygen and energy supply 
to the cochlea, and the accumulation of metabolites, will be 
accompanied by severe functional alterations. It has been shown 
experimentally that applying drugs blocking vasoconstriction 
prevents noise-induced microcirculatory ischaemia, and main­
tains normal hearing thresholds.122 However, the exact role of 
local bloodflow alterations is unclear, and it should be noted that 
it has been observed that hearing loss and cochlear hypoxia may 
actually precede changes in cochlear bloodflow.120
In addition to the accumulation of ROMs seen following 
metabolic and/or mechanical stress, it has been demonstrated 
that acoustical overstimulation leads to a significant rise in intra­
cellular calcium levels in the outer hair cells.123,124 A sustained 
increase in the intracellular calcium concentration is known to 
elicit severe cell injuries, such us cytoskeletal breakdown, mem­
brane defects and DNA damage.125,126 One probable conse­
quence of the increased calcium concentration in the outer hair
cells is the loss of cell body stiffness observed after intense 
acoustical stimulation.127 Moreover, a structural reorganization 
of the organ of Corti has recently been demonstrated following 
acoustical overstimulation.103 The noise-induced changes in cel­
lular stiffness and structure of the hearing organ seem to be at 
least partly reversible, and the results may thus contribute to 
knowledge about mechanisms underlying reversible injuries.
When the metabolic and/or mechanical stress is too large, 
the cells die and a permanent hearing loss is manifest. Cell death 
is a result of either apoptosis or necrosis. Apoptosis is a strictly 
controlled process to eliminate dysfunctional cells without 
affecting surrounding tissue. It can be viewed as a counterbal­
ance to cell division, and a disturbance may, for example, result 
in degenerative disorders or tumour growth. Necrosis, on the 
other hand, is a more passive type of cell death, involving a rapid 
and disorganized breakdown of a cell, often as a consequence of 
acute trauma (toxic substances, ischaemia, etc.). As the cell con­
tents are released directly into the surrounding tissue, an inflam­
matory reaction usually follows. Thus, for the organism, 
apoptosis is the preferred method when it is necessary to elimi­
nate cells. In the auditory system there is no conclusive evidence 
that apoptosis plays a significant role. Structural observations of 
DNA fragmentation may suggest the involvement of either 
apoptotic128 or necrotic mechanisms129 during peri- and postna­
tal development of the inner ear. One study on autopsy material 
from subjects with no history of acoustical trauma suggests that 
apoptosis does not contribute significantly to the regulation of 
the cell population in the normal adult inner ear.130 Neverthe­
less, apoptosis may be involved during noise-induced trauma, 
although there is, to date, no such evidence.
Increased knowledge of the processes leading to cell injuries 
is of fundamental importance in order to develop clinical means 
for protection and repair. Many recent reports on the protection 
against noise-induced hearing loss offered by drugs like anti­
oxidants and neurotrophins are promising for the future.
Diagnosis of noise-induced hearing 
loss
DIAGNOSIS OF NOISE-INDUCED HEARING 
LOSS SHOULD BE BASED ON:
Relevant exposure dam
Shape of the audiogram (high-frequency hearing loss) 
Symmetry of audiograms between both ears (mean of 
speech frequencies not exceeding lOdB between the 
ears).
According to ISO 1999-1990, noise vulnerability is linked to 
A-weighted sound energy entering the ear. No changes are to 
be expected at speech frequencies in the audiogram if the A- 
weighted equivalent noise level is less than 80 dB. However,
  

490 
Auditory disorders and their management
in most countries, if compensation is to be awarded a higher 
level of 85 or 90dB(A) is required- The criteria for NIHL are 
country-dependent, and may include other criteria than those 
related to the audiogram, such as speech intelligibility. In sci­
entific papers, the criterion for acceptance of evidence of NIHL 
is a mean hearing loss of 25 dB across the speech frequencies. 
Usually, the NIHL starts in the 3-6-kHz area, where a typical 
notch in the audiogram can be observed. When the noise dam­
age increases, the notch becomes wider and deeper, and later 
the audiogram starts to flatten, indicating damage at speech fre­
quencies. With prolonged and very severe noise exposure, the 
NIHL levels out across the high frequencies at 60-80 dBHL but 
the low frequencies are less affected than the high frequencies. 
Usually both ears are involved to the same extent, and if the 
difference at speech frequencies exceeds 10dBHL, the inner 
ear damage should be assumed to be complicated by other fac­
tors than noise. These criteria are helpful for diagnosing NHL 
and facilitating differentiation from other high-tone SNHL.
PROBLEMS IN AUDIOMETRIC EVALUATION
1. No baseline audiogram for an employer. Underlining 
ear disorders may confound NIHL.
2. Inadequate instructions in measurement. Variable 
hearing test results.
3. Ears not inspected {wax, foreign body). Hearing 
results variable.
4. A 16-h noise free period not honoured, allowing TTS 
to bias movement.
5. Noisy background in the hearing test room. Difficult 
to evaluate correct hearing level.
6. Background noise during testing not exceeding 40 
dB(A). Difficult to evaluate correct hearing level.
The primary goal of an industrial HCP must be the pre­
vention (or, at least, limitation) of NIHL associated with expo­
sure to industrial noise.85 Other goals may be formulated in 
addition to this primary goal, such as reduction of employee 
stress and absenteeism, and reduction of workplace accidents. 
An HCP is costly and demands resources and personnel. Often, 
due to these factors, only selected personnel are tested audio- 
logically. Newly employed persons are not always tested. If a 
hearing test is not carried out before a person starts work, it may 
be difficult later to show that the hearing loss is of pre-employ- 
ment origin. It is strongly recommended that all persons enter­
ing jobs with a risk of development of NIHL should be tested.
Often, the people who carry out industrial audiometry have 
little experience and education in the field. Earwax may not be 
removed, and the ears may not have been inspected. We often 
observe workers with blocked ear canals or with noise protec­
tion cotton in the ear canal, and such situations may cause 
unexpected hearing threshold shifts in audiometry. On certain 
occasions, the subject may not understand the instructions and
may provide inaccurate responses and an unreliable audiogram. 
Instructions should be simple and given verbally before the test. 
Importantly, the noise-free period should be 16 h to allow hear­
ing threshold measurement that is free from TTS caused by 
environmental or occupational noise. Therefore, the test 
should be done first thing in the morning and the subject 
should not have been exposed to noise the previous evening. 
Attention should be paid to the background noise of the 
audiometry booth, and this noise should be measured, as even 
at low frequencies it may mask the tone pips in the audiometric 
frequencies such that 0-dB threshold values cannot be mea­
sured. As a rule, the background should not exceed 30dB(A) in 
the booth, to allow 0-dB threshold values to be measured. In 
industry, screening audiometry is performed for 25-dB hearing 
level at any frequency. For this purpose, background noise 
should not exceed 40dB(A) in the booth.
Who then should be referred to an otologist? A worker with 
a 10-dB hearing change at two frequencies between the last two 
audiograms should be referred, as the change may indicate 
NIHL or an ear disorder. Also, if the threshold shift is greater 
than 25 dB at any frequency, the worker should be referred to 
an otologist. The American Academy of Otolaryngology— 
Head and Neck Surgery has provided proposals for the referral 
(AAO-HNS 1983).
In addition, to complete the exposure history and audio­
grams, the case history must have documented other factors 
that may cause SNHL. These include the possible use of oto­
toxic drugs such as streptomycin and cis-platinum. Heavy use of 
anti-inflammatory agents such as salicylates and indomethacin- 
type antiphlogistics may cause reversible or non-reversible 
hearing loss and aggravate the NIHL.96 Some inner ear diseases, 
such as idiopathic tinnitus, Meniere’s disease, otosclerosis, and 
sudden deafness, may begin with a pure inner ear component 
affecting only hearing or masking the hearing, as tinnitus may 
do. Infectious ear diseases, such as chronic otitis media or tym­
panosclerosis, cause hearing loss. Hereditary hearing losses, 
either symptomatic or asymptomatic, may be difficult to detect, 
as these occur in about half of the cases. So far, it is not known 
whether genetic (hereditary) hearing loss is more susceptible to 
NIHL. However, general opinion favours the idea of increased 
vulnerability or predisposition. Therefore, for subjects with a 
family history of deafness, the use of ear protection is a must, 
and sometimes changes of work or working tasks are advisable. 
Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that the most common 
genetic disorder is connexin 26 (DNFB3). It is present in 3% of 
the population.
Summary
The aim of developing an industrial database for hearing conser­
vation is four-fold. It includes: (1) screening of workers who may 
be at risk of developing NIHL in selected work tasks or sites; (2) 
warning against excessive noise pollution in selected work tasks 
or sites; (3) allowing the comparative assessment of success
  

Noise-induced hearing loss 
491
among various Hips, and finally (4) calling attention to individ- 
ual susceptibility. To fulfil these demands, the database must 
include all known factors that affect hearing loss. Such factors 
are audiometric testing methods, the testing environment, effi­
ciency of the HPDs, and exposure to military and leisure time 
noise. It must provide accurate data from lifetime noise exposure 
in various jobs or work tasks. The database must also have ade­
quate information on the type and use of HPDs. Finally, con­
founding factors must be controlled, such as elevated blood 
pressure, the presence of VWF syndrome, elevated serum cho­
lesterol level, and use of various ototoxic drugs. Such factors can 
explain a significant variation in the extent of hearing loss in 
individual cases. In the present database, we have attempted to 
include such factors, known to be relevant for the HCP.
References
1. Koton S, Ifrah A, Lerman Y et al. Worker’s health in Israel. Public 
Health Rev 1998; 26: 189-203.
2. Van Camp G, Smith RJH. Hereditary Hearing Loss Homepage. 
http://dnalab-www.uia.ac.be/dnalab/hhh.html
3. International Organization for Standardization. Acoustics—Deter­
mination of Occupational Noise Exposure and Estimation of Noise- 
induced Hearing Impairment, ISO1999-1990. Geneva: ISO 1990.
4. Robinson DW. Estimating the risk of hearing loss due to continu­
ous noise. In: Robinson DW, ed. Occupational Hearing Loss. 
London: Academic Press, 1971.
5. Borg A, Canlon B, Engstrom B. Individual variability of noise- 
induced hearing loss. In: Dancer AL, Henderson D, Salvi RJ et al., 
eds. Noise-Induced Hearing Loss. St Louis: Mosby Year Book, 1992: 
467-75.
6. Humes LE. Noise induced hearing loss as influenced by other 
agents and by some physical characteristics of the individual. J 
Acoust Soc Am 1984; 76: 1318-29.
7. Pyykko I, Pekkarinen J, Starck ]. Sensory-neural hearing loss in 
forest workers. An analysis of risk factor. Int Arch Occup Environ 
Health 1986; 59: 439-54.
8. Yamane H, Nakai Y, Takayama M et al. The emergence of free rad­
icals after acoustic trauma and strial blood flow. A eta Otolaryngol 
(Stockh) Suppl 1995; 519: 87-92.
9. International Organization for Standardization. Acoustics— Guide­
lines for the Measurements and Assessment of Exposure to Noise in 
Working Environment. ISO 9612.2. Geneva: ISO, 1997.
10. Kryter KD. Damage risk criterion and contours based on perma­
nent and temporary hearing loss data. J Am Ind Hyg Assoc 1965; 
26: 34-44.
11. Melnick W. Evaluation of industrial hearing conservation pro­
grams: a review and analysis. Am Ind Hyg Assoc J 1984; 45:459-67.
12. Baughn WL. Relation Between Daily Exposure and Hearing Loss Based 
on Evaluation of 6835 Industrial Noise Exposure Cases. Dayton: 
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Report AMRL-TR-7353. US 
Air Force, 1973.
13. Bums W, Robinson DW. Hearing and Noise in Industry. Her 
Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1960.
14. Robinson DB, Shipton MS. Tables for the Estimation of Noise- 
induced Hearing Loss. NPL Acoustics Report Ac. 61, 2nd edn. 
British ARC, 1977.
15. Robinson DW. The Relationship between Hearing Loss and Noise 
Exposure. NPL Aero Report Ac. 32. British ARC, 1968.
16. Bums W. Permanents effects of noise on hearing. In: Bums W, 
Noise and Man 2nd edn., London: John Murray, 1973.
17. Passchier-Vermeer W. Hearing loss due to continuous exposure to 
steady-state broad-band noise. J Acoust Soc Am 1974: 46(5): 
1585-93.
18. Glorig A, Nixon J. Distribution of hearing loss in various popula­
tions. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1980; 69(2): 497-516.
19. Johnson D. Prediction ofNIPTS due to Continuous Noise Exposure. 
Report No. AMRL-TR-73-91. US Air Force, 1973.
20. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). 
Occupational noise and hearing 1968-72. NIOSH Pub. No 74-116, 
1974.
21. International Organization for Standardization. 
Acoustics—  
Assessment of Occupational Noise Exposure for Hearing Conservation 
Purposes. ISO 1999. Geneva: ISO, 1975.
22. Suter AH. The development of federal standard and damage risk 
criteria. In: Libscomb DM, ed. Hearing Conservation in Industry, 
Schools, and the Military. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, 
1994: 45-66.
23. Robinson DW, Sutton GJ. Age effects in hearing— a comparative 
analysis of published threshold data. Audiology 1979; 18: 320-34.
24. Glorig A, Roberts J. Hearing Levels of Adults by Age and Sex: United 
States 1960-1962. Report PHS-PUB-100-SER-ll-ll. Nat Cent 
Health Serv Res and Dev, 1965.
25. Rowland M. Basic Data on Hearing Levels of Adults 25-74 years. 
DHEW Publication no. (PHS) 80-1663, series 11, no. 215. US 
Department of Health, Education and Welfare, 1980; 49p.
26. Starck J, Pekkarinen J. Industrial impulse noise: crest factor as an 
additional parameter in exposure measurements. Appl Acoust
1987; 20: 263-74.
27. Pfander F. Das Knalltrauma. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer 
Verlag, 1975.
28. Ward D. Auditory effects of noise. In: Berger EH, Ward WD, 
Morrill JC, Royster LH, eds. Noise and Hearing Conservation Man­
ual. AIHA, 1986.
29. Starck J, Pekkarinen J, Pyykko I. Impulse noise and hand-arm 
vibration in relation to sensory neural hearing loss. Scand J Work 
Environ Health 1988: 14: 265-71.
30. Ylikoski M, Ylikoski J. Hearing loss and handicap of professional 
soldiers exposed to gunfire noise. Scand J Work Environ Health 
1994; 20: 93-100.
31. Pekkarinen J, Iki M, Starck J et al. Hearing loss risk from exposure 
to shooting impulses in workers exposed to occupational noise. Br 
JAudiol 1993; 27: 175-82.
32. Pekkarinen J, Starck J, Ylikoski J. Hearing protection against high 
level shooting impulses in relation to hearing damage. J Acoust Soc 
Am 1992; 91: 196-202.
33. Starck J, Pekkarinen J, Aatola S. Attenuation of earmuffs against 
low frequency noise. J Low Frequency Noise Vibration 1987; 6(4): 
167-74.
  

492 
Auditory disorders and their management
34. Toppila E, Starck J, Pihlstrom A et al. The evaluation of protec- 
tion efficiency of hearing protectors for hearing conservation pro- 
grams. Adv Noise Res 1998; 2: 167-76.
35. Ylikoski J, Pekkarinen ], Starck J. The efficiency of earmuffs 
against impulse noise from firearms. Scand Audiol 1987; 16: 85-8.
36. International Organization for Standardization. Acoustics-Hearing 
Protectors. Subjective Method for the Measurement of Sound Attenu­
ation. ISO-4869-1. Geneva: ISO, 1990.
3 7. International Organization for Standardization. Acoustics—Hearing 
Protectors. Estimation of Effective A-weighted Pressure Levels When 
Hearing Protectors are Worn. ISO-4869-2.2. Geneva: ISO, 1992.
38. EN 352 Hearing Protectors—Safety Requirements and Testing—parts 
1-3, 1993.
39. prEN 13819-2 Hearing Protectors—Testing—part 2: Acoustic Test 
Methods, 2000.
40. EN 458 Hearing Protectors—Recommendations for Selection, Use, 
Care and Maintenance, 1993.
41. Sataloff RT, Sataloff J. Hearing loss in musicians, In: Sataloff RT, 
Sataloff ], eds. Occupational Hearing Loss, New York: Marcel 
Dekker, 1993.
42. Liu Chang-Chun, Pekkarinen ], Starck J. Application of the 
probe microphone method to measure attenuation of hearing 
protectors against high impulse sound levels. Appl Acoust 1989; 
27: 13-25.
43. Starck J, Pekkarinen J. Objective measurements of hearing pro- 
tector attenuation for weapons noise exposure. In: Proceedings 
1992; Hearing Conservation Conference, 1992: 89-92.
44. Pekkarinen J. Industrial noise, crest factor and the effect of ear- 
muffs. Am Ind Hyg Assoc J 1987; 48: 861-6.
45. Toppila E, Starck J, Pekkarinen J. Hearing protection efficiency in 
forestry. In: Blomback P, Heikkonen J, Jokiluoma H et al, eds. Pro­
ceedings of the Seminar on Clothing and Safety Equipment in Forestry. 
Kuopio: University Printing Office, 1994: 183-7.
46. Foreshaw S, Cruchley J. Hearing protector problems in military 
operations. In: Alberti P, ed. Personal Hearing Protection in Indus­
try. New York: Raven Press, 1982.
47. Berger EH. Using the NRR to estimate the real world performance 
of hearing protectors. Sound Vibration 1983; 17(1): 12-18.
48. Lipscomp DM. The employee education program In: Lipscomb 
DM, ed. Hearing Conservation in Industry, Schoob and the Military. 
San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, 1994: 81-230.
49. Price G. Relative hazard of weapons impulses. J Acoust Soc Am 
1983; 73: 556.
50. Clarck WW. Noise exposure from leisure activities: a review. ] 
Acoust Soc Am 1991; 90: 175-81.
51. Smith P, Davis A, Ferguson M et al. The prevalence and type of 
social noise exposure in young adults. Noise and Health 2000; 6: 
41-56.
52. Cruickshanks KJ, Klein R, Klein BE, Wiley TL, Nondahl DM, 
Tweeeds TS. Cigarette smoking and hearing loss: the epidemiol- 
ogy of hearing loss. JAMA 1998; 279: 1715-59.
53. Starck J, Toppila E, Pyykko I. Management of a sophisticated hear- 
ing conservation program. Am] Ind Med 1999, 1 (Suppl): 47-50.
54. Drettner B, Hedstrand H, Klockhoff I et al. Cardiovascular risk 
factors and hearing loss. Acta Otolaryngol 1975; 79: 366-71.
55. Friedman GD, Siegelan AB, Seltzer CC. Cigarette smoking and 
exposure to occupational hazards. Am J Epidemiol 1969; 98: 
175-83.
56. Pyykko I, Koskimies K, Starck J et al. Evaluation of factors affect- 
ing sensory neural hearing loss. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) Suppl 
1988; 449: 155-60.
57. Myers EN, Bernstein JM. Salicylate ototoxicity. Arch Otolaryngol 
1965; 82: 483-93.
58. Hawkins JE. Vascular patterns of the membranous labyrinth. In: 
Graybiel A, ed. Third Symposium on the Role of the Vestibular Organs 
in Space Exploration. Washington: NASA, 1967: 241-58.
59. Smith I, Lawrence M, Hawkins JE. Effects of noise and quinine on 
the vessels of the stria vascularis: an image analysis. Am J Oto­
laryngol 1985; 5.
60. Graham JDP, Parker WA. The toxic manifestation of sodium sali­
cylate therapy. Q J Med 1948; 17: 153-63.
61. Crifo S. Aspirin ototoxicity in the guinea pig. ORL J Otorhino- 
laryngol Relat Spec 1975; 37: 27-34.
62. Eddy LB, Morgan RF, Carney HC. Hearing loss due to combined 
effects of noise and sodium salicylate. ISA Trans 1976; 15: 103-8.
63. Miller JM, Ren TY, Dengerink HA et al. Cochlear blood flow 
changes with short sound stimulation. In: Axelsson A, Borch- 
grevink H, Hamemik RP, Hellstrom P, Henderson D, Salvi RJ, 
eds. Scientific Basis of Noise-Induced Hearing Loss, New York: 
Theime Medical Publishers, 1996: 95-109.
64. Pyykko I, Koskimies K, Starck J et al. Risk factors in the genesis of 
sensory neural hearing loss in Finnish forestry workers. Br J Ind 
Med 1989; 46: 439-46.
65. Bergstrom B, Nystrom B. Development of hearing loss during 
long-term exposure to occupational noise. Scand A udiol 1986; 15: 
227-34.
66. Morata TC, Dunn DE, Kretchmer LW, et al. Effects of occupa­
tional exposure to organic solvents and noise on hearing. Scand ] 
Work Environ Health 1993; 19: 245-54.
67. Muijser H, Hoogendijk EM, Hooisma J. The effects of occupa­
tional exposure to styrene on high-frequency hearing threshold. 
Toxicology 1988; 49: 331-40.
68. Makitie A. The ototoxic effect of styrene and its interactions with 
an experimental study in rats. Academic Dissertation, University 
of Helsinki, Helsinki University Hospital, 1997.
69. Ward WD. Endogenous factors related to susceptibility to damage 
from noise. Occup Med 1995; 10: 561-75.
70. Rosen S, Pleater D, El-Mofty A et al. Relation of hearing loss to 
cardiovascular disease. Trans Am Acad Ophthalmol Otolaryngol 
1964; 68: 433-44.
71. Rosen S, Olin P. Hearing loss and coronary heart disease. Arch 
Otolaryngol 1965; 82: 236-43.
72. Pyykko I, Toppila E, Starck J et al. Database for a hearing conser­
vation program. Scand A udiol 2000; 29: 52-8.
73. Pillsbury HC. Hypertension, hyperlipoproteinemia, chronic noise 
exposure: is there synergism in cochlear pathology? Laryngoscope 
1986; 96: 1112-38.
74. Oghalai JS, Nakagawa T, Patell A A et al. Cholesterol partitioning 
within the outer hair cell lateral wall. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1997; 117:91.
  

Noise-induced hearing loss 
493
75. Nguyen T-V, Brownell WE . Contribution of membrane choles- 
terol to outer hair cell lateral wall stiffness. Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 1998; 119: 14-20.
76. Borg E. Noise-induced hearing loss in normotensive and sponta­
neously hypertensive rats. Hear Res 1982; 8: 117-30.
77. Johnsson A, Hansson L. Prolonged exposure to a stressful stimulus 
(noise) as a cause of raised blood pressure in man. Lancet 1977; I: 
86-7.
78. Talbot EO, Findlay RC, Kuller LH et al. Noise-induced hearing 
loss: a possible marker for high blood pressure in older noise- 
exposed populations. J Occup Med 1990; 32: 890-7.
79. McCormic G, Harris DT, Hartley CB et al. Spontaneous genetic 
hypertension in the rat and its relationship to reduce cochlear 
potentials: implications for preservation of human hearing. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 1982; 79: 2668.
80. Starck J, Toppila E, Pyykko I. Smoking as risk factor in sensory 
neural hearing loss among workers exposed to occupational noise. 
Acta Otolaryngol 1999; 119: 302-5.
81. Morton NE. Genetic epidemiology of hearing impairment. Ann 
NY Acad Sci 1991; 630: 16-31.
82. Gates GA, Couropmitree NN, Meyers RH. Genetic associations 
in age-related hearing thresholds. Arch Otol Head Neck Surg 1999; 
125: 654-9.
83. Green CE, Scott DA, McDonald JM et al. Carrier rates in the mid 
western United States for GJB2 mutations causing inherited deaf­
ness. JAMA 281: 2211-16.
84. Kaksonen R, Pyykko I, Kere J et al. Hereditary hearing loss—the 
role of environmental factors. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 2001; 30: 
85-7.
85. Royster LH, Lilley LT, Thomas WG. Recommended criteria for 
evaluating effectiveness of hearing conservation program. Am Ind 
Hyg Assoc 1980; 41: 40-8.
86. International Organization for Standardization. Acoustics. Audio­
metric Test Methods. Part 1: Basic Pure Tone Air and Bone Con­
duction Threshold Audiometry. ISO 8253-1:1. Geneva: ISO, 1989.
87. Royster JD, Royster LH.Using audiometric data base analysis. J 
Occup Med 1986; 28: 1055-68.
88. Kemp DT. Stimulated acoustic emissions from within the human 
auditory system. J Acoust Soc Am 1978; 64: 1386-91.
89. Furst M, Reshef I, Attias J. Manifestation of intense noise stimu­
lation on spontaneous otoacoustic emission and threshold 
microstructure: experiment and model. J Acoust Soc Am 1992; 91: 
1003-14.
90. Avan P, Bonfils P. Frequency specificity of human distortion prod­
uct otoacoustic emissions. Audiology 1993; 32: 12-26.
91. Oeken J. Topodiagnostic assessment of occupational noise- 
induced hearing loss using distortion-product otoacoustic emis­
sions compared to the short increment sensitivity index test. Em 
Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1999; 256: 115-21.
92. Hallmo P, Borchgevink HM, Mair IW. Extended high-frequency 
thresholds in noise-induced hearing loss. Scand Audiol 1995; 24: 
47-52.
93. Chery-Croze S, Truy E, Morgon A. Contralateral suppression of 
transiently evoked otoacoustic emissions and tinnitus. Br J A udiol 
1994; 28(4-5): 255-66.
94. Barrenas M-L. The influence of melanin-binding drug on tempo­
rary threshold shift in humans. Scand Audiol 1994; 23: 93-8.
95. Barrenas M-L, Hellstrom PA. The effect of low-level acoustic 
stimulation on susceptibility to noise in blue- and brown-eyed 
young human subjects. Ear & Hear 1996; 7: 63-8.
96. Pyykko I, Kaksonen R, Toppila E et al. Development of a sophis­
ticated hearing conservation programme. In: Prasher D, Luxon L, 
Pyykko I, eds. Advances in Noise Research, Vol 2. Protection 
Against Noise. London: Whurr Publishers, 1998: 219-23.
97. Attias J, Weisdz G, Almog A et al. Oral magnesium intake 
reduces permanent hearing loss induced by noise exposure. Am J 
Otolaryngol 1994; 15: 26-32.
98. Sha SH, Schacht J. Salicylate attenuates gentamicin-induced 
ototoxicity. Lab Invest 1999; 79: 807-13.
99. Lopez-Gonzales MA, Guerrero JM, Rojas F et al. Melatonin and 
other antioxidants prolong the postmortem activity of the outer 
hair cells of the organ of Corti: its relation to the type of death. 
J Pineal Res 1999; 27: 73-7.
100. Yamasoba T, Schacht J, Shoji F et al. Attenuation of cochlear 
damage from noise trauma by an iron chelator, a free radical scav­
enger and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor in vivo. 
Brain Res 1999;815:317-25.
101. Ulfendahl M. Mechanical responses of the mammalian cochlea. 
Prog Neurobiol 1997; 53: 331-80.
102. Lim DJ, Melnick W. Acoustic damage of the cochlea. A scanning 
and transmission electron microscopic observation. Arch Oto­
laryngol 1971; 94: 294-305.
103. Borg E, Canlon B, Engstrom B. Noise-induced hearing loss. Litera­
ture review and experiments in rabbits. Morphological and electro- 
physiological features, exposure parameters and temporal factors, 
variability and interactions. Scand Audiol Suppl 1995; 40: 1-147.
104. Dew LA, Owen RG Jr, Mulroy MJ. Changes in size and shape of 
auditory hair cells in vivo during noise-induced temporary 
threshold shift. Hear Res 1993; 66: 99-107.
105. Flock A, Flock B, Fridberger A et al. Supporting cells contribute 
to control of hearing sensitivity. J Neurosci 1999; 19: 4498-507.
106. Lyons GD, Dodson, Casey DA et al. Round window rupture sec­
ondary to acoustic trauma. South Med J 1978; 71: 71-3.
107. McNeil PL, Steinhardt RA. Loss, restoration and maintenance 
of plasma membrane integrity. J Cell Biol 1997; 137: 1-4.
108. Saunders JC, Dear SP, Schneider ME. The anatomical conse­
quences of acoustic injury: a review and tutorial. J Acoust Soc Am 
1985; 78: 833-60.
109. Slepecky N. Overview of mechanical damage to the inner ear: 
noise as a tool to probe cochlear function. Hear Res 1986; 22: 
307-21.
110. Ulfendahl M, Khanna SM, Lofstrand P. Changes in the mechan­
ical tuning characteristics of the hearing organ following acoustic 
overstimulation. EurJ Neurosci 1993; 5: 713-23.
111. Luz GA, Hodge DC. Recovery from impulse-noise induced TTS 
in monkeys and men: a descriptive model. J Acoust Soc Am 1971; 
49: 1770-7.
112. Ohlemiller KK, Wright JS, Dugan LL. Early elevation of cochlear 
reactive oxygen species following noise exposure. A udiol Neu- 
rootol 1999; 4: 229-36.
  

494 
Auditory disorders and their management
113. Yamasoba T, Harris C, Shoji F et al. Influence of intense sound 
exposure on glutathione synthesis in the cochlea. Brain Res 1998; 
804: 72-8.
114. Hu BH, Zheng XY, McFadden SL et al. R-phenylisopropy- 
ladenosine attenuates noise-induced hearing loss in the chin­
chilla. Hear Res 1997; 113: 198-206.
115. Seidman MD, Bhagylakshmi G, Shivapuja G et al. The protective 
effects of allopurinol and superoxide dismutase on noise-induced 
cochlear damage. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993; 109:1052-6.
116. Puel JL, Ruel J, Gervais d’Aldin C et al. Excitotoxicity and repair 
of cochlear synapses after noise-trauma induced hearing loss. 
Neuroreport 1998; 9: 2109-14.
117. Axelsson A, Denjerink H. The effects of noise on histological 
measures of cochlear vasculature and red blood cells: a review. 
Hear Res 1987; 31: 183-92.
118. Hawkins JE. The role of vasoconstriction in noise-induced hear­
ing loss. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1971; 80: 903-14.
119. Scheibe F, Haupt H, Ludwig C. Intensity-related changes in 
cochlear blood flow in the guinea pig during and following acoustic 
exposure. Eur Arch Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1993; 250: 281-5.
120. Lamm K, Arnold W. Noise-induced cochlear hypoxia is intensity 
dependent, correlates with hearing loss and precedes reduction of 
cochlear blood flow, 1996.
121. Quirk WS, Seidman MD. Cochlear vascular changes in response 
to loud noise. Am J Otol 1995; 16: 322-5.
122. Goldwin B, Khan MJ, Shivapuja B. Sarthran preserves cochlear 
microcirculation and reduces temporary threshold shifts after 
noise exposure. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 118: 576-83.
123. Fridberger A, Flock A, Ulfendahl M et al. Acoustic overstimula­
tion increases outer hair cell Ca2+ concentrations and causes
dynamic contractions of the hearing organ. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 1998; 95: 7127-32.
124. Fridberger A, Ulfendahl M. Acute mechanical overstimulation 
of isolated outer hair cells causes changes in intracellular calcium 
levels without shape changes. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1996; 
116: 17-24.
125. Orrenius S, McCabe MJ, Nicotera P. Ca2+-dependent mecha­
nisms of cytotoxicity and programmed cell death. Toxicol Lett 
1992; 64/65: 357-64.
126. Trump BF, Berezesky IK. Calcium-mediated cell injury and cell 
death. FASEBJ. 1995; 9: 219-28.
127. Chan E, Suneson A, Ulfendahl M. Acoustic trauma causes 
reversible stiffness changes in auditory sensory cells. Neuroscience 
1998; 83: 961-8.
128. Nishikori T, Hatta T, Kawauchi H et al. Apoptosis during inner 
ear development in human and mouse embryos: an analysis 
by computer-assisted three-dimensional reconstruction. Anat 
Embryol (Berl) 1999; 200: 19-26.
129. Orita Y, Nishizaki K, Sasaki J et al. Does TUNEL staining during 
peri- and post-natal development of the mouse inner ear indicate 
apoptosis? Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) Suppl 1999; 540: 22-6.
130. Jokay I, Soos G, Repassy G et al. Aptoptosis in the human inner 
ear. Detection by in situ end-labeling of fragmented DNA and 
correlation with other markers. Hear Res 1998; 117: 131-9.
131. CHABA. Proposed damage-risk criterion for impulse noise 
(gunfire). Report of working group 57, National Academy of 
Sciences Research Council. Washington DC: Committee of 
Hearing, Bioaccoustics and Biomechanics, 1968.
132. Johnson DL. Prediction of NIPTS due to continuous noise 
exposure. EPA-550/9-73-001-BO.
  

Central auditory 
disorders
Jane A Baron, Frank E Musiek
Introduction
The central auditory nervous system (CANS) is a complex and 
intricate network of neural pathways extending from the 
cochlear nucleus complex through the primary auditory recep­
tion areas of the temporal lobes and beyond. As sensory infor­
mation travels within the CANS, the processing of the signal 
undergoes several levels of processing. This processing occurs 
not only in a hierarchical or serial order as the signal travels up 
the CANS, but also in a parallel manner. The result of this 
combined serial and parallel processing of information is a 
highly efficient, but redundant, system (see Chapter 11).
One of the benefits of such a redundant neural system is 
that compromise of the CANS seldom leads to complete loss 
of auditory function. It is much more common for the effects 
of lesions within the CANS to be subtle, and frequently these 
effects can be identified only when sophisticated test proce­
dures are used to tease out the deficits. Because of the intrin­
sic complexity of the CANS and the unique processing that 
occurs at various levels of the system, the auditory deficits that 
are observed in individuals with compromise of the CANS are 
frequently quite diverse. Therefore, it must be recognized that 
central auditory processing disorders (CAPD) represent a 
heterogeneous group of disorders with a variety of etiological 
bases, including both developmental and pathological condi­
tions, as well as behavioral manifestations.1 It is for this reason 
that no one test will identify all disorders affecting the CANS. 
Assessment procedures must include a number of tests that tap 
specific auditory processes and levels of processing (e.g. brain­
stem versus cortical). Likewise, management procedures need 
to be tailored to the specific deficits and needs of each indi­
vidual patient.
History
Assessment of central auditory function can be traced back to 
the mid-1950s, when two Italian physicians utilized a sensitized 
speech test (low-pass filtered speech) in an effort to tease out
the auditory difficulties which were being reported by patients 
with temporal lobe lesions.2,3 Their findings indicated that, 
while routine peripheral hearing tests failed to identify the 
auditory difficulties being experienced by these patients, use of 
a modified speech test did result in abnormal performance in 
the ear contralateral to the affected hemisphere. Since the time 
of these early investigations, the interest in central auditory 
assessment has grown steadily, and currently there are numerous 
tests available for use in the assessment of CANS function. 
These early efforts to use monaural low-redundancy speech tests 
were quickly followed by utilization of binaural integration 
tests,4’ dichotic speech tests,6,7 temporal patterning tests,8-10 
and electrophysiological procedures11”14 in a variety of clinical 
research investigations. Although many of these early clinical 
research instruments and test protocols did not become com­
mon assessment tools, they laid the foundation for the develop­
ment of many of the tests that are used today in the assessment 
of patients considered to be at risk for CAPDs.15,16
Definition
Along with efforts to develop tests sensitive to dysfunction 
along the CANS came several attempts to define CAPD. What 
emerged was a number of definitions which were embraced by 
some professionals, but not universally by all professionals. 
Many professionals argued that CAPD did not represent a 
unique clinical entity, but rather that any auditory deficits 
noted were simply manifestations of other disorders, such as 
language-processing disorders or attention deficits. Recognizing 
the need to achieve some consensus on several issues surround­
ing CAPD, the American Speech-Language-Hearing Associa­
tion convened a task force in 1993. One of the outcomes of the 
deliberations of this task force was the development of the fol­
lowing definitions for central auditory processes and CAPD.
Central auditory processes are the auditory system mech­
anisms and processes responsible for the following behav­
ioral phenomena: sound localization and lateralization,

496 
Auditory disorders and their management
auditory discrimination, auditory pattern recognition, tem­
poral aspects of audition including temporal resolution, 
temporal masking, temporal integration, and temporal 
ordering, and auditory performance with degraded acoustic 
signals.17 (p. 41)
A central auditory processing disorder is an observed defi­
ciency in one or more of the above listed behaviors. For 
some persons, CAPD is presumed to result from the dys­
function of processes and mechanisms dedicated to audi­
tion; for others, CAPD may stem from some more general 
dysfunction, such as an attention deficit or neural timing 
deficit, that affects performance across modalities. It is also 
possible for CAPD to reflect co-existing dysfunction of 
both types.17 (p. 41)
Of significance in this definition of CAPD is the recognition 
that the disorder can result from dysfunction of the mechanisms 
dedicated to audition, as well as from more global deficits such 
as language, memory or attention deficits, as long as these 
deficits impact negatively upon the processing of auditory 
information.
More recently, participants in a consensus conference held 
in April 2000 on the Diagnosis of Auditory Processing Disor­
ders in School-Aged Children recommended a change in ter­
minology and offered the following definition of an auditory 
processing disorder (APD).
An APD may be broadly defined as a deficit in the process­
ing of information that is specific to the auditory modality. 
The problem may be exacerbated in unfavorable acoustic 
environments. It may be associated with difficulties in lis­
tening, speech understanding, language development, and 
learning. In its pure form, however, it is conceptualized as a 
deficit in the processing of auditory input.18 (p. 468)
This change in terminology was recommended by the expert 
panel of 14 senior-level researchers and clinicians in an effort 
to maintain an operational definition for the auditory deficits 
experienced by many school-aged children who presented with 
normal auditory thresholds, while avoiding the imputation of 
anatomical loci, and underscoring the potential for interac­
tions between disorders originating at both peripheral and 
central sites. Although the consensus conference focused speci­
fically on problems in diagnosing school-aged children with 
auditory processing deficits, the proposed definition of APD 
would appear to have applications for both younger and older 
individuals who may experience similar auditory deficits. Since 
APD is a new term that is not yet widely recognized by hear­
ing healthcare professionals, and since most of the investiga­
tions reviewed in this chapter used CAPD to refer to the 
auditory disorders being studied, both abbreviations will be 
used in the remainder of this chapter.
Many neuroeognitive mechanisms and processes are 
involved in the recognition and discrimination of audi­
tory stimuli. Some of these mechanisms are dedicated to 
the processing of acoustic signals, whereas others, such as 
attentional mechanisms and long-term language repre­
sentation, are not. In the latter case, the term centra/ audi- 
tory processing is used to refer to the deployment of these 
non-dedicated processes and mechanisms in the process­
ing of acoustic information.
Prevalence
There is little information available on the prevalence of 
APD/CAPD. This is due in large part to the heterogeneous 
nature of the disorder, the lack of an agreed upon definition of 
APD/CAPD, the high comorbidity of APD/CAPD with other 
medical, developmental and psychoeducational disorders or dis­
abilities, and the lack of well-designed epidemiological studies. 
Chermak and Musiek16 have estimated the prevalence of 
APD/CAPD in children to be between 2% and 3%. These 
authors based this estimate upon data provided in published 
clinical reports, a review of prevalence data for other comorbid 
conditions, and their own personal clinical experience. Esti­
mates of the prevalence of the disorder in the aging population 
are considerably higher and range from a low of 17% to a high 
of 90%.16,19 The large disparity in these estimates is believed to 
be due to a number of factors, including the age of the popula­
tion studied in the various investigations reviewed, the central 
tests administered as part of the research protocols, and the 
inclusion/exclusion of subjects with peripheral hearing loss or 
cognitive deficits in the experimental groups. Unfortunately, 
many of these studies did not control for peripheral hearing loss 
and/or cognitive status. Therefore, it is difficult to determine 
the prevalence of APD/CAPD in the elderly population at this 
time. However, given the fact that age-related changes are 
known to occur in the brainstem and cortical structures, as well 
as the auditory periphery,20-24 it is anticipated that a significant 
number of elderly patients will experience an APD/CAPD 
related to normal degenerative processes occurring within the 
CANS. Additional information on central auditory function in 
the elderly, as well as a discussion of the potential effects of 
peripheral and cognitive factors on performance, can be found 
in Chapter 17, as well as in other sources.25-28
Etiological bases
Research on children and adults with APD/CAPD has revealed 
a number of etiological bases for the auditory deficits that these 
patients experience. In many individuals, the deficits can be 
linked to frank neurological lesions or disease processes that
  

Central auditory disorders 
497
affect the integrity of the CANS. Frank neurological bases for 
APD/CAPD include trauma, neoplasms, degenerative disor- 
ders, metabolic dysfunction, neurotoxicity, viral infections, 
and surgical lesions.1 In other individuals, the deficits are 
related to benign CANS dysfunction. These etiological bases 
include delays in the neuromaturational development of the 
CANS,29 cerebromorphological abnormalities,30 and age-related 
changes.15
Comorbid conditions
Although APD/CAPD may exist in isolation, it much more 
frequently coexists in an individual with other developmental 
and/or acquired disorders. Common comorbid conditions 
include speech and language disorders, learning disabilities, 
attention deficit disorders with or without hyperactivity, psy- 
chological and emotional disorders, and social and behavioral 
problems. Although there have been many attempts to estab- 
lish cause-and-effect relationships between these various disor- 
ders, the relationships remain elusive at this time, and more 
than likely not unidirectional. More critical to the manage- 
ment of the individual with comorbid disorders than the estab­
lishment of these cause-and-effect relationships is the 
identification of the various disorders or disabilities which coex­
ist within the individual, so that an effective program can be 
developed in an effort to address each area of deficit or disabil­
ity. Since assessment and management may cut across profes­
sional boundaries, it is critical that professionals from a variety 
of disciplines provide input into the development of an assess­
ment and management program whenever comorbid conditions 
may exist.
Since many individuals with APD/CAPD are likely to 
have other comorbid conditions, an interdisciplinary 
model for assessment is recommended, whenever feasible.
Clinical presentation
The CANS is a complicated and extensive neural network, 
with lesions potentially occurring at a number of distinct sites 
along its pathways. Since different types of processing occur at 
various sites along the CANS, the symptoms which patients 
experience are likely to vary with the site of lesion. Moreover, 
many of the auditory symptoms related to CANS dysfunction 
may be subtle and unusual. This is related to the fact that pro­
cessing of an incoming acoustic signal occurs in an overlapping 
or parallel fashion, as well as in a serial fashion. It is therefore 
important that background information be solicited carefully 
from each patient at risk for APD/CAPD. If not, some 
symptoms may be missed, as many are qualitative in nature.
Some of the more commonly reported symptoms include: 
(1) difficulty hearing in noise or highly reverberant rooms; (2) 
subjective tinnitus, typically localized to the mid-line of the 
head; (3) auditory hallucinations or unusual auditory sensa­
tions; (4) difficulty following complex auditory directions; (5) 
poor utilization of prosodic information; (6) auditory inatten­
tiveness and high distractibility; (7) difficulty localizing sound 
sources; (8) auditory memory deficits; and (9) marked decrease 
in the appreciation of music. In addition to these complaints, 
there are a number of other behavioral or academic issues 
which may be heralding an APD/CAPD. Many individuals 
with APD/CAPD experience concomitant spelling, reading, 
writing and organizational skill deficits. Several behavioral 
checklists have been developed for use in determining which 
children should be considered at risk for APD/CAPD.31"34 
These can be used to provide valuable insights into the nature 
of the difficulties which the individual presenting for assess­
ment may be experiencing. Finally, it should be mentioned that 
although all of the checklists referenced above have been 
developed for use with children, many can easily be modified 
for use with adults.
Assessment protocols
There have been numerous classification systems developed in 
an effort to categorize the various central auditory tests which 
can be used to assess CANS function. For the purposes of the 
present discussion, a five-category classification system will be 
used. The categories include binaural interaction tests, dichotic 
speech tests, monaural low-redundancy speech tests, temporal 
patterning tests, and electrophysiological procedures. Space 
limitations preclude an exhaustive discussion of each of these 
five categories and the many tests that fall within each of these 
categories. However, a brief discussion of a representative test 
within each of the categories is presented. Additional informa­
tion on these and other CANS tests can be found in Table 29.1 
and in a number of other sources.1,15,16,19
APD/CAPD can have a number of etiological bases. 
These can include benign cerebromorphological abnor­
malities, delays in the neuromaturational development of 
the central nervous system, and normal aging processes 
occurring within the CANS, as well as frank neurological 
involvement.
  

498 
Auditory disorders and their management
OJ
O
CO QJ QJ 
QJ
CJ> C> C3>
ra ra ra ro
•h^ 
■*—' +-j
c  c  c  
c
(L/ OJ OJ 
QJ
O U CJ 
o
o o
u  u
QJ 
QJ
D> CD
05 03
u  u  u
2^ ^ ^
o o o
u  u  u
qj qj qj
CT) CTs Ol
03 
03 
03
o
t j
QJ
O
O
O
CJ
QJ
QJ
cn
cn
03
03
4—'
■*—'
c
C
Qj
QJ
g
O
QJ
QJ
Q_
Q_
<U
E
o
co
oc:
E
qj
o£
OJ
C
2r
o
'S
3
OS
c
Qj
U
c
QJ
E
c
O
qj
- ao
«/»
3
O
qjEZ
03
£
in
QJ
E
o>
0J
tn
to3
cn--- o
C  
J£? 
QJ
on 
oj
^  E c 
<2 o  IS
E  O
B — E 
<  
i/S
03 
ro 
3 ^ 3
2 . 9 ?
* o
CO
CL
T3
CD
2
3CO
c
CQ
oc
o  £  C
Q .O  (Li
on ^  to
■D
Coa.
un
“O
QJ
>■TO
Qj
- a
o 
t/i t/j
c  
c:
co 
co
' +—'
zs 
13
E E
on In
a .
a_
JES
qj 
aj
_ 
03 
*0 >*d 
£ Q_ 
aj ex 
CTi 03
cn j. 
2  
O  
on ^
<u o  o  u
o o  o o 
r  r  r  r
O  
O  
O  
O'
Q  Q  D  Q
V)eo
o  .
7  s
Q O
■S ? 5  
§ B  *
E E 
In  on
u  ju  
o o
JC jc
c j 
o  
Q  Cl
\n
x 8 •— 
s- ^
co —
s i
qj un 
+-j ca
£ ^  
1/1 o
v_ +j 
qj i/i 
T 3  
CO
co
o
a.
aj
CJc
QJ
QJ
QJ
QJ 
QJ
JO JD JO
-O  X>
CO
co
CO
co co
CJ
CJ
u
O  O
Q .
Q. “5 .
"a. 0,
d .
CL
CL
CL CL
co
CO
CO
CO 
CO
+-» 4->
o
o
0
O  
O
2 :
z  z
o> 
o>
"ro "2 "2
CO 
CO
3
3
3
3  
3
03
CO
CO
co co
c
C
e
c  
e
o
O
0
0 0
on
c
0
b___
o o 
5 5
o  o  
lo  lo  
^  
_ 2  iS
5r a-
o o
c  
c
o o
2  ^
s - s
Ou cl 
CO 
p
(U 
o  
g 8 
tA 
CO 
£ ^  
12 2  
qj uo
■o  
CO
0 jz
1  'I
3  
3
e e
tn  to
To 
to
c  c
o o
o o
iO 
t/)
<U 
QJ
U 
U
d  
£Z
QJ 
O
3  
3
cr cr
flJ 
QJ
on tn
Q . 
+=-
iQ
o
>•
E
o
OJ 
r—
<U
-  >
^  
CD
= E
03 o
•a C
E 4-J
T"j 
^
to
CO
T3
00
Eo
□=
ooo
CO
<u
"D
> .
_o
CL
E
<v
>-
2o*>
CO
a>
CN
J5
CO
o
CD
CO (0 
d
E rtc .2 
^  o  ^
~CO Q_ V>~
> S  2
.■o 53 3  
CL CL 5?
CO 
. b  
DC 
CQ
c  c  c  
5  
O O O * 2
CO CO CO
T3 'O -O ^
IU O OJ 
4^
■o "C -O 
o
*> > *> K
T3 T3 T3 T3
c  r
o o  o  
o
iu W 
OJ 
w
a> a> a/
a  a  a  o.
i/i i/ i 
i/ i 
i/i
O O O 
tj
o o o 
o
x: _sz -d 
jc
u  o  o  
u
Q  Q  Q  Q
■a
o$
-— 
(U
CO 
o
"O c
C  
QJ
O  
■£
a- 5
.1-2
CO
CO
p
■D
QJ 
* -
“O  
U
;> a
X3 TO
O 
O
(U 
QJ
<U 
QJ
•Cl 'Cl
to 
on
CJ 
CJ
*4-^ ‘4-1
o  
o
-d -JZ
CJ 
o
Q  Q
f g  
CJ 
o
o>
^  °  -S O 
i_  
-t—t
■*— 
— 
QJ 
QJ
O  
O  
cn JC
r  r  
cj) t:
u o ro ^
Q  Q  i/l t/i
<u
«  c -
5  
R  qj
c  _  c
Q  
E? qj
^
 
&
 c  
ro
to
*-CJ
c
QJ
c<u
00
5 o
*c
-E
CJ
CJ
CJ
-J
QJ
QJ
QJ
<U
OJ
a. O. Q.
to
to
to
>-
>-
>-
t j
0
U
tz c c
CO TO TO
T3 -a
■a
C c c
3
3
3
T3 ■a ■a
Oj
QJ
g
5
5
5
0
0
_o
"to TO"to
3
3
3
TOCO TO
C c
C
O 0
O
2
2
Ol CTI
C C
*c c
5} a}
2 2
o  o
Q~ CL
E E
<L» Qj
?N 
flj
V  a.
u 1/1
QJ 
T 3
QJ 
qj
QJ •■= 
QJ
S |  E
1 .1  8
QJ
^  
ro 
QJ 
0 >
• i  
B  
o  ~
QJ 
CL
5  I
CJ CJ
to
o  
ic
K ^ 
5E id
e  g_ t l ^  ^
? ■ - £  
QJ 
to
I  5 c s  .2-
O o >- 
O  _ j on
Eo
*o<
t z  
qj 
co t i
Q - CO
■>. Q .
cr Li
<U 3
lSI Q
O  03
E >-
E p
o c
.E <0
<u qj
CO ?
03 -O  
-O C
M  
> • 
~ r 
03
E
8
£  
v
QJ
O 
QJ ~
 
»  
E  
.!£) 
to 
i/i
c X
QJ 
^
00 CD 
<U C
k '£
■s'i
1 £ 
2Q- $
, 
O  
- E  
03
O  
-C
o  «2 -B •-
H I  c  
--g 
$
. 
OJ 
>  
.
QJ ^  
c - 
QJ
E
 Q . 
O  
E
03
03 
<U
“o i  Q^ 
=5 -5 
2 o 
^  <o
CD
O
3 g
CL 
C
-— . 
O
rsi 
o
n z  
cn
O  
<S)
CO 
—
CO 
QJ
•— - 
u
z  
g
o  
3
-a S"
C  
LT)
03 
_£-
CO
IE  
<u
CM 
c
CN 
• -
JZ 
^in
QJ
2 ^
^  E
'T7T o
E °
h: co
QJ .E
3 v
ST 
O
77T jo
i s
O  - c  
LO .tf
E* * 
§ ^
. £  . >  
to  
>
CO -*—1 
'to
E 
<= P.
Qj 
CT3
03 
03 
CJ 
<0
E ^
i/1) - a
E 
E
QJ
1/1
3
E °
'+3 
C
LO <U
M %
>> 
03E
~5 o "5 
E °  i
to 6 ~
aj
QJ
  

Central auditory disorders 
499
Binaural interaction tests
Binaural interaction tests, or binaural integration tests, encom- 
pass those tests that require the interaction of both ears in order 
to effect integration of information that is separated by time, 
intensity, or frequency factors to the two ears. The tests in this 
category are designed to assess the ability of the CANS to take 
disparate information presented to the two ears and to unify 
this information into one perceptual event. This unification of 
auditory information from the two ears is presumed to occur in 
the brainstem. For this reason, tests that fall into this category 
are believed to be sensitive to brainstem pathology. They can, 
however, also be affected by cerebral lesions (Table 29.2).
One of the more sensitive of the tests in this category is the 
masking level difference test. The test paradigm involves the 
presentation of a stimulus (either spondee words or pulsed pure 
tones) to both ears at the same time that a broadband masking 
noise is delivered to the two ears.46 The patient is tested under 
two conditions, a homophasic condition and an antiphasic con­
dition. In the homophasic condition, the stimulus and the noise 
are presented in phase to both ears (S0N0), whereas in the 
antiphasic condition, one of the two signals is presented 180° 
out of phase while the other signal is maintained in phase 
between the two ears (Figure 29.1). For example, in the SnN0 
antiphasic condition, the noise is maintained in phase between 
the two ears, and the signal is presented 180° out of phase. Sub­
tracting the threshold established in the homophasic condition 
from that found in either of the antiphasic conditions results in 
a difference score referred to as the masking level difference. In 
individuals with normal brainstem function, the threshold 
noted in the antiphasic condition is noticeably better than the 
threshold obtained in the homophasic condition. This is con­
sidered to represent a ‘release from masking’, which is consid­
ered to originate at the level of the CANS where information 
from the two ears is first integrated.
Dichotic speech tests
Dichotic speech tests involve speech tests in which different 
speech materials are presented to the two ears in a simultaneous 
or overlapping manner. Test stimuli can involve any type of 
speech stimulus, ranging from consonant-vowel combinations 
(CVs), through monosyllabic words to sentences. In addition, 
patients can be asked to divide their attention (i.e. to repeat all 
stimuli heard in both ears) or to direct their attention (i.e. 
repeat only the stimuli perceived in the right ear or the left ear). 
Research findings suggest that when the CANS is stimulated 
with dichotic speech materials, the weaker ipsilateral pathways 
tend to be suppressed, and the neural impulses travel up the pre­
eminent contralateral pathways to reach the auditory reception 
areas of the cerebrum.6,7 Dichotic speech tests are particularly 
sensitive to lesions of the auditory cortex and interhemispheric 
fibers, and to a lesser degree to auditory brainstem lesions (Table
29.2). Most typically contralateral ear effects are noted with 
lesions of the auditory cortex, whereas left-ear deficits are com­
monly noted in patients with lesions involving the interhemi­
spheric pathways. In cases of brainstem pathology, ipsilateral 
ear deficits are more common in patients with extra-axial 
lesions (i.e. lesions originating from the periphery of the brain­
stem), whereas bilateral, contralateral or ipsilateral ear effects 
may be observed with intra-axial lesions (i.e. lesions originating 
from within the brainstem).
One of the more commonly used tests in this category is 
the dichotic digits test. In this test, two digit pairs (i.e. four 
digits) are presented to the patient at 50dBSL (re: SRT) and 
the patient is asked to repeat all digits perceived (Figure 29.2). 
The digits used include the numbers from 1 to 10 (except 7) 
and are carefully aligned in terms of their stimulus onsets. 
Patients are encouraged to guess, and informed that it is not 
necessary to repeat the digits in any particular order. A per­
centage correct score is derived for each ear and compared to 
age-appropriate norms.
Figure 29.1 Example of the procedure used to 
derive a masking level difference (MLD). The upper 
panel shows a pure tone test stimulus being 
presented in phase to the two ears (i.e. 
homophasic condition), whereas the lower panel 
depicts the presentation of the pure tone stimuli 
180° out of phase between the two ears (i.e. the 
antiphasic condition). In each condition, a noise 
stimulus (not shown) is presented in phase 
between the two ears, and a pure tone detection 
threshold is derived. The difference between these 
two thresholds represents the MLD.
  

Tabic 29.2 
Patterns of central test results that may be observed in patients with lesions at various sites along the CANS.
500 
Auditory disorders and their management
a
CO 
§ 
sz
4-'
CO 
Cl.
u
£ 
tS
Q. 
-O
!£3 
o
E 
= 
£  
o
b 
£
cj
"O
o
c j
ro
'o
T3
O
OJ
x>
o
o
QJ
oc
o
QJ
od
k_
o
<D
Oc
o
tu
>-
o
■5z>
<
oc
o
CO
Z'O
CO U—
B -a
—  CO
ra 
»—
QJ
d ni 
O — 
CJ CQ
cS
u
<u
XI
<
oc
qj
*a
O
2 -
v,
jy  o 
^ o ^
£■ 8. 2 
>r
^  OJ 
ro un X 
c u J5
£ « 2 
a cu +-' 
d  d c
CN 
£  
CO
E
lb* 
o  
c
co 
cn
_ un — 
c 
>  u p 
'in
4_i ---  w 
rvj
^ QJ 
—
g £ «
I  « 2
O Qj +-*
JD<
O
c j
aiCo
E
QJ
_D
x:cr>
oc
o
OJ
u 
£1 
^  
+*
qj ____ . ~
T 3  OJ 
tJ
s
i *
_ O i—
OJ ^
 
CD
Jr- qj <U
4! -a
ra 
co
__co
2 £
— B jo
O
OCQ ^
■o <"N 
^
S  .ti ^
_ <u *-
tja t*— co
u  
OJ
^  -5 —
« m S
™ 
CO 
ft/
^ ^ 
rn
-*-* 
£5 
CO
e ra .-:
o — £
o  co .9-
s .s -s
____CJ 
v-
co 
co
J- tu 
<U
« ? 
£
t  ij ra
C 05 
“
O  ~  
£
O  co _9-
CN
>■ 
"  
! > r  Jt 
2  £  £
™ o c
«* c -2
*- X3 CO
£
 
ra —
« « 2
ra 2 «-»
^  B to
§ 5 1
C_J CQ
£<L»
rt i
ra 1- 2
*“ u 
*
4-J 4^ 
CO
o ~  g
U  co *9-
u 
*—
4> -  Si
- Si ^
CTJ 
!_ 
co
in ra "
I S *
cj co _2~
1j0
coQ.
KO
V
£
CO
LO
_o
'to
JO
o
o 
<u
M— 
C
O 
o
>- >  
c
s  
°
CO 
"O
-O 
c
0 CD
Q_ 
^
1  i
_o
o
c
*co
k_
x>
5o
2r
ocn
<u
CO
wQJ
o
x :u
Q
>*
oc
3
TO
QJ
1
5o
CO <u 
d  O- 
o 1/1
tu
T3
COaj
"co
1_
QJ
CO
CO
o
CL
£
,<u
n
>  1/1 TO 
^'—'
--- ■+_< 
~ 
4—f
e ™ °  
^
o |  -g 
t 3
X> 
C  
CO 
CO
CO X> 
*- 
^
— co jy 
—
2  —  
CO 
2
2  To 
B
5  B £ 
«
'S =  O 
55
_B-m O
tu
in
CL
O
CL
qj
un
qj
d
o
E
CL
t/5
0 /
OJ
Xn
e
>-
<LJ
"co
d
.o
OJ
£ ■
CO
o
CJ
-O
T3
-Q
3
<
doo.
QJincoCl
E
CO
LO
u
8
CO
O-
2:
o
X 5
<
cn 
L=
c 
__
CQ
Eo
o
Eo
°  E
'o 01
O 
(U
>. ^
+± CT
— c
•g :>
o 
<L/ 
E x:
S  2
o
4—
o
S 
-S’
T3
<
£2 co 
c
>  QQ
b Specified deficits would be predicted if the patient was asked to verbally describe the patterns perceived.
c Abnormal results may be noted for one or more of the indices derived during the electrophysiological procedure (see Chapter 16). The use of the singular form 
in this context indicates that any 
abnormalities that exist are limited to one ear.
  

Central auditory disorders 
501
Figure 29.2 Example of a test stimulus from the dichotic digits test. The digit, 
4, is presented to the right ear at the same time that 8 is presented to the left 
ear; this is followed by 2 to the right ear and 5 to the left ear.
Monaural low-redundancy speech tests
Monaural low-redundancy speech tests include tests in which 
the stimuli have been degraded by modifying the frequency, 
temporal or intensity characteristics of the undistorted signal. 
Common to all these tests is the monaural presentation of a 
speech signal that has undergone some type of signal degrada­
tion. Clinical research has demonstrated that these types of tests 
tap auditory closure abilities and are moderately sensitive to 
cortical lesions—in which case, contralateral ear deficits are 
most commonly noted (Table 29.2). In individuals with left- 
hemisphere compromise, bilateral deficits may also be noted. In 
these cases, it is likely that the auditory areas subserving speech 
recognition have been compromised. Monaural low-redun- 
dancy tests are less sensitive to brainstem lesions, and, as was 
the case for the dichotic speech tests, the laterality effects noted 
are likely to differ with the specific location of the lesion. 
Finally, test performance on monaural low-redundancy speech 
tests is unlikely to be affected in patients with interhemispheric 
pathway compromise.
An example of a monaural low-redundancy speech test is 
the compressed speech test. Some of the more commonly used 
versions of this test utilize monosyllabic words that have been 
compressed using time compression ratios of 60% or 65%. This 
is achieved by removing brief segments of the original signal 
until either 60% or 65% of the original speech signal has been 
removed. The remaining segments are then abutted to achieve 
a new speech signal that contains only 40% or 35% of the orig­
inal signal. These compressed stimuli are presented to each ear 
individually at 40dBSL (re: SRT), and percentage correct 
scores are derived for each ear. These scores are compared to 
age-appropriate norms.
Temporal patterning tests
Temporal patterning tests involve feature detection, frequency 
or duration discrimination, and acoustic contour recognition. 
In addition, if the patient is asked to label the patterns per­
ceived, then linguistic processing is also tapped. These tests 
have been shown to be sensitive to compromise of the auditory 
cortex in the right hemisphere, which is responsible for the pro­
cessing of the acoustic contour of the patterns. In addition, if a 
verbal response is required, the test is sensitive to lesions in the 
left hemisphere (responsible for verbally labeling the patterns 
perceived) and/or the interhemispheric pathways. Deficits are 
less common in patients with brainstem lesions (Table 29.2).
The frequency pattern sequences test is one of the more 
popular tests within this category. It is composed of test 
sequences consisting of three tone bursts. In each of the 
sequences, two tone bursts are of the same frequency while the 
third is of a different frequency (Figure 29.3). The two tone 
bursts used on commercially available tests include a low- 
frequency tone (880Hz) and a high-frequency tone (1122 Hz). 
All tone bursts have a 10-ms rise-fall time and a total duration 
of 150 ms, and there is a 200-ms interstimulus interval between 
successive tones in each sequence. Given these parameters, a 
total of six different sequences are possible: high-high-low, 
high-low-high, high-low-low, low-low-high, low-high-low, and 
low-high-high. It is normal practice to have the patients 
describe the sequences perceived using the words ‘high’ and 
‘low’. Thirty sequences are presented at 50dBSL (re: SRT) to 
each ear individually, and a percentage correct score is derived 
for each ear. However, experience has shown that ear differ­
ences are uncommon on this test. Therefore, it is possible to 
derive a single score either diotically under headphones or in 
the sound field. In addition, if a patient is unable to describe the 
sequences, he or she may be asked to hum the sequences. If this 
is done, the test assesses primarily right-hemisphere function. In 
either instance, test scores are compared to age-appropriate 
norms for the specific test procedure administered.
Electrophysiological procedures
Several of the auditory evoked potentials discussed in other 
chapters of this text are of value in assessing CANS integrity and 
can serve as a valuable adjunct to the behavioral tests discussed 
thus far. Electrophysiological procedures can be used to evaluate 
function of the auditory pathways, beginning with the cochlear 
nerve and progressing through the cortical levels of the CANS.
Figure 29.3 Example of a test stimulus from 
the frequency pattern sequences test, showing 
the acoustic stimulus consisting of a series of 
three tone bursts, with two tone bursts of the 
same frequency and a third tone burst of a 
different frequency.
  

502 
Auditory disorders and their management
The auditory brainstem response (ABR) is an early latency 
response which is frequently abnormal in patients with lesions of 
the cochlear nerve and/or caudal brainstem, whereas lesions in 
the thalamic regions and above are likely to result in normal 
ABR findings. The middle latency response (MLR) is sensitive 
to lesions located more rostrally within the CANS (thalamus 
and primary auditory projections), and the late auditory evoked 
response (LAER) and P300 assess cortical functions (Table
29.2). Recently, interest has grown in the use of the mismatch 
negativity responses to assess a patient’s ability to discriminate or 
selectively attend to certain stimuli. Physiological tests offer an 
advantage over behavioral tests, due to their objectivity, and, in 
general, absence of a need for a cooperative patient. The reader 
interested in additional information on these test protocols is 
referred to Chapter 16 as well as to other sources.47,48
Range of severity
As mentioned previously, the deficits noted in many individu­
als with APD/CAPD are often subtle and may not be detected 
during routine audiological testing. On the other end of the 
continuum are individuals who present with dramatic auditory 
deficits, including ‘deafness’ of a central origin, whose deficits 
are quite striking and are obvious even during routine pure tone 
testing. In fact, if testing were limited to routine peripheral 
assessment procedures, the ‘deafness’ noted in these patients 
might well be misdiagnosed as peripheral in origin. In the past, 
a number of terms have been used to refer to the auditory dis­
orders that these individuals experience. Among these terms 
are central deafness, cortical deafness, auditory agnosia, verbal 
auditory agnosia, and word deafness.
The term central deafness has been used to refer to the dis­
order experienced by individuals with bilateral hemispheric 
involvement of the auditory areas of the brain. These individu­
als often show no subjective experience o f‘hearing’ and will fre­
quently present with a profound hearing loss during routine pure 
tone assessments. However, if electroacoustic and electrophysio­
logical testing of the auditory periphery is conducted in these 
cases (e.g. otoacoustic emissions and ABR), they will typically 
reveal normal peripheral auditory function. Abnormal central 
auditory function is implicated in these individuals by the obser­
vation of abnormal test results for the latter auditory potentials 
(MLRs and LAERs). Although the term central deafness has 
been used to refer to bilateral hemispheric lesions, it must be rec­
ognized that the auditory deficits noted in this particular disorder 
can be caused by extensive bilateral lesions of the auditory tracts 
located within the cortex, subcortex, and/or brainstem.1
The term cortical deafness has been used to refer to a con­
dition where the damage in the central nervous system is lim­
ited to the primary auditory areas of the cortex. Concerns have 
been raised that this use of terminology may not accurately 
reflect the site of lesion in many of these patients, as it is quite 
uncommon for damage to be confined to the primary auditory 
areas. In fact, it has been suggested that regions of the subcortex 
are additionally involved in most cases of cortical deafness.49
Auditory agnosia refers to the inability to identify environ­
mental sounds in the presence of normal hearing sensitivity and 
is frequently accompanied by amusia (i.e. the inability to rec­
ognize music), whereas the terms verbal auditory agnosia and 
word deafness are used to refer to the inability to decode 
phonology in the presence of normal hearing sensitivity.50 It has 
been argued that patients with the latter condition will usually 
experience difficulty in recognizing any sound stimulus (verbal 
or non-verbal) that requires a high degree of temporal resolu­
tion. Therefore, most of the individuals who experience verbal 
auditory agnosia or word deafness will also experience difficulty 
in processing non-verbal signals (i.e. auditory agnosia).51
It is important to note that central deafness, cortical deaf­
ness, auditory agnosia and word deafness are not distinct enti­
ties. In most cases, there is considerable overlap in the deficits 
noted.1 Moreover, not all patients with central deafness experi­
ence significant losses of threshold sensitivity, and, in many 
cases, the auditory deficits noted are not stable over time. With 
changes in hearing sensitivity, there are likely to be concomi­
tant changes in the type and extent of the central auditory 
problem(s) noted. It is therefore essential that extensive psy­
choacoustic and electrophysiological testing be done on these 
patients in order to document the nature, extent and variabil­
ity of the deficits experienced by these individuals.
Effects of peripheral hearing loss
A major consideration in the use of any central auditory pro­
cessing test is the presence of a peripheral hearing impairment 
in the patient to be assessed. It is not unusual to find significant 
cochlear distortion effects in an individual with a peripheral 
hearing loss. If depressed scores are noted on routine speech 
audiometric procedures, then depressed scores would be antici­
pated for any test that requires the processing of speech stimuli. 
For many years, it was common practice for the audiologist to 
avoid the administration of any of the central auditory tests if a 
peripheral hearing loss was present. Although such a practice 
avoided the need to account for the potential contribution of 
the peripheral hearing loss to the central test results, it often 
failed to meet the needs of the patient as a central hearing dis­
order may coexist with a peripheral hearing impairment and its 
identification may have important implications for manage­
ment of the individual with hearing loss.27,52,53
To date, there have been a number of investigations which 
have studied the effects of peripheral hearing loss on central 
auditory test results. These investigations have shown that the 
presence of a peripheral hearing loss can have a negative effect 
on the results of a number of central auditory tests.35,41,54-63 
However, in spite of the finding that virtually all central audi­
tory tests can be affected by peripheral hearing loss, some of 
these studies have shown that certain tests may be less affected 
by peripheral hearing loss than others. Both the dichotic digits 
test59,63 and the dichotic sentence identification test41 appear to 
be less affected by the presence of mild-to-moderate hearing 
losses than most of the other speech recognition tests. In addi­
  

Central auditory disorders 
503
tion, the frequency pattern sequences and the auditory duration 
patterns tests have been shown to be relatively resistant to the 
potential confounding effect of mild-to-moderate peripheral 
hearing loss.43,44 Given these findings, these tests should be 
given serious consideration for administration whenever a cen- 
tral auditory assessment is being conducted on a patient with a 
peripheral hearing loss.
Despite the potential confounding effects of peripheral 
hearing loss and the limited number of tests that appear to be 
somewhat resistant to the confounding effects of peripheral 
hearing loss, the assessment of central auditory function in indi­
viduals with mild-to-moderately severe peripheral hearing 
impairment should not be abandoned. The presence of normal 
or abnormal central auditory function can be implicated in a 
number of situations, and this can lead to more effective man­
agement of the individual with hearing loss. These situations 
include the following: (1) if hearing loss is present and central 
test results fall within the normal range for both ears, then the 
presence of CANS compromise or an APD/CAPD can be ruled 
out; (2) if a bilaterally symmetrical hearing loss is present and 
the central test results are more depressed in one ear than in the 
other, then the presence of CANS compromise or an 
APD/CAPD is implicated; (3) if a hearing loss is present 
but it is asymmetrical or unilateral and the ‘better ear’ 
shows the poorer performance, then CANS compromise or an 
APD/CAPD is implicated; (4) if a symmetrical hearing loss is 
present and abnormal middle and/or late potentials are noted 
from electrodes over one hemisphere versus the other (i.e. a 
significant electrode effect), CANS involvement should be sus­
pected; and (5) if a symmetrical hearing loss is present and an 
‘ear effect’ is noted during electrophysiological testing, then the 
possibility of CANS involvement should be entertained.27 In 
these cases, a determination as to the status of the central audi­
tory system can be made with a certain degree of confidence. 
For those individuals who do not fall into one of these cate­
gories, determination of the status of the CANS is difficult, if 
not impossible to make. However, one may still be able to 
manage the deficits identified in such a way as to improve the 
quality of life for the patient with these auditory difficulties, 
even though the etiological basis for the deficits cannot be 
determined.
A significant confounding variable in the assessment of 
APD/CAPD is the presence of a peripheral hearing 
loss. However, the presence of a peripheral impairment 
need not pre-empt assessment of central auditory pro­
cessing skills. Knowledge of the effects of peripheral 
loss on test performance, along with the careful selection 
of tests that are most resistant to cochlear confounds, 
can result in a test battery that is interpretable.
Need for a test battery
As mentioned above, the CANS is a complex neural system 
that is responsible for the processing of acoustic information at 
various sites along its pathways. The nature of the processing is 
complex, and different types of processing occur at different lev­
els. Therefore, it is unlikely that any one test, or even a small 
group of tests, will be appropriate for each individual presenting 
with a potential CANS lesion. For this reason, reliance on one 
test is not advisable. If compromise of one level of the auditory 
system is suspected based upon case history information, then 
tests shown to be sensitive to lesions at that level of the system 
should be targeted for use. For instance, if a cerebral lesion is 
suspected, administration of a dichotic speech test along with a 
temporal patterning test would probably provide more informa­
tion than use of a single dichotic speech test, two dichotic 
speech tests that are essentially testing the same processes, or 
even a binaural interaction test and a dichotic speech test. On 
the other hand, if a brainstem lesion is suspected, then an elec­
trophysiological test (i.e. ABR) and the MLD may be utilized, 
with less reliance on tests for cortical and/or interhemispheric 
pathway function.
The CANS is a complex, but highly redundant, neural 
system. For this reason, the deficits that accompany dis­
orders affecting the CANS are often subtle and may vary 
with the site of lesion. Therefore, it is essential that a 
battery of tests be used to assess auditory function in the 
patient considered to be at risk for an APD/CAPD. The 
test battery should include tests that assess the various 
auditory processes that underlie normal auditory func­
tion, as well as functioning at various levels within the 
CANS.
Management protocols
Non-medical 
management 
of the 
individual 
with 
an 
APD/CAPD has essentially taken one or more of three 
approaches. These include: (1) improving the quality of the sig­
nal; (2) enhancing the individual’s auditory perceptual skills; 
and (3) enhancing the individual’s linguistic and cognitive 
skills. The specific approach or approaches employed with any 
given individual will depend on a number of factors, including 
the age and cognitive abilities of the individual, and the exact 
nature of the APD/CAPD. Typically, the younger the patient, 
the greater the likelihood that management will focus on efforts 
to improve the patient’s auditory perceptual skills, whereas with 
older patients efforts are more likely to focus on strategy 
instruction.
  

504 
Auditory disorders and their management
Auditory plasticity
The foundation for many of the direct intervention strategies 
used in the remediation of APD/CAPD is the concept of brain 
plasticity. Research efforts in this area have provided a substan- 
tial body of evidence that demonstrates that auditory stimula­
tion can result in the development or a reorganization of the 
auditory neural substrate.64 The evidence, however, does impli- 
cate age as a factor in terms of brain plasticity; that is, young 
brains are highly plastic and change more rapidly with appro- 
priate stimulation than more mature brains.65
Auditory plasticity serves as the foundation for many of 
the direct intervention strategies that will be used in the 
remediation of APD/CAPD. The term is used to refer to 
the alteration of nerve cells to better conform to imme­
diate environmental influences. This type of alteration of 
nerve cells is facilitated by repetitive auditory stimulation 
and is typically associated with behavioral change.
Enhancing the quality of the speech signal 
Clear speech
Clear speech is the process where the speaker attempts to pro­
duce every word in an utterance in a precise, accurate and 
clearly articulated manner. As a result of these efforts, speech 
tends to become slower and louder, intonation tends to 
become more varied, and stress on certain words or phrases 
becomes more prominent, thereby increasing the perceptual 
saliency of these words or phrases. In addition, the speech 
stream tends to become more clearly segmented through the 
insertion of pauses between phrases and sentences, and indi­
vidual speech sounds or phonemes are less likely to be omitted 
or reduced. These techniques have been employed with indi­
viduals with peripheral hearing impairment, and the results 
have demonstrated that improvements in speech intelligibility 
are realized when the speaker makes such conscious efforts to 
speak clearly.66-68 Given the difficulty that individuals with 
APD/CAPD have in processing rapidly changing brief acoustic 
information, it is logical to assume that such efforts would 
enhance the ability of the individual with APD/CAPD to 
process auditory information.
Classroom acoustics
One of the most common problems encountered by individuals 
with APD/CAPD is increased difficulty in listening in noisy or 
reverberant backgrounds. Efforts can be made to improve these 
adverse listening environments. These include the application 
of acoustic ceiling tiles, window treatments, carpeting, and 
other architectural changes which serve to absorb sound in the 
room and minimize the amount of reverberation in the listen-
16,69
ing environment.
FM systems
Another method of attempting to improve the individual’s abil­
ity to follow conversation is the provision of an assistive listen­
ing device (i.e. FM system) to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. 
The FM system includes a microphone which picks up the 
voice of the speaker and transmits it to a receiver, where the 
signal is amplified and then transduced back to an acoustic sig­
nal. These types of systems include both personal and classroom 
types of systems. Both have been shown to be effective in assist­
ing individuals with APD/CAPD to overcome many of the dif­
ficulties experienced when having to listen under adverse 
listening conditions.16,69,70
Enhancing the individual’s auditory perceptual 
skills
Auditory training
Auditory training programs for the individual with APD/CAPD 
are similar to those designed for individuals with peripheral 
hearing impairments. Training often initially focuses on tasks 
such as frequency, temporal and intensity discrimination and 
then progresses through activities focused on pattern recogni­
tion, to discrimination and recognition of syllables, words, 
phrases, sentences, and connected speech. The intervention 
program can be tailored to each individual’s abilities and mod­
ified as appropriate.16,69 For example, if a given individual has 
good frequency, temporal and intensity discrimination abilities, 
then activities focusing on the development of these skills can 
be bypassed with initial intervention activities focused on dis­
crimination and recognition of speech materials.
Enhancing the individual’s linguistic cognitive 
skills
The management procedures that follow include procedures 
which can be incorporated into a comprehensive management 
plan in an effort to assist the individual with APD/CAPD to 
overcome the potentially devastating effects of these deficits. 
This is achieved by providing the individual with access to alter­
native knowledge bases and/or strategies which can be utilized to 
derive meaning from an auditory event which would otherwise 
be a challenging, if not impossible, listening activity. It should be 
noted, however, that although these efforts are directed at 
improving linguistic or cognitive skills, it is not uncommon to 
see some improvements in auditory perceptual skills as a byprod­
uct of many of these intervention strategies or procedures. ’
Phonological awareness
Phonological awareness refers to the ability to recognize and 
manipulate the various sound units characteristic of the lan­
guage (i.e. phonemes, syllables, and words). Individuals with 
deficits in this area have difficulty in perceiving, decoding, stor­
ing and retrieving verbal information. Phonemic awareness, a 
component of phonological processing, is the ability to recog­
nize and manipulate the individual sounds in words (e.g.
  

Central auditory disorders 
505
phonemes). Phonological processing difficulties are quite com- 
mon in individuals with APD/CAPD, since the efficient pro­
cessing of speech is based upon the ability to process brief 
acoustic events which are changing rapidly in their temporal, 
spectral and intensity characteristics. It is quite likely that man­
agement of the individual with APD/CAPD, especially if the 
individual is a child, will involve some type of phonemic aware­
ness or phonological processing training.
Skill areas typically targeted during phonemic awareness 
training include: auditory discrimination, sound blending, 
sound segmentation, phoneme identification, recognition of 
sound and sound position in word, and rhyming. Two commer­
cial programs73,74 released within the past few years have 
prompted a great deal of interest in this particular management 
strategy. Although there has been considerable interest gener­
ated in the use of these two programs to remediate poor phone­
mic awareness skills, it should be noted there are a number of 
other workbooks and therapy materials which are commercially 
available, and management materials in this area can be easily 
developed.75,76 Efficacy data for this type of intervention are 
beginning to emerge, and the available evidence appears to sup­
port the continued use of this type of treatment for individuals 
with phonological processing disorders.72,77
Morphology
Morphological markers are frequently not processed efficiently 
by individuals with APD/CAPD, due, in large part, to their 
unstressed and weak acoustic representation within the speech 
stream. Individuals with APD/CAPD who must deduce the 
existence of these markers solely on the basis of their auditory 
experiences with spoken language are likely to demonstrate sig­
nificant delays in the acquisition of these linguistic markers. 
Therefore, efforts should be directed at remediating any delays 
in the individual’s expressive or receptive use of these markers.
Vocabulary
The acquisition of new lexical items is often challenging for the 
individual with an APD/CAPD. This is due in large part to the 
difficulty that the individual has in processing the brief and 
rapidly changing acoustic stream that represents the new lexi­
cal item, deducing the underlying phonological representation 
of the new word, storing the phonological representation in his 
or her mental lexicon, and then retrieving this phonological 
representation from the mental lexicon for future use. Efforts to 
foster the development of new vocabulary items can take a 
number of forms. One procedure which has proven to be par­
ticularly advantageous for the child with APD/CAPD is vocab­
ulary previewing or pretutoring. In this procedure, challenging 
vocabulary items that are to be introduced in the class the fol­
lowing day are provided to a parent or aid the day before so that 
the adult can introduce the novel vocabulary items in a less 
stressful environment. To obtain maximum benefits from this 
approach, it is desirable to have the activities conducted in a 
quiet environment free from auditory and visual distractions. 
The adult should provide the child with an auditory stimulus
supported by visual aids (i.e. the word in print along with a pic­
torial representation, if possible) and then the child should be 
asked to repeat the word. Additional activities could include a 
review of the definition of the new vocabulary item and use of 
the new item in a sentence. The benefit of this type of approach 
is that it allows the child to use a variety of sensory input 
modalities (sight, hearing, and kinesthetic) to assist in the pro­
cessing, acquisition and storage of new information. This 
integration of sensory information helps to facilitate the indi­
vidual’s ability to recognize, recall and retrieve the information 
when the word or words are introduced in the classroom.15,78
Prosody
Prosody or intonation is an important linguistic marker that 
can often change the meaning of an utterance. A declarative 
sentence spoken with a rising as opposed to a falling intonation 
takes on a different meaning and requires a different type of 
response from the communicative partner. Differences in 
prosody can also form the basis for humor. Simply putting the 
stress on a different syllable within a sentence can significantly 
alter the meaning of the sentence. Many individuals with 
APD/CAPD experience difficulty in processing the acoustic 
envelope of an ongoing acoustic stream. As a result, they are 
often unaware of subtle differences in intonation patterns 
which signal alternative linguistic meanings or intentions. 
Hence, this is an area which frequently requires intervention. 
Training should focus on contrasting intonation patterns, to 
foster recognition of the alternative semantic interpretations of 
sentences which may have otherwise identical phonological, 
syntactic and semantic structures.
Metacognition
Metacognition refers to the processes through which an individ­
ual: (1) reflects on the demands inherent in an activity or situa­
tion; (2) recognizes the skills that he or she brings to the activity 
or situation; (3) identifies the variables that can affect perfor­
mance; and (4) uses this information and knowledge to plan, 
monitor and regulate behaviors such as attention, memory, lis­
tening, comprehension, and the use of language. For many indi­
viduals, metacognitive processes are automatic and relatively 
effortless. They are derived or activated with little conscious 
effort.79,80 For other individuals, however, these processes require 
conscious focus on the cognitive demands associated with the 
context or behavior, a recognition of the individual’s goals with 
respect to the context or behavior, and the mental processes 
needed to meet both the demands and goals.81
The latter situation is one that is frequently encountered by 
individuals with APD/CAPD. For these individuals, formalized 
strategy instruction is warranted. Most of the procedures that 
have been advocated to date involve a number of steps, which 
include activities such as: (1) pretesting and commitment to 
strategy development and use; (2) description of the strategy; 
(3) modeling of the strategy; (4) verbal rehearsal of the strategy; 
(5) controlled practice and feedback; (6) post-testing; and (7) 
generalization. ~ 
In addition, since it is unlikely that one
  

506 
Auditory disorders and their management
strategy will meet the needs of the individual in all contexts 
and environments, the ability to identify and use additional 
strategies needs to be fostered.89 In other words, the individual 
must be trained to become strategic. To do so, the individual 
must be capable of recognizing the underlying similarities in 
new problems which may parallel patterns noted in previously 
solved problems.89 The professional can help facilitate the indi- 
viduaFs move toward strategic actions by providing hints, dis­
cussion and reflection, and allowing the individual to teach or 
demonstrate strategic actions.90
Space limitations preclude a detailed discussion of the var­
ious strategies that can be used with individuals with 
APD/CAPD. A few selected procedures are provided to illus­
trate the various types of procedure available. The reader inter­
ested in additional strategies and strategy instruction is referred
1 
16,74,91-94
to other sources.
Contextual derivation
Context can often be used to derive word meaning and enhance 
message comprehension when an individual encounters an unfa­
miliar lexical item or phrase.95 Unfortunately, many individuals 
with APD/CAPD focus their efforts on bottom-up types of pro­
cessing (i.e. they attempt to process the sounds heard or ortho­
graphic symbols seen to achieve word recognition), rather than 
shifting to a more top-down type of processing when unfamiliar 
words or phrases are encountered. As a result, comprehension 
often breaks down. By using linguistic context which is repre­
sented within the utterance or written statement, the efficient 
listener or reader can frequently achieve grammatical closure 
and message understanding despite the fact that they have no 
knowledge of, or experience with, one or more of the lexical 
items within the utterance. In context-derived comprehension 
instruction, the individual is encouraged to use their world and 
linguistic knowledge to deduce word meaning and achieve mes­
sage comprehension. For example, in the sentence ‘The thief 
absconded with the jewels and the money’ the meaning of the 
word ‘absconded’ can be deduced from the semantic information 
contained in the rest of the utterance.
Discourse cohesion devices and schema induction
Discourse cohesion devices are linguistic conventions that con­
nect propositions into complex messages.96 These devices allow 
communicative partners to formulate and comprehend com­
plex messages in an efficient manner by establishing distinct 
relationships between words (for example, the words ‘and’, 
‘therefore’, ‘before’, ‘although’ and ‘instead of’, signal additive, 
causal, temporal, adversative and disjunctive relationships, 
respectively). Schema is a psychological construct used to 
account for knowledge organization which is invoked when dis­
crete cognitive tasks are undertaken.97 A schema is an organized 
assemblage of related concepts, a set of expectations, abstract 
and generic knowledge stored in long-term memory which pre­
serves the relationships among the constituent concepts, and 
generalized knowledge about an event, object, or message. It 
provides the individual with a conceptual framework that can
guide interpretation, as it represents a multidimensional map 
which connects inter-related ideas and concepts. Formal 
schemata are linguistic conventions that serve to organize, inte­
grate and predict relationships among propositions.98 The dis­
course cohesion devices discussed above represent formal 
schemata, as they can be used to organize, integrate and predict 
relationships among propositions. Other linguistic conventions 
include linguistic markers that would signal parallelism or 
correlative status (e.g. not only ... but also, neither ... nor), 
causation or speculation (e.g. if ... then), temporal relation­
ships (first, finally), and so forth.
It has been established that many individuals with 
language-processing disorders have difficulty in formulating 
these types of schemata.99,100 Management efforts for these 
individuals should be directed at developing the ability to first 
recognize the presence of these types of discourse elements 
within utterances and then to discern the unique relationships 
between the propositions being signaled by these discourse ele­
ments. This should assist the individual with an APD/CAPD in 
processing complex spoken information, as utilization of these 
skills and abilities during listening and/or reading activities 
should trigger certain expectations about the message, narrow 
the possible alternatives for interpretation, and provide the 
individual with direction in processing the information.16
Cognitive style and reasoning
Individuals differ along a number of different cognitive style 
continua (flexibility/inflexibility, field independent/field depen­
dent, convergent/divergent, and impulsive/reflective). Some of 
these cognitive styles will serve to facilitate one’s ability to 
adjust to various listening and learning situations, whereas 
others will impede such adjustments. It is essential to the suc­
cess of the management program that the individual be encour­
aged to assume or develop a more facilitative cognitive style 
(e.g. flexible, reflective), if needed. This can be accomplished 
by various behavioral modification techniques.
Several approaches have been 
advocated for the 
management of the auditory difficulties experienced 
by individuals with APD/CAPD. These include: (1) 
improving the quality of the acoustic signal; (2) 
enhancing the individual's auditory perceptual skills; and 
(3) enhancing the individual’s cognitive and listening 
skills. In developing a comprehensive management plan, 
consideration should be given to all three approaches. 
However, the extent to which each of the three 
approaches will be incorporated into a given patient’s 
management plan will probably depend on a number of 
factors (e.g. the specific nature of the patient’s deficits, 
the age and cognitive abilities of the patient, the avail­
ability of technology resources, and the presence/absence 
of any comorbid conditions).
  

Central auditory disorders 
507
Case presentation
History
A left-handed male was 10 years old when he was evaluated at 
our medical facility. He had been delivered by emergency 
Cesarean section following a motor vehicle accident at 34 
weeks of gestation. His neonatal history was complicated by 
hyaline membrane disease, jaundice, respiratory distress syn­
drome, and hepatitis of unknown etiology. As a result of these 
complications, he remained in the NICU for 6 weeks post- 
partem and was then discharged to home.
At the age of 5 months, concerns were raised regarding his 
increasing head circumference and a CT scan was ordered. 
The scan revealed markedly dilated lateral ventricles, with the 
left ventricle being more involved than the right. At that 
time, a ventricular peritoneal shunt was inserted on the left. A 
revision procedure was conducted when the child was 6 years 
of age. At the age of 4 years, this child began to experience 
complex partial seizures, which were managed with 100 mg of 
Dilantin daily.
ABR testing was performed at the age of 4Vi months. The 
results suggested borderline normal hearing in the low fre­
quencies atid a mild loss of hearing in the high frequencies for 
the right ear, and a severe-to-profound loss in the left ear. 
Results of periodic audiological testing over a 2-year period 
following this initial assessment were consistent with these 
early findings. However, subsequent audiological evaluations 
revealed hearing thresholds which were within normal limits 
bilaterally.
Developmental assessment conducted in kindergarten 
reportedly indicated that this child’s development was delayed 
by 6 months. At the present time, he is reported to be func­
tioning 1-2 years behind the grade level in most academic 
areas, and receives remedial services in school for speech and 
language, reading, writing, and spelling.
Audiological findings
Results of pure tone testing revealed hearing thresholds which 
fell within normal limits bilaterally (Figure 29.4). Speech 
recognition scores were excellent in both ears.
Results of behavioral central testing (Figure 29.5) revealed 
depressed scores for the right ear on two dichotic speech tests 
(dichotic digits and competing sentences), and for both ears on 
a monaural low-redundancy speech test (low-pass filtered 
speech) and two temporal patterning tests (frequency pattern 
sequences and auditory duration patterns). When the patient 
was asked to hum the frequency pattern sequences instead of 
verbally describing the sequences, performance rose to within 
normal limits for both ears.
Results of ABR/MLR testing conducted with insert 
receivers revealed a well-defined ABR wave V for both ears 
and normal MLR responses (Na and Pa) for all recording mon­
tages with right-ear stimulation (Figure 29.6). With left-ear
stimulation, the MLR responses did not replicate well. A ques­
tionable Pa was noted on the left ear recordings. However, if 
this is a Pa response, it is delayed in latency and reduced in 
amplitude when compared to the right-ear response (i.e. an 
ear effect).
Figure 29.4 Audiogram (right ear 0; left ear X) of a 10-year-old male 
diagnosed with asymmetrical hydrocephalus of the lateral ventricles.
Figure 29.5 Central auditory test results for the patient described in Figure 
29.4. Data are presented for two dichotic speech tests (CS, competing sentences; 
DD, dichotic digits), a monaural low-redundancy speech test (LPFS, low-pass 
filtered speech), and two temporal patterning tests (FPS, frequency pattern 
sequences; ADP, auditory duration patterns) for the right (0) and left (X) ears. 
For the FPS test, results are provided for both verbal (0 and X) and hummed (02 
and X2) responses. The shaded areas represent the range of normal performance 
for each test.
  

508 
Auditory disorders and their management
Figure 29.6 Combined ABR and MLR recordings for the right and left ears for 
the patient described in Figure 29.4.
Radiological findings
A CT scan conducted at 5 months of age revealed marked 
dilatation of the left lateral ventricle and less marked, but sig­
nificant, dilatation of the right lateral ventricle. In addition, the 
third ventricle was dilated. A diagnosis of asymmetrical hydro­
cephalus was made (Figure 29.7).
Management
This child continues to receive speech and language and acad- 
emic services in his school, with remedial activities focused on 
many of the linguistic interventions suggested earlier in this 
chapter. Since he is receiving appropriate services within his 
school district and the family lives at some distance from our 
center, we are not providing ongoing management services at 
this time. We met with the child’s mother and a number of 
school professionals (speech-language pathologist, classroom 
teacher, special education teacher, and educational plan coor­
dinator) following our evaluation, to review the child’s current 
management plan and identify a number of strategies which can 
be used at home and in school to help the child overcome the 
auditory processing difficulties he is experiencing as a result of 
his CANS lesion.
Comments
This case demonstrates the utilization of central tests in cases of 
central nervous system lesions and the importance of a ‘team 
approach’ to management. The behavioral results showed large 
right-ear deficits with normal left-ear performance for the 
dichotic tests. These deficits represent the ‘classic’ contralateral 
ear deficit (see Table 29.2) often noted with a lesion of the audi­
tory cortex (likely to be secondary to the lateral ventricle 
hydrocephalus). In addition, the pattern of results on the tem-
Figure 29.7 CT scan for the patient described in Figure 29.4, showing marked 
dilatation of the left lateral ventricle and less marked, but significant, dilatation 
of the right lateral ventricle.
poral patterning tests implicates a significant left-sided lesion, 
since verbal labeling of the frequency pattern sequences 
resulted in depressed scores bilaterally, while mimicking (or 
humming) the patterns resulted in normal performance for both 
ears. The bilateral deficits noted on the monaural low- 
redundancy test, with the more prominent depression observed 
for the right ear, may be accurately reflecting the asymmetric 
structural lesion noted during radiological assessment; that is, 
both hemispheres were affected, but the extent of the lesion was 
much greater for the left side. Finally, the MLR tracings 
revealed an ispilateral ear effect which may reflect some com­
promise in the thalamic region. Given the extent of the dilata­
tion of the left lateral ventricle and the question of third 
ventricle involvement in this case, it is possible that both audi­
tory cortex and high brainstem function were affected by the 
hydrocephalus.
Concluding comments
There have been a number of significant developments in the 
field of central auditory processing assessment since the first 
attempts to assess CANS function in patients with neurological 
lesions. Our understanding of the neuroanatomy and neuro­
physiology of the CANS has grown tremendously since the 
time of these early attempts. Many new tests have been intro­
duced in an effort to tease out the various deficits observed in 
individuals with APD/CAPD, and there are a number of inno­
vative assessment protocols which are being investigated in 
research laboratories at the present time. It is anticipated that
  

Central auditory disorders 
509
many of these tests will find their way into the assessment arena 
and will serve to increase the sensitivity of current assessment 
protocols as well as to provide the opportunity for more com­
prehensive assessment of the auditory deficits experienced by 
individuals with CANS lesions. In addition, the past decade 
has seen an increase in the attention paid to the development 
of effective management strategies for use with individuals with 
APD/CAPDs. It is anticipated that management programs will 
be refined as technology is used to a greater extent and the effi­
cacies of the various approaches currently being used are estab­
lished. The end-result of all these endeavors should be an 
improved quality of life for those individuals who present with 
an APD/CAPD.
References
1. Musiek FE, Baran JA, Pinheiro ML. Neuroaudiology: Case Studies. 
San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, 1994.
2. Bocca E, Calearo C, Cassinari V. A new method for testing hear­
ing in temporal lobe tumors. A eta Otolaryngol 1954; 44: 219-21.
3. Bocca E, Calearo C, Cassinari V, Migliavacca F. Testing ‘cortical’ 
hearing in temporal lobe tumors. Acta Otolaryngol 1955; 45: 
289-304.
4. Sanchez-Longo LP, Forster FM. Clinical significance of impair­
ment of sound localization. Neurology 1958; 8: 1191-225.
5. Sanchez-Longo LP, Forster FM, Auth TL. A new clinical test for 
sound localization and its applications. Neurology 1957; 7: 653-5.
6. Kimura D. Cerebral dominance and the perception of verbal stim­
uli. Can] Psychol 1961; 15: 166-71.
7. Kimura D. Some effects of temporal lobe damage on auditory per­
ception. CanJ Psychol 1961; 15: 157-65.
8. Milner B. Laterality effects in audition. In: Montcastle VB ed. 
Interhemispheric Relations and Cerebral Dominance. Baltimore: John 
Hopkins Press, 1962: 117-95.
9. Milner B, Kimura D, Taylor LB. Nonverbal auditory learning after 
frontal or temporal lobectomy in man. Paper presented at a meet­
ing of the Eastern Psychological Association, Boston, April 1968.
10. Shankweiler D. Effects of temporal damage on perception of 
dichotically presented melodies. ] Comparative Physiol Psychol 
1966; 62: 115-19.
11. Jerger JF, Weikers NJ, Sharbrough FW, Jerger S. Bilateral lesions of 
the temporal lobe: a case study. Acta Otolaryngol 1969; 258: 5-51.
12. Starr A, Achor LJ. Auditory brainstem responses in neurological 
disease. Arch Neurol 1975; 32: 761-8.
13. Stockard JJ, Rossiter VS. Clinical and pathologic correlates of 
brain stem auditory response abnormalities. Neurology 1977; 27: 
316-25.
14. Robinson K, Rudge P. Abnormalities of the auditory evoked 
potentials in patients with multiple sclerosis. Brain 1977; 100: 
19-40.
15. Baran JA, Musiek FE. Behavioral assessment of the central audi­
tory nervous system. In: Musiek FE, Rintelmann WF, eds. Con­
temporary Perspectives in Hearing Assessment. Boston: Allyn & 
Bacon, 1999: 375-413.
16. Chermak GD, Musiek FE. Central Auditory Processing Disorders: 
New Perspectives. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, 1997.
17. American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. Central audi­
tory processing: current status and implications for clinical prac­
tice. Am J Audiol 1996; 5: 41-54.
18. Jerger J, Musiek F. Report of the consensus conference on the diag­
nosis of auditory processing disorders in school-aged children. J 
Am A cad Audiol 2000; 11: 467-74.
19. Baran JA. Speech perception test materials for central auditory 
processing assessment. In: Mendel LL, Danhauer JL, eds. Audio- 
logic Evaluation and Management and Speech Perception Assessment. 
San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, 1997: 147-68.
20. Brody H. Organization of cerebral cortex: III. A study of aging in 
human cerebral cortex. J Comparative Neurol 1955; 102: 511-36.
21. Kirikae I, Sato T, Shitara T. A study of hearing in advanced age. 
Laryngoscope 1964; 74: 205-20.
22. Smith BH, Sethi PH. Aging and the nervous system. Geriatrics 
1975; 30: 109-15.
23. Schnuknecht HF. Further observations on the pathology of pres­
bycusis. Arch Otolaryngol 1964; 80: 369-82.
24. Schnuknecht HF. Pathobgy of the Ear. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1974.
25. Humes LE, Christopherson L, Cokely C. Central auditory pro­
cessing disorders in the elderly: fact or fiction? In: Katz J, Stecker 
N, Henderson D, eds. Central Auditory Processing: A Transdiscipli- 
nary View. St Louis: Mosby Year Book, 1992: 141-50.
26. Kricos PB, Lesner SA. Hearing Care for the Older Adult: Audiologic 
Rehabilitation. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1995.
27. Musiek FE, Baran JA. Amplification and the central auditory ner­
vous system. In: Valente M, ed. Hearing Aids: Standards, Options, and 
Limitations. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers, 1996: 407-38.
28. Weinstein BE. Presbycusis. In: Katz J, ed. Handbook of Clinical 
Audiology, 4th edn. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1994: 553-67.
29. Musiek FE, Gollegly KM, Baran J A. Myelination of the corpus cal­
losum in learning disabled children: theoretical and clinical cor­
relates. Semin Hear 1984; 5: 231-42.
30. Musiek FE, Gollegly KM, Ross MK. Profiles of types of central 
auditory processing disorders in children with learning disabilities. 
J Child Commun Disord 1985; 9: 43-61.
31. Fisher LI. Fishers Auditory Problems Checklist. Bemidji, MN: Life 
Products, 1976.
32. Kelly DA. Central Auditory Processing Disorders: Strategies for Use 
with Children and Adolescents. San Antonio, TX: Communication 
Skill Builders, 1995.
33. Smoski WJ, Brunt MA, Tannahill JC. Listening characteristics of 
children with central auditory processing disorders. Language 
Speech Hear Services Schools 1992; 23: 145-52.
34. Willeford JA, Burleigh JM. Handbook of Central Auditory Process­
ing Disorders in Children. Orlando, FL: Grune and Stratton, 1985.
35. Olsen WO, Noffsinger D, Carhart R. Masking level differences 
encountered in clinical populations. A udiology 
1976; 
15: 
287-301.
36. Willeford J. Differential diagnosis of central auditory dysfunction. 
In: Bradford L, ed. A udiology: An Audio Journal for Continuing 
Education, Vol. 2. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1976.
  

510 
Auditory disorders and their management
37. Musiek FE. Assessment of central auditory dysfunction: the 
dichotic digit test revisited. Ear Hear 1983; 4: 79-83.
38. Berlin Cl, Lowe-Bell SS, Jannetta PJ, Kline DG. Central auditory 
deficits after temporal lobectomy. Arch Otolaryngol 1972; 96: 4-10.
39. Katz ]. The use of staggered spondaic words for assessing the integ- 
rity of the central auditory system. J Auditory Res 1962; 2: 327-37.
40. Jerger JF, Jerger SW. Auditory findings in brainstem disorders. Arch 
Otolaryngol 1974; 99: 342-9.
41. Fifer RC, Jerger JF, Berlin Cl, Tobey E, Campbell J. Development 
of a dichotic sentence identification test for hearing impaired 
adults. Ear Hear 1983; 4: 300-5.
42. Beasley DS, Schwimmer S, Rintelmann WF. Intelligibility of 
time-compressed CNC monosyllables. J Speech Hear Res 1972; 15: 
340-50.
43. Musiek FE, Pinheiro ML. Frequency pattern in cochlear, brain­
stem, and cerebral lesions. Audiology 1987; 26: 79-88.
44. Musiek FE, Baran JA, Pinheiro ML. Duration pattern recognition 
in normal subjects and patients with cerebral and cochlear lesions. 
Audiology 1990; 29: 304-13.
45. Baran JA, Musiek FE. Central auditory processing disorders in 
children and adults. In: Wall LG, ed. Hearing for the Speech- 
Language Pathologist and Health Care Professional. Boston: 
Butterworth-Heinemann, 1995: 415-40.
46. Licklider JCR. The influence of interaural phase relations upon the 
masking of speech by white noise. J Acoust Soc Am 1948; 20:150-9.
47. Hall JW. Handbook of Auditory Evoked Responses. Boston: Allyn 
and Bacon, 1992.
48. Musiek FE, Lee WW. Auditory middle and late potentials. In: 
Musiek FE, Rintelmann WF, eds. Contemporary Perspectives in 
Hearing Assessment. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1999: 243-72.
49. Tanaka Y, Kamo T, Yoshida M, Yamadori A. So called cortical 
deafness: clinical, neurophysiological and radiological observa­
tions. Brain 1991; 114: 2385-401.
50. Rapin I. Cortical deafness, auditory agnosia, and word deafness: 
how distinct are they? Human Commun 1985; 5: 29-37.
51. Phillips D, Farmer M. Acquired word deafness and the temporal 
grain of sound representation in the primary auditory cortex. 
Behav Brain Res 1990; 40: 85-94.
52. Stach BA. Hearing aid amplification and central processing disor­
ders. In: Sandlin RE, ed. Handbook of Hearing Aid Amplification. 
Vol. II: Clinical Considerations and Fitting Practices. Boston: 
College-Hill Press, 1990: 87-111.
53. Stach BA, Spretnjak ML, Jerger JF. The prevalence of central pres­
bycusis in a clinical population. J Am A cad Audiol 1990; 1:109-15.
54. Divenyi PL, Haupt RM. Audiological correlates of speech under- 
stading in elderly listeners with mild-to-moderate hearing loss. I: 
Age and lateral asymmetry effects. Ear Hear 1997; 18: 42-61.
55. Divenyi PL, Haupt RM. Audiological correlates of speech under­
standing in elderly listeners with mild-to-moderate hearing loss. 
Ill: Factor representation. Ear Hear 1997; 18: 189-201.
56. Grimes AM, Mueller HG, Williams DL. Clinical considerations 
in the use of time-compressed speech. Ear Hear 1984; 5: 114-17.
57. Kurdziel S, Noffsinger D, Olsen W. Performance by cortical lesion 
patients on 40 and 60% time-compressed materials. J Acoust Soc 
Am 1976; 2: 3-7.
58. Miltenberger G, Dawson G, Raica A. Central testing with periph­
eral hearing loss. Arch Otolaryngol 1978; 104: 11-15.
59. Musiek FE, Gollegly KM, Kibbe K, Verkest-Lenz S. Proposed 
screening test for central auditory disorders: follow-up on the 
dichotic digits test. Am J Otolaryngol 1991; 12: 109-13.
60. Noffsinger D. Clinical applications of selected binaural effects. 
Scand Audiol 1982; 15: 156-62.
61. Orchik DJ, Burgess T. Synthetic sentence identification as a func­
tion of the age of the listener. J Am Acoust Soc 1977; 3: 42-6.
62. Roeser R, Johns D, Price L. Dichotic listening in adults with 
sensorineural hearing loss. J Am Auditory Soc 1976; 2: 19-25.
63. Speaks C, Niccum N, Van Tasell D. Effects of stimulus material on 
the dichotic listening performance of patients with sensorineural 
hearing loss. J Speech Hear Res 1985; 28: 16-25.
64. Musiek FE, Berge BE. A neuroscience view of auditory 
training/stimulation and central auditory processing disorders. In: 
Masters MG, Stecker NA, Katz J, eds. Central Auditory Processing 
Disorders: Mostly Management. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1998: 
15-32.
65. Hassmannova J, Myslivecek J, Novakova V. Effects of early audi­
tory stimulation on cortical centers. In: Syka J, Aitkin L, eds. 
Neural Mechanisms of Hearing. New York: Plenum, 1981: 355-9.
66. Picheny MA, Durlach NI, Braida LD. Speaking clearly for the 
hard of hearing I: Intelligibility differences between clear and con­
versational speech. J Speech Hear Res 1985; 28: 96-103.
67. Picheny MA, Durlach NI, Braida LD. Speaking clearly for the 
hard of hearing II: Acoustic characteristics of clear and conversa­
tional speech. J Speech Hear Res 1986; 29: 434-46.
68. Picheny MA, Durlach NI, Braida LD. Speaking clearly for the 
hard of hearing III: Attempts to determine the contribution of 
speaking rate to differences in intelligibility between clear and 
conversational speech. J Speech Hear Res 1989; 32: 600-3.
69. Beilis TJ. Assessment and Management of Central Auditory Process­
ing Disorders in the Educational Setting: From Science to Practice. 
San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, 1996.
70. Stein RL. Application of FM technology to the management of 
central auditory processing disorders. In: Masters MG, Stecker 
NA, Katz J, eds. Central Auditory Processing Disorders: Mostly 
Management. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1998: 89-102.
71. Merzenich MM, Jenkins WM, Johnston P, Schreiner C, Miller SL, 
Tallal P. Temporal processing deficits of language-learning 
impaired children ameliorated by training. Science 1996; 271: 
77-81.
72. Tallal P, Miller SL, Bedi G et al. Language comprehension in 
language-learning impaired children improved with acoustically 
modified speech. Science 1996; 271: 81-4.
73. Earobics. Evanston, IL: Cognitive Concepts, Inc., 1997.
74. FastForWord. Berkely, CA: Scientific Learning Corporation, 1997.
75. Masters MG, Stecker NA, Katz J, eds. Central Auditory Processing 
Disorders: Mostly Management. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1998.
76. Sloan C. Treating Auditory Processing Difficulties in Children. San 
Diego: College-Hill Press, 1986.
77. Edelen-Smith PJ. How now brown cow: phoneme awareness 
activities for collaborative classrooms. Intervent School Clinic 1997; 
33: 103-11.
  

Central auditory disorders 
511
78. Baran JA. Management of adolescents and adults with central 
auditory processing disorders. In: Masters MG, Stecker NA, Katz 
J, eds. Central Auditory Processing Disorders: Mostly Management. 
Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1998: 195-214.
79. Flavell JH. Cognitive Development, 2nd edn. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1985.
80. Siegler R, Shipley C. Variation, selection, and cognitive change. 
In: Simon T, ed. Developing Cognitive Competence. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1995: 31-76.
81. Siegler R, Shrager J. Strategy choices in addition and subtraction: 
how do children know what to do? In: Sophian C, ed. Origin of 
Cognitive Skills. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1984: 
229-93.
82. Deshler DD, Schumaker JB, Lenz BK, Ellis ES. Academic and 
cognitive interventions for LD adolescents: Part II. J Learn Disabil 
1981; 17: 170-87.
83. Deshler DD, Alley GR, Warner MM, Schumaker JB. Instructional 
practices for promoting skill acquisition and generalization in 
severely learning disabled adolescents. Learn Disabil Q 1981; 4: 
415-21.
84. Harris KR, Graham S, Pressley M. Cognitive-behavioral 
approaches in reading and writing language: developing self­
regulated learners. In: Singh NN, Beale IL, eds. Learning 
Disabilities: Nature, Theory, and Treatment. New York: Springer- 
Verlag, 1991:415-51.
85. Meichenbaum D, Goodman J. Training impulsive children to talk 
to themselves: a means of developing self-control. J Abnorm 
Psychol 1971; 77: 115-26.
86. Palinscar AS, Brown DA. Interactive teaching to promote inde­
pendent learning from text. Reading Teacher 1987; 39: 771-7.
87. Pressley M, Borkowski JG, O’Sullivan JT. Memory strategy 
instruction is made of this: metamemory and durable strategy use. 
Educational Psychologist 1984; 19: 94-107.
88. Wilson CC, Lanza JR, Barton JS. Developing higher level thinking 
skills through questioning techniques in the speech and language 
setting. Language Speech Hear Services Schools 1988; 19: 428-31.
89. Wynn-Darcy ML, Gillam RB. Accessing long-term memory: 
metacognitive strategies and strategic action in adolescents. 
Topics Language Disord 1997; 18: 32-44.
90. Crisafi M, Brown A. Analog transfer in very young children: 
combining two separately learned solutions to reach goal. Child 
Dev 1986; 57: 953-68.
91. Bender WA. Learning Disabilities: Characteristics, Identification, 
and Teaching Strategies, 2nd edn. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1995.
92. Chermak GA. Metacognitive approaches to managing central 
auditory processing disorders. In: Masters MG, Stecker NA, 
Katz J, eds. Central Auditory Processing Disorders: Mostly Manage- 
ment. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1998: 49-62.
93. Gillam RB, ed. Memory and Language Impairments in Children and 
Adults: New Perspectives. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Publishers, 
1998.
94. Hallahan DP, Kauffman JM, Lloyd JW. Introduction to Learning 
Disabilities. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1996.
95. Miller GA, Gildea PM. How children learn words. Sci Am 1987; 
257: 94-9.
96. Halliday MAK, Hasan R. Cohesion in English. London: Longman, 
1976.
97. Kintsch W. The role of knowledge in discourse comprehension: a 
construction-integration model. Psychol Rev 1988; 95: 165-85.
98. Dillon GL. Constructing Texts. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1981.
99. Liles BZ. Cohesion in the narratives of normal and language- 
disordered children. J Speech Hear Res 1985; 28: 123-33.
100. Liles BZ. Episode organization and cohesive conjunctions in 
narratives of children with and without language disorders. 
J Speech Hear Res 1987; 30: 185-96.
  

30 Audiological 
rehabilitation
Dafydd Stephens
Introduction and definition
Audiological rehabilitation has been given many definitions by 
various authors.1”3 The working definition used in this chapter 
is ‘a problem-solving process aiming to minimize the disable­
ments experienced by individuals with hearing disorders and to 
maximize their quality of life’. In terms of the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health of the 
World Health Organization (ICF),4 it entails the minimization 
of activity limitation (disability) and participation restriction 
(handicap). I propose here to make no distinction between 
audiological rehabilitation, aural rehabilitation, auditory reha­
bilitation and hearing rehabilitation, which can be regarded as 
different terms for the same process. I shall indicate that we are 
dealing with patient (client)-orientated processes driven by the 
difficulties encountered by the individual and those around him 
in their actual environment. It relates essentially to concepts of 
ecological audiology developed by Noble and others.5”7
Within this chapter, I shall start by discussing the final draft 
of the World Health Organization Classification of Functioning 
Disability and Health (ICF), which provides a useful frame­
work, albeit with weaknesses, within which the difficulties 
experienced by the patient can be considered. This leads on to 
an updated ‘management model’ derived from that of Goldstein 
and Stephens,8 and which provides a coherent structure for the 
evaluation and appropriate management of the individual con­
cerned. Finally, I shall consider ways in which the process can 
be best evaluated, both from the standpoint of the individual 
patient and also in a broader context in order to assess the cost- 
effectiveness of the system.
Disablements
In 2001, the World Health Organization published, as ICF,4 a 
revision of their earlier classification of Impairments, Disabili­
ties and Handicaps,9 taking into account further studies and 
criticisms of the earlier version, published in 1980. This new 
document changed aspects of the terminology from the two pre­
vious versions and referred to the umbrella concept of disability 
covering the impairments and their consequences for the indi­
vidual. This new structure is shown in Figure 30.1. This shows 
that the underlying disease or developmental defect can give 
rise to an impairment of function or structure which in turn 
may affect the individual’s activity or activities and conse­
quently cause some restriction of participation in aspects of 
society within which the individual might be expected to par­
ticipate. It may be noted that there is not a straightforward 
right-to-left progression from impairment to participation 
restriction, but that this is a two-way process which can be 
modified by interventions or changes in environmental and 
personal factors.
Such modifiers, both external and internal, can act at dif­
ferent stages in the process. Some ways in which this can occur, 
and perhaps even be measured, have been discussed by Borg7 in 
his concept of ecological audiology. The work of Noble and 
Hetu6 concentrates in more detail on the influences of envi­
ronmental factors.
Health condition 
(disorder/disease)
r
Environmental
Personal
factors
factors
Figure 30.1 Outline of the ICF framework.

514 
Auditory disorders and their management
Structure and function
The WHO concept of impairments is divided into two, func­
tional and structural impairments. Elsewhere, we have argued 
that, apart from gross abnormalities of the external ear, the con­
cept of structural impairments is of little practical relevance in 
the field of audiological rehabilitation,10 and further discussion 
will concentrate on functional impairments.
Functional impairments entail abnormal psychological or 
physiological function which can be measured in a standardized 
way, using psychophysical or physiological measures.
This is usually defined in terms of the auditory threshold, 
which is a reflection of the auditory sensitivity of the individ­
ual but may be a measure of a variety of other auditory func­
tions, including intolerance of noise or even tinnitus, as shown 
in Table 30.1. In this table, it may also be seen that there are 
various auditory impairments in addition to impaired thresh­
old sensitivity, derived particularly from damage to the trans­
ducer mechanism of the inner ear. These are discussed in 
Chapter 12.
The inclusion of tinnitus here is somewhat debatable, as it 
is more analogous to pain, and possibly both should be consid­
ered as discomforts separate from the general concept of impair­
ments. The same is possibly true of intolerance of noise when 
considered in isolation and not related to an abnormal growth 
of loudness in a damaged ear (recruitment).
Activity limitation
This is broadly analogous to the former concept of ‘disability’, 
which concerns the hearing or listening activities which are 
affected in the individual’s life. It will depend not only on the 
impairments affecting the individual, but also on the demands 
placed on the auditory system. It is defined as ‘difficulties an 
individual may have in executing activities’. Activity limita­
tion may be assessed by asking the individual about their 
specific difficulties, but also by the use of a variety of question­
naires. These may be constrained or open-ended. It may also 
be assessed by testing the individual using situation-specific 
tests, e.g. recording the noise from the workplace and assessing 
the individual’s ability to recognize relevant speech in that 
context.
Table 30.1 Classification of hearing and related functions.
b2300
Sound detection
62301
Sound discrimination
b2302
Localization of sound source
b2303
Lateralization of sound
62304
Specch discrimination
b2400
Ringing in ears or tinnitus
b2404
Irritation in the ear
b2405
Aural pressure
b2408
Phonophobia or hyperacusis
A classification of activities, based on ICF is shown in 
Tables 30.2 and 30.3. This has significant weaknesses in that, 
communication aside, there is only one subsidiary category 
(al 15— Listening) which covers almost all other auditory 
activity limitations. We would argue that the approach adopted 
in the intermediate (pi) classification11 is more appropriate, 
and this is what has been adopted here in a modified version.
Different individuals with the same functional impairment, 
such as a bilateral high-frequency sensorineural hearing impair­
ment, may experience very different activity limitations. Exam­
ples of such different problems experienced by different 
individuals could be steelworkers who may not be aware of any 
activity limitation, particularly as friends and colleagues proba­
bly have a similar hearing loss; secretaries who may be aware of 
problems only when in an open-plan office; and teachers whose 
work situation may become impossible because of the problem 
as they cannot hear their pupils.
Participation restriction
It may be seen that these problems of activity limitation lead on 
easily into participation restriction, the effects of impairment 
and/or activity limitation on the individual’s lifestyle. It may be 
more easily defined as ‘the non-auditory consequences of hearing 
impairment’, and is influenced by a variety of psychosocial and
Table 30.2 Communication activities.
d310
Receiving spoken messages
d315
Receiving nonverbal messages
d320
Receiving formal sign language messages
d325
Receiving written messages
d350
Conversation
d360
Using communication devices and techniques
Table 30.3 Potential classification of listening activity.
1.
Ability to receive loud auditory signals ( in noise or quiet)
2.
Hearing when there is background noise
3.
Hearing when sounds come from different directions
4.
Ability to hear moderately loud noises (in noise or quiet)
5.
Ability to hear soft sounds (in noise or quiet)
6.
Recognizing
7.
Recognizing distance, e,g. footsteps, traffic, birds
8,
Recognizing direction, e,g> warning signals, traffic, birds
9.
Ability relating to noise tolerance
10,
Environmental awareness
  

Audiological rehabilitation 
515
environmental factors. ICF defines it as the ‘problems an indi­
vidual may experience in involvement in life situations’. The 
activity construct addresses the question as to whether the indi­
vidual ‘can’ do the activity, whereas the participation construct 
addresses the question as to whether the individual ‘does’ do the 
task.
Participation restriction is determined particularly by the 
activity limitations experienced, but may occur in the presence 
of hearing impairment without any experienced activity limita­
tion. It is generally assessed by interview or questionnaires, but 
may also be assessed by indirect measures such as numbers of days 
of work lost, or related medical consultations. As participation 
restriction extends broadly across the consequences of a variety 
of impairment types such as visual or locomotor impairments, 
approaches using quality of life measures may be relevant here.
Furthermore, participation restriction, more than other ele­
ments of disablement, is the factor most likely to determine 
whether or not the individual seeks help for their hearing loss.12
The domains of participation are shown in Table 30.4, 
which mirrors the domains of activity. It may be seen from this 
that these cover a wide range of areas which can also be influ­
enced by other (non-auditory) impairments. Among these, the 
most important and commonly related areas are those of 
reduced participation in social interaction at a variety of levels, 
ranging from with partners and family members through to with 
strangers. Communication domains at a participation level 
cover the individual’s exclusion from a conversation or tele­
phone call, rather than their perceived difficulties in hearing in 
these circumstances. Restriction in work and educational 
environments may even create particular problems for the indi­
viduals in their 80s seeking to improve their knowledge.
Contextual factors
The contextual factors or modifiers which may influence the 
individual’s degree of activity limitation and participation 
restriction may be considered in the two broad categories of 
environmental factors — external to the person concerned and
Table 30.4 Domains of activity and participation.
1. 
Learning and applying knowledge
2. 
General tasks and demands
3. 
Communication
4. 
Movement
5. 
Self-care
6. 
Domestic life
7. 
Interpersonal interactions and relationships
8. 
Major life areas
9. 
Community, social and civic life
personal, relating to the personality, experiences and the coping 
strategies which the individual adopts to deal with a range of 
experienced problems.
The environmental factors cover a range of areas, both 
human and inanimate, and even include societal attitudes 
towards hearing impairment and approaches to its manage­
ment. Another area is devices, which may be used to alleviate 
the individual’s problems, including both hearing aids and envi­
ronmental aids (assistive listening devices). This area in partic­
ular highlights the way in which activity limitation and 
participation restriction constitute a dynamic, continually 
changing process which may be altered by changes in environ­
mental factors.
Thus use of an appropriate hearing aid system may reduce 
activity limitation and consequently increase some aspects of 
participation. However, stigmatizing societal reactions to the 
wearing of a hearing aid may subsequently result in the individ­
ual using it only at home, so increasing his activity limitation or 
participation restriction with regard to involvements outside the 
home. The contextual factors are shown in Table 30.5 and 30.6.
A management model
The model development by Goldstein and Stephens in 1981s 
aimed to be sufficiently broad to cover all types of hearing
Table 30.5 Environmental factors.
1.
Products and technology
2.
National environment and human-made changes to the
environment
3.
Support and relationships
4,
Attitudes
5.
Services, systems and policies
Table 30.6 Proposed classification of personal factors.
1.
Personal and demographic characteristics-age, race, 
gender
2.
Education profession
3.
Past and current experience
4.
Overall behaviour pattern and character style
5.
Individual psychological assets
6,
Other health conditions, fitness
7,
Lifestyle, habits, upbringing
8,
Coping styles
9.
Social background
  

516 
Auditory disorders and their management
problems and to be relevant on an individual basis to each per­
son with such problems. It should be applicable within all socio- 
medical systems. We argued that it was important to consider 
all relevant factors, if only to dismiss many immediately as 
being irrelevant. The model was based on the principle of inte­
grating instrumental and non-instrumental aspects of rehabili­
tation, so facilitating intervention which was appropriate to the 
individual’s needs.
The model was updated in detail in 1997,13,14 while retain­
ing the fundamental principles of the original concept. The 
main ideas gave increased emphasis to the problems (activity 
limitations and participation restrictions) reported by the indi­
vidual concerned, and also increased emphasis on the role of 
significant others. Within the following account, further minor 
amendments are incorporated, aimed at integrating some of the 
other aspects of ICF.
The overall model is shown in Figure 30.2. The main 
changes from the 1997 version are the renaming of the first sec­
tion as Activity and Participation, and the third section as 
Contextual Factors, bringing in here the individual’s physical
A model of Audiological Rehabilitation
Evaluation 
\
Integration and 
Decision making
Short term 
remediation
On-going
remediation
Figure 30.2 Management model for rehabilitation.
environment in addition to the psychosocial factors which have 
predominated in previous versions of the model. The fourth 
section is now called Related Functions and Activities. Finally, 
an element of environmental modification has been incorpo­
rated, with the final section previously known as ‘Communica­
tion Training’ being renamed ‘Continuing remediation’, as it 
includes factors other than communication skills.
This management model will be used to provide the frame­
work for the remainder of this chapter. Overall, it will be seen 
that it comprises four basic sections:
1. Evaluation — determining the problems and the ‘raw mate­
rials’ with which the professional has to work.
2. Integration and decision making— drawing together this 
basic information and making appropriate initial decisions.
3. Short-term remediation— immediate actions and proce­
dures implemented over a short period of time.
4. Ongoing 
remediation — the 
continuing 
process 
of 
remediation.
Evaluation
As mentioned earlier, this is the stage in which it is important 
to consider all possibly relevant factors, if only to dismiss some 
immediately. A range of evaluative techniques may be used, 
extending from brief observation to detailed testing, and have 
been discussed in some detail elsewhere.1,14 The approach cho­
sen will depend on the individual, their set of problems, and 
also what is relevant to the interventions which might be con­
sidered. There is little point in wasting time collecting detailed 
information which will not have any bearing on the choice or 
details of interventions.
Activity and participation
This is the key point, as it determines the specific problems 
which the patient is encountering and which they would like 
addressed. They are usually tapped by a combination of tech­
niques, including direct questioning, and open-set and closed- 
set questionnaires. Other, more objective, approaches are 
available but rarely used. These could include testing the indi­
vidual’s recognition of a relevant sample of speech in back­
ground noise recorded where they have problems, surveying 
communicative interactions, or examining their help-seeking 
behaviours in different contexts.
Determination of the individual’s specific problems may be 
performed using the Problem Questionnaire, which asks sim­
ply ‘Please make a list of the difficulties you have with your 
hearing. List them in order of importance, starting with the 
biggest. Write down as many as you can think of.’ This has the 
advantage of tapping into what the patient sees as relevant and 
does tend to be effective at defining relevant activity limita­
tions, such as general conversation, hearing the television, 
hearing the doorbell, speech in noise and telephone conversa­
tions. It is, however, less effective at tapping into participation 
restriction.16,17 In this context, we have recently adopted a new
  

Audiological rehabilitation 
517
questionnaire, ‘Please make a list of the effects of hearing loss 
on your life. Write down as many as you can think of.* About 
half of the responses to this are still activity limitations, but 
about a quarter are now participation restrictions, with a further 
20% being personal contextual factors/effects.17
This open-set approach may be used in a quantitative way 
to assess changes in specific problems as a result of intervention, 
such as on repeated occasions after a cochlear implant (Figure
30.3).18 A widely adopted use of this approach is also found in 
Dillon’s COSI (Client Orientated Scale of Improvement)19,20 
and in a section of Gatehouse’s Glasgow Hearing Aid Benefit 
Profile.21
A variety of questionnaires tapping different aspects of 
activity limitation and participation restriction have appeared 
since the introduction of the Hearing Handicap Scale22 in 1964, 
which, in fact, measured predominantly speech hearing activity 
limitations. A number of the most recent of these measures are 
listed in Table 30.7, and they have been recently reviewed in 
the context of self-report outcome measures in audiological 
rehabilitation.23 Unfortunately, many are rather confused in 
terms of the ICF dimensions, and relatively few set out to 
specifically assess participation restriction, which, as mentioned 
earlier, is not well delineated by open-set questionnaires. It is in 
this domain that such measures17 could continue to have a use­
ful role in the assessment of the needs of the specific individual. 
Their use as outcome measures is probably restricted to the 
assessment of specific interventions in particular groups of sub­
jects, and this is discussed further later in this chapter.
Communication status
The components of this section, which covers, broadly speaking, 
the raw materials of communication, are shown in Table 30.8.
Auditory
This represents essentially the impairments of function which 
are relevant to the rehabilitative process. The first, and gener-
Table 30,7 Some recent scales of activity limitation and 
participation restriction
Amsterdam Inventory for Auditory Disability Et Handicap - 
Kramer et
Communication Scale for Older Adults - Kaplan et aI59
Gothenburg Profile -  Ringdahl et o/w
Hearing Disability Et Handicap Scale -  Hetu et ol!31
ally most crucial, is a measure of sensitivity, usually a pure tone 
audiogram. The type and details will be relevant to the rehabil­
itative approach and, in individuals with an audiometric con­
figuration which changes rapidly across the frequency range, a 
sweep frequency measure like Bekesy or Audioscan audiometry 
may be more relevant (see Chapter 11).
Most sophisticated techniques of non-linear processing in 
hearing aids emphasize the need for measures of the dynamic 
range. While most measures of most comfortable loudness lev­
els (MCLLs) show considerable intra-subject variability, the 
uncomfortable loudness level (ULL) measures are more consis­
tent, and MCLLs may be extrapolated from these.24
Speech recognition scores are important in deciding which 
ear to aid and which instrumental approach may be most appro­
priate. However, they should not be the only factor in such 
decisions, as some individuals with poor speech recognition in 
one ear may still wish to use that ear to provide a three- 
dimensional approach and to enable them to hear and locate 
relevant environmental sounds.
With the advent of digital hearing aids including binaural 
systems, a range of other psychophysical measures of binaural 
and monaural signal processing are becoming relevant, depend­
ing on the system being considered. As elsewhere, the proce­
dures to be adopted will depend on them being relevant to the 
rehabilitative approach considered suitable for the individual 
concerned.
Visual
While whether or not the individual uses spectacles, and how 
often they use them, may have some bearing on the broad type
Table 30.B Communication status
Changes in specific complaints (s8)
Can't go shopping 
Can't hear the children 
TV
Using telephone 
Need to rely on others
Auditory
Visual
Speech Production 
Manual
Non-verbal Skills 
Previous Rehabilitation
Figure 30.3 Changes in ratings of disablements by a patient with a cochlear 
implant, before and up to 4 years post-implant.
Overall
  

518 
Auditory disorders and their management
of hearing aid to be selected, the use of smaller-in-the-ear and 
behind-the-ear aids, together with the disappearance of specta­
cle aids, has made this of less relevance than formerly.
Visual acuity, aided where relevant, is of more importance 
in deciding on the emphasis to be given to binaural hearing aid 
fittings, and is also something to check and correct in order to 
improve the individual’s speech-reading (lipreading) ability. 
Such ability may be assessed in a variety of ways, although in 
recent years the emphasis has been on testing the recognition 
of individual phonemes and sentences and on connected dis­
course tracking (CDT).25 These are illustrated in Table 30.9.
The approach to be adopted will depend on the aim of the 
assessment. Sentence lists (e.g. BKB lists,26 CID lists27) may be 
used to obtain a broad overall picture of the individual’s abilities 
relative to this. They can also be used to compare auditory, visual 
and audiovisual recognition of speech by the same person.
CDT, in which the number of words per minute of a text 
read by the tester or correctly repeated is scored, is a valuable 
measure of change in performance over time and following 
intervention. It can be chosen from a text compatible with the 
individual’s needs and lexicon. Video-recorded versions have 
been used, but most testing uses live presentations.
Tests of recognition of individual phonemes or phoneme 
groups — usually consonants in the form aka/asa/ada, or vowels 
in the form hid/had/hod or bid/bad/bod — are used for defining 
specific problems which the individual experiences and the 
effectiveness of the particular therapeutic approach in reducing 
them. The pattern of errors found can help focus the training 
on particular sources of errors made by the individual patient.
Speech and language production
Speech and language production effects may also be considered 
in the context of the individual within their social and envi­
ronmental situation and with regard to their more specific prob­
lems. Thus, in the first context, it is important to be aware of 
the individual’s dominant language and, where relevant, the 
dialect of that language. In addition, the rehabilitative training 
programme may be structured differently according to the indi­
vidual’s lexicon and lexical needs, according to, for example, 
whether the person concerned is a farmer or a computer 
programmer.
Hearing impairments of most types will influence the 
phonological elements of the individual’s speech production,
Table 30.9 Speechreading tests
Consonant confusions; e.g. /aba/, /ada/ 
Vowel confusions; e.g. /hid/r /had/
Word recognition; e.g. Boothroyd 
Sentence recognition; e.g, BKB sentences 
Connected discourse tracking
that is to say how they pronounce different components of 
speech, and this needs to be defined. Thus high-frequency 
hearing losses will mainly affect the fricatives for which the 
individual receives no acoustical feedback. The pragmatic ele­
ments of speech, influenced predominantly by intonation pat­
terns, on the other hand, will be influenced more by the 
low-frequency hearing level. Inability to hear this can, for 
example, affect the individual’s ability to differentiate between 
a question and a statement, or the stress on particular parts of 
a sentence.
While these are relevant to all types of hearing loss, con­
genital and acquired, semantic and syntactic aspects of speech 
production are abnormal generally only in those with congeni­
tal hearing impairments who have not learned the rules for 
these in the spoken language, which may be very different from 
those in the dominant sign language culture of the country con­
cerned. This must be understood before an in-depth rehabilita­
tion programme is planned.
Sign language
Sign language (or manual communication) may be classified 
into three types (Table 30.10). First, there are sign languages, 
usually associated with the local deaf culture, which have their 
own syntax and vocabulary and can be regarded as languages in 
their own right. While these have a high status in certain soci­
eties, such as parts of the USA, in other countries such as the 
UK, they tend to be eschewed by the education system. In such 
countries, there is more emphasis on sign systems which use the 
syntax of the dominant aural/oral culture, such as ‘Signs Sup­
porting English’ or the Paget Gorman System. In any case, it is 
important for the individual planning the rehabilitation service 
to be aware of these differences and evaluate the patient’s flu­
ency in production/reception of the relevant sign system.
Other systems are concerned with signs which support or 
complement speech reading. The two main systems in this con­
text are the American Cued Speech (Cornett)28 and the Dan­
ish Mouth-hand System.29 The latter is one which purely 
complements speech reading, just providing cues on voicing, 
nasality and place, whereas cued speech is a more complex sys­
tem, giving information on most aspects of speech. In addition, 
elements of finger spelling may be used to complement speech 
reading by signing elements of speech such as voicing/nasality 
which are not usually lipreadable. Thus, in the differentiation
Table 30.10 Types of manual communication
Support to speechreading; e.g. Cued speech, mouth-hand 
system, (finger spelling}
Systems based in the spoken language of the society; e.g. 
Paget Gorman, signed English
Autonomous sign languages; e.g. British sign language, 
American sign language
  

Audiological rehabilitation 
519
of ‘Pan’, ‘Ban’ and ‘Man’, the first letter of the word may be 
signed to clarify which is being said.
Non-verbal communication
Non-verbal communication, the use of gestures and expressions 
in communication, will be well established in most individuals 
who lose their hearing in later life, and is unlikely to be 
impaired. However, many individuals with a congenital hearing 
impairment may never have acquired these skills, which may 
need to be taught to enhance the person’s communication 
skills. The other group in whom this is important comprises 
immigrants from another society in which the code of non­
verbal communication is different. It will be helpful for them, if 
hearing impaired, to learn the non-verbal symbolism of their 
adopted society in order to improve their overall communica­
tion skills.
Previous rehabilitation
It is important, as well, to be aware of what rehabilitative help 
the individual has received previously, to build on the positive 
aspects and work to overcome the negative experiences. Thus, 
the context will be set by the individual’s attitude to what has 
been done for them previously, whether positive or negative, 
and this will need to be known before approaching the specific 
details. These details will cover instrumental help, hearing aids 
and environmental aids, and any speech-reading training or 
other skill-building techniques, including sign language train­
ing. For example, if an inappropriate hearing aid system has 
been fitted previously, the professional’s approach will be very 
different in overcoming the individual’s problems, convincing 
them that a more appropriate aid may be helpful, than if they 
have an appropriate aid which merely needs updating or to be 
complemented with other approaches.
Overall
Finally within this section, it is important to remember that the 
individual’s overall communication ability will not necessarily 
be the same as the total of the separate elements of their com­
munication which have been assessed— it may be less or it may 
be more. It is thus important to assess their communication 
ability in the favoured mode of communication, whether it is 
audiovisual, signing plus speech reading, etc.
Contextual factors
These are the components which will influence the profes­
sional’s overall approach to the rehabilitation of the individual 
concerned. Formerly, we have restricted this to the individual’s 
human environment, but it is important to consider their phys­
ical environment as well. Thus a person living in an isolated 
detached bungalow will have a very different set of needs and 
approaches from one living in a block of flats in a city.
The two contextual components of environmental and per­
sonal factors can be regarded as referring to the external and 
internal environments in which the individual operates. The 
latter will cover predominantly the psychological components
and experiences of the individual together with their motiva­
tion and approaches to coping.
The main grouping of these factors is shown in Tables 30.5 
and 30.6, derived from ICF.4
Environmental factors
The first section, ‘Products and technology’, will be defined by 
the nature of the society in which the person lives on both the 
macro- and microlevels and will generally change with time. 
The two main areas of relevance here are ‘Products for personal 
use in daily living’ and ‘Products for communication’. The for­
mer includes both general devices such as computers, and also 
the availability of assistive technology (environmental aids), 
which includes alarm and alerting technologies.
Likewise, ‘Products for communication’ covers both general 
communication devices and the modified versions of these, 
which may be used to promote access for hearing-impaired peo­
ple. It is interesting that expansion of the available technology 
in this field is paralleling the change in Western society from pro- 
duction-based employment to communicative employment.30
Within the context of ‘Natural environment and human 
changes to this’, the area of the noise in the environment in 
which the person lives and works is the most relevant, although 
illumination will have an important second-order effect.
‘Support and relationships’ covers the main sociological 
factors of the previous version of the model. Here we are con­
cerned about those significant others playing an important role 
in the individual’s life, from family through friends to work col­
leagues and carers, and their attitudes towards the individual 
and their problems.
This overlaps with the grouping ‘Attitudes, values and 
beliefs’ which influences these relationships. Such attitudes will 
be those held by the significant others of the hearing-impaired 
person, but also those of society as a whole. The broad societal 
attitudes, values and beliefs may well be reflected in the group 
around the individual, or alternatively some or all of the group 
may have very different attitudes to the prevailing pattern 
within the particular society. This can have a major knock-on 
effect on aspects of the stigma experienced by the patient.31
The needs of and provisions for the patient will be influ­
enced by the social, health, educational and employment ser­
vices available locally, which may vary in different parts of any 
one country, as well as between countries, in terms of the 
availability of free or subsidised provision of environmental aids 
or FM radio systems.
This again comes within the broader concept of the general 
systems and policies of the country concerned; these will deter­
mine access to different provisions, which may be paid for from 
central taxation, insurance; or from the pocket of the individ­
ual concerned.
Personal factors
These cover basically the attitudes, values and beliefs of the 
individual with a hearing impairment together with their per­
sonality and approaches to coping. These will all have a key
  

520 
Auditory disorders and their management
role in the approaches to be adopted in the rehabilitative 
process in terms of what will be acceptable, what needs to be 
encouraged, and what problems need to be overcome. They will 
cover the attitudes towards having rehabilitative help at all, 
and also towards different parts of the process — e.g. hearing 
aids, speechreading. It will further determine whether the indi­
vidual can see the positive as well as the negative dimensions of 
their disability and adopt a positive attitude towards the prob­
lems being faced.
Such an approach will also influence the effects of the hear­
ing impairment on the individual’s psychological state, which 
could lead to the individual becoming more isolated, suffering 
form increased depression, or becoming more anxious as a result 
of concerns about not hearing intruders in their homes.
Related functions and activities
Whereas the contextual factors influence the broad-based 
approach to the rehabilitative process, this is an area of the 
assessment of the individual which impacts on detailed aspects 
of the process, such as determining specific types of instrumen­
tation to be used, the balance between hearing aids and envi­
ronmental aids, and which ear(s) to fit hearing aids to. It also 
governs the approach to presenting these to the patient and 
instructing them.
The factors which influence this are shown in Table 30.11, 
which again broadly follow the earlier approach of‘Related con­
ditions’. The area of ‘Mental functions’ is new, and covers 
broadly the intellectual, attention and memory functions of the 
patient. Such an individual may range from an alert, vigorous 
person living in their own home to a cognitively compromised 
individual with Alzheimer’s disease or Down’s syndrome in an 
institution. Their acceptance of the intervention may be posi­
tive but the means by which it is presented will need to be tied to 
the individual’s ability to understand and remember any instruc­
tions. Generally, significant others will play a greater role.
Sensations associated with hearing and vestibular function 
cover three particularly relevant areas, ‘Ringing in the ears or 
tinnitus’, ‘Irritation in the ear’, and ‘Aural pressure’. In addi­
tion, the vestibular section could be assumed to include the 
Tullio phenomenon, in which loud sounds may induce vertigo. 
This would be a contraindication to having too high a maxi­
mum output of a hearing aid which would induce dizziness.
Table 30.11 Related functions and activities
Mental functions
Sensations associated with hearing and vestibular 
function
Touch function
Manipulative activities
Walking activities
The presence of tinnitus will usually be a positive indica­
tion to fitting a hearing aid to the affected ear or ears, which 
will generally result in some relief from tinnitus.32 It is impor­
tant, however, to use as open an earmould as possible, as occlu­
sion of the meatus can increase the level of the tinnitus. In 
addition, a small proportion of patients, even fitted with non­
occlusive earmoulds, may report an increase in the level of the 
tinnitus, so such a fitting should be avoided in these cases.
Irritation and related discharge from an ear can be aggra­
vated by a hearing aid fitting and, indeed, in such an infected 
ear, a fitting may precipitate a severe infection.
The sensation of blockage in the ear, while in many peo­
ple’s minds associated with otitis media with effusion, is a com­
mon occurrence in cochlear disease, particularly endolymphatic 
hydrops. In patients complaining of this symptom, an occlusive 
earmould should be avoided, and as open a mould as possible 
should be used. Even in severe hearing losses, the use of a vent 
with a sintered filter may relieve the occlusion without result­
ing in feedback.
‘Touch function’, particularly in the fingers, can influence 
the difficulty individuals have in fitting hearing aid systems to 
the ear and in controlling settings of the hearing aids. This will 
need to be taken into account in the detailed selection of the 
hearing aid systems, to ensure that fitting and controlling the 
hearing aid and the earmould are within the tactile capabilities 
of the individual concerned.
This links closely to the activity o f‘Fine hand use’ (manip­
ulating), limitations of which tend to run in parallel with loss 
of sensation, particularly in elderly people.
The final section here comprises ‘Walking activities’, which 
defines the mobility of the individual and, by extension, his or 
her likelihood of encountering different environments. For 
individuals whose mobility is so limited that they are bedbound 
or housebound, it may be more reasonable to concentrate on 
pertinent environmental aids rather than hearing aids, unless 
the individual has difficulties in face-to-face conversations.
Integration and decision-making
The stage has now arrived for all the information acquired in the 
evaluative stage of the rehabilitative process to be pulled 
together and relevant management decisions made with and for 
the patient. This will include any relevant information obtained 
from significant others. In particular, elements of the individual’s 
‘attitude’ towards their hearing loss and its management will 
need to be taken into account and, if inappropriate, some effort 
made to modify it. Their ‘understanding’ of what has happened 
to them and what can be done to help can also influence the 
process, as can their ‘expectations’ of the outcome of the process. 
These again can sometimes be manipulated to ensure that not 
too high an expectation exists which, if it is not achieved, can 
result in disillusionment and rejection of the entire process. Fur­
ther, if expectations are too low, the individual may not persist 
with the rehabilitation. The skilled clinician must aim at achiev­
ing a happy medium of realistic expectations.
  

Audiological rehabilitation 
521
We have argued that the next stage is one of categorization 
of the individual. The four-way classification8 proposed in 1981 
seems to have withstood the passage of time and is summarized 
in Table 30.12.
Basically those classified as type 1 are strongly motivated to 
have help for their problems and are prepared, within reason, to 
accept any appropriate intervention. They have no complicat­
ing factors obvious either to themselves or to the audiological 
professional and may expect to pass quickly through the system. 
They will probably be fitted with a hearing aid system, be 
reviewed to ensure that they are coping well, and receive fur­
ther advice and adjustments of their hearing aid, and advice on 
environmental aids and hearing tactics, and then generally be 
discharged on the understanding that they will return should 
there be any significant problems.
Type 2 patients will similarly be positively motivated but 
have some complicating factors. They may have severe tinnitus 
or otorrhoea, have manipulative problems, tremor etc. or may 
have either a very severe or very mild hearing impairment. All 
these will be broadly apparent to the patient. The professional 
may also see that they have an audiometric configuration that 
will be difficult to fit, e.g. a low-frequency sensorineural hearing 
loss or a ski-slope high-frequency loss. They may also have 
somewhat unrealistic expectations or concerns. These patients 
will need more time with audiological professionals and require 
extensive counselling and training, together with repeated 
adjustments of their hearing aids, before they are optimally 
helped. While for many of these patients this may take only 
three or four sessions, in others, particularly those with a pro­
found hearing loss, the rehabilitation may continue over 
months or years.
Type 3 patients are seeking help, but are very negative 
about certain approaches which would, in principle, be helpful 
for them. Most commonly, this aversion concerns hearing aids. 
Others may be convinced that a hearing aid system will solve 
all their problems with relationships and are reluctant to accept 
the concepts of hearing tactics, counselling or psychological 
help. In both cases, the professional needs to be devious, using 
an indirect approach. An immediate straightforward hearing 
aid fitting would be inappropriate in both cases, being rejected 
immediately in the first case, and being rejected when the 
patient sees that it does not achieve the perceived goal in the 
second case.
Table 30.12 Category types
1. Positively motivated and straightforward
2. Positively motivated with complicating factors
3. Want help, but problems with elements of the rehabilitation 
process
4. Deny problems
The use of group sessions with a mixture of individuals can 
be helpful in these cases, with the idea of hearing aids intro­
duced by hearing-impaired peers, in a way which the patient 
feels to be less threatening than when the idea comes from a 
professional. Groups will also include some elements of coun­
selling, which can lead on to individual counselling sessions to 
meet the specific needs of the particular individual.
Type 4 patients are negative about any helpseeking, either 
not being conscious of any disablement or refusing to admit to 
one. They will attend the clinic as a result of pressure from sig­
nificant others and may or may not openly articulate their prob­
lems. It is important that, in part of the evaluative session at 
least, they should be assessed separately from any significant 
others so that their true feelings can be determined.
Intervention in these cases is counterproductive. If the 
individual denies any disablement, their opinion must be 
respected and the patient discharged with the clear option of 
returning should they feel they have any problems at a later 
date. At the same time, wherever possible, the significant oth­
ers should be contacted by the hearing therapist (or other rele­
vant professional), who can discuss the importance of the 
patient’s views on this matter, no matter how loud their televi­
sion, and also give advice on communication tactics and envi­
ronmental aids, which the patient may accept as being nothing 
directly to do with their disablement.
Following this initial categorization of the individual from 
the professional’s standpoint, the professional should work with 
the individual and also with any relevant significant other to 
define some initial goals which are both important for the 
patient and realistically achievable. While in most type 1 and 2 
patients this will entail some instrumental provision/fitting, in 
a small number of individuals with mild hearing impairment or 
with King Kopetzky syndrome, the professional may proceed 
directly to the strategy stage of the remediation process, 
depending on the specific goals. These goals are important in 
assessing the ultimate efficacy of the rehabilitative process and 
are incorporated in the use of COSI20 as an outcome measure.
Instrumentation
This section covers all aspects of instrumental help which may 
be provided for a patient. The particular instrumentation falls 
into two groups — personal (hearing aids, tactile aids and 
cochlear implants), which are tailored to the specific individ­
ual, and environmental (assistive listening devices— ALDs) 
which may be appropriate for and used by a wide range of peo­
ple. All need to be accompanied by appropriate training.
Personal instruments
Most aspects of hearing aids, cochlear implants and their selec­
tion are dealt with elsewhere in this book (Chapters 27 and 34). 
Here it is important to consider just a few general principles, 
mainly non-acoustical. Examples of how the information 
obtained in the evaluation process can be applied in the selec­
tion of both the hearing aid and the earmould as well as the 
cochlear implant or tactile aid have been discussed elsewhere.
  

522 
Auditory disorders and their management
While the particular signal processing strategy to be used 
in the aid continues to develop and become more sophisti­
cated, the individual, generally elderly, person using it, does 
not. Thus there are two main factors which come into play 
here and which often work in opposite directions. The first is 
the stigma of having to use a hearing aid adding to the 
stigma already experienced of having a hearing impairment.31 
This will make the individual seek an aid which, ideally for 
them, is invisible — essentially an all-in-the-canal instrument. 
The problems which then arise are those of manipulating the 
controls, fitting the aid to the ear, and changing the battery. 
While the first can be overcome by an infrared remote con­
trol system, the second and third remain problematic without 
increasing dependence on a sympathetic significant other 
who may themselves have similar tactile and manipulative 
problems as the patient. In addition, such an ‘invisible’ aid is 
not going to have the effect on a communication partner of 
alerting them to the fact that the individual is hearing 
impaired and that they may need to adjust their speech 
appropriately.
Manufacturers of hearing aids have traditionally paid little 
attention to ergonomically friendly hearing aids, despite the 
need within the elderly community; such aids can be easily 
designed (e.g. Figure 30.4 which shows such a device produced 
as an undergraduate engineering project33), but need to be
accepted. Many patients need to be fitted first with an aid of a 
size acceptable to them and acoustically appropriate. By this 
means, they will realize the sound benefits which they are 
obtaining and further realize the impossibility of handling it, 
and then be more enthusiastic about trying a larger, more man­
ageable aid.
The culture is now beginning to change with the develop­
ment of coloured and bejewelled aids which, together with 
more attractive earmoulds, are beginning to make hearing aids 
more acceptable, particularly to younger people.
Such cosmetic considerations also apply to a lesser extent 
to cochlear implants, for which there was also much patient 
pressure for the development of head-worn systems and, ulti­
mately, ‘invisible’ systems. Again, however, they will never 
completely ‘normalize’ the individual’s hearing, and the need to 
signal to the communication partner to make more effort with 
their speech will still be there.
Environmental aids
Within the ICF, these come within the context of ‘Products 
and technology’ of ‘environmental factors’. There they come 
into two areas, ‘Products for personal use in daily living’ and 
‘Products for communication’. This approach is in line with 
earlier audiological approaches, in which the former have 
sometimes been defined as alerting and warning systems, and 
the latter as communication devices. In both cases, a variety 
of approaches have been adopted to improve access for 
the hearing-impaired individual to the particular system 
concerned.
Figure 30.4 Ergonomic hearing aid, showing simple on-off switch (a) and the 
volume control incorporating the battery compartment (b). (After Roberts. An
ergonomic investigation into the design of a behind the ear (BTE) hearing aid to 
overcome handling difficulties experienced by elderly users. Undergraduate 
dissertation, University of Glamorgan, 1992.33)
  

Audiological rehabilitation 
523
Products for use in daily living Table 30.13 shows the types of 
aids which are available in the ‘use in daily living’ category 
and the approaches to making them accessible to hearing- 
impaired people. It may be seen that approaches range from 
increasing sound amplitude and the signal/noise ratio through 
to various types of sensory substitution. The most recent 
developments include multipurpose portable devices providing 
a tactile, visual or auditory warning with different variants on 
the stimulus presented, according to whether the doorbell is 
being rung, the telephone bell is ringing or a smoke alarm has 
been triggered.
In many respects, the simplest are the most effective, with an 
extension to the doorbell being located in the room where the 
individual watches the television. Even if no extension is used 
for the doorbell, replacing a sophisticated high-frequency bell 
with a cheap low-frequency buzzer may be the best solution for 
an individual with a high-frequency hearing loss living in a small 
house or flat. As in all elements of the rehabilitative programme, 
the approach must be tailored to the needs of the particular 
hearing-impaired individual within their normal environment.
Problems with the telephone bell not being heard in cer­
tain parts of the house are being reduced by the increasing use 
of mobile telephones and cordless phones which the individual 
can keep with them. In addition, there may be different exten­
sion telephones located in different strategic points of a large 
house. Where these present problems, or the individual is pro­
foundly impaired and uses a text telephone, a visual alerting sys­
tem, either built into the telephone or hard-wired into the 
house lighting system, may be used, which flashes the lights 
with the rings of the phone. This can also be linked to a 
portable vibrator system.
Related assistive technology for communication 
While current 
changes 
in 
employment 
from 
manufacturing 
to 
communication-based skills present a difficulty for those with
hearing impairment,30 the concomitant developments in 
technology provide better access in many ways for those with 
such problems.
Modes of communication that can be helped by tech­
nological developments include telephone communication, 
television/videos, public address systems, radios, teaching 
environments, banks and ticket offices, cinema/theatre, 
churches and within public transport, including aeroplanes. In 
most cases, this entails improving the signal/noise ratio, but 
some provide visual substitution. The range of facilities is 
summarized in Table 30.14.
Most progress is currently being made in telephone systems, 
which are also being replaced in certain contexts by increasing 
use of the Internet, with which people with hearing problems 
can communicate equally easily with others with hearing prob­
lems and with the normally hearing world. Among telephone 
devices themselves, the simplest is an additional earpiece, 
which can be used by a hearing partner of the hearing-impaired 
individual, who can then lipspeak or sign what is being said to 
the patient. Other long-standing approaches entail the incor­
poration of an additional amplifier into the handset and also 
the use of a built-in loop system. With normal telephones, these 
roles can be fulfilled by clip-on devices which can be fixed to 
the handset by an elastic band, and either amplify the acousti­
cal signal or convert it to an electromagnetic field, which can 
be picked up by a hearing aid on the telecoil system.
More recent developments include the video-phone sys­
tem, which enables the individual to obtain speech-reading 
cues or signs from the individual with whom they are commu­
nicating. It is, however, likely to be a few years before this is 
widely available, although the World Wide Web is having a 
major impact in this respect. More currently readily available 
are text telephones (e.g. Minicom and several mobile telephone 
systems), although these usually need to pass through the inter­
mediary of a human interpreter when the hearing-impaired
Table 30.13 Types of aids for daily living.
Doorbell 
Phone bell 
Alarm clock 
Smoke alarm 
Burglar alarm
Auditory
Low-frequency 
+  
±  
+ 
+ 
+
Loud 
+  
+  
+  
+ 
+
Extensions 
+  
+
Mobile with patient 
+  
+  
(watch)
Visual
Built-in light 
+  
+ 
+
Link to lighting system 
+  
+
Separate strobe system 
+  
+  
+  
+
Tactile
Mobile vibrator 
+ 
+  
+  
+
Fan alarm 
+
  

524 
Auditory disorders and their management
Table 30.14 Types of aids for communication.
Telephone 
TV/Video 
PA systems
Lectures/classrooms, theatres 
Places of worship 
Cinemas/theatres
Banks/ticket offices
Buses/trains
Aircraft
Additional
speaker
+
+
+
+
+
+
Additional
amplifier
+
+
+
+
+
Acoustical 
Loop 
Infrared
+
+
+
+
+
+
FM
+
+
Text
supplement
+
+
person is communicating with a hearing individual. These are 
likely to be replaced by automatic speech recognition and pro­
duction systems as technology improves.
Mobile telephones, particularly digital systems, at the pre­
sent time present more of a problem for hearing aid users with 
pickup of electronic noise. Some of this problem may be reduced 
by distancing the speaker from the hearing aid and the use of a 
neckloop system in digital signal-processing hearing aids.
Many loudspeakers in television sets are of poor quality, 
and the clarity of the output sound signal can be improved by 
the use of an external speaker or headphone or by taking the 
output via a high-fidelity system. This can be combined with an 
additional amplifier fed directly from a television output, or by 
having a microphone attached close to the television speaker, 
leading to an amplifier and either a headset or a loop system. 
Such a loop system may range from a silhouette or neckloop sys­
tem through to one creating an electromagnetic field in the 
whole room. The quality of the field produced by such loop sys­
tems is sometimes poor, and better quality can be obtained by 
transmitting the sound to the individual using either an 
infrared or FM radio system. These have the additional diffi­
culty of needing to be linked to the patient with the receiver 
connected to the hearing aid either indirectly via a neck loop 
or directly via an audio input.
Many television films and other programmes now have a 
subtitling or captioning facility which is being increasingly used 
and which is made easier by new digital technology. The 
replacement of video cassettes by DVDs, which generally have 
the option of subtitling one or more languages, can be helpful 
in this context. In addition, various television systems, particu­
larly news and sport, may have information fully available in 
written form, although this role has gradually been taken over 
by the World Wide Web/Internet.
Finally some programmes of particular relevance, e.g. news 
bulletins, may have the announcer ‘shadowed’ by a signer to
make the information more accessible to the deaf community. 
This is more widely available in some countries than in others.
The acoustical systems discussed above are also available 
for the use of people listening to the radio or recorded music.
Public address systems, particularly in stations and airports, 
present a considerable problem for most hearing-impaired peo­
ple. The background noise is high, as is the reverberation. 
Sometimes information is presented by a loop system in certain 
demarcated areas. More commonly, there is a visual presenta­
tion of the information via television monitors or specifically 
designed information boards.
With all instrumental approaches, ranging from wearable 
hearing aids through cochlear implants to text telephones, 
appropriate instruction and training will be necessary to ensure 
that the patient is deriving optimal benefit from the device. In 
particular, this entails monitoring their progress after it has 
been fitted or provided.
Strategy
This section is concerned with the development of behavioural 
strategies to help the individual cope with their hearing prob­
lems in a real-life environment. Much of the need for such an 
approach is based on the premise that no hearing aid or implant 
system can restore their hearing to its pristine state. However, 
such strategies are also relevant for normally hearing people in 
difficult listening circumstances and also for those individuals 
with King Kopetzky syndrome (obscure auditory dysfunction 
(OAD): auditory disability with normal hearing (ADN)) who 
have normal octave-band audiometric thresholds but difficulty 
in hearing in the presence of any background noise. Hearing 
aids will not help such individuals.
The approach of teaching ‘Hearing tactics’ was developed 
particularly in Denmark in the 1970s34,35 and entails manipulat­
ing one’s environment, both animate and inanimate, to facili­
tate hearing— usually conversation. However, before such
  

Audiological rehabilitation 
525
appropriate techniques may be taught or developed, it is impor­
tant to define the specific auditory goals which the individual is 
trying to achieve and the broad gamut of approaches which 
would be acceptable to the particular individual.
The process of developing an appropriate strategy passes 
through various stages as outlined in Table 30.15.
Goal setting
This must be an interactive approach involving the patient, the 
professional and, usually, one or more significant others. How­
ever, such significant others must not be allowed to dominate 
the preferences of the hearing-impaired individuals.
The starting point returns to a consideration of the partic­
ular activity limitations and participation restrictions experi­
enced by the patient and which they find as having the most 
important impact on their life. The Problem Questionnaire15 
may be used as a starting point, but the problems listed there are 
often very general — such as ‘hearing conversation’, which may 
be refined by discussing the circumstances, the types of conver­
sation, and the particular individuals with which the person 
may have most difficulty. The patient also needs to be prompted 
for participation restrictions that they encounter, which tend to 
be under-represented in the Problem Questionnaire. Significant 
others may be helpful in highlighting areas in this respect, but 
only after probing first with the patient themselves.
Philosophy/personality
This concerns the approach of the individual to different cir­
cumstances as well as their overall approach to life. While one 
individual may be very shy or very outgoing in all circum­
stances, others may have different views according to their self- 
confidence or experience in dealing with particular groups of 
people.
Thus someone who is an expert in archaeology may have a 
very different approach at a meeting dealing with archaeologi­
cal topics, being very dominant and controlling the meeting, 
than if he attends a political meeting to raise a particular local 
issue, where he may be very reserved. In developing appropriate 
tactics for the individual, the professional needs to take into 
account what he sees as the individual’s own very particular
needs and devise, in conjunction with him, the set of tactics for 
such particular circumstances.
Hearing tactics
This term was coined by Von der Lieth34 in Denmark to define 
the behavioural approaches that could be used by an individual 
to optimize their communication. In this early work, it gener­
ally entailed adopting a rather assertive approach, which is 
reflected in the publication Hearing Tactics.35 Subsequently, 
Field and Haggard36 published a broader classification of hear­
ing tactics (Table 30.16), opening the way for a consideration 
of more passive behaviours as well as assertive behaviours. They 
subdivided tactics into ‘Manipulating social interaction’, 
‘Manipulating the physical environment’ and ‘Observations’ 
but did not include ‘withdrawal’ from a communicative situa­
tion among their valid tactics. This has even been regarded by 
some as a maladaptive behavioural response.37
Elsewhere we have argued that withdrawal is an appropri­
ate response in certain circumstances,38 in terms of saving face 
and maintaining a self-image. Further, we have found that 
social withdrawal is one of the commonest tactics adopted by 
hearing-impaired people, being reported as frequently as asking 
others to repeat what they said and more frequently than pas­
sive positioning of themselves, interrupting and pretending to 
have heard.39 Their use of these tactics is shown in Figure 30.5.
Pichora-Fuller et al40 have highlighted the differences 
between ‘transactional’ aspects of communication aimed at 
achieving a specific, if limited, aim, and ‘interactional’ aspects 
aimed at maintaining or building relationships. They have 
found that someone with high social skills may maintain the
Table 30.16 Hearing tactics (after Field ft Haggard36)
Manipulating social intervention; e.g. asking talker to face 
you, asking speaker to specify topic
Manipulating physical environment; e.g. reducing background 
noise, soft furnishings to reduce reverberation
Observation; e.g. watching face of speaker, noting non-verbal 
communication
Table 30.15 Strategy
Goal definition 
Personality 
Significant others 
Hearing tactics
- Manipulating social interaction
- Manipulating physical environment
- Observation
Figure 30.5 Percentage reported use of different hearing tactics-always or 
often. (After Stephens et al. BrJ Audiol 1999; 33: 17-27.39)
  

526 
Auditory disorders and their management
latter without their communicative ability being put into ques­
tion, as it might if they were noticed to make major mistakes in 
the former. This is an area of communication tactics which 
merits and indeed needs further study.
Ancillary help (services)
This is the stage at which it is important to consider other sup­
port services which will complement the rehabilitative support 
given to the hearing-impaired individual. This covers areas 
related to that provided in the normal rehabilitative services 
but which cannot be covered to the same degree or in the same 
respects.
Within ICF, these come within the realms of ‘Environmen­
tal factors— services’, which can have an impact on the dis­
ablements encountered by the hearing-impaired individual, in 
particular participation restriction. Referrals to such agencies 
complement the rehabilitative service, but should be consid­
ered in parallel with what is being done in related aspects of 
rehabilitation. The components of this section are summarized 
in Table 30.17, following the ICF classification of services.
Social services
These have a different role in different countries, and the needs 
for their intervention will depend on social problems high­
lighted by the evaluation process of the patient. These may 
range through housing and support for self-care through to 
aspects of possible abuse. Within the UK, in addition, under the 
terms of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970 
the social services have a responsibility for the provision of 
environmental aids (ALDs) although the degree and conditions 
in which such a provision is made vary throughout the UK.
Health services
These will play a different role according to the structure of the 
rehabilitative service in the particular centre concerned. In 
many centres in Europe, the rehabilitative service is based on 
medical departments, and related aural conditions such as otor- 
rhoea, wax and vertigo can be dealt with as part of the service. 
In other countries, particularly the USA and Canada, they may 
be based on non-medical departments, so such aural conditions 
will call for referral to other appropriate services. In all cases, 
the management of the patient may highlight other important
Table 30.17 Ancillary help (services)
■ 
Social services
■ 
Health services
-  Other medical, psychological, etc. 
Education and training services 
Labour and employment services 
Voluntary organizations
untreated health conditions, e.g. tremors affecting the rehabili­
tative management of the patient which may call for appropri­
ate referral either to the patient’s primary physician or to a 
relevant specialist.
The other aspect of health service referral pertinent to the 
rehabilitative process is for psychological or psychiatric help. 
This may be necessary in the individual severely emotionally 
affected by their hearing impairment, or in cases where inade­
quately treated underlying psychological/psychiatric conditions 
interfere with the individual’s ability to participate adequately 
in the rehabilitative process.
Education and training services
While close liaison with such services is a traditional part of 
paediatric audiology, often including teachers within the reha­
bilitative team, it is frequently not implemented as well as it 
could be. Good relationships between the rehabilitative and 
educational services are essential from the age of diagnosis, with 
both services providing valuable inputs for the hearing- 
impaired child. The rehabilitative service can provide advice 
on the latest aspects of amplification and environmental aids 
and provide speech therapy support, but must take care to avoid 
clashes with the domains covered by the teachers.
Such liaison with education services does not finish when 
the individual reaches 16 or 18 years of age. Further and higher 
education now continues through colleges, universities and 
other training establishments for much of the individual’s life, 
and links to ensure appropriate support, environmental help, 
note-takers, interpreters and sophisticated communication sys­
tems should continue for most of the individual’s life. Indeed, 
many people well into their 80s attend evening and other part- 
time classes or television-based university studies, and liaison 
with appropriate support individuals in these contexts will be 
important.
Labour and employment services
The role of disability employment advisors in this respect has 
been highlighted in many Western countries by the passing of 
disability discrimination legislation. The support of such indi­
viduals in facilitating the retraining or support of hearing- 
impaired individuals in their chosen domain of work can be 
vital. They also have an important role in liaison with appro­
priate employers, alerting them to the needs of employees with 
hearing impairments, and what can be done to facilitate their 
participation in the workplace in the context of the acoustical 
environment and environmental aids.
Voluntary organizations
Many individuals with hearing impairment feel isolated within 
society and unable to find non-professionals with whom they 
can discuss their problems. The various voluntary organizations 
for deaf children, deaf adults, hard-of-hearing adults and those 
with profound acquired hearing impairment have an important 
role in meeting these needs. This is particularly important for 
parents of deaf children, but many adults with acquired hearing
  

Audiological rehabilitation 
527
impairment also find that support from hard-of-hearing peers 
can be helpful, particularly in the early stages of adjustment to 
their hearing impairment. Obviously, such organizations have 
other campaigning and support roles, but the source of contact 
is the main element of immediate relevance to the newly 
treated hearing-impaired individual. Information about volun­
tary organizations should be made available within the rehabil­
itative departments but not forced on the individuals 
concerned.
Continuing remediation
This differs from other aspects of the remediation process, in 
that it may continue over a period of weeks, months or even 
years, while the bulk of the other components are achieved in 
two or three sessions immediately following the evaluation and 
decision-making stages. While in some rehabilitative pro­
grammes this is a fixed-duration process which all patients pass 
through, we would argue that it is a process which should be tai­
lored to the needs of the specific individual concerned. Thus, 
while for some category 1 patients it may comprise merely a 
short part of one session, in other cases, such as some patients 
with profound acquired hearing loss or severe auditory distor­
tions stemming from brainstem injuries, it may extend over a 
considerable period of time.
However, in all cases it is important to consider each of the 
stages shown in Table 30.18 to determine what, if anything, 
needs to be done to alleviate the individual’s disablements.
Information provision
This may cover a wide range of matters, from the structure of 
the ear and what has happened to it in the individual’s case, 
through to the basic signal processing used in the latest digi­
tal hearing aid. It is a very patient-centred process and must 
be organized to meet the needs of the particular person. Some 
may be obsessed with the cause, mechanism and prognosis of 
their otosclerosis, whereas others will only be concerned 
about the long-term prognosis for their hearing. Some 
patients will want to know all about the processing strategies 
and capabilities of a cochlear implant, whereas others will 
prefer to treat it as a black box. The level of sophistication of 
the information provision will depend on the background and 
understanding of the individual concerned, but, in all cases,
Table 30.18 Continuing remediation
■ 
Information provision 
Skill-building 
Instrument modification 
Counselling
Changes to the physical and cultural environment
the information must be presented in an easily comprehensi­
ble manner. For many patients, such an understanding of 
what is affecting their hearing and what any of the treatment 
options can be expected to achieve, and how, is a precondi­
tion for their acceptance of their condition and any further 
intervention.
Skill-building
This area is one in which many aspects of the rehabilitative 
process are elaborated. It can range from training the elderly 
tremulous patient to fit an earmould and hearing aid into their 
ear, to learning how to supplement their visual input from a tac­
tile stimulator or frequency transposition hearing aid.
All these aspects are important in order to help the indi­
vidual to minimize the difficulties which they have as a result 
of their hearing impairment and improve their participation in 
their chosen lifestyle. They thus range from using their instru­
mentation optimally through practising and refining appropri­
ate tactics to improving their audiovisual communication 
skills.
From an instrumental standpoint, the biggest initial prob­
lem experienced by most patients, particularly the elderly, is fit­
ting their hearing aid system to their ears. Without this, they 
will derive inadequate benefit from their aid and may reject the 
whole process. The skill-building here is to help the patient 
achieve this fitting successfully and effortlessly. This may entail 
cutting down the earmould as well as working with the patient 
to develop a technique to fit their aid to the most difficult- 
shaped ears.
In order to obtain optimal benefit from their hearing aid, 
tactile aid or cochlear implant, the patient must learn to obtain 
optimal benefit from it in the difficult listening situations which 
they normally encounter. This will entail auditory training, i.e. 
learning to utilize and understand distorted or altered inputs 
such as from a frequency transposition or tactile aid, and to 
integrate this with their visual input. This can be achieved by 
training with different but relevant practice materials, and 
computerized video-based techniques can be helpful in this 
respect.41
Such auditory and audiovisual training techniques can also 
be important in patients with essentially normal hearing sensi­
tivity but distorted recognition of speech, such as those with 
central auditory dysfunction (see Chapter 29). Related to this is 
training in speechreading (lipreading), although there is little 
evidence to suggest that general lipreading classes can help the 
overall lipreading performance of an individual, except by 
improving their self-confidence.
In many, if not all, cases this approach is not sufficient to 
meet all the needs of the patient, and the role of hearing tactics 
must be considered here. While the short-term aspects of the 
remedial process may cover a presentation and discussion of 
the different tactics which can be used, some individuals lack 
the confidence or understanding to implement them and require 
training to cope with specific difficult situations, such as meet­
ings around a table, or group discussions. The training in these
  

528 
Auditory disorders and their management
circumstances is often optimal with a group of patients being 
supported by one or more therapists.
Instrument modification
This covers two broad areas, that of the support for the long- 
term adaptation to a particular hearing aid system, and the 
selection of appropriate environmental aids after hearing aid 
fitting.
Barfod,42 in a theoretical discussion, highlighted the fact 
that an aid which acoustically may be appropriate for an indi­
vidual’s hearing impairment may be unacceptable, as the indi­
vidual has become used to a distorted input (e.g. reduced high 
frequencies). This may lead to a biasing in the individual’s 
recognition mechanism towards the type of acoustical input to 
which they are accustomed. Adding more high frequencies will 
result in what, to the patient, is a distorted input, and they will 
reject the aid. Barfod suggested that patients need to be weaned 
onto the ideal hearing aid characteristics by increasing the 
high-frequency amplification gradually over time in steps 
acceptable to the individual until they are able to both appre­
ciate the sound of the aid and benefit from the appropriate fre­
quency configuration.
Gatehouse43 and others have extensively studied this adap­
tation process and have shown that it may occur over a period 
of 3-6 months, particularly when sophisticated signal-process- 
ing strategies are used. The audiologist must ensure that the fit­
ting is acceptable to the patient so that they continue to use the 
hearing aid and are moving in a direction which should result 
in optimal performance.
Some environmental aids, such as systems for hearing the 
doorbell or the alarm clock, where the patient will be receiving 
the sound in the presence of background noise, is unaffected by 
the hearing aid, or is not using their aid(s), can be selected at 
an early stage of the rehabilitative process. In other cases, such 
as watching the television in the company of a normally hear­
ing partner, the hearing aid may reduce or minimize all their 
problems. In these cases it is important to see which problems 
remain after the hearing aid fitting and which environmental 
aids will then be appropriate to resolve these. The same may 
also be true of a variety of other communication and alerting 
systems, where the hearing aid system may alleviate many of the 
difficulties.
In addition to the adaptation to the hearing aids, the partic­
ular hearing aid system selected may not meet the specific needs 
of the patient in their chosen environments and may need to be 
modified or changed according to the expressed problems. It 
must be remembered that the best hearing aid prescription for­
mulae provide only a guide to the optimal hearing aid settings for 
a given hearing loss and cannot allow for the particular environ­
ments in which the individual may need to use their aid. Thus, 
fine-tuning may be necessary over a period of time. However, the 
professional must be alert for the individual who is always com­
plaining and requesting further adjustments to the hearing aid 
fitting, when really he is trying to tell the professional that he is 
rejecting the hearing aid system altogether.
Counselling
This is a key part of any continuing remediation, supporting the 
patient in their continuing needs and difficulties. There are 
many counselling techniques44 aimed mainly at improving the 
patient’s adjustment to their disablements, and the professional 
must adopt an approach in harmony with their philosophy and 
orientation.
The counselling may, in some individuals, entail practical 
discussions of how to cope with a specific situation which has 
arisen. In others, it may entail attempting to change their 
approach to the whole rehabilitative process and could involve 
endeavouring to convert patients in the type 3 category into 
those more amenable to intervention.
In the context of particular sets of problems, it is also 
important to involve significant others in the counselling 
process, if the patient is amenable to such an approach. The 
behavioural modifications may well involve these significant 
others and they can support the patient in various ways.
Changes to the physical and cultural environment
These may be specific to the environment of the patient or they 
may have an influence in the society as a whole, or at least in 
the local situation.
What these will entail is an attempt to change the acousti­
cal, visual and stress-related problems confronting the patient 
through involvement of the patient, his family, employers, edu­
cators and others in a position to influence the environment. 
All this, obviously, must be done only with the full agreement 
of the patient.
In a broader context, the professional has a responsibility to 
attempt to change the attitudes and approaches of the society 
in which the patient lives, in order to facilitate the individual’s 
full participation within this environment. This may entail 
liaising with media professionals to, for example, cut down on 
the use of any background noise or music during spoken broad­
casts. This can have knock-on effects to benefit other hearing- 
impaired individuals, and not just the particular target person. 
The need for such actions may be highlighted by the com­
plaints of one particular individual, who can then act as a trig­
ger for something which may be of broad general benefit.
The professionals can also, by use of the media, attempt to 
reduce the stigmatizing attitudes of society towards hearing 
impairment in general and hearing aids in particular. This can 
be achieved only slowly, but steps can be made by broad public 
health education approaches and by seeking role models capa­
ble of influencing the views of the public at large.
Outcome measures
In the context of any rehabilitative programme, it is important 
to use appropriate outcome measures which can enable those 
working in the programme to assess the effectiveness of what 
they are doing for the particular individual. They have other 
applications, as are discussed below.
  

Audiological rehabilitation 
529
Performance*based measures
These are usually orientated towards a particular technology 
such as hearing aids or cochlear implants and may entail four 
different approaches (e.g. Table 30.19). The first three are 
broadly self-explanatory and are covered elsewhere in this 
book, in the context of hearing aids (Chapter 31).
The quality and quantity of spontaneous communication 
may apply to the linguistic and interactive elements of the 
speech of children receiving implants, hearing aids or sign lan­
guage programmes. It may also apply to an assessment of indi­
viduals in retirement homes, with regard to their various types 
of communicative interactions with staff and other residents 
before and after rehabilitative interventions.
Satisfaction measures
Various ad hoc approaches have been used in this context 
for satisfaction with the approach, process or particular 
interventions received. These may be tailored towards the 
particular approach under study. Cox and Alexander45 pub­
lished their well-researched ‘Satisfaction with Amplification 
in Daily Life Scale’ (SADL), which has subscales of ‘Positive 
effects’, ‘Service and cost’, ‘Negative features’ and ‘Personal 
image’. This is capable of modification for other circum­
stances.
Improvement in activity and participation 
(reduction in disability and handicap)
A great variety of such scales have been described, dating back 
to the Hearing Handicap Scale of High, Fairbanks and Glorig,22 
which was a measure of speech communication activity limita­
tion. Many of these have been discussed by Noble46 and by 
Bentler and Kramer.23 They all largely come under the category 
of ‘standardized scales’— see Table 30.7.
In addition, there are patient-generated scales, of which 
the most promising would appear to be the ‘Cliented Orien­
tated Scale of Improvement’ (COSI).20 In this the patient is 
required to specify the major problem areas during the assess­
ment process. At the end of the rehabilitation, they then rate 
the improvement and residual problems in each of these areas.
The ‘Glasgow Hearing Aid Benefit Profile’ (GHABP)21 can 
be regarded as a hybrid of these two, with fixed standardized 
components as in the first group, and patient-generated com-
Table 30.19 Performance-based measures
1. 
Speech in noise recognition
2. 
Threshold improvement
3. 
Quantity and quality of spontaneous communication
4. 
Hearing aid use, etc.
plaints as in the second. The main problem here is obtaining 
the relevant balance between the two sections, which should, 
arguably, be scored separately.
Simple ratings have been used elsewhere,18 in which the 
patients lists their problems as in COSI and in the second part 
of the GHABP and then rate the magnitude of these problems 
on a visual analogue-type scale, rating them again at the end of 
the rehabilitative process.
Improvement in quality of life
These are usually performed using standardized scales such as 
the SF3647 or Health Utilities Index,48 all of which have some 
limitations from an audiological standpoint. Alternatively, the 
patient may be asked to rate their quality of life or the effects of 
their hearing on their quality of life, before and after interven­
tion, as used in the Euroquol thermometer.49
A global assessment of any programme should use a combi­
nation of these approaches, depending on what is being 
assessed, and for what purpose. The groupings of uses of these, 
particularly the questionnaire-based measures, have been dis­
cussed by Cox et al.50 They list four goals for these measures, as 
follows.
Assessment of the rehabilitative outcomes for an 
individual hearing-impaired person
This is a key function in all patient-centred rehabilitative 
processes.
A key tool to use in such an assessment is COSI,26 which 
measures improvement and residual problems in a range of 
dimensions specified by the patient at their initial assessment. 
It is important also at the initial assessment to probe for partic­
ipation restrictions (handicaps), which tend to be listed less 
than activity limitations (disabilities). It is also important in 
the formulation of this to seek views of significant others, if pre­
sent, as to what major problems may be. A useful starting point 
for both the individual and the significant others is the Problem 
Questionnaire,15 which can be sent to the patient with their 
clinic appointment. This can also be used with significant oth­
ers, who can complete their version while the patient is being 
tested.51
This measure may be supplemented by one or more ques­
tions as to the patient’s satisfaction with the rehabilitative 
process, ranging from a simple question such as ‘Overall, how 
satisfied are you with the rehabilitation service?’ through to 
more extensive measures, primarily hearing aid orientated, such 
as SADL.45
The assessment of the effectiveness of the service(es) 
provided by a particular clinical unit or agency
This enables purchasers to decide between a variety of compet­
ing service providers.
In this context, as well, COSI is a useful tool, which has 
been found in Australia to provide a valuable outcome measure,
  

530 
Auditory disorders and their management
and which relates well to a pool of other measures.20 Again, it 
should be supplemented with a satisfaction measure, and in this 
context, the two following questions would appear to be useful:
1. ‘How satisfied were you with the approach of the profes-
sionals you saw about hearing problems?’
2* ‘How satisfied are you with the extent to which your hear­
ing problems have been reduced?’
Finally, the individuals should be asked to list the benefits and 
shortcomings of the service which they had received, as used by 
Stephens and Meredith52 in a hearing aid study, and subse­
quently in other studies.53
The assessment of the effectiveness of new instrumental 
technologies
These may include different hearing aid systems, cochlear 
implants or environmental aids.
In this context, performance-based measures will come into 
their own in order to best define the differences between two 
broadly similar approaches. They also have the advantage that 
they are more resistant to biasing from patient and experi­
menter preferences (the Hawthorn effect). There have been 
very few double-blind comparisons of different hearing aid sys­
tems. The most widely used tests in this context are speech- 
in-noise 
tests 
(e.g. 
FAAF)54 
and 
triplet 
tests 
(e.g. 
letter-digit-letter), which enable the tester to determine the 
speech threshold in a certain level of background noise. Tests 
such as the BKB test26 may also be used to determine the opti­
mal speech recognition score in such noise.
Other surrogate performance scores may include assess­
ments of device use, either self-report, or using some measuring 
system. In addition, a variety of rating scales of sound quality 
have been used.
In terms of specific hearing aid benefits, SHAPIE (Short­
ened Hearing Aid Performance Inventory for the Elderly)55,56 
has been rigorously evaluated, and can be recommended. This 
asks questions as to the benefit which the individual derives 
from the hearing aid in a range of situations. However, other 
tools may be more relevant under other circumstances, depend­
ing on the aims of the particular new technology.
The evaluation of the effect of hearing rehabilitation 
services on the quality of life
This last is important from a public health standpoint, when 
considering resources which should be provided to audiological 
services against, for example, services treating varicose veins.
Health-related quality of life measures are the key tools in 
this respect. All have many limitations in the weighting which 
they attach to hearing and communication problems in relation 
to more physical or life-threatening conditions. The two most 
relevant, and widely used in this context are the SF3647 and the 
Health Utilities Index.48 The latter is probably the most useful 
in this field, and has achieved acceptance in the domain of 
cochlear implants.57
References
1. Stephens D. Audiological rehabilitation. In: Stephens D. (ed.) 
Scott Brown's Otolaryngology, 5th edn. London: Butterworth, 1987: 
446-80.
2. Tye-Murray N. Foundations of Aural Rehabilitation. San Diego: 
Singular.
3. Alpiner JG, McCarthy PA (eds). Rehabilitative Audiology: Children 
and Adults, 2nd edn. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1993.
4. World Health Organization. ICF: International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health. Geneva: WHO, 2001.
5. Noble W. Hearing, hearing impairment and the audible world: a 
theoretical essay. Audiology 1983; 22: 325-38.
6. Noble W, Hetu R. An ecological approach to disability and hand­
icap in relation to impaired hearing. A udiology 1994; 33: 117-26.
7. Borg E. Audiology in an ecological perspective — development of a 
conceptual framework. Scand Audiol 1998; 27(suppl 49): 132-9.
8. Goldstein DP, Stephens SDG. Audiological rehabilitation: man­
agement model: I. Audiology 1981; 20: 432-52.
9. World Health Organization. The International Classification of 
Impairments, Disabilities, and Handicaps— a Manual Relating to the 
Consequences of a Disease. Geneva: WHO, 1980.
10. Stephens D, Kerr P. Auditory disablements: an update. Audiology 
2000; 39: 322-32.
11. World Health Organization. 
International 
Classification 
of 
Impairments, Activities and Participation—ICIDH-2. (Beta-1 draft). 
Geneva: WHO, 1997.
12. Stephens SDG, Meredith R, Callaghan DE, Hogan S, Rayment A. 
Early intervention and rehabilitation: factors influencing out­
come. A eta Ololaryngol Suppl 1991; 476: 221-5.
13. Stephens SDG. Hearing rehabilitation in a psychosocial frame­
work. Scand Audiol 1996; 25 (suppl 43): 57-66.
14. Stephens D. Audiological rehabilitation. In: Stephens D, ed. Scott 
Brown's 
Otolaryngology, 
6th 
edn. 
Oxford: 
Butterworth 
Heinemann, 1997: 2/13/1-36.
15. Barcham LJ, Stephens SDG. The use of an open ended problem 
questionnaire in auditory rehabilitation. Br J Audiol 1980; 14: 
49-54.
16. Stephens SDG. People’s complaints of hearing difficulties. In: 
Kyle JG, ed. Adjustment to Acquired Hearing Loss, Bristol: Centre 
for Deaf Studies, 1987: 37-47.
17. Stephens D, Gianopoulos I, Kerr P. Determination and classifi­
cation of the problems experienced by hearing-impaired elderly 
people. A udiol 2001; 40: 294-300.
18. Stephens D, Jaworski A, Kerr P, Zhao F. Use of patient-specific 
estimates in patient evaluation and rehabilitation. Scand Audiol 
1998; 27(suppl 49): 61-8.
19. Dillon H, Birtles G, Lovegrove R. Measuring the outcomes of a 
national rehabilitation program: normative data for the Client 
Oriented Scale of Improvement (COSI) and the Hearing Aid 
User’s Questionnaire (HAUQ).J Am Acad Audiol 1999; 10:67-79.
20. Dillon H, James A, Ginis JA. The Client Oriented Scale of 
Improvement (COSI) and its relationship to several other mea­
sures of benefit and satisfaction provided by hearing aids. J Am 
Acad Audiol 1997; 8: 27-43.
  

Audiological rehabilitation 
531
21. Gatehouse S. Glasgow hearing aid benefit profile: derivation and 
validity of a client-centred outcome measure for hearing aid ser- 
vices. J Am A cad Audiol 1999; 10: 80-93.
22. High WS, Fairbanks G, Glorig A. Scale for the self assessment of 
hearing handicap. J Speech Hear Disord 1964; 19: 215-30.
23. Bentler RA, Kramer SE. Guidelines for choosing a self-report out­
come measure. Ear Hear 2000; 21: 37S-49S.
24. Stephens SDG. Auditory rehabilitation. Br Med Bull 1987; 43: 
999-1026.
25. De Filippo CL, Scott BL. A method for training and evaluating 
the reception of ongoing speech. J Acoust Soc Am 1978; 63: 
1186-92.
26. Bench J, Bamford J. (eds). Speech-Hearing Tests and the Spoken 
Language of Hearing-Impaired Children. London: Academic Press, 
1979.
27. Hirsh IJ, Davis H, Silverman SR, Reynolds EG, Eldert E, Benson 
RW. Development of materials for speech audiometry. J Sp Hear 
Dis 1952; 17: 321-37.
28. Cornett RD, Beadles R, Wilson B. Automatic cued speech. In: 
Pickett JM, ed. Papers from the Research Conference on Speech- 
Processing Aids for the Deaf Washington, DC: Gallaudet College, 
1982: 224-39.
29. Forchammer G. Om nodvendigheden af sikre meddelelsesmidler i 
Dovestumm eundervisningen. K0benhaun: Frimodt, 1903.
30. Ruben RJ. Redefining the survival of the fittest: communication 
disorders in the 21st century. Laryngoscope 2000; 110: 241-5.
31. Hetu R. The stigma attached to hearing impairment. Scand Audiol 
1994; 25(suppl 43): 12-24.
32. Vernon JA, Meikle MB. In: Tyler RS, ed. Tinnitus Masking in 
Tinnitus Handbook, Vol. 14. 2000; 14: 313-55.
33. Roberts P. An ergonomic investigation into the design of a behind the 
ear (BTE) hearing aid to overcome handling difficulties experienced by 
elderly users. Undergraduate dissertation, University of Glamor­
gan, 1992.
34. Von der Lieth L. Hearing Tactics I & II. Scand Audiol 1972; 1: 
155-60.
35. Vognsen S (ed.). Hearing Tactics. Copenhagen: Oticon, 1976.
36. Field DL, Haggard MP. Knowledge of hearing tactics 1: assessment 
by 
questionnaire and inventory. BrJ Audiol 1989; 23: 349-54.
37. Demorest ME, Erdman SA. Development of the communication 
profile for the hearing impaired. J Speech Hear Disord 1987; 52: 
129-43.
38. Jaworski A, Stephens D. Self-reports on silence as a face-saving 
strategy by people with hearing impairment. Int J Appl Linguistics 
1998; 8(1): 61-80.
39. Stephens SDG, Jaworski A, Lewis P, Aslan S. An analysis of the 
communication tactics used by hearing-impaired adults. Br J 
Audiol 1999; 33: 17-27.
40. Pichora-Fuller MK, Johnson CJ, Roodenburg KEJ. The discrep­
ancy between hearing impairment and handicap in the elderly: 
balancing transaction and interaction in conversation. J Appl 
Commun Res 1998; 26: 99-119.
41. Tye-Murray N, Tyler RS, Bong B, Nares T. Computerised laser 
videodisc programs for training speechreading and assertive com­
munication behaviours. J Acad Rehabil Audiol 1988; 21: 143-52.
42. Barfod J. Speech perception processes and fitting of hearing aids. 
Audiology 1979; 18: 430-41.
43. Gatehouse S. Report of the First Eriksholm Consensus Conference 
on Auditory Deprivation and Acclimatization. Ear Hear 1996; 17.
44. Erdman SA. Counselling hearing-impaired adults. In: Alpiner JG, 
McCarthy PA, eds. Rehabilitative Audiology: Children and Adults, 
2nd edn. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1993: 374-413.
45. Cox RM, Alexander GC. Measuring Satisfaction with Amplifica­
tion in Daily Life: the SADL Scale. Ear Hear 1999; 20: 306-20.
46. Noble W. Self Assessment of Hearing and Related Functions. London: 
Whurr, 1998.
47. Brazier JT, Usherwood, Harper R, Thomas K. Deriving a prefer­
ence-based single index from the UK SF-36 Health Survey. J Clin 
Epidemiol 1998; 51: 1115-28.
48. Torrance GW. Measurement of health state utilities for economic 
appraisal—a review. J Health Economics 1986; 5: 1-30.
49. Euroquol Group. A new faculty for the measurement of health 
related quality of life. Health Policy 1990; 16: 199-208.
50. Cox R, Hyde M, Gatehouse S et al. Optimal outcome measures, 
research priorities and international cooperation. Ear Hear 2000; 
21: 106S-15S.
51. Stephens SDG, France L, Lormore K. Effects of hearing impair­
ment on the patient’s family and friends. Acta Otolaryngol 
1995;115:115-17.
52. Stephens SDG, Meredith R. Qualitative reports of hearing aid 
benefit. Clin Rehabil 1991; 5: 225-9.
53. Stephens D, Board T, Hobson J, Cooper H. Reported benefits and 
problems experienced with bone-anchored hearing aids. Br J 
Audiol 1996; 30: 215-20.
54. Foster JS, Haggard M. The four alternative auditory feature test 
(FAAF)—linguistic and psychometiric properties of the material 
with normative data in noise. BrJ Audiol 1987; 21: 165-74.
55. Dillon H. Shortened Hearing Aid Performance Inventory for the 
Elderly (SHAP1E): a statistical approach. Austj Audiol 1997; 16:
37-48.
56. Walden BE, Demores ME, Hepler EL. Self-report approach to 
assessing benefit derived from amplification. J Speech Hear Res 
1984; 27(1): 49-56.
57. Summerfield AQ, Marshall DH. Report by the MRC Institute of 
Hearing Research on the Evaluation of the National Cochlear Implant 
Programme. Main Report. Cochlear Implantation in the UK, 
1990-1994.
58. Kramer SE, Kapteyn TS, Festen JM, Tobi H. Factors in subjective 
hearing disability. Audiology 1995; 34: 167-99.
59. Kaplan H, Bally S, Brandt, Busacco D, Pray J. Communication 
Scale for Older Adults (CSOA). J Am A cad Audiol 1997; 8: 
203-17.
60. Ringdahl A, Eriksson-Mangold M, Andersson G. Psychometric 
evaluation of the Gothenburg Profile for measurement of experi­
enced hearing disability and handicap: applications with new 
hearing aid candidates and experienced hearing aid users. Br J 
Audiol 1998; 32: 375-85.
61. Hetu R, Getty L, Philbert L, Desilets F, Noble W, Stephens D. 
Mise au point d’un outil clinique pour la mesure d’incapacites et 
de handicaps. J Speech Language Pathol Audiol 1994; 18: 83-95.
  

Auditory amplification 
in adults
Stuart Gatehouse
Fitting of a hearing aid or hearing aids remains the only viable 
management option for the vast majority of listeners with sen­
sorineural hearing impairment, and a smaller though still sig­
nificant number of people with conductive impairment for 
whom surgery has either been refused, is not appropriate, or per­
haps has been unsuccessful. However, as an opening statement, 
this sentence is in itself incomplete, as it tends to view a hear­
ing aid fitting in isolation. The realistic object of intervention 
at present is not to provide a ‘cure’ for sensorineural hearing 
impairment (however laudable and desirable such an aim might 
be) but, rather, to provide a process which attempts to over­
come the disabilities and handicaps of hearing-impaired listen­
ers and their families and others with whom they interact. 
Thus, while this chapter restricts itself to considerations of 
amplification per se, it would be unwise to read and interpret 
the information contained herein in isolation from the other 
contributions in this book, which address the overall 
components of a rehabilitation service for hearing-impaired 
individuals.
The content of this chapter is aimed at physicians and sur­
geons who have the overarching responsibility for the manage­
ment of hearing-impaired listeners, and who might have the 
responsibility for the organization and delivery of a hearing 
rehabilitation service containing at its core the provision of 
amplification. As such, it is not aimed at technical specialists in 
audiology in the detail it provides. A search of the scientific and 
clinical literature will identify an extensive collection of infor­
mation addressing hearing aids and their fitting—indeed, this 
author’s own collection of published papers in this field (which 
is by no means extensive or complete) runs to some 3500 items, 
and the reader will readily identify any number of specialist 
texts relating to signal processing for hearing aids, the fitting of 
hearing aids, and the verification and evaluation of their per­
formance. No single chapter could possibly hope to provide a 
comprehensive description of this knowledge base, and, there­
fore, certain strategies and decisions have been taken in config­
uring the content. This chapter aims to identify the major 
decision-points and the dimensions of those options which a 
clinician might face in the management of individual hearing-
impaired listeners or the organization of a service. It attempts to 
summarize current knowledge and to provide an accessible syn­
opsis. It does contain a relatively extensive bibliography 
(though not 3500 strong!) to direct the reader to the evidence 
base from which the conclusions are drawn. Where the line of 
argument becomes more extensive, a short-form conclusion is 
provided and highlighted. Given that in the UK the great 
majority of hearing aid fittings are undertaken by the National 
Health Service (NHS), much of the information provided 
makes reference to current and potential future practice within 
the NHS. However, to address only NHS concerns would be 
overly restrictive, particularly in view of the currently narrow 
range of technological options open to the NHS and rehabili­
tative contexts within which those technological options are 
delivered. This is particularly apposite given the initiatives at 
the time of writing to upgrade the status, organization and con­
tent of hearing aid services offered by the NHS. Therefore, this 
chapter does indeed consider technologies which are currently 
not available through the NHS, but which might well become 
part of a clinician’s armoury in years to come.
As has been mentioned, the fitting of a hearing aid is, at all 
of its stages, inextricably linked to the overall rehabilitation 
programme that the service delivers. The detailed descriptions 
of rehabilitative options are available elsewhere in this book 
but, for the purposes of configuring this chapter, the overly sim­
plified schematic shown in Figure 31.1 is used as an artifice to
Figure 31.1 Schematic representation of the hearing aid fitting and 
rehabilitation process.

534 
Auditory disorders and their management
delineate some of the major stages, and identifies four main 
components comprising assessment, selection and fitting, veri­
fication and evaluation.
This chapter enters the process at the point where the clin­
ician has taken the decision that the management of disability 
and handicap should contain an element of amplification—that 
is, a hearing aid or aids are to be fitted. There are, of course, a 
whole host of elements which enter into that decision, of which 
only a minority are audiological in nature. Clearly, for a hearing 
aid to be appropriate, it is helpful if the patient has a hearing 
impairment so that the device has the opportunity to make 
audible sounds that were previously inaudible (although, as will 
be mentioned later, there are potential roles for processing fea­
tures such as directional microphones which improve the sig- 
nal-to-noise ratio even for listeners with very minor auditory 
impairments). At the other end of the impairment spectrum, 
for profound losses the role of acoustical amplification gives way 
to management via electrical stimulation (cochlear implants) 
and tactile devices. It is unwise to try to generate, at either end 
of the severity distribution, levels or configurations of hearing 
impairment which delineate people whose hearing is regarded 
as ‘too good’ to be helped by amplification from those who 
are hearing aid candidates, and from those whose hearing is 
regarded as ‘too impaired’ to benefit from acoustical amplifica­
tion. Certainly, current practice in adult cochlear implantation 
is to manage as well as possible using hearing aids, and then 
the restricted benefits derived from those devices itself form 
candidature criteria for implantation. Similarly, listeners who 
complain of hearing disability and wish to try amplification 
should not be discouraged because of an arbitrary limit in the 
impairment domain. Indeed, it is more likely that the clinician 
will need to persuade an unwilling candidate that amplification 
offers a viable option. Candidature criteria in the impairment 
domain are useful for epidemiological and service planning 
purposes,1 but should not be used to restrict access on an 
individual basis.
When a clinician makes a recommendation to a hearing- 
impaired individual concerning the likely benefits of amplifica­
tion, he will of course address a number of non-audiological 
issues, including lifestyle demands, motivations, physical and 
cognitive function and manipulation abilities, both in the 
initial decision regarding management and in the choice of 
hearing aid management.
Selection and fitting of hearing aid 
features
Following the decision to include a hearing aid fitting as part 
of an individual’s management, there is a host of options con­
cerning the features of that hearing aid fitting which are avail­
able to the clinician. Some of these features concern the various 
signal-processing options within hearing aids, while others are 
more general ‘features’ which include the different physical
options for hearing aids and the ways in which they are coupled 
to the impaired auditory system. All of these different styles of 
feature are relevant to the hearing aid fitting process, and are 
addressed here in turn.
Hearing aid style
Under this heading we consider some of the physical aspects of 
a hearing aid,2 in terms of its size, and some of the electronic 
and electroacoustical elements of the way in which a hearing 
aid functions. Early electronic aids to hearing consisted of a bat- 
tery-pack and electronics worn on the belt or body which were 
coupled via cables to a transducer at the patient’s ear. Such 
‘body-worn’ devices are now rarely used, except in rare cases 
where feedback issues become paramount (discussed below) or 
where the physical ability to manipulate controls is severely 
compromised. The vast majority of modem hearing aids are of 
the ‘at-the-ear’ type. The two broad divisions are shown in 
Figures 31.2 and 31.3. Figure 31.2 shows two postaural units 
(behind-the-ear (BTE)) of differing physical size. With the 
advances in battery technology, transducer technology and 
electronic circuitry, it has proved possible to manufacture BTE 
devices that are much less cumbersome than those available 
hitherto. The requirement for large postaural casings has largely 
been removed. Since the relatively early days of integrated cir­
cuit technology, the hearing aid industry has striven to reduce 
the size of devices, and to fit them in the ear canal itself with 
the primary objective of making the hearing aid ‘invisible’ (a 
central point of much hearing aid advertising). Figure 31.3 
shows instances of devices which are conventionally labelled as 
‘in-the-ear’ (ITE), ‘in-the-canal’ (ITC) and ‘completely in-the- 
canal’ (CIC), with progressive degrees of miniaturization. The 
primary drive for this miniaturization is cosmetic, and might at 
first consideration appear to be a purely technical issue. How­
ever, there is here an interaction with the overall rehabilitation 
concept which is worthy of mention. When most hearing- 
impaired listeners are first seeking help and being fitted with 
hearing aids, they express a strong desire for their hearing aids
Figure 31.2 Styles of behind-the-ear (BTE) hearing aids.
  

Auditory amplification in adults 
535
Figure 31.3 Styles of in-the-ear (ITE) hearing aids. CIC, completely in the canal; 
ITC, in the canal.
to be as invisible as possible so that it is not apparent to others 
that the impaired person has a hearing problem. The whole 
issue of stigma associated with both hearing impairment and 
with hearing aids, and the implications that this has for hearing 
aids themselves, and the design and delivery of rehabilitation 
services, contains many elements. Perhaps one of the most 
important is that the cosmetic drive towards miniaturization 
can be part of an unwanted and unhelpful avoidance on the 
part of the hearing-impaired person of the existence of prob­
lems and the impact this has both on their own lives and those 
of their companions. It is instructive to contrast this approach 
with reports from experienced users of hearing aids who posi­
tively suggest that they wish their hearing aid to signal to other 
people that they do have a hearing problem, and that appropri­
ate communication strategies should be adopted. The tension 
between the desire of hearing aid manufacturers and hearing- 
impaired people to have invisible devices, and the comprehen­
sive approach to the rehabilitation of disability and handicaps, 
remains unresolved.
Although the primary motivation for miniaturization 
remains cosmetic, there are a number of acoustical advantages 
in devices which are fitted in rather than behind the ear. A BTE 
hearing aid delivers its sound to the tympanic membrane via a 
tube and earmould (Figure 31.4). The tube and earmould has an 
acoustical effect which is often undesirable. If the output of a 
hearing aid is delivered closer to the tympanic membrane, there 
are advantages in terms of the power that is needed to drive the 
device, and the fidelity of the sound that is produced (provided
Figure 31.4 A post-aural (BTE) hearing aid and earmould coupling.
that undue engineering compromises are not required in the 
miniaturization process itself)- A further set of potential bene­
fits arise from the fact that in ITE devices the hearing aid micro­
phone is located in a more ‘natural’ position and serves to better 
preserve some of the cues which underpin sound localization 
and aspects of binaural hearing.
There are, however, significant disadvantages associated 
with progressively smaller devices. As the separation between 
the microphone and the hearing aid output decreases, the like­
lihood of feed back increases. The smaller the device and its 
associated controls, the greater will be the difficulties experi­
enced in physically fitting and adjusting the device by (pre­
dominantly elderly) people whose manipulation abilities are 
compromised. In addition, ITE devices are naturally more 
prone to blockage and damage by wax than are postaural units. 
Cleaning or replacing an earmould is easier and more conve­
nient than replacing a hearing aid. Nevertheless, ITE as 
opposed to BTE fittings are desired by hearing-impaired people 
and play an increasing role in provision. A discussion of the 
issues surrounding the benefits and problems of ITE and BTE 
devices can be found in the literature.3”11
A simplified representation of the functional elements of a 
hearing aid is shown in Figure 31.5. Sound in the environment
Sound input
J
.._
Microphone
I
Processor
Control
m
Receiver
T
Sound output 
Figure 31.5 Basic elements of a hearing aid.
  

536 
Auditory disorders and their management
is converted by the microphone into an electrical signal. This 
electrical signal is then processed (e.g. amplified) and recon­
verted via the hearing aid receiver (output transducer) into 
sound to be delivered into the ear canal. There is usually some 
form of control (at the disposal of the hearing-impaired listen­
ers or of the dispensing audiologist) over the characteristics of 
the processor (at its simplest level, this might be a volume con­
trol). The three broad classifications of the electronic means by 
which the hearing aid achieves its processing are analog, digi­
tally programmable and fully digital. At one stage, all hearing 
aids were analog in nature, whether they were based upon valve 
technology, transistor technology or integrated circuits, and 
whatever control was available was achieved by external 
mechanical elements accessed by either switches, volume 
wheels or internal screwdriver potentiometers.12 A subsequent 
development was the emergence of electronic circuits whose 
characteristics could be controlled by a computer or other 
external programming devices.13 The fundamental processing of 
the signal was still analog in nature,14 but increased range and 
flexibility of control elements were available, not least because 
of the relaxation of the requirement for physical external con­
trols. Recent years have seen the development of fully digital 
devices,15 whose first processing stage is to convert the analog 
signal from the microphone into a discrete digitized signal 
which is then processed (by the equivalent of a miniature com­
puter) and reconverted to an analog signal for presentation at 
the receiver. (Technical developments make this description 
overly simplistic, but this chapter is not the place for a more 
detailed consideration of those issues.) One of the prime devel­
opments in recent years has been the explosion of claims for the 
benefit of ‘digital’ hearing aids over analog counterparts and 
pressure upon health services to deliver such devices. One fur­
ther development comprises remote control facilities. Here the 
user has a small hand-held unit which communicates with the 
hearing aid via infrared or wireless technology to control some 
functions of the hearing aid.
Because of the sheer pace of technological developments, 
any contribution which attempts to survey the details of pro­
cessing options and their deliverable benefits will, of necessity, 
be out of date. At the time of writing, numerous studies have 
been published concerning the benefit provided by digital 
signal processing.16-34 Most studies have demonstrated that dig­
ital signal processing does not provide better speech recognition 
in noise than hearing aids with analog signal processing. 
However, most studies have demonstrated a subjective prefer­
ence for digital signal processing, and improvements in sound 
quality, ease of listening etc., using a wide range of measures. 
Many of these subjective tools include questions related to pref­
erences, benefits and/or satisfaction in recognizing speech-in- 
noise. It is unknown whether the subjective reported benefits 
for digital signal processing are simply a result of the ways in 
which all elements of society automatically recognize ‘digital’ as 
superior. In any event, this chapter adopts the standpoint that 
the particular engineering implantation of a hearing aid feature 
is largely unimportant. It is almost certainly the case that all
new hearing aids will be digital in nature, because that is the 
direction that hearing aid manufacturers are pursuing in their 
research and development divisions. It is also undoubtedly true 
that some features can only be realized by digital signal process­
ing (or perhaps realized much more easily, effectively and cost- 
effectively) and, despite the marketing pressures, what a 
clinician needs to try and determine are the ways in which var­
ious features of a hearing aid and its fitting might deliver bene­
fits to hearing-impaired listeners.35-38 Also, at the time of 
writing, there is an initiative by the NHS to run comprehensive 
trials of the effectiveness of digital hearing aids within the 
mass-provision service whose outcome is presently unknown.
In-the-ear fittings are desired hy listeners primarily for 
cosmetic reasons. They do confer acoustical benefits and 
benefits in spatial hearing. Drawbacks include suscepti­
bility to feedback, problems with manipulation and sus­
ceptibility to blockage with wax.
Unilateral versus bilateral fittings
Most listeners have two ears and normal hearing listeners use 
the signals arriving at their two ears to advantage in a number 
of domains. Figure 31.6 shows a representation of a sound 
source which is located on the right side of a listener. The path 
length between the sound source and the right ear is shorter 
than that between the source and left ear. Hence, the sound 
will arrive at the right ear before it arrives at the left. Thus, for 
any part of the waveform, there is an interaural time difference 
(ITD) between the two ears.39 This ITD provides an important 
cue for the location of the sound source in the horizontal plane. 
A further effect is that the head casts an acoustical shadow so 
that the sound arriving at the left ear is attenuated relative to 
that arriving at the right ear.40 The resultant interaural intensity 
difference (IID) is a second important cue for sound localiza­
tion. The combination of the (predominantly low-frequency) 
ITD and the (predominantly high-frequency) IID provides the 
auditory system with sufficient information to determine the
  

Auditory amplification in adults 
537
location of sound sources in the environment in the horizontal 
plane.41-46 There are further complex head and pinna effects 
which, in combination with head movements, allow the lis­
tener to determine location in elevation and to resolve confu­
sions between sound sources located in the frontal plane and 
those behind the listener. While listeners with sensorineural 
hearing impairment can and do suffer from deficits in the abil­
ity to process these localization cues, if the sounds are made 
audible at the two ears then at least partial use can be made of 
both the ITD and IID cues.47
Now consider the arrangement in Figure 31.7, where a 
speech source is located in front of the listener on the mid-line 
and some interfering noise source is located on the right-hand 
side (notice that this is a listening circumstance of some eco­
logical relevance, as we usually orientate conversations so that 
speaker and listener are facing each other). In this circum­
stance, the speech sound arriving at the two ears is identical (as 
the speech is on the mid-line), while the interfering noise dif­
fers in the ways described in Figure 31.6. Thus, the noise arriv­
ing at the left ear is ‘shadowed’ relative to the noise arriving at 
the right ear. Hence, the signal-to-noise ratio (the level of the 
speech relative to the level of the noise) at the left ear will be 
more advantageous than that arriving at the right ear. Thus, in 
this circumstance, the listener can ‘choose’ to listen through 
their left ear—the ear with the more advantageous signal-to- 
noise ratio. The listener now finds himself in the environment 
represented in Figure 31.8 where the interfering noise source 
occurs on the left side. Now the more favourable signal-to-noise 
ratio occurs at the right ear. Thus, a listener with two function­
ing ears gains an advantage over the equivalent ‘one-eared’ per­
son in always having the option of listening at either the left ear 
or the right ear, depending upon which has the more advanta­
geous signal-to-noise ratio.
Another advantage can occur in the situation represented 
in Figure 31.9 where the speech and noise are both located on 
the mid-line and, hence, the signals arriving at the two ears are 
identical. This circumstance is referred to as diotic listening, 
and the normal auditory system uses the identical information 
arriving at the two ears to advantage by a process referred to as 
‘binaural redundancy’.
In addition to head-shadow advantages and diotic advan­
tages, the binaural auditory system uses and combines the infor­
mation 
arriving 
at 
the 
right 
ear 
(less 
advantageous 
signal-to-noise ratio) with that arriving at the left ear (more 
advantageous signal-to-noise ratio) in Figure 31.7 to improve 
performance yet further by a process referred to as ‘binaural 
squelch’.
For normal hearing listeners, depending on the spectrum 
and content of the speech material and the location of the 
speech and noise sources, the advantages from head shadow 
effects can be around lOdB of signal-to-noise improvement, the 
advantages of binaural squelch around some 3 dB in terms of 
signal-to-noise ratio improvements, and those of diotic advan­
tage approximately 2 dB of signal-to-noise ratio improvement.48 
It will be apparent that the advantages from head shadow
f t — -  
— JN
f i  
f  
a
SR 1 
Nrv i L^
\  
r  
/
|X ^  
i s \
k
n l
Noise
Source
•
•
Figure 31.7 Schematic representation of spatially separated speech and 
interfering noise sources.
Figure 31.8 Schematic representation of spatially separated speech and noise 
sources with the noise located to the other ear.
Figure 31.9 A diotic listening situation where the signals arriving at the two 
ears are identical.
(which result from simple physical acoustics independent of 
sensorineural hearing impairment) will also be delivered to lis­
teners with sensorineural hearing impairment. Although there is 
some evidence of diminished advantages in binaural squelch and 
diotic summation, those advantages still do occur in listeners
  

538 
Auditory disorders and their management
with sensorineural hearing loss. Thus, there are advantages to 
the gain in making signals audible to the two ears of such a 
listener with sensorineural hearing loss.
At this point, some clarification of terminology is required. 
The term ‘binaural listening’ is used to represent the situation 
where a signal is available at both ears. The term ‘binaural aid­
ing’ or ‘binaural hearing aids’ is not used. Rather, the term 
‘bilateral fitting of hearing aids’ is advocated. The reason for 
this is that fitting two hearing aids does not necessarily imply 
that the desired signals are audible at both ears and, similarly, 
fitting of a single hearing aid does not imply that the desired sig­
nals are only available at the fitted ear. Therefore, binaural lis­
tening and bilateral or unilateral fitting of hearing aids can be, 
to some extent, independent.
There is a substantial body of literature suggesting that lis­
teners with sensorineural impairment can and do gain benefit 
from bilateral fitting of hearing aids in a number of domains for 
different listening circumstances.41^ 5, 49-54 These benefits are 
largely independent of asymmetries in hearing, provided that 
listeners have two ears that are impaired and two ears whose 
impairment is acoustically aidable. The determining factors are 
the range of environments in terms of location of desired and 
unwanted signals and magnitude of desired and unwanted sig­
nals in the environments that listeners experience, and the 
importance of those environments to everyday listening. Thus, 
it would appear that the great majority of hearing-impaired lis­
teners are realistic candidates for the bilateral fitting of hearing 
aids. Contrast this with standard practice in the UK NHS, 
where the great majority of fittings are unilateral. It has to be 
stated that the main reason that underpins this policy is eco­
nomic rather than audiological. There are, however, potential 
disadvantages to bilateral fittings which have to be taken into 
consideration. It has already been mentioned that there is a 
degree of stigma associated with hearing impairment and hear­
ing aids, and a common reaction from hearing impaired listen­
ers, when offered bilateral hearing aids, is ‘I’m not that deaf, 
doctor’. Part of the reason for this is associated with current 
practice, in that it is only individuals with severe and profound 
hearing impairments who are routinely offered and fitted with 
bilateral amplification, thus reinforcing the stereotype. Other 
disadvantages associated with bilateral fitting occur when 
patients with material manipulative and cognitive deficits find 
the burden of coping with two prosthetic devices unacceptable. 
A very small number of patients suffer from a phenomenon 
referred to as ‘binaural interference’ in which the sound at the 
second ear actively disrupts their ability to perceive and process 
that at the first.55 However, there is also evidence that long­
term listening through a unilateral fitting leads to a process of 
auditory deprivation in the unaided ear.
Overall, the evidence in favour of bilateral fittings is suffi­
ciently substantial to recommend that a sensible default posi­
tion (independent of economic considerations) should be to 
offer bilateral fittings to all candidates rather than the current 
practice of recommending unilateral fittings in all but special 
cases.
Most patients are candidates for bilateral fitting of hear­
ing aids. Most patients will benefit from bilateral fittings. 
Bilateral fittings should be the default norm.
Frequency shaping for linear fittings
The simplest form of hearing aid is one which provides linear 
amplification—that is, an input signal is amplified by the same 
amount, independent of its level. Figure 31.10 shows a repre­
sentation of the input/output function for such an amplifier at 
any particular given frequency. As the input level is increased 
by any given amount, the output level also increases by the 
same degree. Such a representation shows what happens at any 
particular frequency. It is well recognized that most listeners 
with sensorineural hearing loss have thresholds which are 
poorer at high frequencies by amounts greater than at low fre­
quencies. Clearly, then, the audibility of high-frequency sounds 
will be compromised to a greater extent than the audibility of 
low-frequency sounds. A very natural response to this is to 
attempt to amplify high-frequency sounds by greater amounts 
than low-frequency sounds, leading to a gain characteristic 
which is a function of frequency. Such a characteristic is shown 
in Figure 31.11, and is fairly typical of a current postaural fitting 
employed by the UK NHS. When confronted with a hearing- 
impaired listener who is to be fitted with a hearing aid, the clin­
ician needs to decide what is the most appropriate frequency 
gain characteristic to use. Unfortunately, at this point, the clin­
ician encounters a wide variation in the audiological literature. 
Many prescription regimens exist which attempt to predict, 
from the hearing thresholds as a function of frequency, the gain 
that is likely to be required at each frequency to optimally com­
pensate for the hearing loss.37,60-73 These prescription regimens 
have different conceptual origins and, indeed, can lead to dif­
ferent frequency gain characteristics. Perhaps the most com­
monly used prescription regimen originates from the National 
Acoustic Laboratories (NAL) in Australia. The NAL regimen
3--
o
input level
Figure 31.10 The input-output function for a simple linear hearing aid.
  

Auditory amplification in adults 
539
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 31.11 An example of a frequency-gain characteristic.
also happens to be the procedure which has received the 
greatest experimental verification and one which has as its the­
oretical basis a well-thought-out set of assumptions and imple­
mentations. Although this chapter is not the place for an 
in-depth discussion of the origins, merits and demerits of the 
various alternatives, it is perhaps worth stating that the NAL 
prescription regimen aims to make different frequency bands of 
speech equally loud to hearing-impaired listeners, so that no one 
frequency region of the speech spectrum dominates the percep­
tion of the loudness of the speech signal. With the flexibility of 
modem technology, there is every opportunity to realize a par­
ticular target gain for the frequencies which are important for 
speech understanding. A reasonable issue that clinicians might 
raise is the question of whether matching a target actually mat­
ters, in terms of the benefits delivered to hearing-impaired listen­
ers. Certainly, the verification work which underpins the various 
prescription regimens would suggest that this is an issue of poten­
tial importance. Indeed, within the context of the very limited 
technological options hitherto available to the UK NHS, there 
is also a body of evidence suggesting that user preferences for 
and benefits from hearing aid prescriptions which more closely 
match a clinically achievable and soundly based prescription 
regimen do indeed result in increased benefits.74,75
Clinicians should select the frequency gain characteristic 
of a hearing aid on the basis of a rationale with a verifi­
able evidence base.
Output limiting
Any hearing aid has a limit to the amount of output that can be 
produced, and, indeed, there are levels for both normal hearing 
listeners and listeners with sensorineural hearing impairment 
above which sound becomes uncomfortably loud. For a linear 
hearing aid, the output will increase by lOdB for each 10-dB
increase in the input until the hearing aid limit is reached and 
the hearing aid is driven into saturation. When considering the 
maximum output that a hearing aid can deliver, the gain char­
acteristic shown in Figure 31.11 is not the most appropriate rep­
resentation and the output characteristic shown in Figure 31.12 
is preferable. This displays the output of the hearing aid in dB 
SPL as a function of frequency. When the maximum output of 
the hearing aid is reached, then an increase in the input level 
will not result in an increase in the output level. The corre­
sponding input/output function is shown in Figure 31.13. Here, 
above a certain level, the hearing aid saturates. For a simple lin­
ear hearing aid, as the device is driven into saturation, there are 
some undesired effects of this saturation on the input signal.76-78 
These are illustrated in Figure 31.14, which shows the increase 
in the input signal as the input increases, and the ‘clipping’ of 
the output signal as the input increases beyond the saturation 
point. This is perceived by the listener as distortion of the sig­
nal, and can lead to further problems in the intelligibility of
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 31.12 An example of a hearing aid output characteristic.
Figure 31.13 A hearing aid input-output function demonstrating saturation.
  

540 
Auditory disorders and their management
Figure 31.14 The input-output function of a peak clipping hearing aid.
speech. Given that the aim of any amplification device is to 
present the signal with minimal loss of fidelity, such a process is 
clearly undesirable. Many linear hearing aids still achieve limi- 
tation on their output via this process of peak-clipping, though 
for many years alternatives have been available. The primary 
alternative has been output compression limiting, shown in Fig­
ure 31.15. Here, above a certain threshold (the compression 
threshold), increases in input level result in much smaller 
increases in output level, with minimal distortion of the signal. 
Experimental studies have shown that the great majority of 
hearing-impaired listeners both prefer and perform better with 
output compression-limiting devices than those which are lim­
ited via peak-clipping. The exception would appear to be some 
listeners with severe and profound hearing losses who express 
preferences for peak-clipping devices. It is unclear whether this 
preference is simply a result of an engineering limitation of out­
put compression devices, whereby the maximum gain and out­
put that can be delivered is reduced over the equivalent peak- 
clipping circuitry, or whether it is a genuine perceptual link to 
and preference for the peak-clipped signal (which might appear 
unlikely). Despite this extensive body of evidence, at the time 
of writing, output limiting by peak-clipping in NHS hearing 
aids is still the norm rather than the exception.
Most hearing aids, whether of the output compression or 
the peak-clipping type, contain the ability to adjust the level at 
which the hearing aid is driven into saturation. This is usually 
adjusted so that the loudest sounds that the hearing aid can pro­
duce do not exceed the threshold of uncomfortable loudness for 
a hearing-impaired listener. As companions to prescription reg­
imens for the frequency gain characteristic, there are predic­
tions from auditory threshold of average settings for thresholds 
of uncomfortable listening and, hence, maximum power output 
from hearing aids.69,79~*2 It might appear more direct to measure 
the threshold of uncomfortable listening and adjust the hearing 
aid accordingly, although there are a number of complicated 
intervening factors, such as the calibration differences between 
audiometric measures on sinusoids and hearing aid characteris­
tics in couplers and the extent to which broadband sounds 
exhibit differing loudness relationships to narrow-band 
sinewaves. If the maximum power output (MPO) is set too low, 
then signals in the environment will regularly drive the device 
into saturation, and the listener is likely to complain that 
louder sounds are often distorted. An MPO set too high is likely 
to result in complaints that a hearing aid is ‘too loud’ even if the 
frequency gain characteristic is appropriate for the listener’s 
hearing thresholds.
Inappropriate output limiting can compromise hearing 
aid acceptance and benefit. Clinicians should, as a rou­
tine, adjust the maximum power output of a device in the 
light of patient characteristics.
Figure 31.15 The input-output function of a compression limiting hearing aid.
Earmoulds
It has already been mentioned that for postaural hearing aids 
the sound is conducted from the hearing aid to the ear canal via 
tubing83 and earmoulds. These earmoulds have acoustical 
effects, and are themselves the subject of an extensive litera­
ture. Of more practical importance is the extent to which an 
earmould in a listener’s ear leads to the occlusion effect.84,85 The 
occlusion effect can manifest itself as a feeling of blockage, but 
it also has an important acoustical element in the way that 
sounds are presented and perceived. Perhaps the easiest way to 
demonstrate this is for a normal hearing listener to place a fin­
ger into their own ear canal, and then to speak and observe the 
effect on the listener’s own voice. Although effects on signals 
are not limited to one’s own voice, they are perhaps most obvi­
ous for that signal. A normal hearing listener will clearly per­
  

Auditory amplification in adults 
541
ceive the differences in timbre and loudness that occlusion of 
the ear canal produces. Many earmoulds are designed to not 
completely occlude the ear canal, but to allow a degree of vent' 
ing to address both the overall ‘blockage’ perception and to 
counteract, at least in part, some of the acoustical problems of 
occlusion and to allow entry of low-frequency sounds from out- 
side unprocessed by the hearing aid. The particular styles and 
characteristics of earmoulds are varied, and perhaps the easiest 
summary is to recommend that an earmould with the largest 
degree of venting and the least degree of occlusion that is com- 
patible with the patient’s hearing loss and amplification charac- 
teristics without encountering feedback problems is the desired 
choice. There is some evidence that the deep canal fittings 
which accompany completely in-the-canal hearing aids lead to 
decreased problems with the acoustical aspects of occlusion.
One of the advantages of ITE hearing aids is that the 
unwanted acoustical effects of tubing and earmoulds (indepen- 
dent and not associated with occlusion) can be relatively easily 
overcome, leading to better high-frequency responses and out- 
put than from postaural devices. Although they find little 
favour and application in world markets, it is possible to use ITE 
devices of a modular type (Figure 31.16) which contain a basic 
unit to which is attached a custom shell. Modular devices have 
the advantage of not requiring total custom shells, so that in the 
event of a malfunction in a hearing aid, the standard unit can 
be replaced immediately, and the listener does not have to 
forego amplification while a repair is undertaken.
Earmould selection should be based on a compromise 
between minimization of the occlusion effect and 
prevention of feedback.
Compression and multichannel processing
Above we considered linear processing, which amplifies a signal 
by an amount which is independent of its input level. Hearing- 
impaired listeners exhibit elevated hearing thresholds, but also 
have thresholds of uncomfortable listening which are similar to 
or only mildly elevated above those exhibited by listeners with 
normal hearing. Thus, listeners with sensorineural hearing 
impairment exhibit a reduced dynamic range between the
threshold of hearing and the threshold of uncomfortable listen­
ing. Furthermore, as most sensorineural hearing losses slope 
from low frequencies to high frequencies, such listeners also 
exhibit reduced dynamic range at high frequencies compared to 
that at low frequencies. Thus, a hearing aid is faced with the 
task of mapping signals in the auditory environment into an 
available range of hearing which is less than that enjoyed by 
normal hearing listeners, and is more compromised at high fre­
quencies than it is at low frequencies. One clear approach to 
this is to configure the amplification so that it amplifies low- 
level sounds by a greater amount than higher-level sounds. The 
input/output function of such a scheme is shown in Figure 
31.17. Here, once the input level reaches a certain point (the 
compression knee-point) the increase in the output level is less 
than the increase in the input level. For a compression ratio of 
2:1, for each 10-dB increase in the input level, the output level 
increases by 5dB. Numerous experiments on amplitude com­
pression systems have been conducted over the years, and it is 
now normally accepted that compression ratios of greater than 
around 3:1 are undesirable because of deleterious effects on 
speech intelligibility.
Given that, for a hearing-impaired listener, the reduction 
in dynamic range at high frequencies is greater than at low fre­
quencies, there is the natural consequence that the desirable 
compression characteristics for high-frequency signals will dif­
fer from those for low-frequency signals. This introduces the 
concept of multi-band processing, where the hearing aid has 
different characteristics as a function of frequency, not only in 
terms of the gain that is delivered but in the ways in which gain 
varies as a function of input level. A reasonable question is then 
‘How many channels do we need?’ If one looks at the commer­
cial hearing aid market, then multi-channel devices are avail­
able with anything from 2 to 20 channels, although there is 
some potential confusion between the concepts of a ‘frequency 
band’ and a ‘compression channel’. Modem devices have a 
number of frequency bands which allow the matching of a par­
ticular target with a degree of precision, and this can be different
Limiting
Input level
L
Figure 31.17 Schematic representation of the input-output function for one 
Figure 31.16 Example of modular and custom in-the-ear (ITE) hearing aids. 
frequency in a simple compression hearing aid.
  

542 
Auditory disorders and their management
from the number of independent compression channels within 
which it is possible to implement different dynamic relation­
ships in terms of the input/output function. Although there is 
an absence of evidence from robust clinical trials, there is a rea­
sonable supposition that somewhere between four and eight 
independent frequency bands might be required to properly 
compensate for a particular audiometric configuration, whereas 
somewhere between two and four independent dynamic 
compression channels might be useful.
One aspect of compression that has not yet been consid­
ered is that of time constants. When considering output com­
pression limiting, it is reasonable to assume that the 
compression system should act as rapidly as possible in order to 
protect the listener from loud transient sounds in the environ­
ment, such as a door slamming. The issue is not necessarily as 
clear-cut when considering compression to compensate for 
restrictions in dynamic range (and the distortions in frequency 
and temporal processing which are almost an inevitable accom­
paniment to sensorineural hearing loss). Here there are broadly 
two approaches, referred to as ‘slow-acting automatic volume 
control’ (AVC), and fast-acting wide dynamic range compres­
sion (WDRC). Slow-acting AVC attempts to compensate for 
the changes that occur in the acoustical environment as the 
background that the listener experiences or the desired signals 
within that environment themselves change. Examples of this 
might be the differing requirements placed on hearing aids 
when one exits from a quiet house into a busy street, or the dif­
fering requirements when conversing with one’s ‘quietly-spoken 
Scottish or Welsh grandmother’, compared with the stentorian 
tones of a ‘gruff English uncle’. Here the hearing aid processing 
attempts to alter its characteristics as the acoustical environ­
ment in which it functions alters. The environment changes 
relatively slowly, and time constants of hundreds of millisec­
onds, or even seconds, are appropriate.
In contrast, WDRC attempts to compensate more directly 
for some of the characteristics of a sensorineural hearing loss. 
The objectives of WDRC processing can be illustrated by con­
sideration of the utterance ‘asa’. This consists of a relatively 
intense, relatively low-frequency vowel ‘a’ followed by a rela­
tively less intense, relatively high-frequency, consonant ‘s’, 
followed by another incidence of the vowel ‘a’. A device 
employing fast-acting WDRC will provide greater amplification 
and greater high-frequency amplification during the consonant 
‘s’ than in the preceding and successful vowels ‘a’ in an attempt 
to make available on a moment-to-moment basis as much of the 
acoustical information contained within the speech waveform 
as is feasible. Clearly, processing which reconfigures its charac­
teristics across syllables and phonemes has to act more rapidly 
than processing which attempts to compensate for environ­
mental changes, and here time constants of milliseconds and 
tens of milliseconds are appropriate.
Although there are almost as many implementations of com­
pression systems as there are manufacturers, and, indeed, many 
modem devices contain elements of both AVC and fast-acting
WDRC, either within or between frequency bands, the differing 
overall objectives of the two approaches remain in force.
There is an extensive and contradictory literature on the 
implementation, benefits and limitations of a variety of com­
pression systems, both in the laboratory and in wearable hear­
ing aids.83,86-104 Perhaps a reasonable summary would suggest 
that there are unlikely to be benefits of any compression system 
when compared to linear amplification which has been adjusted 
and optimized for any particular listening environment, be that 
in quiet or in noise. However, compression systems do allow lis­
teners to function in a wider range of acoustical environments 
and to process a wider range of input signal characteristics than 
is the case for more constrained linear amplification, and that 
the benefits can reside in aspects of improved sound quality 
and ease of listening as well as measures of speech identification 
performance.
There is some preliminary evidence105 that the diversity 
and importance of the acoustical environments that listeners 
experience and are required to function in can be an important 
factor in determining candidature for linear as opposed to non­
linear processing.
Current compression rationales do not improve speech 
identification in noise relative to optimized linear pro­
cessing. They do permit improved functioning in a wider 
range of auditory environments than linear fittings.
Multi-memory fittings
The previous section on amplitude compression systems con­
sidered the ways in which hearing aid processing can be config­
ured to obtain optimal function in a variety of acoustical 
environments. This makes the assumption that there is a sim­
ple mapping between aspects of the environment (e.g. overall 
signal level) and the processing that is required and, further­
more, it makes the assumption that the desirable properties of 
processing for a particular environment will not change over 
time. There is reasonable evidence that the characteristics of a 
hearing aid that are optimum for speech intelligibility are not 
necessarily those that are optimum for sound quality or listen­
ing comfort, and may differ yet again from those that are opti­
mum for spatial hearing and localization. It may be that within 
any given environment at different times, the hearing-impaired 
listener has differing goals and requirements and, therefore, a 
hearing aid that is configured with one particular predominant 
goal in mind may not be suitable for different environments in 
different circumstances. An alternative to the automatic 
approach is to configure a number of different control pro­
grammes in the hearing aid, and then allow the listener to 
select the different programmes, depending upon the environ­
ments that they find themselves in, and their particular wishes
  

Auditory amplification in adults 
543
and priorities when in those environments. Such an approach 
gives the user more control over the desirable properties of the 
processing for any given listening experience. This philosophy 
can be extended to give the hearing aid user some input to or 
control over the basic types of processing built into devices.106 
The physical and electrical characteristics of hearing aids were 
discussed above, and one of the available options is to control 
the characteristics of the hearing aid remotely, rather than hav­
ing to constantly adjust switches on the device, with the con­
sequent problems that occur with feedback and small control 
elements. A convenient remote control device which commu­
nicates with the hearing aid, using infra red or wireless tech­
nology, can be used to select one of a number of programmes 
(usually between two and four), with different inherent charac­
teristics according to the environment and wishes of the lis­
tener. Such an approach places the listener in a position of 
greater control over the signals that they are receiving. 
Although detailed field trials of such devices are in their rela­
tive infancy, information is becoming available regarding the 
configuration of and candidature for such multi-memory
i 
. 
107, 108
devices.
Multi-memory devices are beneficial to listeners who 
require to function in a wide range of auditory environ­
ments with a diverse set of listening demands.
Figure 31.18 Directivity patterns for some hearing aid microphone systems.
Directional microphones
Most microphones have (in the free field) a characteristic 
which is referred to as omni-directional. This is illustrated in 
Figure 31.18a. Here, the sensitivity of the microphone 
(indexed by the distance from the centre of the circle) is inde­
pendent of the origin of the sound source. Microphones can be 
configured to have particular directional characteristics, and 
directional microphones have been available for many years. 
They had been relatively unsuccessful in hearing aid applica­
tions until the advent of switchable directional microphones. 
Conventional directional microphones achieve their direction­
ality by having dual inlet ports in the microphone so that sound 
from some particular location is ‘cancelled out* while sound 
from other locations is not. The technological development 
was to replace the single dual-port directional microphone with 
a pair of omnidirectional microphones. The signals from those 
two microphones can then be processed in a variety of ways 
(usually by subtraction with varying time delays) to achieve 
directivity patterns with a variety of different characteristics. 
Some of these are shown in Figure 31.18 b, c, d. The bi­
directional microphone is equally sensitive towards the front 
and the rear, but is insensitive to sounds arising from the left- 
hand and right-hand sides. The cardioid microphone has no 
sensitivity from the back but still has reasonable sensitivity to 
the sides, while the hyper-cardioid characteristic attempts to 
minimize the influence from the left- and right-hand sides, 
while retaining some suppression from the rear. This can be 
seen from the characteristics in Figure 31.18 (which, it must be 
stressed, are schematic illustrations—the actual directivity 
patterns of real microphones in real hearing aids worn on real 
heads and in real ears are somewhat more complex). The polar 
patterns can locate the nulls and maxima in the directivity 
response in a variety of locations.
One of the reasons why directional microphones only 
began to find substantial applications in hearing aids when they 
became switchable is that there are listening circumstances 
whereby a directivity pattern which, for example, suppressed 
sound from the sides might be definitely disadvantageous. If I 
am travelling in a car, either as the passenger or the driver, and 
wish to converse with my companion, the last thing (particu­
larly if I am the driver) that I wish to do is to have to turn 
towards my companion to be able to hear what they are saying. 
Similar factors can come into play, for example, around a din­
ner table, or in music environments. The opportunity to be able 
to switch between omnidirectional and directional character­
istics allows the listener to access different components of the 
environments which match their listening needs. Depending 
upon the configuration of the sound sources in the environ­
ment, the benefits of directional microphones are established 
and unequivocal and, indeed, are an example of one of the few 
types of processing which does physically improve the signal- 
to-noise ratios of signals delivered to hearing-impaired listen­
ers.36, 109-124 Indeed, one might argue that listeners with marginal 
hearing losses (marginal in the sense of gaining benefit from
  

544 
Auditory disorders and their management
amplification, that is) can gain benefits from the improvements 
in signal-to-noise ratio that accompany low-gain hearing aid fit­
tings with directionality available. When coupled with the 
availability of multi-programme devices as described in the pre­
vious section, it is possible to combine the advantages of selec- 
table directional microphones with other aspects of a hearing 
aid processing strategy so that optimized parameters, e.g. 
directed at listening in noisy environments, can be derived and 
selected using remote control facilities.
Directional microphones are the single hearing aid 
feature with an evidence base to improve speech identifi­
cation ability in noise*
Feedback management
Feedback is one of the commonest causes of complaint from 
hearing aid users, and a significant bar to achieving hearing aid 
use and benefit. The concept of feedback is illustrated in Figure 
31.19. When a hearing aid amplifies the sound input to produce 
a sound output, a certain amount of the energy produced has 
the opportunity to return to the microphone via a feedback 
leakage path. One of the reasons for earmoulds, and the impor­
tance of properly fitting ITE devices, is to reduce this feedback 
path to manageable proportions, but with vented earmoulds 
and increasingly small ITE devices where the microphone input 
and receiver input are brought closer and closer together, the 
opportunities for feedback become ever greater. When the 
amplification provided by the hearing aid processor exceeds 
the attenuation that is present in the feedback path, then oscil­
latory feedback takes place and the hearing aid is driven into 
saturation. The whistling hearing aid is a phenomenon with 
which all clinicians will be all too familiar. The first approach 
to feedback management is to reduce the feedback leakage 
path, either by improvements in the earmould or ITE fitting, or 
by the reduction of venting availabilities. However, such mea­
sures are not always successful, particularly when hearing aids
Figure 31.19 Schematic representation of the feedback process in a hearing 
aid system.
with high gain are required. The problem can also be exacer­
bated in amplitude compression systems where high gains are 
applied to low-level signals. There are two further approaches 
to feedback management. The first of these is to try and iden­
tify when feedback might be occurring or about to occur, and to 
reduce the gain of the device for those signals which are likely 
to lead to feedback. With the advent of digital signal process­
ing, and the ability to adjust the frequency gain characteristics 
of hearing aid processing in narrow-frequency bands, it is possi­
ble to not eliminate, but reduce, the occurrence of feedback 
without altering the overall gain characteristic to a material 
extent and, hence, without compromising access to many com­
ponents of the input signal. The extent to which hearing aids 
can dynamically configure their frequency gain characteristics, 
depending upon the occurrence or likely occurrence of feed­
back, is a factor of hearing aid processing that is developing 
rapidly with the advent of digital signal-processing techniques. 
At present, feedback management techniques are becoming an 
integral component of many digital hearing aids, though with 
varying degrees of sophistication and effectiveness. A further 
approach to feedback management is to detect the feedback 
path that is occurring, and then to introduce an artificial signal 
into the hearing aid processing which attempts to cancel the 
feedback and, hence, allow use of greater gain without driving 
the system into oscillatory feedback. Such devices are in their 
relative infancy, but are becoming available to increase the 
headroom that is available to hearing-impaired listeners. A dis­
cussion of the various approaches to feedback management can 
be found in the literature.125-130
Modern digital signal-processing options are a material 
addition to the traditional procedures in management of 
feedback.
Noise reduction systems
The primary complaint of all listeners with sensorineural hear­
ing loss, and the prime limitation of all hearing aids, is the 
ability to understand speech in noisy or other adverse environ­
ments. The ‘Holy Grail’ of hearing aid processing is to amplify 
those signals to which the listener wants access while suppress­
ing those which are undesired. Such a goal is distant, but cur­
rently available digital signal-processing techniques are 
beginning to make advances.
The first element is the extent to which the hearing-impaired 
listener might be aware of the internal noise of the hearing aid 
itself, particularly in quiet environments where amplitude com­
pression systems will configure high gain. In such a situation, 
the hearing aid processing can detect the aspects of the envi­
ronment (e.g. the input level), can detect whether or not there is 
a ‘interesting’ signal present, and, if a decision is made that such 
a signal is not present, can suppress the hearing aid output and, 
hence, the internal noise of the hearing aid amplifier.
  

Auditory amplification in adults 
545
A more ambitious approach is to try and identify the nature 
of the input signal. This is usually done on a frequency-by- 
frequency band basis. Within any particular frequency band, a 
variety of statistics from the input signal are derived (often 
aspects of the modulation spectrum and the coherence of inter* 
band envelopes) to determine whether the input signal is likely 
to be classified as speech, or as a non-speech input. Those fre­
quency regions where the input is classified as predominantly 
speech can then be selectively amplified with respect to those 
frequency regions where the input is classified as a non-speech 
signal. Such techniques are a natural development of previous 
regimens to introduce reductions in low-frequency amplifica­
tion when an extraneous noise signal has been detected,131 but 
do so on a much more sophisticated basis. Clearly, it would be 
unreasonable to suppress all signals which were classified as 
non-speech, as the listener would then have no access to envi­
ronmental sounds in occurrences where a speech signal was not 
present. Such an implementation would be clearly dangerous. 
Of all the topics within this chapter, this element concerning 
noise reduction is likely to be the one that becomes most 
rapidly dated, given the increasing access to sophisticated pro­
cessing techniques in digital signal processing.
Bone conduction fittings
Bone conduction hearing aids have been part of the armoury of 
amplification for many years. They usually find application 
where acoustical coupling of the hearing aid to the middle ear 
is not possible, because of a disease process, traumatic injury or 
congenital malformations. In these cases, coupling has been 
achieved by placing a mechanical vibrator on the bony mastoid 
process and stimulating the cochlea via bone conduction. Such 
devices have poor sound quality, are uncomfortable, and have 
limited gain characteristics. In recent years, bone conduction 
coupling, using either transcutaneous electro-magnetic cou­
pling,132 or percutaneous direct coupling,133-139 has been devel­
oped. Such devices still find application in the relatively small 
number of listeners for whom acoustical coupling is not appro­
priate. There are instances of application of such devices to 
middle ear problems such as otosclerosis as options for acousti­
cal amplification.140 It must be pointed out, however, that at 
present, the controlled trials comparing such devices with 
appropriate acoustical amplification (and many of the trials 
have not used appropriate acoustical amplification) have yet to 
be conducted.
Implantable hearing aids
As a potential alternative to acoustical coupling to the middle 
ear, it is possible to implant electromagnetic or piezoelectric 
transducers directly on the ossicular chain.141”143 Such devices 
can be the internal component driven by an external device or 
can form part of a totally implantable unit. It is suggested that 
such devices might be suitable for listeners for whom wearing of 
an earmould is impossible (e.g. congenital abnormalities) or 
where the listener refuses to countenance an earmould (because 
of, for example, extensive problems with occlusion). In addi­
tion, the relatively low forces that are required to stimulate the 
ossicular chain might make such devices appropriate for indi­
viduals with severe or profound hearing impairment who are 
not suitable for cochlear implants and for whom acoustical 
devices deliver insufficient gain and, hence, benefit, although 
this latter possibility is not yet realized because of output 
limitations of the experimental units. It is doubtful whether 
such devices will find widespread application in the routine 
management of sensorineural hearing impairment, because of 
the requirements for surgery and the high cost of devices and 
the associated health-economic issues.
Personal communicators
There are some situations where the wearing of a hearing aid 
can be unacceptable and inappropriate. In such circumstances, 
a portable personal communicator which allows the speaker to 
present amplified sound to a hearing-impaired listener can be a 
useful aid to communication (Figure 31.20). Such devices tend 
to find application in long-stay healthcare facilities for elderly 
patients with multiple deficits.
Verification
In the light of the needs of the hearing-impaired listener and 
the availability of the various technological options and other 
features of a hearing aid fitting discussed above, the clinician 
will select and fit a hearing aid or hearing aids. Depending upon 
the decisions that have been taken, this will be achieved via a 
variety of means. A simple linear fitting might, for example, be 
implemented via a prescribed target gain, while the fitting of a 
more complex multi-channel amplitude compression device 
might be implemented via one of the published regimens to 
achieve equal loudness or normalized loudness. Perhaps more 
likely will be the increasing use of manufacturer-specific fitting 
tools associated with particular products. No matter what the 
details of the implementation, the regimen is always based upon 
the ways in which a relatively large number of hearing-impaired 
listeners perform with any given device and its fitting. 
Inevitably, an individual hearing-impaired listener can and will 
differ from the prescribed average, both in terms of the acousti­
cal characteristics of their auditory system and the ways in
Figure 31.20 Example of a portable communicator.
  

546 
Auditory disorders and their management
which their impaired hearing mechanism processes the sound 
signals. It is, therefore, imperative that clinicians do not rely on 
the assumption that the individual hearing-impaired listener 
under their care will conform to the ‘average client’ but that an 
individual process by which the hearing aid fitting is verified 
and fine-tuned is undertaken as a matter of routine.144
Acoustical verification
The ways in which hearing aids perform in standard couplers is 
different from the ways in which they perform in real ears.145-147 
It is possible to assess the performance of a hearing aid in a cou­
pler which represents the average of a set of human ears,148’ 149 
but the acoustical characteristics of ears to be fitted can and do 
vary. This is true for simple linear amplification, but becomes 
more of an issue when more complex signal processing is 
employed in the hearing aid fitting.
Although at present only a small component of clinical 
practice in the UK NHS, it is argued here that real-ear mea­
surement of the acoustical characteristics of a hearing aid fitting 
should become part and parcel of routine clinical practice.
This chapter is not the place to discuss the technical details 
of real-ear measurement systems and procedures,149”154 and a 
brief description only is given. All systems consist of a flexible 
probe tube which can be placed in close proximity to the lis­
tener’s tympanic membrane and, hence, can measure the sound 
pressure level delivered into the ear canal. The measurement is 
performed without a hearing aid to assess the acoustical charac­
teristics of the listener’s ear prior to fitting. The measurement is 
then repeated with the hearing aid in place and adjusted 
according to the particular prescription regimen. The difference 
between the two measures is the effect of fitting the hearing aid 
which can then be compared with the particular prescription 
target. There is a relatively diverse set of terminologies used in 
real-ear measures. For the purposes of this chapter, we use only 
three concepts, whose definitions are given in Table 31.1. The 
real-ear unaided response (REUR) represents the acoustical 
characteristics of the unaided ear, the real-ear aided response 
(REAR) represents the acoustical performance of the hearing 
aid in the listener’s ear, while the difference between the two,
the real-ear insertion response (REIR), represents the ways in 
which the hearing aid processes the sound.
For a simple linear fitting, a plot of the real-ear insertion as 
a function of frequency (see Figure 31.11 for an illustrative 
example) can be compared to the target prescription, and a sim­
ilar process can be repeated for the maximum power output of 
the hearing aid (in that case, the hearing aid gain is set to max­
imum and a loud input signal is used). Such a fitting is relatively 
simple and constrained, and the particular characteristics of the 
signal that are used to assess the REIR are largely immaterial, as, 
for the linear system, the gain is independent of input level and 
the spectral characteristics of the signal.
For more complex hearing aid fitting, this no longer holds. 
Instead of producing a single target as in Figure 31.11, which 
needs to be verified, there will be a whole family of targets for 
signals with different input levels, e.g. when fitting a WDRC 
device. Furthermore, the device will perform differently 
depending upon the spectral characteristics of the input signal. 
Current practice, therefore, uses a broadband input signal with 
spectral characteristics similar to those of conversational 
speech.155 This, however, is not necessarily the end of the story. 
For an amplitude compression device, the performance of the 
hearing aid fitting depends not only on the signal that is cur­
rently being presented, but also on signals that have previously 
been presented, and this becomes a particular problem in hear­
ing aids with long time constants whose characteristics vary 
only slowly. At the time of writing, the hearing aid industry and 
the audiological community have not converged upon a set of 
agreed standards for the specification of more complex hearing 
aids. One of the challenges that faces both researchers and clin­
icians is the development of verification procedures which can 
more realistically characterize the ways in which hearing aids 
perform for realistic signals when worn by hearing-impaired 
listeners.
As a matter of routine, hearing aid fittings should be 
acoustically verified by a measure of real-ear performance.
Table 31.1 Terminology used in real-ear measures for acoustical verification.
Real-ear unaided response (REUR)
Real-ear aided response (REAR)
Real-ear insertion response (REIR)
A plot of the sound-pressure level arriving in the 
ear canal as a function of frequency for a given 
input signal presented at a given level from a 
given orientation measured in the listener's 
open ear.
A plot of the sound-pressure level 
arriving in the ear canal as a function of 
frequency for a given input signal 
presented at a given level from a given 
orientation in the listener's open ear 
measured with the hearing aid adjusted 
and in situ.
The REUR subtracted from the REAR 
to provide a representation of 
the effect of the hearing aid 
on a given input signal.
  

Auditory amplification in adults 
547
Table 31.2 Examples of environments which 
might be 
employed in a fine-tuning process.
Soft speech presented in-quiet 
Soft speech presented in-noise 
Conversational speech presented in-quiet 
Conversational speech presented in-noise 
Loud speech presented in-quiet 
Loud speech presented in-noise 
Listener's own voice 
Traffic noise
Fine-tuning
As has been mentioned previously, a particular fitting rationale 
locates a set of hearing aid characteristics that are thought to be 
appropriate for the average of hearing'impaired listeners, with, 
for example, audiometric thresholds, thresholds of uncomfort' 
able listening, and loudness growth relationships, depending on 
the input to the rationale. Any given hearings impaired listener 
is likely to differ from the overall average in ways that are not 
necessarily connected with the detailed acoustics of their ear 
(as appropriate to the verification process) but associated with 
their perceptions of different sound of different spectrum and 
intensity. It is, therefore, necessary to conduct a process of fine- 
tuning so that the listener’s perception of a range of different 
sounds is appropriate for the hearing aid fitting. Table 31.2 con­
tains a possible list of the sorts of sound situations which might 
be presented to a listener and their responses elicited. These 
attempt to encompass the range of listening environments 
likely to occur in everyday life and that are, therefore, appro- 
priate to the hearing aid fitting. They include listening to 
speech in quiet and noise in a variety of presentation levels in 
addition to loud extraneous sound represented by traffic noise 
and the important perception of the listener’s own voice. It is 
clear that some of these can be conducted informally between 
the fitter and hearing-impaired listener, though increasingly 
practitioners will access calibrated systems of pre-recorded 
material so that listeners can be assessed and questioned in 
more controlled environments. The sorts of responses that will 
be informative to the fitter will include ‘too quiet’, ‘too loud’, 
‘too boomy’, and ‘too tinny’, and depending upon the controls 
available, adjustment of the hearing aid devices and their fitting 
packages provide fine-tuning guides which couple to the hard­
ware and software controls on the hearing aid in an interactive 
manner. Indeed, researchers are developing fitting rationales of 
an adaptive nature whereby the listener’s perceptions of differ­
ent sound signals feed back in an interactive manner to the 
characteristics of the hearing aid fitting itself.
Systematic fine'tuning of a hearing aid fitting, considered 
over a range of auditory environments, should become 
part of practice as technological flexibility increases.
Evaluation
Even when a clinician has fully assessed the needs and charac­
teristics of a hearing-impaired listener, and properly verified and 
fine-tuned the fitting to achieve a good technological match 
and acceptance by the user, the process is by no means ended. 
There is abundant evidence that ongoing care is required to 
maximize the benefit that listeners derive from hearing aid fit­
tings and that continued information and support is required to 
minimize residual disabilities and handicaps. 
Therefore, all 
hearing aid programmes should contain elements whereby lis­
teners are followed up to assess the success or otherwise of a 
hearing aid fitting and the extent to which further intervention 
might be required.
If it is accepted that the objective of intervention is to min­
imize the disabilities and handicaps experienced by hearing- 
impaired listeners, then it naturally follows that the success or 
otherwise of a hearing aid fitting should be assessed by measures 
of those very entities. Almost independent of the mode of 
healthcare delivery (but increasingly important in systems such 
as the UK NHS) is an evaluation culture whereby services are 
required to document the quality standards that they employ 
and to strive for continuously improved performance. The 
funding agencies for services wish to know the extent to which 
the facilities they provide are clinically effective and cost- 
effective, and as the range of technological options and reha­
bilitative contexts available to practitioners increases, then 
targeting those options to hearing-impaired listeners will 
require routine information regarding the performance of a 
service and its various components.
This background implies that a routine component of hear­
ing aid fitting should be an evaluation of the extent to which the 
fitting has alleviated the disabilities and handicaps experienced 
by hearing-impaired listeners as a means of making sensible deci­
sions about the future management of individual hearing- 
impaired listeners, and also providing information concerning 
the performance of the healthcare system. The requirements 
placed upon an outcome measure become quite severe when the 
intention to provide system information regarding the extent to 
which a practice, clinic or service is meeting its objectives is 
coupled with the need to provide clinically useful information 
regarding management of hearing-impaired listeners. Any prac­
tical outcome measure must have high face validity for both the 
hearing-impaired listener and the audiologist (that is, it must be 
clear to both parties that the information that is being gathered 
is relative and appropriate). If the outcome measure is used in the 
optimization and development of services, it must be sensitive 
to changes in both the technological content (the hearing aids 
themselves and their fittings) and the rehabilitative context. A 
useful outcome measure should have the discriminatory power 
to reliably identify appropriate changes in the effectiveness and 
cost-effectiveness. Furthermore, outcome measures which have 
a clinical utility in the management process (that is, they actu­
ally help clinicians with the task of patient management) are 
more likely to find widespread acceptance than instances which
  

548 
Auditory disorders and their management
serve only as some form of quality control. Thus, an outcome 
measure aims to fulfil both the system evaluation requirement 
and the requirement to guide management of individual 
patients. A myriad of hearing disability and handicap scales 
have been used to assess the effectiveness of hearing aid fittings 
in the past, and there is a substantive body of literature docu­
menting the psychometric evaluation and the properties of such 
scales.119, 164-173 Although naturally partisan because of this 
author’s own activity, a little space is devoted here to one partic­
ular outcome measure (The Glasgow Hearing Aid Benefit 
Profile—GHABP), which is finding increasing relevance in the 
UK NHS context.174-176 This is given as an example of the sort 
of measure and application that is envisaged.
In considering the desirable properties of an outcome mea­
sure, it is suggested that in addition to the required psycho­
metric abilities, an outcome measure should recognize and 
appropriately access the different dimensions of disability and 
benefit. It should retain the ability to address the relevant con­
cerns of individual hearing-impaired listeners while providing 
outputs which are analytically tractable and psychometrically 
viable. It is argued that good audiological practice will require, 
in addition to some measure of auditory impairment prior to 
hearing aid fitting, an assessment of recognition of the disabil­
ity experienced by the client, and the extent to which that dis­
ability impacts upon the client’s life (hearing handicap). Where 
an audiologist wishes to ascertain the extent to which inter­
vention has been successful, it will be required to have some 
indication of the extent to which the client makes use of the 
hearing aid, the extent to which the hearing aid fitting has 
delivered benefit to the client, the extent to which the client 
has residual problems which may or may not require further 
intervention, and the extent to which the client is satisfied with 
the overall delivery of service. The GHABP attempts to access 
these dimensions while allowing the client to participate in the 
problem-setting and -solving exercise by determining the goals 
of the intervention. Space in this chapter does not permit a full 
description of the steps and principles that have entered into 
the generation or validation of the GHABP, and the details are 
available elsewhere. A tool such as the GHABP can be appro­
priate for the evaluation of the system, and is sensitive to 
changes in the technological content of a service, the hearing 
aids and the rehabilitative context within which those devices 
are prescribed. Although a different clinical setting might lead 
to a different choice of particular outcome measure, it is argued 
that routine evaluation of the extent to which a hearing aid 
fitting has achieved its required objectives should be an essen­
tial component of modem clinical practice.
Routine evaluation of the extent to which hearing aid fit­
tings alleviate disability and handicap should accompany 
hearing aid fittings as a matter of routine to guide 
individual management decisions and as part of system 
quality standards.
Future developments
Any contribution which attempts to survey hearing aids and 
their fitting in a time of rapid technological change will, of 
necessity, date rapidly. The particular devices that are available 
and the processing that they employ have changed enormously 
over the last 2-3 years, and the only safe prediction that one 
can make is that this pace of change will increase rather than 
decrease. The flexibility of devices that are available to clinical 
practitioners will increase, although the extent to which a state- 
funded health care system such as the UK NHS will have access 
to that technology remains unclear. Consequences of this rapid 
technological change are that the clinical trial information that 
is required to validate particular processing and its fitting to hear­
ing-impaired listeners will almost inevitably lag behind the 
availability of the devices, and that as hearing aids employ more 
complex processing specific to individual manufacturers (incor­
porated, among other motives, for sales and marketing reasons), 
particular fitting rationales and regimens are likely to be manu- 
facture-specific rather then generic. Clinical practitioners will 
have to exercise care to understand the particular motivation 
and content of different hearing aid processing and fitting, and 
themselves gamer information concerning the extent to which 
different devices and rationales are providing benefits to their 
patients and clients. Given the wide range of technological pos­
sibilities and the different and sometimes conflicting rationales 
which underpin them, it would appear likely that there are dif­
ferent groups of hearing-impaired listeners who will gain benefit 
from different rationales and approaches. One of the prime chal­
lenges for future researchers and clinicians is to determine sets of 
principles which match the technological features of hearing 
aids and their fittings to the characteristics and needs of hearing- 
impaired listeners to maximize the benefit that they receive, and 
to package such procedures into forms which can be applied clin­
ically with all of the constraints on time and resources that that 
requirement imposes.
References
1. Haggard MP, Gatehouse S. Candidate for hearing aids: justifica­
tion for the concept and two-part criterion. BrJ Audiol. 1993; 27: 
271-6.
2. Olsen W. Physical characteristics of hearing aids. In: Hodgson W, 
ed. Hearing Aid Assessment ands Use in Audiologic Habilitation. 
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1986; 13-37.
3. Clasen T, Vesterager V. ln-the-ear hearing aids: a comparative 
investigation of the use of custom-made versus modular type aids. 
Scand Audiol 1987; 16(4) 195-200.
4. Henrichsen J, Noring E. ln-the-ear hearing aids. The use and 
benefit in the elderly hearing-impaired. Scand Audiol 1988; 17:
209-12.
5. Henrichsen J, Noring E. The use and benefit of in-the-ear hearing 
aids: a four-year follow-up examination. Scand Audiol 1991; 20(1): 
55-9.
  

Auditory amplification in adults 
549
6. Jerivall L, Almqvist B. Clinical trial of in-the-ear hearing aids. 
Scand Audiol 1983; 12. 63-70.
7. Meredith R, Stephens D. In-the-ear and behind-the-ear hearing 
aids in the elderly. Scand Audiol 1993; 2: 211-16.
8. Parving A, Boisen G. In-the-canal hearing aids. Scand Audiol 
1990; 19: 25-30.
9. Pumford J, Seewald R, Scollie S, Jenstad L. Speech recognition 
with in-the-ear and behind-the-ear dual-microphone hearing 
instruments. J Am A cad Audiol 2000; 11(1): 23-35.
10. Stuart A, Allen R. The effects of venting on in-the-ear canal, and 
completely-in-the-ear-canal hearing aid shell frequency responses: 
real-ear measures. J Speech Language Hear Res 1999; 42: 804-13.
11. Turk R. A clinical comparison between behind-the-ear and in- 
the-ear hearing aids. Audiol Acoust 1986; 25: 76-86.
12. Agnew J. Hearing aid adjustment through potentiometers and 
switch options. In: Valente M, ed. Hearing Aids: Standards, Options 
and Limitations. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers, 1996;
210-51.
13. Dejonge R. Microcomputer applications for hearing aid selection 
and fitting. Trends Ampl 1996; 1(3): 114.
14. Fortune T. Amplifiers and circuit algorithms of contemporary hear­
ing aids. In: Valente M, ed. Hearing Aids: Standards, Options and 
Limitations. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers, 1996; 152-209.
15. Agnew J. Digital hearing aid terminology made simple: a handy 
glossary. Hear] 2000; 53(3): 37, 40-44.
16. Arlinger S, Billermark E. One-year follow-up of users of a digital 
hearing aid. BrJ Audiol 1999; 33: 223-32.
17. Arlinger S, Billermark E, Oberg M, Lunner T, Hellgren J. Clinical 
trial of the Oticon Digifocus hearing aid. Scand Audiol 1998; 27: 
51-61.
18. Berminger E, Karslsson KK. Clinical study of Widex Senso on 
first-time hearing aid users. Scand Audiol 1999; 28: 117-25.
19. Bille M, Jensen A, Kjarbol E, Vesterager V, Sibelle P, Nielsen H. 
Clinical study of a digital versus an analogue hearing aid. Scand 
Audiol 1999; 28: 127-35.
20. Boymans M, Dreschler W, Schoneveld P, Verschure H. Clinical 
evaluation of a full-digital in-the-ear hearing instrument. A udiol- 
ogy 1999; 38: 99-108.
21. Bray V, Nilsson M, Ghent R, Johnson J. Results from a clinical 
evaluation of a new DSP hearing aid using an optimized platform. 
Poster presentation at the 11th meeting of the American Academy 
of Audiology, Miami Beach, FL, 1999.
22. Knebel S, Bentler R. Comparison of two digital hearing aids. Ear 
Hear 1998; 19(4): 280-9.
23. Lunner T, Hellgren J, Arlinger S, Elberling C. A digital filterbank 
hearing aid: three digital signal processing algorithms—user 
preference and performance. Ear Hear 1997; 18(5): 373-87.
24. Lunner T, Arlinger S, Hellgren J. 8-channel digital filter feedbank 
for hearing aid use: preliminary results in monaural, diotic and 
dichotic modes. Scand Audiol 1993; 38(suppl): 75-81.
25. Lunner T, Hellgren J, Arlinger S, Elberling C. A digital filterbank 
hearing aid: improving a prescriptive fitting with subjective 
adjustments. Scand Audiol 1997; 26: 169-76.
26. Lunner T, Hellgren J, Arlinger S, Elberling C. A digital filterbank
hearing aid: predicting user preference and performance for two 
signal processing algorithms. Ear Hear 1997; 18(5): 12-25.
27. Lunner T, Hellgren J, Arlinger S, Elberling C. Non-linear signal 
processing in digital hearing aids. Scand Audiol 1998; 27(suppl 49): 
40-9.
28. Murray D, Hanson J. Application of digital signal processing to 
hearing aids: a critical survey. J Am A cad Audiol 1992; 3: 145-52.
29. Newman C, Sandridge S. (1998). Benefit from, satisfaction with, 
and cost effectiveness of three different hearing aid technologies. 
Am J Audiol 7(2):115-28.
30. Ringdahl A, Magnusson L, Edberg P, Thelin L. Clinical evalua­
tion of a digital power hearing instrument. Hear Rev 2000; 7(3): 
59-62, 64.
31. Roeser R, Taylor K. Audiometric and field trials with a digital 
hearing instrument. Hear Instr 1988; 39(4): 14-6, 18, 20, 22.
32. Sweetow R. Selection and fitting of programmable and digital 
hearing aids. In: Valente M, Roeser R, Hosford-Dunn H, eds. 
Audiology: Treatment Strategies, New York: Thieme Medical Pub­
lishers, 1999.
33. Valente M, Fabry D, Potts L, Sandlin R. Comparing the perfor­
mance of the Widex Senso digital hearing aids with analog hear­
ing aids. J Am Acad Audiol 1998; 9: 342-60.
34. Valente M, Sweetow R, Potts L, Bingea B. Digital versus analog 
signal processing: effect of directional microphone. J Am Acad 
Audiol 1999; 10: 133-50.
35. Byrne D. Key issue in hearing aid selection and evaluation. J Am 
Acad Audiol 1992; 3: 67-80.
36. Byrne D. Hearing selection for the 1990s: Where to? J Am Acad 
Audiol 1996; 7: 377-95.
37. Hawkins D. Selection of hearing aid characteristics. In: Hodgson 
W, ed. Hearing Aid Assessment and Use in Audiologic Habilitation. 
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1986; 128-51.
38. Walden BE. Toward a model clinical-trials protocol for substantiat­
ing hearing aid user-benefit claims. Am] Audiol 1997; 6(2): 13-24.
39. Kuhn G F. Model for the interaural time differences in the 
azimuthal plane. J Acoust Soc Am 1997; 62: 157-67.
40. Shaw E A G. Transformation of sound pressure level from the free 
field to the eardrum in the horizontal plane. J Acoust Soc Am 1975; 
56 : 1848-61.
41. Byrne D, Noble W. Effects of hearing aids on localization of sounds 
by people with sensorineural and conductive/mixed hearing loss. 
Aus] Audiol 1995; 17(2): 79-86.
42. Byrne D, Noble W. Effects of earmold type on ability to locate 
sounds when wearing hearing aids. Ear Hear 1996; 17: 3.
43. Byrne D, Noble W. Optimising sound localization with hearing 
aids. Trends Ampl 1998; 3: 49-73.
44. Byrne D, Sinclair S. Open earmold fittings for improving aided 
auditory localization for sensorineural hearing losses with good 
high-frequency hearing. Ear Hear 1998; 19: 62-71.
45. Lorenzi C, Gatehouse S, Lever C. Sound localization in noise in 
normal-hearing listeners. J Acoust Soc Am 1999; 105(3): 1810-20.
46. Noble W, Byrne D. Auditory localization under conditions of uni­
lateral fitting of different hearing aid systems. BrJ Audiol 1991; 15: 
237-50.
  

550 
Auditory disorders and their management
47. Lorenzi C, Gatehouse S, Lever C. Sound localization in noise in 
hearing-impaired listeners. J Acoust Soc Am 1999; 105(6): 
3454-63.
48. Zurek PM. Binaural advantages and directional effects in speech 
intelligibility. Acoustical Factors Affecting Hearing Aid Performance. 
2nd edn. Studebaker GA and Hockberg I, eds. Boston, Allyn- 
Bacon, 1980: 255-76.
49. Byrne D. Clinical issues and options in binaural hearing aid fit­
ting. Ear Hear 1987; 2(5): 187-93.
50. Colburn HS, Zurek PM. Binaural directional hearing-impairments 
and aids. Directional Hearing. Yost WA and Gourevitch G. New 
York, Springer-Verlag, 1987: 261-78.
51. Day GA, Browning GG, Gatehouse S. Benefit from binaural hear­
ing aids in individuals with severe hearing impairment. BrJ Audiol 
1988; 22: 273-7.
52. Gatehouse S, Haggard M P. The influence of hearing asymmetries 
on benefits from binaural amplification. Hear J 1986; 22(1): 
15-20.
53. Hawkins DB, Yacullo WS. Signal-to-noise ratio advantage of bin­
aural hearing aids and directional microphones under different 
levels of reverberation. J Speech Hear Dis 1984; 49: 278-86.
54. Jerger J, Carhart R, Dirks D. Binaural hearing aids and speech 
intelligibility. J Speech Hear Res 1961; 4(2): 137-48.
55. Chmiel R, Jerger J. Unsuccessful use of binaural amplification by 
an elderly person. J Am Acad Audiol 1997; 8: 1-10.
56. Emmer M. Review of late-onset auditory deprivation and clinical 
implications. HearJ 1999; 52(11): 26, 28-30, 32.
57. Hurley R. Recovery from the unaided ear effect. Hear J 1999; 
52(11): 35-6, 38 ,40. Hear Rev 5(9): 40-2, 71.
58. Palmer C. Deprivation and acclimatization in the human auditory 
system: do they happen? Do they matter? HearJ 1999; 52(11): 
2323-4.
59. Silman S, Gelfand SS. Late-onset auditory deprivation: effects of 
monaural versus binaural hearing aids. J Acoust Soc Am 1984; 
76(5): 1357-62.
60. Byrne D. Implications of the National Acoustic Laboratories 
(NAL) research for hearing gain and frequency response selection 
strategies. In: Acoustical Factors Affecting Hearing Aid Performance. 
Studebaker GA, Hochberg I, Boston: Allyn-Bacon, 1980: 8: 
119-31.
61. Byrne D, Dillon H. The National Acoustic Laboratories (NAL) 
new procedure for selecting gain and frequency response of a hear­
ing aid. Ear Hear, 1986; 7: 257-65.
62. Byrne D, Parkinson A, Newall P. Hearing aid gain and frequency 
response requirements for the severely/profound hearing impaired. 
Ear Hear 1990; 11: 40-9.
63. Humes LE. An evaluation of several rationales for selecting hear­
ing aid gain. J Speech Hear Dis 1986; 51: 272-81.
64. Humes LE, Hailing D. Overview, rationale and comparison of 
suprathreshold-based prescriptive methods. In: Valente M, ed. 
Strategies for Selecting and Verifying Hearing Aid Fittings, New York: 
Thieme Medical Publishers, 1994; 19-37.
65. Leijon A, Lindkvist A, Ringdahl A, Israelsson B. Sound quality 
and speech reception for prescribed hearing aid frequency 
responses. Ear Hear 1991; 12(4): 251-60.
66. Libby R. The 1/3-2/3 insertion gain hearing aid selection guide. 
Hear Instr 1986; 37: 27-8.
67. McCandless G. Hearing aid formulae and their application. In: 
Sandlin R, ed. Handbook of Hearing Aid Amplification, Vol. 1. 
Boston: Little Brown and Company, 1988; 221-38.
68. McCandless G. Overview and rationale of threshold-based hear­
ing aid selection procedures. In: Valente M, ed. Strategies for 
Selecting and Verifying Hearing Aid Fittings. New York: Thieme 
Medical Publishers, 1994; 1-18.
69. McCandless G, Lyregaard P. Prescription of gain/output (POGO) 
for hearing aids. Hear Instrum 1983; 34: 16-21.
70. Macrae JH, Dillon H. Gain, frequency response and maximum 
output requirements for hearing aids. J Rehab Res Dev 1996; 33(4): 
363-76.
71. Moore BCJ, Glasberg B R. Use of a loudness model for hearing-aid 
fitting. 1. Linear hearing aids. BrJ Audiol 1998; 32: 317-35.
72. Palmer C, Lindley G, Mormer E. Selection and fitting of conven­
tional hearing aids. In: Valente M, Roeser R, Hosford-Dunn H, 
eds. Audiology: Treatment Strategies. New York: Thieme Medical 
Publishers 1999.
73. Valente M, Bentler R, Seewald R, Trine T, Van Vliet D. Guide­
lines for hearing aid fitting for adults. Am J Audiol 1998; 7: 5-13.
74. Harrowven R. Insertion gain versus median ear corrected coupler 
gain: a comparison of two fitting methods in new NHS hearing aid 
users. BrJ Audiol 1998; 32: 153-65.
75. Swan I R C ,  Gatehouse S. The value of routine in-the-ear mea­
surement of hearing aid gain. BrJ Audiol 1995; 29: 271-7.
76. Fortune TW, Preves DA. Hearing aid saturation and aided loud­
ness discomfort. J Speech Hear Res 1992, 35: 175-85.
77. Gabrielsson A, Sjogren H. Perceived sound quality of hearing aids. 
Scand Audiol 1979; 8: 159-69.
78. Stelmachowicz P, Lewis D, Hoover B, Keefe D. Subjective effects 
of peak clipping and compression limiting in normal and hearing- 
impaired children. J Acoust Soc Am 1999; 105: 412-22.
79. Dillon H, Storey L. The National Acoustic Laboratories’ proce­
dure for selecting the saturation sound pressure level of hearing 
aids: theoretical derivation. Ear Hear 1998; 19: 255-66.
80. Mueller, HG, Bright, KE. Selection and verification of maximum 
output. In: Valente M, ed. Strategies for Selecting and Verifying Hear­
ing Aid Fittings. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers, 1994;
38-63.
81. Pascoe DP. Clinical measurement of the auditory dynamic range and 
their relation to the formulas for hearing aid gain. In: Jensen JH, ed. 
Hearing Aid Fitting: Theoretical and Practical Views. 13th Danavox 
Symposium. Copenhagen: Stougaard Jensen, 1988; 129-52.
82. Storey L, Dillon H. The national acoustic laboratories procedure 
for selecting the saturation sound pressure level of hearing aids: 
experimental validation. Ear Hear 1998; 19: 267-79.
83. Moore B. Benefits of linear amplification and multichannel com­
pression for speech comprehension in backgrounds with spectral 
and temporal dips. J Acoust Soc Am 1999; 105: 400-11.
84. Dempsey JJ. The occlusion effect created by custom canal hearing 
aids. Am] Otol 1990; 11(1): 44-6.
85. Mueller HG, Northern BK. Studies of the hearing aid occlusion 
effect. Semin Hear 1996; 17(1): 21-32.
  

Auditory amplification in adults 
551
86. Barker C, Dillon H. Client preferences for compression threshold 
in single-channel wide dynamic range compression hearing aids. 
Ear Hear 1999; 20: 127-39.
87. Chouard C, Ouayoun M, Meyer B et al. Auditory performances 
of a 3-4-7 programmable numeric filter hearing aid. Audiology 
1997; 36: 339-53.
88. Comelisse L, Seewald R, Jamieson D. Wide dynamic range 
compression hearing aids: the DSL[i/o] approach. Hear J 1995; 
47(10): 23-4, 26, 28-9.
89. Cox RM. (1995). Using loudness data for hearing aid selection: 
the IHAFF approach. HearJ 1995; 48(2): 10, 39-44.
90. Dillon H. Compression in hearing aids. In: Sandlin R, ed. Hand­
book of Hearing Aid Amplification, Vol. 1. Boston: Little Brown 
and Company, 1988; 121-46.
91. Dillon H, Byrne D, Brewer S, Katsch R, Ching T, Keidser G. 
NAL non-Linear (NAL-NL1). (Version 1.01 User Manual). 
Chatswood, 1998.
92. Hickson L, Thyer N, Bates D. Acoustic analysis of speech through 
a hearing aid: consonant-vowel ratio effects with a two-channel 
compression amplification. J Am Acad Audiol 1999; 10: 549-56.
93. Jenstad L, Pumford J, Seewald R, Comelisse L. Comparison of 
linear gain and wide dynamic range compression hearing aid cir­
cuits II: aided loudness measures. Ear Hear 2000; 21: 32-44.
94. Jenstad L, Seewald R, Comelisse L, Shantz J. Comparison of lin­
ear gain and wide dynamic range compression hearing aid circuits: 
aided speech perception measures. Ear Hear 1999; 20: 117-26.
95. Kam A, Wong L. Comparison of performance with wide range 
compression and linear amplification. J Am Acad Audiol 1999; 
10: 445-57.
96. Keidser G, Dillon H, Brewer S. Using the NAL-NL1 prescriptive 
procedure with advanced hearing instruments. Hear Rev 1999; 
6(11): 8, 10, 12, 16, 18.
97. Kochkin S. Customer satisfaction and subjective benefit with 
high performance hearing aids. Hear Rev 1996; 3(12): 16-26.
98. Kuk F. Rationale and requirements for a slow-acting compression 
hearing aid. HearJ 1998; 51(6): 45-53, 79.
99. Lindley G, Palmer C. Fitting wide dynamic range compression 
hearing aids: DSL [i/o], the IHAFF protocol, and FIG6. Am J 
Audiol 1997; 6: 19-28.
100. Moore BCJ, Glasberg BR. A comparison of four methods of 
implementing automatic gain control (AGC) in hearing aids. Br 
J Audiol 1988; 22: 93-104.
101. Moore BCJ, Glasberg BR. Optimization of a slow-acting auto­
matic gain control system for use in hearing aids. Br J A udiol 
1991; 25: 171-82.
102. Moore BCJ, Glasbert BR. Use of a loudness model for hearing aid 
fitting: III A general method for deriving initial fittings for hear­
ing aids with multi-channel compression. B rJ Audiol 1999; 33: 
241-58.
103. Stelmachowicz P, Dalzell S, Peterson D, Kopun J, Lewis D, 
Hoover B. A comparison of threshold based fitting strategies for 
nonlinear hearing aids. Ear Hear 1998; 19: 131-8.
104. Stone MA, Moore BCJ. Comparison of different forms of com­
pression using wearable digital hearing aids. J Acoust Soc Am 
1999; 106(6): 3603-19.
105. Gatehouse S, Elberling CE, Naylor G. Aspects of auditory ecol­
ogy and psychoacoustic function as determinants of benefits from 
and candidature for non-linear processing in hearing aids. In: 
Rasmussen AN ed. Auditory Models and Non-linear Hearing Instru­
ments, 18th Danavox Symposium Holmens Trykkeri, 1999; 
221-34.
106. Elberling CE, Hansen KV. Hearing instruments—interaction 
with user preference. In Rasmussen AN ed. Auditory Models and 
Non-linear Hearing Instruments, 18th Danavox Symposium, 
Holmens. Trykkeri, 1999, 341-8.
107. Keidser G. The relationship between listening conditions and 
alternative amplification schemes for multiple memory hearing 
aids. Ear Hear 1995; 16(6): 575-86.
108. Keidser G, Dillon H, Byrne D. Guidelines for fitting multiple 
memory hearing aids. J Am A cad Audiol 1996; 7: 406-18.
109. Cox RM, Gilmore C. Development of the profile of hearing aid 
performance (PHAP). J Speech Hear Res 1990; 33: 343-57.
110. Frank T, Gooden RG. The effect of hearing aid microphone types 
on speech scores in a background of multi-talker noise. Maico 
Audiol Library Series 1973; 11(5): 1-4.
111. Hoffman M, Stewart R. Simulation of multi-microphone hearing 
aids in multiple interference environments. BrJ Audiol 1996; 30: 
249-60.
112. Leeuw AR, Dreschler WA. Advantage of directional hearing aid 
microphones related to room acoustics. Audiology 1991; 3: 
330-44.
113. Lentz WE. Speech discrimination in the presence of background 
noise using a hearing aid with a directionally-sensitive micro­
phone. Maico Audiol Library Series 1972; 10(9): 1-4.
114. Lurquin P, Rafhay S. Intelligibility in noise using multi­
microphone hearing aids. A eta Otorhinlarynol (Belg) 1996; 50: 
103-9.
115. Madison TK, Hawkins DB. The signal-to-noise ratio advantage 
of directional microphones. Hear Instr 1983; 34(2): 18, 49.
116. Nielson HB. A comparison between hearing aids with a direc­
tional microphone and hearing aids with a conventional micro­
phone. Scand Audiol 1973; 2: 45-8.
117. Nielson HB, Ludvigsen C. Effects of hearing aids with directional 
microphones in different acoustic environments. Scand Audiol 
1978; 7: 217-24.
118. Ricketts T, Dhar S. Comparing performance across three direc­
tional hearing aids. J Am Acad Audiol 1999; 10: 180-9.
119. Ricketts T. Directivity quantification in hearing aids: fitting and 
measurement effects. Ear Hear 2000; 21: 45-58.
120. Ricketts T, Mueller G. Making sense of directional microphone 
hearing aids. Am J Audiol 1999; 8(2): 117-27.
121. Sung GS, Sung RJ, Angelelli RM. Directional microphone in 
hearing aids. Arch Otol 1975; 101: 316-19.
122. Upfold LLP. Directional advantage with lower gain directional 
hearing aids. AustJ Audiol 1996; 18(1): 35-45.
123. Valente M, Fabry D, Potts L. Recognition of speech in noise with 
hearing aids using dual microphones. J Am A cad Audiol 1995; 6: 
440-9.
124. Voss T. Clinical evaluation of multi-microphone hearing instru­
ments. Hear Rev 1997; 4(9): 36, 45-6, 74.
  

552 
Auditory disorders and their management
125. Dyrlund O, Bisgaard N. Acoustic feedback margin improvements 
in hearing instruments with a prototype DFS (digital feedback 
suppression system). Scand Audiol 1991; 20: 49-53.
126. Dyrlund O, Henningsen L. Bisgaard N, Jensen J. Digital feedback 
suppression (DFS). Characteristics of feedback-margin improve- 
ment in a DFS hearing instrument. Scand Audiol 1994; 23: 
135-8.
127. Dyrlund O, Ludvigsen C. Hearing aid measurements with speech 
and noise signals. Scand Audiol 1994; 33(3): 153-7.
128. Engebretson M, French-St M, O’Connell G, O’Connell MP. 
Adaptive feedback stabilization of hearing aids. Scand Audiol 
1993; 38: 56-64.
129. Hellgren J, Lunner T, Arlinger S. System identification of feed­
back in hearing aids. J Acoust Soc Am 1999; 105 (6): 3481-96.
130. St George MF, Wood DJ. Behavioural assessment of adaptive 
feedback equalization in a digital hearing aid. J Rehab Res Dev 
1993; 30(1): 17-25.
131. Van Tasell DJ, Crain TR. Noise reduction hearing aids: release 
from masking and release from distortion. Ear Hear 1992; 13(2): 
114-21.
132. Browning GG. The British experience of an implantable, subcu­
taneous bone conduction hearing aid (Xomed Audiant). J Laryn­
gol Otol 1990; 104: 534-8.
133. Carlsson P, Hakansson B. A speech-to-noise ratio test with the 
bone-anchored hearing aid: a comparative study. Otol Head Neck 
Surg, 1986; 94: 421-6.
134. Cooper HR, Burrell SP. The Birmingham bone anchored hearing 
aid programme: referrals, selection, rehabilitation, philosophy 
and adult. J Laryngol Otol 1996; BAH A Suppl: 13-20.
135. Hakansson B, Tjellstrom A. The bone-anchored hearing aid. 
Acta Otol (Stockh) 1985; 100: 229-39.
136. Mylanus EAM, Snik AFM. Audiological results for the bone- 
anchored hearing aid HC220. Ear Hear 1994; 15: 187-92.
137. Mylanus EAM, Snik AFM. Patients’ opinions of bone-anchored 
vs conventional hearing aids. Arch Otol Head Neck Surg 1995; 
121:421-5.
138. Ringdahl A, Eriksson-Mangold M. Perceived sound quality of 
three bone-anchored hearing aid models. Br J Audiol 1995; 29: 
309-14.
139. Ringdahl A, Israelsson B. Paired comparisons between the clas­
sic 300 bone-anchored and conventional bone-conduction hear­
ing aids in terms of sound quality and speech intelligibility. Br J 
Audiol 1995; 29: 290-307.
140. Burrell SP, Cooper HC. The bone anchored hearing aid. The 
third option for otosclerosis. J Laryngol Otol 1996; BAH A Suppl: 
31-7.
141. Gyo K, Saiki T, Yanaghihara N. Implantable hearing aid using a 
piezoelectric ossicular vibrator: a speech audiometry study. A udi­
ology 1996; 35: 271-6.
142. Yanagihara N, Aritoma H, Yamanaka E, Gyo K. Implantable 
hearing aids. Arch Otol Head Neck Surg 1987; 113: 869-72.
143. Yanagihara N, Hinohira Y. Surgical rehabilitation of deafness 
with partially implantable hearing aid using piezoelectric ceramic 
bimorphiossicular vibrator. Auris Nasus Larynx 1997; 24: 91-8.
144. Bentler R. Future trends in verification strategies. In: Valente M, 
ed. Strategies for Selecting and Verifying Hearing Aid Fittings. New 
York: Thieme Medical Publishers, 1994: 343-62.
145. Fikret-Para S, Revit LJ. Individualised correction factors in the 
pre-selection of hearing aids. J Speech Hear Res 1992; 35:384-400.
146. Munro K, Hatton N. Customized acoustic transform functions 
and their accuracy in predicting real-ear hearing aid perfor­
mance. Ear Hear 2000; 2 1: 59-69.
147. Mueller HG, Hawkins D, Northern J. Probe Microphone Measure­
ments. Hearing Aid Selection and Assessment. San Diego: Singular 
Press, 1992.
148. American National Standards Institute. Specification of Hearing 
Aid Characteristics ANSI S3.22-1987. New York: Acoustical 
Society of America, 1987.
149. American National Standards Institute. American National Stan­
dard for Specification of Hearing Aid Characteristics. ANSI S3.22- 
1996. New York: ANSI, 1996.
150. Cole W, Sinclair S, Block M, Baer J, Groth J, Majest B. Equip­
ment to assess the performance of nonlinear hearing aids. Trends
Ampl 1998; 3(4): 122-71.
151. Dejonge R. Real-ear measures: individual variations and mea­
surement error. In: Valente M, ed. Hearing Aids: Standards, 
Options and Limitations. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers, 
1996: 72-125.
152. Preves D, Curran J. Hearing aid instrumentation and procedures 
for electroacoustic testing. In: Valente M, Roeser R, Hosford- 
Dunn H, eds. Audiology: Treatment Strategies, New York: Thieme 
Medical Publishers 1999.
153. Revit L. Real-ear measures. In: Valente M, Roeser R, Hosford- 
Dunn H, eds. A udiology: Treatment Strategies. New York: Thieme 
Medical Publishers 1999.
154. Tecca J. Use of real-ear measures to verify hearing aid fitting. 
In: Valente M, ed. Strategies for Selecting and Verifying Hearing 
Aid Fittings. New York:Thieme Medical Publishers, 1994: 
88-107.
155. American National Standards Institute. American National Stan­
dard for Testing Hearing Aids with a Broad-band Noise Signal. ANSI 
S3.42-1992. New York: ANSI, 1992.
156. Brooks D N. Counselling and its effect on hearing aid use. Scand 
Audiol 1979; 9: 101-7.
157. Brooks D N. The time course of adaption to hearing aid use. Br J 
Audiol 1996; 30: 55-62.
158. Gatehouse S. The time course and magnitude of perceptual 
acclimatization to frequency responses: evidence from monaural 
fitting of hearing aids. J Acoust Am 1992; 92: 1258-68.
159. Gatehouse S. Role of perceptual acclimatization in the selection 
of frequency responses for hearing aids. J Am Acad Audiol 1993; 
4: 296-306.
160. Lindley G. Adaptation to loudness: implications for hearing aid 
fittings. HearJ 1999; 52(11): 50, 52, 56-7.
161. Sweetow RW. Counselling: it’s the key to successful hearing aid 
fitting. HearJ 1999; 52(3): 10-17.
162. Ward PR. Effectiveness of aftercare for older people prescribed a 
hearing aid for the first time. Scand Audiol 1981; 10: 99-106.
  

Auditory amplification in adults 
553
163. Ward PR, Gowers JI. Fitting hearing aids: the effects of method 
of instruction. BrJ Audiol 1980; 14: 15-18.
164. Cox RM, Alexander GC. The abbreviated profile of hearing aid 
benefit. Ear Hear 1995; 16: 176-86.
165. Dillon H. Shortened hearing aid performance inventory for the 
elderly (SHAPIE): a statistical approach. Aust J Audiol 1994; 
16(1): 37-48.
166. Dillon H, James A, Ginis J. Client-oriented scale of improve­
ment (COSI) and its relationship to several other measures of 
benefit and satisfaction provided by hearing aids. J Am Acad 
Audiol 1997; 8 :27-43.
167. Erdman S, Demorest M. CPHI Manual: A Guide for Clinical Use. 
Simpsonville, MD: CPHI Services, 1990.
168. Malinoff RL, Weinstein B E. Measurement of hearing aid benefit 
in the elderly. Ear Hear 1989; 10(6): 354-6.
169. Mason D, Popelka. Comparison of hearing aid gain using func­
tional, coupler, and probe-tube measurements. J Speech Hear Res 
1986; 29: 218-26.
170. Newman CW, Weinstein BE. The hearing handicap inventory 
for the elderly as a measure of hearing aid benefit. Ear Hear 1988; 
9(2): 81-5.
171. Newman C, Weinstein B, Jacobson G, Hug G. The hearing 
handicap inventory for adults: psychometric adequacy and audio- 
metric correlates. Ear Hear 1990; 11: 430-3.
172. Noble W. Self assessment of Hearing and Related Functions. 
London: Whurr, 1998.
173. Noble W, Atherley G. The hearing measure scale: a questionnaire 
for the assessment of auditory disability. JAud Res 1970; 10:229-50.
174. Gatehouse S. The Glasgow Hearing Aid Benefit Profile: deriva­
tion and validation of a client-centred outcome measure for hear­
ing aid services. J Am A cad Audiol 1999; 10: 80-103.
175. Gatehouse S. A self-report outcome measure for the evaluation 
of hearing aid fittings and services. Health Bulletin 1999; 57(6): 
424-36.
176. Gatehouse S. The Glasgow hearing aid benefit profile. Hear J 
2000; 53(3): 10, 12, 14, 16, 18.
  

32 The pathophysiology 
and assessment of 
tinnitus
Kajsa-Mia Holgers, Marie-Louise Barrenas
Tinnitus aetiology and 
pathophysiology
Definition
Tinnitus can be defined as a sound sensation in the absence of 
an external sound or electrical stimulation. Tinnitus may also 
be generated by internal body sounds, i.e. sounds from blood 
vessels. This is called objective tinnitus, since a sound genera­
tor is present and because the sound may be heard by others. 
This presentation will mainly focus upon subjective tinnitus 
which cannot be explained by the presence of external or inter­
nal sound sources.
Epidemiology
Tinnitus is a common symptom, occurring in 10-15% of the 
general population. In 1-2% of sufferers, tinnitus affects daily 
life severely.1,2 Tinnitus is often related to an auditory dysfunc­
tion, and approximately two-thirds of the sufferers have hearing 
loss.1,3-5 More men than women seek help for tinnitus. They are 
also younger and have worse hearing loss than women.5-8 In 
women, the tinnitus frequency is lower and the characterization 
is more complex than in men.6
The knowledge of tinnitus in children is limited. The inci­
dence of tinnitus in children has been reported to vary between 
6% and 36%.9-12 In children with hearing loss, the incidence is 
reported to be much higher, up to 76%.9-12 The reported inci­
dence of tinnitus varies between studies, and the variability is 
greater in children than in adults. This might reflect the diffi­
culties faced when interviewing children. To increase the relia­
bility of the answers given in the tinnitus interview, Stouffer 
and co-workers included only children who, at the beginning of 
the interview, had given reliable answers to practical questions 
which did not concern tinnitus. In their study of 120 children,
13% with normal hearing had experienced tinnitus. Similar 
results (12%) were found in a study of 961 7-year-old school 
children.13,14 Among the schoolchildren with and without hear­
ing loss, 9% and 13% respectively had experienced tinnitus to 
* 
„ 13’H 
a varying extent.
Tinnitus can be defined as a sound sensation in the 
absence of a sound generator or electrical stimulation.
10-15% of the general adult population perceive tin­
nitus and 10-20% of these cases have tinnitus severe 
enough to affect daily life, The occurrence of tinnitus in 
children is less well known, but is presumably 12-13%.
Tinnitus aetiology
Tinnitus is a multifactorial symptom which can be induced by a 
number of conditions (Figure 32.1). Lesions at different loca­
tions in the auditory system, somatic disorders, psychiatric con­
ditions and drug effects are all associated with tinnitus.15-20 
Moreover, psychological factors play an important role21-23 in 
the intrusiveness of tinnitus. Usually, tinnitus aetiology is clas­
sified by type and underlying disorders24 (Figure 32.2). However, 
tinnitus is not regarded as an organic disease but more as a func­
tional system or disorder of the auditory system, including the 
interpretation of auditory activity by the auditory cortex.
Tinnitus is not regarded as an organic disease but more as 
a functional system or a disorder of the auditory system, 
including the interpretation of auditory activity by the 
auditory cortex.
The mechanisms of tinnitus sensation have been discussed, and 
several reviews on the different theoretical hypotheses of the

556 
Auditory disorders and their management
neural origin of subjective tinnitus have been presented.25-27 
The value of these models is limited, because no single model 
can explain the fact that, although damage to the auditory sys- 
tem may induce tinnitus, patients with hearing loss will not 
necessarily perceive tinnitus. Nonetheless, the models have 
increased the understanding of different mechanisms by which 
tinnitus may be induced and maintained. Models focusing upon 
the mechanisms underlying the severity of tinnitus have also 
been proposed.8,28
Figure 32.1 Different aetiological factors for the emergence of tinnitus. 
Used with permission of Holgers In: Hazell, ed. Sixth International Tinnitus 
Seminar, Cambridge. Kings Lynn: Biddles Short Run Books, 1999: 218-19.13
Tinnitus is a common phenomenon but not everyone who 
is aware of tinnitus ‘suffers’ from the symptom. Therefore, it is 
very important to distinguish tinnitus awareness from tinnitus 
complaint. Some hypotheses provide explanations as to why 
some patients suffer more than others and provide great help to 
the clinician when explaining possible mechanisms of the 
generation of the symptom to the patient. It has been suggested 
that noise damage but also other initial insults may induce 
plastic changes in the central auditory structures and, after 
some time, these changes could be consolidated as neural 
patterns that represent tinnitus. This consolidation may be 
facilitated by different causes. A new model based on the 
aetiology of tinnitus suffering has been introduced which 
divides tinnitus complaint into three categories: somatic 
tinnitus, depression-anxiety-related tinnitus complaint, and 
audiological tinnitus suffering.8 Somatic tinnitus is when abnor- 
malities in the musculoskeletal apparatus influence suffering 
from tinnitus by possible interactions between the auditory and 
somatosensory systems. Anxiety- and depression-related tinni­
tus suffering is connected with anxiety and depressive disorders. 
Audiological tinnitus is present when the patient has signifi­
cant limitations in life due to the combination of severe hear­
ing loss and persistent tinnitus. The severity of tinnitus will be 
further discussed later in this chapter.
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to describe all the 
theoretical models that have been described in the literature to 
explain the aetiology of tinnitus. Instead, emphasis has been 
placed on those models which we have found to be illustrative 
and useful when describing tinnitus mechanisms to patients and 
students.
Tinnitus
Physiological
I
SOAEs
Temporary dysfunctional
Pathological
Pseudo-tinnitus
I 
I
I
r
Muscular (hums),
I
Muscular
i
Noise-
i
Drug-
i
Toxaemic
i
Environmental
vascular, or
(snaps)
induced
induced
Brownian
Feigned
Extra-auditory
i 
I 
i
Muscular 
Respiratory 
Vascular
Conductive
(enhancements) 
______ I
(movements) 
r____ I_____
Sensorineural
Sensory 
Peripheral 
neural
Central
neural
Associated 
_____ I____
Cervical
Temporo­
mandibular
Psychological
Hallucinatory 
Imagery
Coincident 
Consequent 
Other 
on m-c disorder
External ear
Middle ear
Emergence of 
tinnitus
Lack of 
environmental 
sound
Figure 32.2 Aetiology of tinnitus based on underlying disorders. SOAE, spontaneous otoacoustic emissions. (From Coles. Proc 5th Int Tinnitus Sem, Portland, OR, USA. 
Reprinted with permission from the American Tinnitus Association, www.ata.org: 1995, 25—9.24)
  

The pathophysiology and assessment of tinnitus 
557
Experimental animal models
In experimental settings, tinnitus is often induced by drugs or 
noise. A prerequisite for animal research is to induce tinnitus 
and to interpret and evaluate behavioural changes due to tinni­
tus in the animal, which is difficult. Therefore, current experi­
mental models are only valid to a limited extent in modelling 
the psychophysical and clinical features of tinnitus. Owing to 
these circumstances, conclusions based on results from animal 
models are open to debate. However, animal research offers a 
good opportunity to study changes of calcium homeostasis, 
cochlear bloodflow, distortion otoacoustic emission (DPOAE), 
tinnitus-related neuronal signals and potential central mecha­
nisms related to tinnitus, including the investigation of sponta­
neous neural and metabolic activity, neurotransmitters and 
plastic changes in the central nervous system.29-32
General tinnitus hypotheses
The following general hypotheses are linked to the models 
which we will describe later in this chapter:
1. Tinnitus is regarded as a perceptual consequence of altered 
spontaneous activity within the auditory system.
2. The induction of tinnitus usually involves some kind of 
damage to the peripheral auditory structures that results in 
altered spontaneous inputs to the central auditory system.
3. The generation, maintenance and intrusiveness of tinnitus 
involves central auditory structures which are not necessar­
ily impaired, e.g. the limbic system and the autonomic ner­
vous system.
The most important characteristics of tinnitus
■ 
Tinnitus persists even after destruction of the cochlea or the 
VUIth nerve.
■ 
Tinnitus can be masked both ipsi- and contralaterally, but 
its masking behaviour differs from that of an external 
sound.
■ 
Tinnitus can show residual inhibition by masking by 
external sound.
■ 
Tinnitus can be transiently masked by intravenous 
administration of lidocaine.
■ 
Tinnitus may sometimes change through manipulations of 
the musculoskelatal system.
Neuropathophysiologieal tinnitus 
models
A major task of the auditory cortex is to determine whether a 
particular activity pattern in afferent auditory neurons is caused 
by an external sound stimulus, or represents spontaneous ‘non­
sense' activity. Under non-pathological silent conditions, the 
spontaneous activity from the afferent auditory neurones is
completely irregular and almost non-existent (Figure 32.3a). 
Normally, this stochastic spontaneous discharge pattern is not 
perceived by the central auditory system as a sound. An exter­
nal sound stimulus will increase the action potential rate and 
modulate the temporal action potential pattern from irregular 
to regular. These changes will be recognized by the auditory 
cortex as ‘sound’ (Figure 32.3b) (note that the action potentials 
are synchronized when induced by an external sound).
In the case of tinnitus, it is believed that the rate and/or the 
stochastic temporal pattern of the spontaneous neural activity 
is altered by the pathological process from irregular (non-sound 
pattern) to synchronized (sound pattern). Accordingly, the 
pathology will produce neural activity, which simulates the 
presence of an acoustical signal, although there is no true 
acoustical input. It is believed that tinnitus is mainly a conse­
quence of an abnormal synchronized action potential pattern of 
the spontaneous activity within the central auditory pathways. 
An altered firing rate seems to be less important; both increased 
and decreased firing rates have been reported in association 
with tinnitus (increased by salicylate and decreased by Co2+ or 
Mn2+).
The pathologically synchronized spontaneous activity from 
the auditory nerve is processed by the same central auditory 
structures and physiological mechanisms as external sounds. 
Therefore, the afferent system will interpret the pathologically 
synchronized spontaneous activity as a non-pathological sound. 
Accordingly, the auditory cortex will interpret a non-sound as 
an acoustical ‘signal’, and the patient will perceive tinnitus.
Model 1—The synaptic synchronisation of the 
hair cell by Ca~ influx
In the absence of mechanical stimulation, the normal hair cell 
is partially depolarized as a result of a leakage of K+ flowing 
through the transduction channels at the top of the hair cells. 
This steady depolarization opens the Ca2+ channels, allowing 
Ca2+ to enter into the cell, as Ca2+ ions only enter when the 
hair cell is depolarized. The entry of Ca2+ ions into the hair cell 
results in spontaneous transmitter release of glutamate in the 
synapse between the inner hair cell and the afferent auditory 
neurone. For example, ion channel dysfunction of the inner 
hair cells (IHCs) located at the maximum locus of the hearing 
loss can become a source of leakage currents, which in turn con­
tinuously generate a depolarization and transmitter depletion of 
the synapse.33
Another possible mechanism is damage to the hair cell 
cilia, a common finding due to noise trauma, resulting in a con­
stant influx of K+ ions, causing Ca2+ entry. In both conditions, 
the Ca2+ influx might alter the spontaneous input from the 
IHCs to the auditory nerve from being non-synchronized to 
synchronized. Then the central auditory system will interpret 
the regular spontaneous activity as an external sound, instead of 
silence, and the patient will perceive tinnitus.
The benefit of this model is that it can explain why tinnitus 
is induced by noise trauma or ototoxic drugs. A shortcoming is
  

558 
Auditory disorders and their management
(a)
CNS
I
(b)
CNS
Efferent fibres
Figure 32.3 (a) Normal nervous activity in a silence condition (undamaged cochlea), (b) Normal nervous activity in a noisy condition (undamaged cochlea).
that it does not explain why not all patients with sensorineural 
hearing loss (SNHL) due to hair cell damage perceive tinnitus.
Model 2—Induction of tinnitus by outer hair 
cell damage, including the influence of the 
efferent system
In most tinnitus patients, an SNHL is found.1-5 Usually, the 
SNHL is caused by outer hair cell (OHC) damage. The OHCs 
may be damaged by a variety of different underlying mechanisms, 
such as presbyacusis, noise, ototoxic drugs, and Meniere’s disease. 
The activity of the OHCs is modulated by the efferent system, 
which originates from the superior olivary complex. The efferent 
nerve fibres are mainly arranged in the crossed olivocochlear
bundle, which terminates predominantly on the OHCs. The 
uncrossed bundle terminates on the IHCs. The efferent system, 
the OHCs, the IHCs, the VUIth nerve and the superior olivary 
complex are linked together, forming a feedback system. The 
function of this feedback system is to regulate the micro­
mechanics of the cochlea, which, in turn, are controlled by the 
central nervous system. The efferent system modulates the OHC 
activity to provide an optimum operation point for the amplifi­
cation of the travelling wave, in order to increase the afferent 
input from the IHCs. Thus the IHCs are rendered more sensitive.
In a silent environment, the afferent auditory input is small 
or non-existent. It is hypothesized that this will also be the case 
if the OHCs are damaged or lacking (Figure 32.3c). In order to 
increase the afferent auditory input, the efferent system will
  

The pathophysiology and assessment of tinnitus 
559
(c)
CNS
I
Efferent fibres
(d)
CNS
OHC
Figure 32.3 (c) Abnormal nervous activity (damaged outer hair cells), (d) Masking of tinnitus by noise. Normalized nervous activity in a noisy condition (damaged 
outer hair cells). (Opposite situation compared to (c)J CNS, central nervous system; IHC, inner hair cell; OHC, outer hair cell.
activate the remaining OHCs at the edge of the hair cell loss by 
stimulating the IHCs. Consequently, the few intact OHCs will 
become ‘hyperactive*. This, in turn, will increase the firing rate 
from the IHCs. If the spontaneous activity in the auditory nerve 
becomes synchronized, then a ‘cochlear tinnitus’ is induced. 
When people with normal hearing and no tinnitus are placed 
in a noisy environment, the afferent input is increased by the 
acoustical stimulation. In turn, the activity in the efferent sys­
tem will be reduced. It is suggested that this is also the case for 
patients with tinnitus, explaining why tinnitus is often reduced 
by noise, i.e. the masking effect (Figure 32.3d).
The benefit of this model is that it offers an interpretation 
for the masking phenomenon, but it does not explain why not 
all patients with hearing loss perceive tinnitus.
Model 3—The ‘gate control* theory
Tonndorf34 focused upon the similarities between chronic tin­
nitus and chronic pain, when presenting the ‘gate control 
hypothesis for tinnitus’ in analogy with that for pain. Both 
conditions are wholly subjective and continuous sensations. 
However, with time, they may change in both quality and 
character. In selected cases, both sensations can be alleviated, 
masked or even totally suppressed by suitable inputs, e.g. 
different stimulations of the somatosensory system. In both 
tinnitus and pain, the alleviation of the pathological sensation 
may outlast the cessation of the alleviating stimulus (residual 
inhibition). Finally, anaesthetic agents can suppress both 
sensations.
  

560 
Auditory disorders and their management
The ‘gate control’ theory implies the joint action of two 
different fibre systems, which together with relay neurones in 
the brainstem form a ‘gate control system’. The ‘gate’ regulates 
the input of information from the peripheral to the central 
auditory system. If the input is increased as a result of damaged 
hair cells, then the gate will stay open for a longer period of 
time as a result of adaptation.
A benefit of this model is that it opens up options for treat­
ment programmes like physiotherapy or treatment of temporo­
mandibular dysfunctions. A shortcoming is that this theory is 
very theoretical and has still not been verified for tinnitus.
Model 4—The neural model of ephaptic 
transmission for tinnitus
The neural model of ephaptic interaction between nerve fibres 
seems to be valid in cases of tinnitus caused by auditory nerve 
damage (e.g. acoustical neurinoma, demyelinating diseases).25,26 
If the myelin sheaths of the nerve fibres are damaged and the 
electrical isolation between the fibres is lost, this might lead to 
ephaptic transmission across or ‘cross-talk’ between fibres. This 
will alter the normally stochastic spontaneous activity in the 
auditory nerve, because the neural activity between fibres will 
be pathologically synchronized and interpreted as ‘sound’ by the 
central auditory system. This model is also valid for tinnitus 
caused by surgery on the VUIth nerve. A benefit of this model 
is that it is supported by both clinical and experimental studies. 
In humans, a gaze-evoked tinnitus may occur after deafferenta- 
tion that can be turned on and off by eye movements.35
The mechanisms and neuroanatomical sites of this phenom­
enon are not known. According to the neural sprouting hypothe­
sis, gaze-evoked tinnitus is caused by a regeneration of neurones 
and new synapse formation between the para-abducens nucleus 
and the cochlear nucleus or between the auditory pathways and 
the neural integrator for eye movements. Owing to reactive 
synaptogenesis, intact axons will grow and replace those lost by 
injury. This possibility is supported by experimental studies on 
animals in which both degenerative and regenerative changes are 
found in the peripheral and central auditory pathways, after com­
plete unilateral deafferentation of the auditory periphery 
(cochlea and/or auditory nerve). Changes in gaze can also act as 
powerful triggers and/or suppressors of a variety of phantom sen­
sory and motor events. These findings are in accordance with the 
suggestion that synchronous neural activity from the ocular 
motor system can be transmitted to the auditory system and the 
central auditory system will interpret this activity as ‘sound’.
The benefit of this model is that it is supported by experi­
mental studies. A shortcoming is that only a few patients suffer 
from this particular phenomenon.
It is crucial to distinguish between the aetiology of the 
onset of tinnitus and the aetiology of the development of 
tinnitus suffering.
Neurophysiological models of 
tinnitus suffering
It is of great importance to be aware of all aspects of possible 
mechanisms leading to suffering associated with tinnitus. In 
each case, 
a careful audiological and neuro-otological 
approach requires evaluation to investigate the aetiology of 
the onset of tinnitus, but also factors relevant to why the 
patient suffers from tinnitus. To differentiate between the 
aetiology of tinnitus and the aetiology of tinnitus suffering is 
crucial. It is not uncommon for patients who have had tinnitus 
many times or have had it for many years to suddenly develop 
persistent tinnitus and/or tinnitus that becomes a troublesome 
problem.
The neurophysiological model
As we have pointed out earlier, one has to separate the 
induction of tinnitus from the maintenance of tinnitus lead­
ing to suffering complaint. Jastreboff and Hazell28 suggest why 
some patients suffer more from the symptoms of tinnitus than 
others. The model focuses on the network of neural activity 
in the parasympathetic and sympathetic autonomic nervous 
systems, the auditory system and the limbic system (including 
the cortical structures (the olfactory cortex, hippocampal for­
mation, cingulate gyrus, subcallosal gyrus) and subcortical 
areas, including the amygdala, septum, hypothalamus, epi- 
thalamus, anterior thalamic nuclei and parts of the basal gan­
glia). The auditory periphery is described as the source of 
tinnitus. All levels of the auditory pathways, from the 
cochlea, auditory subcortical centres to the auditory cortex, 
are necessary in creating the perception of tinnitus. The 
pathological spontaneous activity which results from cochlear 
damage is processed by subcortical auditory centres and by 
the limbic system, before the action potentials reach the 
auditory cortex. In non-sufferers, it is suggested that the tin- 
nitus-related neural activity remains constrained within the 
auditory pathways. Therefore, the person is not bothered by 
tinnitus. However, in tinnitus sufferers, activation of the lim­
bic and autonomic nervous systems plays a crucial role by 
establishing strong negative emotions related to the tinnitus 
sensation and also, simultaneously, various defence responses 
of the body. These researchers point out the importance of 
focusing upon such reactions in the management of tinnitus 
patients. Tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT) is based on this 
theory.36,37
The model is highly relevant clinically, because it is well 
understood by patients. The benefit of this model is that 
involvement of the limbic system in tinnitus perception was 
demonstrated by PET-scan studies demonstrating increased 
bloodflow in the limbic system and in the auditory cortex 
when tinnitus was turned on and off by orofacial movements.38 
However, the theory that tinnitus is generated in the cochlea 
is not supported by PET-scan studies.
  

The pathophysiology and assessment of tinnitus 
5G1
In non-sufferers, it is suggested that the tinnitus-related 
neural activity remains constrained within the auditory 
pathways. In tinnitus sufferers, activation of the limbic 
and autonomic nervous systems plays a crucial role hy 
establishing strong negative emotions related to the 
tinnitus sensation and also, simultaneously, various 
defence responses of the body.
Somatic modulation of tinnitus
The interpretation of the ‘tinnitus signal’ is also considered to 
be related to the activity of the central nervous system other 
than the auditory system, the limbic system and the autonomic 
nervous system. Activity in the somatosensory systems may 
influence the tinnitus sensation, and is called ‘somatic modula­
tion of tinnitus’. By stimulating the median nerve, tinnitus 
loudness was altered,39 suggesting a connection between the 
auditory and somatosensory systems. It is also well known that 
the annoyance of tinnitus is increased if the patient has pain,
i.e. in the neck or head, or suffers from temporomandibular dys- 
function (TMD).39-42 TMD is a collective term for a number of 
clinical problems that involve the masticatory muscles, the 
temporomandibular joint and associated structures. Tinnitus is 
one of the otological symptoms frequently reported by patients 
with TMD; additionally, Rubinstein41 reported that 30% of 
tinnitus patients could change their tinnitus with jaw move­
ments. Moreover, extremity and head or neck manipulations 
modulate tinnitus, and head or neck manoeuvres are twice as 
likely to alter the tinnitus signal as extremity manipulations.42 
Somatic-auditory interactions are hypothesized to take place at 
the level of the dorsal cochlear nucleus, which receives ipsilat- 
eral auditory and somatic inputs. One hypothesis is that the 
interaction between these signals determines whether or not 
the patients will be aware of the tinnitus signals. Accordingly, a 
somatic modulation of tinnitus has been suggested.
Neurophysiological model of the aetiology and 
treatment of tinnitus suffering
Another more recent description also distinguishes between the 
mechanisms of the awareness of tinnitus and those involved in 
the suffering. This model is based on research focusing on the 
severity of tinnitus.13,14,20,40,43 High scores on all dimensions of 
the NHP (Nottingham Health Profile), such as ‘Emotional 
disturbances’, ‘Sleep disturbances’, ‘Pain’, ‘Physical mobility’, 
‘Social isolation’ and ‘Energy’, were found in patients with 
tinnitus who had tinnitus that severely influenced their work­
ing capacity.20 They also had high scores on several items of the 
Tinnitus Severity Questionnaire. The strongest predictors for 
the development of such severe tinnitus were the depression 
factors and the physical immobility factor in the NHP. How­
ever, the pure tone averages of hearing thresholds at the low 
and middle frequencies were moderate predictors only. It has
also been found that the occurrence of depression and anxiety 
disorder according to DSM-IIIR was 75% in consecutive tinni­
tus patients seeking help at an audiological department.20, 43 
Preliminary results have shown that the occurrence of depres­
sion and anxiety disorders is even higher in patients with a high 
risk of developing incapacitating tinnitus. Based on these find­
ings, which are in accordance with those of other researchers, it 
is possible to categorize the suffering of tinnitus into:
■ 
somatic tinnitus
m 
depression-anxiety-related tinnitus
■ 
audiological tinnitus.
A schematic model has been proposed to describe the develop­
ment of severe tinnitus suffering starting from the occurrence of 
tinnitus (Figure 32.4). By identifying the aetiology or aetiolo­
gies of the patients suffering, the rehabilitation may thereafter 
be chosen based on these aetiology/aetiologies found in each 
individual case. This approach is presented in Figure 32.5 and 
is aimed at stopping or reducing the negative development of 
persistent severe tinnitus, following the onset of tinnitus.
The onset of tinnitus is suggested to be a consequence 
of different types of damage which have resulted in 
hearing impairment. Mainly, the suffering of tinnitus 
can he due to somatic disorders, audiological disorders or 
depressive and anxiety disorders, or a monoaminergic 
vulnerability.
Monoaminergie-vulnerability model 
of tinnitus
As already described, the majority of consecutive tinnitus 
patients who seek help at an audiological clinic have anxiety 
and depressive disorders.43
This common comorbitidy of psychiatric symptoms and 
tinnitus raises questions about the possibility of common neu­
rochemical dysfunctions.44 The neurotransmitter serotonin is a 
likely candidate, because of its involvement in the modulation 
of the sensory processing in the primary auditory cortex,45,46 and 
the serotonin transporter is reported to be involved in unipolar 
as well as bipolar depression.47 Antidepressant drugs which 
modulate serotonergic functions in the brain have been used in 
a clinical trial by Dobie et al,48 and they reported on the 
positive effect of nortriptyline in the treatment of patients with 
tinnitus and depressive symptoms. Their results showed a 
reduction in depression parameters, functional disability, and 
the audiometrically measured tinnitus loudness and frequency.
Salvi and collegues suggested that the plastic changes in 
the auditory pathways after noise trauma created a hyper­
excitability which could create the tinnitus sensation.49 The 
plastic changes in the auditory cortex consisting of the genera­
tion of new synaptic contacts are likely to be random in nature.
  

562 
Auditory disorders and their management
Figure 32.4 Different aetiological factors for the development of persistent tinnitus. HL, hearing loss. (Translated from Holgers,'4 used by permission.)
Figure 32.5 Aetiologically based tinnitus therapy, a model for management of tinnitus. (Translated from Holgers. Tinnitus vardprogram 2000 Stockholm: National 
Board of Health and Welfare, 1999.14 Used by permission.)
In some individuals, these changes may include contact 
between neurones that represents tinnitus, while in others the 
neurological changes could be insignificant.
It has been suggested that it is possible that there is a 
vulnerability in the monoaminergic system, presumably in the
- 
43 44
serotonergic system, in patients who perceive severe tinnitus. 
Serotonergic nerve endings are present in the auditory nuclei, 
such as the superior olivary complex, the lateral leminiscus, 
the inferior colliculus and the cochlear nucleus, as well as in the 
primary auditory cortex.50-52 It is possible that changes in the 
neurotransmission, changes in the monoaminergic receptors or 
changes of the transporters are present, due to a vulnerability in 
these neurochemical systems. This vulnerability may lead to 
the development of severe tinnitus.
The neurochemical-vulnerability model, according to 
Holgers and Zoger,44 suggests that it is possible that a vulnera- 
ble monoaminergic system is present in patients who develop 
severe tinnitus, as it is in patients developing depression. It is 
also possible that the mechanisms behind these changes may 
lead to tinnitus in some patients, to depression in others, and to 
both depression and tinnitus in others.
The neurochemical-vulnerahility model suggests that it is 
possible that a vulnerable monoaminergic system is pre^ 
sent in patients who develop severe tinnitus, as it is in 
patients developing depression.
  

The pathophysiology and assessment of tinnitus 
563
Clinical tinnitus assessment
In the authors’ clinical experience, the majority of tinnitus 
patients only visit the clinic once or twice, during an 18-month 
period. However, more persistent tinnitus generates more suf­
fering. This makes a patient seek more frequent help in order to 
try to reduce the symptoms. If tinnitus treatment is to be suc­
cessful, it is of great importance to use instruments and meth- 
ods by which patients who are at a high risk of severe persistent 
tinnitus can be identified. It is also important to identify the 
predictive factors which have a strong impact on the daily life 
and wellbeing of the tinnitus patient.
In the clinical management of tinnitus patients, it is essen- 
tial to have reliable tools to examine the tinnitus symptoms and 
predictors and to be able to analyse the effect of different tinni­
tus therapies. Usually, tinnitus is assessed by clinical gradings, 
psychometrically and/or psychoacoustically.
Clinical gradings
The degree of tinnitus can be described by using clinical 
gradings based on judgements of tinnitus severity, such as 
grading into different categories (not always present (I) /always 
present (II) and always disturbing (III)).53 Based on epidemi­
ological data from the MRC Institute of Hearing Research, 
Coles categorized tinnitus annoyance into none, slight, mod­
erate and severe, and also by the degree of tinnitus effect on 
life—none, slight, moderate, severe.3 Some authors have cate­
gorized patients into help-seeking or not help-seeking and 
complainers or non-complainers.54,55 A rather robust method 
is to determine whether or not tinnitus affects the working 
capacity.8
Patients are also often asked to describe both the quality of 
their tinnitus sounds and the localization of their tinnitus. The 
subjective description of tinnitus (ringing, buzzing, whistling, 
pulsatile) has been reported not to correlate with tinnitus aeti­
ology.56 It is reported that ‘tonal tinnitus’ and tinnitus of high 
pitch are the most common descriptions, and bilateral tinnitus 
is more common than unilateral.57,58
The degree of tinnitus can be described in different ways:
■ 
how often tinnitus occurs
■ 
how intrusive tinnitus is perceived to be
■ 
how tinnitus causes limitations in daily life 
« how tinnitus affects the patient mentally
m 
the effect on working capacity
■ 
how tinnitus affects general health and life quality.
However, one major problem in the assessment of tinnitus is 
the lack of objective measurements. The character of tinnitus 
symptoms is multi-dimensional and very complex. Therefore, 
it is important to use instruments that assess a variety of faces 
of tinnitus suffering, such as concentration, sleep problems, 
hearing difficulties, anxiety, depression disorders, and differ­
ent psychosomatic problems. Owing to the subjectivity of 
tinnitus symptoms, a variety of questionnaires for measuring
different aspects and perceptions of tinnitus severity have
i 
j  5, 8, 21-23, 54, 55, 59-68
been used.
The character of tinnitus symptoms is multi-dimensional 
and very complex. Therefore, it is important to use 
instruments that assess a variety of facets of tinnitus 
suffering.
In Table 32.1, examples of well-known instruments and mea­
surements are outlined, including the number of items, levels, 
dimension of the instruments and reliability. In Table 32.2, cor­
relations between these instruments/measurements and other 
parameters such as hearing parameters, psychological measure­
ments and aspects of general health are summarized. When 
investigating the outcome of an intervention, instruments 
should be chosen that assess the aspects of tinnitus focused 
upon by the intervention.
Psychoacoustical measurements
Psychoacoustical measurements include matching of tinnitus 
quality, pitch, loudness and masking levels.69-78
Tinnitus pitch is often a high-frequency sound in patients 
with noise-induced hearing loss,79 but it is not possible to use 
pitch measurements as indicators of noise-induced hearing loss. 
Tinnitus loudness often appears to be close to the hearing 
thresholds at the poorest audiometric frequency.79, 80 The 
individual tinnitus sensation level, i.e. the difference between 
the tinnitus audiometric level and hearing threshold, is 
approximately 5 dB HL.79,80
The maskeability of tinnitus can be regarded as a possible 
method to describe the intrusiveness of tinnitus by analysing 
the sound level needed to mask tinnitus. Both narrow- and 
broadband noise have been used.81-85 When performing mea­
surements of the maskeability of tinnitus, the localization of the 
masking noise generator (left or right ear) did not seem to 
matter.81 This implies that central components of tinnitus 
awareness are important. The value of these assessments is in 
dispute as, often, only weak correlations have been reported 
between perceived tinnitus severity and psychoacoustical 
tinnitus measurements.
Questionnaires
Many different questionnaires are used in the management of 
tinnitus. There are two main types, namely non-diagnosis- 
specific and tinnitus-specific questionnaires.
Usually, questionnaires are self-assessed and distributed to 
the patient by mail or in the clinic. The questionnaires may also 
be used as tools when conducting face-to-face interviews. 
When using different questionnaires, it is of great importance to 
have information about the quality of each specific instrument, 
e.g. the reliability, i.e. test-rest reliability, or the internal
  

Table 
32.1 
Examples of instruments and 
m easurem ents, number of items, levels and 
dim ension.
564 
Auditory disorders and their management
g
Vic<u
E
Q
V 
£
>  
o
(U 
<u
^  
Q_ 
£
3
' F  
(tJ 
i
-r^ 
. t f  
c n
™ 
3  -5
£3o
>03
.55 *5
o  
if?
i/1 03 
CO <n
^  iT
£  Qu 
c  'O >
o  
C  
C  ^
 
- r  _
 JC  
^
 
l o
<5 
03 
Q . 
"*T 
co 
co 
c  C  O  0 C  — ,
-2 O £ yn O g1
in
CO
jy
"O
c
CO
Jk£
O
5
di .Si
<jO ,-tT
n > 
zj 
>
o
in
C ? s  
B o
o E co 
t  E ^
U- UJ CJ 
IU K  I
o
'“O  
Cl
_ 
<D
CO 
rtj
S3 t
c  
<u
<U 
^
CD _
'~ o
w -o
Cf
CO
co
‘ to
m
3
in
H—
o
3V-
CJ
o
co>
QJ
U
c
(D
'to
ID
c
CO
_ >  
"■i—1
Oj
-O
jj
' c
>
o
UO CT
0J
>
O
UO <
Q
CJ
>
00
to
CD
O
I
o .
to
&
OJ
T3
s
o  
. - e t ; ' ?
sE 
tz o co
>- s
o  o  
“O 
>
E  S o  
| S
|
CO tn £5 
w rro -O
■: o S  
£  o  .2
J= t_J Q  
CL. I/) O
— >  
_
 =
T3
cn
£o
■— in 
O 3 ^ 
E
"O
CL
Eo
uo
oo 
>  >
? £i 
CL «
&c
>
CJ
c
cm
r- n 
O  £
~  8 
CD
O  co
w  c
<n i-
qj 
OJ 
■ £= 
JL - c  
in cn
£ if
00 
r-. 
o  
co ||
CD 
^
o  a
II X
C5 *“
-Oco
<j
00
r-.
o
°  °  M
ii 
x  £
cs ^  i
_  
wi n
-F. 3 ^
co 
^  
OJ
■£ 
> X
O 
= : l7l
o  fE £
to
CD
* -  
a
in 
_
Zj 
—
C - 
CJ
0> 
CO
I  ■§
m  O
3
12
L->
>-
CJ w
-^r
cr>
3  <=> 
d
lo
II
CJ
-Oco
CJ
E
<D
O _n
<D 
(U > 
JO  
<L»
PZ ro
E J2 
£ >
Eaj 
Qj
— <u
LD ---
cni ro
oo
r- S
CM 
in
i/)
£
(U 
<u
■— <u
CD —
CM LO
i/l
E ^
OJ 
OJ
<&
CD — 
»- 04
tn
E Jfl
OJ ^
— <u
OD —
cn in
£ ^3 
>
— cu
o  —
ro
<u 
> aj
-S. E
X 3 
U
S E
CO 
3
5.1
| T 5
i-
<Lf
-o J? 
c  o 
co x  
3
. £
-
o
■s £ S
4^ O  
C
=  ^  a
CO 
to
s _ ^ tii
To § ^ -
in
Qj
(jO 
O 
»_ 
CO 
H- C J U J GO
CO
03
OJ
f?
to
OJ
c
00
"co
c
co
E
OJ
E
c
5
<u
CO
QJ
E
J3 _to
B
s
CO
CO
ro
QJ
OJ
s
Oj
c
c
"co
a
co
CO
ro
E
E
QJ
E
_
 
$
5
o
 ^
X  
^
<LI
QJ
i =  ^
l ~  ^
CO 
— —
a  
0c
co
‘E ;5_
—  
CO
*o ^
5  "P
CO 
>—
un t£
j£? 
CO
Cn x
"O
uo c
OO CO
o
T 3
___ _ CO
5
o
o
O l =
V
’ c  
ro 
i
 S
 X
o' aj S
c  
lo _ _ r  
'O  
1 
CO 
—
15 JB* 
^
Oj m d; it /i
V x  u, 
+1 
_a. c .« t— ^  
u o  t i  
5  o
X  ^  <  
<  X
co
qj
TSQ, Tinnitus Severity Questionnaire; THI, Tinnitus Handicap Inventory; THQ, Tinnitus Handicap Questionnaire; TRQ, Tinnitus Reaction Questionnaire; STSS, Subjective Tinnitus Severity Scale; H, Help- 
seeking; NH, Non-Help-seeking; AWT, Absence from 
Work; NHP, Nottingham 
Health Profile; BDI, Beck Depression Inventory; MMPI, Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory; BMI, body mass index; 
PTA, pure tone average; SRSL, Symptom 
Rating Scale List; NS, not significant.
  

Table 32.2 
Correlations between the instruments/measurements and psychoacoustical, psychological measurements and aspects of general health are presented.
The pathophysiology and assessment of tinnitus 
565
-C
I
I I
J2 ro
O <U 
CJ cn
<u o
S Z  —
O o
CO oi
T3 —
ro i-
<U <D
JZ >
c &
OJT3
O
E
G_
I I
■3
C3 w 
O T3 
in c
O  
to
C  W- 
QJ QJ
bO >
a  
o  £
QJ
*a
o
E
QJ
QJ5 ro 
O
D _ 
C  
o n  
OJ 
2
3 e
W. 
qj
> a
O
E
3
OJ
c
*ro
Q .
C L
QJ
QJ
01
1/1 In1
QJ
CU
ifi S
un
O
<U "0
E
T 3
'r-
E
O
X
E
QJ
"ro0 ST "ro
CJ
’t/i X
t/i
z
>
S I
Q_ >•
Q .
O l
CL. —1—
X
QJ
EZ
z :
LU
GO
c  >? 
-9 g>
cS
^  JO  
3 g ,
■s ^to .
ro
o j E
_> ^
o j 
m
- S
i
QJ I—  4 -  
Q l 
tO 3 
W 
QJ
$ 
_o
QJ
>  on
a
,1— .
QJ
_ c
CL
LO
CO
O
7;
1c:
“O
OJ
Qu
IZ
X
ro a
2 !
x ;
on
►—
on
cc
on
£ 
OJ > 
OJ 
QJ5
Q 
CO
.^ J 
in
"O 
r -
S .I 
£ 2
CL qj ’ 
(/I ~o
g s :  
S £
3  >  , 
o u .
~  ro
s  §
2 8 
> -S 
o  J
c
OJ>
QJ 
QJ
CO 
CO
Qj  
a j
*o -o
o  
o
E E
>
acc
c
CJ
Q_3
O
cn 
y  X
QJ
3 
O
it: ;ro 
lc 4"-
_  
CJ 
C
c >. —
.2 g. >. 
4^ 
O l
£5 ■a o
CQ ■«—> 
CO
E
1 ^  2 
ro Q.
E
°  t
c
<uucoo
t/l
£Z
oV* _c 
co ♦—
QJ - C
“ I
.2 S
o c 
Ew ro
un 
—
|  .8
> .£5
<  "
5
c ^  
O
■— QJ
ro E
<u o
CJ ro
LA 2
2  <u
£  o
H E
ro to 
Q- , , 
cn ^  
.E
s £
j z . 
a .
1/1 uo
3 3
£ £
S £
a  a
on t/i
5o
c■a3
_o
"Ocro
JZ
cj
" o _in3
4J qj
- a  
to
!3 1
c  
I
QJ bO
> ^
j—  Q _
E
3O
l/l
33
o
4J $ 
3 ©
cu
o
l/l
QJ
3  
UJ 3
I ts fc!
^  
QJ
*0 o
I— o 4J
3  E a.
<C 
on
0/
2
"O W1
c  01 
ro c
1/1 T3
c 2
<u on
1 »
2 .y 
It; «=
S .  !C T3
*ro ^ c 
™ 
01 ro
*-* ~r1
cu 
O  
c
-
1
0
on _* ^  
co 03 c
CD 
CO
^  _g -g i2
^ ?  5 2i
a  B ro ti -g1
o ~  ro O
h—  C J  UJ 
CD X
QJ
Cro
E
5
QJ
- u
co ro
4—> 4—*
QJ QJ
C C
ro ro
E E
5 $
QJ QJ
Z E 
c  5 
ro ^
E 2
5S  
oj —
2  2
3 _  a3
~ro *”
QJ
IOl
O
o n  - c
—r  
lo
i l
CJ
-e 01
- -  E c 
ro 
_ to
QJ
ro 
qj 
qj
E
o
 
c
d |
|
 g
^  
^  -Zi
acc
cn
c:
"O <u 
ro
o n  
v P
^  ro
o n  
Id
ro
CJ
cobO
"O
o n  
c  
tn ro
*0
c
___ ro
i  - 
^
 flJ 
_
 O i^
—r- c ro
“  - i 131- 
? 
s
C 
m —
1  Q, ™ §
<L' 1/ U tn
V I  m -D
-  s  -s s
qj 
o  J : t
X
 ^
 <
 LU
ro
cu 
+  [ 
^  
T 1 
QJ
(— _Ol
^  o 
<  x
TSQ, Tinnitus Severity Questionnaire; THI, Tinnitus Handicap Inventory; THQ, Tinnitus Handicap Questionnaire; TRQ, Tinnitus Reaction Questionnaire; STSS, Subjective Tinnitus Severity Scale; H, Help- 
seeking; NH, Non-Help-seeking; AWT, Absence from 
Work; THSS, Tinnitus Handicap and Support Scale; NHP, Nottingham 
Health Profile; BDI, Beck Depression Inventory; MMPI, Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory; MSPQ, Modified Somatic Perception Questionnaire; PLU, Personal Loudness Units; NS, not significant
  

566 
Auditory disorders and their management
consistency (Cronbach’s a), but also the validity, i.e. correla- 
tions with other measurements.
The review presented in Table 32.2 focuses upon tinnitus- 
specific questionnaires, and how they correlate with psycho­
acoustical audiometric variables and with different dimensions 
of non-diagnosis-specific questionnaires and different clinical 
gradings. As can be observed upon review, when analysing tin­
nitus severity in relation to inner ear damage, non-significant or 
weak correlations have often been reported between perceived 
tinnitus severity and psychoacoustically measured tinnitus and 
hearing function. Nonetheless, some reports have presented 
moderate correlations between tinnitus severity and audiomet­
ric parameters, such as pure tone averages and tinnitus loudness 
match. However, the relationship between audiometry and tin­
nitus severity is reported to be weaker than the correlation 
between tinnitus severity and psychological factors, e.g. depres­
sion, concentration problems and irritability. Other important 
aetiological factors influencing tinnitus severity are poor 
general health, poor sleep patterns, and pain. The suffering of 
tinnitus is also correlated with frequent headaches, dizziness 
and oversensitivity to sound, as can be seen in Table 32.2. It 
is important to be aware of those symptoms that may be 
considered by the patient to be related to tinnitus suffering but 
that may also be due to a depressive disorder. It is of great 
importance to identify and treat depressive disorders early.
The relationship between audiometry and tinnitus sever­
ity is reported to be weaker than the correlation between 
tinnitus severity and psychological factors. Symptoms 
related to tinnitus may also be symptoms of a current 
depressive disorder.
Other techniques for measuring tinnitus
Auditory brainstem responses (ABRs)
Several studies have evaluated the ABR responses in tinnitus 
patients, aiming to localize tinnitus and assess central auditory 
dysfunction. 
In some reports, the test stimuli during ABR 
recording can mask tinnitus and, therefore, it can be difficult to 
use ABR in these patients.86
Four main types of observation have been reported:
*  changes in morphology of the ABR waveform
m fluctuation in amplitude of waves III and V
■ prolonged brainstem transmission time
ft lidocaine effect on the morphology of the waveform.
Rosenhall and Axelsson89 reported on prolonged responses of 
wave I accompanied by a prolongation of waves III and V in 
tinnitus patients compared to normal controls. A lengthening of 
the III—V interpeak latencies was also reported. These findings 
indicate both peripheral dysfunction and dysfunction in the 
brainstem. Lemaire and Beutter90 reported that the ABR findings 
in tinnitus patients differed by gender. However, tinnitus was
always associated with a significant lengthening of 0-1 and I-V 
latencies on the tinnitus-affected side. However, when compar­
ing ABR responses from tinnitus patients and normal controls, 
the changes have not always been conclusive.91,92
Compression of the intracranial portion of the cochlear 
nerve has been suggested to cause severe tinnitus. In patients 
with severe tinnitus, a prolonged interpeak latency of peaks 
I—III (0.2 ms or more) or a prolonged interpeak latency of III—V 
(0.2 ms or more) has been used as an inclusion criterion for 
microvascular decompression surgery of the cochlear nerve.93,94 
However, there is a high incidence of asymptomatic individuals 
who have compression of the nerve without having any symp­
toms,94 so this treatment should be used very carefully. This 
treatment should not be performed without investigating the 
psychological/psychiatrical status of the patients.8
Auditory evoked magnetic field (AEF)
Hoke et al.95,96 and Pantev et al.97 reported that the amplitude 
ratio of the two major waves of the auditory evoked magnetic 
field (AEF), M200/M100, could be used as an objective 
measurement allowing discrimination between individuals 
suffering from tinnitus (ratio less than 0.5) and individuals 
without tinnitus (ratio greater than 0.5). However, Jacobson et 
al.98 could not verify these findings. This inconsistency could be 
due to the selection of subjects tested. Hoke et al.99 also 
reported on the age effect on these responses. In normally-hear- 
ing individuals, the average amplitude ratio decreases linearly 
with age.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging
By using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), it 
seems possible to investigate tinnitus-related abnormalities in 
brain function in patients with lateralization of tinnitus. The 
method is, however, based on masking noise stimulus which is 
used to change tinnitus loudness and examining the corre­
sponding changes in activity of the inferior colliculus (IC). For 
lateralized tinnitus subjects, the sound-evoked activation 
showed an asymmetric IC, but in the control group, the right 
versus left IC did not differ significantly.
Positron emission tomography
The bloodflow in the brain can be measured using positron 
emission tomography. Increased activity in the primary auditory 
cortex in tinnitus patients compared to normal controls was 
reported in a study by Arnold et al.100 This study was supported 
by other researchers,38 who also found indices for the involve­
ment of the hippocampus. In Denmark, Mirz et al.101 reported 
that the increased neuronal activity caused by tinnitus occurred 
predominantly in the right hemisphere, with significant foci in 
the middle frontal and middle temporal gyri, in addition to lat­
eral and mesial posterior sites. These results are consistent with 
the hypothesis that the sensation of tinnitus is associated with 
activity in cortical areas functionally linked to functions such as 
attention, emotion and memory, and supports the neurophysio­
logical models earlier presented.
  

The pathophysiology and assessment of tinnitus 
567
Conclusion
Different models focus on the results of damage to the sensory 
cells in the cochlea as the aetiology of tinnitus. However, these 
models do not explain why tinnitus causes suffering in some 
persons. Since not all patients with hearing loss suffer from 
tinnitus, additional explanations are necessary. The depression 
factor had a very strong impact on working ability for tinnitus 
patients, so a procedure for identifying depressive and anxiety 
disorders in tinnitus patients should be included in the early 
contact with tinnitus patients. Tinnitus comorbidity with 
depressive and anxiety disorders is high, and a monoaminergic" 
vulnerability model has been suggested to be a predisposing 
factor to induce the development of severe tinnitus. It is of 
great importance to be aware of all aspects of possible mecha­
nisms beyond the symptom of tinnitus. A careful audiological, 
somatic and neuro-otological approach must be carried out in 
each patient, to investigate the aetiology of the debut of tinni­
tus and to find out the reason why the patient suffers from 
tinnitus.
Acknowledgement
We are grateful to the Regional Health Authority in West 
Sweden and the National Board of Health and Welfare for 
financial grants. We would also like to acknowledge Profes- 
sor Linda Luxon and Dr Derek N. Eder for valuable 
comments.
References
1. 
Axelsson A, Ringdahl A. Tinnitus—a study of its prevalence and 
characteristics. BrJ Audiol 1989; 23: 53-62.
2. 
Davies AC. Hearing in Adults. London: Whurr, 1995.
3. 
Coles RRA, David AC, Haggard MP. Epidemiology of tinnitus. In: 
Evered D, Lauresson G, (eds.), London: Tinnitus C1BA Foundation 
Symposium 85. Pitman 1981.
4. 
Davies AC. The prevalence of hearing impairment and reported 
hearing disability among adults in Great Britain. Int J Epidemiol 
1989; 18:911-17.
5. 
Holgers KM, Barrenas ML. The correlation between speech recog' 
nition scores in noise in patients with no, mild or severe tinnitus. 
In: XXIII International Congress Of Audiology, Bari, 1996.
6. 
Meikle MB, Griest SE. Gender based differences in characterise 
tics of tinnitus. Hear J 1989; 42: 68-76.
7. 
Meric C, Gartner M, Collet L, Chery-Croze S. Psychopathologi- 
cal profile of tinnitus sufferers: evidence concerning the relation- 
ship between tinnitus features and impact on life. Audiol Neurootol 
1998; 3: 240-52.
8. 
Holgers K-M, Erlandsson SI, Barrenas M-L, Predictive factors for 
the severity of tinnitus. A udiology 2000; 39: 284-91.
9. 
Nodar RH. Tinnitus aurium in school age children: a survey. J 
Audiol Res 1972; 12: 133-5.
10. Mills RP. Tinnitus in childhood. Clin Otolaryngol 1986; 11: 431-4.
11. Graham ]. Tinnitus in hearing-impaired children. Tinnitus. 1987; 
7: 137-43.
12. Stouffer JL, Tyler RS, Booth JC Buckrell B. Tinnitus in normal- 
hearing and hearing-impaired children. In: Aran JM, ed. Proceed- 
ings of the Fourth International Tints Seminar. New York: Kugler, 
1991: 255-8.
13. Holgers KM. Tinnitus in children. In: Hazell J, ed. Sixth Interna­
tional Tinnitus Seminar, Cambridge. King’s Lynn: Biddles Short 
Run Books Ltd, 1999: 218-19.
14. Holgers KM. Tinnitus vdrdprogram ‘2000 Stockholm: National 
Board of Health and Welfare, 1999.
15. Chole RA, Parker WS. Tinnitus and vertigo in patients with tem­
poromandibular disorders. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992; 
118:817-21.
16. Vernon J, Griest S, Press L. Attributes of tinnitus that may predict 
temporomandibular joint dysfunction. J Craniomand Pract 1992; 
10: 282-7.
17. Rubinstein B, Erlandsson S. A stomatognatic analysis of patients 
with disabling tinnitus and craniomandibular disorder. Br J Audiol 
1991; 25:77-83.
18. Seligmann H, Podoshin L, Ben-David J, Fradis M, Goldsher M. 
Drug'induced tinnitus and other hearing disorders. Drug Safety 
1996; 14(3): 198-212.
19. Iwarsson S, Andersson D, Gretzer-Quick I. et al. (eds). PASS 
2000. Stockholm: LINFO AB, 2000.
20. Holgers KM, Zoger S, Svedlund J, Erlandsson SI. Psychiatrical 
profiles of tinnitus patients seeking help at an audiological clinic. 
In: Hazell JW ed. Sixth International Tinnitus Seminar. King’s Lynn: 
Biddles Short Run Books Ltd, 1999: 283-5.
21. Gerber KE, Nehemikis AM, Chawter RA, Jones HC. Is tinnitus a 
psychological disorder? IntJ Psychiatry 1985/86; 15: 81-7.
22. Collet L, Moussu MF, Disant F, Ahami T, Morgan A. Minnesota 
Multiphasic Personality inventory in tinnitus disorders. A udiology 
1990; 28: 101-6.
23. Erlandsson S, Hallberg L, Axelsson A. Psychological and audio- 
logical correlates of perceived tinnitus severity. A udiology 1992; 
31: 168-79.
24. Coles R. In: Reich GE, Vernon JA, eds. Proceedings of the Fifth 
International Tinnitus Seminar, Portland, Oregon, USA. American 
Tinnitus Association, 1995: 25-9.
25. Eggermont JJ. On the pathophysiology of tinnitus; a review and a 
peripheral model. Hear Res 1990; 48: 111-24.
26. Moller AR. Pathophysiology of tinnitus. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1984; 93(1 Pt 1): 39-44.
27. Lenarz T, Schreiner C, Snyder RL, Ernst A. Neural mechanisms of 
tinnitus. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1993; 249(8): 441-6.
28. Jastreboff PJ, Hazell JWP. A neurophysiological approach to tin­
nitus: clinical implications. BrJ of Audiol 1993; 27: 7-17.
29. Eggermont JJ, Kenmochi M. Salicylate and quinine selectively 
increase spontaneous firing rates in secondary auditory cortex. 
Hear Res 1998; 117(1-2): 149-60.
30. Jastreboff PJ, Brennan JF, Sasaki CT. Animal models of tinnitus. 
Laryngoscope 1988; 98: 280-286.
31. Kellerhals B, Zogg R. Tinnitus-induced weight loss in rats. An
  

568 
Auditory disorders and their management
animal model for tinnitus research. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat 
Spec 1991; 53(6): 331-4.
32. Jastreboff P, Sakai CT. Salicylate-induced changes in the sponta­
neous activity of single units in the inferior colliculus of the 
guinea pig. J Acoust Soc Am 1986; 80: 1384-91.
33. Zenner HP, Ernst A. Cochlear-motor, transduction and signal- 
transfer tinnitus: models for three types of cochlear tinnitus. Eur 
Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1993; 249(8): 447-54.
34. Tonndorf J. The analogy between tinnitus and pain: a suggestion 
for a physiological basis of chronic tinnitus. Hear Res 1987; 
28(2-3): 271-5.
35. Cacace A, Lovely T, Pames S, Winter D, McFarland D, Gaze- 
evoked tinnitus following unilateral peripheral auditory deaf- 
ferentation: a case for anomalous crossmodal plasticity. In: Salvi 
RJ, ed. Auditory System Plasticity and Regeneration. New York: 
Thieme Medical Publishers Inc., 1996: 354-8.
36. Jastreboff P, Jastreboff M, How TRT derives from the neurophysi­
ological model. In: Proceedings of the VIth International Tinnitus 
Seminar 1999.
37. Hazell JWP. The TRT method in practice. In: Proceedings of the 
VIth International Tinnitus Seminar 1999.
38. Lockwood AH, Salvi RJ, Coad ML, Towsley ML, Wack DS, 
Murphy BW. The functional neuroanatomy of tinnitus: evidence 
for limbic system links and neural plasticity. Neurology 1998; 
50(1): 114-20.
39. Moller AR, Moller MB, Yokota M. Some forms of tinnitus may 
involve the extralemniscal auditory pathway. Laryngoscope 1992; 
102: 1165-71.
40. Erlandsson SI Holgers KM. The relationship between perceived 
tinnitus severity and health-related quality of life with aspects of 
gender. Noise Health.
41. Rubinstein B. Tinnitus and craniomandibular disorders. Is there a 
link? Doctoral thesis, University of Goteborg, 1993.
42. Levine RA. Somatic modulation appears to be a fundamental 
attribute of tinnitus. In: Hazell JW, ed. Sixth International Tinnitus 
Seminar. Biddles Short Run Books, King’s Lynn: 1999; 193-7.
43. Zoger S, Svedlund J, Holgers KM. Psychiatric disorders in tinnitus 
patients without severe hearing impairment: 24 month follow-up 
of patients at an audiologic clinic. A udiology 2001; 40: 133-40.
44. Holgers KM, Zoger S. 1st Etiologically Based Tinnitus Therapy 
Course} Thorskog, Sweden, 1999.
45. Hegerl U, Juckel G. Intensity dependence of auditory evoked 
potentials as indicators of central serotonergic neurotransmission 
—new hypothesis. Biol Psychiatry 1993; 33: 173-87.
46. Juckel G, Monar M, Hegerl U, Csepe V, Karmos G. Auditory 
evoked potentials as indicator of brain serotonergic activity—first 
evidence in behaving cats. Biol Psychiatry 1997; 41: 1181-95.
47. Ressler KJ and Nemeroff CB. Role of serotonergic and noradren­
ergic systems in the pathophysiology of depression and anxiety dis­
orders. Depression and Anxiety 2000; 12: 2-19.
48. Dobie R, Sakai CS, Sullivan MD, Katon WJ, Russo J. ‘Anti­
depressant treatment of tinnitus patients: report of a randomized 
clinical trial and clinical prediction of benefit.’ Am J Otol 1993; 
14(1): 18-23.
49. Salvi R, Wang J Powers N. Rapid functional reorganization in the
inferior colliculus and cochlear nucleus after acute cochlear dam­
age. In: Salvi R, Henderson D, Fiorino F, Colletti V eds. Auditory 
System Plasticity and Regeneration. New York: Thieme Medical 
Publishers Inc., 1996: 275-96.
50. Woods Cl, Azeredo WJ. Noradrenergic and serotonergic projec­
tions to the superior olive: potential for modulation of olivo­
cochlear neurons. Brain Res 1999; 836: 9-18.
51. Thompson GC, Thompson AM, Garrett KM, Britton BH. 
Serotonin and serotonin receptors in the central auditory system. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994; 110: 93-103.
52. Andom AC, Vittorio JA, Bellflower J. 3H-spiroperidol binding 
in human temporal cortex (Brodmann areas 41-42) occurs at 
multiple high affinity state with serotonergic selectivity. Psycho- 
pharmacology 1989; 99: 520-5.
53. Klockhoff 1, Lindblom U. Meniere’s disease and hydrochloro­
thiazide (Dichlotride)—a critical analysis of symptoms and thera­
peutic effects. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1967; 63: 347-65.
54. Attias J, Shemesh A, Bleich A et al. Psychological profile of help- 
seeking and non-help-seeking tinnitus patients. Scand Audiol 
1995; 24: 13-18.
55. Hallberg L, Erlandsson S. Tinnitus characteristics in tinnitus com- 
plainers and noncomplainers. BrJ Audiol 1993; 27: 19-27.
56. Alberti PW. Tinnitus in occupational hearing loss: nosological 
aspects. J Otolaryngol 1987; 16: 34-5
57. Stouffer JL, Tyler RS. Characterization of tinnitus by tinnitus 
patients. J Speech Hear Res 1990; 55: 439-53.
58. Meikle MB, Taylor-Walsh E. Characteristics of tinnitus and 
related observations in over 1800 tinnitus clinic patients. J Laryn­
gol Otol 1984; 9: 17-21.
59. Coles RRA, Lutman ME, Axelsson A, Hazell JWP. Tinnitus 
severity gradings; cross sectional studies. In: Aran JM, Dauman R, 
eds. Tinnitus 91 Fourth International Tinnitus Seminar. Bordeaux: 
Kugler, 1991; 453-5.
60. Baskill JL, Coles RRA, Lutman ME, Axelsson A. Tinnitus sever­
ity grading: longitudinal studies. In: Aran JM, Dauman R, eds. 
Proceedings of the Fourth International Tinnitus Seminar. Bordeaux: 
Kugler, 1991; 457-60.
61. Newman CW, Sandridge SA, Jacobson GP. Psychometric ade­
quacy of the tinnitus handicap inventory (THI) for evaluating 
treatment outcome. J Am Acad Audiol 1998; 9: 153-160.
62. Newman CW, Jacobson GP, Spitzer JB. Development of the 
tinnitus handicap inventory. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1996; 122: 143-8.
63. Newman CW, Wharton JA, Shivapuja BG, Jacobson GP. 
Relationships among psychoacoustic judgements, speech under­
standing ability and self-perceived handicap in tinnitus subject. 
Audiology 1994; 33: 47-60.
64. Kuk F, Tyler RS, Russell D, Jordan H. The psychometric properties 
of a tinnitus handicap questionnaire. Ear Hear 1990; 11: 434-45.
65. Wilson PH, Henry J, Bowen M, Haralambous G. Tinnitus reaction 
questionnaire: psychometric properties of a measure of distress 
associated with tinnitus. J Speech Hear Res 1991; 34: 197-201.
66. Halford JBS, Stewart D, Andersson M. Tinnitus severity measured 
by a subjective scale, audiometry and clinical judgement. J Laryn­
gol Otol 1991; 105:89-93.
  

The pathophysiology and assessment of tinnitus 
569
67. Hallam RS. Manual of the Tinnitus Questionnaire (TQ). London: 
Psychological Corporation, 1996.
68. Goebel G, Hiller W. Tinnitus-Fragebogen (TF) Ein instrument zur 
Erfassung von Belastung und Scheregrad bei Tinnitus (Mannual) 
Gottingen: Hogrefe Verlag, 1998.
69. Coles RRA, Baskill JL, Sheldrake J. Measurement and manage- 
ment of tinnitus. J Laryngol Otol 1984; 98: 1171-6.
70. Josephson EM. A method of measurement of tinnitus. Arch 
Otolaryngol 1931; 14: 282-3.
71. Wegel RL. A study of tinnitus. Arch Otolaryngol 1931; 14: 158-65.
72. Tyler RS, Stouffer JL. A review of tinnitus loudness. HearJ 1989; 
42: 52-7.
73. Tyler RS, Conrad- Armes D. Tinnitus pitch: a comparison of three 
measurement methods. BrJ Audiol 1983; 17: 101-7.
74. Bums EM. A comparison of variability among measurements of sub­
jective tinnitus and objective stimuli. A udiology 1984; 23:426-40.
75. Penner MJ.Variability in matches to subjective tinnitus. J Speech 
Hear Res 1983; 26: 263-7.
76. Fowler EP. The ‘illusion of loudness’ of tinnitus—its etiology and 
treatment. Laryngoscope 1942; 52: 275-85.
77. Hinchcliffe R, Chambers C. Loudness of tinnitus: an approach to 
measurement. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1983; 29: 163-73.
78. Tyler RS, Conrad-Armes D. Masking of tinnitus compared to 
masking of pure tones. J Speech Hear Res 1984; 27: 106-11.
79. Axelsson A, Sandh A. Tinnitus in noise-induced hearing loss. Br 
J Audiol 1985; 9:271-6.
80. Man A, Naggan L. Characteristics of tinnitus in acoustic trauma. 
Audiology 1981; 20: 70-8.
81. Tyler RS. Tinnitus maskers and hearing aids for tinnitus. Semin 
Hear 1987; 8: 49-61.
82. Feldmann H. Homolateral and contralateral masking of tinnitus 
by noise-bands and pure tones. Audiology 1971; 10: 138-44.
83. Penner MJ. Masking of tinnitus and central masking. J Speech 
Hear Res 1987; 30: 147-52.
84. Shailer MJ, Tyler RS, Coles RRA. Critical masking bands for 
sensorineural tinnitus. Scand Audiol 1981; 10: 157-62.
85. Smith PA, Parr VM, Lutman ME, Coles RRA. Comparative study 
of four noise spectra as potential tinnitus maskers. Br J Audiol 
1991; 25: 25-34.
86. Shulman A, ABR and tinnitus—an overview. J Laryngol Otol 
1984; 9: 170-7.
87. Ikner CL, Hassen AH. The effect of tinnitus on ABR latencies. 
Ear Hear 1990; 11(1): 16-20.
88. Maurizi M, Ottaviani F, Paludetti G, Almadori G, Tassoni A. 
Contribution to the differentiation of peripheral versus central 
tinnitus via auditory brain stem response evaluation. A udiology. 
1985; 24(3): 207-16.
89. Rosenhall U, Axelsson A. Auditory brainstem response latencies 
in patients with tinnitus. Scand Audiol 1995; 24(2): 97-100.
90. Lemaire MC, Beutter P. Brainstem auditory evoked responses in 
patients with tinnitus. Audiology 1995; 34(6): 287-300.
91. Attias J, Urbach D, Gold S, Shemesh Z. Auditory event related 
potentials in chronic tinnitus patients with noise induced hear­
ing loss. Hear Res 1993; 71(1-2): 106-13.
92. Bamea G, Attias J, Gold S, Shahar A. Tinnitus with normal 
hearing sensitivity: extended high-frequency audiometry and 
auditory-nerve brain-stem-evoked responses. A udiology 1990; 
29(1): 36-45.
93. Moller MB, Moller AR, Janetta PJ. Vascular decompression 
surgery for severe tinnitus: selection criteria and results. Laryngo­
scope 1993; 17: 421-7.
94. Vasama JP, Moller MB, Moller AR. Microvascular decompression 
of the cochlear nerve in patients with severe tinnitus. Preopera­
tive findings and operative outcome in 22 patients. Neurol Res 
1998; 20: 242-8.
95. Hoke M, Feldmann H, Pantev C, Lutkenhoner B, Lehnertz K. 
Objective evidence of tinnitus in auditory evoked magnetic 
fields. Hear Res 1989; 37(3): 281-6.
96. Hoke M. Objective evidence for tinnitus in auditory-evoked 
magnetic fields. A eta Otolaryngol Suppl 1990; 476: 189-94.
97. Pantev C, Hoke M, Lutkenhoner B, Lehnertz K, Kumpf W. 
Tinnitus remission objectified by neuromagnetic measurements. 
Hear Res 1989; 40(3): 261-4.
98. Jacobson GP, Ahmad BK, Moran J, Newman CW, Tepley N, 
Wharton 
J. 
Auditory 
evoked 
cortical 
magnetic 
field 
(M100-M200) measurements in tinnitus and normal groups. 
Hear Res 1991; 56(1-2): 44-52.
99. Hoke M. Objective evidence for tinnitus in auditory-evolved 
magnetic fields. Acta Otolaryngol 1990; 479: 189-94.
100. Arnold W, Bartenstein P, Oestreicher E, Romer W, Schwaiger M. 
Focal metabolic activation in the predominant left auditory cor­
tex in patients suffering from tinnitus: a PET study with 
[18F]deoxyglucose. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec 1996; 
58(4): 195-9.
101. Mirz F, Pedersen B, Ishizu K et al. Positron emission tomography 
of cortical centers of tinnitus. Hear Res 1999; 134(1-2): 133-44.
  

Management of the 
tinnitus patient
Richard S Tyler, Soly Erlandsson
Introduction
This chapter provides a general outline for the management of 
the tinnitus patient. It does not review the entire subject of tin­
nitus (see other reviews: Tyler and Babin,1 Coles2), and nor does 
it provide details about specific treatments. Instead, this chap­
ter focuses on overall strategies for the ‘everyday clinical man­
agement* of typical and distressed patients with sensorineural 
tinnitus.
This approach is founded on three levels of tinnitus severity, 
based on our clinical experiences (Table 33.1). Most patients 
require only simple information and reassurance. We refer to these 
as level 1 patients. However, some patients require more detailed 
explanations regarding tinnitus and its treatments. Once they 
have a better understanding of causes and treatments, they are sat­
isfied with this knowledge. These patients are at level 2. Finally, a 
few patients with a severe reaction to tinnitus require specific 
formal treatments. These patients are referred to as level 3.
Typically, we assume that patients are at level 1. As the 
counseling session progresses, it usually becomes apparent if they 
require level 2 assistance. We prefer to let patients go home (with 
a handout) and consider what they have learned. Usually, a 
second appointment is scheduled if they are at level 3.
We realise that this is an oversimplification. Some patients 
may move from one level to another, and some patients may 
require level 3 therapy immediately. Nonetheless, this a useful, 
overall plan.
There is a period of adjustment, and patients eventually
Level 1 —Basic information 
become less attentive to the tinnitus, and focus on other aspects
of their life; tinnitus then becomes less important. Although
t ■ 
** 
patients are occasionally aware of their tinnitus, they are able to
Listen to the patient 
F 
, 
i j
move forward without a tinnitus handicap.
It is always important to let the patient share what is bothering 
Other patients, however, are not as fortunate. Tinnitus
them about their tinnitus. This provides some insight into what 
becomes a major focus of their life.3 Their reaction to the tin-
direction the counseling should take and how much depth is 
nitus becomes worse, they cannot or are unable to ignore their
required. It is also therapeutic for the patient. 
tinnitus, and there is an increased alertness to the symptoms.
Many people with tinnitus are not handicapped by it. Nor- 
Patients with tinnitus almost always have a hearing loss,
mally, the initial onset results in some concern and distress. 
Therefore, most patients will improve their communication
Table 33.1 Outline of approach in three levels of treatment
Level 
Overall goal 
Focus areas
Basic information
2 
Preliminary 
counseling
Tinnitus assessment 
and treatment
Listen to the patient 
Provide hearing aid if 
necessary 
Provide general information 
about the background and 
treatment of tinnitus 
Determine if there is a need 
for further treatment
Listen to the patient 
More detail about tinnitus 
More detail about treatments 
Assess individual needs 
Provide plan for self­
treatment 
Determine if further 
treatment needed
Listen to the patient 
Assess tinnitus handicap 
Measure tinnitus 
Assess psychological wellbeing 
Provide information about 
treatments 
Assess treatment plan options 
and decide on treatment(s)
33

572 
Auditory disorders and their management
with a hearing aid. In some patients, the hearing aid will also 
help the tinnitus. If the patient requires a wearable noise gen­
erator (see below), then the provision of a noise generator and 
a hearing aid in a ‘combination unit' should be considered. 
Before providing the hearing aid, it would be desirable to intro­
duce the concept of noise generators and allow the person to 
listen to a low-level broadband noise (from the audiometer or 
from an in-stock noise generator).
Hearing aids can help tinnitus because they:
*  
improve communication and reduce stress
*  
amplify low-level background noise, which can be useful for 
masking, habituation, and distraction
m 
produce noise, when can be useful for masking, habituation, 
and distraction.
It may be desirable to adjust the frequency response of the hear­
ing aids to:
n 
extend the low- or high-frequency range of amplification to 
activate a broader frequency range of the auditory system 
« 
amplify more low frequencies to enhance environmental 
sounds.
Provide general information about background 
and treatment
Table 33.2 describes the general information that can be pro­
vided at an initial session. Most patients are surprised and com­
forted to know what causes tinnitus and how common it is. It 
will help some to understand that tinnitus is often a ‘natural’ 
part of the aging process. The fact that different external agents 
(e.g. noise exposure) cause tinnitus often reassures them that it 
is not something just ‘in their head’.
Patients need to know that there is no ‘magic pill’ to cure 
tinnitus. However, they should also be told at the same time 
that there are lots of things people can do to help themselves. 
It is the clinician’s responsibility to provide the patients with 
the guidance and resources so that they can help themselves. 
Sufficient information should be provided so that the patient is 
aware of the help that is available, and the different profession­
als providing this help. This knowledge can be helpful to 
patients in case they decide to return for more help in the 
future.
Approximately 1 in 10 people has tinnitus, and about 1 in 
200 has a very bothersome tinnitus that interferes with their 
ability to lead a normal life. In about 75% of patients, tinnitus 
remains the same throughout life. In about 10% of patients, the 
tinnitus gets worse, and in about 15% it improves over time.4 
Most patients learn to adjust to it.
Assess need for further treatment
Most patients are satisfied with this general information. They 
now have reliable information about tinnitus, are aware of 
the treatments available, and know where to receive treat­
Table 33.2 General information about tinnitus to be provided 
at initial contact
Information area
Prevalence
Causes
Content
Treatments
About 1 in every 10 people 
experiences some tinnitus
About 1 in every 200 people is 
severely bothered by tinnitus
Stress
Noise-induced hearing loss
Aging
Medications
Head injury
Almost anything that causes 
hearing loss
No magic pill
Strategies to help yourself
Hearing aids, counseling, relaxation, 
psychological therapies, maskers, 
habituation
ment. They can contact their therapist in the future if they 
require further help. However, other patients remain anxious, 
depressed, or just unclear, and require additional counseling.
Level 2—Preliminary counseling
Patients should be considered for the preliminary counseling 
level if they:
■ 
are not satisfied with the discussion at the initial contact
■ 
express an interest in further treatment 
m 
are depressed or anxious.
Listen to the patient
At this level, it can be useful to ask more probing questions 
about what troubles the patient. They now have some accurate 
information about tinnitus. It is useful if they have had time to 
consider this information. If possible, provide them with an 
informational handout, which they can review at home before 
the appointment.
A few questions that are helpful include the following:
■ 
What troubles you most about your tinnitus? 
it 
What would you like to happen next? 
m 
What can I do to help you the most?
More details about tinnitus
Review the material presented in Table 33.2 regarding causes, 
prevalence, and treatments. In some patients, providing more 
details can be helpful. In others, simply restating what has 
already been said is sufficient. The level and detail of
  

Management of the tinnitus patient 
573
information provided must match the level of interest and 
sophistication of the patient.
Additional information can be discussed relating the mech- 
anisms of tinnitus and regarding the patient’s reaction to tinni­
tus (Table 33.3). Although the specific mechanisms of tinnitus 
are unknown, discussing possible mechanisms in a concrete 
fashion makes the tinnitus more tangible. It is a real physiolog­
ical mechanism that is reinforced by emotional reactions. It is 
not something they are imagining.
Separating the tinnitus and the patient’s reaction to tinni­
tus is the basis for cognitive behavior modification.5’6 For most 
patients, it is useful to distinguish ‘hearing’ the tinnitus and the 
patient’s reaction to the tinnitus. Patients often benefit from 
seeing how they can have some control over their reaction.
Normally, nerve fibers throughout the auditory system 
have some level of activity, even in the absence of sound. This 
spontaneous activity is normal and is not perceived as sound. 
When a sound is presented, action potentials are produced and 
this pattern of activity is interpreted by the brain as sound. 
Some places in the auditory system have inhibitory neural cir­
cuits, such that the presentation of sounds can actually 
decrease spontaneous activity.
Because the presence of sound is coded by action poten­
tials, the obvious correlate of tinnitus would be high rates of 
spontaneous activity. However, when animal physiologists have 
examined nerve fibres in animals exposed to a noise-induced 
hearing loss, for example, the spontaneous discharge rate has 
actually decreased. Furthermore, understanding the mechanisms 
of tinnitus is difficult, because it is not possible to ask animals if 
they have tinnitus. Thus, theories are speculative.
There are many different theories regarding how tinnitus 
is coded in the auditory system. These theories can broadly be 
categorized in the following areas:
m increased spontaneous rate
a bursts of increased spontaneous firing
m decreased spontaneous rate
m the edge between normal and decreased spontaneous rate
Table 33,3 Additional areas to discuss for patients at level 2,
Information area 
Content
Mechanisms
Separate tinnitus 
from reaction to 
tinnitus
Spontaneous activity in the 
nervous system 
Probably an increase In spontaneous 
activity
Probably involves entire auditory 
pathway from cochlea to brain
Tinnitus can be loud or soft, 
low- or high-pitched, 
composed of one or many sounds 
Sound of tinnitus is different from 
reaction to tinnitus, people can 
learn new reactions
■ 
coordinated activity across nerve fibers
*  
brain reorganization resulting in a greater than normal 
representation of one frequency region.
More details about treatments
At this point, the patient could have learned about treatment 
options from various sources:
■ 
from you at an earlier counseling session 
m 
from other health care professionals
■ 
from friends or acquaintances with tinnitus 
n 
from the media or internet.
Determine what treatments the patient is particularly inter­
ested in. At this point, the patient is ready for more detailed 
information regarding what treatments are available. The infor­
mation needs to be sufficiently detailed to allow the patient to 
decide if she/he wants to pursue a treatment and, if so, which 
one. Table 33.4 provides a broad outline of some different 
treatments.
Provide plan for self-treatment
It can be very useful to provide some general guidelines that 
give the patient a clear plan and something to do for their tin­
nitus. It should give them a feeling of control. Table 33.5 has 
some suggestions that are helpful for most patients.
Table 33,4 General treatments available for tinnitus.
Treatments
Refocus
Hearing aids
Sound therapy
Medications for 
coping
Information
Attention on tinnitus or attention 
on engaging activity 
Develop plan for when reaction to 
tinnitus is bad
Improving communication and 
therefore reduce stress 
Amplify low-level background 
noise, which can be useful for 
masking, habituation, and 
distraction 
Produce noise which can be useful 
for masking, habituation, and 
distraction
Mask or cover up sound 
Reduce the loudness of tinnitus 
Distract (divert) attention from 
tinnitus 
Facilitate habituation
Not a cure 
Help sleeping 
Help relax
Help anxiety, depression
  

574 
Auditory disorders and their management
Table 33.5 General plan appropriate for most patients.
Areas to address
Awareness of problems
Awareness of environmental 
factors
Possible solutions 
Potential use of solutions 
Plan to implement solutions
Relevant questions
What problems are perceived 
to be related to tinnitus?
In what situations is tinnitus 
worse?
When is patient least 
disturbed by tinnitus?
What activities can be used 
to reduce tinnitus?
What will patient do in 
specific situation when 
reaction to tinnitus is 
worse?
Patients can describe the problems that they think are 
related to their tinnitus. They can keep a diary, identifying daily 
situations where they perceive their tinnitus to be the most 
problematic. They can also list times during the day when their 
tinnitus is not bothersome, and things that they do successfully 
to cope with their tinnitus.
Based on these observations, the patient may produce their 
own strategy for coping with tinnitus by:
■ 
reducing time spent in situations where tinnitus is 
problematic.
■ 
increasing time in situations where tinnitus is not a problem
■ 
having plans to perform activities that render tinnitus less 
problematic when tinnitus is bothersome.
Although this can be easier said than done, it can empower 
some patients.
Determine if further treatment is needed
The patient should now have a more thorough understanding 
of treatment options. The patient can then decide if additional 
treatment is desired. Sometimes it is helpful to give the patient 
a handout to go home with, allowing time to consider the 
options and schedule a follow-up appointment if desired.
Most patients benefit from joining the American Tinnitus 
Association for support and information (PO Box 5, Portland, 
OR, 97207-0005: 1-800-634-8978, E-mail: tinnitus@ata.org, 
web page: http://www.ata.org), and other similar organizations 
worldwide.
Level 3—Tinnitus assessment and 
treatment
At this level of intervention, a more direct therapy is probably 
going to be selected. Therefore, more time is spent measuring
tinnitus and related difficulties to be able to later quantify the 
benefits of treatment.
Assess tinnitus handicap
We use three approaches to quantify the disability and handi­
cap (Table 33.6). We have patients assigned a value to the 
severity of their tinnitus on a scale from 0-100, 0 being the least 
severe tinnitus they can imagine and 100 being the most severe. 
They are then given the open-ended Tinnitus Problems Ques­
tionnaire.7 Patients are asked to list the problems that they 
believe have been ‘caused’ by their tinnitus. This is helpful, 
because it allows the patient to consider what is important to 
them. A closed set of questions might not ask the right ques­
tion. The most common complaints involve sleep difficulties, 
speech understanding, anxiety and depression.
It is often useful to quantify the handicapping nature of 
tinnitus on standardized questionnaires. There are several well- 
studied questionnaires available.8 These include the Tinnitus 
Reaction Questionnaire,9 the Tinnitus Handicaps Question­
naire,10 and the Tinnitus Handicap Inventory.11 With the 
Tinnitus Handicap Questionnaire, the severity of a patient’s 
handicap can be compared directly with other patients who 
have completed the questionnaire to determine their handicap 
related to others. This provides a more concrete assessment of 
the severity of their handicap.
Measure tinnitus
Measuring the psychoacoustical aspects of tinnitus can be 
helpful for many reasons, including:
m 
confirmation to the patient that their tinnitus is real 
w 
to monitor changes of the magnitude of the tinnitus 
m 
to provide some insights into the mechanism 
a 
to aid in the fitting of a device (for example, it can be 
helpful to know if the tinnitus can be masked and at what 
level, or to know if the tinnitus can be masked in the 
contralateral ear)
■ 
to determine reliability in legal cases
Table 33.6 Handicap assessment tools.
General tool
Category scale severity rating
Problems important to patient
Formal questionnaire of 
tinnitus handicap or disability
0-100
Open-ended questionnaire
Tinnitus Reaction 
Questionnaire 
Tinnitus Handicap 
Inventory 
Tinnitus Handicap 
Questionnaire
  

Management of the tinnitus patient 
575
Table 33.7 Audiological measurement of tinnitus.
Measurement 
Details
Description
Localization
Pitch
Loudness
Broadband noise masking
Uncomfortable loudness 
levels (for hyperacusis)
Ringing
Roaring
Pulsing
Humming
■ 
Left ear 
Right ear
■ 
Bilateral
In the head 
Outside of the head
At least 5 replications reporting 
each match
At least 3 replications reporting 
each match
Ipsilateral ear 
Contralateral ear
Ascending method, caution 
needed in some patients
These measurements should only be made when there is a clear 
purpose in mind, such as those listed above.
Table 33.7 makes some general suggestions about measuring 
tinnitus. Tinnitus pitch can be measured by adjusting the 
frequency of a pure tone to have the same pitch as the most 
prominent pitch of the tinnitus. Similarly, the intensity of a 
tone can be adjusted to have the same loudness as the tinnitus, 
The level of a broadband noise can be adjusted so that it just 
masks the tinnitus in the ipsilateral and/or contralateral ear. 
Details regarding procedures can be found in the literature.12,13
Loudness and minimal masking can be useful to quantify 
the magnitude of the tinnitus. Comparing ipsilateral and con- 
tralateral can suggest ipsilateral and contralateral involvement.
Assess psychological wellbeing
The patient must be understood and treated in the context of 
their environment and their psychological self. Table 33.8 high­
lights a few areas that should be addressed. The role of gender 
for the experience of tinnitus suffering should also be taken into 
consideration, as the life situation and the gender roles of 
women are different from those of men.3 Gender differences in 
the perceived health-related quality of life among tinnitus 
patients have been reported.20
What expectations does the patient have about the ther­
apy? Do they expect to be cured? Are they simply looking for 
reassurance? What previous therapies have they tried? Is this 
their first attempt to treat their tinnitus? Have they traveled 
around the country to several clinics?
Tinnitus affects interpersonal relationships. It is difficult 
for others to understand the devastating nature of tinnitus.
Table 33.8 Background and psychological areas of assessment
Area to evaluate
Expectations from tinnitus therapy
Previous tinnitus treatments tried and results
Interpersonal relationships/support system in place
Sleep difficulties
Anxiety
Depression
Suicide
Problems occur with spouses, children, and co-workers. Are 
there any critical external circumstances that could be rele­
vant? Has the patient changed jobs, experienced changes in 
marriage, or had a death in the family? Are there any events 
that could have triggered the tinnitus or made it worse? Is the 
tinnitus only one symptom of many difficulties faced by the 
patient? What kind of support system does the patient have? 
Does the patient live alone? Were they accompanied to the 
clinic with a sympathetic partner?
Sleep problems are often reported with tinnitus. Referrals to 
a ‘sleep clinic’ can be necessary. Some basic suggestions include:
■ 
getting to sleep at the same time each evening
■ 
reserving the bed as a place to sleep, not read or think
■ 
not drinking or eating before bedtime.
What is the personality of the patient? Some patients may be 
anxious, whereas others can be depressed. Consultation or 
referrals to psychologists or psychiatrists may be helpful. What 
is the overall wellbeing of the patient? Are they happy with 
their life? Do they enjoy their work? Do they have hobbies? Do 
they have a general positive outlook?
Finally, one should not overlook the fact that some tinnitus 
patients consider and commit suicide. If the patient mentions 
or hints at suicide, a referral to a psychiatrist is essential.
Assess treatment plan options
After carefully assessing the patient, a clear and complete 
description of therapies and options should be discussed.
Provide specific treatment
Table 33.9 reviews a number of specific treatment options that 
are available.
Counseling
General counseling can be helpful to assist the patient to 
develop successful coping strategies, to reduce distress and 
modify maladaptive behavior. The specific problem that compels 
the patient to seek help might be an overwhelming anxiety; not 
over a feared physical disease, but over the risk of suffering a
  

576 
Auditory disorders and their management
Tabic 33.9 Treatments available. 
Table 33.10 Counseling specific to tinnitus retraining therapy.
Treatment
References
Counseling
Tyler et al17 
Wilson and Henry6
Relaxation
Erlandsson3
Cognitive behavior
Sweetow5*
modification
Wilson and Henry*3
Masking
Vernon18
Tyler and Bentler19
Habituation
Jastreboff and Hazell
Sound therapy
See text
Refocus therapy
See text
mental breakdown.21 When effective, counseling can help to 
open up new possibilities, increased awareness, empowerment 
and enhanced quality of life.22
Relaxation
Relaxation is aimed at gaining control over tension and being 
able to relax when necessary. These techniques can be used rou­
tinely, or particularly when tinnitus appears worse. This has the 
additional benefit that it increases confidence. There are many 
techniques that help patients relax when they are particularly 
bothered by their tinnitus. Examples include videotapes, using 
recorded soft music, or biofeedback. As with most things, results 
are typically better when relaxation therapy is provided by 
someone trained in the procedure.
Cognitive behavior modification
Cognitive therapy involves separating the tinnitus from a 
patient’s reaction to the tinnitus. It evaluates the way in which 
patients talk and think about their tinnitus. The intent is to 
have them think about their tinnitus in a realistic fashion, to 
adjust their thoughts about tinnitus, and to design therapies to 
change their reaction to tinnitus.
Masking
Tinnitus masking can involve covering up tinnitus so that the 
tinnitus is inaudible, or partially masking it so that the tinnitus 
loudness is decreased. Wearable noise generator devices, 
maskers, portable tape players, combination hearing aids and 
maskers, or non-wearable devices can be used to produce noise. 
Environmental noise can be used to produce masking. These 
devices can also be used to help the patient get to sleep.
Habituation or retraining therapy
The brain naturally habituates to sounds that are unimpor­
tant.14 For example, within seconds of entering a room, our 
brain ignores a noisy refrigerator. Retraining therapy combines 
counselling (Table 33.10) and habituation (Table 33.11) to 
reduce the fear of tinnitus and structure the environment to
The link between the tinnitus, the brain and emotions
The general principles of the habituation process
The specific mechanisms by which tinnitus can be habituated
Retraining of thinking—altering the beliefs and thoughts about 
tinnitus so they do not fear tinnitus, and do not feel threatened 
or in danger
The importance of maintaining audibility of the tinnitus
The importance of continued use of the noise generators
Inform the patients that we expect them to benefit from the 
treatment because others with similar tinnitus have benefited 
from this treatment in the past
Table 33.11 General principles of habituation.
Treat hyperacusis first if it is present
Use hearing aids if there is a communication handicap
Use hearing aid/noise generator combination units if background 
sound amplified by hearing aids is insufficient to reduce 
tinnitus. The tinnitus must be audible
If tinnitus is exacerbated by noise, start sound level below mixing 
point and gradually increase over weeks
Routine daily exposure to low-level background sound is advised 
(minimally about 8 h per day)
Wearable binaural noise generators are most desirable, although 
habituation through environmental sounds with or without 
hearing aids is possible
Avoid silence during all waking hours
Do not focus on the tinnitus
Provide follow-up contact to ensure compliance with mixing point 
and noise exposure
ensure that the patient is frequently in the presence of low lev­
els of background noise.15 Both wearable and non-wearable 
noise generators and environmental noise can be used. The 
noise level is adjusted to where the tinnitus begins to break up, 
the ‘mixing point’.
Sound therapy
Most patients report that the presence of background noise or 
music is helpful. These sounds can:
m 
mask (cover up) the tinnitus
*  
reduce its loudness (while still hearing the tinnitus) 
it 
distract the patient from attending to the tinnitus.
The types of sound used in sound therapy include:
■ 
Broadband noise—many patients report that it is easier to 
listen to the noise than it is to listen to their tinnitus.
  

Management of the tinnitus patient 
577
■ 
Music—usually soft, light, background music (e.g. classical 
baroque, simple piano music).
■ 
Sound produced particularly for relaxation or distraction 
(e.g. waves lapping against the shore, raindrops falling on 
leaves—sometimes these are combined with light music).
There are several different devices that produce these sounds:
■ 
Wearable devices that resemble hearing aids. These sound 
generators can be worn inside the ear canal or behind the ear.
■ 
Wearable devices with earphones or insert earphones 
(portable cassette or CD players).
■ 
Non-wearable devices that include radios, tape players, 
compact disk players or sound generators specifically 
produced for relaxation or tinnitus. Some are meant to be 
used at the bedside with timers and different sound types.
Sound therapy does not have to be used all the time.
Refocus therapy
Many patients focus their attention on their tinnitus. They think 
about their tinnitus much of the day. The more they think about 
their tinnitus, the worse it gets, and the worse it gets, the more 
they think about it. Tinnitus becomes a critical part of their life. 
They spend much of their time trying to ‘fix’ their tinnitus, learn 
more about it, and trying numerous ‘popular’ cures.
We have found that many patients need to redirect their 
attention away from their tinnitus and onto other aspects of 
their life. Tinnitus is real, and it is probably not going to go 
away. However, most people in life have some intrusion they 
have to manage. They may have some other serious illness, or 
be responsible for the care of someone who does. Few of us 
escape the challenges of life.
We have also found that some patients benefit from a frank 
conversation about the importance of the other activities in 
their life that they enjoy. Many of the patients have people who
Table 33.12 Influencing patient expectations to facilitate 
therapy.
Attributes
8e perceived as a knowledgeable 
professional
Be sympathetic towards the 
patient
Demonstrate that you 
understand tinnitus
Provide a clear therapy plan 
Show that you sincerely care
Details
Act professional 
Impact useful knowledge 
Be organized and clear
Listen
Acknowlegde problems
Discuss
Problems
Causes
Treatments
Be sincere 
Provide follow-up
love and care about them. Many get great satisfaction from 
their work. Others have interesting and captivating hobbies. 
Patients can also be encouraged to develop new interests. We 
call this strategy ‘refocus therapy’. The clinician’s role is to help 
them put the handicap resulting from their tinnitus in perspec­
tive, and to help them to focus on other activities in their life. 
It is important for all of us to focus our attention on things in 
life that we enjoy.
Influencing patient expectations
The manner in which we interact with the patient can have an 
enormous impact on the success of our therapy. Table 33.12 pro­
vides an outline of some of the critical factors involved in nur­
turing patient expectations.16 Patient expectations influence 
the success of many treatments. Many of these critical factors 
that influence patient expectations can and should be utilized 
to influence therapy.
The patient will feel more confident if they perceive the 
therapist as competent, sympathetic, and having a good know­
ledge of tinnitus. This can be complicated, because although 
there are some common aspects of tinnitus, there are also indi­
vidual aspects that are unique to each patient. The therapy 
plan, whatever it is, should be clear and understood by the 
patient. The therapy should produce feelings of hope and 
mastery in the patient. The patient should be empowered 
to engage in therapy and turn their hopes into concrete 
expectations.
Summary
Tinnitus can be treated, but not all patients require the same 
approach. We have organized treatment levels depending on 
the needs of the patient. These approaches are helpful to most 
patients encountered.
Most patients with sensorineural tinnitus entering an 
audiology/otology clinic require only a simple explanation 
about tinnitus (level 1). They benefit from having someone 
listen to their difficulty, but do not need detailed counseling or 
treatment. The initial contact section is sufficient, and they 
can be welcomed back should they have problems in the 
future.
Other patients need a more detailed explanation about the 
causes and treatments of tinnitus (level 2). They have more 
serious questions, but are satisfied when they have a deeper 
understanding of what options are available to them. Many will 
benefit from a simple plan to monitor their tinnitus for a few 
weeks and strategies for using background sound.
Finally, some patients require participation in a specific 
therapy (level 3). For these patients, we measure tinnitus and 
the handicap resulting from it. Following a thorough under­
standing of the patient’s environments and needs, a detailed 
description of treatment options can be provided and the 
patient directed to appropriate professionals.
  

578 
Auditory disorders and their management
References
1. Tyler RS, Babin RW. Tinnitus. In: Cummings CW, Fredrickson 
JM, Harker L, Krause C], Schuller DE, eds. Otolaryngology—Head 
and Neck Surgery. St Louis: CV Mosby Co., 1993: 3031-53.
2. Coles RRA. Tinnitus and its management. In: Stephens SDG, 
Kerr 
AG, 
eds. 
Scott'Brown’s 
Otolaryngology. 
Guildford: 
Butterworth, 1989: 368-414.
3. Erlandsson S. Psychologic profiles. In: Tyler RS, eds. Handbook on 
Tinnitus San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing Group, 2000: 25-57.
4. Stouffer JL, Tyler RS. Characterization of tinnitus by tinnitus 
patients. J Speech Hear Disord 1990; 55: 439-53.
5. Sweetow RW. Cognitive aspects of tinnitus patient management. 
Ear Hear 7: 390-6.
6. Wilson PH, Henry JL. Psychological management. In: Tyler RS, 
ed. Handbook of Tinnitus. San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing 
Group, 2000: 263-79.
7. Tyler RS, Baker LJ. Difficulties experiences by tinnitus sufferers. 
J Speech Hear Disord 1983; 48: 150-4.
8. Tyler RS. Tinnitus disability and Handicap Questionnaires. Semin 
Hear 1993; 14: 377-84.
9. Wilson PH, Henry J, Bowen M, Haralambous G. Tinnitus 
Reaction Questionnaire: Psychometric properties of a measure of 
distress associated with tinnitus. J Speech Hear Res 1991; 34: 
197-201.
10. Kuk F, Tyler RS, Russell D, Jordan H. The psychometric properties 
of a tinnitus handicap questionnaire. Ear Hear 1990; 11(6): 
434-42.
11. Newman CW, Jacobson GP, Spitzer JB. Development of the
Tinnitus Handicap Inventory. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1996; 122: 143-8.
12. Tyler RS. Psychoacoustical measurement. In: Tyler RS ed. Handbook 
on Tinnitus. San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing Group, 2000.
13. Henry JA, Flick CL, Gilbert A, Ellingson RM, Fausti SA. 
Reliability of tinnitus loudness matches under procedural varia­
tion. J Am A cad Audiol 1999; 10: 502-20.
14. Hallam RS, Jakes SC, Hinchcliffe R. Cognitive variables in tinni­
tus annoyance. BrJ Clin Psychol 1988; 27: 213-22.
15. Jastreboff PJ, Hazell JWP. A neurophysiological approach to tin­
nitus: clinical implications. BrJ Audiol 1993; 27: 7-17.
16. Tyler RS. The use of science to find successful tinnitus treatments. 
In: Hazell J, eds. Proceedings of the Sixth International Tinnitus 
Seminar. London: The Tinnitus and Hyperacusis Centre, 1999:3-9.
17. Tyler RS, Stouffer JL, Schum R. Audiological rehabilitation of the 
tinnitus patient. J A cad Rehabil Audiol 22: 30-42.
18. Vernon JA. Tinnitus: Treatment and Relief Needham Heights, MA: 
Allyn & Bacon, 1998.
19. Tyler RS, Bentler RA. Tinnitus maskers and hearing aids for tin­
nitus. Semin Hear 1987; 8(1): 49-61.
20. Erlandsson SI, Holgers KM. The impact of perceived tinnitus 
severity on health-related quality of life with aspects of gender. 
Noise Health 2001 10: 39-52.
21. Erlandsson SI. Psychological counselling in the medical setting— 
some clinical examples given by patients with tinnitus and 
Menieres disease. IntJ Adv Counsel 1998; 20: 265-76.
22. Robertson SE, Brown RI (eds). Rehabilitation Counselling. 
Approaches in the Field of Disability. Suffolk, UK: Chapman & 
Hall, 1992
  

U Aspects of the 
paracuses
Ronald Hinchcliffe
Introduction
The subject of this chapter will be the paracuses other than 
diminutions of hearing sensitivity. These encompass a variety of 
disturbances of auditory perception which patients, unless they 
are musicians, infrequently admit to, let alone complain about. 
Many of the terms are inappropriate and are used differently, or 
not at all, by different writers (see Glossary). Many patients are 
also unable to recognize, or confuse, these various disturbances, 
so that they are brought to light only by a clinical examina­
tion.1 Nevertheless, this is a topic of increasing interest.
Classifications of various aspects and disturbances of audi­
tory perception are shown in Figures 34.1 and 34.2.
Intensity-related phenomena
Loudness is the subjective magnitude of the physical magnitude 
(intensity, pressure) of sound. Like any other sensory magni- 
tude, it bears a particular mathematical relationship (power
function) to the physical magnitude of the sensory stimulus, the 
power law of the psychophysical function.2,3 An international 
standard4 prescribes two methods5-7 for calculating the loudness 
of environmental noises. Just as one can calculate the loudness 
of a sound in sones so one can calculate the noisiness of a sound 
in noys.8,9 There are individual differences in loudness functions 
(the rate at which loudness grows with increase in sound 
level).10
Noise caused by traffic and industrial or recreational activ­
ities is one of the main environmental problems in the world 
and the source of an increasing number of complaints. Different 
acoustical features are responsible for annoyance at different 
sound levels: ‘at low levels, the feature of tonality is dominant 
above absolute level. However at higher noise levels, the fea- 
ture of absolute level is more dominant than tonality.’11 More­
over, ‘the wide variety of descriptions of the characteristics of 
the noise stimuli highlighted the large number of subjective 
descriptors for the perceived character of a noise resulting from 
a physical feature. It appears that a noise can be judged by dif­
ferent features by different listeners.’12
Paracuses
I
I
Intensity-related dysfunctions 
I
I
Frequency-related dysfunctions
1
Localizing dysfunctions
i
P. acris
T
P. obtusa
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
P. perversa 
P. sclerotica146,149,150 
P. duplicata 
P. isoacutica146,147 
Pitch/intensity73,88,89
P. loci157
hypersensitivity
hypoacusis
(P. Willisii)155
(polyacusis)
Direction101,102,104~108-158*159
to sound27
anacusis
(diplacusis)156
Distance
Phonophobia152
I
Hyperacusis50
1
---------- I----------------
i
Sonalgia27
Autophony131"133
Oxyaecoia119
D. monauralis82,160,161
D. binauralis59,72,162,163
D. echotica164,165
Over-recruitment140
I
I
Idiophonic effect166
i
i 
i
Aftertone134,150
Tonalis133 
Atonalis134 
1
Harmonica 
Dysharmonica
I
Harmonica89,167
i
Dysharmonica59
Figure 34.1 Aspects of the paracuses. The meanings of the various terms are given in the Glossary.

580 
Auditory disorders and their management
Spatial hearing ability (stereoacusis)168 174
Perceived acoustic space ' ' 
(soundscape ) 
Source(s) identification 
Intrasensory interactions
I 
I 
Multisensory integration
r_____________ |_________ , 
I____________________ , 
Vestibular99'100'181'182
Visual183,184
Spatial impression185 
Projicience186 
Fixed source(s)187 
Moving source(s)188,189
■ 
I 
Doppler shift
Source broadening185 
Listener envelopment185 
Directionality103'190 192 
Distance 
Spatial discrimination
Sound Fields193
Free-field 
Diffuse field
Figure 34.2 Aspects of stereoacusis (spatial hearing ability). The meanings of the various terms are given in the Glossary.
‘Physically identical sound may become noise to one person 
and music to another, depending on whether one likes Mozart 
or rock and roll...  The noise of the neighbor’s lawnmover (sic) 
may be annoying if (s)he mowed the lawn two days ago, but a 
pleasant relief if (s)he just returned from a six weeks vacation 
to clean up an overgrown front yard.’13 Indeed the non-acousti- 
cal properties of noises, e.g. controllability, fears, or beliefs 
about maleficent effects, are more important determinants of 
individual annoyance than are the acoustical properties of the 
noises.14
Reductions in the annoyance properties of noises can be 
approached not only by altering the perceptions of the listeners 
but also by modifing the nature and quality of the noise. Yehudi 
Menuhin made the plea that ambulances need not shriek and 
police cars need not wail—they should make harmonious 
sounds (alternating thirds), pleasing to the human ear, as they 
do in France.15 Even helicopter noise can be aestheticized. In 
the composition Choppers and strings, Stockhausen merged the 
sounds of helicopters with those of musical instruments.16
Hyperacusis
This is an unfortunate term, since it implies that an affected 
individual would have better hearing than a normally hearing 
person. In that sense it would be equated with oxyaecoia. Such 
is rarely the case. The alternative description of hypersensitiv­
ity is no better, since many describe the hearing threshold level 
as a measure of auditory sensitivity.
The Hyperacusic Network17 defines hyperacusis as ‘a col­
lapsed tolerance to normal environmental sounds. It is a rare 
hearing disorder where the individual becomes highly sensi­
tive to noise.’ As with other conditions, any prevalence fig­
ure will be determined by the criteria adopted for its diagno­
sis. For example, if hyperacusis is defined ‘by the onset of 
symptoms of loudness discomfort from everyday sounds that 
previously had not bothered the patient and/or uncomfortable 
loudness levels for pure tones in the 500-4000 Hz range of 
less than 70 dB HL’,18 then a higher prevalence would obtain 
than if one noted how many patients actually complained of 
an intolerance to loud sounds. Judging from other auditory 
percepts, it could make a difference in prevalence of 50 to 1. 
Deciding on the normal range for thresholds of uncomfort­
able loudness is a similar problem to that of deciding on the 
normal range for thresholds of hearing. It has been proposed 
that the phrase ‘clinical limits’ be used to refer to the 2Vi and 
97/2 percentage points to the distribution of healthy per­
sons. 
It is not stated to what centile a threshold of uncom­
fortable loudness (TUL) of 70dBHL corresponds. Moreover, 
there is also the question of to what extent a low TUL is of 
central origin20 and results from anxiety.21 Different diagnos­
tic criteria could well account for the difference between ‘In 
our Tinnitus Clinic, where more than 4000 patients have 
been seen, hyperacusis has been seen only 4 times,’22 and ‘about 
40% [of tinnitus patients] exhibited hyperacusis in varying 
degrees.’23 However, the American Tinnitus Association rates 
the prevalence of hyperacusis among tinnitus patients as of 
the order of 2%.24 Preferred loudness levels do, however, 
appear to be lower in patients with tinnitus. The mean most 
comfortable loudness level for tinnitus patients is 17 dB lower 
than that for a normal control group.
An individual’s hypersensitivity to sound may be associated 
with hypersensitivity to other sensory stimuli,26’27 e.g. light and
  

Aspects of the paracuses 
581
touch, with headaches and migraine,27’28 with sound distor- 
tion,27 and with tinnitus,23 where it may be more troublesome 
than the tinnitus.18
Hypersensitivity to sound is characteristic of acute noise 
damage to hearing. ’ 
but not of chronic occupational noise 
damage to hearing,31”34 with the exception of those occupations 
where the exposure is to music.27 ‘In persons regularly exposed 
to industrial noise the limit of discomfort is generally found to 
be shifted to considerably higher sound levels . . . the higher 
sound tolerance of workers accustomed to noise is due only to a 
process of central adaptation’.35
Hypersensitivity to sound is observed in Bell’s palsy,36 
where its presence is a poor prognostic sign,37 and in Ramsay 
Hunt syndrome.38 It is reported to be a symptom of VUIth nerve 
vascular compression syndrome,39 and is a feature of GM1 
gangliosidosis type 2,40 Tay-Sachs disease41 and Williams 
syndrome.42 It is also observed in autistic children.17
Intolerable hypersensitivity to sound is an adverse effect of 
trifluoromethane.4 Along with photophobia, it is a feature of 
the benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome.44
It has been suggested that ‘central hyperacusis’ is a symp­
tom of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT; serotonin) dysfunction.20 
5-HT has a role in the control of anxiety.45
SOUND INTOLERANCE: INVESTIGATION
Anamnesis
Clinical ototogical, neurological and psychological 
examination.
Audiometry [preferably Bekesy type]
Threshold measurements
MCLL
TUL
Individual loudness functions 
Speech audiometry 
in quiet 
in noise
Acoustical stapedius reflexes (?)
SOUND INTOLERANCE: MANAGEMENT
Passive attenuator 
Desensitization
Electronic loudness supression devices 
Cochlear labyrinthectomy (unilateral cases, rarely)
The investigation of patients with hypersensitivity to 
sound includes not only a detailed history and a clinical oto­
logical, neurological and psychological examination, but also 
audiometric tests. These should include measurements of hear­
ing threshold levels, most comfortable loudness levels and 
TULS. Bekesy audiometry is eminently suitable for these 
purposes.46’ 47 The same technique can be used to construct 
individual loudness functions.25 The determination of TULs for 
specific sounds, as well as speech audiometry in the quiet and in 
a noisy background, may also be indicated. The patient may or 
may not tolerate acoustical stapedius reflex studies.
Schemes for grading48’ 49 and classifying20’27’ 49,50 patients 
with hypersensitivity to sound have been published. However, 
the classifications are mainly intuitive and not based on tax- 
onometric methods.51
Management includes psychological methods, including 
desensitization. For example, a good response of hyperacusis in 
tinnitus patients is reported to treatment with low-level wide­
band noise to the affected ear for 6h per day for several 
months.26 Most if not all hyperacusic patients wear some form 
of passive attenuator. Indeed, this behavior can be considered 
to be the pathognomonic sign of the condition. Subjects fitted 
binaurally with electronic loudness suppression devices 
reported that they benefited from the devices in at least some 
listening conditions.24 These devices supply low-level amplifi­
cation followed by an extreme form of amplitude compression. 
Very rarely, hyperacusis may be sufficiently bad as to justify sur­
gical destruction of the affected ear.52
Paracusis Willisii
This is perhaps the best known of the paracusias. It is a feature 
not only of otosclerosis but of conductive hearing impairments 
in general. It has been attributed to a speaker unconsciously 
raising his voice to communicate with a hearing-impaired indi­
vidual. It is named after Thomas Willis, who described the phe­
nomenon in 1672, although William Holder had described it 3 
years earlier.53
Frequency-related phenomena
There are a multiplicity of disorders of auditory perception that 
have been described as a result of damage to the sound- 
analyzing organ of the internal ear,54 although these paracuses 
can arise, if but rarely, from central lesions also.55,56
Diplacusis
Diplacusis is a feature of Meniere’s disease,57 where it is the first 
sign to disappear in response to treatment.58 Its presence has 
been reported as indicative of cochlear otosclerosis59 and it 
has been reported after both stapedectomy and fenestration 
operations.60 It has been reported as an adverse effect of potas­
sium iodide medication61 and chloroform inhalation.62 Binaural 
diplacusis was experienced by a non-factory worker following 
exposure to factory noise.63 In respect of ONIHL, the UK 
Health and Safety Commission (HSC) stated ‘auditory symp­
toms other than impairment of hearing which result from noise 
damage to hearing [the clinical source of this section is not 
stated]: Tinnitus (‘ringing in the ears’) can become permanent. 
Many people find this as distressing as the hearing loss [but this
  

582 
Auditory disorders and their management
picture is not that which has emerged from direct examinations 
over the years of workers in Britain exposed to hazardous occu- 
pational noise levels,31’64”66 and tinnitus occurs early, if at all, in 
the course of hazardous occupational noise exposure and is not 
a prominent feature of such exposure]. Diplacusis (double hear- 
ing) in which a sound will have a different tone in each ear, or 
will sound rough. This will contribute to lowered intelligibility 
of speech which cannot be improved by a hearing aid/6 Nev­
ertheless, it is clear that people in both Canada68 and the UK69 
with noise-damaged hearing can obtain substantial benefit from 
hearing aids.
Reports of diplacusis associated with the central nervous 
system are rare, but a lesion of the posterior thalamus resulted 
in diplacusis binauralis.56
The investigation of diplacusis includes not only a 
detailed history and a clinical otological, neurological and psy­
chological examination, but also hearing tests of a more 
sophisticated kind than are usually employed. Diplacusimetry,70 
an adaptation of Bekesy audiometry, provides measures of 
binaural diplacusis. There is not normally a difference of more 
than 4% for a pair of tones that are matched to give the same 
pitch perception to the two ears. In Meniere’s disease, the 
difference may amount to 37% (maximum at 250 Hz) and, in 
high frequency hearing losses, 17% (maximum at 4000 Hz). 
There is an upward shift in perceived pitch on the affected 
side.71 The maxima for binaural frequency differences corre­
spond to the maxima in hearing threshold differences for the 
two ears.72
More sophisticated psychoacoustical testing would include 
the determination of psychophysical tuning curves, pitch- 
intensity functions, masking patterns, and frequency just- 
noticeable differences (jnds) as well as diplacusis measures.73 
Temporal acuity, normally about 2 ms,74 would also be of 
interest.
However, many of these functions, e.g. frequency selectiv­
ity and frequency discrimination, and speech discrimination (in 
the quiet or in noise) are highly correlated with one another 
and so may reflect the same basic process(es).75’76 It is not pos­
sible to establish a primary relationship between, say, impaired 
frequency resolution, pure tone threshold and speech intelligi­
bility.77 Nevertheless, 
in noise-induced threshold shifts, 
impaired binaural pitch matching78 and frequency resolution 
changes79 may be demonstrated in regions where the threshold 
of hearing is normal.
Moreover, neither impaired frequency selectivity nor 
impaired temporal resolution is specific to any one type of 
internal ear disorder.80
Diplacusis cannot be demonstrated in all subjects with 
sensorineural hearing loss, and nor is it absent in subjects with 
otherwise normal hearing.81
Otoacoustical emissions should also be studied in individu­
als with diplacusis. The consumption of aspirin by one subject 
with monaural diplacusis reduced the spontaneous otoacousti­
cal emissions (SOAEs) into the noise floor and eliminated the 
monaural diplacusis.82
Pitch-intensity aberrations
Pitch is primarily a function of the frequency of a tone.83 How­
ever, it is secondarily a function of the intensity of the tone.84”88 
Even in normally hearing subjects, a given tone seems lower in 
pitch as it becomes more intense and higher as it grows weaker.84
Accentuation of the pitch-intensity relationship is associ­
ated with diplacusis.89 Pitch-intensity function aberrations are 
best investigated with psychophysical tuning curves, masking 
patterns, frequency jnd’s and diplacusis measurements.73
Patients who are neither musicians nor psychoacousticians 
will not usually be complaining of diplacusis, pitch-intensity 
aberrations or other related paracuses. All these aberrations are 
subsumed under the term ‘distortion’, and they will consider 
this to affect their ability to enjoy life to a greater degree than 
does any tinnitus.90 This serves to emphasize the greater 
attention that needs to be paid to these paracuses.
Sound Localization
There are a number of component abilities that govern sound 
localization, e.g. direction perception, distance perception and 
spatial resolution.91 Studies of what have been said to be ‘sound 
localization’ have almost exclusively been concerned with 
sound directionalization.
Both intensity92 and |>hase93 differences are important for 
sound directionalization.4’ 95 Time differences, which are 
reflected in phase differences at the two ears, are of considerable 
importance.96 The role of the auricles in all this is paramount. 
Each gives rise to time delays and stimulus redundancy, which 
provide a unique temporal pattern for every locus in space.97
Stereoacusis is dependent on normal vestibular function.98
Elevation (vertical plane) directionalization requires the ability
a. 
u 
j 
i°° 
to move the head.
There are no differences in localization acuity between 
sides, but there are significant differences between front and 
back regions. Azimuth (horizontal plane) and elevation error 
are well matched and low in the front. However, azimuth error 
increases in the regions behind the head, particularly for 
azimuth positions 120° to 160°. Larger increases are found for 
positions in the upper elevations of this region. Elevation error 
also increases in the upper elevations behind the head. A com­
parison of auditory and visual data indicates that this pattern of 
error is not due to motor factors. These findings relate to the 
structural characteristics of the auricles and the modifications 
that they impose on incoming sound energy.101
Dysstereoacusis
Thirty-three of the forty-two patients with supratentorial neu­
rological disease had defects in azimuth (horizontal) direction­
alization on the side opposite to the involved hemisphere; in 
three cases the directionalization defect was bilateral. None 
of the patients with neurological disease which was not 
supratentorial showed directionalization defects.102 Disturbed
  

Aspects of the paracuses 
583
directional hearing is common among patients with sensory
i 
. 1 0 3
aphasia.
A sophisticated study of ‘140 subjects, including 69 with 
different types of hearing impairments, 32 with neurological 
diseases, and 39 with normal hearing,’ concluded ‘There exist 
characteristic impairments of sound localization in different 
types of hearing impairments tested. On a general level, the 
results are consistent with the concept that the localization of 
sound relies on a decision made by the central auditory system 
based on a number of cues present in the acoustic signal at the 
two ears. The cues tested in our study are: 1) the interaural time 
difference, 2) the interaural intensity difference, and 3) the 
spectrum of the received signal at each ear. At a more specific 
level, the sound localization impairments found in conductive 
hearing losses are interpreted as bone-conduction effects, the 
results found in sensorineural hearing losses are interpreted as 
consequences of impaired or preserved spectral processing, the 
results in neurinomas are interpreted as impaired signal trans­
mission in the auditory nerves, and the results of subjects with 
central involvements suggest that separate processors exist at 
some level in the central auditory system for the different local­
ization cues.’104 Although the study referred to ‘sound localiza­
tion’, it was concerned with the purely directional aspects of 
stereoacusis (as the authors conceded).
Different mechanisms are involved for the two planes. Ver­
tical plane directionalization requires the possession of normal 
high-frequency auditory acuity. For example, normal horizontal 
plane directionalization, but impaired vertical plane direction­
alization, has been observed in a patient with a bilateral abrupt 
high-tone loss above 4 kHz (90 dB HL at 6 kHz; 75 dB at 8 kHz); 
the converse ability was observed in a patient with a total uni­
lateral hearing loss.105 Vertical plane directionalization thus 
depends on the ability to correlate head movement with high- 
frequency acoustical clues. Neurological cases may similarly 
show different behavior in the two planes. For example, a man 
with a parietal glioblastoma showed normal (or near normal) 
vertical plane directionalization, but impaired horizontal plane 
localization. The converse behavior is sometimes associated 
with brainstem lesions.106
Hearing-impaired children behave significantly poorer on 
horizontal sound directionalization tasks than do their nor­
mally hearing counterparts; individual differences among the 
hearing impaired can be attributed to age and hearing thresh­
old differences.107 None of 44 children with a severe unilateral 
hearing loss directionalized a 500-Hz pure tone as well as nor­
mally hearing controls, although nine were able to direction- 
alize a high-pass noise as accurately as those with normal 
hearing. This was attributed to better use of auricular informa­
tion by these nine children.108 The contribution of the auricles 
to stereoacusis also explains the ability of many individuals 
with a unilateral hearing loss to localize sounds accu­
rately,109-111 although in surveys of the general population, 
sound localization ability (assessed by a questionnaire) was
highly correlated with measures of hearing impairment in the
112
worse ear.
DYSSTEREOACUSIS: INVESTIGATION
Clinical otological and neurological 
Auditory function measurements
Pure tone threshold for air (and bone) conduction 
Phase audiometry
Minimal audible angles (right-left; front-back) 
Vestibular examination 
Neuro-imaging
Impaired sound localization may be the presenting symp­
tom for patients with a vestibulocochlear schwannoma. There 
are also individuals with impaired sound localization as the pre­
senting symptom who are found to have normal manual pure 
tone and speech audiograms, no unusual findings on routine 
neurological examination, normal interaural time and intensity 
jnds, and normal minimal audible angle for right-left distinc­
tions but abnormal minimal audible angle for front-back dis­
tinctions. This condition might be referred to as idiopathic 
dysstereoacusis. One of two affected individuals had a history of 
recurrent embolic disease of unknown origin.104
Dysstereoacusis must be distinguished from auditory inat­
tention.113, 114 The latter applies to conditions in which the sub­
ject reacts as though acoustical stimuli (whether unilateral or 
bilateral) were coming from one side only. The condition 
occurs in certain hemisphere lesions. In parietal lesions, there is 
no response to contralateral stimuli, and in frontal lesions, no 
response to ipsilateral stimuli.
For clinical purposes, directional hearing can be measured 
using phase audiometry.115 An interaural phase lag produces a 
sensation of lateralization of the sound inside the head towards 
the side of the ear which has the lead in phase. However, if 
appropriate equipment is available, the minimal audible angle 
for both front-back and right-left distinctions should also be 
determined, since one or other may be abnormal when interau­
ral time and intensity jnds are normal. Moreover, sound direc­
tionalization in the vertical plane should be tested as well as 
that in the horizontal plane, because this function may be 
impaired when that in the horizontal plane is normal, and vice 
versa.
Conclusions
Disorders of the ears and of the central nervous system may 
produce a number of aberrations of auditory sensations other 
than shifts in the absolute threshold of hearing. These paracuses 
may betoken disease of which clinicians need to be aware and 
so must be adequately investigated. Moreover, these paracuses 
may be compensable under the English common law. 
Medical 
examinations of hearing will therefore need to be more 
extensive than they have been hitherto.
  

584 
Auditory disorders and their management
References
1. Hinchcliffe R. Clinical tests of auditory function in the adult and 
in the schoolchild. In: Beagley HA, ed. Audiology and Audiologi- 
cal Medicine Vol. 1. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981:320-64.
2. Stevens SS. The measurement of loudness. J Acoust Soc Am 1955; 
27: 815-29
3. Scharf B, Stevens JC. The form of the loudness function near 
threshold. In: Cremer L ed. Proceedings of the 3rd International Con­
gress on Acoustics, Stuttgart. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1959.
4. International Organization for Standadization. ISO 532: 1975. 
Acoustics— Method for Calculating Loudness Level Geneva: ISO, 
1975.
5. Stevens SS. Calculation of the loudness of complex noise. J Acoust 
Soc Am 1956; 28: 807-32.
6. Zwicker E. Ein Verfahren zur Berechnung der Lautstarke. Acustica 
I960; 10: 304-8.
7. Zwicker E. Subdivision of the audible frequency range into critical 
bands (Frequenzgruppen). J Acoust Soc Am 1961; 33: 248.
8. Kryter KD. Scaling human reactions to the sound from aircraft. J 
Acoust Soc Am 1959; 31: 1415-29.
9. Kryter KD, Pearsons KS. Modification of noy tables. J Acoust Soc 
Am 1964; 36: 394-7.
10. Barbenza CM de, Bryan ME, McRobert H, Tempest W. Individual 
loudness susceptibility. Sound 1970; 4: 75-9.
11. Berry BF, Porter ND. The evaluation of acoustic features in 
industrial noise. In: Proceedings of Inter-noise 94, Yokohama, 1994: 
803-8.
12. Porter ND. The Assessment of Industrial Noise—Subjective Listening 
Tests and Objective Assessment Procedures. NPL Report RSA(EXT) 
0057A. Teddington: National Physical Laboratory, 1995.
13. Berglund B, Lindvall T (eds). Community Noise. Archives of the 
Center for Sensory Research Vol 2, Issue 1. Document prepared 
for the World Health Organization. Stockholm: Stockholm Uni­
versity and Karolinska Institute, 1995.
14. Borsky PN. Review of community response to noise. In: Tobias JV, 
Jansen G, Ward WD, eds. Proceedings of the Third International 
Congress on Noise as a Public Health Problem, Freiburg 1978. 
ASHA Report 10. Rockville, Maryland: American Speech- 
Language-Hearing Association, 1980: 453-74.
15. Lister D. Tuneful sirens, please. Independent; 12November 1998: 9.
16. http://www.u.arizona.edu/~jkandell/music /stock/stock_prem.html 
(1997).
17. http://www.hyperacusis.net/
18. Coles RRA. Tinnitus. In: Stephens D, ed. Scott-Brown’s Otolaryn­
gology 6th edn, Vol. 2, Adult Audiology. London: Butterworth- 
Heinemann, 1997: 2/18/1-34.
19. Elvebach LR, Guillier CL, Keating Jr FR. Health, normality and 
the ghost of Gauss. J Am Assoc 1970; 21 1: 69-75.
20. Marriage ], Barnes NM. Is central hyperacusis a symptom of 
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) dysfunction? J Laryngol Otol 1995; 
109: 915-21.
21. Stephens SDG, Anderson CMB. Experimental studies on the 
uncomfortable loudness level. J Speech Hear Res 1971; 14: 
262-70.
22. Vernon JA. Pathophysiology of tinnitus: a special case—hypera­
cusis and a proposed treatment. Am J Otol 1987; 8: 201-2.
23. Jastreboff PJ, Gray WC, Gold SL. Neurophysiological approach to 
tinnitus patients. Am J Otol 1996; 17: 236-40.
24. Sammeth CA, Preves DA, Brandy WT. Hyperacusis: case studies 
and evaluation of electronic suppression devices as a treatment 
approach. Scand Audiol 2000; 29: 28-36.
25. Hinchcliffe R, Chambers C. Loudness of tinnitus: an approach to 
measurement. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1983; 29: 163-73.
26. Hazell JWP, Sheldrake JB. Hyperacusis and tinnitus. In: Aran J-M, 
Dauman R eds. Tinnitus 91: Proceedings of the Fourth International 
Tinnitus Seminar, Bordeaux 1991. Amsterdam: Kugler, 1992: 
245-8.
27. Anari M, Axelsson A, Eliasson A, Magnusson L. Hypersensitivity 
to sound. Scand Audiol 1999; 28: 219-30.
28. Woodhouse A, Drummond PD. Mechanism of increased sensitiv­
ity to noise and light in migraine headache. Cephalalgia 1993; 13: 
417-21.
29. Elonka DR. Acute acoustic trauma after acoustic reflex testing. 
Am J Otol 1986; 7: 164-5.
30. Axelsson A, Hamemik RP. Acute acoustic trauma. Acta Otolaryn­
gol 1987; 104: 225-33.
31. Barr T. Enquiry into the effects of loud sounds upon the hearing of 
boilermakers and others who work among noisy surroundings. Proc 
Glasgow Phil Soc 1886; 17: 223-39.
32. Larsen B. Investigations of professional deafness in shipyard and 
machine factory labourers. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1939; Suppl 
36: 3-255.
33. Committee on the Problem of Noise. Noise: Final Report. Cmnd. 
2056. London: HMSO, 1963.
34. Alberti PW. Noise and the ear. In: Stephens D, ed. Scott- 
Brown's Otolaryngology, 6th edn, Vol. 2, Adult Audiology. London: 
Butterworth-Heinemann, 1997: 2/11/1-34.
35. Niemeyer W. Relations between the discomfort level and the 
reflex threshold of the middle ear muscles. Audiology 1971; 10: 
172-6.
36. Lucae A. Ueber Gehorstorungen bei Facialislahmung. Verhandlung 
Berl Med Gesellschaft 1866; 1: 134.
37. Kar N, Banerjee SK. Prediction of recovery of Bell’s palsy from 
clinical manifestations. ] Ind Med Assoc 1992; 90: 267-9.
38. Adour KK. Otological complications of herpes zoster. Ann Neurol 
1994; 35 (Suppl): S62-4.
39. Brandt T, Dieterich M. VUIth nerve vascular compression syn­
drome: vestibular paroxysmia. Baillieres Clin Neurol 1994; 3: 
565-75.
40. Gascon GG, Ozand PT, Erwin RE. GM1 gangliosidosis type 2 in 
two siblings. J Child Neurol 1992; 7 (Suppl): S41-50.
41. Arisoy AE, Ozden S, Ciliv G, Ozalp I. Tay-Sachs disease: a case 
report. Turkish J Pediatr 1995; 37: 51-6.
42. Nigam A, Samuel PR. Hyperacusis and Williams syndrome. J 
Laryngol Otol 1994; 108: 494-6.
43. Fagan SC, Rahill AA, Balakrishnan G, Ewing JR, Branch CA, 
Brown GG. Neurobehavioral and physiologic effects of trifluo- 
romethane in humans. J Toxicol Environ Health 1995; 45: 
221-9.
  

Aspects of the paracuses 
585
44. Lader M. Anxiolytic drugs: dependence, addiction and abuse. Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol 1994; 4: 85-91.
45. Marsden CA. 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor subtypes and new 
anxiolytic drugs: an appraisal. In: Psychopharmacology of Anxiety 
Tyrer P, ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989: 3-27.
46. Hinchcliffe R. Audiology. In Maran AGD, Stell PM, eds. Clinical 
Otolaryngology. Oxford: Blackwell, 1979.
47. Hinchcliffe R. Hearing: symptoms, examination, disorders. In: 
Oosterveld WJ, ed. Otoneurology. Chichester: John Wiley, 1984: 
221- 66.
48. AxelssonA,AnariM. Hyperacusis.ZLarmbekdmpf 1995;42:18-20.
49. Goldstein B, Shulman A. Tinnitus—Hyperacusis and the loudness 
discomfort level test—a preliminary report. Int Tinnitus J 1996; 2: 
83-9.
50. Brandy W, Lynn J. Audiologic findings in hyperacusic and nonhy- 
peracusic subjects. Am J Audiol 1995; 4: 46-51.
51. Sokal RR, Sneath PH A. Principles of Numerical Taxonomy. San 
Francisco: Freeman, 1963.
52. Cherry JR, Brown MJ. Relief of severe hyperacusis and diplacusis 
in a deafened ear by cochlear labyrinthectomy. J Laryngol Otol 
1996; 110: 57-8.
53. Weir N. Otolaryngology: An Illustrated History. London: Butter- 
worths, 1990.
54. Stephens SDG. The input for a damaged cochlea. Br J Audiol 
1976; 10: 97-101.
55. Auerbach SH. Central razzle: a central auditory pain syndrome. 
Arch Neurol 1981; 38: 671.
56. Ghosh P. Central diplacusis. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1990; 247: 
48-50.
57. Lee J-S. http://madang.ajou.ac.kr/~ajouorl/meniere.htm
58. Williams HL. Meniere's Disease Springfield, IL: Charles Thomas, 
1952: 109.
59. Shambaugh GE Jr. Diplacusis: a localising symptom of disease of 
the organ of Corti. Arch Otolaryngol 1940; 31: 160-4.
60. Rossberg G. Beobachtungen von Diplacusis binauralis nach Fen- 
sterungsoperation bei Otosklerose. Z Ohrenkeilkunde 1954; 33: 
236-42.
61. Moos S. Doppelhoren in Folge einer Jodkaliumcur. Z Ohrenkeilkunde 
1882; 11:52-3.
62. Moos S. Klinik der Ohrenkrankheiten: ein Handbuch fur Studirende 
undAerzte. Vienna: Wilhelm Braumiiller, 1866.
63. Spalding FA. Diplacusis binauralis. Eine Selbstbeobachtung. Z 
Ohrenkeilkunde 1881; 10: 143-6.
64. McKelvie WB. The effect of noise on hearing. The Medical Press 
and Circular 193 7; 195: 401-2.
65. Johnston CA. A field study of occupational deafness. British Jour- 
rial of Industrial Medicine 1953; 10: 41-50.
66. Atherley GRC, Nobel WG. Clinical picture of occupational hear- 
ing loss obtained with the hearing measurment scale. In Occupa- 
tional Hearing Loss. DW Robinson (ed) London: Academic Press 
1971, pp 193-216.
67. Health and Safety Commission. Prevention of Damage to Hearing 
from Noise at Work: Draft Proposals for Regulations and Guidance. 
Consultative document. London: HMSO, 1987.
68. Alberti PW. In: Salvi RJ, Henderson D, Hamernik RP, eds. Basic
and Applied Aspects of Noise-Induced Hearing Loss. New York: 
Plenum Press, 1986.
69. Harrowven RGC, Greener JDF, Stephens SDG. A double blind 
cross-over study of high-frequency emphasis hearing aids in individ­
uals with noise-induced hearing loss. Br J Audiol 1987; 21:209-19.
70. Albers GD. Diplacusimetry. In: Proceedings of VIII International 
Congress of Otolaryngology, Tokyo, 1965. Amsterdam: Excerpta 
Medica, 1966: 401.
71. Jones RO, Pracy R. An investigation of pitch discrimination in 
the normal and abnormal hearing adult. J Laryngol Otol 1971; 85: 
795-802.
72. van den Brink G. Diplacusis and threshold audiogram. Int Audiol 
1966;5:439-41.
73. Bums EM, Turner C. Pure-tone pitch anomalies. II. Pitch- 
intensity effects and diplacusis in impaired ears. ] Acoust Soc Am 
1986; 79: 1530-40.
74. Forrest TG, Green DM. Detection of partially filled gaps in noise 
and the temporal modulation transfer function. ] Acoust Soc Am 
1987; 82: 1933-43.
75. Scharf B. Comparison of normal and impaired hearing. Scand 
Audiol 1978; Suppl 6: 49-54.
76. Bonding P. On Auditory Frequency Selectivity and Loudness of Noise 
Bands—Normative and Clinical Data. Copenhagen: FADL’s Forlag, 
1981.
77. Tyler RS, Wood EJD, Fernandes M. Frequency resolution and 
hearing loss. Br J Audiol 1982; 16: 45-63
78. Brandt JF. Frequency discrimination following exposure to noise. J 
Acoust Soc Am 1967; 41: 448-57.
79. Tyler RS, Fernandes M, Wood EJ. Masking, temporal integration 
and speech intelligibility in individuals with noise-induced hear­
ing loss. In: Taylor IG, Markides A, eds. Disorders of Auditory Func­
tion III. London: Academic Press, 1980.
80. Schorn K, Zwicker E. Frequency selectivity and temporal resolu­
tion in patients with various inner ear disorders. Audiol 1990; 29: 
8- 20.
81. Robinson DO. Diplacusis associated with bilateral high frequency 
hearing loss. J Speech Hear Res 1975; 18: 5-16.
82. Long G. Perceptual consequences of the interactions between 
spontaneous otoacoustic emissions and external tones. I. Monaural 
diplacusis and aftertones. Hear Res 1998; 119: 49-60.
83. Boring EG. Sensation and Perception in the History of Experimental 
Psychology. New York: Appleton-Century, 1942.
84. Urbantschitsch V. Zur Lehre von der Schallempfindung. Arch 
gesamte Physiol 1881; 24: 574-95.
85. Zurmiihl G. Abhangigkeit der Tonhohenempfindung von der 
Lautstarke und ihre Beziehung zus Helmholtzschen Resonanzthe- 
orie des Horens. Z Sinnesphysiol 1930; 61: 40-86.
86. Stevens SS. The relation of pitch to intensity. J Acoust Soc Am 
1935; 6: 150-4.
87. Morgan CT, Gamer WR. Further measurements of the relation of 
pitch to intensity. Am Psychologist 1947; 2: 433.
88. Burns EM. Pure-tone anomalies. I. Pitch-intensity effects and 
diplacusis in normal ears. J Acoust Soc Am 1982; 72: 1394-402.
89. Gradenigo G. Ueber Diplacusis monauralis. Z Ohrenkeilkunde 
1892; 23: 251-3.
  

586 
Auditory disorders and their management
90. Hinchcliffe R, Gordon A. Subjective magnitude of symptoms 
and handicaps related to hearing impairment. In: Tobias JV, 
Jansen G, Ward WD, eds. Proceedings of the Third International 
Congress on Noise as a Public Health Problem, Freiburg 1978. 
ASHA Report 10. Rockville, MD: American Speech-Language- 
Hearing Association, 1980.
91. Blauert J. Raumliches Horen. Stuttgart: Hirzel, 1974.
92. Kries J von, Auerbach F. Die Zeitdauer einfachster psychicher 
Vorgange. Arch Anat Physiol 1877; 1: 297-378.
93. Thompson SP. Phenomena of binaural audition. Philosophical 
Magazine 1878; 6: 383-91.
94. Stevens SS, Newman EB. The localization of pure tones. Proc 
Acad Sci, Washington 1934; 22: 668-72.
95. Stevens SS, Newman EB. The localization of actual sources of 
sound. A m ] Psychol 1936; 48: 297-306.
96. Hombostel EM von, Wertheimer M. Ueber die Wahmehmung der 
Schallrichtung. Akademisch Wissenschaft Wien 1920; 15: 388-96.
97. Batteau DW. The role of the pinna in human localization. Proc R 
Soc Series B 1967; 168: 158-80.
98. Laborde J-V. Essai dune determination experimentale et mor- 
phologique du role fonctionnel des canaux semi-circulaires. Bull 
Soc Anthropol, Paris 1881; 4: 797-840.
99. Young PT. The role of head movements in auditory localization. 
J Exp Psychol 1931; 14: 95-124.
100. Wallach H. The role of head movements and vestibular and 
visual cues in sound localization. ] Exp Psychol 1940; 27: 339-68.
101. Oldfield SR, Parker SP. Acuity of sound localisation: a topogra­
phy of auditory space. I. Normal hearing conditions. Perception
1984; 13:581-600.
102. Klingon GH, Bontecou DC. Localisation in auditory space. Neu­
rology 1966; 16: 879-86.
103. Rosenhall U, Norrsell U, Ramsing S, Blomstrand C. Directional 
hearing and aphasia. ] Audiol Med 1998; 7: 200-8.
104. Hausler R, Colburn S, Marr E. Sound localization in subjects 
with impaired hearing. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl 1983; 400.
105. Butler RA. The effect of hearing impairment on locating sound 
in the vertical plane. Int Audiol 1970; 9: 117-26.
106. Walsh EG. An investigation of sound localization in patients 
with neurological abnormalities. Brain 1957; 80: 222-50.
107. Humes LE, Allen SK, Bess FH. Horizontal sound localization 
skills of unilaterally hearing-impaired children. Audiology 1980; 
19: 508-18.
108. Newton VE. Sound localisation in children with a severe unilat­
eral hearing loss. Audiology 1983; 22: 189-98.
109. Jongkees LBW, van der Veer RA. On directional sound localiza­
tion in unilateral deafness and its explanation. Acta Otolaryngol 
1958; 49: 119-31.
110. Bauer RW, Matuzsa JL, Blackmer RF, Glucksberg S. Noise local­
ization after unilateral attenuation. J Acoust Soc Am 1966; 40: 
441-4.
111. Freedman SJ, Fisher SG. The role of the pinna in auditory local­
ization. In: Freedman SJ, ed. The Neuropsychology of Spatially Ori­
ented Behaviour. Homewood, IL: Dorsey, 1968.
112. Lutman ME, Brown EJ, Coles RRA. Self-reported disability 
and handicap in the population in relation to pure-tone
threshold, age, sex and type of hearing loss. Audiology 1987; 
21: 45-58.
113. Heilman KM, Pandya DN, Karol EA, Geschwind N. Auditory 
inattention. Arch Neurol Chicago 1971; 24: 323-5.
114. Soroker N, Calamaro N, Glicksohn J, Myslobodsky MS. 
Auditory inattention in right hemisphere-damaged patients 
with and without visual neglect. Neuropsychologia 1997; 35: 
249-56.
115. Nilsson R, Liden G. Sound localization with phase audiometry. 
Acta Otolaryngol 1976; 81: 291-9.
116. Clement-Evans C. New developments in noise-induced hearing 
loss. ENT News 1998; 7: 28-9.
117. Laird DA. Acuity of hearing. Science 1935; 82: 152-3.
118. Dickson EDD, Ewing AWG, Littler TS. The effects of aeroplane 
noise on the auditory acuity of aviators: some preliminary 
remarks. J Laryngol Otol 1939; 54: 531-48.
119. Jepsen O. Studies on the Acoustic Stapedius Reflex in Man. Aarhus: 
Aarhus University, 1953.
120. Lawton RW, Robinson DW. A Concise Vocabulary of Audiology 
and Allied Topics. Southampton: University of Southampton’s 
Institute of Sound and Vibration Research, 1999.
121. McBride P. A Guide to the Study of Ear Disease. Edinburgh: 
Johnston, 1884: 156.
122. Bergman PS. Unilateral auditory hallucinations. Trans Am Neu­
rol Assoc 1965; 90: 226-7.
123. Currie S, Heathfield KWG, Henson RA, Scott DF. Clinical 
course and prognosis of temporal epilepsy: a survey of 666 
patients. Brain 1971; 60: 13-21.
124. Ross ED, Jossman PB, Bell B, Sabin T, Geschwind N. Musical 
hallucinations in deafness. JAMA 1975; 231: 620-2.
125. Goodwin PE. Tinnitus and auditory imagery. Am J Otol 1980; 2: 
5-9.
126. Berrios GE. Musical hallucinations: a historical and clinical 
study. Br] Psychiatry 1990; 156: 188-94.
127. Nayani TH, David AS. The auditory hallucination: a phenome­
nological survey. Psychol Med 1996; 26: 177-89.
128. Ishigaki T, Tanno Y. The signal detection ability of patients with 
auditory hallucination: analysis using the continuous perfor­
mance test. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 1999; 53: 471-6.
129. Formby C, Gjerdingen DB. Pure-tone masking of tinnitus. Audi­
ology 1980; 19: 519-35.
130. Gulick WL, Gescheider GA, Frisina RD. Hearing: Physiological 
Acoustics, Neural Coding, and Psychoacoustics. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1989.
131. Brunner G. The etiology and symptomatology of autophony. 
Arch Otol 1883; 12: 238-44.
132. Knapp H. A personal experience of an acute attack of autophony. 
Arch Otol 1900; 29: 325-8.
133. O’Connor AF, Shea JJ. Autophony and the patulous eustachian 
tube. Laryngoscope 1981; 91: 1427-35.
134. Ward W. Tonal monaural diplacusis. ] Acoust Soc of Am 1955; 27: 
365-72.
135. Hyde ML, Stephens SDG. Psychoacoustical experimentation. In: 
Beagley HA, ed. Auditory Investigation. Oxford: Oxford Univer­
sity Press, 1979.
  

Aspects of the paracuses 
587
136. Hood JD, Poole JP. Tolerable limits of loudness: its clinical and 
physiological significance. ] Acoust Soc Am 1966; 40: 47-53.
137. Simmons FB, Dixon RF. Clinical implications of loudness bal- 
ancing. Arch Otolaryngol 1966; 83: 449-54.
138. Fowler EP. Some attributes of loudness recruitment. Trans Am 
Acad Ophthalmol Otol 1965; 53: 78-84.
139. Davis H, Goodman AC. Subtractive hearing loss, loudness 
recruitment, and decruitment. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1966; 
75: 87-94.
140. Morrison AW. Meniere’s disease. In: Dix MR, Hood JD, eds. 
Vertigo. Chichester: John Wiley, 1984: 133-52.
141. Dix MR, Hallpike CS, Hood JD. Observations upon the loudness 
recruitment phenomenon, with a special reference to the differ- 
ential diagnosis of disorders of the internal ear and eighth nerve. 
Proc R Soc Med 1948; 41: 516-26.
142. Dix MR. Observations upon the nerve fibre deafness of multiple 
sclerosis, with particular reference to the phenomenon of loud­
ness recruitment. J Laryngol Otol 1965; 79: 695-706.
143. Davis H, Silverman SR. Hearing and Deafness. New York: Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, 1978.
144. Ward WD. Effects of noise exposure on auditory sensitivity. In: 
Lee DHK, ed. Handbook of Physiology. Vol. 9: Reaction to Envi­
ronmental Agents. Bethesda: American Physiological Society, 
1977: 1-15.
145. Kemp DT. Evidence of mechanical nonlinearity and frequency 
selective wave amplification in the cochlea. Arch Otolaryngol 
1979; 224: 37-45.
146. Daae H. Ueber Doppelhoren. Z Ohrenkeilkunde 1894; 25: 251-68.
147. Bunch CC. Hearing aids. Trans Am Acad Ophthalmol Otol 1942; 
46: 163-78.
148. Evans EF. The sharpening of cochlear frequency selectivity in the 
normal and abnormal cochlea. Audiology 1975; 14: 419-42.
149. Itard JMG. Traite des maladies de l ’oreille et de Vaudition. Paris: 
Mequignon-Marvis, 1821: 42.
150. Bacon SP, Viemeister NF. A case study of monaural diplacusis. 
Hear Res 1985; 19: 49-56.
151. Hallam R, Jakes SC, Chambers C, Hinchcliffe R. A comparison 
of different methods for assessing the ‘intensity’ of tinnitus. Acta 
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1985; 99: 501-8.
152. Tschiassny K. Stapedioparalytic phonophobia (‘hyperacusis’) in a 
dead ear; case reports including studies on analysis of the phe­
nomenon and suggestions for applications of phonophobia test. 
Laryngoscope 1949; 59: 886-903.
153. Small AM. Pure-tone masking. J Acoust Soc Am 1959; 31: 
1619-25.
154. Leschowitz B, Lindstrom R, Zurek P. Psychophysical tuning 
curves in normal and hearing impaired ears. J Acoust Soc Am 
1975; 58: S71.
155. Gibson WPR. The physical and functional examination of the ear. 
In: Ballantyne J, Groves J, eds. Scott-Brown’s Diseases of the Ear, 
Nose and Throat. Vol. 2 The Ear. London: Butterworths, 1984.
156. Lempp O. Ueber Diplakusis und musikalisches Falschhoren. 
Hals-, Nasen-, Ohrenartz 1938; 46: 193-255.
157. Politzer A. Studien iiber die Paracusis loci. Arch Ohrenheilkunde 
1876; 11:231-6.
158. Oldfield SR, Parker SP. Acuity of sound localisation: a topogra­
phy of auditory space. II. Pinna cues absent. Perception 1984; 13: 
601-17.
159. Oldfield SR, Parker SP. Acuity of sound localisation: a topogra­
phy of auditory space. III. Monaural hearing conditions. Percep­
tion 1986; 15: 67-81.
160. Berthold E. Ueber diplacusis monauralis. Arch Ohrenkeilkunde 
1902; 55: 17-25.
161. Formby C, Gjerdingen DB. Some systematic observations on 
monaural diplacusis. Audiology 1981; 20: 219-33.
162. Moos S. Ein einfaches Verfahren zur Diagnose einseitig 
simulierter Taubheit. Arch Augenheilkunde 1869; 1: 240-4.
163. Shambaugh GE Jr. Syndrome of diplacusis and nerve deafness for 
low tones. Arch Otolaryngol 1935; 21: 694-702.
164. Gruber J. Lehrbuch der Ohrenheilkunde. Vienna: Carl Gerold’s 
Sohn, 1888.
165. Treitel L. Ueber Diplacusis binauralis. Arch Ohrenkeilkunde 1891; 
32: 215-24.
166. Flottorp G. Pure-tone tinnitus evoked by acoustic stimulation: 
the idiophonic effect. Acta laryngobgica 1953; 43: 396-415.
167. Steinbriigge H. Ein Fall von Diplacusis. Z Ohrenkeilkunde 1882; 
11:53-5.
168. Medical Research Council. The Localisation of Sound. Report of 
the Committee on the Physiology of Hearing III. MRC Special 
Report Series No. 207. London: Medical Research Council, 1936.
169. Blauert J. The Psychophysics of Human Sound Localisation. Cam­
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
170. Gilkey RH, Anderson TR (Eds) Binaural and Spatial Hearing in 
Real and Virtual Environments. New York: Erlbaum, 1997.
171. Bernstein LR. Auditory processing of interaural timing informa­
tion: new insights. J Neurosci Res 2001; 66: 1035-46.
172. Mrsic-Flogel TD, King AJ, Jenison RL, Schnupp JW. Listening 
through different ears alters spatial response in ferret primary 
cortex. J Neurophysiol 2001; 86: 1043-46.
173. Euston DR, Takahashi TT. From spectrum to space: the contri­
bution of level difference cues to spatial receptive fields in the 
bam owl inferior colliculus. J Neurosci 2002; 22: 284-93.
174. Lewald J, Foltys H, Topper R. Role of the posterior parietal cor­
tex in spatial hearing. J Neurosci 2002; 22: RC207.
175. Tohyama M, Suzuki H, Ando Y. The Nature and Technology of 
Acoustic Space. New York: Academic Press, 1995.
176. Recanzone GH, Guard DC, Phan ML, Su TK. Correlation 
between the activity of single auditory neurons and sound-local- 
ization behavior in the macaque monkey. J Neurophysiol 2000; 
83: 723-39
177. http://www.sfu.ca/sonic-studio/handbook/Acoustic_Space.html 
(accessed 28 May 2002).
178. http://www.sfu.ca/sonic-studio/handbook/Soundscape.html 
(accessed 28 May 2002)
179. Koch U, Grothe B. Interdependence of spatial and temporal cod­
ing in the auditory midbrain. J Neurophysiol 2000; 83: 2300-14
180. Pratt H, Bleich N, Mittelman N. Echo suppression in the human 
cortex is affected by the spatial and temporal proximity of the pri­
mary sound and echo. J Basic & Clinical Physiol & Pharmacol 
2001; 12: 109-23.
  

588 
Auditory disorders and their management
181. Lewald J, Kamath HO. Vestibular influence on human auditory 
space perception. J Neurophysiol 2000; 84: 1107-11.
182. DiZio P, Held R, Lackner JR et al Gravitoinertial force magni- 
tude and direction influence head-centric auditory localization. 
] Neurophysiol 2001; 85; 2445-60
183. Frassinetti F, Pavani F, Ladavas E. Acoustical vision of neglected 
stimuli: interaction among spatially converging audiovisual 
inputs in neglect patients. J Cogn Neurosci 2002; 14: 62-9.
184. Pavani F, Ladavas E, Driver J. Selective deficit of auditory locali­
sation in patients with visuospatial neglect. Neuropsychologia 
2002; 40: 291-301.
185. Morfey CL. Dictionary of Acoustics. New York: Academic Press, 
2001.
186. http://www.sfu.ca/sonic-studio/handbook/Proj icience.html 
(accessed 28 May 2002)
187. Mickey BJ, Middlebrooks JC. Responses of auditory cortical neu­
rons to pairs of sounds: correlates of fusion and localization. J 
Neurophysiol 2001; 86: 1333-50.
188. Ingham NJ, Hart HC, Me Alpine D. Spatial receptive fields of 
inferior colliculus neurons to auditory apparent motion in free 
field. J Neurophysiol 2001; 85: 23-33
189. Xiang J, Chuang S, Wilson D et al. Sound motion evoked mag­
netic fields. Clin Neurophysiol 2002; 113: 1-9.
190. Reale RA, Brugge JF. Directional sensitivity of neurons in the pri­
mary auditory (Al) cortex of the cat to successive sounds ordered 
in time and space. J Neurophysiol 2000; 84: 435-50.
191. Su TI, Recanzone GH. Differential effect of near-threshold stim­
ulus intensities on sound localization performance in azimuth 
and elevation in normal human subjects. Jaro 2001; 2: 246-56.
192. Toliinn DJ, Yin TC. The coding of spatial location by single units 
in the lateral superior olive of the cat. II. The determinants of 
spatial receptive fields in azimuth. J Neurosci 2002; 22: 1468-79.
193. Yost WA. Fundamentals of Hearing, Fourth edition. San Diego: 
Academic Press, 2000.
Glossary
Acoustic space-The perceived volume encompassed by a 
soundscape, either an actual environment, or an imagined one 
such as produced with a tape recording and several loud­
speakers.
Agnosia, auditory-Inability to recognize music, words or other 
organized sounds because of a defect of the hearing part of the 
brain.
Anacusis-Complete elevation of the hearing threshold level,
i.e. total loss of hearing.
Anechoic room (chamber)-A room or chamber that attempts 
to obtain free-field conditions; this is achieved by lining the 
room surfaces with sound-absorbing material, usually in the 
form of wedges.
Auditory acuity-A term to denote sharpness of hearing; used 
to refer to the hearing threshold level117-119 or, more broadly, to 
also cover other auditory functions, e.g. frequency and intensity 
discriminations.120
Auditory 
hallucinations-Hearing 
organized 
sounds 
(in
contrast to tinnitus), e.g. voices or music, which are not
audible to others and where there is no corresponding external 
i 
121-128 
stimulus.
Auditory sensitivity-A term to denote hearing sensitivity 
without any commitment as to whether or not the hearing is 
within the range of normality or outside it, and, if the latter, 
whether it is better or poorer, and, if the latter, whether it 
amounts to an impairment (material or otherwise) or a hearing 
loss and whether or not it results in one or more inabilities, dis­
abilities or handicaps.129,130
Autophony-Increased resonance of one’s own voice, breath or 
other body sounds which is perceived in association with upper 
respiratory tract and middle ear cleft disorders,131’132 including 
patulous auditory tube.133
Combination tone-A tone which may be heard when an 
acoustical stimulus is delivered to the ear but is not present 
physically in that stimulus; it must therefore have arisen from 
non-linear distortion in the auditory system; the case which is 
usually being considered is when the acoustical stimulus com­
prises two pure tones of different frequencies.
Critical band-The range of frequencies that are centered on 
some specified frequency and whose width is a measure of the 
frequency resolution (selectivity) of the ear at that frequency. 
Diffuse field-Where reflecting surfaces are such that the sound 
intensity is uniform.
Diplacusis-An abnormal perception of sound in respect of time 
or pitch in which one sound is heard as two (or more) sounds; 
strictly speaking, the phenomenon should be referred to as 
‘polyacusis’.134
Diplacusis, binaural-A given sound is perceived as two differ­
ent sounds in the two ears.
Diplacusis echoica-A sound heard in the affected ear is per­
ceived as being repeated.
Diplacusis, monaural-A sound heard in the affected ear is per­
ceived as two sounds; more precisely, the phenomenon is said to 
exist when an acoustical stimulus consisting of a single sinusoid 
and presented monaurally is judged to be plural.134 
Diplacusis, monaural, atonal-The perceived sound is buzzing, 
noisy or rough.
Diplacusis, monaural, tonal-The perceived sound is of two or 
more pure tones.
Directionalization, sound-A term to denote an individual’s 
ability to determine the direction from which a sound is
135
coming.
Discrimination, frequency-The ability to distinguish two suc­
cessively presented tones.
Doppler shift-Shift in perceived sound frequency as a sound 
source moves towards (increase in frequency) or away from 
(decrease in frequency) an observer.
Dysacusis-A term that has been applied to any impairment of 
auditory perception that is not primarily a loss of auditory sen­
sitivity, so that it has been used to cover the diplacuses, dys­
stereoacusis, hyperacusis, speech discrimination loss, auditory 
agnosia, auditory inattention, and King-Kopetzky syndrome.
  

Aspects of the paracuses 
589
Dysstereoacusis-Impaired ability to localize sound in space 
(syn. paracusis loci).
Echoic (reverberation) room (chamber)-A room or chamber 
that attempts to obtain diffuse-field conditions; used to invests 
gate reverberation times; these increase when sound absorption 
decreases and the volume of the sound spaces increases. 
EOAE-Evoked otoacoustic emissions (Kemp ‘echoes’).
Free field-An environment free of sound scattering or reflect­
ing boundaries so that outgoing sound waves never return 
towards their source origin. In a truly free field change in sound 
intensity conforms to the inverse square law.
Hallucinations, auditory-Hearing organized sounds (in con- 
trast to tinnitus), e.g. voices or music, which are not audible 
to others and where there is no corresponding external 
stimulus.
Health and Safety Commission-The official body in the UK 
which is responsible for the care of factory workers.
Hearing loss-An impairment of hearing that exceeds a criter­
ia! level; no units, but may be qualified, in terms of severity, as 
‘mild’, ‘severe’ etc. Neither the term ‘hearing loss’ nor the term 
‘hearing gain’ should be used to describe hearing which is, 
respectively, greater than, or less than, the average hearing 
threshold level, just as the terms ‘height loss’ or ‘height gain’ 
would not be used to describe the height of someone who was 
less than, or greater than, average height, unless it had been 
shown that a loss or a gain in height had occurred, e.g. by serial 
measurements.
Hearing status-A description of the degree to which the hear­
ing of an individual functions normally with respect to accepted 
criteria (analogous to health status).
Hearing threshold level (HTL)-For a particular ear, and a 
given frequency and test system, it is an individual’s threshold 
of hearing (i.e. the quietest sound that he can hear) as deter­
mined in a stated manner and expressed by the system’s 
indicated ‘hearing level’ value. Expressed in decibels, i.e. as 
dBHTL.
HSC-Health and Safety Commission.
HSS-Hypersensitivity to sound.27
5-HT-Abbreviation for 5-hydroxytryptamine.
HTL-Abbreviation for hearing threshold level.
5 -Hydroxytryptamine-Synonym for serotonin. 
Hyperacusis-Abnormal sensitivity to one or other sound; also 
defined more strictly as a condition in which the patient, with 
or without hearing loss, experiences severe loudness discomfort 
from everyday environmental sound levels;50 ‘It is incorrect to 
use the term as a general designation, as it only rarely signifies 
an increased auditory acuity, but more frequently a hypersensi- 
tiveness to loud sounds.’119
Hyperacusis, threshold-Hyperacusis associated with abnor­
mally low auditory thresholds (^10dB better than the age- 
related norm)50
Hyperacusis, suprathreshold-Discomfort from sounds less 
than about 65 dBSPL when hearing is normal.50 
Hypoacusis-Partial impairment of hearing as indicated by an 
elevated hearing threshold level.
Inverse square law-In an acoustic free^field the sound intensity 
is inversely proportional to the distance from the sound 
squared. Thus doubling the distance produces a fall in the 
sound intensity by a factor of four, i.e. 6 dB (10 log 4). Since the 
sound pressure is proportional to the square root of the inten­
sity, doubling the distance produces a fall in the sound pressure 
by a factor of two. This still represents a 6 dB change (20 log 2). 
jnd-Just-noticeable difference.
LDL-Loudness discomfort level136 (but since there are many 
loudness discomfort levels, it is preferable to refer to the thresh­
old of uncomfortable loudness (TUL), which the LDL test pur­
ports to determine).
Listener envelopment-The sense of being surrounded by 
sound, especially in a concert hall. Listener envelopment is a 
component of spatial impression; it is considered to be related to 
the later reverberant sound received by the listener and to 
increase with sound level.
Localization, sound-Encompasses both directionalization and 
distance perception.
Loudness-The subjective dimension of the objective (physi­
cal) dimension of sound (intensity, pressure); unit is the sone; 
as a rule of thumb, a 1-dB increase in the SPL of a noise gives 
a 10% increase in loudness, and a 10-dB increase produces a 
doubling of the loudness.
Loudness adaptation-Decrease in the loudness of a steady tone 
over time.
Loudness decrement-Synonym loudness derecruitment.137 
Loudness derecruitment-The converse of loudness recruitment, 
i.e. the presence of an abnormally slow growth in loudness.138,139 
Loudness level-The loudness level, in phons, of a sound is 
numerically equal to the sound pressure level in decibels (rela­
tive to a pressure of 20 fiPa) of a simple tone of frequency 1 kHz 
which is judged by the median listener to be equivalent in 
loudness.4
Loudness over-recruitment-A condition in which the growth 
of loudness results not only in normal loudness for a given 
sound pressure but continues to rise so that a greater loudness 
than would otherwise be the case is reached; this phenomenon 
may be associated with abnormal sensitivity to sound.140 
Loudness recruitment-The growth of the sensation of loudness 
more rapidly than is normally the case.141 
Loudness reversal-Synonym for loudness derecruitment.142 
MAA-Minimum audible angle; a measure of spatial discrimi­
nation for sound sources.104 
MCLL-Most comfortable loudness level. 
mel-The unit of pitch; 1000 mels is the pitch of a 1000-Hz tone 
at a sensation level of 40 dB.
Most comfortable loudness level-The level at which an indi­
vidual registers what he considers to be the most comfortable 
loudness for a sound (tone, speech units) that is presented to 
him (usually from an audiometer); provides a measure of loud­
ness tolerance and an index of loudness recruitment. 
Neurotransmitter: a specific body chemical that transmits the 
information contained in a nervous impulse from one nerve cell 
to the next.
  

590 
Auditory disorders and their management
Noise-Unwanted sound, but ‘physically identical sound may 
become noise to one person and music to another, depending 
on whether one likes Mozart or rock and roll . . . The noise of 
the neighbor’s lawnmover [sic] may be annoying if (s)he 
mowed the lawn two days ago, but a pleasant relief if (s)he just 
returned from a six weeks vacation to clean up an overgrown 
front yard.’13
Noise pollution level-An index of noise annoyance which 
takes into account not only the level of noise but also the fluc­
tuation in that level (abbreviation NPL; symbol LNP)
Normal threshold of hearing-‘A term which should be 
avoided because of its medical and medicolegal implica­
tions.’143 There is no single normal threshold of hearing; 
there are indeed a number of normal thresholds of normal 
hearing.
Nosoacusis-Hearing loss due to all factors other than aging, 
and industrial and non-industrial noise exposure.144 
noy-The unit (subjective) of noisiness, i.e. parallels the sone 
for loudness; thus a sound of 4 noys is four times as noisy as a 
sound of one noy.
OAE-Otoacoustical emissions (may be SOAE or EOAE). 
ONIHL-Occupational noise induced hearing loss 
Otoacoustic emissions-Sound energy which is emitted by the 
internal ear (more specifically, the outer hair cells of the 
cochlea), either spontaneously or evoked.145 
Oxyacoa-Synonym for oxyaecoia.
Oxyacoia-Synonym for oxyaecoia.
Oxyaecoia-Enhanced sensitivity to sounds due to having a 
threshold of hearing that is lower than that of the average 
person.
para—A prefix that denotes a departure from the normal. 
Paracusis-A term applied to one or other of the various 
disorders of auditory perception which may have a peripheral or 
central origin.
Paracusis acris-Synonym for hyperacusis.
Paracusis duplicata-Synonym for diplacusis.
Paracusis isoacutica-A condition in which all frequencies in a 
particular frequency band are perceived as being of the same 
pitch;146,147 the pathophysiological basis could be the loss of 
‘tips’ of the tuning curves of cochlear neural elements with 
degradation to a very broad tuning.148
Paracusis loci-Impaired, including absent, ability to determine 
the location of a sound source.
Paracusis obtusa-Impaired, including absent, hearing, so cov­
ering hypoacusis and anacusis.
Paracusis perversa-Synonym for parcusis Willisii.
Paracusis sclerotica-If this form of paracusis is present, the 
patient will say that the sound is distorted, harder (hence the 
term, paracusis sclerotica), harsher, rougher or out of tune on 
one or other side;7,146,149,150 this percept can be considered as a 
variant of paracusis duplicata in the sense that it can be looked 
upon as atonal polyacusis.
Paracusis Willisii-The symptom of hearing a speaker better in 
noisy environments than in quiet ones; synonym for false 
paracusis.
Personal loudness unit-The unit of a scale of loudness that has 
been determined for a specific individual.25 Only audiometric 
matches of the tinnitus ‘intensity’ in terms of PLUs are signifi­
cantly correlated with reported loudness; unlike other measures 
of tinnitus ‘intensity’, PLU transformations of tinnitus ‘inten­
sity’ produce tinnitus ‘intensity’ values that are generally inde­
pendent of other audiometric measures.151 
phon-The unit of loudness level; 40 phons is the loudness level 
of a 40dBSPL 1-kHz tone.
Phonophobia-A morbid fear of one or other sound, including 
one’s own voice, although term also used as a synonym for 
hyperacusis.152
Pitch-The subjective magnitude of frequency; unit is the mel. 
PLU-Personal loudness unit
Post-traumatic stress disorder-A psychiatric disorder (F43.1 of 
ICD-10) that arises as a delayed or protracted response to a 
stressful event or situation (of either brief or long duration) of 
an exceptionally threatening or catastrophic nature, which is 
likely to cause pervasive distress in almost anyone. Predisposing 
factors, such as personality traits or previous history of neurotic 
illness, may lower the threshold for the development of the syn­
drome or aggravate its course, but they are neither necessary nor 
sufficient to explain its occurrence. Typical features include 
episodes of repeated reliving of the trauma in intrusive memo­
ries (‘flashbacks’), dreams or nightmares, occurring against the 
persisting background of a sense of ‘numbness’ and emotional 
blunting, detachment from other people, unresponsiveness to 
other people, unresponsiveness to surroundings, anhedonia, and 
avoidance of activities and situations reminiscent of the trauma. 
Projicience-The sense of depth of a sound in acoustic space 
(http://www.sfu.ca/sonicstudio/handbook/Projicience.html 
(accessed 28 May 2002)).
Psychophysical function-The mathematical expression that 
relates the subjective magnitude of a stimulus to its physi­
cal magnitude; until the 1950s, this was considered to be a 
logarithmic function; the scientific evidence accumulated 
over the past half-century indicates it to be a power 
function.
Psychophysical tuning curve-A measure of the frequency 
selectivity of the ear.153,154
Psychophysics-The science that studies the relationship 
between physical stimuli and the resulting sensations. 
PTC-Psychophysical tuning curve.
Range-The difference between the minimum and maximum 
values for a measurement.
Range of normal hearing-The scatter of actual determinations 
of hearing sensitivity of normally hearing persons with respect 
to age and gender. Sometimes, the limit is taken arbitrarily as 
two standard deviations from the mean, sometimes as the 95th 
percentile.
Selectivity, frequency-The ability to detect one frequency in 
the presence of others.
Semeion-Any untoward phenomenon, or departure from the 
normal in structure, function or sensation, which is experienced 
by an individual, or noted by another person, but which is
  

Aspects of the paracuses 
591
elicited only by direct questioning and is not spontaneously 
reported; such a person is termed a respondent (not a patient). 
Serotonin-A 
neurotransmitter 
(physiological 
chemical), 
5-hydroxytryptamine, that influences the calibre of blood 
vessels, body secretions and psychological states. 
SOAE-Spontaneous otoacoustical emissions.
Sonalgia-Pain experienced by sound exposure.27 
sone-The unit of loudness; one sone is the loudness of a sound 
whose loudness level P is 40 phons; loudness S in sones is 
related to loudness level in phons by the relation:4
5 _  2(P_40)/1°
Sound field-Any environment that contains sound. 
Soundscape-A sound environment, with emphasis on the way 
it is perceived and understood by the individual, or by a society. 
It thus depends on the relationship between the individual and 
any such environment. The term may refer to actual environ- 
ments, or to abstract constructions such as musical composi­
tions and tape montages, particularly when considered as an 
artificial environment.
Source broadening-The sense that a sound source, especially 
the orchestra or players in a concert hall, occupies a larger 
region than its physical extent. It is one component of spatial 
impression.
Spatial impression-The sense, due to sound heard by the ears, 
of being in three-dimensional space. Spatial impression in con­
cert halls is currently thought to consist of two separate com­
ponents, i.e. source broadening and listener envelopment. 
Stereoacusis-Spatial hearing ability.
Symptom-Any untoward phenomenon, or departure from the 
normal in structure, function or sensation, which is experi­
enced by a patient, or noted by another person, and sponta­
neously reported to the doctor when medical advice is 
sought.
TUL-Threshold of uncomfortable loudness (as determined by 
audiometric testing, usually for pure tones). 
ULL-Uncomfortable loudness level (but since there are many 
uncomfortable loudness levels, it is preferable to refer to the 
threshold of uncomfortable loudness (TUL), which the ULL 
test purports to determine).
  

35 Psychological aspects 
of hearing impairment 
and tinnitus
Laurence McKenna, Gerhard Andersson
Introduction
The application of clinical psychology within the fields of 
audiological medicine and otolaryngology is relatively new. 
Most of the clinical psychology research in this field has 
taken place since the early 1980s in a few centres around the 
world, particularly in the UK, Sweden and Australia. The 
amount of psychological research done in this area has not 
matched that seen in other areas of health care such as pain 
management, primarily because the number of psychologists 
involved in audiology is still relatively few. In spite of this, 
psychologists have made important contributions to our 
understanding of the nature and management of distressing 
audiological symptoms. The body of psychological work has 
been reviewed in a number of places ’ and this chapter seeks 
to highlight the more salient aspects of the psychological lit­
erature on tinnitus and acquired hearing loss and to update 
the earlier reviews.
Tinnitus
To view tinnitus as a complaint about a noise in the ears 
or head that varies only in its psychophysical parameters 
is inadequate. Peoples complaints about tinnitus are 
complex and usually multidimensional.
There are a number of descriptions of the negative conse­
quences of tinnitus.3”7 These accounts indicate that tinnitus 
complaint includes references to factors such as sleep distur­
bance and emotional distress as well as auditory perceptual dis­
orders. It is important to note that there are large individual 
differences in the extent to which people experience these 
problems. It is also the case that different treatments may be
expected to affect different aspects of tinnitus complaint. 
Recent work8 suggests that children’s experiences of tinnitus are 
parallel to those of adults.
Tinnitus and emotional distress
The link between tinnitus and emotional distress has been 
investigated in several studies.9-16 Most studies on the emo­
tional consequences of tinnitus have been conducted on 
highly selective samples of patients with severe tinnitus dis­
tress and the conclusions drawn may not apply to all tinnitus 
patients. Some studies have found relatively low (but signifi­
cant) correlations between tinnitus distress and psychological 
complaints.10,18
45% of those whose main complaint was tinnitus showed 
signs of significant psychological disturbance,n while 
63% of tinnitus sufferers could be classified as psychiatri- 
cally disturbed and 46% had mood disorder as assessed by 
the Structured Interview tor the DSM-11I-R (SCID).
Russo et al.19 used the DSM-IV to estimate the prevalence of 
psychiatric disorder among tinnitus patients. A number of stud­
ies have used the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)20 in the 
assessment of tinnitus patients. Kirsch et al.12 reported that the 
mean BDI score for a group of tinnitus patients was within the 
normal range, but other researchers21 and unpublished data 
from a Swedish population (Andersson, unpublished data), 
using larger samples, revealed mean scores within the range of 
mild mood disturbance. Erlandsson22 theorized that there are 
two psychological reactions to tinnitus, one characterized by 
anxiety and one by depression, but these thoughts have not yet 
been validated empirically. In a review by Hinchcliffe and

594 
Auditory disorders and their management
King23 depression was found to be the principal distinguishing 
feature between tinnitus complainers and non-complainers. 
However McKenna,24,25 reported that anxiety, and in particular 
trait rather than state anxiety,26 is a characteristic of tinnitus 
patients. Subsequent, unpublished data from the same author27 
indicated BDI scores within the normal range for a group of tin­
nitus patients. As with hearing impairment, psychoacoustical 
measures (e.g. matching of tinnitus loudness) have not been 
found to be good predictors of tinnitus discomfort.28
A number of self-report scales for the assessment of tinnitus- 
related distress have been developed.7,21,29 Most of these scales 
have good psychometric properties, and the Tinnitus Effects 
Questionnaire7 has been applied both in Germany30 and in 
Sweden.31 It is recognized that much of the severity of tinnitus 
relates to the individual’s psychological response to the stimulus, 
and it has been recommended that these self-report scales form 
part of the assessment of tinnitus severity in both clinical and 
medico-legal contexts.32 Daily measures of tinnitus distress and 
loudness on Visual Analogue Scales have been used in clinical 
and research settings,33,34 even though the use of repeated mea­
sures designs is relatively rare. Self-report measures like the BDI,20 
the Beck Anxiety Inventory,35 and other measures of psychologi­
cal problems, such as personality and coping, may well be used in 
audiological populations, given some consideration of the group 
being assessed. Self-report is becoming an important tool in audi­
ological research and rehabilitation. It has a potential value for 
research on rehabilitation effectiveness and for the treatment 
itself. A structured interview has been developed in Uppsala, 
Sweden, with which all patients referred to the psychologist for 
tinnitus treatment are assessed. The interview is structured along 
cognitive behavioural principles. In addition to descriptions of 
the tinnitus, detailed information is sought about its antecedent 
variables (affecting changes in it) and consequences, and its 
severity is graded on a three-point scale.36 The information 
gathered then guides the psychological treatment offered.
Psychological model of tinnitus
Among the earliest and most significant of contribu­
tions from psychologists within the field was Ha Ham, 
Hinchcliffe and Rachman’s4 psychological model of tin­
nitus. The authors suggested that the natural history' of 
tinnitus is characterized by the process of habituation. 
They conceived of patients1 complaints of distress asso­
ciated with tinnitus as a failure of habituation. They 
suggested that habituation to tinnitus follows the same 
rules as habituation to any other constant stimulus. 
They pointed out that habituation is slowed by factors 
such as a high level of tonic arousal and by the stimulus 
acquiring an emotive significance.
This original model has been challenged.37 Dishabituation may 
be another way of describing the process of developing tinnitus-
related distress, in that the emotional colouring of the tinnitus 
sound is interpreted as a warning signal that short-circuits the 
habituation.38 However, relatively little research has been done 
to support these other approaches, and the above model4 
remains the main inspiration for clinical work, suggesting that 
psychological treatment should focus on reducing patients’ 
arousal and changing the emotional significance of the tinnitus, 
i.e. a cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) approach to tinnitus 
management.
Cognitive behavioural therapy
A CBT approach to tinnitus management has been suggested 
by others. 
Other psychological treatment styles, besides a 
strict CBT approach, have also been suggested, but most, like 
CBT, are aimed at decreasing the psychological distress associ­
ated with tinnitus, rather than lessening the sound itself. 
Andersson et al.40 reviewed psychological outcome studies 
employing hypnosis, biofeedback, relaxation, and CBT with 
or without applied relaxation. They concluded that CBT 
approaches received the most empirical support. The clearest 
benefits observed were in terms of reduced tinnitus annoyance, 
with weaker improvements in negative affect and sleep 
disturbance. Improvements were reported in tinnitus loudness 
immediately following treatment.
Perhaps the most challenging aspect of the psychological 
model is its reference to cognitive therapy. Implicit within this 
approach to treatment is the idea that tinnitus per se is less 
important than the patients’ beliefs about it. Many patients do 
not find this an intuitively appealing idea, and a certain amount 
of convincing or ‘socializing’ of patients to this model is often 
needed.
Cognitive therapy is a form of psychotherapy that focuses 
on discovering people’s thought processes and changing 
these when they are unrealistically negative or unhelpful.
It is based on the cognitive model of Aaron Beck,41 and forms 
the basis for the practice of many clinical psychologists in the 
UK and elsewhere. The model proposes that people’s thoughts 
influence their emotional state, and that negative thoughts are 
not only a feature of emotional disturbance, but maintain the 
disorder. Negative beliefs relate to the person, the world and 
the future. They are maintained by cognitive distortions 
such as ‘all or nothing thinking’ or the selective acceptance of 
information that confirms the person’s ideas and rejection of 
information that contradicts them. Cognitive distortions are, in 
turn, thought to occur as a consequence of the poor emotional 
state. Cognitive therapy is pragmatic in style and is usually 
brief, ranging from as few as six to about twenty sessions, over a 
course of months rather than years. Part of the therapeutic 
effort is to elucidate the person’s thoughts about his or her cir­
cumstances. People are often unaware of the content of their
  

Psychological aspects of hearing impairment and tinnitus 
595
thoughts until they pay specific attention to them, and they are 
commonly much more aware of the emotions than the thoughts 
produced. Thoughts often have an automatic quality and take 
the form of a ‘running commentary’ or ‘dialogue’ and are fre­
quently in a shorthand form. Automatic thoughts are not nee- 
essarily the result of reasoning or reflection on a situation, but 
instead often arise spontaneously. They tend to be specific and 
can be plausible in-spite of evidence that contradicts them. 
They do not necessarily arise as a result of external events but 
can be provoked by ruminations or memories. Techniques such 
as questioning and diary-keeping help to reveal the content of 
automatic thoughts. Another part of the therapy involves 
assessing the accuracy of automatic thoughts through the use of 
techniques such as questioning (rather than persuasion) or 
behavioural experiments. The discovery of negative distortions 
in one’s automatic thoughts leads to the thoughts being refor­
mulated and a consequent improvement in the associated emo­
tion. In addition to day-to-day thoughts, the person can be 
helped to become aware of deeper ‘core’ beliefs that are formed 
through early learning experiences. These are more difficult to 
articulate and may take some effort to access. These core 
beliefs are generalized in nature and ultimately have a deter­
mining influence on how the person thinks about all events. 
Most people maintain relatively positive core beliefs, most of 
the time, but at times of emotional distress negative beliefs can 
emerge and become dominant. When they have a negative 
content, core beliefs are commonly concerned with the idea 
that the person is ‘not good enough’ in terms of being either 
inadequate or unloveable in some way. Intermediary beliefs in 
the form of attitudes, rules and assumptions lie between the 
core beliefs and the day-to-day automatic thoughts. Intermedi­
ate beliefs help the person to cope with painful ideas inherent 
in the core beliefs. Initially, therapy usually focuses on identi­
fying and changing automatic thoughts in order to produce 
symptom relief. Subsequently, intermediate and core beliefs, 
which are common to many situations, become the focus of 
the treatment.
Neurophysiological model of tinnitus
There are striking parallels between Hallam’s4 model and the 
more recent neurophysiological model of tinnitus suggested by 
Jastreboff and Hazell.42 Although different language is used, 
both emphasize the role of central rather than peripheral fac­
tors in tinnitus perception, both point to the importance of 
autonomic nervous system arousal, and both highlight the 
importance of the emotional significance of the tinnitus.
The neurophysiological model, however, extends the 
psychological one by suggesting that the use of sound 
enrichment serves to disrupt neuronal networks that 
process tinnitus information.
Tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT), the treatment that derives 
from this model, involves a combination of counselling and 
sound enrichment. This model further extends the psychologi­
cal one by suggesting that TRT leads not only to habituation 
of reaction to tinnitus but in some cases also to habituation of 
perception of tinnitus.
The similarities and differences between the neurophysio­
logical and psychological models and the relative merits of both 
have been a focus of debate. A particular confusion has been 
between the counselling element of TRT, known as directive 
counselling, and CBT. Early papers on the neurophysiological 
model seem to use the terms ‘directive counselling’ and ‘cogni­
tive therapy’ interchangeably, and the intention of the directive 
counselling process is to change patients’ beliefs about their 
tinnitus. Psychologists,43 however, have suggested that directive 
counselling does not equate to cognitive therapy, as it does not 
meet the rigorous standards and protocols of that therapy. 
Jastreboff44 also sought to highlight differences between TRT 
and cognitive therapy. However, the descriptions of the 
directive counselling provided are again reminiscent of those 
associated with cognitive therapy. She has suggested that 
psychological therapy will not lead to lasting improvements in 
tinnitus complaints. It is suggested that, while both psycholog­
ical therapy and TRT seek to modify the emotional significance 
of tinnitus, TRT extends this by addressing patients’ subcon­
scious non-verbal processing of tinnitus information, presum­
ably through the use of sound enrichment. The contention44 is 
that only by influencing both conscious and subconscious 
processes can enduring improvements be achieved. The evi­
dence, to date, does not support this contention. A number of 
methodological difficulties with TRT studies have been high­
lighted by Wilson et al.43 and it is not yet clear that the bene­
fits of TRT extend beyond those that might be offered by 
directive counselling. One of the most recent psychological 
therapy outcome studies45 reported results that were as 
favourable, or more so, than the suggested standards for TRT.46
Cognitive measures in tinnitus sufferers
The focus on central factors in tinnitus perception has led to 
studies on measures such as evoked potentials,47 regional cere­
bral blood flow,48 and auditory brain stem responses.49 It has also 
led to a small series of studies on the cognitive functioning or 
information-processing abilities of tinnitus patients.24,25,27 This 
work has focused on a hitherto neglected aspect of tinnitus 
complaint, i.e. concentration problems. The findings suggest 
that tinnitus patients do experience some inefficiency in cogni­
tive processing that cannot be accounted for simply in terms of 
emotional disturbance. A clearer understanding of the exact 
nature of the difficulties is still awaited, but it may be that 
tinnitus occupies part of the capacity of the working memory 
system, a series of cognitive structures that hold information on 
its arrival in the system until it can be processed further. 
Research on tinnitus and cognitive performance has led to a 
modified psychological theory of tinnitus in which it is regarded
  

596 
Auditory disorders and their management
as a ‘changing-state* stimulus (i.e. it comes and goes because of 
masking environmental sound or it is a variable stimulus in 
itself). 
This reasoning is influenced by cognitive psychology 
and the finding that an auditory stimulus that changes in pitch 
has the capacity to negatively affect cognitive processing to an 
equal degree as irrelevant speech.51 Given that tinnitus can be 
regarded as a ‘changing-state’ stimulus it is not surprising to 
find that tinnitus patients often complain of concentration 
problems and that many people do not manage to habituate to 
tinnitus. The psychology of tinnitus continues to develop.
Hearing loss
Hearing-impaired people are commonly regarded as suffering 
from ^psychological disturbances such as depression or para­
noia, although this observation has only partly been investi­
gated in the empirical literature.53 It has also been observed that 
people who use hearing aids are regarded less favourably by oth­
ers than people without a hearing aid.54 There are certainly 
good reasons to suppose that hearing loss might influence the 
onset of psychological disturbance. Acquired hearing impair­
ment involves losses of one kind or another. Depression may 
come about when a person experiences a sense of loss and/or 
helplessness, i.e. a sense that one’s actions do not influence 
events. Anxiety may arise when a person anticipates loss, or 
believes that things will go wrong in some way.
There are many descriptions of the negative emotional 
consequences of hearing loss. For example, McKenna et 
al.n reported that 27% of people attending a neuro-otol­
ogy clinic with a main complaint of hearing loss were suf­
fering from significant psychological disturbance. This is 
considerably higher than the prevalence of psychological 
disturbance among the general population (approxi­
mately 5% have significant psychopathology). It is, 
however, lower than the prevalence rates reported to 
be associated with other audiological symptoms such as
j  
13, 55, 56
tinnitus and vertigo.
A different approach to the question has been to examine the 
extent of hearing loss among populations of known psychiatric 
patients, but the results are far from clear. However, there is the 
potential for a hearing loss to lead to mis-classification in psy­
chiatric cases, and it is important for this to be taken into 
account in the diagnostic process.57 When other health prob­
lems have been taken into consideration, the correlations 
between hearing loss and anxiety and depression are weaker. 
The experience of multiple symptoms leads to a greater likeli­
hood of a person suffering from significant psychological dis­
tress. The high comorbidity between hearing loss and tinnitus 
is particularly relevant in this respect; many hearing-impaired 
people may experience significant psychological distress as a 
consequence of the combined effects of that loss and tinnitus.
It is clear that the relationship between hearing loss and 
psychological wellbeing is a complex one. This point is high­
lighted by the fact that many people, particularly older people, 
do not complain about their hearing loss. It is often the case 
that older people tolerate a greater degree of impairment before 
taking action than do younger people, and they regard a hear­
ing aid as of little use to them. It has been noted that some peo­
ple deny that they have a hearing problem even when 
confronted with audiometric evidence of a hearing loss.58 It is 
also the case that the link between audiological measures and 
psychological disturbance is unclear. If hearing loss is associated 
with psychological disturbance then it might be expected that 
there would be a relationship between the extent of the hear­
ing loss and the extent of the psychological problems. Many 
studies,58-61 however, have found that this is not the case. One 
study,60 however, suggested that while there was no clear rela­
tionship between degree of hearing loss and psychological dis­
turbance for most of the population assessed, there was a higher 
degree of disturbance among a subgroup of people with particu­
larly severe hearing loss and poor speech discrimination, and 
who received little benefit from hearing aids.
Therefore, at first sight, the evidence on the relationship 
between hearing loss and psychological well-being seems 
mixed. In part, this may be because of an overly simple 
approach to assessing psychological status. Many studies59,60,6 ~64 
have used an approach that classifies people as either psychi- 
atrically disturbed or not. This runs the risk of neglecting those 
people who experience emotional distress but who fall short of 
a classification as dysfunctional. For example, it seems reason­
able to suppose that because it involves loss, acquired hearing 
impairment might lead to a grief reaction. Clearly, not everyone 
experiencing grief about hearing loss will react in ways that 
would allow them to be classified as psychiatrically dysfunc­
tional. One recent study used a different approach to the study 
of hearing loss. The researchers61 used a questionnaire method 
and factor analysis to discover the subjective experiences of 
people with acquired hearing loss. They emphasized the multi­
dimensional nature of the experience and described the effects 
of hearing loss in terms of six factors.
SUBJECTIVE 
EXPERIENCE 
OF 
ACQUIRED 
HEARING LOSS
Co mm u n i cat ion proble ms 
Social restrictions 
Poor interaction with others 
Psychological dimension 
distress
social isolation 
Sense of loss/bereavement 
Positive experiences 
social support 
philosophical resources
  

Psychological aspects of hearing impairment and tinnitus 
597
Only one of these factors referred to the communication 
problems that one might expect to be associated with hearing 
loss. One factor was concerned with social restrictions such as 
employment difficulties and strained family relationships. 
Another factor referred to poor interactions on the part of 
others, that is, deafened people perceive others as using strate­
gies that undermine the hearing-impaired person. The other 
factors emphasized the psychological dimensions of the experi­
ence. One factor was concerned with the distress associated 
with interactions and a sense of social isolation. Another factor 
highlighted a sense of loss and bereavement and a sense that 
hearing people do not understand what it is like to be deafened. 
The last factor was concerned with positive experiences associ­
ated with hearing loss, such as social support and greater inner 
philosophical resources. In common with other studies, Kerr 
and Cowie61 found that audiological factors did not allow one 
to say how much impact a hearing loss would have on a person’s 
life.
The finding that hearing loss might be associated with 
some positive consequences may seem surprising. However, 
there are other sources of evidence that the effects of hearing 
loss are not always those that one might intuitively think of. 
For example, it is worth noting that not all cochlear implant 
users report a positive psychological outcome, even when the 
implant provides obvious acoustical benefit. It is sometimes the 
case that the ‘restoration of hearing’ provided by the implant 
does not lead to the changes in life that the person hoped for 
and, just as with hearing aids, a proportion of implant recipients 
do not use their devices.65
The World Health Organization model applied 
to hearing loss
The complexity of the relationship between hearing loss and 
emotional wellbeing can be accounted for by the fact that 
hearing loss does not occur in a vacuum but rather within the 
‘rich tapestry of life’. To restate the point: two people with the 
same level of hearing loss may have quite different life experi­
ences. The World Health Organization (WHO) 198066 classi­
fication of impairment, disability and handicap has been 
appealed to when seeking to explain the lack of a clear rela­
tionship between the extent of hearing loss and the level of 
psychological disturbance.
W HO (1980) Classification
Impairment The defective function that may be mea­
sured using psychoacoustica! techniques.
Disability 
The auditory problem experienced, and 
complained of, by the individual.
Handicap 
The non-auditory problems that result from 
hearing impairment and disability.
Stephens and Hetu67 provided definitions of impairment, 
disability and handicap within an audiological context. They 
defined impairment as the defective function that may be 
measured using psychoacoustical techniques and suggested that 
it is independent of psychosocial factors. Stephens and Hetu67 
defined disability as the auditory problem experienced, and 
complained of, by the individual. They refer to handicap as the 
non-auditory problems that result from hearing impairment and 
disability and suggested that this is determined by the social 
and cultural context within which the hearing impairment 
occurs. As handicap refers to the disadvantage that the indi­
vidual experiences, there is not a direct relationship between 
impairment, disability and handicap.
The WHO 198066 model has been challenged in other 
areas of health-care.68 Johnston68 summarized a number of diffi­
culties with the traditional model as applied to physical disor­
ders and suggested amendments to it. The WHO 1980 model66 
assumes that different health professionals would rate a person’s 
behaviour in a similar way. Johnston68 reported that, in fact, 
nurses consistently rated patients as more disabled than physio­
therapists and occupational therapists did and sought to explain 
this observation in terms of social circumstances influencing 
the level of disability observed. Some psychological models 
used in the study of people with chronic disease postulate that 
people cope with their mental representations of the problem 
rather than with the problem per se. Studies have also indi­
cated that patients’ perceptions of the control they have over 
recovery and level of disability influence the outcome of 
rehabilitation, even allowing for original level of disability.
The theory of planned behaviour: a 
psychological model
It can not be assumed that all disabled people have an equal and 
full intention to perform everyday tasks. For example, past fail­
ures to perform tasks may lead a person to give up even when 
there has been a recovery from impairment. Johnston68 argued 
that levels of disability are influenced by a combination of an 
intention to behave in a certain way and perceived control over 
being able to do so. Johnston cited the Theory of Planned 
Behaviour69 in this context. This theory suggests that a person’s 
intention to perform a task is determined by a combination of a 
change in attitudes to the behaviour, the subjective norm for 
the behaviour, and the person’s perception of control over the 
behaviour. In a hearing rehabilitation context, the behaviour in 
question might be speaking with others. A change in attitude 
associated with this might be ‘when I speak to people I mishear 
and feel embarrassed and I dislike embarrassment’. The subjec­
tive norm might be ‘my spouse wishes to do the talking for 
me and I am happy to go along with this’ and an example of 
perceived control over the behaviour could be ‘I am not con­
fident that I can hear what people say’. Applying the Theory 
of Planned Behaviour to the WHO 1980 model,66 Johnston68
  

598 
Auditory disorders and their management
proposed that physical impairment influences mental represen­
tations, which, in turn, determine behavioural intentions and 
disabled behaviour. In summary, the suggestion is that disabil­
ity, like handicap, refers to behaviour that is subject to manip­
ulation in the same way as any other behaviour. The ideas of 
famous behavioural psychologist B. F. Skinner add to this view 
of hearing.70 Hearing can be viewed as an operant, i.e. as a 
behaviour classified on the basis of its effects and also that is 
under the influence of contingencies of reinforcement. During 
his later years, Skinner extended his theories into the field of 
ageing and hearing loss.71 He advocated an assertive approach 
while acknowledging that when it is impossible to hear: ‘You do 
best to stop trying to hear things when you are having trouble. 
You are probably not enjoying what is said in a television pro­
gram if you are straining to hear it’71 (p. 44). The point that 
social factors influence the level of disability was recognized 
by Stephens and Hetu.67 While the social model of disability72,73 
emphasizes social barriers as the determinants of disability, (for 
example a wheel-chair user is disabled because there are steps 
rather than a ramp), Johnston’s68 argument goes beyond this by 
highlighting not only social determinants of disability but also 
cognitive or mental ones. The relative contributions of social 
and psychological factors and their place in the models of 
disability are discussed by Arnold.74
While the notion that hearing-impaired people face social 
barriers is now considered self-evident, from a clinical point of 
view it is also apparent that they encounter psychological 
obstacles through factors such as anxiety or reduced motiva­
tion. The evidence suggests that the effects of acquired hearing 
loss go beyond communication problems, and there are strands 
of support for the idea that psychological factors influence hear­
ing disability directly. One piece of research from the field of 
cochlear implants75 adds to this picture. An assessment was car­
ried out of a group of implant users’ retrospective perceptions of 
changes in their psychological status. The assessment indicated 
that almost all of the group studied believed that their lives 
were close to ideal prior to the onset of hearing loss, and that 
this was radically changed by hearing loss. It seems implausible 
that so many in any group would have had near-perfect lives 
before losing their hearing. It seems unlikely that this perception 
is the consequence of only social factors. It seems likely that this 
represents a cognitive manoeuvre or a change in people’s mental 
maps of their psychological space. The effect is to increase the 
perception of the loss experienced, and this in turn is likely to 
be a determinant of the subsequent disability behaviour.
A new WHO model
A new classification of impairments, disability and handicap 
has been developed by the WHO.76 The proposed new classifica­
tion again refers to three levels of disablement: losses or abnor­
malities of bodily function and structure (previously referred to 
as impairments), limitations of activities (previously disabili­
ties), and restriction in participation (previously handicaps).
NEW WHO (2001) CLASSIFICATION OF 
FUNCTIONING, DISABILITY AND HEALTH
Loss or abnormalities of bodily function and structure 
Limitations of activities 
Restriction in participation
The proposed new classification is set within the context of the 
social model of disability. It suggests that disablement occurs 
within and by means of contextual factors. Two sorts of contex­
tual factors are identified: social and environmental factors, and 
personal factors. Social and environmental factors include phys­
ical conditions such as climate and terrain as well as aspects of 
the social environment such as social attitudes, laws, policies 
and social and political institutions. Personal factors include 
gender, age, other health conditions, coping styles, social back­
ground, education, profession, past and current experience, 
overall behaviour pattern, character style and other factors that 
influence how disability is experienced by the individual. This 
new classification is broad enough to incorporate the ideas put 
forward within the psychological model.68 However, Johnston’s68 
model delineates more clearly the role of psychological factors.
Treatment perspectives regarding 
hearing loss
From a psychological point of view, much of the emphasis 
within a clinical setting has been on providing a psychother­
apeutic or counselling response to the emotional conse­
quences of hearing loss. Clinically, an emphasis is often 
placed on working through a grief process or changing a per­
son’s beliefs about the implications of the loss through the 
use of cognitive therapy.41 There is therefore an overlap with 
the psychological therapy approaches to tinnitus. A behav­
ioural perspective to the management of people with hearing 
loss has also been suggested. Within a behavioural approach 
emphasis is placed on considering each patient as unique and 
requiring a tailor-made set of rehabilitation strategies.2 The 
behaviours that need changing are identified, together with 
the factors that control them. It needs to be remembered that 
the patient experiences hearing loss in his or her own envi­
ronment. Identifying the controlling factors involves observ­
ing those circumstances in which the relevant behaviour 
takes place and also observing the consequences of the 
behaviour.
McKenna77 described a behavioural approach to audio- 
logical rehabilitation based on goal-planning principles. This 
system involves the use of clear behavioural language in the 
description of the patient’s needs and the things that each 
person involved in the rehabilitation will do. Abstract con­
cepts are avoided, and goals are described in terms of what
  

Psychological aspects of hearing impairment and tinnitus 
599
the person says or does. For example, rather than having a 
vague objective for a patient, such as ‘better communica­
tion’, specific goals may be stated, such as ‘he needs to wear 
his hearing aids for six hours a day’ or ‘he needs to tell peo­
ple how to talk to him’. These goals are then broken down 
into achievable steps, and each person’s role in achieving 
the steps is described. An emphasis is placed on abilities 
rather than disabilities and positive language is used, e.g. 
‘the patient needs to practise relaxation techniques’ rather 
than ‘he cannot relax’. Goal-planning does not impose any 
theoretical framework or dictate what therapies should be 
used in the rehabilitation. Rather, it is a framework for 
organizing the rehabilitation process. It is a means of stating 
what should be achieved but does not dictate the method of 
intervention.
A cognitive behavioural approach to the management of 
hearing loss in elderly people has been described in a series of 
studies by Andersson et al.78-81 These have focused on the use 
of hearing tactics, i.e. the methods used by hearing impaired 
people to solve the everyday problems resulting from the 
hearing loss. The treatment involves setting individualized 
treatment goals and achieving these through the use of 
behavioural tasks and communication strategies. It includes 
the rehearsal of tactics and teaching relaxation and coping 
skills. Overall, the results indicate that subjects treated in this 
way were better able to cope with their hearing loss, and 
evidence of some 
long-term benefit was 
also found. 
Andersson et al. concluded that disability resulting from 
hearing impairment could be regarded as a behavioural prob­
lem and that this behaviour can be the central focus of reha­
bilitation. They suggested that cognitive, and especially 
motivational, factors are of the utmost importance in how 
hearing disability is viewed.
Conclusions
Whether or not hearing loss or tinnitus are problematic 
is dependent as much, if not more, on psychological 
factors as on physical ones.
People’s responses to tinnitus and to hearing loss are not 
always easily predictable. They depend on cognitive, behav­
ioural and social influences as well as the changes in acousti­
cal ability.
An approach to auditory rehabilitation that focuses only 
on an attempt to alter acoustical input runs the risk of 
ignoring fundamental aspects of the experience and 
therefore faces the prospect of only limited success.
This is evidenced in the large variation in people’s acceptance 
and use of devices such as hearing aids or tinnitus instruments. 
The management of acquired hearing loss needs to go beyond 
the provision of hearing aids to the manipulation of many fac­
tors, including psychological ones. This was recognized over 20 
years ago when Goldstein and Stephens82 recommended that 
aural rehabilitation should address psychological factors. Our 
understanding of the issues involved has improved since then, 
and the argument for the involvement of clinical psychologists 
in rehabilitation of hearing-impaired people has become all 
the more persuasive. It now seems likely that not only is the 
handicap associated with a hearing loss psychologically 
determined but that the level of disability is also the product 
of psychological factors. The future direction of psychology 
within the field of hearing loss may be in manipulating the 
determinants of disability as much as moderating handicap. 
Psychological treatment of tinnitus is now well established in 
major centres. However, there is a need for these treatments to 
be refined so that they become efficacious across a wider spec­
trum of tinnitus complaint. For example, the efficacy of psy­
chological treatments on tinnitus-related insomnia is limited,83 
and not well studied.84 To date, the treatment strategies have 
not specifically addressed sleep disturbance, and it seems likely 
that psychological treatments that specifically tackle insomnia 
may lead to greater success. Given the limited success that psy­
chological treatments have had on auditory perceptual aspects 
of tinnitus complaint,40 it may be that this is another area in 
which a refinement of treatment approaches would lead to 
greater success. The greater understanding of tinnitus com­
plaint that psychologists have developed in recent years, 
including of the difficulties in concentration associated with 
tinnitus, may lead to a more sophisticated and more useful 
cognitive model of tinnitus. The main impediment to these 
developments is the continuing paucity of psychologists 
working in audiology.
References
1. Jakes S. Otological symptoms and emotion. A review of the 
literature. Adv Behav Res Ther, 1988; 10: 53-103.
2. McKenna L, Andersson G. Hearing disabilities. In: Bellack A, 
Hersen M. eds. Comprehensive Clinical Psychology, Vol. 9: Diverse 
Populations. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1998: 69-83.
3. Fowler E. The emotional factor in tinnitus aurium. Laryngoscope. 
1948; 58: 145-54.
4. Hallam RS, Rachman S, Hinchcliffe R. Psychological aspects of 
tinnitus. In: Rachman S, ed. Contributions to Medical Psychology. 
Oxford: Pergamon Press, Vol 3. 1984: 31-53.
5. Tyler R, Baker L. Difficulties experienced by tinnitus sufferers. 
J Speech Hear Disord, 1983; 48: 150-4.
6. Hallam R. Living with Tinnitus: Dealing with the Ringing in Your Ears. 
Wellingborough: Thorsons, 1989.
7. Hallam R, Jakes S, Hinchcliffe R. Cognitive variables in tinnitus 
annoyance. Br J Clin Psychol, 1988; 27: 213-22.
  

600 
Auditory disorders and their management
8. Kentish RC, Crocker SR, McKenna L. Children’s experiences of 
tinnitus: a preliminary survey of children presenting to a psychol- 
ogy department. BrJ Audiol 2000; 34: 335-40.
9. Zoger S, Holgers K-M, Svedlund J. Psychiatric disorders in tinni- 
tus patients without severe hearing impairment: 24 month follow- 
up of patients at an audiological clinic. Audiology 2001; 40: 
133-40.
10. Halford J. Anderson S. Anxiety and depression in tinnitus 
sufferers. J Psychosom Res, 1991; 35: 383-90.
11. Harrop-Griffiths J, Katon W, Dobie R, Sakai C, Russo J. Chronic 
tinnitus: association with psychiatric diagnoses. J Psychosom Res. 
1987;31:613-21.
12. Kirsch C, Blanchard E, Pames S. Psychological characteristics of 
individuals high and low in their ability to cope with tinnitus. 
Psychosom Med 1989; 51: 209-17.
13. McKenna L, Hallam RS, Hinchcliffe R. The prevalence of psy­
chological disturbance in neuro-otology outpatients. Clin Oto­
laryngol. 1991; 16: 452-6.
14. Simpson RB, Nedzelski JM, Barber HO, Thomas MR. Psychiatric 
diagnoses in patients with psychogenic dizziness or severe tinnitus. 
J Otolaryngol 1988; 17: 325-30.
15. Stephens S, Hallam R. The Crown Crisp experiential index in 
patients complaining of tinnitus. Br J Audiol 1985; 19: 151-8.
16. Wood K, Webb W, Orchik D, Shea ]. Intractable tinnitus: 
psychiatric aspects of treatment. Psychosomatics 1983; 24: 559-65.
17. Briner W, Risey J, Guth P, Noris C. Use of the million clinical 
multiaxail inventory in evaluating patients with severe tinnitus. 
A m ) Otolaryngol 1990; 11: 334-7.
18. Hiller W, Goebel G, Rief W. Reliability of self rated tinnitus dis­
tress and association with psychological symptom patterns. Br J 
Psychol 1994; 33: 231-9.
19. Russo J, Katon W, Sullivan M, Clark M, Buchwald D. Severity of 
somatisation and its relationship to psychiatric disorders and 
personality. Psychosomatics 1994; 35: 546-56.
20. Beck A, Ward C, Mendelson M, Mock J, Erbaugh J. An inventory 
for measuring depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1961; 4: 561-71.
21. Wilson P, Henry ], Bowen M, Haralambous G. Tinnitus reaction 
questionnaire: psychometric properties of a measure of distress 
associated with tinnitus. J Speech Hear Res 1991; 34: 197-201.
22. Erlandsson S. Tinnitus: tolerance or threat? Psychological and 
psychophysiological perspectives. Doctoral Thesis, University of 
Goteborg, 1990.
23. Hinchcliffe R, King P. Medicolegal aspects of tinnitus. 1: 
Medicolegal position and current state of knowledge. J Audiol Med 
1992; 1: 38-58.
24. McKenna L, Hallam RS, Shurlock L. Cognitive functioning in 
tinnitus patients. In: Reich GE, Vernon JA. ed. Proceedings of the 
Fifth International Tinnitus Seminar, 1995/1996. Portland: American 
Tinnitus Association, 1996: 589-95.
25. McKenna L., Hallam R. A neuropsychological study of concen­
tration problems in tinnitus patients. In: Hazell J, ed. Proceedings 
of the Sixth International Tinnitus Seminar, Cambridge, UK: The 
Tinnitus and Hyperacusis Centre; 1999: 108-113.
26. Speilberger C, Gousuch A, Lushene A. Test Manual of the State-Trait 
Anxiety Inventory. Palo Alto: Consulting Psychology Press; 1970.
27. McKenna L. Audiological disorders: psychological state and 
cognitive functioning. Unpublished doctoral thesis, The City 
University, London, 1997.
28. Dobie RA. A review of randomized clinical trials in tinnitus. 
Laryngoscope 1999; 109: 1202-11
29. Kuk F, Tyler R, Russell D, Jordan H. The psychometric properties 
of a tinnitus handicap questionnaire. Ear Hear 1990; 11: 434-45.
30. Hiller W, Goebel G. A psychometric study of complaints in 
chronic tinnitus. J Psychosom Res 1992; 36: 337-48.
31. Andersson G. The role of optimism in patients with tinnitus and 
in patients with hearing impairment. Psychol Health 1996; 11: 
697-707.
32. McCombe A, Baguley D, Coles R, McKenna L, McKinney C, 
Windle Taylor P. Guidelines for the grading of tinnitus severity: 
the results of a working group commissioned by the British Asso­
ciation of Otolaryngologists, Head and Neck Surgeons. Clin Oto­
laryngol 2001; 26: 388-93.
33. Andersson G, Hagnebo C. Dysphoria, optimism, confidence in 
activities and daily symptoms of Meniere’s disease. J Audiol Med 
1996; 5: 83-91.
34. Lindberg P, Scott B, Melin L, Lyttkens L. The psychological treat­
ment of tinnitus: an experimental evaluation. Behav Res Ther 
1989; 27: 593-603.
35. Beck A, Epstein N, Brown G, Steer R. An inventory for measur­
ing clinical anxiety. Psychometric properties. J Consult Clin 
Psychol 1988; 56: 893-7.
36. Andersson G, Lyttkens L, Larsen HC. Distinguishing levels of tin­
nitus distress. Clin Otolaryngol 1999; 24: 404-410.
37. Carlsson S, Erlandsson S. Habituation and tinnitus: an experi­
mental study. J Psychosom Res 1991; 35: 509-14.
38. Baltissen R, Boucsein W. Effects of a warning signal on reactions 
to aversive white noise stimulation: does warning ‘short-circuit’ 
habituation? Psychophysiology 1986; 23: 224-31.
39. Scott B, Lindberg P, Melin L, Lyttkens L. Psychological treatment 
of tinnitus. An experimental group study. Scand Audiol 1985; 14: 
223-30.
40. Andersson G, Melin L, Hagnebo C, Scott B, Lindberg P. A review 
of psychological treatment approaches for patients suffering from 
tinnitus. Ann Behav Med. 1995; 17: 357-66.
41. Beck A. Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders. Madison, 
CT: International Universities Press, 1976.
42. Jastreboff P, Hazell J. A neurophysiological approach to tinnitus: 
clinical implications. Br J Audiol 1993; 27: 7-17.
43. Wilson P, Henry J, Lindberg P, Andersson G, Hallam R. A critical 
analysis of directive counselling as a component of tinnitus 
retraining therapy. BrJ Audiol 1998; 32: 273-86.
44. Jastreboff MM. Controversies between cognitive therapies and 
TRT counselling. In: Hazell J, ed. Proceedings of the Sixth Interna­
tional Tinnitus Seminar, Cambridge, UK: The Tinnitus and Hyper­
acusis Centre; 1999: 288-291.
45. Henry J, Wilson P. Cognitive behavioural therapy for tinnitus 
related distress: an experimental evaluation of initial treatment 
and relapse prevention. In: Hazell J, ed. Proceedings of the Sixth 
International Tinnitus Seminar, Cambridge, UK: The Tinnitus and 
Hyperacusis Centre; 1999: 118-124.
  

Psychological aspects of hearing impairment and tinnitus 
601
46. McKinney C, Hazell J, Graham R. An evaluation of the TRT 
method. In: Hazell J, ed. Proceedings of the Sixth International 
Tinnitus Seminar. Cambridge, UK: The Tinnitus and Hyperacusis 
Centre; 1999: 99-105.
47. Attias J, Urbach D, Gold S, Sheemesh Z. Auditory event related 
potentials in chronic tinnitus patients with noise induced hearing 
loss. Hear Res 1993; 71: 106-13.
48. Andersson G, Lyttkens L, Hirvela C, Furmark T, Tillfors M, 
Fredrikson M. Regional cerebral blood flow during tinnitus: a PET 
case-study with lidocaine and auditory stimulation. Acta Otolaryn­
gol 2000; 120: 967-972.
49. Rosenhall U, Axelsson A. Auditory brainstem response latencies 
in patients with tinnitus. Scand Audiol 1995; 24: 97-100.
50. Andersson G, Khakpoor A, Lyttkens L. Masking of tinnitus and 
mental activity. Clin Otolaryngol 2002; 27: 270-4.
51. Jones D, Macken W. Irrelevant tones produce an irrelevant 
speech effect. J Exp Psychol Learning Memory Cognition 1993; 19: 
369-81.
52. Jones E, White AJ. Mental health and acquired hearing impair- 
ment. A review. BrJ Audiol 1990; 24: 3-9.
53. Andersson G. Hearing as behaviour. Psychological aspects of 
acquired hearing impairment in the elderly. Doctoral dissertation, 
Acta Universitas Upsaliensis, 1995.
54- Danhauer J, Johnson CE, Kasten R, Brimacombe J. The hearing 
aid effect. Summary, conclusions & recommendations. Hear J 
1985; 38: 12-14.
55. Asmundson GJG, Larsen DK, Stein MB. Panic disorder and 
vestibular disturbance: an overview of empirical findings and clin­
ical implications. J Psychosom Res 1998; 44: 107-20.
56. Meric C, Gartner M, Collet L, Chery-Croze S. Psychopathologi- 
cal profile of tinnitus sufferers: evidence concerning the relation­
ship between tinnitus features and impact on life. Audiol Neuro- 
otol 1998; 3: 240-52.
57. Kreeger JL, Raulin ML, Grace J, Priest BL. Effect of hearing 
enhancement on mental status ratings in geriatric psychiatric 
patients. Am J Psychiatry 1995; 152: 629-31.
58. Gilhome Herbst K, Humphrey C. Hearing impairment and men­
tal state in the elderly living at home. BMJ 1980; 281: 903-5.
59. Mahapatra S. Deafness and mental health: psychiatric and psy­
chosomatic illness in the deaf. Acta Psychiatr Scand 1974; 50: 
596-611.
60. Thomas A, Gilhome Herbst K. Social and psychological implica­
tions of acquired deafness for adults of employment age. Br J 
Audiol 1980; 14: 76-85.
61. Kerr P, Cowie R. Acquired deafness: a multidimensional experi­
ence. Br J Audiol; 1997; 31: 177-88.
62. Knapp P. Emotional aspects of hearing loss. Psychosom Med 1948; 
10: 203-22.
63. Ingalls G. Some psychiatric observations on patients with hearing 
deficit. Occup Ther Rehabil 1946; 25: 62-6.
64. Singerman B, Reidner E, Folstein M. Emotional disturbance in 
hearing clinic patients. BrJ Psychiatry 1980; 137: 58-62.
65. McKenna L. The psychological assessment of cochlear implant 
patients. BrJ Audiol 1986; 20: 29-34.
66. World Health Organization. International Classification of Impair­
ments, Disabilities and Handicaps. Geneva: WHO, 1980.
67. Stephens SDG, Hetu R. Impairment, disability and handicap in 
audiology: towards a consensus. Audiology 1991; 30: 185-200.
68. Johnston M. Models of disability. Psychobgist 1996; May: 205-10.
69. Azjen I. Attitudes, Personality and Behaviour. Milton Keynes: Open 
University Press, 1988.
70. Skinner B F. Verbal Behavior. New York: Appleton-Century- 
Crofts, 1957.
71. Skinner BF, Vaughan ME. Enjoy Old Age. A Program for Self-man­
agement. London: Hutchinson. 1983.
72. Finkelstein V. Attitudes and Disabled People. New York: World 
Rehabilitation Fund, 1980.
73. Finkelstein V. ‘We’ are not disabled, ‘you’ are. In: Gregory S, 
Hartley G, eds. Constructing Deafness. London: Pinter/Milton 
Keynes: Open University Press, 1990: 265-71.
74. Arnold P. Is there still a consensus on impairment, disability and 
handicap in audiology? BrJ Audiol 1998; 32: 265-71.
75. McKenna L, Denman C. Repertory grid technique in the assess­
ment of cochlear implant patients. J Audiol Med 1993; 2: 75-84.
76. WHO. International Classification of Functioning, Disability and 
Health. 2001; Geneva: World Health Organization.
77. McKenna L. Goal planning in audiological rehabilitation. Br J 
Audiol 1987;21:5-11.
78. Andersson G, Melin L, Scott B, Lindberg P Behavioural coun­
selling for subjects with acquired hearing loss. A new approach to 
hearing tactics. Scand Audiol 1994; 23: 249-56.
79. Andersson G, Melin L, Scott B, Lindberg P. An evaluation of a 
behavioural treatment approach to hearing impairment. Behav Res 
Ther 1995; 33(3): 283-92.
80. Andersson G, Melin L, Scott B, Lindberg P. A two-year follow-up 
examination of a behavioural treatment approach to hearing 
tactics. Br J Audiol 1995; 29: 347-54.
81. Andersson G, Green M, Melin L. Behavioural hearing tactics: a 
controlled trial of a short treatment programme. Behav Res Ther 
1997; 35: 523-30.
82. Goldstein DP, Stephens SDG. Audiological rehabilitation: 
Management model I. Audiol 1981; 20: 432-52.
83. McKenna L. Tinnitus and insomnia. In: Tyler RS, ed. Tinnitus 
Handbook. San Diego: Singular Publishing; 2000: 59-84.
84. Andersson G, Lyttkens L. A meta-analytic review of psychological 
treatments for tinnitus. BrJ Audiol 1999; 33: 201-10.
  

36 Surgical management 
of hearing impairment 
in audiological 
medicine
Paul Van de Heyning, Jos Claes, Jan Brokx, Frank Declau, 
An Boudewyns, Evert Hamans, Erwin Koekelkoren, 
Dirk De Ridder
Introduction
For many decades, ear surgery has endeavoured to improve 
hearing impairment. Initially, ear surgery was aimed at eradi­
cating infectious middle ear pathology, but with better public 
health and the advent of antibiotics, tumour surgery, especially 
acoustical neuroma surgery, and the surgical treatment of inca­
pacitating vertigo developed. Progressively, the aim of hearing 
improvement became more and more important, and a branch 
of ear surgery evolved aimed at purely functional hearing 
restoration. This has been named cophosurgery or functional 
ear surgery. International societies focusing on otosurgery (e.g. 
Politzer Society) have developed, and many international con­
ferences and workshops, together with dedicated industrial 
technology, have contributed immensely to the broad 
application of functional ear surgery.
The main indication for hearing improvement with func­
tional ear surgery was, and still is, conductive hearing loss. This 
is achieved by direct action on the structures of the outer ear 
canal, tympanic membrane, ossicles or middle ear structures. 
A specific place is taken by bone-anchored hearing aids 
(BAHAs), which bypass the outer and middle ear amplifier.
The last 30 years have been characterized by the progres­
sive development of cochlear implantation, making it possible 
to restore hearing in severe or profound bilaterally hearing- 
impaired patients to a level comparable with moderate to mod­
erate-severe hearing loss. As well as adults, children have 
benefited from this technology, insofar as it has radically
changed the approach towards the failing organ of Corti. More­
over, recently, the field of surgically implanted hearing aids for 
sensorineural hearing loss has been established, especially as 
totally implantable systems are becoming a reality.
Last, the otoneurosurgical approach to the distressing 
audiological symptom of tinnitus is discussed as an adjunct 
to the neurocognitive approaches to tinnitus, such as tinni­
tus retraining therapy, tinnitus coping therapy and noise 
generators.
Outcome research in functional ear 
surgery
Outcome analysis of functional ear surgery comprises many 
aspects, mainly related to the desired improvement of hearing 
level, but also linked to the initial pathology treated, the con­
tralateral hearing level, the environment, the subjective self- 
evaluation of the patient concerning his or her quality of life, 
and the adverse effects of the sound quality (e.g. distortion and 
hyperacusis) or surgery, such as pain, discomfort, changes of 
taste and dizziness.1 Indeed, important aspects of outcome may 
remain unnoticed if only objective measures are used.2,3
Applied to hearing disablements, WHO guidelines recom­
mend three domains of evaluation: functional impairment, dis­
ability or the ability to perform daily activities, and handicap 
for the degree of participation in socio-economic aspects of life.

604 
Auditory disorders and their management
The only guidelines existing on functional outcome in conduc­
tive hearing loss were issued in 1995 by the Committee on 
Hearing and Equilibrium of the American Academy of Oto­
laryngology and Head and Neck Surgery (AAO-HNS).4 The 
Committee recommended that the average air-bone gap at 0.5,
1, 2 and 3 kHz calculated from postoperative bone and hearing 
thresholds be reported. The Committee also encouraged the 
reporting of raw data. Simple visual representations of these raw 
data have been proposed. The air-bone gap evaluates, in par­
ticular, the result of the technical surgical intervention. These 
data have to be complemented by data on the comparison of 
pre- and postoperative bone conduction thresholds, to detect 
overclosure or iatrogenic cochlear damage.
In many countries outside the USA, the 4 kHz is more fre­
quently measured than the 3 kHz, and thus, in these instances, 
the 3 kHz should be calculated as the mean of 2 and 4 kHz. In 
the majority of publications, when dealing with the results of 
conductive hearing loss, auditory threshold values are the basis 
of reporting the level of success. A frequently used technique is 
to report the percentage of achieved air-bone closure to within 10 
or 20 decibels. It should be noted that the frequencies used to cal­
culate this mean air-bone gap often comprise the combination of 
0.5, 1 and 2 kHz.6-8 In many publications, postoperative air 
thresholds are also compared with preoperative bone thresholds. 
Investigations have shown that the use of the mean of 0.5,1 and 2 
kHz, as well as the combination of preoperative bone thresholds 
with postoperative air thresholds, appear better than is actually 
the case. Using the gain of the speech reception thresholds (SRTs) 
as an external criterion, the best correlations of hearing gain were 
achieved with the combination of 0.5, 1, 2 and 3 or 4 kHz, sup­
porting the guidelines of the AAO-HNS.9,10 The inclusion of the 
4-kHz thresholds gives a better indication for speech in noise. 
Indeed, the all-or-none inclusion of 4 kHz in defining hearing 
impairment has an important effect on the prevalence figures of 
hearing impairment in general11 and success rates in particular.10
It has to be emphasized that the determination of exact 
thresholds in bilateral mixed hearing loss, as is often found in 
chronic otitis media and otosclerosis, is compromised by the 
difficulty of masking. Also, the preoperative influence of the 
Carhart effect12 renders the preoperative estimation of the true 
cochlear function problematic. This can be partially overcome 
by the use of insert phones, although the use of these phones 
has not become a standard procedure, and nor has it been 
included in the guidelines or recommendations. Indeed, with 
deep insertion of insert phones, interaural attenuation is con­
siderably larger, leading to more robust masking procedures. 
The postoperative air-bone gap is not necessarily representa­
tive of the benefit perceived by the patient in terms of satisfac­
tory social hearing following surgery.13
Evaluation of activities and participation is typically 
assessed with validated questionnaires. These include generic 
questionnaires, such as the SF 36,14 or disease-specific question­
naires. These latter questionnaires can focus on auditory capac­
ities (e.g. the Hearing Handicap Inventory for Adults15) and 
different listening conditions and tasks, such as speech recogni­
tion in noise and in quiet, the discrimination of sounds and 
sound quality or directional hearing,16 or can be complemented 
by different patient-specific items, as evaluated in the Client 
Oriented Scale of Improvement (COSI).
In order to assess the benefit of an operation for the patient 
based on air conduction thresholds, the Belfast rule of thumb (suc­
cess is achieved when postoperative airconduction is equal or bet­
ter than 30 dB or the interaural difference is 15 dB or less17) was 
introduced, and afterwards elaborated by the Glasgow Benefit 
Plot.18 Based on this approach, the benefit from bilateral stapedec­
tomy19 or from BAHA was demonstrated, and others subse­
quently simplified this method for defining patient success.20 
Outcome instruments for evaluating the treatment of specific 
hearing disorders were also developed, mainly for research pur­
poses (e.g. cochlear implants,21 and for conductive hearing loss22).
To date, none of these disability-oriented methods has 
gained universal application in the evaluation of the correction 
of conductive hearing loss, partially due to the lack of good val­
idated studies and partially due to the initial aim of the surgeon 
of focusing on the surgical result itself. Nevertheless, a multi­
dimensional outcome approach is becoming almost compulsory, 
in terms of both evidence-based medicine and finance—the 
latter dictated by the healthcare insurers. This approach has 
been able to analyse the preference of patients for functional 
ear surgery in comparison to hearing aids.3,23 However, to date, 
only a few studies have complied with the principles of 
evidence-based medicine and good clinical practice.24
The method of reporting results of conductive hearing loss 
contrasts with the more broadly applied methodology to assess 
hearing improvement, whether using hearing aids (e.g. abbrevi­
ated profile of hearing aid benefit25) or evaluating or treating 
sensorineural hearing loss.26 Functional results are reported in 
terms of hearing gain or achieved hearing level based on air 
conduction threshold values, most often based on the mean of
0.5, 1, 2 and 3 or 4 kHz, on speech recognition tests in quiet and 
in noise, and on disease-specific questionnaires. The use of pho­
netically balanced monosyllables has gained wide acceptance as 
a measure of assessing cochlear performance. Sentence tests, on 
the other hand, tend to evaluate speech comprehension and, 
hence, are essentially monitoring the process of acclimatization. 
The results after cochlear implantation in pre-lingually deaf 
children include educational, receptive and expressive speech 
and language developmental measures as well.
Comparing hearing improvement 
outcomes by surgery or by fitting 
auditory prostheses
Elements and essential considerations 
involved in the decision-making process
Decisions about the best approach for solving auditory problems 
by surgery or the provision of auditory prostheses may not be
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
605
OUTCOME MEASURES IN THE SURGICAL 
TREATMENT OF HEARING LOSS
the use of the mean for four frequencies (0.5, 1,2 and 
3 or 4 kHz) derived from the same postoperative 
audiogram
postoperative air-bone gap in case of conductive 
hearing loss
air conduction hearing gain in case of sensorineural 
hearing loss
comparison 
of 
pre- 
and 
postoperative 
bone 
conduction
speech recognition of monosyllables
assess the disability and handicap with validated
d isease -spec i fi c quest ion na i res
based on the evaluation of auditory impairments alone. Also, 
the consequences of the impairments in daily life in terms of 
disablements and handicaps also need to be evaluated sepa­
rately. A good overview of these individual components, 
together with knowledge of the advantages and disadvantages 
of each approach, ensure that the elements for a good 
decision-making process are available.
In most countries, the estimation of hearing disability is 
based on a pure-tone average of auditory thresholds. Analysis 
(N = 274) of the ‘Inventory for Auditory Disability and 
Handicap’ from Kramer showed that more factors are 
involved than the detection of sounds alone. Discrimination 
and recognition of sounds, localization, speech intelligibility 
in silence and speech intelligibility in noise are independent 
dimensions.27-30 Also, intolerance to noise is an important 
dimension for many patients. Analysis of the data has shown 
that not all of these factors are of equal importance. Poor 
speech perception in noise appears to be the most important 
factor for most hard-of-hearing individuals.
Handicap is much more than the sum of the disabilities of 
disordered auditory functions, and describes the individual neg­
ative consequences in daily life functioning. Of interest is the 
distinction that Kramer makes between primary and secondary 
handicaps. Primary handicaps are the disadvantages experi­
enced in daily life, while secondary handicap elements reflect 
the mental effort and concentration problems caused by the 
hearing loss.
Kramer’s approach was developed for the validation of a 
hearing loss. In fact, the same elements are relevant when dis­
tinguishing between a surgical intervention and a technical 
solution using hearing aids.
Other factors that have to be taken into account are the 
advantages and disadvantages of the use of hearing devices. For 
different patient groups, such as the multisensory and the men­
tally disabled these factors or the impact of these factors may be 
different.
Some disadvantages of hearing devices could be as follows:
» 
Intolerance of materials used for earmoulds or devices, 
n 
Problems in handling by the client or by the management.
■ 
Directional hearing or environmental orientation. This is 
an important factor when dealing with the multisensory 
handicapped. In many cases, environmental orientation is 
more relevant than optimal speech understanding.
■ 
For some multisensory handicapped or mentally disabled 
patients, the non-linear behaviour and the environmental 
adaptive properties of modem digital hearing devices may 
cause disorientation.
A different approach using the COSI method
Another way of obtaining information about the added value of 
a certain approach is the COSI. This is a client-oriented review 
system developed by the Australian Hearing Services (NAL).31
In a comparative study on result measurements in hearing 
aid fitting, the Hearing Aid User’s Questionnaire (HAUQ), the 
Hearing Difficulties Inventory (HDI), the Global Satisfaction 
Scale (GSA), the Profile of Hearing Benefit (PHAB), the 
Shortened Hearing Aid Performance Inventory (SHAPIE) and 
the COSI were compared. In this study, the SHAPIE was the 
best, but proved to be impractical because of the 25-item ques­
tionnaire. In terms of the ease of testing, COSI was the second 
best and scored only the items which were of relevance for each 
individual client. With the COSI system, specific needs, expec­
tations and their relevance for the client can be assessed in an 
easy way. This information relates to the total intervention and 
also facilitates the measurement of results.
The setup is very simple. First, the specific needs and expec­
tations of a client are listed. Second, the needs are ranked in an 
interview with the client, such that any proposed intervention 
will focus on the items with the highest priorities. After the 
intervention, the list can be evaluated and improvements can 
be estimated on a five-point scale: worse, no difference, a little 
better, better and much better. If the items with the highest 
rank order do not improve satisfactorily, a new intervention is 
appropriate, followed by a repeat evaluation.
This easy and practical system was developed for the hear­
ing aid fitting process, but can be applied to almost all inter­
ventions. Moreover, a similar application can be adapted for use 
with the independent disability and handicap elements of the 
Kramer approach. The specific needs can be listed and ranked, 
and the advantages and disadvantages of a certain intervention 
can be evaluated.
For the client, personal problems can be considered and 
expectations become more realistic. Above all, personal 
involvement is obtained. For the surgeon, the COSI gives a 
patient’s point of view, and to date there are no generally 
accepted alternatives. Further, COSI gives a structure for the 
client needs in the decision-making process, leads to other 
interventions or fine-tuning and, finally, measures the level of a 
client’s satisfaction.
  

606 
Auditory disorders and their management
For research purposes, a modified COSI can be proposed. 
This is illustrated in an unpublished study considering the 
preference for analogue or digital hearing aids among a specific 
group of clients with Usher’s syndrome type II.32 These clients 
have an average hearing loss (across 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 kHz) of 
about 70dBHL and retinitis pigmentosa.
From an inventory, it became clear that these clients, 
because of their combined auditory and visual disabilities, had 
different degrees of handicap in respect of certain situations: 
communication at home, communication at work, orienta­
tion/mobility at home, and orientation/mobility outside.32 For 
each of these situations, a separate COSI was undertaken. The 
responses after the intervention, i.e. the fitting of a digital hear­
ing aid, could be evaluated on a seven point scale. For analysis 
purposes, the responses were weighted as follows: much worse, 
—3; worse, —2; a little worse, —1; no difference, 0; a little bet­
ter, + 1; better, +2; much better, +3. For each of the four situ­
ations, the client could identify his three most important needs. 
Then, the responses for the items with the highest priority were 
multiplied by 3, the responses for the item of second priority by
2, and the responses for the item with the lowest priority by 1. 
In this way, per situational COSI, a maximum of 18 points 
could be obtained when a maximal improvement was scored for 
all three levels of need.
The results of this experiment showed a significant 
improvement of speech perception in all listening situations 
and also better orientation/mobility at home. However, orien­
tation/mobility outside was disturbed by the ongoing adapta­
tions to the varying listening situations of the digital hearing 
aids. For a number of these clients, the integrity of the per­
ceived environmental sounds was of such importance that they 
preferred an analogue hearing aid, despite the poorer speech 
perception in nearly all listening situations.
This example illustrates the potential power of the client- 
oriented approach. When surgery or fitting hearing devices are 
alternatives, a COSI might help in the decision-making 
process. The elements of the disorder and the handicap can be 
considered, and the client may be able to rank his or her needs
ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS IN THE DECISION- 
MAKING PROCESS
auditory thresholds
discrimination and recognition of sounds 
localizing sounds
speech perception in silence and in noise
intolerance of noises
problems in handling
mental effort and concentration problems
Client Oriented Scale of Improvement (COSI)
Easy-to-use system for assessing specific needs, expecta­
tions and their relevance for the client. Developed for 
hearing aid fitting but applicable in most interventions.
and expectations. The feedback from the COSI gives the 
surgeon quantified information about the decisions that were 
made together with the client. In some cases, a modified COSI 
can be helpful, especially when there is interference by 
impairments.
Surgery in conductive hearing loss 
being a part of a congenital or 
hereditary syndrome
Congenital middle ear abnormalities can be divided into major 
and minor anomalies: the major malformations represent the 
congenital atresias of the external auditory canal, the minor 
relate to the congenital defects of the ossicular chain.
The prevalence of major anomalies can be estimated as 1 in 
10000 births; there are no proper data on the prevalence or 
incidence of minor anomalies. The latter are syndromal in 25% 
of cases.
These congenital anomalies cause moderate-to-severe hear­
ing loss and require early detection after birth, within 3 months, 
of the hearing level by evoked potentials. Also, genetic coun­
selling is required, not only to establish the hereditary pattern, 
but also to rule out associated anomalies in other organ systems. 
In bilateral anomalies, amplification by air or bone conduction 
hearing aids, within 6 months after birth, is essential to avoid 
delays in speech or language development. During early child­
hood, it is important to check both ears regularly for the presence 
of otitis media. In unilateral atresia cases, it is especially impor­
tant to check the normal ear regularly to exclude otitis media 
with effusion. If secretory otitis media is present, prompt medical 
and/or surgical therapy is needed. Also, the atretic ear may be 
involved and exhibit signs of acute otitis media. If this diagnosis 
is suspected in the atretic ear, prompt antibiotic treatment 
should be commenced to minimize the risk of complications 
such as coalescent mastoiditis or subdural abscess.
The classification of the minor middle ear anomalies, is 
modified after Teunissen and Cremers33 (Table 36.1), has been 
approved by the HEAR consensus group of the European Work­
group on Genetics of Hearing Impairment. This classification is 
based on the peroperative findings and has direct impact on the 
reconstruction technique applied.
This classification is not based on the degree of abnormal­
ity, but depends on the degree of fixation of the stapedial foot­
plate or on the presence or absence of accompanying anomalies 
of the other ossicles. With the exception of severe dysplasia or 
aplasia of the oval and/or round window (group IV), a postop­
erative air-bone gap of ^20 dB was found in 72% of the oper­
ated cases. Preoperative inclusion criteria are: (1) older than 10 
years; (2) no intermittent periods of secretory otitis media; (3) 
tonal and speech audiogram as well as tympanometry with con­
tralateral stapedial reflexes performed; and (4) high-resolution 
CT scan performed.
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
607
Table 36.1 HEAR classification for ossicular malformations.
I 
Isolated congenital stapes ankylosis
A, Footplate fixation
B, Stapes suprastructure fixation
II 
Idem + another ossicular chain anomaly
A. Discontinuity of the chain
B. Epitympanic fixation
C. Tympanic fixation
III Congenital anomaly of the ossicular chain but a mobile stapes 
footplate
A  Discontinuity of the chain 
B. Epitympanic fixation 
C  Tympanic fixation
IV Congenita] aplasia or severe dysplasia of the oval or round 
window: aplasia or dysplasia; crossing nerve VII; persistent 
stapedial artery
Further rehabilitation of atresia patients is performed either 
with a surgical correction or with a BAHA. Atresia repair 
surgery should only be performed in carefully selected patients 
after a thorough investigation of all parameters involved. A 
proper selection based on stringent audiological and radiology 
cal criteria is obligatory. Preoperatively, a complete audiometric 
survey is performed, as well as a high-resolution CT scan of the 
temporal bones.
The atresias are classified, according to a modification of 
the classification of Altmann34 (Table 36.2). This classification 
is based on the degree of malformation present. Type II is fur­
ther classified into types Ila and lib according to the tympanic 
bone and the course of the facial nerve35,36 (Figure 36.1) or 
depending on the thickness of the atretic plate.37
As radiological criteria, the scoring system defined by 
Jahrsdoerfer et al38 is recommended.
A meta-analysis of the surgical results published in the last 
30 years39 demonstrated a mean hearing gain of 20-25 dB in
Table 36.2 HEAR classification for congenital atresia of the 
external ear canal
Type I: mild-tympanic membrane is hypoplastic; various kinds of 
ossicular malformations 
Type II: moderate-atretic plate; tympanic cavity is within normal 
limits
Ila: tympanic bone is hypoplastic; course of the facial nerve 
usually normal
lib: tympanic bone is absent; abnormal course of the facial 
nerve
Type III: severe-atretic plate with a severely hypoplastic tympanic 
cavity
atresia type II and 30-35 dB in atresia type I. Surgical correc­
tion is only recommended if postoperative hearing better than 
25-30 dB can be realized. The long-term results remain almost 
unchanged.37 Most frequently, the anterior approach is used to 
open the atretic plate. This type of surgery can be performed 
from the ages of 5 to 6 years. In the literature, no agreement can 
be found on surgery for unilateral cases: some surgeons will not 
operate on these cases, while others wait until the age of 18, so 
that the patient can decide. Patients who do not meet the cri­
teria for surgical intervention should be helped by BAHAs. The 
results of the BAHA show not only a hearing gain in 89%, but 
also better comfort when compared to classical bone conduc­
tion hearing aids.40 Also, the speech discrimination and intelli­
gibility scores are also much better.41,42 The age limit for 
implantation has been set around 5 years in most centres. In 
children, it is performed under general anaesthesia using a two- 
stage procedure: in the first stage, the titanium fixtures (usually 
two) are placed in the bone at the mastoid and 2 months later, 
after osseointegration has taken place, the fixtures are liberated 
and the external hearing aid attached to the bone-anchored 
implant.
Figure 36.1 Classification of atresia type II according to Marquet. (a) Atresia type Ila. Coronal view through the external auditory canal; incomplete bony closure by 
atretic plate (*) formed by squamosal bone and malformed tympanic bone. Abnormal ossicular chain. Normal course of facial nerve in its mastoid segment, (b) 
Atresia type lib. Absence of tympanic bone; incomplete bony closure by atretic plate formed by squamosal and petrous bone (*). Superficial hypotympanum and 
dysplastic ossicular chain. Abnormal anterior course of the facial nerve in its mastoid segment.
  

608 
Auditory disorders and their management
In surgery for minor middle ear anomalies, a postopera­
tive air-bone gap of ^ 2 0 dB may usually he expected in 
most cases.
In surgery for congenital ear atresia, a mean hearing gain 
of 20-25 dB in atresia type 11 and 30-35 dB in atresia type 
I may be expected.
BAHA is a good alternative in patients who do not meet 
the criteria for surgical intervention.
Otosclerosis
Definition
Otosclerosis is a hereditary disease of the otic capsule, character- 
ized by deposits of abnormal bone. About half of the cases are 
assumed to be caused by specific gene defects, with variable pene­
trance and expression. The sites of predilection for otosclerotic 
foci are the fissura ante fenestram, and the round and oval win­
dows. Otosclerotic foci near the oval window may be asympto­
matic, but often result in ankylosis of the stapes footplate, causing 
a conductive hearing loss. Otosclerosis in the cochlear turns or 
vestibulum may result in sensorineural hearing loss and vertigo. 
The clinical expression is most often a mixed hearing loss.
Otosclerosis is a relatively frequent cause of hearing loss. 
Declau et al examined a large series of non-selected temporal 
bones and found histological features of otosclerosis in 2.5% of 
236 temporal bones studied.43 This provides an extrapolated 
clinical prevalence of 0.30-0.38% The pathogenesis is most 
likely multifactorial: hormonal influences, fluoride deficiency, 
viral infection (measles) and genetic deficits are recognized as 
contributing factors.44
Audiometric findings
The characteristic of otosclerotic hearing loss is a progressive, 
bilateral conductive hearing loss, which is often more pro­
nounced in one ear, this difference being maintained over the 
years. An additional sensorineural hearing loss may develop 
later on (due to cochlear involvement, ageing or noise expo­
sure) or may be the only manifestation (Figure 36.2).
The hearing loss in otosclerosis can be explained by a 
reduction in the effectiveness of sound transmission at the 
lower frequencies and increased resonance frequency. In the 
earlier stages of the disease, audiometry shows a progressive low- 
frequency hearing loss, which is often not noticed by the 
patient until it reaches a threshold of about 25 dB. As the 
growth of otosclerotic foci progresses and the footplate becomes 
completely fixed, a stabilization of low-frequency thresholds is 
found, accompanied by a progressive increase of high-frequency 
thresholds and a progressive widening of the air-bone gap. In 
the absence of cochlear involvement, complete fixation of the 
stapes footplate results in a maximum conductive hearing loss 
of 60-65 dB.
However, in many cases the cochlea becomes involved 
in the disease process, and a mixed hearing loss becomes 
apparent.
Fixation of the stapes footplate results in an impaired 
bone conduction response. The audiometric hallmark of oto­
sclerosis is the Carhart notch, characterized by elevation of 
bone conduction thresholds of approximately 5dB at 500 Hz, 
10 dB at 1000 Hz, 15 dB at 2000 Hz and 5dB at 4000 Hz.12 
Importantly, the Carhart notch is a mechanical artefact and 
does not represent the true cochlear reserve; it disappears 
with closure of the air-bone gap after successful surgery, a 
phenomenon known as ‘overclosure’ of the air-bone gap. 
(Figure 36.4).
{a) 
db
(b) 
db 
$  AC threshold
Figure 36.2 Pure tone audiometry of otosclerosis of a mainly conductive hearing loss (a) and of a mainly sensorineural hearing loss (b)
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
609
Speech audiometry in cases with a pure conductive hearing 
loss demonstrates a speech reception threshold in agreement 
with a three-frequency (500-1000-2000 Hz) pure tone average 
(±6dB), and word identification accuracy at suprathreshold 
levels is 90-100%. Abnormalities (on/off phenomenon) or 
absence of acoustical reflexes in the affected ear on ipsi- and 
contralateral stimulation become evident fairly early in the 
disease process.45
It is important to differentiate preoperatively between fixa- 
tion of the malleus and stapes fixation. Causse and Causse 
report that malleus fixation occurs in as many as 10.6% of cases 
of primary stapedectomies.46 Malleus fixation may occur as a 
primary disorder or in association with otosclerosis. A conduc- 
tive hearing loss of 10-15 dB is more often found with isolated 
malleus fixation, and the air-bone gap is seldom more than 30 
dB.47 The presence of a Carhart notch is of no value for differ" 
ential diagnosis, because it may also be seen with malleus 
fixation due to ossicular chain pathology.
Surgical technique
The aim of surgical intervention for otosclerosis is to restore 
sound transmission at the level of the oval window and to 
improve speech understanding. Rosen in 1952 and Shea in 
1958 laid the cornerstones for modem stapes surgery.48
Stapes surgery is based on three major anatomical and 
physiological principles (Figure 36.3):49
* 
At least a small part of the stapes footplate should be 
removed.
■ 
By using a prosthesis, a solid connection should be estab­
lished between the long process of the incus and the 
cochlear fluids beneath the opening, with no adhesion to 
the edges of the oval window niche. 
m 
A watertight seal of the labyrinth at the opening should be 
created in order to avoid fistulization or possible infection.
There has been tremendous variation in surgical techniques for 
stapes surgery over recent years, with variations in the type of 
prosthesis used (Teflon, Teflon-steel), the diameter of the pros­
thesis, and the amount of stapes footplate removed (total 
removal, partial removal or small-hole stapedotomy). The 
advantages and disadvantages of cutting the stapedial tendon, 
the use of grafted material to seal the oval window and the 
employment of laser surgery have all been debated. An in-depth 
discussion of these issues is beyond the scope of this chapter and 
the reader is referred to surgical textbooks for a more detailed 
description.49
The major surgical techniques are ‘stapedectomy’ and 
‘stapedotomy’. The first steps are similar for both procedures. An 
endaural approach with the creation of a tympanomeatal flap is 
advocated. The tympanomeatal flap is elevated until the fibrous 
annulus can be identified. Subsequently, the tympanic mem­
brane is lifted out of the sulcus so that the posterior half can be 
folded forwards over the handle of the malleus. The chorda tym- 
pani is then identified and gently displaced forwards. This is fol­
lowed by the identification of the inducostapedial joint and the 
stapes footplate, which may necessitate a partial removal of the 
bony canal wall. Thereafter, one must carefully verify the pres­
ence of stapes fixation and normal mobility of the malleus. A cal­
ibration rod is now employed to measure the length of the 
prosthesis which is to be used subsequently. The incudostapedial 
joint is then disconnected, followed by fragmentation of the 
posterior and anterior crus of the stapes and removal of the 
stapes superstructure. Some authors advocate preservation of 
the stapes tendon, but this is not universally accepted.
During stapedectomy, the previous steps are followed by 
fracturing of the stapes footplate and gentle removal of the foot­
plate fragments. In order to prevent fistulization, the oval win­
dow may be covered or filled with a soft tissue graft prepared 
from a compressed vein or earlobe fat. A calibrated Teflon or 
steel prosthesis is then placed between the centre of the graft 
and the long process of the incus. The loop of the prosthesis is 
secured around the incus.
With stapedotomy, removal of the crura is followed by fen­
estration of the footplate (small hole technique).50 This is 
achieved by drilling a calibrated hole through the footplate by 
means of micro-instruments,50 a microdrill48,51 or laser.52 The 
hole should be 0.1 mm larger than the prosthesis. The prosthe­
sis is placed in such a way that it enters the hole and encircles 
the long crus of the incus, where it is tightened to avoid 
dislocation.
At the end of the procedure, the tympanomeatal flap is 
turned back and the outer ear canal filled with an earpack.
Difficult or unusual cases may require a specialized 
approach, adopted by the surgeon during the procedure.53
Results of stapes surgery
The results of stapes surgery are considered to be highly suc­
cessful. In the hands of very experienced surgeons, over 90% of 
patients achieve a closure of the air-bone gap to less than 
10 dB.6,54-56 Cremers et al compared differences in hearing gain 
1 year after stapedotomy, partial platinectomy, or total 
stapedectomy for otosclerosis at different frequencies and con­
cluded that hearing gain for air conduction was significantly 
better by an average of 7.4 dB for all frequencies combined, after 
either stapedotomy or partial platinectomy compared to total 
stapedectomy.56
Indications for surgery in otosclerosis
The risk of surgery should be weighed against the expected ben­
efit. Therefore, the air-bone gap should be at least 15 dB and 
there should be a speech discrimination score of 60% or more 
to obtain a good hearing improvement. Surgery might also be 
considered in patients with a severe hearing loss of 90-100 dB 
and without measurable cochlear reserve on speech discrimina­
tion. In those cases, the aim of surgery is to improve hearing to 
a level where a hearing aid may be of help.
Formal contraindications for stapes surgery are:
  

610 
Auditory disorders and their management
Figure 36.3 Schematic surgical technique illustrated with the use of a laserprobe. For details see text. (From Hausler. Laryngorhinootologie 2000; 79(S2): 59-139.“ 
Georg Thieme Verlag)
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
611
* 
a patient unfit for surgery due to the presence of general 
medical disease, especially patients with bleeding disorders 
or an excessively unstable autonomic system
■ 
the presence of an infection in the ear to be operated on 
m 
a tympanic membrane perforation
■ 
chronic otitis media
■ 
tympanosclerosis (because of the likelihood of concomitant 
malleus fixation).
Relative contraindications are:
■ 
a patient with only one hearing ear
■ 
the presence of vertigo and clinical evidence of endolym- 
phatic hydrops or labyrinthine fistula
■ 
congenital malformations of the middle or inner ear, 
because these are associated with an increased risk for 
pre- or postoperative perilymph leakage and sensorineural 
hearing loss.
When treatment counselling is provided to a patient with oto­
sclerosis, the possibilities of surgery or hearing aids should be dis­
cussed. It must be explained that even after an initially successful 
surgical procedure, a progressive worsening of bone conduction 
thresholds may develop as time passes postoperatively. Long­
term worsening of hearing acuity is mainly sensorineural and can 
be attributed to presbyacusis or cochlear otosclerosis. Whereas 
many patients will eventually need a hearing aid in the long 
term, it has been demonstrated that stapes surgery can postpone 
the need for a hearing aid for more than 20 years. In addition, 
some authors have found bone conduction thresholds to be 
maintained better in operated as opposed to unoperated ears.57
Risks of stapes surgery
The major surgical risks of stapes surgery are perilymph fistula 
and sensorineural hearing loss. A perilymph fistula gives rise to 
dysequilibrium and hearing loss, and is associated with an 
increased risk for meningitis. A fistula may develop years after 
the initial procedure.
Postoperative or late sensorineural hearing loss occurred in 
23 of 2521 ears (0.91%) of patients undergoing stapes surgery by 
Marquet.8 Causes of sensorineural hearing loss after stapes 
surgery are perilymph fistula, surgical trauma, noise from surgi­
cal drilling or viral infection. Facial palsy is a rare complication, 
with a reported incidence of 0.1%. It is considered to be an 
idiopathic form of facial palsy without direct trauma to the 
nerve.
Future perspectives
Although small innovations in surgical technique are still pos­
sible, major innovations in the management of patients with 
otosclerosis are likely to be found in the field of molecular biol­
ogy and genetics. Up to now, two genes involved in the devel­
opment of otosclerosis have been discovered and their mode of 
inheritance unravelled.58,59
OTOSCLEROSIS
Otosclerosis is characterized hy a mixed or sensorineural 
hearing loss due to deposition of otosclerotic foci in the 
middle ear and cochlea. Surgery consists of the interposi­
tion of a calibrated piston between the oval window and 
the long process of the incus in order to restore sound 
transmission at the level of the stapes footplate. Both 
stapedotomy and stapedectomy are highly successful in 
most cases, provided that a proper preoperative assess­
ment of the patient and his audiometric and radiological 
data has been performed. Patients considered not to be 
surgical candidates can be fitted with a hearing aid.
Chronic otitis media and its surgical 
management
Definition and approach
Chronic otitis media (COM) is a collective noun for different 
forms of chronic middle ear disease. Middle ear atelectasis, 
adhesive otitis media and chronic otitis media with or without 
cholesteatoma are all part of a chronic (non)-infectious state of 
the middle ear.
The prevalence of COM has decreased over the last 20 
years, due to antibiotic treatment and the use of ventilation 
tubes. The prevalence is estimated to be between 1.5% and 
2.6%.32
COM can lead to infectious complications, including acute 
and chronic mastoiditis, petrositis and intracranial infections. 
The non-infectious sequelae, including chronic perforation of 
the tympanic membrane, ossicular erosion, labyrinthine erosion 
and tympanosclerosis, are major causes of hearing loss.
The decision regarding surgical management of COM 
requires a complete assessment of the patient’s problem. 
Aural discharge and hearing loss are the principal symptoms. 
Sometimes, there may be hardly any hearing loss, because 
the cholesteatoma is itself transmitting sound. Otalgia is 
uncommon. The development of headache, vertigo, fever or 
facial palsy is evidence of complications. Early diagnosis of 
intracranial complications is a prerequisite for a favourable 
outcome.
Otoscopic examination of the ear will reveal the nature of 
the disease. The extent of the disease has to be examined with 
audiological assessment and radiological imaging.
A pure tone audiogram, including air and bone conduction 
with full masking, is essential to evaluate the degree of hearing 
loss and to determine the air-bone gap. In cases in which an 
attempt to improve hearing is being considered, a speech 
audiogram and self-assessment are valuable.
Hearing thresholds vary considerably in cases of COM, 
ranging from normal hearing to a dead ear. The characteristics 
of the hearing loss will significantly influence the possibility of
  

612 
Auditory disorders and their management
surgical hearing improvement and therefore will influence the 
decision-making.
Most patients with COM will present with a conductive 
hearing loss due to tympanic membrane perforation, ossicular 
fixation or destruction and tympanosclerosis.
In addition to the conductive hearing loss, many patients 
have a degree of sensorineural hearing loss.60 Cochlear damage 
has been attributed to the diffusion of toxic products of 
inflammation through the scala tympani via the round window 
membrane.
The anatomy of the temporal bone is well demonstrated by 
CT scanning. Extension of the disease may be observed in a 
case of cholesteatoma, erosion of the ossicular chain is some­
times visible, a labyrinth fistula can be predicted, and intracra­
nial complications can be demonstrated. Chronic inflammatory 
tissue or exudate presents as clouding in the tympanic space or 
mastoid. The specificity of this clouding is very low. CT scan 
and MRI are no adequate substitute for a ‘second look’ opera­
tion in the assessment of cases which have undergone canal 
wall surgery for cholesteatoma.3
Pathophysiology
Middle ear atelectasis is thought to result mainly from long­
standing Eustachian tube dysfunction. One of the main func­
tions of the Eustachian tube is ventilation. Opening of the 
Eustachian tube allows the exchange of gases and equalization 
between the environment and middle ear. The middle ear gases 
also are exchanged via the middle ear mucosa. Bilateral diffu­
sion between the middle ear cavity and the blood may also be 
an important factor in the development of atelectasis, because 
the gas composition of the middle ear basically resembles that 
of venous blood and differs from that of air.61
Aural cholesteatomas are epidermal inclusion cysts of the 
middle ear or mastoid. They contain the desquamated debris 
(keratin) from their keratinizing, squamous epithelial lining.
It is generally accepted that cholesteatomas may be congen­
ital or acquired. Congenital cholesteatomas, by definition, orig­
inate from areas of keratinizing epithelium within the middle ear 
cleft. The pathogenesis of acquired cholesteatomas has been 
debated for more than a century. There are four basic theories:
(1) invagination of the tympanic membrane (retraction pocket);
(2) basal cell hyperplasia; (3) epithelial ingrowth through a per­
foration (migration); and (4) squamous metaplasia of middle ear 
epithelium.
Chronic otomastoiditis without cholesteatoma is marked 
by the presence of irreversible inflammatory changes within 
the middle ear and mastoid. Very frequently, there is a tym­
panic membrane perforation, but the factors that allow acute 
infections within the middle ear and mastoid to develop into 
chronic infections are not clear. Chronic obstruction of the 
attic and antrum with infection may lead to this chronic 
status.
Tympanosclerosis is thought to be a consequence of 
resolved otitis media or trauma, in which acellular hyaline and
calcified deposits accumulate within the tympanic membrane 
and the submucosa middle ear. Osteoneogenesis can occur in 
these lesions, and bone deposition leads to ossicular fixation, 
mainly involving the malleus and incus.
In most patients, these plaques are clinically insignificant 
and cause no or little hearing impairment. Ossicular chain fix­
ation leads to conductive hearing loss, but results of surgical 
treatment are often unpredictable. This significantly influences 
the decision-making concerning surgery.
Secretory otitis media (SOM) is the accumulation of fluid 
in the middle ear cavity behind an intact tympanic membrane 
without symptoms of acute infection. Eustachian tube dysfunc­
tion, failure of ciliary clearance and bacterial invasion in the 
middle ear are responsible factors.
Surgical management
The most important surgical aim in COM is to eradicate the 
pathology that causes the patient’s symptoms of aural discharge 
and hearing loss. This aspect needs a complete and convincing 
explanation to the patient to prevent the development of unre­
alistic expectations, especially concerning hearing improve­
ment. If the pathology is not or incompletely eradicated, 
recurrent or residual pathology will result in complications or 
unsatisfactory hearing improvement in the short and long term.
Decision-making regarding surgery includes many aspects 
of both medical and non-medical importance, and should be 
evidence-based. There are few evidence-based arguments in the 
literature regarding hearing improvement after surgery for 
COM. Critical appraisal of evidence-based medicine in the 
general literature shows little sign that the approach is effective 
and indicates that further rigorous evaluation is a priority.62
In evaluating an ear, the following questions should be 
asked. What is the nature of the disease? What is the extent of 
the disease? Are the ossicles involved? What is the status of 
hearing in the contralateral ear? Do voice and tuning fork tests 
confirm audiometric tests? What is the status of the middle ear 
mucosa? What is the condition of the external ear canal? Is a 
semicircular canal fistula present? What is the status of 
Eustachian tube function?
Prognostic factors influencing the functional outcome of 
tympanoplasty are dry status of the mucosal lining, availability 
of the malleus handle, mastoidectomy, tympanic membrane 
perforation, preoperative air-bone gap, contralateral absence of 
pathology, and younger age.63,64
The primary pathology is the most important determining 
factor in decision-making. If the pathology is aggressive or com­
plications are present or expected in the future (in the case of 
cholesteatoma), surgery is necessary. If the pathology is chronic, 
but no further evolution is expected, other factors will help in 
decision-making. Frequent episodes of aural discharge, aural 
pain or hearing loss can be very annoying for the patient and 
can justify surgery. If hearing loss is the one and only problem 
from a medical point of view, hearing aids can be a very 
effective alternative to surgery.
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
613
Tympanic membrane perforations often cause few symp­
toms. The decision of whether to operate or not is therefore 
based on the potential benefits to the patients: (1) prevention 
of recurrent discharge; (2) hearing improvement; and (3) 
ability to swim.
Frequent episodes of discharge provoke inflammatory 
changes in the middle ear and tympanosclerosis. Postponing 
surgery, e.g. in children, will possibly result in less hearing 
improvement because of these changes, while functional results 
of tympanoplasty are good in the childhood population.65 In 
88% of cases, the surgery resulted in a closed tympanic mem­
brane and a median hearing gain of 10 dB.
In cases of middle ear atelectasis, the tympanic membrane 
becomes retracted onto the promontory and the ossicles, and 
otitis media with effusion is usually coexistent. In atelectatic 
ears, the middle ear space is partially or completely obliterated. 
This results in changes in the mucosa of the middle ear and may 
lead to erosion of the long process of the incus and the stapes 
superstructure.
Middle ear atelectasis may be reversible with ventilation 
tubes. The tympanic membrane can revert to its normal 
position and hearing will improve. Hearing improvement is 
explained by the evacuation of the effusion and by the 
restoration of the normal vibrating function of the tympanic 
membrane.
Cholesteatomas can only be eradicated by surgical resec­
tion. There is, however, a small group of elderly and medically 
unfit patients who are best managed by regular suction 
clearance in the outpatient clinic.
In the early days of chronic ear surgery, radical mastoidec­
tomy, with removal of the incus, malleus and tympanic mem­
brane, was the operation of choice. This proved to be effective as 
a means of eradicating the disease, but was associated with poor 
hearing and a high incidence of chronic discharge. The modified 
radical operation, with preservation of the malleus handle and a 
remnant of drum tissue, was devised to overcome these disad­
vantages. Intact canal wall surgery was introduced by Jansen in 
the late 1950s.66 With this ‘closed technique’, an open cavity 
with its inherent problems could be avoided, functional recon­
struction was facilitated, and the ability to fit a hearing aid in a 
dry ear with a suitable external auditory meatus was improved.
The purpose of surgery is eradication of disease and man­
agement of complications, and, secondarily, reconstruction of 
the middle ear to improve hearing.
Restoration of hearing can be achieved by reconstruction 
of the tympanic membrane and the ossicular chain. The 
long-term audiometric results of this surgery are generally 
disappointing.
After 10 years of follow-up, gain of the air conduction 
between 1 and lOdB was reported.49,67
Ossicular destruction leads to hearing loss. To improve 
hearing, reconstruction of the sound-transmitting chain is 
needed. Whether this reconstruction should resemble the orig­
inal anatomical structures can be debated. In the early 1960s, 
tympano-ossicular allografts were introduced in the field of mid­
dle ear reconstruction. The alleged advantage was the perfect 
anatomical reconstruction ability. This technique was success­
ful in improving hearing when an intact stapes superstructure
Figure 36.4 Pre- (a) and postoperative (b) audiogram of a patient with otosclerosis of the right ear. Note the presence of a Carhart notch at 2000 Hz on the 
preoperative audiogram and an improvement of both air and bone conduction postoperatively (overclosure).
  

614 
Auditory disorders and their management
was present. It was less successful in those ears in which only a 
mobile stapes footplate remained.68
In recent years, collaborative efforts between biomaterial 
scientists and surgeons have led to the manufacture of metals, 
solid and porous polymer materials and a range of ceramic 
materials, specifically designed for implantation. These materi­
als are biotolerant or biocompatible in order not to provoke 
inflammatory reactions or extrusion of the implant.
Audiological results of ossicular reconstruction are very 
variable in the literature, depending mostly on the primary 
pathology, which led to ossicular destruction. An inflammatory 
mucosa, tympanosclerosis, bad Eustachian tube function, 
absence of the malleus and revision surgery were all bad 
prognostic factors influencing the audiological outcome.31
Malleus-to-footplate prostheses seem to provide good 
results compared with other techniques. A high degree of bio­
compatibility and stability and therefore optimal sound transfer 
is responsible for this.21,69
Reconstruction of an eroded incus with a malleus handle 
present and an intact stapes results in a postoperative air-bone 
gap within 20 dB in 85% of cases.70
Malleus ankylosis is an unusual pathology but should be 
systematically assessed during surgery and preferably after sepa­
ration of the incudostapedial joint. A preoperative diagnosis is 
difficult to ascertain. A postoperative air-bone gap smaller than 
lOdB is obtained in 77% of cases in the short term.33
Tympanosclerosis within the middle ear is histologically 
similar to that occurring within the tympanic membrane, but it 
often leads to conductive hearing loss caused by ossicular fixa­
tion. Ossicular reconstruction can be performed in ears with 
tympanosclerosis, but the risk of cochlear damage appears to be 
greater than in other middle ear diseases because of the extensive 
dissection that is required in tympanosclerotic ears.
Surgical mobilization of the ossicular chain results in better 
hearing in the short term. In the long term, tympanosclerosis 
has a tendency to relapse. On the one hand, it is the nature of 
the disease that causes the relapse, but on the other hand, every 
surgical act in the middle ear evokes scar tissue and will 
enhance the process of tympanosclerosis. Therefore, the patient 
should be well informed about the limitations of surgery. The 
surgeon should be conservative in his decision-making, and 
hearing aids should be considered.
SOM or otitis media with effusion are two terms used for 
the chronic condition in which there is an accumulation of 
non-purulent fluid in the middle ear for more than 12 weeks.9 
SOM has its highest prevalence in the first 2 years of life and 
decreases thereafter. It is preceded by acute otitis media in most 
cases. Risk factors for SOM are male gender, bottle feeding, 
contact with other daycare children, allergy, socio-economic 
status, smoking by the mother and viral upper airway 
infections.71
The fluid-containing middle ear results in a conductive 
hearing loss of about 35-40 dB. In rare cases of acute otitis 
media with purulent bulging of the drum, there may be a sen­
sorineural hearing loss, caused by toxic inflammatory agents.
The adverse effects of this hearing loss on the development of 
cognitive, linguistic, auditive and communication skills have 
long been debated.
The otologic sequelae of SOM are perforation of the tym­
panic membrane, COM, tympanosclerosis, adhesive otitis 
media and retraction pockets of the tympanic membrane.
The diagnosis of SOM is made by otoscopy and tympa­
nometry. The hearing loss is assessed by audiometry and 
otoacoustical emissions.
Management of SOM can be medical and surgical. Anti­
biotic treatment is used in the USA, but this is much debated, 
since the effusion in the middle ear is not proven to be due to 
bacterial infection. Surgical treatment is often recommended 
for prompt remediation of the hearing loss and avoidance of 
long-term sequelae. In children younger than 3 years of age, 
who have persistent otitis media, prompt insertion of tympa­
nostomy tubes does not measurably improve developmental 
outcomes at the age of 3 years.44
Insertion of ventilation tubes is the treatment of choice. 
The decision regarding surgical treatment should be postponed 
for several weeks, because the effusion has a tendency to 
resolve by itself. Thus, a balance must be reached between the 
probability of spontaneous resolution versus the sequelae of 
prolonged morbidity and the risk of intercurrent infection. 
Surgery is recommended more often in the autumn, because of 
the high likelihood of exacerbation of the condition during 
winter.
Other, more urgent, indications for surgical intervention, 
regardless of the time of year, relate to structural abnormalities 
of the tympanic membrane that may lead to ossicular erosion 
and cholesteatoma, namely retraction pockets.
The rationale for using tympanostomy tubes is prolonged 
ventilation of the tympanic cavity. The mucosal hyperplasia 
will revert to a more normal condition with aeration.
The efficacy of adenoidectomy for SOM is debated. Chil­
dren with a history of upper airway infections, especially puru­
lent rhinitis, are considered good candidates for adenoidectomy. 
Indeed, adenoidectomy is considered by many authors to be 
disease-modifying.
The first aim of surgery in chronic otits media is cure 
of the diseased middle ear and eradication of the 
pathology.
The perceived hearing improvement will be dependent 
on factors other than the air-bone gap alone.
A correct assessment of the preoperative status, a sound 
judgement of the influencing risk factors and an operative 
plan are essential for the medical and functional out­
come.
Many factors in COM surgery are uncontrolled, e.g. 
Eustachian tube function, mucosal function, scar tissue 
and tympanosclerosis formation during the healing 
process.
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
615
Bone-anchored hearing aids (BAHAs)
Principle
The basic principle of treatment with BAHAs is simple: sound 
vibrations are directly transmitted to the skull bone via a skin- 
penetrating titanium implant and then are further transmitted 
to the cochlea, bypassing the middle ear.40
Bone conduction stimulation of the cochlea results from:
■ 
sound radiation in the external ear canal (predominantly 
the high frequencies)
m 
the inertial response of the middle ear ossicles and the inner 
ear fluids (predominant contribution at the low frequencies)
■ 
the compression response of the inner ear spaces (predomi­
nant response at the middle frequencies).72
For BAHAs, the latter two responses are the most 
important, and the end result will depend on the sensorineural 
functional level of the cochlea. However, sound radiation in 
the ear canal is still possible with the use of the BAHA, which 
does not occlude the external ear canal, and this is one of the 
major benefits of this form of amplification.
For patients with chronic middle and external ear diseases 
and atresias, the use of a conventional bone-conducting hear­
ing aid, fixed on the arms of spectacles or on a headset, usually 
results in poor auditory rehabilitation, for several reasons, e.g.
■ 
low pressure of the sound transducer or movements on the 
mastoid
m 
damping properties of the skin and the subcutaneous tis­
sues, with inconsistency in sound quality
■ 
discomfort from the continuous pressure.73
By using a percutaneous osseointegrated stable titanium 
implant as the fixing point, a BAHA will overcome these dis­
advantages and stimulate the cochlea ipsilaterally and even 
contralaterally by bone conduction. The reported results are 
very good, especially in cases with a pure conductive hearing 
loss in which problems of recruitment, distortion or phonemic 
redundancy are not present.40,60,72 Problems of acoustical feed­
back are not mentioned, but Snik74 demonstrated that a percu­
taneous device gives better results than a transcutaneous 
device.
Disadvantages include the higher costs in comparison to a 
classic air conduction hearing aid, the surgical procedure nec­
essary to implant the titanium fixing screw, and the limited 
power transferred by the bone conductor implant into the skull 
bone. In this way, good results (>90% of the cases successfully 
treated) for hearing losses up to 45 dB pure tone bone conduc­
tion average (0.5-3 kHz) can be obtained with the classic or 
compact sound processor.
For higher hearing losses from 45 to approximately 60 dB 
pure tone bone conduction average (0.5-3 kHz), satisfactory 
functional results can be achieved by using a powerful body- 
worn sound processor connected to the transducer on the 
implant.
Indications
The current criteria for the application of a bone conductor as 
hearing aid include:
1. Sensorineural hearing loss in which the use of a conven­
tional air conduction hearing aid is not possible for reasons 
of recurrent infections associated with the occlusion of the 
external ear canal by the prosthesis, or skin reactions in 
the external ear canal, e.g. contact allergy or eczema 
reaction, making the use of a conventional hearing aid 
impossible.
Congenital malformation with agenesis or atresia of the 
external and/or middle ear structures or acquired stenosis of 
the external meatus. Most of these patients have a major 
conductive or mixed hearing loss with preservation of the 
inner ear function resulting in good bone conduction 
thresholds. In children, the limiting factor is the thickness 
of the dense cortical bone in the temporo-occipital region 
of the skull. High-resolution multiplanar CT scanning and 
the use of three-dimensional image reconstruction for pre­
operative examination together with the use of computer- 
guided navigation during surgery will highly benefit the 
success rate of osseointegration of the implant. In this way, 
early implantation (even before the age of 2 years) will 
make it possible to minimize the delay in speech and lan­
guage development in children with bilateral congenital 
agenesis or atresia of the ear.75 In these cases, the combined 
application of a BAHA and an auricular prosthesis fixed 
onto an osseointegrated implant will not only result in a 
functional benefit but also offer the possibility of a very 
good aesthetic rehabilitation with major psychoemotional
Figure 36.5 Schematic view of the BAHA in place.
  

616 
Auditory disorders and their management
Figure 36.6 The acoustical pathways to the 
cochlea, when stimulated by air conduction 
(ac), bone conduction (be), and direct bone 
conduction (dbc). Note the bypass of external 
and middle ear achieved by bone conduction 
hearing devices. (From Huttenbrink. 
Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2001; 34:
315- 35.66)
Figure 36.7 The maximum output level of the BAHA Classic 300 and the BAHA 
Cordelle. pN micro Newtons. (From Huttenbrink. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 
2001;34:315-35.66)
benefits. Moreover, for the patients using eyeglasses, a sta­
ble support can be offered. 
It should be emphasized that 
for cases of ear malformation, a BAHA can be a temporary 
solution that neither damages the inner ear nor excludes 
the possibility of functional tympano-ossicular surgery 
when the child is older, provided that the anatomical 
conditions are favourable.61
3* Otosclerosis or chronic middle ear pathology (e.g. 
cholesteatoma) in a unilateral hearing patient, in whom the 
risk of failure of surgical intervention, e.g. a stapedotomy 
operation, is complete deafness.77 When the sensorineural 
hearing threshold of the inner ear is preserved and the con­
ductive hearing loss becomes too high, the use of a bone 
conductor will give better functional results and resolve the 
discomfort of the classical hearing aid, e.g. the distortion
and the tendency to provoke acoustical feedback or Larsson 
effect.
4. Major radical mastoidectomy cavities, with which the use 
of the conventional hearing aid is not possible for a number 
of reasons: the acoustical features of the cavity (uncontrol­
lable feedback when using an air conduction aid); humidity 
resulting in recurrent foul-smelling ear discharge and 
responsible for recurrent technical problems of a standard 
AC aid.
Newer recent indications for BAHA are :
* 
Congenital or acquired unilateral deafness as, for example, 
after resection of an acoustical neuroma, where the applica­
tion of a BAHA will contribute to the restoration of the 
stereophonic aspects of hearing. The audiological results of 
such an application remain premature and too limited to 
lead to definite conclusions, but the initial subjective reac­
tions of patients suggest significant satisfaction, especially if 
the delay between onset of the unilateral deafness and the 
commencement of the use of a BAHA is short.
■ 
Bilateral use of a BAHA in cases of bilateral moderate and 
severe conductive or mixed hearing loss with symmetric 
sensorineural thresholds after, for example, chronic middle 
ear pathology with persistent intermittent ear discharge 
even after several surgical interventions.78 The advantage of 
bilateral application has been found in better localization of 
sound in space, resulting in stereophonic hearing. In quiet, 
the speech recognition threshold was 3-6 dB better for a 
binaural BAHA than for a monaural application. In noise, 
the results show a significant difference in speech recogni­
tion threshold between monaural and binaural BAHA 
application, depending on the localization of the noise and 
the side of initial fitting.79-81
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
617
Surgery
The use of a pure titanium implant screw as the fixing point is 
best suited to guarantee a sure osseointegration. The place­
ment is performed following a standard method of controlling 
the forces exerted with maximum cooling during drilling, tap­
ping the screwthread and inserting the titanium implant 
device, in order to keep the heat production as low as possible 
to prevent osseolysis at the site of implantation and allow the 
process of osseointegration. The location of the implant site is 
determined by use of a BAHA dummy and, if possible, by 
using a peroperative image-guiding navigation system.
This latter technique offers a special benefit in cases of con­
genital malformation, in which the skull bone is often very 
irregular and thin in some places. During the implantation pro­
cedure, contamination of the titanium surface of the implant 
device by contact with metal material other than titanium has 
to be avoided. Therefore, one part of the surgical equipment is 
manufactured out of pure titanium and will be separated from 
the other tools during the entire surgical intervention. On the 
other hand, a low-speed drilling motor, with controlled force, is 
absolutely necessary.
The surgical intervention can be performed under general 
or local anaesthesia, during a short stay in hospital (±2 days).
To fit the hearing aid to the implant screw, a percutaneous 
device, the so-called ‘abutment’, has been developed and pro­
duced in pure titanium. This abutment has a special design, ini­
tially adapted for a so-called ‘bayonet’-connection. Currently, 
however, a completely different, so-called ‘snap’-connection, is 
used to guarantee stable and fixed positioning of the hearing aid 
with guaranteed holding forces, but safe loosening capacities in 
response to accidental forces on the hearing aid, and also 
allowing safe removal.
During surgical implantation, a skin modification with 
reduction of the subcutaneous tissue at the implant site has to 
be performed to get an area of hair-free skin with close adher­
ence to the periosteum in order to diminish the skin mobility 
around the abutment. In this way, reduced accumulation of skin 
debris will prevent the intrusion of an infection around the 
implant, which could be responsible for the extrusion and loss 
of the implant screw.
In most cases, the implantation of the screw and the adap­
tation of the skin is actually performed in one stage. In cases 
where the osseointegration could be at risk (e.g. in very young 
children or patients with a congenital atresia or radiated skull 
bone area), a two-stage procedure may be used. In the former 
two situations, a longer delay (usually at least 6 months) before 
loading the implant is necessary.
Loading of the implant can be performed safely after com­
pleted osseointegration, which takes 3-4 months, although in 
practice a tendency exists to perform loading at an earlier stage.
To guarantee the best chance of good osseointegration and 
stable fixation of the implant in the long term, implant location 
in dense cortical skull bone is necessary. This will not only 
result in stable positioning of the hearing aid, but also give
Figure 36.8 The BAHA Compact with snap coupling and the percutaneous 
abutment and fixture screw.
Figure 36.9 Schematic view of the abutment for snap coupling and the skin 
adaptation.
better functional results. In order to achieve this, the use of 
high-resolution multiplanar CT scanning, with three-dimen­
sional imaging and preoperative planning, together with the use 
of intraoperative computer-guided navigation, can be helpful.
Contraindications
The following limitations mitigate against an optimal result:
■ 
pure tone average bone conduction thresholds (0.5-3 kHz) 
worse than 60 dB HL
■ 
age less than 2 years.
  

618 
Auditory disorders and their management
Results
The surgical procedure is minor, well established and almost 
risk-free.40 A success rate of 97% for osseointegration has been 
reported.60
Skin-penetrating abutments cause only a few cases of 
adverse skin reactions, which are mostly temporary and can be
i
j
 
.i 
40,60
resolved easily.
If necessary, the removal of the skin-penetrating coupling 
can be performed without anaesthesia and without future 
complications.
The subjects’ positive opinions about the BAHA were con­
firmed by results obtained from both patients’ questionnaires 
and audiological tests.40,60,72,79
Mylanus et al82 demonstrated a small but significant 
improvement in the speech recognition in noise test. This 
improvement was related to the size of the air-bone gap: the 
greater the air-bone gap, the poorer the results with 
conventional air conduction hearing aids.
The contribution to improvement in quality of life of 
BAHAs, compared with conventional hearing aids, for hearing- 
impaired patients with chronically draining ears, malformed 
ears, or otosclerosis or tympanosclerosis can be characterized by:
m 
improvement of the quality of sound 
m 
improved comfort
* 
better appearance
■ 
diminished risk for ear infections, improving healing of 
ongoing chronic ear infection.
Conclusions
Currently, the use of a BAHA can fulfil the criteria for a valu­
able surgical treatment for specifically selected problems of 
hearing rehabilitation, not only for adults but also for chil­
dren.75,83,84 Although some shortcomings, such as problems with 
the telephone, wind noise and hearing speech in noise, are 
reported, there are many practical, acoustical, psychological 
and medical benefits reported by patients.85 A significant qual­
ity of life benefit has been demonstrated by Arunachalam, who 
measured the result of the BAHA surgical intervention using 
the Glasgow Benefit Inventory. The maximum benefit was 
noted in patients with congenital atresias followed by discharg­
Figure 36.10 The abutment for snap coupling on the left, the Compact BAHA 
in place on the right photograph.
ing mastoid cavities. The general benefit score was comparable 
to that with middle ear surgery, but just below the benefit from 
cochlear implant.86
Actual experiences based on long-term follow-up in many 
patients are leading to the introduction of new indications for 
BAHA application which seem to offer satisfactory results.
Some of them, e.|. the use of BAHAs in pure sensorineural 
hearing impairment 
or in unilateral conductive or mixed 
hearing loss,88 are only pilot studies.
More and more ENT doctors and patients are becoming 
familiar with this specialized hearing aid. Possible develop­
ments for the future are miniaturization and semi-implantable 
bone-conducting devices, percutaneous electrical coupling, and 
a BAHA for tinnitus suppression.75
Bone-anchored hearing aids use bone conduction stimu­
lation of the cochlea. The end result will depend on the 
sensorineural functional level of the cochlea.
The application of the BAHA needs a surgical procedure, 
which is minor, well established and almost risk-free. The 
high success rate is based on the process of osseointegra­
tion of a titanium fixture screw and the use of a titanium 
skin-penetrating abutment.
Bypassing the external and middle ear structures, the 
classical indications for application of the BAHA are the 
cases with a pure conductive hearing loss, e.g. in con­
genital agenesis of the external and middle ear struc­
tures, otosclerosis or chronic middle ear pathology (e.g. 
cholesteatoma) in a unilateral hearing patient.
However, all cases, even those with a sensorineural hear­
ing loss, in which the use of a conventional air conduc­
tion hearing aid is not possible are potential indications 
for the use of a BAHA.
Based on the good functional results and the high patient 
satisfaction, newer indications are found in: congenital or 
acquired unilateral deafness (e.g. after resection of an 
acoustical neuroma) and in the bilateral application for 
patients with bilateral moderate and severe conductive 
or mixed hearing loss with symmetrical sensorineural 
thresholds (e.g. chronic middle ear pathology with persis­
tent intermittent ear discharge even after several surgical 
interventions).
Cochlear implantation
The concept
Cochlear implantation is a method designed to improve the 
communication abilities of severely hearing-impaired people 
with bilateral cochlear dysfunction, who derive little or no ben­
efit from amplified sound through traditional hearing aids.
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
619
CIs have evolved into an accepted standard of care for 
severely to profoundly hearing-impaired adults and children.89
A Cl is a partially implantable neurostimulator of the 
cochlear nerve, replacing the organ of Corti and hence bypass­
ing the outer, middle and inner ear. It comprises an internal sur­
gically implantable part—the implant—and an external part 
consisting of a microphone system, a speech processor, a battery 
compartment empowering the Cl and an emitting coil (Figure 
36.11).
For nearly a decade, the intracochlear multichannel Cl has 
become the widely accepted auditory prosthesis for both adults 
and children with a severely dysfunctional or failing organ of 
Corti.90,91 The vast majority of these patients derive substantial 
benefit, especially when used in conjunction with (cued) 
speech reading according to the NIH Consensus Statement.92 It 
has to be stressed that access to optimal educational and reha­
bilitation services is important to adults and critical to children 
in order to maximize the benefits available from cochlear 
implantation.
Therefore, the Cl is not just a device or a surgical inter­
vention, but has evolved over 30 years into a whole concept of 
care for the person with a failing organ of Corti.
Owing to the driving force of technical improvement and 
the reliability of many implants, the concept of cochlear 
implantation and holistic rehabilitation has dramatically 
changed the approach to the severe to profoundly hearing 
impaired person and has led to an enormous amount of scien­
tific research concerning every aspect of ear, hearing, hearing 
impairment, deafness, rehabilitation and technical innova­
tions.89,93 Indeed, every progress in this field can eventually be 
implemented in the Cl care programme, leading to improved 
communication skills.
The importance of technological innovation is demon­
strated by the substantial improvement of auditory capacities of 
Cl users. Moreover, the success of CIs is evidenced by the very 
low rate of non-users.94
An overview of working principles, candidate selection and 
results in terms of expressive and receptive speech outcomes is 
given.
Figure 36.11 Postoperative X-ray Medel Combi 40+ electrode array in place in 
the cochlea.
Schematic functioning and place of Cl surgery
CIs replace the inner and outer hair cell function, by trans­
forming sound and speech to meaningful electrical stimulation 
of the dendrites and the ganglion cells of the spiral ganglion. 
Table 36.3 summarizes the addresses of the major Cl companies. 
Figure 36.11 represents a schema of a CL
First, the sound is captured by a microphone, which sends 
the signal to the speech processor. At this level, initial process­
ing, designated as pre-processing, occurs. A novel example of 
processing development is the two-microphone noise reduction 
system,95 as enhancing the signal-to-noise ratio by 10 dB. The 
microphone is most often fitted behind the ear, but may be 
remote, using a microphone coupled with an FM system.
The speech processor converts the microphone signal to a 
digital code of instructions for the implanted neurostimulator. 
The operating program of the speech processor executes the 
speech-coding strategy, i.e. the way in which sound is converted
Table 36.3 General Information on Cochlear Implant Companies
Medel 
Cochlear
Advanced Bionics
M X M .
Name of implant
Origin
Company
Combi 4 0 +
Austria
Medel
Fiirstenweg 77a 
6020 Innsbruck 
Austria
Tel: 43/512/288389 
Fax: 43/512/293381
Cl 24R
Australia
Cochlear A,G. 
Margarethenstrasse 47 
4053 Basel 
Switzerland 
Tel: 41/61/050404 
Fax: 41/61/050405
CLARION Ctl Bionic Ear system 
USA
Advanced Bionic Corp.,
12740 San Fernando Road,
Sylmar, CA 91342,
USA
Tel: 1/818/3627588
Fax: 1/818/3625069
E-mail: info@advancedbionics.com
europe@advancedbionics.com
Digisonic DX10 
France
Laboratoires M.X.M, 
Les Mimosas 
Quartier Croix Rouge 
06600 Antibes 
France
Tel: 33/93331413 
Fax: 33/93335376
  

620 
Auditory disorders and their management
into electrical signals for the brain to interpret. The speech cod­
ing has to deliver a combination of temporal and spectral infor­
mation that is optimal for the Cl user. Although physiological 
data of a normally hearing ear are fundamental, they are not 
necessarily optimal96 or even exploitable97 for the affected audi­
tory system and, moreover, may not even be similar for all
. 
_ 98
patients.
All the speech-processing systems pass the signal through a 
filter bank, mimicking the simultaneous tonotopy of passive fil­
tering of the cochlea. The active cochlear amplifier and the sto­
chastic stimulation of the nerve fibres which occur in normal 
cochlear nerves, however, are more difficult to replicate. Adap­
tations, e.g. amplitude enhancement, jitter-like stimulation, 
background noise injection64 and signal interaction cancelling 
(G. F. Smoorenburg, personal communication), are possible 
future refinements currently under investigation.
Physically, the speech processor, together with the battery 
compartment, is built into a body-worn device, or a behind-the- 
ear (BTE) processor. In the latter case, the microphone system 
is also included in the BTE. Progress is to be expected in battery 
technology, allowing further miniaturization of the BTE. The 
use of BTE speech processors has improved both the comfort of 
and acceptance by the patient.99
Via an RF link between the external emitting coil and the 
receiving internal coil, the information and the power are 
transmitted to the internal part of the device, which is the sur­
gically implanted part of the CL To improve the information 
transfer, resolutions are developed enhancing the artificial 
intelligence of the implant and allowing more transfer capacity 
for the fluctuation of the captured sound. The implanted part of 
the device itself has no battery. The electronic and neurostim­
ulator part is embedded in a recess drilled in the skull in the 
retroauricular region. Owing to smaller receiving coils in the 
implant, minimal invasive approaches can be used with smaller 
retroauricular incisions of 3-4 cm.100 This makes it feasible to 
perform this surgery with only an overnight hospital stay, or as 
a day case depending on the facilities in the hospital.
The electrode array carries 12-24 independent electrodes. 
The electrode array is brought into the scala vestibuli of the 
cochlea, each electrode corresponding to a certain tonotopi- 
cally (frequency-to-place relationship) defined frequency 
region. High tones correspond with electrodes located at the 
basal part of the array, and low tones with those at the apical 
part. The approach to the scala tympani is through a mas­
toidectomy and a posterior tympanotomy (Figure 36.12). There 
is also experience with a retroauricular, transcanal approach or a 
supralabyrinthine approach. The electrodes are sequentially 
activated using pulsatile electric signals, or they are activated 
simultaneously with analog electrical signals. The most common 
technique is the former, but a significant part of the fine structure 
information is lost in this way. The latter has the disadvantage of 
channel interaction of the instantaneous electrical fields.62
The stimulation mode may be hybrid, in which case the 
lower tones are stimulated in an analog way, while the higher 
frequencies are stimulated in a digital way.
Minimal invasive surgery
Tonotopic intra-cochlear 
stimulation
Figure 36.12 Intracochlear position of an electrode array.
An increase in efficacy of conveying the electrical current 
to the remaining nerve fibres in the spiral ganglion is achieved 
by the application of so-called ‘modiolar hugging’ electrodes 
facing the cochlear neural compartment. This is achieved by 
the intrinsic shape characteristics of the electrode, or by the 
addition of an electrode-positioning system (Figure 36.13). 
Lower stimulation thresholds and less across-patient variability 
have been reported.101
The Cl can not only stimulate the nerve, but can also col­
lect information about the functionality of the system by back 
telemetry. For instance, electrode impedances and Cl charac­
teristics can be analysed. Using the Cl, the electrically evoked 
compound action potentials can be recorded from activated spi­
ral ganglion cells stimulated by the same CI. A customized algo­
rithm 
(Neural 
Response 
Telemetry, 
NRT) 
has 
been 
implemented in the CI24 for clinical and research use.102,103 
This allows for peroperative checking of the integrity of the 
implant, the intracochlear neural system and the correct func­
tioning of the device. Experiments have demonstrated that the 
use of NRT will be helpful for the fitting procedures (G. F. 
Smoorenburg, personal communication).104,10
The fitting procedure itself commences about 4 weeks after 
cochlear implantation and is integrated into the auditory reha­
bilitation. Threshold levels (T-levels) and maximal comfortable 
levels (C-levels) are defined in several fitting sessions, and the 
pitch and loudness perception eventually adjusted.
Complications of CIs, including device failure, occur in 
0.9-10% over a 10-year period. Especially for parents of small
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
621
Figure 36.13 Radiological image of a perimodiolar Contour electrode array.
children, re implantation is an emotionally loaded event, and 
has to be anticipated when discussing CIs.
Cochlear implant candidacy
The general condition for candidacy for cochlear implantation is 
the presence of bilateral severe-to-profound hearing impairment 
not obtaining sufficient benefit from optimal conventional hear­
ing aids. There should also be no formal medical or 
(neuro)anatomopathological contraindications, evidence that 
oral communication will be used, and the presence of favourable 
mental and social conditions to participate in an active 
rehabilitation programme. These include realistic expectations. 
When considering CIs, an elaborate and comprehensive 
multidisciplinary evaluation is set up.
It is argued that non-aided auditory thresholds cannot rep­
resent the only auditory criterion. Aided speech recognition 
tests after following a rehabilitation programme have to be 
included.106,107 As a general guideline for adults, the mean 
thresholds at 500, 1 and 2 kHz of the better-hearing ear should 
be worse than 85 dB HL, and maximal aided speech recognition 
for spondee lists should be 40% or less.
If the hearing is better than these criteria, the domain of 
experimental exploration of the limits of Cl is entered and, 
occasionally, a conventional hearing aid might be better or at 
least as good.
In prelingual children, conventional hearing aids are nearly 
always fitted first and an intensive course of auditory training is 
initiated. If it becomes clear after at least 3 months that the 
child has no benefit, a Cl can be considered. Specific tools to 
monitor the progress of sound production, auditory capabilities
and communication development are instrumental for this
108-110
assessment.
The actual minimal age for cochlear implantation accord­
ing to FDA regulations is 18 months. Many children younger 
that 18 months and even 12 months, however, have been 
implanted. As claimed by studies with hearing aids, it is 
expected that cochlear implantation in these very young chil­
dren may produce a better result than later implantation. As 
results become available, it will be clear whether the warnings 
of some groups of educators are well founded.111
From a theoretical viewpoint, the hearing loss should be 
due primarily to outer and inner hair cell failure. Although a 
good neural reserve seems to predict better outcome, the link 
between ganglion population counts and speech intelligibility is 
weak. Moreover, the majority of severely to profoundly hearing- 
impaired patients still have enough neural reserve in order to 
benefit from cochlear implantation. Even in specific conditions, 
e.g. congenital malformations112 or auditory neuropathy,113 
cochlear implantation provided substantial benefit. In the 
absence of any auditory nerve, such as in neurofibromatosis, 
direct electrical stimulation of the cochlear nuclei with 
auditory brainstem implants (ABIs) can result in improved 
communication.
An important element in candidacy is the evidence that 
the patient will comply with the fitting procedure, will use oral 
communication with the implant and, especially for children, 
will follow an intensive rehabilitation programme.
A number of conditions deserve special attention, and may 
influence the decision of the multidisciplinary implant team on 
whether or not to implant the patient.
The first one is severe to profound hearing impairment due 
to bacterial meningitis. A considerable risk exists of endo- 
cochlear bone formation (labyrinthitis ossificans). This condi­
tion is also characterized by a more extensive loss of ganglion 
cells. Once this process is observed on high-resolution CT scan, 
cochlear implantation is an emergency. In the case of a blocked 
scala vestibuli due to labyrinthitis ossificans, specific drill-outs 
to embed the electrode arrays and implants with split electrode
i t  
68,114,115
carriers may overcome the problem.
On average, the results will be significantly inferior than 
with cochlear implantation in normal patent cochleae.
The second situation is bilinguism at home and/or at 
school. At least a sufficient amount of auditory training and 
stimulation has to be provided in order to obtain benefit from 
cochlear implantation.110 Some studies have shown better audi­
tory skills with pure auditory-verbal training. On the other 
hand, mixed education, including the acquisition of sign 
language, has advantages from the total relational viewpoint, 
and studies have not shown inferior speech development.116 
This approach allows children to belong to both worlds, the 
hearing world and the deaf community. The third situation is 
the case of a second implant, creating a bilateral Cl. Prelimi­
nary results show increased patient satisfaction and increased 
speech recognition in noise. It is not clear, and certainly not in 
all patients, whether this increased speech understanding is the 
result of head shadow effects, or whether there is a true dichotic 
or squelch effect. In conventional hearing aids, bilateral use has
  

622 
Auditory disorders and their management
been shown to result in improved speech understanding in 
difficult listening conditions.
Results
The outcomes in prelingually deaf children and postlingually 
deaf adults are fundamentally different. Both situations have to 
be discussed separately.
Among postlingual adults, the majority of Cl patients 
demonstrate clearly increased open-set speech recognition as 
early as 3 months post-fitting.117,118 Further improvement in per­
formance may extend over a time course of 3-4 years. Many 
series show mean open-set speech understanding for sentences 
of >80%, with ceiling effects occurring in the test material. For 
this reason, more difficult listening tests have been developed, 
in particular speech-in-noise. Preoperative prognostic factors 
predicting auditory capacity outcome are mainly duration of 
deafness and hearing level.119 Old age is not a contraindication, 
but the potential for rehabilitation and relearning may be 
diminished. There are no studies showing whether intensive 
speech therapy improves the result in comparison with fitting 
sessions and aural communication.
Speech tests best predicting the Cl speech recognition out­
come are the monosyllable tests. In properly selected postlin­
gual candidates, scores range from 10% to 70%, with a mean of 
40-50%.107'118
Progress and evolution in congenital and prelingually 
implanted children are followed up by evaluating auditory func­
tion (speech reception),109 and expressive capabilities (speech 
production). In comparison with conventional hearing aids, 
both aspects of speech improve significantly after cochlear 
implantation, as shown in many studies.110,120
If no other handicaps exist or develop, severely and pro­
foundly hearing-impaired children implanted before the age of
2 years can follow mainstream education at the age of 5 years. 
The majority of children implanted before the age of 5 years 
with oral language as their sole means of communication will 
develop significant and usable open-set speech perception.121 
Implantation at a young age and oral communication were the 
most important determinants of later speech perception in one 
study.110
Regular testing for developmental retardation is mandatory, 
as in some series up to 50% of the severely or profoundly hear­
ing-impaired children eventually develop a selective or more 
general developmental deficit. When children with congenital 
or prelingual profound hearing impairment are implanted at an 
older age, the results become less favourable. When prelingually 
profoundly hearing-impaired children have reached the age of 
10 years, patients may exceptionally be allowed onto the Cl 
programme after very extensive counselling. This does not 
apply to the congenitally hearing-impaired patients who have 
substantial benefit from conventional hearing aids but who suf- 
ferred, at a later age, further deterioration of their hearing. They 
appear to have fairly good outcomes.
Cochlear implantation bypasses the inner ear.
Candidate selection is not merely based on non-aided 
auditory thresholds, but aided speech recognition tests in 
quiet and in noise after a rehabilitation period may be 
decisive.
The vast majority of severely or profoundly hearing- 
impaired persons can benefit from cochlear implantation. 
Cochlear implantation restores hearing in 80% of 
postlingually deaf adults to a level allowing normal con­
versation, using the telephone and even understanding in 
a limited amount of background noise.
Congenitally severely or profoundly hearing-impaired 
children implanted before the age of 2 years will outper­
form patients operated on at a later age.
Cochlear implantation is not just a technique, but the 
driving force behind an elaborate care programme for the 
severely hearing-impaired patient.
Implantable electronic devices for 
sensorineural hearing loss
Description
Conventional hearing aids continue to have important limita­
tions, even when vigorous patient selection and device adapta­
tion is used. Many patients with sensorineural hearing loss 
(SNHL) paradoxically avoid the use of a hearing aid. Apart 
from psychological factors, distortion of the sounds amplified by 
the device is often cited as a major reason for this attitude. The 
presence of a hearing aid in the external ear canal is described 
as uncomfortable, cosmetically unacceptable and stigmatizing. 
Occlusion may cause external otitis or wax accumulation. 
Acoustical transmission of amplified sound has several limita­
tions. Acoustical feedback phenomena occur at high frequen­
cies and high intensities. A small receiver has large distortions 
at low frequencies. These problems degrade speech understand­
ing and limit the gain that can be achieved with conventional 
hearing aids.
The design of a hearing aid that does not use acoustical 
transmission of sound and is preferably totally implantable 
would probably meet the needs of a large population of patients 
with SNHL.
Advantages over conventional hearing aids 
and principles of functioning
Implantable electronic devices transmit acoustical sound to the 
cochlea as a mechanical vibration, in most cases applied to the 
ossicular chain; they are therefore often referred to as ‘direct 
drive’ transducers. A piezoelectric element, electromagnetic
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
623
force or even hydrostatic force can generate the mechanical 
vibration.
Obviously, these systems make occlusion of the external ear 
canal and the use of sound speakers unnecessary, and therefore 
appear user-friendlier and promise better quality of amplified 
hearing.
The coupling of the driving element of these devices to the 
ossicular chain is a critical issue.
Our knowledge of the micromechanics of the normal ossic- 
ular chain as a sound transducer is evidently incomplete. These 
notions nevertheless are equally or even more important than 
considerations of technical and surgical feasibility when a 
coupling system is designed. The mass load effect of a device, 
the direction of force transmission to the ossicular chain 
and the condition of the interface between implant and ossicle 
in the long term are issues still under evaluation today.66
Types of implants currently available for 
clinical implantation
Four types of implants are currently available for clinical use 
under FDA and/or CE approval.
The Vibrant Soundbridge (Symphonix Devices, San Jose, 
California, USA) is a semi'implantable device consisting of an 
electromagnetically driven transducer (also called ‘floating mass 
transducer’), which is attached to the long process of the incus. 
The internal receiver of the device is implanted in a recessed 
seat in the temporal fossa, similar to a Cl. A wire links the 
internal receiver to the floating mass transducer. A mastoidec- 
tomy with posterior tympanotomy is necessary for exposition of 
the long process of the incus, to which the floating mass trans- 
ducer is attached. The audio processor is worn externally like 
the external coil of a Cl, and is coupled to the internal receiver 
by telemetry (Figure 36.14).
The Totally Implantable Communication Assistance 
device (TICA, Implex AG, Munchen, Germany) picks up 
sounds transcutaneously in the external ear canal and trans­
forms them into microvibrations that are delivered to the ossic­
ular chain. The microphone is a membrane sensor implanted in 
the posterior bony external ear canal, underlying the canal skin. 
The transducer is a piezoelectric element, which allows mini- 
mal power consumption, and is implanted in a mastoidectomy 
cavity. The processor module and battery are implanted subcu- 
taneously in the postauricular skin. It is plug-connected to the 
transducer and microphone and can be replaced separately. The 
battery lifetime is 3-5 years and expected to become longer 
with technical progress. The battery is an accumulator cell that 
has to be transcutaneously recharged by induction. The trans­
ducer has a titanium rod that can be coupled to the long incus 
process with a clip or directly to the body of the incus. Coupling 
to a piston prosthesis, the stapes head or perilymph directly is 
under development. A titanium micromanipulator is inte­
grated into the transducer, and allows safe manipulation 
and application of the titanium rod to the ossicular chain 
(Figure 36.15).
Figure 36.14 The Vibrant Soundbridge system.
The Otologics Middle Ear Transducer (MET, Otologics, 
Boulder, Colorado, USA) consists of an external audio 
processor which is worn on the skin overlying the temporal 
fossa, and an internal receiver-transducer that drives an alu­
minium oxide probe that is coupled to the incus body. The 
electromagnetic transducer is mounted into a atticomas- 
toidectomy cavity. A hole is made in the body of the incus 
with a laser, and a micrometer screw is used to position the 
probe in this hole. The receiver capsule with electronics is 
embedded in a temporal fossa seat, much like is done in 
cochlear implant surgery (Figure 36.16).
The Soundtec Direct Hearing System (Soundtec Inc., 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA) consists of an external 
and an internal portion. The external part carries a 
microphone and a sound processor connected to an elec­
tromagnetic coil; it can be worn in the ear canal or 
behind the ear with a custom ear canal mould in which
  

624 
Auditory disorders and their management
the coil is incorporated. The internal part is a magnet 
that 
is 
attached 
to 
the incudostapedial joint (Figure
3 6.17). It can be implanted through a transmeatal tympan­
otomy.
Patient selection criteria
Only adult patients are selected for Vibrant Soundbridge 
implantation today. There should be an SNHL loss, which is 
not of retrocochlear origin. Middle ear anatomy must be nor­
mal, and there should be no air-bone gap greater than lOdB at 
two or more frequencies at 0.5, 1,2 and 4 kHz. The hearing loss 
must be stable in time. The use of a conventional hearing aid 
must be contraindicated for medical reasons or rejected by the 
patient after optimal fitting and a reasonable period of use. The 
pure tone unaided hearing levels of the fitted ear must lie 
within the boundaries given in Figure 36.18. Speech under­
standing should be at least 50% in open-set word tests at the 
most comfortable listening level.
For the TICA device, selection criteria include the lack of 
benefit from conventional hearing aids, a normal volume of the 
mastoid as evaluated with Schuller’s radiograph, and SNHL 
levels within the boundaries shown in Figure 36.19.
Speech intelligibility test scores are not included in the cri­
teria. Although only patients with pure SNHL have been 
implanted until today, coexistent conductive hearing loss will 
probably not remain an exclusion criterion, since the company 
is developing coupling devices to stapes head, piston prosthesis 
or perilymph.
The selection criteria for the MET implant include adult 
patients with SNHL, no signs of conductive or retrocochlear 
hearing loss, and no history of recurrent otitis media. The hear­
ing loss must be stable, of postlingual onset and lie within the 
limits given in Figure 36.20.
Patients should have realistic expectations of their device’s 
benefit.
The Soundtec aims at patients of 18 years or older, with 
normal middle ear anatomy and function (bone thresholds 
within lOdB of air thresholds), who have an SNHL within the
Figure 36.17 The Soundtec Direct Hearing system.
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 36.18 Audiological selection criteria for Vibrant Soundbridge.
dB ISO 
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 36.19 Audiological criteria for TICA: a maximum hearing loss of 30 dB 
at 0.5 kHz and 90 dB at 3 kHz and higher, with a slope of 30 dB or more between 
0.5 and 2 kHz.
limits of what is defined in Figure 36.21. The SNHL should be 
stable over the last 2 years, and there is also a speech 
discrimination score criterion.
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
625
Results
There are several reports by different European centres on 
results after implantation of the Vibrant Soundbridge sys­
tem.71,122-124 All of these reports concern rather small series of 
patients, the largest being a series of 34.124 A multicentre audio­
metric results report (on a total number of 63 patients) has been 
published.125 In this report, an overall conclusion states that 
most of the patients clearly benefited from the Vibrant Sound­
bridge, with, however, a subgroup of patients experiencing a 
low gain (at threshold or at conversational sound level) that 
could not be explained by their preoperative degree of hearing 
impairment. Speech recognition scores after implantation are 
comparable to results obtained with conventional hearing aids, 
with, however, a large spread of results. Unsatisfactory results in 
some of the patients are attributed to problems with positioning 
and fixation of the floating mass transducer, as well as to subop- 
timal programming of the audio processor. With regard to the 
subjective evaluation of sound quality after implantation, 
patients report undistorted hearing resulting in a better speech 
understanding even in situations with loud background noise.124
Since the TICA device has only been implanted clinically 
in one centre until now,126 reports are only available from that 
centre. The most recent summary of their results on 20 
implanted patients mentions a statistically significant increase 
of monosyllabic word recognition score as well as in sentence 
recognition in quiet and in the presence of noise, when the sys­
tem is compared with the unaided preoperative status.127
The MET implant system has only recently entered the 
phase of multicentre clinical study. The phase I FDA clinical 
trial results indicate good tolerance of the implant with superior 
sound quality, but a need for higher amplification. The output 
of the implant now in phase II study has therefore been 
increased.
There are three studies available, performed by two differ­
ent centres, which report on the results of clinical implantation 
of the Soundtec system.70,128,129 Results of, respectively, 10, 5 
and 23 implanted subjects suggest a considerable gain over tra­
ditional hearing aids, especially in the high-frequency range. 
The subjective evaluation of the acoustical performance of the 
device was clearly in favour of the device.
In none of the clinical studies were local or general adverse 
effects or significant hearing loss caused by the implantation 
reported. There is long-term experience of at least 10 years in a 
large series of Japanese patients with an investigative piezoelec­
tric device. Deterioration of bone conduction caused by use of 
the device was not noted in any of the patients.130
Conclusion
After a long period of experimental studies and research, the 
implantable electronic hearing devices for SNHL are now on 
the verge of broad clinical application. The first clinical 
results are very promising, and the currently used devices are 
safe and functional. They will probably become a good alter­
native for those patients who are dissatisfied with their con­
ventional hearing aid. It is also clear that some changes in 
the technical aspects of implantation—especially in the 
design of the ideal coupling between transducer and ossicular 
chain—are needed before these hearing aids will become 
widely accepted.
Implantable electronic devices for sensorineural hearing 
loss have a number of theoretical advantages that make 
them a valuable solution for patients who do not tolerate 
a conventional hearing aid. The technical progress made 
over the last 30 years has made these devices possible 
today. The early clinical experience seems to support the 
predicted advantages, Some issues—specifically on the 
coupling of the device to the human auditory system— 
are still open to improvement.
Figure 36.20 Audiological criteria for MET.
Figure 36.21 Audiological criteria for Soundtec.
  

626 
Auditory disorders and their management
Otoneurosurgieal treatment of 
tinnitus
Introduction
Tinnitus is a distressing symptom affecting 15% of the popula- 
tion. It leads to depression or insomnia in half of the patients 
and causes an important decrease in the quality of life in 20% 
of tinnitus sufferers.131
Tinnitus can be subdivided into two completely different 
entities, pulsatile and non-pulsatile tinnitus. Pulsatile tinnitus 
is the result of a normally functioning auditory system in 
which vascular anomalies create a resonance effect in the 
petrous bone, and can be subdivided into an arterial pulse-syn- 
chronized tinnitus and a venous hum. The venous hum origi­
nates either from primary venous disease or from conditions 
producing increased intracranial pressure.132 Non-pulsatile tin­
nitus, on the contrary, is caused by an abnormally functioning 
auditory system and can be considered an auditory phantom 
phenomenon, 133-136 similar to phantom pain. It is caused by a 
reorganization of the auditory tract and auditory cortex and it 
probably develops in two phases. An initial reversible phase 
tends to turn into an irreversible tinnitus after 2-3 years.137,138 
This might warrant surgical treatment of non-pulsatile tinnitus 
to be considered as relatively urgent.137,139
Surgical treatment of pulsatile tinnitus
Almost all causes of pulsatile tinnitus can be diagnosed by 
MRI and magnetic resonance angiography, except for the 
most frequent cause of pulsatile tinnitus, benign intracranial 
hypertension.
Table 36.4 Surgically treatable causes of tinnitus.
Pulsatile tinnitus
Venous
Benign intracranial hypertension
Chiari malformation 
High jugular bulb
Arterial
Carotid stenosis 
Glomus tumour 
Vascular lesions of petrous 
bone/skull base 
Arteriovenous malformation 
Aneurysm
Microvascular compression
Non-pulsatile tinnitus
Vestibular schwannoma 
(acoustical neuroma) 
Other cerebellopontine 
angle lesions 
Arachnoid cyst 
Meniere’s disease 
Otosclerosis 
Brain tumour 
Chiari malformation 
Microvascular compression
Venous hum
Benign intracranial hypertension is a clinical entity usually 
affecting obese women who suffer from a venous hum, 
headache and blurry vision. Importantly, the venous hum, even 
unilaterally, can be the only presenting symptom.132 Clinically, 
it can be diagnosed by compressing the ipsilateral jugular vein, 
causing the venous hum to disappear. Except for the rarely diag­
nosed condition of sinus thrombosis,140 magnetic resonance 
angiography and MRI are usually negative, and the diagnosis is 
confirmed by lumbar puncture (pressure > 20cm water). Treat­
ment consists of weight loss, diuretics or ventriculoperitoneal or 
lumboperitoneal shunting.
The Chiari malformation is a clinical entity in which there 
is a tonsillar herniation into the foramen magnum (Figure 
36.22). Of these patients, 7—10%141 suffer from tinnitus, and it 
can be both non-pulsatile and pulsatile.142 The pulsatile tinni­
tus consists of a venous hum caused by raised intracranial pres­
sure and worsens on bending over, but disappears on ipsilateral 
jugular vein compression, which also results in an improvement 
of the hearing (masking). No brainstem auditory evoked 
potential changes are noted in this kind of tinnitus. After the 
surgical decompression, this form of tinnitus disappears.142
Non-pulsatile tinnitus, on the other hand, is usually inter­
mittent and the cause is not known. It is due either to stretch­
ing of the cochlear nerve, e.g. by microvascular compression, or 
to brainstem traction.143 Brainstem auditory evoked potential 
changes are noted in 75% of the patients, and consist of an IPL 
III—V prolongation in 100% of the patients (brainstem traction 
and/or contralateral microvascular compression?) and of IPL I-
III prolongation in 30%143 (ipsilateral microvascular compres­
sion?). Posterior fossa decompression, which consists of opening 
the foramen magnum and widening the dura mater, results in 
abolishing the non-pulsatile tinnitus if tinnitus is of recent 
origin.
The high jugular bulb can generate a venous hum, as a 
result of intimate direct contact with the cochlea. This venous 
hum disappears on compressing the ipsilateral jugular vein and 
can be diagnosed by CT imaging. Surgically ligating or lower­
ing the jugular bulb and interposing Teflon or bonewax can 
abolish or diminish this form of tinnitus.144,145
Arterial pulse*synchronous tinnitus
Carotid stenosis is the most frequent cause of arterial pulsatile 
tinnitus. The pulsatile tinnitus disappears on compressing the 
ipsilateral, internal carotid artery. Diagnosis can be confirmed 
by angiography. Treatment of the extracranial carotid artery 
stenosis consists of dilatation and stenting or carotid 
endarterectomy. As for the rarer intracranial carotid artery 
stenosis (Figure 36.23a) two approaches can be followed. An 
initial balloon occlusion test under transcranial doppler and 
EEG monitoring can verify whether the ipsilateral carotid 
artery can be sacrificed. If so, one option is to ligate the symp­
tomatic carotid artery. The other option is to dilate and stent 
(Figure 36.23b) the intracranial portion of the carotid artery, 
resulting in a disappearance of the arterial pulsatile tinnitus.146
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
627
Figure 36.22 Tonsilar herniation (white arrow) leading 
to ipsilateral venous hum or non-pulsatile tinnitus. 
Arnold-Chiari malformation. This very discrete unilateral 
herniation resulted in ipsilateral non-pulsatile tinnitus, 
disappearing after surgery.
A major problem still faced today is that stents tend to occlude, 
and thus this elegant technique still remains experimental until 
the coagulation problems are better controlled.146
Glomus tumours, or paraganglioma, are found in women 
presenting with unilateral hearing loss and pulsatile tinnitus. 
As they are benign lesions growing to less than 2 cm in 5 years, 
treatment options are a ‘wait and see* policy or embolization
i 
147
and surgery.
Other vascular lesions of the petrous bone or skull base, 
such as haemangiopericytoma,148 plasmacytoma148 and giant 
cell tumours,149 among others, are also known to generate a 
treatable pulsatile tinnitus.
Dural arteriovenous malformations (AVM) result from 
chronic mastoiditis or other causes leading to occlusion of the 
sigmoid transverse sinus. Vascular bypasses develop around the 
occlusion, resulting in a dural AVM (Figure 36.24a). If the dural 
AVM is symptomatic or if it is asymptomatic with lep- 
tomeningeal drainage, these lesions should be embolized (Fig­
ure 36.24b), usually in multiple sessions. If intractable with 
endovascular treatment, surgical excision of the AVM and dura 
can be proposed.150
Microvascular compressions of the cochlear nerve can 
cause incapacitating low-pitch pulsatile or high-pitch non-pul- 
satile tinnitus.139 This difficult diagnosis is based on the clinical 
picture and confirmed by auditory brainstem evoked potentials 
and MRI (Figure 36.25).137,139,151,152 Results of microsurgical vas­
cular decompression are related to the surgical delay, the preop­
erative hearing status, MRI imaging and gender. In general, we 
can state that if the tinnitus has been present for less than 3 
years,137 if there is serviceable or normal hearing,139 and if the 
MRI demonstrates vascular compression139,151,152 in women137— 
the results can be good. Vascular compressions of the vestibulo­
cochlear nerve are found in many asymptomatic patients153,154
(21.5% and 12.5% respectively), but this discrepancy is also 
found in trigeminal neuralgia (14%),155 and even in herniated 
lumbar disks (36%),156 where this is not considered an argu­
ment against the pathophysiological importance of the neural 
compression in generating symptoms.
Non-pulsatile tinnitus
Any lesion along the auditory tract altering its normal function 
can cause non-pulsatile tinnitus. Meniere’s disease, vestibular 
schwannoma, cerebellopontine angle lesions, arachnoid cysts, 
microvascular compressions, Chiari malformation and brain 
tumours are causes of non-pulsatile tinnitus that can be treated 
surgically.
In vestibular schwannoma, the high-pitch tinnitus (ringing 
or steam from a kettle) is present in 60-85% of patients. 
Recently, vestibular schwannomas have often been treated by 
radiosurgery. This seems to have almost no effect on the tinni­
tus,157 whereas with microscopic surgery 40-50% of the tinnitus 
disappears.158 Unfortunately, microsurgery also creates tinnitus
. 
„ 
159
in many patients.
Other cerebellopontine angle lesions (CPAs),160 such as 
meningiomas, epidermoid tumours, lipomas, choroid plexus 
papillomas, epithelial cysts, teratomas, cavemomas, and hae- 
mangiomas, can present with non-pulsatile tinnitus, usually 
with associated symptoms, depending on the location of the 
lesion and the degree of brainstem, cerebellar or cranial nerve 
compression.
Arachnoid cyst is a rare cause of non-pulsatile tinnitus 
(Figure 36.26). It is a congenital or post-traumatic/postinflam- 
matory disorder161' 164 leading to vague symptoms. Arachnoid 
cysts producing tinnitus can occur in the cerebellopontine 
angle, but can also be retroclival and retrocerebellar. Usually,
  

628 
Auditory disorders and their management
r
L
/
(b)
Figure 36.23 (a) Intracranial petrous carotid artery stenosis (arrow) causing arterial pulsatile tinnitus; (b) postdilation and stenting of petrous carotid artery stenosis 
resulting in abolishing pulsatile tinnitus.
symptoms of intracranial hypertension are associated with non- 
pulsatile tinnitus.65,165 Surgical treatment consists of marsupial­
ization or excision of the cyst.65,165
In Meniere’s disease no kind of surgery, whether vestibular 
nerve section, cochlear nerve section, endolymphatic sac 
surgery131 or gentamicin injections,166 seems to produce greater 
than 50% tinnitus control—a marginal improvement ujpon the 
30% spontaneous disappearance in its natural history.
In otosclerosis, relief of the non-pulsatile tinnitus by suc­
cessful stapedectomy can be expected in about 40-64% of
168,169
cases.
A brain tumour compressing the auditory cortex (Figure 
36.27) can cause a low-pitch (cortical tonotopy), non-pulsatile 
tinnitus as the sole symptom, probably due to a direct influence 
on normal cortical sound processing. Removal of the lesion 
results in abolishing the tinnitus.170 Tumours elsewhere along 
the auditory tract, e.g. the brainstem, usually give rise to 
additional symptoms related to the closeness of other neural 
structures.
For intractable non-pulsatile tinnitus, auditory brainstem 
implants171 and auditory cortex stimulations can be expected 
to give some relief in intractable non-pulsatile tinnitus, in a 
similar manner to dorsal column stimulation and motor cor­
tex stimulation, used for intractable phantom pain. The 
advantage of both approaches in comparison to electrical 
stimulation via Cl is that both techniques could be used to 
preserve hearing.
Conclusion
Tinnitus actually consists of two entirely different entities with 
different pathophysiologies, different clinical symptoms and dif­
ferent treatment. For pulsatile tinnitus, whether of arterial or 
venous origin, a cause can usually be found, and thus surgical 
treatment can be proposed.
However, the cause of non-pulsatile tinnitus, especially in 
unilateral non-pulsatile tinnitus, producing abnormal function
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
629
of the auditory system should be sought, and this has a relative 
urgency as, after 2-3 years, an irreversible form of tinnitus 
develops. For intractable non-pulsatile unilateral tinnitus or
a
17
.(b) ,
Figure 36.24 (a) Dural artriovenous malformation generating arterial pulsatile 
tinnitus; (b) complete obliteration of dural arteriovenous malformation, 
resulting in diappearance of pulsatile tinnitus. Unfortunately these 
malformations or fistulas tend to recur due to the pathophysiology of their 
origin.
bilateral tinnitus future developments consisting of auditory 
brainstem implants and auditory cortex stimulation might 
provide help and benefit.
Figure 36.25 Microvascular (black 
arrow) compression of vestibulocochlear 
nerve (white arrow) generating high 
non-pulsatile or low pitch pulsatile 
tinnitus
  

630 
Auditory disorders and their management
Figure 36.26 (a) Arachnoid cyst at 
cerebellopontine angle causing non- 
pulsatile tinnitus; (b) detail of arachnoid 
cyst stretching the vestibulocochlear nerve 
(black arrow)
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological mcdieine 
631
Figure 36.27 Meningioma of auditory cortex area (ovoid) 
causing low pitch (tonotopy) non-pulsatile tinnitus that 
disappeared after surgical removal
Highlights
Tinnitus = pulsatile or non-pulsatile tinnitus 
Pulsatile tinnitus = normal function of auditory system, 
resonance effect in petrous bone
Pulsatile tinnitus = arterial pulse-synchronous or venous 
hum
Venous hum = venous disease or raised intracranial 
pressure
Non-pulsatile tinnitus = pathological auditory system = 
auditory phantom phenomenon 
Pulsatile tinnitus can be cured
Non-pulsatile tinnitus is to be treated relatively urgently
Final remarks
Functional ear surgery has an important place in the treat­
ment of hearing impairment. When considering surgery, not 
only the otological criteria have to be taken into account, 
but also general aspects and contraindications regarding oper­
ability, pregnancy, drug abuse, mental and emotional status 
and a correct understanding by the patient of the interven­
tion. Realistic expectations are a cornerstone of patient satis­
faction with respect to the offered health intervention. For 
this reason, assessment must include not only the hearing 
capability itself, but also the impact on the quality of life of 
the patient.
The option of the use of a combination of methods,
i.e. surgery and hearing aids, has to be considered. In cases 
of advanced mixed hearing loss, neither surgery nor a hear­
ing aid can provide enough improvement to provide a 
socially serviceable hearing level. However, surgery can
reduce conductive hearing loss to a level within reach of 
conventional hearing aids. A specific situation consists of 
open cavities in which the posterior bony ear canal is 
rebuilt to render a more favourable acoustical situation for 
hearing aids. A second situation is that of a mixed hearing 
loss, in which the sensorineural component is more than 
70 dB, such that the precise bone conduction hearing level 
cannot be determined. Stapedectomy in advanced otosclero­
sis creates a situation in which conventional hearing aids 
yield good speech understanding and cochlear implantation 
can be avoided.
An emerging field is the implantation of drug delivery sys­
tems (e.g. round window microcatheter or Otowick) to the 
inner ear to treat sensorineural hearing loss. These systems are 
currently being evaluated in the treatment of vertigo. It is to be 
expected that trials with corticosteroids, and also with neuro- 
transmitters and neurotrophic factors, will find an indication in 
the treatment of hearing impairment and tinnitus.
Acknowledgements
The authors especially thank Professor Linda Luxon for her 
important support, and Miss S. Beckers and the late D. De 
Saegher for their technical assistance.
References
1. 
Ramsay H, Karkkainen J, Palva T. Success in surgery for 
otosclerosis: hearing improvement and other indicators. Am J 
Otolaryngol 1997; 18: 23-8.
  

632 
Auditory disorders and their management
2. Sperling NM, Patel N. A patient-benefit evaluation of unilateral 
congenital conductive hearing loss presenting in adulthood: 
should it be repaired? Laryngoscope 1999; 109: 1386-91.
3. Stewart MG, Coker NJ, Jenkins HA et al. Outcomes and quality 
of life in conductive hearing loss. OtolaryngolHeadNeckSurg 2000; 
123: 527-32.
4. Monsell EM, Balkany TA, Gates GA. Committee on Hearing and 
Equilibrium guidelines for the evaluation of results of treatment of 
conductive hearing loss. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995; 113:
186-7.
5. De Bruijn AJG, Tange RA, Dreschler WA. Efficacy of evaluation 
of audiometric results after stapes surgery in otosclerosis. II. A 
method for reporting results from individual cases. Otolaryngol­
HeadNeckSurg 2001; 124: 84-9.
6. Shea J]. Stapedectomy technique and results. Am J Otol 1985; 6: 
61-2.
7. Shea ]]. Thirty years of stapes surgery. J Laryngol Otol 1988; 102: 
14-19.
8. Somers T, Govaerts P, Marquet T et al. Statistical analysis of oto­
sclerosis surgery performed by Jean Marquet. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1994; 945-51.
9. Berliner KI, Doyle KJ, Goldenberg RA. Reporting operative hear­
ing results in stapes surgery: does choice of outcome measure make 
a difference? Am J Otolaryngol 2001; 17: 521-8.
10. De Bruijn AJG, Tange RA, Dreschler WA. Efficacy of evaluation 
of audiometric results after stapes surgery in otosclerosis. I. The 
effects of using different audiological parameters and criteria on 
success rates. OtolaryngolHeadNeckSurg 2001; 124: 76-83.
11. Duijvestijn JA, Anteunis LJC, Hendriks JJ et al. Definition of 
hearing impairment and its effect on prevalence figures: a survey 
among senior citizens. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1999; 119: 
420-3.
12. Carhart R. Effects of stapes fixation on bone conduction 
responses. In: Schuknecht H, ed. International Symposium on Oto­
sclerosis. Boston: Little-Brown, 1962: 175.
13. Lundman L, Mendel L, Bagger-Sjoback D et al. Hearing in 
patients operated unilaterally for otosclerosis: self assessment of 
hearing and audiometric results. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1999; 
119: 453-8.
14. Ware JE, Snow KK, Kosinski M et al. SF-36 Health Survey. Man­
ual and Interpretation Guide. Boston: Nimrod Press, 1993.
15. Newman CW, Weinstein BE, Jacobson GP et al. The hearing 
handicap inventory for adults: psychometric adequacy and audio- 
metric correlates. Ear Hear 1990; 11: 430-3.
16. Kapteyn TS, Kramer SE. Validiteitsbeoordeling op grond van vra- 
genlijst en testbatterij. In: Dreschler WA, ed. Validiteit van het 
gehoor. 1999: 91-123.
17. Smythe GDL, Patterson CC. Results of middle ear reconstruction. 
Do patients and surgeons agree? A m ] Otol 1985; 6: 276-9.
18. Browning GG, Gatehouse S, Swan IRC. The Glasgow benefit 
plot: a new method for reporting benefits from middle ear surgery. 
Laryngoscope 1991; 101: 180-5.
19. Porter MJ, Zeitoun H, Brookes GB. The Glasgow benefit plot used 
to assess the effect of bilateral stapedectomy. Clin Otolaryngol 
1995; 20: 68-71.
20. Bulman CH. Audit of stapedectomy in the north west of England 
for 1996: an analysis of the criteria used to describe success. Clin 
Otolaryngol 2000; 25: 542-6.
21. Hinderink JB, Krabbe PF, Van den Broek P. Development and 
application of a health-related quality-of-life instrument for adults 
with cochlear implants: the Nijmegen cochlear implant question­
naire. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2000; 123: 756-65.
22. Stewart MG, Jenkins HA, Coker NJ et al. Development of new 
outcomes instrument for conductive hearing loss. Am ] Otol 1997; 
18: 413-20.
23. Eriksson-Mangold M, Erlandsson SI, Jansson G. The subjective 
meaning of illness in severe otosclerosis: a descriptive study in 
three steps based on focus group interviews and written question­
naire. Scand Audiol 1996; 43(S): 34-44.
24. Robinson K. Evidence-based medicine and its implications for 
audiological science. BrJ Audiol 1999; 33: 9-16.
25. Cox R, Alexander GC. The abbreviated profile of hearing aid 
benefit. Ear Hear 1995; 16: 176-86.
26. Chiossoine-Kerdel JA, Baguley D, Stoddart RL, Moffat DA. An 
investigation of the audiologic handicap associated with unilateral 
sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Am J Otol 2000; 21: 645-51.
27. Kramer SE, Kapteyn TS, Festen JM et al. Factors in subjective 
hearing disability. Audiology 1995; 34: 311-20.
28. Kramer SE, Kapteyn TS, Festen JM et al. The relationship 
between self-reported hearing disability and measures of auditory 
disability. Audiology 1996; 35: 277-87.
29. Kramer SE, Kapteyn TS, Festen JM et al. Assessing aspects of 
hearing handicap by means of pupil dilatation. Audiology 1997; 
36: 155-64.
30. Kramer SE, Kapteyn TS, Festen JM. The self-reported handicap­
ping effect of hearing disabilities. Audiology 1998; 37: 301-12.
31. Dillon H, James A, Ginis J. Client Oriented Scale of Improve­
ment (COSI) and its relationship to several other measures of 
benefit and satisfaction provided by hearing aids. J Am Acad 
Audiol 1997; 8: 27-43.
32. Brokx J, Pepers A. Betekenis van digitale hoortoestellen voor 
mensen met gecombineerde auditieve en visuele problemen. 
Unpublished report, Instituut voor Doven, The Netherlands 1999.
33. Teunissen E, Cremers CW. Classification of congenital middle ear 
anomalies. Report on 144 ears. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1993; 
102: 606-12.
34. Altmann F. Congenital aural atresia of the ear in man and 
animals. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1955; 64: 824-58.
35. Marquet J. Allografts and congenital aural atresia. Adv Otorhino­
laryngol 1988; 40: 15-23.
36. Declau F, Offeciers F, Van de Heyning P. Classification of the non- 
syndromal type of meatal atresia. In: Devranoglu I, ed. In: Pro­
ceedings of the XVth World Congress of ORL and Head and Neck 
Surgery: panel discussions. 1997: 135-7.
37. Cremers CW, Oudenhoven J, Marres EH. Congenital aural atre­
sia. A new subclassification and surgical management. Clin Oto­
laryngol 1984; 9: 119-27.
38. Jahrsdoerfer RA, Yeakley JW, Aguilar EA et al. Grading system for 
the selection of patients with congenital aural atresia. Am J Otol 
1992; 13: 6-12.
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
633
39. Declau F, Cremers C, Van de Heyning P. Diagnosis and manage- 
ment strategies in congenital atresia of the external ear canal. Br 
J Audiol 1999; 33:313-27.
40. H&kansson B, Liden G, Tjellstrom A et al. Ten years of experience 
with the Swedish bone-anchored hearing system. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1990; 99 (suppl 151): 1-16.
41. Powell RH, Burrell SP, Cooper HR et al. The Birmingham bone 
anchored 
hearing aid programme: paediatric experience and 
results. J Laryngol Otol 1996; Suppl 21: 21-9.
42. Snik AF, Mylanus EA, Cremers CW. The bone-anchored hearing 
aid compared with conventional hearing aids. Audiological results 
and the patients’ opinions. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1995; 28:
73-83.
43. Declau F, Van Spaendonck M, Timmermans P et al. Prevalence of 
otosclerosis in an unselected series of temporal bones. Otol Neurol 
2001; 22: 596-602.
44- Niedermeyer HP, Arnold W, Schuster M et al. Persistent measles 
virus infection and otosclerosis. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 2001; 
110: 897-903.
45. Causse JR, Causse JB. Otospongiosis as a genetic disease. Am J 
Otol 1984; 5: 211-23.
46. Causse JR, Causse JB. Eighteen-year report on stapedectomy. I: 
problems of stapedial fixation. Clin Otolaryngol 1980; 5: 49-59.
47. Powers WH, Sheehy JL, House HP. The fixed malleus head. A 
report of 35 cases. Arch Otolaryngol 1967; 85: 77-181.
48. Shea JJ. Fenestration of the oval window. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryn­
gol 1958; 67:932-51.
49. Portmann M, Portman D. The surgery of deafness (operations for 
function). In: Portman M, Portman D, ed. Otologic Surgery: Man­
ual of Oto-surgical Techniques. London: Singular Publishing Group, 
1998: 16.
50. Marquet J, Creten WL, Van Camp KJ. Considerations about the 
surgical approach in stapedectomy. Acta Otolaryngol 1972; 74: 
406-10.
51. House J. Stapedectomy technique. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 
1993; 26: 389-3.
52. Hausler R, Messerli A, Romano V et al. Experimental and clinical 
results of fiberoptic argon laser stapedotomy. Eur Arch Otolaryngol 
1996; 253: 193-200.
53. Hausler R. Fortschritte in der Stapeschirurgie. Laryngorhinootologie 
2000; 79(S2): S95-139.
54. Fisch U. Stapedotomy versus stapedectomy. Am J Otol 1982; 4: 
112-17.
55. Causse JB, Causse JR, Parahy C. Stapedectomy technique and 
results. Am J Otol 1985; 6: 68-75.
56. Cremers CWRJ, Bensen JMS, Huygen PLM. Hearing gain after 
stapedotomy, partial platinectomy or total stapedectomy for oto­
sclerosis. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1991; 100: 959-61.
57. Smyth GDL, Hassard TH. Eighteen years experience in stapedec­
tomy. The case for the small fenestra operation. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1978; 2(suppl 49): 1-36.
58. Van den Bogaert K, Govaerts PJ, Schatteman I et al. A second 
gene for otosclerosis (OTSC2) maps to chromosome 7q34-36. 
Am J Hum Genet 2001; 68: 495-500.
59. Tomek MS, Brown MR, Mani SR et al. Localization of a gene for
otosclerosis to chromosome 15q25-q26. Hum Mol Genet 1998; 7: 
285-90.
60. Mylanus E. The bone anchored hearing aid. Clinical and audio- 
logical aspects. Thesis, Nijmegen, 1994.
61. Portmann D, Boudard P, Vdovytsya O. Bone-anchored hearing 
aids BAHA: 10 years’ experience. Ren Stomatol Chir Maxillofac 
2001; 102: 274-7.
62. Pelizzone M. Auditory speech reception, signal processing and 
strategies for representing speech. In: Babighian G, ed. Consensus 
on Auditory Implants: first European Conference on Cochlear and 
Brainstem Implants and State of the Art Symposium on Implantable 
Hearing Aids. Padova: Azienda Ospidaliera Padova, 2001: 8-9.
63. Albu S, Babighian G, Trabalzini F. Prognostic factors in 
tympanoplasty. Am J Otol 1998; 19: 136-40.
64. Chatterjee M, Robert ME. Noise enhances modulation sensitivity 
in cochlear implant listeners: stochastic resonance in a prosthetic 
sensory system? JARO 2001; 2: 159-71.
65. Haberkamp T, Mansell M, House W et al. Diagnosis and treat­
ment of arachnoid cysts of the posterior fossa. Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1990; 103: 610-14.
66. Huttenbrink KB. Middle ear mechanics and their interface with 
respect to implantable electronic otologic devices. Otolaryngol 
Clin North Am 2001; 34: 315-35.
67. Paradise J, Feldman H, Campbell T et al. Effect of early or delayed 
insertion of tympanostomy tubes for persistent otitis media on 
developmental outcomes at the age of three years. N  Engl J Med
2001; 344: 1179-87.
68. Lenarz T, Battmer RD, Lesinski A et al. Nucleus double array: a 
new approach for ossified cochleae. Am J Otol 1997; 18: 39-41.
69. Choi J, Kim D. Pathogenesis of arachnoid cyst: congenital or trau­
matic? Pediatr Neurosurg 1998; 29: 260-6.
70. Hough J, Dyer R, Matthews P et al. Early clinical results: 
SOUNDTEC implantable hearing device phase II study. Laryngo­
scope 2001; 111: 1-8.
71. Snik AF, Cremers CW. First audiometric results with the Vibrant 
soundbridge, a semi-implantable hearing device for sensorineural 
hearing loss. Audiology 1999; 38: 335-8.
72. Van der Pouw C. Bone anchored hearing. Short and long term 
results. Thesis, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 1998.
73. Snik AF, Mylanus EA, Cremers CW. Speech recognition with the 
bone-anchored hearing aid determined objectively and subjec­
tively. Ear Nose Throat J 1994; 73.
74. Snik AF, Dreschler WA, Tange RA et al. Short- and long-term 
results with implantable transcutaneous and percutaneous bone- 
conduction devices. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 124: 
265-8.
75. Tjellstrom A, Hakansson B, Granstrom G. Bone-anchored hear­
ing aids: current status in adults and children. Otolaryngol Clin 
North Am 2001; 34: 337-64.
76. Proops DW. The Birmingham bone anchored hearing aid pro­
gramme: surgical 
methods and complications. J Laryngol Otol 
Suppl 1996; 21:7.
77. Burrell SP, Cooper HC, Proops DW. The bone anchored hearing 
aid—the third option for otosclerosis. J Laryngol Otol Suppl 1996; 
21:31-7.
  

634 
Auditory disorders and their management
78. Hamann C, Manach Y, Roulleau P. Bone anchored hearing aid. 
Results of bilateral applications. Rev Laryngol Otol Rhinol (Bord) 
1991;112:297-300
79. Snik AF, Mylanus EA, Cremers CW. Binaural application of the 
bone-anchored hearing aid. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1998; 107:
187-93.
80. Van der Pouw KT, Snik AF, Cremers CW. Audiometric results of 
bilateral bone anchored hearing aid application in patients with 
bilateral congenital aural atresia. Laryngoscope 1998; 108: 548-53.
81. Bosman A], Snik AF, van der Pouw CT et al. Audiometric evalu­
ation of bilateral fitted bone anchored hearing-aids. Audiology
2001; 40: 158-67.
82. Mylanus EA, van der Pouw KC, Snik AF, Cremers CW. Intraindi­
vidual comparison of the bone-anchored hearing aid and the air- 
conduction hearing aids. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 
124: 271-6.
83. Papsin BC, Sirimanna TK, Albert DM et al. Surgical experience 
with bone anchored hearing aids in children. Laryngoscope 1997; 
107: 801-6.
84. Lustig LR, Arts HA, Brackmann DE et al. Hearing rehabilitation 
using the BAHA bone-anchored hearing aid: results in 40 
patients. Otol Neurotol 2001; 22: 328-34.
85. Stephens D, Board T, Hobson J et al. Reported benefits and prob­
lems experienced with bone-anchored hearing aids. Br J Audiol 
1996; 30: 215-20.
86. Arunachalam PS, Kilby D, Meikle D et al. Bone-anchored hear­
ing aid quality of life assessed by Glasgow Benefit Inventory. 
Laryngoscope 2001; 111: 1260-3.
87. Stenfelt S, Hakansson B, Jonsson R et al. A bone-anchored hear­
ing aid for patients with pure sensorineural hearing impairment: a 
pilot study. Scand Audiol 2000; 29: 175-85.
88. Wazen JJ, Spitzer J, Ghossaini SN et al. Results of the bone- 
anchored hearing aid in unilateral hearing loss. Laryngoscope 2001; 
111:955-8.
89. Waltzman SB, Cohen NL. Cochlear Implants. New York: Thieme, 
2000.
90. Cohen NL, Waltzman SB, Fisher SG. A prospective, randomized 
study of cochlear implants. N  Engl J Med 1993; 328: 233-7.
91. Miyamoto RT, Osberger MJ, Cunningham L. Single to multi­
channel conversions in pediatric cochlear recipients. Am J Otol 
1994; 15: 40-6.
92. National Institutes of Health. Cochlear Implants in Adults and 
Children. Consensus statement no. 100. NIH, 1995: 13: 1-30.
93. Babighian G. Consensus on Auditory Implants: first European Con­
ference on Cochlear and Brainstem Implants and State of the Art Sym­
posium on Implantable Hearing Aids. Padova: Azienda Ospedaliera 
Padova, 2001: 220-9.
94. Archbold S, O’Donoghue G, Nikolopoulos T. Cochlear implants 
in children: an analysis of use over a three-year period. Am J Otol 
1998; 19: 328-31.
95. Wouters J, Vanden Berghe ]. Speech recognition in noise for 
cochlear implantees with a two-microphone monaural adaptive 
noise reduction system. Ear Hear 2001; 22: 420-30.
96. Loizou PC, Poroy O. Minimal spectral contrast needed for vowel 
identification by normal hearing and cochlear implant listeners. J
Acoust Soc Am 2001; 110: 1619-27.
97. Friesen LM, Shannon RV, Baskent D et al. Speech recognition in 
noise as a function of the number of spectral channels: compari­
son of acoustic hearing and cochlear implants. J Acoust Soc Am 
2001; 110: 1150-63.
98. Giraud AL, Truy E, Frackowiak RSJ et al. Differential recruitment 
of the speech processing system in healthy subjects and rehabili­
tated cochlear implant patients. Brain 2000; 123: 1391-402.
99. Baumgartner W, Van de Heyning PH, Probst R et al. Subjective 
Evaluation of the Tempo 14- Speechprocessor in Comparison to the 
Cisprol + processor in Children and Adults. Los Angeles: House Ear 
Institute, 2001: 78.
100. O’Donoghue GM. Minimal access surgery for cochlear implanta­
tion. In: Babighian G, ed. Consensus on Auditory Implants: 
first European Conference on Cochlear and Brainstem Implants and 
State of the Art Symposium on Implantable Hearing Aids. Padova: 
Azienda Ospidaliera Padova, 2001: 88.
101. Donaldson GS, Peters MD, Ellis MR et al. Effects of the clarion 
electrode positioning system on auditory thresholds and comfort­
able loudness levels in pediatric patients with cochlear implants. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2001: 127: 956-60.
102. Abbas P, Brown C, Shallop J et al. Summary of results using the 
Nucleus CI24 implant to record the electrically evoked com­
pound action potential. Ear Hear 1999; 20: 45-59.
103. Dillier N, Lai WK, Almquist B et al. Measurement of the electri­
cally evoked compound action potential (ECAP) via a neural 
response telemetry (NRT) system. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
2002; 111:407-14.
104- Brown CJ, Hughes M L, Luk B et al. The relationship between 
EAP and EABR thresholds and levels used to program the 
Nucleus 24 Speech Processor: data from adults. Ear Hear 2000; 
21: 151-63.
105. Van de Heyning PH, Craddock L, Cooper H et al. Comparison 
between NRT based MAPS and behaviourally measured MAPS 
a different stimulation rates: a multi center investigation. In: 
Babighana, ed. Consensus on Auditory Implants: First European 
Conference on Cochlear and Brainstem Implants and State of the 
Art Symposium on Implantable Hearing Aids. Padova: Azienda 
Ospidalieva Padova, 2001.
106. Flynn MC, Dowell RC, Clark GM. Aided speech recognition 
abilities of adults with a severe or severe-to-profound hearing 
loss. J Speech Language Hear Res 1998; 41: 285-99.
107. Hamzavi J, Franz P, Baumgartner WD et al. Hearing performance 
in noise of cochlear implant patients versus severely-profound 
hearing-impaired patients with hearing aids. Audiology 2001; 40: 
26-31.
108. Archbold S, Lutman ME, Marshall DH. Categories of auditory 
performance. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1995; 104(suppl 166): 
312-14.
109. Nikolopoulos T, Archbold S, O’Donoghue G. The development 
of auditory perception in children following cochlear implanta­
tion. Int] Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1999; 49(suppl 1): 189-91.
110. O’Donoghue G, Nikolopoulos T, Archibold SM. Determinants 
of speech perception in children after cochlear implantation. 
Lancet 2000; 356: 466-8.
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
635
111. Gregory S. Ethical aspects and counselling. In: Babighian G, ed. 
Consensus on auditory implants: first European Conference on 
Cochlear and Brainstem Implants and state of the art symposium 
on implantable hearing aids. Padova: Azienda Ospedale Padova, 
2001: 10- 11.
112. Weber BP, Dillo W, Dietrich B et al. Pediatric cochlear implan- 
tation in cochlear malformations. Am J Otol 1998; 19: 747-53.
113. Shallop JK, Peterson A, Facer GW et al. Cochlear implants in 
five cases of auditory neuropathy: postoperative findings and 
progress. Laryngoscope 2001; 111: 555-62.
114- Bredberg G, Lindstrom B, Lopponen H et al. Electrodes for ossi- 
fied cochleas. Am J Otol 1997; 18: S42-3.
115. Balkany T, Bird PA, Hodges AV et al. Surgical technique for 
implantation of the totally ossified cochlea. Laryngoscope 1998; 
108: 988-92.
116. Connor CM, Hieber S, Aerts HA et al. Speech, vocabulary, and 
the education of children using cochlear implants: oral or total 
communication? / Speech Language Hear Res 2000; 43: 1185-204.
117. Aschendorff A, Marangos N, Laszig R. Early and long-term 
results of rehabilitation of cochlear implant patients. Laryngorhi- 
nootobgie 1997; 76: 275-7.
118. Helms J, Muller J, Schon F et al. Evaluation of performance with 
the COMBI 40 Cochlear Implant in adults: a multicentric clini­
cal study. ORL 1997; 59: 23-35.
119. Tyler RS, Summerfield AQ. Cochlear implantation: relationships 
with research on auditory deprivation and acclimatization. Ear 
Hear 1996; 17: 38S-50S.
120. Vermeulen AM, Beijk CM, Brokx JPL et al. Development of 
speech perception abilities of profound deaf children: a compari­
son between children with cochlear implants and those with 
conventional hearing aids. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1995; 104: 
215-17.
121. Waltzman SB, Cohen NL, Gomolin RH et al. Open-set speech 
perception in congenitally deaf children using cochlear implants. 
AmJ Otol 1997; 18: 342-9.
122. Lenarz T, Weber BP, Mack KF et al. The Vibrant Soundbridge 
System: a new kind of hearing aid for sensorineural hearing loss. 
1: Function and initial clinical experiences. Laryngorhinootobgie 
1998; 77: 247-55.
123. Dazert S, Shehata-Dieler WE, Dieler R et al. ‘Vibrant 
Soundbridge’ middle ear implant for auditory rehabilitation in 
sensory hearing loss. I. Clinical aspects, indications and initial 
results. Laryngorhinootobgie 2000; 79: 459-64.
124. Lenarz T, Weber BP, Issing PR et al. Vibrant Sound 
Bridge System. A new kind of hearing prosthesis for patients 
with 
sensorineural hearing loss. 2. Audiological results. 
Laryngorhinootobgie 2001; 80: 370-80.
125. Snik AF, Mylanus EA, Cremers CW et al. Multicenter audio­
metric results with the Vibrant Soundbridge, a semi-implantable 
hearing device for sensorineural hearing impairment. Otolaryngol 
Clin North Am 2001; 34: 373-88.
126. Zenner HP, Leysieffer H, Maassen M et al. Human studies of a 
piezoelectric 
transducer and a microphone for a totally 
implantable electronic hearing device. Am J Otol 2000; 21: 
196-204.
127. Zenner HP, Leysieffer H. Total implantation of the Implex TICA 
hearing amplifier implant for high frequency sensorineural hear­
ing loss: the Tubingen University experience. Otolaryngol Clin 
North Am 2001; 34: 417-46.128.
128. Hough ], Dyer R, Matthews P et al. Early Semi-implantable 
electromagnetic middle ear hearing device for moderate to 
severe sensorineural hearing loss. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 
2001; 34: 401-16
129. Roland PS, Shoup AG, Shea MC et al. Verification of improved 
patient outcomes with a partially implantable hearing aid, the 
SOUNDTEC Direct Hearing System. Laryngoscope, 2001; 111: 
1682-90.
130. Yanagihara N, Sato H, Hinohira Y et al. Long-term results using 
a piezoelectric semi-implantable middle ear hearing device: the 
Rion device E-type. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2001; 34: 
389-400.
131. Meyershoff W, Ridemour B. Tinnitus. In: Meyershofif, Ria, eds. 
Otolarangobgy Head and Neck Surgery, Philadelphia, PA: WB 
Saunders, 1992: 435-46.
132. Sismanis A. Pulsatile tinnitus, a 15 year experience. Am J Otol 
1998; 19: 472-7.
133. Moller A. Similarities between severe tinnitus and chronic pain. 
J Am A cad Audiol 2000; 11: 115-24.
134. Miihlmichel W, Elbert T, Taub E et al. Reorganization of auditory 
cortex in tinnitus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998; 95: 10340-3.
135. Pantev C, Liitkenhoner B. Magnetoencephalographic studies of 
functional organization and plasticity of the human auditory cor­
tex. J Clin Neurophysiol 2000; 17: 130-2.
136. Tomdorf J. The analogy between tinnitus and pain: a suggestion 
for a physiological basis of chronic tinnitus. Hear Res 1987; 28: 
271-5.
137. Moller M, Moller A, Jannetta P et al. Vascular decompression 
surgery for severe tinnitus: selection criteria and results. Laryn­
goscope 1993; 103: 421-7.
138. Wiech K, Preissl H, Lutzenberges W et al. Cortical reorganisation 
after digit to hand replantation. J Neurosurg 2000; 93: 876-83.
139. Ryu H, Yamamoto S, Sugiyama K et al. Neurovascular compres­
sion syndrome of the eighth cranial nerve. What are the most reli­
able diagnostic signs? Acta Neurochir (Wien) 1998; 140: 1279-86.
140. Donaldson ]. Pathogenesis of pseudotumor cerebri syndromes. 
Neurobgy 1981; 31: 877-80.
141. Paul K, Lye R, Strang F et al. Amold-Chiari malformation; 
review of 71 cases. J Neurosurg 1983; 58: 183-7.
142. Wiggs W, Sismanis A, Laine F. Pulsatile tinnitus associated with 
congenital central nervous system malformations. Am J Otol 
1996; 17: 241-4.
143. Ahmmed A, Mackenzie I, Das V et al. Audio-vestibular mani­
festations of Chiari malformation and outcome of surgical 
decompression: case report. J Laryngol Otol 1996; 110: 1060-4.
144. Couloignier V, Grayeli A, Bouccara D et al. Surgical treatment of 
the high jugular bulb in patients with Meniere’s disease and pul­
satile tinnitus. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1999; 256: 224-9.
145. Golueke P, Panetta T, Sclafani S, Varughese G. Tinnitus origi­
nating from an abnormal jugular bulb: treatment by jugular vein 
ligation. J Vase Surg 1987; 6: 248-51.
  

636 
Auditory disorders and their management
146. De Ridder D, Fransen H, Cammaert T et al. Intracranial stenting 
for pulsatile tinnitus. Poster presentation at Tinnitus Seminar, 
Fremantle Australia, 2001; 3: 5-7.
147. Jackson C, Harris P, Glasscock M et al. Diagnosis and manage- 
ment of paragangliomas of the skull base. AmJ Surg 1990; 159: 
389-93.
148. Megerian C, McKenna M, Nadol J. Non-paraganglioma jugular 
foramen lesions masquerading as glomus jugulare tumors. Am J 
Otol 1995; 16: 94-8.
149. Rosenbloom J, Storper I, Aviv ] et al. Giant cell tumors of the 
jugular foramen. AmJ Otolaryngol 1999; 20: 176-179.
150. Awad I, Barrow D, eds. Dural Arteriovenous Malformations. Park 
Ridge, IL: American Association of Neurological Surgeons, 1993.
151. Brookes G. Vascular decompression surgery for severe tinnitus. 
Am J Otol 1996; 17: 569-76.
152. Ko Y, Park C. Microvascular decompression for tinnitus. Stereo- 
tact Funct Neurosurg 1997; 68: 266-9.
153. Makins A, Nikolopoulos T, Ludman C et al. Is there a correlation 
between vascular loops and unilateral auditory symptoms? Laryn­
goscope 1998; 108: 1739-42.
154. Reisser C, Schuknecht H. The anterior inferior cerebellar artery 
in the internal auditory canal. Laryngoscope 1991; 101: 761-6.
155. Hamlyn P. Neurovascular relationships in the posterior cranial 
fossa, with special reference to trigeminal neuralgia. 2. Neurovas­
cular compression of the trigeminal nerve in cadaveric controls 
and patients with trigeminal neuralgia: quantification and influ­
ence of method. Clin Anat 1997; 10: 380-8.
156. Boden S, Davis D, Dina T et al. Magnetic resonance scans of the 
lumbar spine in asymptomatic patients. J Bone Joint Surg 1990; 
72A: 403-8.
157. Noren G. Long-term complications following gamma knife 
radiosurgery of vestibular schwannoma. Stereotact Funct Neuro­
surg 1998; 70(suppl 10): 65-73.
158. Dandy WE. Surgical treatment of Meniere’s disease. Surg 
Gynaecol Obstet 1941; 72: 421-5.
159. Berliner K, Shelton C, Hitselburger W et al. Acoustic tumours: 
effect of surgical removal on tinnitus. AmJ Otol 1992; 13: 13-17.
160. Lalwani A. Meningiomas, epidermoids, and other non acoustic 
tumors of the cerebellopontine angle. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 
1992; 25: 707-28.
161. Bengochea F, Blanco F. Arachnoid cysts of the cerebellopontine 
angle. J Neurosurg 1954; 12: 66-71.
162. Lesoin F, Dhellemes P, Rousseoux M et al. Arachnoid cysts and 
head injury. Acta Neurochir 1983; 69: 43-51.
163. Pappas D, Brackmann D. Arachnoid cysts of the posterior fossa. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1981; 89: 328-32.
164- Yanaka K, Enomoto T, Nose T et al. Post-inflammatory arach­
noid cyst of the quadrigeminal cistern. Observation of develop­
ment of the cyst. Childs Nerv Syst 1988; 4: 302-5.
165. Daspit C. Neurotologic aspects of posterior fossa arachnoid cysts. 
In: Jackler RK, Brackmann DE, eds. Neurotobgy. St Louis: 
Mosby-Year Book, 1994: 939-44.
166. Kaasinen S, Pyykko I, Ishizak H et al. Effect of intratympanic 
administered gentamycin on hearing and tinnitus in Meniere’s 
disease. A eta Otolarygol Suppl 1995; 52: 184-5.
167. Vernon J, Johnson R, Schleuning A. The characteristics and nat­
ural history of tinnitus in Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol Clin 
North Am 1980; 13:611-19.
168. Gersdorff M, Nouwen J, Gilain C et al. Tinnitus and otosclerosis. 
Eur Arch Otolaryngol 2000; 257: 314-16.
169. Glasgold A, Thedinger B, Cueva R. The effect of stapes surgery 
on tinnitus in otosclerosis. Laryngoscope 1966; 76: 1524-32.
170. De Ridder D, Krahel N, De Waele L et al. Auditory cortex 
meningeoma causing low pitch non-pulsatile tinnitus. Poster pre­
sentation at Tinnitus Seminar, Fremantle Australia, 2002; 3: 5-7.
171. Soussi T, Otto S. Effects of electrical brainstem stimulation on 
tinnitus. A eta Otolaryngol 1994; 114: 135-40.
Further Reading
Bluestone C. Current concepts of pathogenesis of otitis media 
with effusion. Pediatr Ann 1984; 13: 417-21.
Browning G, Gatehouse S. The prevalence of middle ear disease 
in the adult British population. Clin Otolaryngol 1992; 17: 
317-21.
Claes J, Van de Heyning PH, Creten W et al. Allograft tym­
panoplasty: predictive value of preoperative status. Laryngoscope 
1990; 100: 1313-18.
Colletti V, Fiorino F. Malleus-to-footplate prosthetic interposi­
tion: experience with 265 patients. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1999; 120: 437-44.
Domhoffer J, Gardner E. Prognostic factors in ossiculoplasty: a 
statistical staging system. Otol Neurotol 2001; 22: 299-304. 
Hamans E, Govaerts P, Somers T et al. Allograft tympanoplasty 
type 1 in the childhood population. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1996; 871-6.
Hough J, Dyer R, Matthews P et al. Semi-implantable electro­
magnetic middle ear hearing device for moderate to severe sen­
sorineural hearing loss. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2001; 34:
401-16.
Huttenbrink K. The mechanics and function of the middle ear. 
Part 1: The ossicular chain and middle ear muscles. Laryngorhi­
nootobgie 1992; 71: 545-51.
Iurato S, Marioni G, Onofri M. Hearing results of ossiculoplasty 
in Austin-Kartush group A patients. Otol Neurotol 2001; 22: 
140-4.
Jansen C. The combined approach for tympanoplasty (report on 
10 years experience). J Laryngol Otol 1968; 82: 779-93.
Janssens S, Govaerts PJ, Casselman J et al. The LAURA multi­
channel cochlear implant in a true Mondini dysplasia. Eur Arch 
Otorhinolaryngol 1996; 253: 301-4.
Kasic JF, Fredrickson JM. The Otologics MET ossicular stimula­
tor. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2001; 34: 501-13.
Marquet J. Twelve years experience with homograft tym­
panoplasty. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1977; 3: 581-93. 
Paparella M, Brady D, Hoel R. Sensorineural hearing loss in 
chronic otitis media and mastoiditis. Trans Am Acad Ophthalmol 
Otolaryngol 1970; 741: 108-15.
  

Surgical management of hearing impairment in audiological medicine 
637
Pepers-van Lith G, Brokx J, Vriens R. Enquete over auditieve 
mogelijkheden met hoorapparatuur bij clienten met het synd- 
room van Usher type II. Unpublished report, Instituut voor 
Doven, The Netherlands, 1996.
Quaranta N, Fernandez-Vega Feijoo S, Piazza F et al. Closed tym­
panoplasty in cholesteatoma surgery: long-term (10 years) hear­
ing 
results 
using 
cartilage 
ossiculoplasty. 
Eur 
Arch 
Otorhinolaryngol 2001; 258: 20-4.
Ryu H, Yamamoto S, Sugiyama K et al. Neurovascular decom­
pression of the eighth cranial nerve in patients with hemifacial 
spasm and incidental tinnitus: an alternative way to study tinni­
tus. J Neurosurg 1998; 88: 232-6.
Sade J, Luntz M, Levy D. Middle ear gas composition and middle 
ear aeration. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1995; 104: 369-73.
Schatteman I, Somers T, Govaerts P et al. Long-term results of 
allograft tympanoplasty in adult cholesteatoma. In: 6th Interna­
tional Conference on Cholesteatoma and Ear Surgery, Abstract book, 
FP 75, PI 1,2000.
Teele D, Klein J, Rosner B. Epidemiology of otitis media during 
the first seven years of life in children in greater Boston: a 
prospective cohort study. J Infect Dis 1989; 160: 83-94.
Vanden Abeele D, Coen E, Parizel P et al. Can MRI replace a 
second look operation in cholesteatoma surgery? Acta Otolaryngol 
1999; 119: 555-61.
Vincent R, Lopez A, Sperling N. Malleus ankylosis: a clinical, 
audiometric, histologic and surgical study of 123 cases. AmJ Otol 
1999; 20: 717-25.
  

___ Section IV
Vestibular science

37 The pathology of the 
vestibular system
Francesco Scaravilli
Anatomy
Labyrinth, vestibular nerve and nuclei
The inner ear includes the vestibular component of the 
cochleovestibular system. It consists of three semicircular ducts, 
the utricle and the saccule, all involved in maintaining the 
equilibrium, orientation in space, gaze and muscle tone.
The ducts, each with a terminal dilatation (ampulla), are 
arranged at right angles to each other (Figure 37.1). The 
ampulla contains a transversely orientated ridge (crista 
ampullaris) covered by the cupula; its columnar epithelium 
consists of neuroepithelial hair cells (the receptor). Following 
the displacement by angular acceleration of the endolymphatic 
fluid within the ducts, a movement of the cupula follows, which 
results in stimulation of the hair cells. The utricle and the sac­
cule form the otolith organ; their sensory epithelium (macula) 
possesses hair cells in contact with gelatinous material contain­
ing concretions (otoliths). Whereas the utricle is sensitive to
Figure 37.1 Anatomy of vestibular structures within the inner ear: AA, LA, PA 
=  anterior, lateral and posterior ampulla; C: cochlea; CN: cochlear nerve; FN: 
facial nerve; IVG and SVG: inferior and superior vestibular ganglion; S: saccule; 
U: utricule; VN: vestibular nerve.
gravitational forces, the saccule responds to linear acceleration 
in the ventro-dorsal axis of the body.
The vestibular ganglion (of Scarpa) is located in the inter­
nal auditory meatus and consists of superior and inferior parts, 
joined by a thin bridge (Figure 37.1). Vestibular nuclei are 
located predominantly in the floor of the fourth ventricle, span­
ning craniocaudally from slightly beyond the level of the Vlth 
cranial nerve nucleus to a level rostral to the nucleus of the 
hypoglossus. The four components of the vestibular nucleus are 
arranged in two longitudinal columns, the lateral including the 
superior, lateral and inferior nuclei, and the medial consisting 
exclusively of the medial nucleus, the largest (Figure 37.2).
Primary vestibular pathways
The vast majority of fibres entering the brainstem with the 
vestibular nerve bifurcate into ascending and descending 
branches and terminate in the four nuclei. Cells of the superior 
vestibular ganglion (from the utricular macula) project to the 
ventrolateral nucleus and those of the inferior ganglion (saccu­
lar macula) to the dorsolateral parts of the inferior vestibular
Figure 37.2 Components of the vestibular nucleus: M: medial; S: superior; L: 
lateral; I: inferior cell groups.

642 
Vestibular science
nucleus. Fibres from the cristae of the semicircular ducts termi­
nate in the superior vestibular and rostral parts of the medial 
vestibular nucleus. A small contingent of primary vestibular 
fibres traverse the lateral and superior vestibular nuclei and 
proceed, as primary vestibulocerebellar fibres, directly to the 
ipsilateral nodulus and uvula of the cerebellum.1
Afferent projections to the vestibular nuclei
The vestibular nuclei receive afferent fibres from the cerebel­
lum (the most numerous).2 They arise from the ipsilateral floc­
culus, nodulus and ventral uvula, and are directed to the superior 
and medial nuclei, from the ipsilateral anterior vermis to the 
dorsal part of the lateral vestibular and dorsorostral part of 
the inferior vestibular nuclei. The spinal projection connects 
the forelimb region of the anterior lobe with the forelimb 
region of the lateral vestibular nucleus. No fibres from the cere­
bral cortex, striatum or superior colliculi reach the vestibular 
nuclei. On the other hand, the medial vestibular nucleus is 
reached by fibres from the interstitial nucleus of Cajal, via the 
medial longitudinal fasciculus. Fibres from ganglion cells inner­
vating the cristae of the semicircular ducts and reaching the 
contralateral superior and medial vestibular nuclei, via com­
missural projections, have inhibitory effects; contralateral 
fibres from the maculae of the otoliths are, on the other hand, 
excitatory.
Secondary vestibular fibres 
From the vestibular nuclei fibres project:
1. To the cerebellum— from the inferior and medial vestibu­
lar nuclei to the ipsilateral nodulus, uvula and flocculus 
through the juxtarestiform body.
2. To the nuclei of the three oculomotor nerves (III, IV, VI) 
— crossed and uncrossed fibres via the medial longi­
tudinal fasciculus (MLF). They pass medially in the region 
of the nucleus of the VI nerve to form the fasciculus. 
The function of these fibres is to provide a simultaneous 
contraction of the lateral rectus on one side and of the 
medial rectus muscle on the opposite side, in order to 
achieve the conjugate lateral gaze. Those which terminate 
on motor neurones exert inhibitory influence on these 
cells.3 The MLF contains, in addition, non-vestibular fibres 
from: (a) interstitial nucleus of Cajal (interstitiospinal 
tract); (b) superior colliculus (tectobulbar and tectospinal 
tract); (c) pontine reticular formation (reticulospinal tract) 
and fibres from rostral brainstem nuclei directed to the 
inferior olive.
3. To the most caudal regions of the spinal cord via the ante­
rior and lateral funiculi (vestibulospinal tract, ipsilateral). 
These fibres are somatotopically arranged. The lateral 
vestibular nucleus, which receives impulses from the 
vestibular nerve and a number of cerebellar areas, mediates 
the muscular responses in the trunk and extremities, which 
are aimed at facilitating the tone of extensor muscles.
Pathology of the vestibular syste?n
The whole vestibular system can be affected by primary and 
secondary lesions (Table 37.1).
Malformations
These include underdevelopment or malformation of the 
vestibule, absence, thinning or malformation of the oval win­
dow, and calcification of its annular ligament. The vestibular 
aqueduct may be underdeveloped or displaced, and the utricle 
and saccule absent, underdeveloped or malformed. Maculae 
may be abnormal. The endolymphatic duct and sac may be 
underdeveloped, short or wide and the utriculoendolymphatic 
valve abnormal.
The internal auditory meatus may be absent or underdevel­
oped; its vestibular component can also be displaced. There 
may be abnormality of the blood vessels.
With regard to the aetiology of the malformations, it is 
unknown for some (congenital absence of the round window), 
and known for others. Some are genetically transmitted: the 
cardio-auditory syndrome (Jervell Lange-Nielsen syndrome 
(JLNS) is a recessive disorder with congenital deafness and long 
QT (LQTS1) on the EEG. Mutations in the potassium channel 
gene KVLQT1 have been identified in JLNS and in the auto­
somal dominant LQT syndrome.4 Waardenburg syndrome is an 
autosomal dominant disorder characterized by sensorineural 
hearing loss, pigmentary disturbances and other developmental 
defects,5 and is caused by defective function of the embryonic 
neural crest.6 Depending on additional symptoms, it is further 
classified into four subtypes (WS1, 2, 3 and 4).7 Mutations in 
the microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) and 
PAX3 are responsible for WS2 and WS1/3, respectively,7 bear­
ing in mind that WS3 is an extreme form of WS1. Usher syn­
drome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by 
sensorineural hearing loss and visual impairment secondary to 
retinitis pigmentosa. The disorder is clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous; several subtypes of Usher type 1 have been 
described, the most frequent being USH1B, located on 
chromosome llql3.5.8
Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder with a 
defective organic binding of iodine leading to goitre, hypopla­
sia of the cochlea and widened vestibular aqueduct.9 The gene
Table 37.1 Pathology of the vestibular system.
Malformations 
Positional vertigo 
Bone lesions
Ageing and degenerative diseases 
Ototoxicity
Infectious and inflammatory diseases
Vascular lesions
Neoplasms
  

The pathology of the vestibular system 
643
responsible for the disorder has been mapped to chromosome 
7q31.10
The genetics related to acoustical neuroma will be dealt 
with later in this chapter. Chiari malformation was first 
described in 1891, and includes three subtypes.11
Type 1 presents with conical elongation of the cerebellar 
tonsils and adjacent cerebellar tissue into the vertebral canal. 
Spina bifida is not a feature, whereas adult patients can develop 
hydrocephalus. After studying 32 patients, Shady et al12 con­
cluded that tonsillar herniation is the consequence of bony 
occipital dysplasia.
Type 2 is found most commonly in infants together with 
myelomeningocele and hydrocephalus. Pathological changes 
consist of elongation of the inferior vermis and brainstem, 
which are displaced in the cervical spinal canal. The disorder is 
associated with abnormalities of the bone and dura and, in 50% 
of the patients, the lower medulla bends to form an S-shaped 
curve over the cervical cord.13 In addition, patients have 
macroscopic polygyria.14 The pathogenesis of the disorder is 
controversial, although a skeletal defect appears the most likely 
possibility.13
Type 3 is very rare. Pathological changes include occipito­
cervical or high cervical bone defects leading to cerebellar her­
niation. Associated changes are breaking of the tectum, 
elongation and folding of the brainstem, and lumbar spina 
bifida.
Vestibular 
symptoms 
in 
Chiari 
malformation 
are 
reported.15-17
Positional vertigo
This is a clinical symptom with no definite pathological coun­
terpart, as pathological lesions outside the vestibular system, in 
particular in the cerebellum, can be responsible for it.18 In a 
study by Lindsay and Hemenway19 atrophy of the superior divi­
sion of the vestibular nerve, utricle and crista of the lateral 
semicircular canal were described. Dix and Hallpike20 and 
Cawthorne and Hallpike21 showed degeneration of the macula 
of the utricle and of the cristae of the lateral and superior 
semicircular canals and of the superior vestibular nerve. 
Schuknecht22 described, in two cases of positional vertigo, 
basophilic deposits adhering to the posterior surface of the 
cupula of the left posterior semicircular canal. The author sug­
gested that the abnormal material could derive from otoconia 
in a degenerated utricular macula. This type of abnormality is 
called cupulolithiasis as opposed to canalithiasis which is due to 
free-floating debris in the long arm of the posterior canal.23
In a study of 363 patients presenting with vertigo,24 32% 
were found to have migraine. Common migraine can be 
defined as a unilateral, pulsating headache, lasting one to sev­
eral days, which may be associated with nausea and vomiting.25 
Migraine, as well as oral contraceptives, is a common risk fac­
tor for cerebral infarction in young women.26 Organic lesions 
associated with migraine include meningocortical calcifying 
angiomatosis,27 mitochondrial cytopathy,28-30 CADASIL,31-35
hereditary endotheliopathy with retinopathy, nephropathy 
and stroke (HERNS), a disorder distinct from CADASIL,36 
moyamoya disease,37 and giant cell arteritis.38
Bone lesions
Presentation and discussion of the disorders due to bone pathol­
ogy go beyond the scope of this chapter, and the reader is 
invited to consult specialized books on this topic.39,40 Here, only 
inherited hyperostoses will be mentioned.
Camurati-Englemann (or Englemann) disease, an uncom­
mon condition inherited as an autosomal dominant trait,41 is 
characterized radiologically by symmetric diaphyseal sclerosis 
involving the tubular bones, and clinically by limb pain, mus­
cle weakness, waddling gait and sometimes deafness.42 Hearing 
impairment is reported in 18% of the patients.43 Hanson and 
Pames44 reported compression of the vestibular nerve, and 
Wilhelm et al45 described vestibular disturbances and facial 
paralysis, in addition to damage to the optic nerves. The patho­
genesis of the disorder consists of the narrowing of the internal 
auditory canal.43
Paget’s disease of the bone, or ‘osteitis deformans’, is a dis­
order characterized by rapid remodelling resulting in abnormal 
bone formation. It affects 3-5% of people over 40 years. 
Genetic linkage analysis of families with this disease shows 
linkage to a region of chromosome 18q, near the polymorphic 
locus D18S42.46
Vestibular dysfunction has been reported by Proops et al,47 
who also described the pathological features of the disorder.
Ageing and degenerative diseases
Elderly people may present with disturbances of balance (pres- 
byastasis) resulting in dysequilibrium, vertigo, light-headedness 
and falls. The disorder can be permanent or episodic.48 Vestibu­
lar changes include degeneration of the saccular and, to a lesser 
extent, the utricular macula and loss of otoconia.49 Rosenhall50 
described epithelial cysts in the sensory epithelium of the pos­
terior and superior ampullary cristae, whereas reduction in the 
number of vestibular ganglion cells has not been confirmed.
With regard to neurodegenerative diseases, the lateral 
vestibular nucleus was found to harbour numerous neurofibril­
lary tangles in patients with Alzheimer’s disease, albeit without 
nerve cell loss.51 Neuronal loss, gliosis and neurofibrillary tan­
gles in vestibular nuclei were described in progressive supranu­
clear palsy52 (Figure 37.3a) and in a patient with thalamic 
degeneration of 20 years’ duration.53 Multisystem atrophy 
includes a group of disorders which were formerly described sep­
arately as olivopontocerebellar atrophy, Shy-Drager syndrome 
and striatonigral degeneration. These disorders are character­
ized by nerve cell loss in various regions and by the presence 
of characteristic glial inclusions.54 Vestibular nuclei (Figure 
37.3b), together with the primary motor and premotor cortex, 
putamen, globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, pretectal area, 
pontine nuclei, motor nuclei of the V, VII and XII cranial
  

644 
Vestibular science
Figure 37.3 Neurone of the vestibular nucleus containing a tou-positive neurofibrillary tangle in a patient with progressive supranuclear palsy (a). Similar changes 
can be found in a number of neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's disease, (b) In MSA (multisystem atrophy), a number of glial cells (oligodendrocytes) 
contain typical cytoplasmic inclusions (arrows), best visualized by the Galiyas metod. X360.
nerves, pontomedullary reticular centres and intermediolateral 
column of the spinal cord are among the areas with the highest 
density of these inclusions.
A growing number of neurodegenerative disorders are 
presently known to be caused by an expanded CAG trinu^ 
cleotide repeat that encodes polyglutamine in the disease pro- 
tein.55 To date, these disorders include Huntington’s disease, 
spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy, dentatorubropallidoluysian 
atrophy and eight spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, 
12 and 17). The characteristic pathological feature common to 
all of them is the presence of ubiquitin-positive intranuclear 
inclusions within neurones. Involvement of the vestibular 
nuclei has not been reported in SCA1 and 2,56 whereas it has 
been described in many patients with SCA357-59 (Figure 37.4). 
Moreover, vestibular nuclei are also abnormal in denta­
torubropallidoluysian atrophy (all three cases in Iizuka et al;60 
case 4 in Hayashi et al61).
Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease is a familial form 
of prion disease known to have mutations, first found at codons
102, 105 and 117 and subsequently also at codons 145, 198 and 
217. Pathological changes include amyloid, kuru-like plaques, 
spongiform changes of variable severity, nerve cell degeneration 
and reactive gliosis. Among the various regions of the brain 
involved, Kuzuhara et al62 found cell loss also in the vestibular 
nuclei.
toxicity. This is the direct result of action by the drug on 
sensory cells and is further enhanced in patients with ele- 
vated serum iron.63 The effect of tobramycin on the human 
ear has been documented by Sone et al64 in six patients. 
Four of their temporal bones showed loss of hair cells and 
degeneration of ganglion cells. Moreover, six bones 
revealed degeneration of the spiral ganglion. In amino- 
glycoside65 and gentamicin66 toxicity, hair cell loss in the 
cochlea takes place via apoptosis.
2• Ethacrynic acid, a loop diuretic, has been involved in oto­
toxicity. It damages the hair cells of the cochlea and 
vestibule.67 Vestibular changes are described as cyst forma­
tion in the sensory epithelium of the posterior semicircular 
canal and the saccular macula.40 It should be mentioned 
that ethacrynic acid enhances ototoxicity induced by 
streptomycin, by addition (not potentiation) of the effects.68
3. The effect of salicylates on the vestibular system has been 
interpreted by Pickrell et al69 as being due to potentiation 
of the action of ototoxins, probably by increasing the levels 
of these toxins in the endolymphatic fluid. No pathological 
changes have been reported in experimental studies, and 
there are no human temporal bone studies.
4. Quinine and 5. cytotoxic drugs are not known to induce 
changes of the vestibular structures.
Ototoxicity
Damage to the inner ear has been described following adminis­
tration of a number of drugs. Five classes are considered by 
Michaels.40
1. Aminoglycoside antibiotics (streptomycin, kanamycin, 
gentamicin, tobramycin, viomycin and aminokacin). As 
these drugs also induce damage to the kidney, any delay in 
clearing the drug from the circulation would increase oto­
Infeetious and inflammatory diseases
Agents of inflammatory diseases include bacteria, protozoa, 
fungi, metazoa and viruses. Involvement of the vestibular 
system follows various routes and takes place at different levels.
Bacterial infections
Invasion of the labyrinth may occur either from an otitis media, 
by far the most frequent occurrence, or via the meninges. In the 
first instance, infection enters via the oval or round windows,
  

The pathology of the vestibular system 
645
s
producing bone damage resulting in a fistula between the mid- 
die ear and labyrinth which may extend to the leptomeninges.70 
As for the meningeal route, involvement occurs via the inter­
nal auditory meatus and the cochlear aqueduct. In a study of 41 
patients with bacterial meningitis,71 suppurative labyrinthitis 
occurred in 20 of them.
The role of meningitis in producing bilateral vestibular fail­
ure (BVF) was evaluated by Brandt72 and confirmed by Rinne 
et al.73 The latter authors found that BVF was secondary to 
meningitis in 11% of 53 patients. The long-lasting effects of 
meningitis were followed up by Hugosson et al,74 who detected 
subclinical vestibular pathology in 6 of 9 adults who had 
suffered from meningitis in childhood.
With regard to the aetiology of meningitides, damage to the 
vestibular system was revealed in patients who had survived 
meningococcal group B meningitis. ’ In Haemophilus influent 
zae meningitis, the loss of vestibular functions was attributed to 
ampicillin,77 whereas tetracyclines, used in the treatment of 
Chlamydia, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, rickettsial and gonococcal 
infections, may also cause vestibular damage.78 Vestibular are- 
flexia was reported as a sequel in 13 of 111 patients with previ­
ous pneumococcal meningitis.79 One case of vestibular nerve 
damage was reported by Heininger et al80 in a boy with borre- 
liosis, whereas McNeil and Gordon81 report lack of labyrinthine 
function as a sequel of Streptococcus suis type II meningitis.
Tuberculous meningitis may occasionally affect the middle 
ear. The incidence of this infection is now increasing again, 
particularly among destitute people. The vestibular nerve and 
pathways may appear as a tuberculoma which, when localized to 
the cerebellopontine angle, may mimic the symptoms of the 
schwannoma of the VIII nerve.
The histological appearances of the process are similar to 
those seen elsewhere and include a granulomatous reaction
Figure 37.4 Photomicrographs of 
intranuclear inclusions in the vestibular 
nuclei of a patient suffering from 
SCA3/MJD. In H&E-stained sections, the 
pale inclusion is seen adjacent to a small 
a nucleolus (a). Inclusions are strongly 
'  ubiquitin-and lC2-positive. (b) X900.
with epithelioid and multinucleated giant cells of Langhans’ 
type as well as lymphocytes (Figure 37.5). Caseous necrosis 
occurs with a meningeal localization, but is considered rare in 
the bone.39 The diagnosis is confirmed by histochemical visual­
ization 
of 
acid-fast 
organisms 
with 
light 
microscopy 
(Zeehl-Neelsen method), fluorescence (auramine-rhodamine) 
or culture.
Because of the many morphological similarities with 
tuberculosis, it is appropriate to describe sarcoidosis at this 
point. This systemic disease of unknown aetiology is found pre­
dominately among women, and appears morphologically as 
non-caseating granulomas consisting of closely packed epithe­
lioid cells which often include Langhans’ or foreign body multi­
nucleated giant cells (Figure 37.6). Necrosis is usually absent 
and never has a caseating appearance. In chronic cases, a ring 
of fibrous or hyaline tissue may surround the granuloma. Lami­
nated calcified concretions (Schaumann bodies) and asteroid 
bodies may be seen within giant cells. Neither type of body is 
pathognomonic.
Sarcoidosis has a predilection for the meninges at the base 
and therefore affects cranial nerves. The VIII nerve has been 
found to be involved in 5% of patients,82 making it the fourth 
most commonly involved cranial nerve,83 the facial nerve being 
the most affected.84 Hooper and Holden85 described both 
acoustical and vestibular signs. In their patient 2, functional 
tests suggested a non-labyrinthine lesion, possibly located in 
the brainstem.
In congenital syphilis, the infection may appear as gummae 
involving the bone marrow and periosteum and as diffuse pet­
rositis.40 Deafness is present in over a third of patients with con­
genital syphilis,86 and indeed it is one of the components of the 
Hutchinson’s triad (together with interstitial keratitis and 
deformed incisor teeth).
  

646 
Vestibular science
<9
* • 
** 
*W-'
*  ■ -• 
■«. -  ■ • * % ;
Figure 37.5 Tuberculous granulomas consist of epithelioid cells, 
lymphocytes and Langhans’ multinucleated giant cells and are 
associated with caseous necrosis, which is seen in this picture 
surrounding the granuloma. HftE, X220.
In the acquired infection, the central nervous system 
(CNS) is regularly involved in early syphilis, and sensorineural 
hearing loss is the commonest symptom. In association with 
HIV infection, tertiary syphilis may appear at an earlier stage 
than in the penicillin era (within 2 years of onset of Treponema 
infection). Musher et al87 reported 40 such patients with asymp­
tomatic neurosyphilis, meningitis or cranial nerve abnormali­
ties. Cranial nerves involved included the optic and VIII 
nerves.
Protozoa
The four main groups of protozoa which produce infections of 
the nervous system in humans (amoebae, including free living 
amoebae, Plasmodium, Toxoplasma and Trypanosoma) do not 
appear to affect the vestibular system, except as part of a more 
generalized involvement of the nervous system.
Fungi
Although the incidence of mycoses has been increasing in the 
last three decades because of the growing number of immuno- 
suppressed patients, infections of the inner ear and peripheral 
vestibular system remain rare. In most cases they take place via 
the bloodstream, although on occasion (see mucormycosis 
below) they spread by contiguity through the bone.
Infection of the inner ear by Candida has been reported.88 
In an experimental study by Ashman et al89 systemic infection 
by Candida albicans in ageing inbred mice produced lesions of 
the utricle, adjacent parts of the semicircular canals, and also of 
the saccule and scala vestibuli. In another study,90 involvement 
of the vestibule seemed to proceed from the brain and 
pachymeningitis that eroded the petrous bone.
A granulomatous meningitis due to Coccidioides immitis, a 
fungus endemic in South America (particularly Argentina and
4 
W 
•<? 
f 
" V * 
-"vA  
%
* 
«  
/  
J *  -4  ♦ 
\
 
I , 
* 
!&
/  
V  * 
' 
■"'* 
V s* '
*9? f * 
_ 
* r • 
v ■
I 
“ 
* 
m 
B 
m
V r \ .  
* V
.  
1 
- 
" V
v V
,  
'
* £ 
* 
k 
^ 
#
V* 
j  
* 
k 
1 
•  
ft k
b 
|  
ft
If*-. 
•• 
*  •'%  
*  
, «
r 
f * * 
‘ j B >*.
.
^ 
* S , . 
.. 
f;. r 
" 
• 
- 
, ;
'« 
„ .
- 
*  
* 
Jf 
A 
^  
? 
• 
A  -  V . - j
• / t -  
c 
- 
... . • ■ 
t *• •;
¥ .%■ _ 
m 
i * 
0
*1 
.  
*• 
^  
\  ' Y /  •
. *v-» '
. 
c  
— 
r  - / 
^
* - 
. r  
, 
-  -  
**m * 
'  >  • V
 
#
Figure 37.6 In sarcoidosis, granulomas are similar to those described 
in tuberculosis, but typically lack the necrosis. H6tE, X220.
  

The pathology of the vestibular system 
647
Paraguay), Mexico, and also southern California,91 affecting the 
vestibular nerve, was reported in a dog.92
Destruction of the VIII nerve and end organs was 
described in a 19-year-old woman with cryptococcal meningi­
tis,93 and Teuscher et al94 reported a vestibular syndrome associ­
ated with Cryptococcus neoformans in a horse. Meningitis is 
different in immunocompetent and immunocompromised 
patients. In the former it shows a cellular component consisting 
of small inflammatory cells, including multinucleated giant 
cells. In the latter it includes almost exclusively organisms 
extensively infiltrating the central and peripheral nervous 
system (Figure 37.7).
As a number of members of the orders Mucorales and Ento- 
morphthorales affect the head and neck, including bone and 
soft tissues, they can spread to the vestibular system. Meyerhoff 
et al88 reported on a mildly diabetic patient in whom mucor 
infection had reached the middle ear, producing multiple cra­
nial nerve (including the VIII) involvement. The infection had 
started as a focus in the pharynx and had spread to the base of 
the skull by contiguity.
Metazoa
Involvement of the vestibular system in metazoal infections 
depends on the localization of the parasite.
In cysticercosis, caused by the pig tapeworm Taenia solium, 
cysts tend to be multiple and localized within the brain 
parenchyma, in the meninges, in the ventricles, and sometimes 
in the spinal cord. Meningeal cysts often have a basal localiza­
tion and can affect the vestibular nerve; as parenchymal cysts, 
they can involve the central vestibular pathways. In one patient 
reported by Ronge et al95 cysts, localized in the cerebellopontine 
angle, produced a deficit of the cochleovestibular nerve.
Hydatid disease, the infection due to Echinococcus granulo­
sus, is a worldwide problem. Whereas in humans the most 
involved organ is the liver (55%), the brain is affected in less
? i
than 1% of patients. Cyst formation in the brain is usually soli­
tary, spherical and unilocular. Cysts are almost always found in 
the cerebral hemispheres. A patient with a cyst involving the 
cerebellar vermis and right cerebellar hemisphere was described 
by Palomico-Nicas and Pachon-Diaz.96
Viral infections
These can involve the central and peripheral vestibular path­
ways. With regard to the former, a viral aetiology is still a con­
troversial issue in most cases. Although Meniere’s disease is 
widely regarded as being more probably due to endolymphatic 
hydrops, Adour et al97 concluded that it results from a gan­
glionitis caused by herpes simplex virus (HSV). Indeed, intense 
vertiginous 
spells of sudden onset were 
observed by 
Mangabeira-Albemaz and Gananca98 in patients with previous 
viral infections. Neuro-otological examination revealed central 
vestibular involvement. Furuta et al" examined at post­
mortem 26 vestibular ganglia. Using PCR, in situ hybridization 
and immunohistochemistry, they detected HSV DNA in 6 of 
10 ganglia. However, as the latency-associated transcript (LAT) 
of HSV-1 was negative in all 16 ganglia examined, they con­
cluded that ganglia are latently infected and that LAT is tran­
scribed weakly or not at all. In another study by Shimizu et al100 
various viruses were investigated (HSV and Herpes zoster virus 
(HZV), cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus (EB), adenovirus, 
influenza type A and B, parainfluenza 3, mumps, rubella and 
measles virus) in 57 patients with vestibular neuronitis. HSV-1 
IgM was found in only one case. In a study of 232 patients with 
acute peripheral vestibulopathy, usually attributed to viral 
inflammation or ischaemia of the extra-axial vestibular portion 
of the VIII nerve, 45 showed electrophysiological signs of 
pontine involvement. Possible causes included vertebrobasilar 
ischaemia (22 patients) or multiple sclerosis (8 patients).101 The 
pathology is poorly documented. In an ultrastructural study of 
the ganglion of Scarpa and vestibular nerve, Friedmann and
Figure 37.7 Cryptococcus meningoencephalitis involving the 
medulla and the cochleovestibular nerve in an immunocompromised 
patient Note that in these patients the organisms, appearing as 
spherical structures in a pale and mucoid background, are not 
accompanied by inflammatory cells. HEtE, X90.
  

648 
Vestibular science
* * A-
A '
* * ',f
*
• 
<  T
, 
. .  
T 
„  
, - j * ,  
,  ±  
, v ^ .  
-
• 
V 
, 
* * 
* 
- 
-
. 
,, 
# 
» <# 
f V 
• ^
5  
I 
‘ 
* V  
, ' v 
/  
m  
*  m“ i 
■ \  
+
* 
> 
*,*• f 
y ^ 
* 
* 
ftV ?*
’• 
’ > 
*• 
*• 
v a  
- * v  : 
* *■ - * i «
1 * %
% * 1 I 4
% ^ % 
V
%* *
. 
.  
o  
/
• A *
•' * - V ' * •
. 
/>1 
* *« . 
»•
V 
^ c 
_ *
s '  
' 
A  
*
*» 
’~, f 
- 3
Figure 37.8 The inflammatory process, shown here to involve the 
vestibular nuclei in CMV encephalitis, includes a spotty area of 
necrosis, microglial hyperplasia and two large astrocytes with an 
intranuclear inclusion (arrows). HEtE, X220.
House102 described degenerative neuronal changes and axonal 
lesions, both non-specific.
Although involvement of the central vestibular pathways 
in viral diseases does take place, signs and symptoms are not so 
frequently reported, as they are probably overshadowed by more 
severe ones elicited by the diffuse involvement of the brain.
HSV encephalitis has, in most cases, a hyperacute course, 
with haemorrhagic and necrotic lesions located predominantly 
in areas of the brain forming the limbic system. However, in 
cases with a subacute course, it shows the features of micro- 
nodular encephalitis. Localization to the brainstem shows these 
appearances. Kaji et al103 analysed data from 27 patients: 
although limbic encephalitis was by far the commonest occur­
rence, two patients were found to also have a brainstem local­
ization. Using in situ hybridization, Schmidbauer et al104 
revealed HSV DNA in 16 of 34 patients (43%) with brainstem 
(microglial nodule) encephalitis, thus confirming HSV as the 
cause of nodular encephalitis; the authors do not mention the 
cochleovestibular nuclei among those involved by the process.
The brainstem may be involved in HZV encephalitis;105 a 
brainstem localization of cytomegalovirus (CMV) with truncal 
ataxia was reported by Fuller et al106 in a patient suffering from 
AIDS (Figure 37.8).
The pathology depends on the causative agent; however, 
pathognomonic features (intranuclear inclusion bodies in many 
encephalitides) may be absent. Common abnormalities include 
perivascular cuffings, usually by lymphocytes and occasionally 
plasma cells, hypertrophy and proliferation of microglial cells, 
reactive gliosis, occasional foci of necrosis and neuronal 
changes (chromatolysis and neuronophagia).105 In progressive 
multifocal leukoencephalopathy, localization to the brainstem 
occurs, albeit not frequently. The main pathological changes 
are severe myelin loss, scanty perivascular lymphocytic cuffs, 
macrophages and transformation of a number of surviving 
oligodendrocytes into large cells, many of which contain 
intranuclear inclusions of papovavirus.
The reader is referred to texts of neuropathology for more 
detailed descriptions regarding bacterial, fungal, protozoal, 
metazoal and viral diseases.91,105,107
Inflammatory diseases
These include disorders with an inflammatory pattern, but 
whose aetiology is either not known or definitely not infectious. 
The central vestibular pathways may be involved if the disorder 
has a brainstem localization. They can be grouped as follows:
1. multiple sclerosis
2. autoimmune encephalitis
3. vasculitides
4. paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS)
This is the most frequent and frequently identified disorder in 
this group and affects the central myelin. It is characterized by 
relapses and remissions of neurological disturbances with pro­
gressive deterioration. This can take place in a steadily progres­
sive way from the onset (primary progressive MS) or through 
progression after an incomplete remission (secondary progres­
sive MS). It affects individuals from 15 to 50 years at onset, and 
there is a 1.5:1 female predominance. The course spans from a 
few months to many decades, with an average life-expectancy 
of 25 years. In Europe its incidence increases with increasing 
latitude, and in the UK it varies between 175/100000 and 
99/100000 between Scotland and the south of England. 
Genetic factors, in addition to environment, also play a role: 
MS has a low incidence among Orientals, and shows a 30% 
concordance among identical twins. In most populations, the 
disease is associated with HLA-DR15.
MS can present as an acute, subacute or chronic illness 
affecting the white matter of any region of the CNS. One of its 
most characteristic features is its lack of respect for any anatom­
ical boundary. Therefore, with regard to the vestibular, as
  

The pathology of the vestibular system 
649
indeed any other, system, the whole or part of it may be 
involved, together with adjacent regions (Figure 37.9). Other 
characteristic pathological features of the typical lesions 
(plaques) are their multiplicity, the sharp demarcation from 
the surrounding normal white matter, the predominantly 
subependymal or subpial location, and their different age. 
Moreover, plaques are accompanied by perivenous lymphocytic 
cuffing. Areas of remyelination may also be present (shadow 
plaques). As white matter is ubiquitous in the CNS, including 
within the cortical grey matter, so are plaques.
The cellular composition of the plaques varies according 
to their stage of evolution. Inactive chronic plaques are 
hypocellular, contain predominantly astrocytes, no oil red O- 
positive material (indicative of a rather acute process), sparse 
oligodendrocytes, thickened veins with inflammatory cells, and 
normal or beaded axons. In active chronic stages, myelin break­
down is in progress at the edges of the plaque, there is oil red O- 
or myelin basic protein-positive material in macrophages, and 
oligodendrocytes may be either increased or decreased in num­
ber, whereas astrocytes do not take an active part. Remyelinat- 
ing (shadow) plaques contain palely stained myelinated fibres. 
They may either persist indefinitely or further demyelinate. In 
acute plaques, myelin breakdown is associated with the pres­
ence of microglia and macrophages. The vessels are initially 
normal, and astrocytes and lymphocytes are fewer in number. 
The fate of oligodendrocytes varies, whereas axons are beaded. 
Two to three months later, enlarged astrocytes become obvious, 
myelin-laden 
macrophages 
disappear 
progressively, 
and 
lymphocytes increase in number.
As for the aetiology of MS, a viral hypothesis is supported 
by: (1) abnormal immune responses to a number of viral agents 
shown by patients; (2) long latencies and recurrences shared 
with some viral diseases; and (3) destruction of oligodendro­
cytes, as seen in some viral diseases. However, in MS, demyeli-
Figure 37.9 A plaque of multiple sclerosis in the medulla is shown to involve 
the vestibular nuclei. The plaque is sharply demarcated from the surrounding 
normal myelin and bears no relationship to any boundaries or systems. Luxol 
fast blue/cresyl violet.
nation cannot be seen as a bystander of inflammation, as the 
latter appears late. In favour of an autoimmune process are the 
following data: (1) induction of spontaneously relapsing/remit- 
ting disorders following injection of myelin components; (2) 
MS-like lesions induced in humans after injection of nervous 
tissue; and (3) similarities between myelin destruction in MS 
and experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE). However, 
there are morphological differences between MS and EAE, and 
autoreactive T cells or anti-myelin and anti-oligodendrocyte 
antibodies, similar to those seen in MS, are detected in other 
inflammatory diseases of the CNS.
Autoimmune encephalitides include: 
(1) perivenous 
encephalomyelitis in its post-infectious and post-vaccinal 
forms; and (2) acute haemorrhagic leukoencephalomyelitis. 
The latter (Hurst’s disease), usually fatal, is characterized by 
abrupt onset, preceded in 50% of the cases by a febrile illness. 
It affects individuals between 2 and 36 years and can be con­
sidered as a hyperacute form of perivenous encephalomyelitis 
affecting the white matter. Pathological features include small 
vessel necrosis with fibrinoid degeneration, petechial haemor­
rhages and neutrophil infiltration. With regard to the aetiology 
of these lesions, a direct viral hypothesis appears to have been 
ruled out on the basis of: (1) failure to recover a virus from the 
brain or to demonstrate either viral antigens or nucleic acid in 
the nervous system in patients with perivenous encephalo­
myelitis;108,109 and (2) pathological features that are quite differ­
ent from those of any known viral encephalitis. On the other 
hand, the possibility that autoimmunity plays a role is supported 
by the following observations: (1) the stereotyped pattern of the 
reaction; (2) the delay between contact of the agent with the 
subject and development of the disorder; (3) pathological simi­
larities with changes seen in EAE induced by whole white mat­
ter or myelin;110 and (4) detection of lymphocytes reactive to 
myelin basic protein in peripheral blood and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) in patients who develop perivenous encephalomyelitis 
following various viral infections.111,112
Brainstem involvement has been documented in acute 
haemorrhagic leukoencephalitis in humans113,114 and in a dog.115 
No reports have been published on similar involvement in 
perivenous encephalomyelitis.
Vasculitis
This includes primary forms and those which are a manifesta­
tion of systemic diseases. Among the former are: (1) Takayasu’s 
arteritis; (2) giant cell (temporal) arteritis; and (3) primary 
angiitis of the CNS. The latter include: (1) systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE); (2) polyarteritis nodosa; (3) Wegener’s 
granulomatosis; (4) Churg-Strauss syndrome; (5) Sjogren syn­
drome; and (6) Bel^et syndrome. Pathological features of these 
disorders are described in detail by Kalimo et al.116
Brainstem involvement, and hence possible vestibular 
complications, have been reported in SLE,117,118 Sjogren 
syndrome119 and Behcet disease.120,121
Vasculitis may also occur in individuals taking phenyl­
propanolamine or amphetamine, methamphetamine and
  

650 
Vestibular science
ephedrine, the latter being sympathomimetics with chemical
structures similar to that of phenylpropanolamine, 
damage usually results in brain haemorrhage.
122 Vascular
Paraneoplastic disorders
Paraneoplastic syndromes (PNS) include a number of uncom­
mon disorders associated with systemic non-invasive malignan­
cies. 
The 
incidence of paraneoplastic disorders varies 
depending on the criteria applied to their definition.123 More­
over, the correlation between type of neoplasm and appearance 
of the changes in the central and peripheral nervous systems is 
not absolute or is even absent. These syndromes may become 
clinically evident before, after or at the time of the discovery of 
the neoplasm.
The detection, in patients with PNS, of antibodies reacting 
both with neuronal antigens and tumours supports an autoim­
mune pathogenesis. Various antibodies are known, whose 
description and properties go beyond the scope of this 
chapter.124
PNS are chronic encephalomyelitides or ganglionitis which 
share the following morphological features:
1. predominant involvement of the grey matter, ganglia and 
nerves
2. presence of inflammatory changes, including perivascular 
lymphocytic cuffing and microglia hyperplasia and forma­
tion of neuronophagic nodules
3. absence of vasculitic changes
4. non-specific astrocytic hypertrophy
5. white matter changes secondary to neuronal loss.
The central and peripheral nervous systems can be involved 
separately or together, and the following clinico-pathological 
subtypes are described:
1. limbic encephalitis
2. brainstem encephalitis
3. myelitis
4. ganglioradiculoneuritis and autonomic neuropathy.
Particularly relevant for neuro-otologists is subtype (2). It poses 
differential diagnostic problems with vascular disorders, motor 
neurone disease, MS, infections and inflammatory disorders and 
intrinsic tumours, mainly before the tumour has become mani­
fest. The inflammatory process may involve any of the nuclei 
of the brainstem, and Gulya126 has reported cochleovestibular 
dysfunction in personal cases (Figure 37.10).
Vascular lesions
The CNS is highly dependent on the continuous flux of oxygen 
and nutrients through the blood vessels, and adequate blood 
supply can be affected by abnormalities of these vessels. The 
main vascular lesions responsible for an impaired circulation are 
the following:
1. atherosclerosis
2. hypertensive angiopathy
3. inflammatory
4. aneurysms
5. vascular malformations
6. miscellaneous disorders.
Atherosclerosis
This is the commonest vascular disorder, and many risk factors 
are considered. They include dyslipidaemia, hypertension, dia­
betes mellitus and smoking. Its incidence among ethnic groups 
varies, reflecting also differences in socio-economic conditions. 
Various hypotheses have been put forward regarding its patho­
genesis: (1) the lipid hypothesis; (2) the response to injury; and 
(3) a unifying theory. Atherosclerotic lesions undergo stages, 
beginning with intimal changes, which lead ultimately to the 
degeneration of part of the wall, with either dilatation or severe 
reduction of the lumen.
• 
,  
*
* 
V’ 
I
* /
•i »
** 
• 
4 0 
m* 
I 
• 
•
* » ' 
'V  f
* 
*4
**
Figure 37.10 Photomicrograph of the vestibular nuclei in a patient 
with the bulbar localization of paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis. 
Note the small microglial nodule (arrow) in the place of an absent 
nerve cell. HEtE, X220.
  

The pathology of the vestibular system 
651
The vertebrobasilar sector of the cerebral vessels is fre­
quently affected. According to Stebhens127 the extracranial seg­
ment of the vertebral arteries escapes atherosclerosis, except at 
its origin. On the other hand, Fisher et al128 state that the 
carotid and vertebral arteries suffer equally in their intra- and 
extracranial portions. Meyer and Beck129 described segmental 
involvement of the vertebral arteries in their cervical course, 
plaques tending to affect wider or ectatic segments between the 
foramina of the transverse processes. The brainstem can suffer 
from cerebrovascular accidents. With regard to the vestibular 
system, the size and location of its nuclei and pathways within 
the brainstem are such that vascular changes in this area 
involve more than one cranial nerve, in addition to long 
ascending and descending tracts. On the other hand, the distri­
bution of the various branches is so stereotyped and the chances 
of collateral circulation so small that well-defined neurological 
sequelae can follow damage to the small branches of the 
vertebrobasilar system.
Wallenberg’s syndrome results from occlusion either of the 
posterior inferior cerebellar artery or of the bulbar branches of 
the vertebral artery, producing a well-circumscribed area of 
infarct (Figure 37.11). Although the commonest cause is ath­
erosclerosis, syphilitic arteritis has also been blamed. The syn­
drome may develop gradually or suddenly, and is characterized 
clinically by: (1) ipsilateral analgesia of the face with loss of 
the comeal reflex; (2) miosis, enophthalmos and ptosis and 
sometimes anhydrosis; (3) ipsilateral coarse ataxia; (4) con­
tralateral insensitivity to pain and temperature of the trunk 
and extremities; (5) ipsilateral paralysis of the soft palate, 
pharynx and larynx; (6) variable involvement of the VI, 
VII and VIII cranial nerves; and (7) rare contralateral 
hemiparesis.
Hypertensive angiopathy
Chronic hypertension damages the nervous system in two ways: 
it worsens changes due to atherosclerosis in both extra- and 
intracranial arteries and induces damage to the small arteries. 
The latter is considered to be specific to hypertension.
Pathological changes are seen in small arteries and arteri­
oles located within the brain tissue. They show thickened walls, 
due, initially, to proliferating smooth muscle fibres. Subse­
quently, they become homogeneously eosinophilic and contain 
fewer cells (Figure 37.12). The eosinophilic appearance may 
consist of fibrinoid change in the early stages and hyaline tissue 
late in the process.
Another change traditionally associated with hypertension 
is the so-called micro-aneurysm of Charcot and Bouchard,130 a 
microscopic saccular formation in vessels ranging in diameter 
from 25 to 250 jLim.131,132 Its existence is controversial,132’133 and 
it is possible that racial differences may account for this dis­
crepancy between the authors. Localization of these aneurysms 
includes particularly the thalamus, but they are found also in 
the pons, cerebral cortex, claustrum, cerebellum and cerebellar 
peduncles.
Within the group of vascular disorders associated with 
hypertension, Binswanger’s disease134 is a subtype usually associ­
ated with dementia. It has the typical CT scan appearances of 
periventricular low densities and is found predominantly among 
hypertensive patients. Sufferers are usually between 50 and 70 
years, and there is no sex predominance.
Microscopic examination shows myelin pallor throughout 
the whole hemispheric white matter. In some areas there may 
be necrosis, and axons are constantly severely damaged and/or 
reduced in number. There is also a variable amount of astrocytic 
hyperplasia. Arterioles in affected areas resemble those seen in 
hypertensive patients.
Pathological changes have been seen to extend to the 
brainstem,13 with potential involvement of the vestibular 
nuclei and pathways.
The disorder is probably related to deficient blood supply 
due to vessel damage produced by hypertension. The damaged 
blood-brain barrier results in leakage of blood proteins. 
Repeated bursts of oedema, known to spread more easily through 
the white than the grey matter, induce white matter damage.116
In the past, a number of patients with pathological changes 
resembling those of Binswanger’s disease did not appear to be 
hypertensive. In these cases, the disease presented in families
* 
* • • .
Figure 37.11 Drawing of the medulla showing (shaded area) the distribution of 
Figure 37.12 In the late stages of hypertensive angiopathy, small-calibre 
the softening responsible for Wallenberg's syndrome; the artery parallel to the 
intraparenchymal blood vessels show a thick wall consisting of fibrous tissue, 
left edge of the medulla is the inferior cerebellar artery. 
Their lumina are reduced in diameter. HStE, X220.
  

652 
Vestibular science
with an autosomal dominant mode. It was first described by 
Sourander and W&linder in 197706 and in 1993 Toumier- 
Lasserve et al137 established it as a genetic disorder due to a 
defective chromosome 19ql2. The disease was given the name 
CADASIL, an acronym for cerebral autosomal dominant 
arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy.
Morphologically, the vessels show non-arteriosclerotic, 
non-amyloid arteriopathy affecting the meninges, vessels pene­
trating the white matter as well as those in nerves, muscles and 
skin. Changes consist of concentric fibrohyaline thickening of 
the arterial walls, involving both the media and adventitia.138 
The former, which shows degenerative changes of muscle fibres, 
is PAS (periodic acid Schiff)-positive and contains, in addition, 
PAS-positive and basophilic granules. Mayer et al139 described 
involvement of the brainstem in two members of a German 
family affected by the disorder.
Inflammatory diseases
Inflammatory diseases involving intracerebral vessels have been 
dealt with above.
Aneurysms
These include saccular, fusiform, infectious aneurysms as well as 
the Charcot-Bouchard type, which has been dealt with above.
Fusiform aneurysms are usually seen in patients with severe 
forms of atherosclerosis (see above).
Infectious aneurysms are produced by septic emboli and are 
seen in about 3% of patients with infective endocarditis. They 
can rupture with consequent intracerebral haemorrhage, the 
risk being 3-7% in patients with infective endocarditis.140 The 
middle cerebral artery is the most frequently affected, the supe­
rior cerebellar artery having been involved in only one patient. 
The organisms most commonly involved are Streptococcus viri- 
dans and Staphylococcus aureus. Mycotic aneurysms can also be 
seen, the genus Aspergillus being the commonest culprit.
Morphologically, the segment of the arterial wall adherent 
to the embolus is oedematous, necrotic and infiltrated predom­
inantly by polymorphs.
Saccular (berry) aneurysms appear as dilatations of part of 
the wall of large intracranial arteries. Their incidence is 
2-5%, depending on the accuracy with which they are inves­
tigated.141 Rare in children, they increase in frequency with 
age, 60% of them being found in patients between 40 and 60 
years, predominantly women (female/male ratio 3:2) and 
they may appear in families.142,143 About 40-70% rupture 
before death.
Virtually all saccular aneurysms originate in close proxim­
ity to, or at, the bifurcation of the main intracranial arteries. 
These, unlike their extracranial counterparts, are characterized 
by a rather thin muscle wall and absence of the external elastic 
lamina.
About 85-90% of them arise in the carotid arteries or their 
main branches, 5-10% in the vertebrobasilar arteries (Figure 
37.13), and 5% in their minor branches, this distribution being 
reversed in children, in whom 40-45% have a posterior location.
Figure 37.13 A large saccular aneurysm originating from the posterior inferior 
cerebellar artery (PICA) appears to compress the (left) lateral side of the 
medulla. The stretched VII and VIII nerves are seen on its anterior aspect.
Aneurysms vary in size, some reaching ‘gigantic’ propor­
tions (over 2.5 cm). Their wall varies in colour from grey to yel­
low or dark red, depending on the presence and age of the blood 
component.
Histologically, their walls consist exclusively of endothe­
lium (whenever present) and fibrous tissue. A blood clot may 
occupy a variable part of the sac, and the fibrous tissue may con­
tain blood, haemosiderin, areas of necrosis or inflammatory cells.
Vascular malformations
These differ from each other with regard to localization within 
the meninges or the nervous system and the type of their 
component vessels (arteries, veins or a mixture of both). They 
are considered congenital, although irradiation of the brain and 
occlusion of the dural sinuses can induce lesions similar to the 
congenital ones.
Vascular malformations have been classified by Kalimo et 
al116 as shown in Table 37.2. This classification is adapted from 
Challa et al.144
Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs)
These consist of irregular aggregates of arteries, veins and con­
necting vessels and can become clinically evident at any age, 
but particularly during the second, third and fourth decades.
  

The pathology of the vestibular system 
653
Table 37.2 Intracranial vascular malformations.
Congenital malformations within the brain parenchyma 
Arteriovenous malformations 
Variant: malformation of the vein of Galen 
Venous angioma and varicose vein 
Cavernous angiomas 
Capillary telangiectasia 
Mixed:
Cavernous and venous 
Cavernous and capillary 
Other: haemangioma calcificans
Congenital malformations within the meninges 
Arteriovenous malformations 
Venous angioma and varicose vein 
Cavernous haemangioma
Malformations as part of CNS or generalized syndromes 
Phakomatoses
Hereditary haemorrhagic teleangiectasia 
Others
Acquired vascular lesions simulating vascular malformations 
Radiation-induced lesions of the white matter 
Lesions secondary to venous sinus obstruction
feeding vessels are either one or both posterior cerebral arteries, 
and less frequently small posterior branches of the middle cere­
bral artery or carotid or basilar arteries.
Venous angiomas
These consist exclusively of aggregates of veins. They are often 
asymptomatic, but can give rise to epilepsy or haemorrhage.
Cavernous malformations (or cavernous angiomas)
These are aggregates of thin-walled vessels located both in 
brain and leptomeninges, including the brainstem. They usually 
become clinically manifest during the second or third decades, 
with seizures, headache and, less frequently, haemorrhages.
They appear as sharply demarcated nodules of variable size. 
Their thin vessels consist of endothelium and a surrounding 
ring of collagen of variable thickness. Angiomas in the brain can 
be associated with similar lesions in kidney, liver, lung and skin.
Capillary teleangiectasias
These consist of dilated capillaries separated by quasi-normal 
brain tissue. They are rarely symptomatic and are found 
predominantly in the pons. In addition, vascular malformations 
are known which combine the features of several lesions 
mentioned above.
They are localized predominantly in the supratentorial regions 
and at the surface of the brain or in the deep grey nuclei, but are 
also found in the dura.
The walls of these vessels are irregular in thickness, and a 
number of veins may appear arterialized, as shown by the 
presence of the internal elastic lamina. An important 
morphological feature of AVMs is the presence of brain tissue 
separating the vessels, which shows reactive gliosis and 
haemosiderin-laden macrophages (Figure 37.14).
The so-called aneurysm of the vein of Galen is an arterio­
venous fistula, the vein undergoing aneurysmal dilatation. The
Miscellaneous disorders
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) results from extracellular 
deposition of protein fibrils (amyloid) in the walls of blood ves­
sels of brain and meninges. The fibrils consist of p-pleated sheet 
secondary structures and are typically Congo red-positive. |J- 
amyloid angiopathies are the commonest forms of amyloid 
deposition. The protein is encoded on chromosome 21. Pres­
ence of apolipoprotein Es4 (ApoEs4) is a risk factor for CAA.
In sporadic cases, CAA is responsible for 5-12% of primary 
haemorrhages; however, the brainstem is not primarily involved 
by CAA.
3  
■
.
j*);* wv 
r
* .*$* s 
, *  '- m :  ■ 
■
Figure 37.14 Photomicrograph of an arteriovenous malformation 
appearing as a tuft of vessels surrounded by brain tissue. The vessels 
have thin walls, some of which possess a complete or incomplete 
elastic lamina, appearing as a black thin line just beneath the 
endothelial lining. Elastin-van Gieson, X90.
  

654 
Vestibular science
In fibromuscular dysplasia arteries are affected by a non­
inflammatory thickening of the vessel wall. It occurs at any age, 
particularly in adults, is more common in women, and involves 
predominantly the mid-portion of the cervical internal carotid 
artery, mostly bilaterally. The extradural portion of the vertebral 
arteries is less frequently affected and involvement of the 
intracranial arteries is rare. However, Saygi et al145 reported 
changes in the basilar artery and found five cases in the literature.
Any layer of the arterial wall may be affected, but it is the 
media that shows the most severe changes. These consist of 
fibrosis with segmental narrowing of the lumen which alter­
nates with dilated portions of the vessel.
Haemosiderosis of the nervous system is the result of recur­
rent or persistent haemorrhages within the subarachnoid 
spaces, leading to deposition of large quantities of iron pigment 
in the subpial, subependymal tissue of the brain and spinal cord 
and leptomeninges. It was seen following hemispherectomy.146 
Koeppen and Wood147 studied five cases and discussed the fol­
lowing causes: a small arteriovenous malformation of the infe­
rior medullary velum, ependymoma of the cauda equina, 
undiagnosed chronic subdural haematoma and recurrent 
glioma. In the fifth case, a spinal arteriovenous malformation 
was suspected. Morita et al148 reported haemosiderosis in a 
family with caeruloplasmin deficiency.
The lesion is quite uncommon; in advanced cases, patients 
present the typical triad of symptoms of progressive cerebellar 
ataxia, hearing loss and myelopathy. Both CT scan and MRI 
can help in the clinical diagnosis by confirming the presence of
147
iron.
Macroscopic examination reveals fibrous thickening and 
brown discoloration of the leptomeninges over the cerebral and 
cerebellar hemispheres; the VIII cranial nerve is involved, 
whereas the adjacent VII is free of pigment. The ependymal 
lining is also abnormal.
Histological examination shows reactive gliosis and pres­
ence of iron within astrocytes, macrophages and perivascular 
cells (Figure 37.15), as well as free in the tissue.
With regard to the pathogenesis of the lesion, two findings 
deserve attention: the particular vulnerability of the content of 
the posterior fossa, and that of the VIII nerve compared with 
the others. An important role in the process is played by fer­
ritin, which is instrumental in sequestration and detoxification 
of iron,149 and whose biosynthesis is stimulated by free iron mol­
ecules.150,151 The biosynthesis of ferritin takes place in microglia, 
whereas the Bergmann glia is the source of iron- and haeme- 
responsive ferritin-repressor protein (FRP). Most of the 
haemosiderin formation (from haemoglobin, via haeme, iron 
and ferritin) occurs in microglia and macrophages, and the vul­
nerability of the cerebellar molecular layer probably depends on 
the large number of microglia and presence of Bergmann glia.152 
The severe damage of the VIII nerve is related to the fact 
that, in the subarachnoid space, its myelin is of the central type 
(and hence includes microglia), as the transition from CNS to 
peripheral nervous system is located quite distally, in proximity 
to the internal acoustical meatus, rather than near the exit from 
the brainstem, as occurs in the other cranial nerves from the 
III to the XII.153154
Tumours
The brainstem can be the site of any primary and secondary 
tumours. However, some neoplasms are more common than 
others, while others, such as the schwannoma of the VIII nerve, 
are characteristic features of this region.
Peripheral nerve tumours
These include those consisting exclusively or partly of: (1) 
Schwann cells (schwannomas); (2) sheath fibroblasts; and (3) 
perineurial cells.
Schwannomas are the commonest type accounting for 
7-8% of all primary intracranial tumours. Those arising from 
the VIII nerve represent 80-90% and, although they derive 
from its vestibular branch, the whole nerve (as well the facial) 
is affected. This neoplasm is found predominantly during the
-
* 
*
■ 
a
* 
* 
* * 
4' 
r
* 
* 
r
- # * 
_ 
’F
V ‘
'
i 
*
Figure 37.15 The vestibular nerve in a brain with haemosiderosis. 
Note the cluster of iron-containing cells at the transition between 
central (left) and peripheral (right) myelin. Peris, X220.
  

The pathology of the vestibular system 
655
5th decade and among women (female/male ratio 1.5:2/1 )155,156 
and is unusual in children. About 95% are solitary; 5% are 
bilateral and part of the neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2, see 
below) syndrome.
Other less frequent localizations are the trigeminal nerve 
roots and the ganglion. The tumour is found predominantly in 
sensory nerves, but motor ones (facial, hypoglossal, abducens 
and trochlear nerves) can also be affected, particularly in a set­
ting of neurofibromatosis. Schwannomas of the nerve roots 
account for 16-30% of all spinal tumours, are particularly fre­
quent in the lumbosacral region and cauda equina, and are 
found predominantly in males.
Intraparenchymal schwannomas also exist with both 
intracranial and spinal localizations. In the cerebral hemi­
spheres they are periventricular, but they can be seen also in the 
brainstem and 4th ventricle. The absence of Schwann cells in 
both regions suggests that their origin is either from Schwann 
cells of nerves within vessels, from nerves running in the dura, 
or from ectopic neural crest cells.
Schwannomas are well-encapsulated formations, whose 
shape depends on the size and the compression they receive from 
adjacent structures (bone, brain, vessels). The VIII nerve of 
origin and the facial nerve may be stretched on the surface and 
appear as thin whitish filaments (Figure 37.16). On cut sections, 
the neoplasm is grey with yellow areas, but may contain areas of 
recent or old haemorrhage. Cystic areas may also be included.
Histologically, schwannomas reveals two main patterns 
irregularly intermingled and called Antoni type A and B. The 
former consists of interweaving fascicles of elongated cells, 
whose cytoplasm has ill-defined borders and whose nuclei are 
hyperchromatic and elongated. The arrangement of the latter 
in palisades may be seen (Figure 37.17a). The Antoni B (Figure 
37.17b) pattern is characterized by spindle or stellate cells in a 
loose myxoid and microcystic background.
Schwannomas also include hyalinized vessels, areas of fresh 
haemorrhage or foci of haemosiderin-laden macrophages, mod­
erate nuclear pleomorphism, and, at least in tumours of the VIII 
nerve, total absence of mitoses.
Schwannomas are S-100 (Figure 37.17c) and vimentin 
positive. GFAP (glial fibrillary acidic protein) has also been 
demonstrated. ’
Histological variants include cellular and melanotic 
schwannomas.
The former are unusual tumours found in younger individ­
uals, predominantly females. Half of the cases in the series by 
Carney159 were part of the Carney complex. In these instances, 
there was no sex predominance and the average age was 22.5 
years. Font and Truong160 reviewed the literature: the most fre­
quent locations were the spinal nerve roots and adjacent struc­
tures (12 patients), the soft tissue (5), and heart, oesophageal 
wall, acoustic nerve and mandible (1 each). Further reports of this 
tumour localized to the acoustic nerve are those by Miller et al161 
and Earls et al,162 the latter authors describing a malignant one.
NF2 is an autosomal dominant disorder with 95% pene­
trance; it affects 1/40000-50000 individuals and is associated 
with a gene abnormality on chromosome 22ql2,163 which acts 
as a tumour suppressor gene. The gene was cloned;164,165 its 
product is merlin (or schwannomin). In addition to schwanno­
mas, meningiomas or meningiomatosis, gliomas, particularly in 
the cord and microhamartomas are described.
NF1 is also an autosomal dominant disorder with 100% 
penetrance; approximately 1/3000 individuals are affected, and 
2-29% of them progress to have malignant tumours. The gene 
responsible for the disorder has been located on chromosome 
17q, and the protein it encodes is called neurofibromin. 
Affected patients present multiple, including paraspinal, neuro­
fibromas, plexiform neurofibromas, optic nerve gliomas, and 
rarely paraspinal and pilocytic or high-grade astrocytomas.
Tumours of the meninges
These include meningiomas, mesenchymal tumours, primary 
melanocytic lesions and tumours of uncertain origin.
Meningiomas represent 13-19% of intracranial tumours; 
those with spinal localization represent 12%. Most of them 
appear between 45 and 55 years, have a female/male ratio of 
1.8:1) and are rare during the first and second decades, when, 
however, they tend to be more aggressive. Meningiomas local­
ized to the lower spinal regions are found exclusively in women.
They can develop anywhere, including inside the ventri­
cles, predominantly in the lateral ones, only 15% and 5% being 
found in the 3rd and 4th, respectively. Extracranial menin­
giomas can also be seen. Multiple meningiomas, which are of 
the same histological type as single ones, are most commonly 
associated with NF2.
Figure 37.16 A cerebellopontine angle tumour (asterix) exerting compression in 
the region of the VII and VIII nerves.
Although meningiomas are, on the whole, benign tumours, 
between 13%166 and 29%167 of all patients show recurrences, 
incomplete resection representing the main cause.
Meningiomas are of variable size (Figure 37.18), and their 
appearances depend on their location. In the majority of cases,
  

656 
Vestibular science
ft  
V* 
i. •
7 ,
''* ; V
V
*
V v .
• •  • V * ,V 
V *  v  ^ 4|
;  
# *  
• 
/ v ' V
1 *  
..*
• • 
r  - 
». •* 
W •
/  /  
i v  *
♦ • • * . , v* f * 
' I .
* 
f 
*
- 
*  
' *  
*» 
•
• 
v‘ 
* f \  
»
v *  *♦: 
*: 
* 
* \
# >  
’ * 
e 
* <* »•
: 
« .  # 
‘ i
c,
ff .
I i
« 
• *
7
,• * 
• 
** 
• «  • 
^  
•  
• # #  
r 
^  
* * «r 
•
* - f 
~  
* I 
.
V *
•
• f
• 
1 r . * t  
1
% • O : * i %
•  * 
t  
•»
* 
■"  \  
I 
* ♦ 
- ^
• 
I 
* • 
Jfc ^ <
they are firmly adherent to the dura and their consistency varies 
from soft to firm and fibrotic. The so-called meningiomas en 
plaque grow by expanding widely instead of forming nodular 
structures; they are found predominantly at the base, on the 
sphenoid wing. Some tumours extend through the dura and 
may infiltrate the bone and even extend to the adjacent mus­
cle. This behaviour is not considered, in the absence of other 
features, a criterion for malignancy.
The following histological subtypes have been described: 
(1) meningothelial (Figure 37.19a); (2) fibrous; (3) transitional; 
(4) psammomatous (Figure 37.19b); (5) angiomatous; (6) 
microcystic; (7) secretory; (8) clear cell (Figure 37.19c); (9) 
chordoid; (10) lymphoplasmacytic; and (11) metaplastic. On 
immunohistochemistry, all meningiomas are EM A (epithelial 
membrane antigen)-positive (Figure 37.19d).
The reader is referred to texts of neuropathology for more 
detailed descriptions of these subtypes.168
Figure 37.17 Schwannomas of the VIII nerve can present 
with two main histological appearances. In Antoni type A 
(a), cells are bipolar and their nuclei are often arranged to 
palisades. In Antoni type B (b), cell nuclei are seen in a 
loose microcystic background. Tumour cells are strongly 
S-100-positive; immunostaining involves both nuclei and 
cytoplasm of Schwann cells (c). (a, b): HEtE, X220; (c): S- 
100 immunostaining, X600.
All the varieties mentioned above are classified as WHO 
grade 1. More aggressive tumours (grade 2) have the follow­
ing features: increased mitotic activity and cellularity, high 
nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, prominent nucleoli, patternless 
growth, necrosis and high Ki67 labelling index.
Anaplastic meningiomas have a poorly differentiated 
appearance, a high mitotic rate, areas of necrosis and brain 
invasion. They predominate during the 6th and 7th decades, 
with female predominance and a 100% tendency to recur.
The papillary variant of meningioma (Figure 37.20), is 
characterized by a perivascular pattern, reminiscent of ependy­
momas, and lacks any features of typical meningiomas. It devel­
ops at younger ages (50% in children), is invasive and tends to 
recur and metastasize. It is classified as grade 2-3.
Mesenchymal tumours of the meninges include: (1) 
haemangiopericytoma; (2) meningeal sarcomas; (3) fibro­
sarcomas; (4) chondrosarcomas; (5) rhabdomyosarcomas; (6)
  

The pathology of the vestibular system 
657
Figure 37.18 The meningioma shown in this photograph was located in the 
posterior fossa compressing the brainstem, including the VIII nerve.
meningeal sarcomatosis; and (7) solitary fibrous tumours of 
the meninges.
Haemangiopericytomas have an incidence of 2.5-7% of 
meningeal tumours and affect individuals in the 4th to 6th 
decades, with no sex predominance. Their common presenta­
tion in the tentorium and posterior fossa may affect the VIII 
nerve. Spinal and multiple tumours are also reported. Their 
cells are uniform in shape and size, with oval and hyperchro- 
matic nuclei, and ill-defined borders, and surround thin capil­
laries (Figure 37.21). Reticulin is seen surrounding small 
clusters of cells. The tumour may include areas of necrosis, vari­
able mitotic activity and obvious signs of anaplasia. Haeman­
giopericytomas are vimentin, CD34, desmin, actin and laminin 
positive, and EM A, GFAP and S-100 negative.
Haemangiopericytomas, particularly those originating from 
the posterior fossa and tentorium, should be regarded as malig­
nant tumours with a high rate of recurrence and a tendency to 
invade.
Primary melanocytic lesions include diffuse melanosis, 
melanocytomas and malignant melanomas. As melanomas 
spread easily along nerve roots, whenever they develop within 
the posterior fossa they can involve multiple cranial nerves, 
including the VIII.
Chordomas are rare tumours (0.2% of brain tumours)168 
which occur at any age, although intracranial localizations are 
more frequent at a younger age than spinal ones. They are found 
predominantly in males (2: l).169 Localization to the clivus 
accounts for 36%169 and may produce vestibular symptoms.170
Chordomas vary in size from small and asymptomatic to 
large, soft and gelatinous masses. They consist of cells with 
small, round and hyperchromatic nuclei and abundant cyto­
plasm which may contain vacuoles (hence the name 
physaliphorous cells). Cells form clusters or elongated, branch­
ing aggregates which are located within a mucinous, alcian 
blue-positive matrix. Tumour cells are S-100 and cytokeratin 
positive, unlike the morphologically similar chondrosarcoma, 
which is only S-100 positive.
Among the tumours of uncertain origin, haemangioblas- 
tomas deserve a mention, as they are localized predominantly in 
the posterior fossa (93%); the next commonest site, the spinal 
cord, contributes with 3.8%, whereas supratentorial tumours 
represent only 2.9% of the cases. Their incidence is 1-2% of 
intracranial tumours and they may be seen at any age (peak at 
35-45 years), with a male/female ratio of 2:1. Their association 
with von Hippel-Lindau disease is well known.
Haemangioblastomas are well encapsulated and vary in size 
from one to several centimetres. Their colour betokens their 
high levels in blood. Cystic cavities of variable size are not 
uncommon.
Histological examination shows a rich meshwork of capil­
laries surrounded by ‘stromal’ cells. These are relatively large, 
and have small hyperchromatic nuclei and cytoplasm that 
may appear homogeneously eosinophilic or finely vacuolated 
(Figure 37.22a). The content of the vacuoles consists of 
lipids. Mitotic activity is ususally not a feature. The reticulin 
component is rich and surrounds single cells or small clusters 
(Figure 37.22b).
Neuroepithelial tumours
These include the following subgroups:
1. astrocytomas
2. oligodendrogliomas
3. ependymomas
4. mixed gliomas
5. choroid plexus papillomas and carcinomas
6. neuroepithelial tumours of uncertain origin
7. neuronal and neuronal-glial tumours
8. pinealomas/pineoblastomas
9. embryonal tumours.
All these subgroups can involve, either directly or indirectly, 
the posterior fossa and the brainstem, and damage the 
cochleovestibular pathways. Some of them, however, are more 
common at this site and are briefly described.
Pilocydc astrocytomas
These are slow-growing tumours representing 6% of intracra­
nial neoplasms and are the most frequent tumours in children: 
indeed 75% are found in patients below 20 years of age, with a 
peak between 8 and 13; there is no sex predominance. Preferred 
sites are the midline structures such as the optic nerve and 
chiasma, brainstem, spinal cord and cerebellum. The temporal 
lobe is the most frequent cerebral localization.
  

658 
Vestibular science
' »
V  > * ft '» = Jv 
H
*■- 
£  
. 
.
« ° v  
- .
‘V, 
*  
.1 
;•-■ 
'
\  'v * 
^ V. 
S' 
*«*
♦ 
$  t , .6 
I
) V,
9
•r* 'V *
Lli - I I
* 
A
^ 
1
f  
♦
*
♦ . >
-
#-
, vV l *V*
* 
> A *
m • v;
■ 
V
:  *
i * 
j
A v v\  •
f
K
& 0
4 *
. 
> s.
?. 
*i V
«*
f * 
# 
1 
1
- ^ A.;
* 
i* j
^
 
-
i *
%
'S  *
#
" * 4  
*
~ f v l
*  »
t '" *  .. v
«v;
j'-' «
• \
\  »' , '*>
*
\  .
^ 
ri, *
’ 
%*t* >\ 
* * ' 
v* >> ; *
. 
C- 
>
' u tv „ t . t / ' t ;  
“
V
7  >
/
I
%
fc•-*’• 
*£k
* v
-a 4 »  
’"
%
i
TW
v  
<y
M
$ > - A  V s*! 
V %
* 1 L *  %
< *£- 
■ 
v'*«  
*  -
» i f  
n
^  
*
•  ** 
»  
%  * •
i +  
*
^  ft 
« *
4  M
#  
*  »  
*
4
*  
^
*  
1
#
w r 
<» 
#
*  
*. 
*
• * : * * *
... *  *  
• * »
0
. 
»
*  •
#*■
ii
•* 
* * ,
Figure 37.19 
Photomicrographs of 
meningothelial (a), 
psammomatous (b) and clear 
cell (c) meningiomas. 
Immunohistochemically, all 
meningiomas are characterized 
by positive anti-EMA staining 
(d). (a, b, c): HEtE; (a, c): X220; 
(b. d): X600.
Macroscopically they are generally well demarcated, 
except when they involve the optic nerves, and expand rather 
than infiltrate, with frequent cyst formation. Microscopically, 
they show a biphasic pattern consisting of pilocytic and 
microcystic areas; nuclei may have a considerable degree of 
pleomorphism, and blood vessels may show endothelial prolif­
eration. Characteristic features of this neoplasm are the gran­
ular bodies and Rosenthal fibres. The reticulin component 
may be conspicuous, and the tumour can be seen invading the 
leptomeninges. Pilocytic astrocytomas are regarded as grade 1 
tumours.
Diffuse astrocytomas are ubiquitous, but predominate in the 
cerebral hemispheres. They are characteristic of adulthood, 
infiltrate adjacent structures and tend to progress towards 
malignancy. They are classified as WHO grade 2-4. They may 
involve the brainstem, thus producing symptoms localized to 
one or more cranial nerves, including the VIII.
Mentioned by the WHO among the neuroepithelial 
tumours of uncertain origin, gliomatosis cerebri is a rare tumour 
involving the cerebral hemispheres and posterior fossa, and 
extending even to the spinal cord. Affected brains show global 
enlargement.
  

The pathology of the vestibular system 
659
f
J* V
r  
7
■VX
<k
*>
■
•  '£•
-  , < 
v - ^  
-V:
• > r
l l
■Wfij
4r-
?•
fe«
M u
*<Jr-
*»***■ s*
♦»
£
\ 
A
J ?
w
,  V
%
' * s
J
i
I
f
* &
t
^
 
. *
*
 
*
► ‘ 
f p
t
*
 
1
* 
' 
*
1§
;.-t
#
Figure 37.20 In the papillary variant of meningioma, cells are 
arranged in a pattern that is suggestive of ependymomas. HStE, X220.
Histological examination reveals oval or fusiform glial cells, 
with hyperchromatic and slightly pleomorphic nuclei, infiltrat­
ing the brain tissue without inflicting excessive distortion on its 
structures. GFAP positivity is variable. Their diagnosis can be 
made only at postmortem.
Because of their frequent localization to the 4th ventricle, 
ependymomas may produce vestibular symptoms. Their inci­
dence varies between 1% and 6% of intracranial tumours, and 
they are most frequent from childhood to adulthood in both 
sexes. After the 4th ventricle, which represents the commonest 
site, the lateral and 3rd ventricles follow. In the spinal cord 
(cervicothoracic level), ependymomas are the most frequent 
neoplasm and may also occur outside the nervous system.
The following histological subtypes are described: cellular, 
papillary (rare), clear cell and tanycytic (reminiscent of 
astrocytomas).
The typical ependymoma is graded 2, and its proliferative 
index, as established by Ki67, is 2.6 ± 2.5%. It has a 44% ten-
Figure 37.21 Photomicrographs of a haemangiopericytoma, showing 
closely packed cells surrounding thin-walled capillaries. Cells show 
some degree of pleomorphism and have nucleolated nuclei. Mitoses 
are usually seen (arrow). HEtE, X360.
dency to recur, and a better prognosis in adults than in children 
and when localized to the spinal cord. Spinal seeding is now 
considered a rarer event than previously thought. Recurrences 
may be local or extradural.
A number of ependymomas, varying from 5% to 7%, are 
considered anaplastic and rated as WHO grade 3. About 27% 
of these can occur in the posterior fossa. Their diagnostic 
criteria are loss of ependymal differentiation, pleomorphism, 
necrosis, high mitotic rate and local invasion.
Mixed neuronal and neuronal-glial tumours 
This group includes gangliogliomas with their anaplastic and 
desmoplastic infantile variants, the desmoplastic cerebral 
astrocytoma of infancy, ganglioneuromas and desmoplastic 
neuroepithelial tumours.
Gangliogliomas represent 0.4-6% 
of primary brain 
tumours, but amount to 20% of the epilepsy-related lesions. 
They develop at all ages, but are found predominantly around
  

660 
Vestibular science
Figure 37.22 
The histological 
appearances of 
haemangioblastomas 
include the presence 
of large cells with 
dark nuclei and pale, 
in places finely 
vacuolated, cytoplasm 
(a). Single or small 
clusters of cells are 
surrounded by a fine 
meshwork of reticulin 
fibrils (b). (a) HftE, 
X360; (b) silver 
impregnation for 
reticulin, X360.
20 years (14 years in the brainstem location) and have a 
male/female ratio of 1.3:1. They can be found in all the 
cerebral lobes, cerebellum, brainstem, sella, optic nerve and 
chiasma and spinal cord. There is no association with 
phakomatoses, but they are associated with neuronal migration 
disorders, Down’s syndrome, agenesis of the corpus callosum, 
cerebral micropolygyria, cortical glioneuronal hamartias and 
vascular malformations.
Their histological features include the presence of neoplas­
tic ganglion cells and neoplastic glia, some areas appearing 
exclusively glial, a variable stromal component and the pres­
ence of focal perivascular lymphocytic infiltrates.
When gangliogliomas progress towards malignancy, this 
takes place in the glial component, which may become 
indistinguishable from glioblastoma multiforme.
References
1. Brodal A. Anatomy of the vestibular nuclei and their connec­
tions. In: Handbook of Sensory Physiology: Vestibular System, Vol. 6. 
Komhuber HH, ed. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1974; 239-352.
2. Brodal A, Hoivik B. Site and mode of termination of primary 
vestibulo-cerebellar fibres in the cat. Arch Ital Biol 1964; 102:1-21.
3. Wilson VJ, Yoshida M. Monosynaptic inhibition of neck motoneu­
rons by the medial vestibular nucleus. Exp Brain Res 1969; 9:365-80.
4. Schulze-Bahr E, Haverkamp W, Wedekind H et al. Autosomal 
recessive long QT syndrome (Jarvell Lange-Nielsen syndrome) is 
genetically heterogeneous. Hum Genet 1997; 100: 573-6.
5. Attaie A, Kim E, Wilcox ER, Lalwani AK. A splice-site mutation 
affecting the paired box of PAX3 in a three generation family with
Waardenburg syndrome type 1 (WS1). Mol Cell Probes 1997; 11: 
233-6.
6. Pingault V, Bondurand N, Kuhlbrodt K et al. SOXIO mutations in 
patients with Waardenburg-Hirschprung disease. Nat Genet 1998; 
18: 171-3.
7. Watanabe A, Takeda K, Ploplis B, Tachibana M. Epistatic rela­
tionship between Waardenburg syndrome genes MITF and PAX3. 
Nature Genet 1998; 18: 283-6.
8. Espinos C, Najera C, Millan JM et al. Linkage analysis in Usher 
syndrome type 1 (UST1) families from Spain. J Med Genet 1998; 
35:391-8.
9. Cremers WR, Bolder C, Admiraal RJ et al. Progressive 
sensorineural hearing loss and a widened vestibular aqueduct in 
Pendred syndrome. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 124: 
501-5.
10. Mustapha M, Azar ST, Moglabey YB et al. Further refinement of 
Pendred syndrome locus by homozygosity analysis to a 0.8 cM 
interval flanked by D7s496 and D7s2425. J Med Genet 1998; 35: 
202-4.
11. Chiari H. Uber die Veranderungen des Kleinhims, des Pons, und 
des Medulla oblongata infolge von congenitaler Hydrocephalie 
des Grosshims. Dtsch Med Wochenschr 1891; 27: 1172-5.
12. Shady W, Metcalfe RA, Butler P. The incidence of craniocervical 
bony anomalies in the adult Chiari malformation. J Neurol Sci 
1987; 82: 193-203.
13. Harding BN, Copp AJ. Malformations. In: Graham DI, Lantos PL, 
eds. Greenfield’s Neuropathology, Vol. 1. London: Arnold, 1997: 
397-533.
14. McLendon RE, Crain B], Oakes WJ, Burger PC. Cerebral poly­
gyria in the Chiari type II (Amold-Chiari) malformation. Clin 
Neuropathol 1985; 4: 200-5.
  

The pathology of the vestibular system 
661
15. Hain TC, Zee DS, Maria BL. Tilt suppression of vestibulo-ocular 
reflex in patients with cerebellar lesions. A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 
1988; 105: 13-20.
16. Perez-Garrigues H, Yaya R, Lopez-Arlandis ] et al. Oculographic 
findings in the Amold-Chiari malformation type 1. An Otorino- 
laringol Ibero-Am 1991; 18: 479-90.
17. Bronstein AM, Miller DH, Rudge P, Kendall BE. Down beating 
nystagmus: magnetic resonance imaging and neuro-otological 
findings. J Neurol Sci 1987; 81: 173-84.
18. Rudge P. Clinical Neuro-otology. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
1984.
19. Lindsay JR, Hemenway WG. Postural vertigo due to unilateral 
sudden partial loss of vestibular function. Ann Otol 1956; 65: 
692-706.
20. Dix MR, Hallpike CS. The pathology, symptomatology and 
diagnosis of certain common disorders of the vestibular system. 
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1952; 61: 987-1016.
21. Cawthome TE, Hallpike CS. A study of the clinical features and 
pathological changes within the temporal bones, brainstem and 
cerebellum of an early case of positional nystagmus of the so-called 
benign paroxysmal type. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1957; 48: 
89-105.
22. Schuknecht HE Cupolithiasis. Arch Otolaryngol 1969; 90: 765-78.
23. Herdman SJ, Tusa RJ, Zee DS et al. Single treatment approaches 
to benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Arch Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1993; 119: 450-4.
24. Savundra PA, Carroll JD, Davies RA, Luxon LM. Migraine- 
associated vertigo. Cephalalgia 1997; 17: 505-10.
25. Szirmai A. Vestibular disorders in patients with migraine. Eur 
Arch Otorhinolaryngol Suppl 1997; 1: S55-7.
26. Barinagarrementeria F, Gonzalez-Duarte A, Miranda L, Cantu C. 
Cerebral infarction in young women: analysis of 130 cases. Eur 
Neurol 1998; 40: 228-33.
27. La Mantia L, Polio B, Savoiardo M et al. Meningo-cortical calci­
fying angiomatosis and celiac disease. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 1998; 
100: 209-15.
28. Prayson RA, Wang N. Mitochondrial myopathy, lactic acidosis 
and stroke-like episodes (MELAS) syndrome: an autopsy report. 
Arch Pathol Lab Med 1998; 122: 978-81.
29. Ohno K, Isotani E, Hirakawa K. MELAS presenting as migraine 
complicated by stroke: case report. Neuroradiology 1997; 39: 
781-4.
30. Sano M, Ozawa M, Shiota S et al. The TC  8356; mitochondrial 
DNA mutation in a Japanese family. J Neurol 1996; 243: 441-4.
31. Desmond DW, Moroney JT, Lynch T et al. CADASIL in a North 
American family: clinical, pathologic and radiologic findings. 
Neurology 1998; 51: 844-9.
32. Mellies JK, Baumer T, Muller JA et al. SPECT study of a German 
CADASIL family: a phenotype with migraine and progressive 
dementia only. Neurology 1998; 50: 1715-21.
33. Taillia H, Chabriat H, Kurtz A et al. Cognitive alterations in non- 
demented CADASIL patients. Cerebrovasc Dis 1998; 8: 97-101.
34. Chabriat H, Joutel A, Vahedi K, et al. CADASIL: Cerebral Auto- 
somal Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts and 
Leukoencephalopathy. Rev Neurol (Paris) 1997; 153: 376-85.
35. Rubio A, Rifkin D, Powers JM et al. Phenotypic variability of 
CADASIL and novel morphologic findings. Acta Neuropathol 
1997; 94: 247-54.
36. Jen J, Cohen AH, Yue Q et al. Hereditary endotheliopathy with 
retinopathy, nephropathy and stroke (HERNS). Neurology 1997; 
49: 1322-30.
37. Battistella PA, Carollo C. Clinical and neuroradiological findings 
of moyamoya disease in Italy. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 1997; 99 
Suppl 2: S54-7.
38. Gurwood AS, Brilliant R, Malloy KA. The enigma of giant cell 
arteritis: multidisciplinary management of two cases. J Am Optom 
Assoc 1998; 69: 501-9.
39. Friedman I. Pathology of the Ear. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific 
Publications, 1974: 119-26.
40. Michaels L. Ear, Nose and Throat Histopathology. London: 
Springer-Verlag, 1987.
41. Naveh Y, Kaftori JK, Alon U et al. Progressive diaphyseal dyspla­
sia: genetics, clinical and radiologic manifestations. Pediatrics 
1984; 74: 399-405.
42. Heymans O, Gebhart M, Alexiou J, Sokolow Y. Camurati- 
Englemann disease: effects of corticosteroids. Acta Clin Belg 1998; 
53: 189-92.
43. Higashi K, Matsuki C. Hearing impairment in Englemann disease. 
Am J Otol 1996; 17: 26-9.
44. Hanson W, Pames LS. Vestibular nerve compression in Camurati- 
Engelmann disease. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1995; 104: 
823-5.
45. Wilhelm KR, Lenarz T, Weise D et al. Value of various radiologi­
cal study results in the follow-up of Camurati-Engelmann disease. 
ROFO Fortschr Geb Rontgenstr Nuklearmed 1987; 147: 278-82.
46. Nellissery MJ, Padalecki SS, Brkanac Z et al. Evidence for a novel 
osteosarcoma tumor-suppressor gene in the chromosome 18 region 
genetically linked with Paget disease of the bone. AmJ Hum Genet 
1998; 63: 817-24.
47. Proops D, Bayley D, Hawke M. Paget’s disease and the temporal 
bone. A clinical and histopathological review of six temporal 
bones. J Otolaryngol 1985; 14: 20-9.
48. Belal A, Glorig A. Dysequilibrium of ageing (presbyastasis) 
J Laryngol Otol 1986; 100: 1037-41.
49. Johnsson LG, Hawkins JE. Pathologic changes in idiopathic 
labyrinthine hydrops. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1972; 73:
402-12.
50. Rosenhall U. Epithelial cysts in the human vestibular apparatus. J 
Laryngol Otol 1974; 88: 105-12.
51. Ransmayr G, Benesch H, Nowakowski C et al. Neurofibrillary tan­
gles without cell loss in the lateral vestibular nucleus of patients 
with Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci Lett 1994; 177: 11-14.
52. Jankovic J. Progressive supranuclear palsy. Clinical and pharma­
cologic update. Neurol Clin 1984; 2: 473-86.
53. Pilz P, Erhart P. Thalamic degeneration. Acta Neuropathol Suppl 
1981; 7: 362-4.
54. Papp MI, Kahn JE, Lantos PL. Glial cytoplasmic inclusions in the 
CNS of patients with multiple system atrophy (striatonigral 
degeneration, olivoponto-cerebellar atrophy and Shy-Drager 
syndrome). J Neurol Sci 1989; 94: 1-3.
  

662 
Vestibular science
55. Bates G. Expanded glutamines and neurodegeneration — a gain of 
insight. Bioassays 1996; 18: 175-8.
56. Robitaille Y, Lopes-Cendes I, Becher M et al. The neuropathology 
of CAG repeat diseases: review and update of genetic and mole- 
cular features. Brain Pathol 1997; 7: 901-26.
57. Woods BT, Schaumburg HH. Nigrospinodentatal degeneration 
with nuclear ophthalmoplegia. A unique and partially treatable 
clinicopathological entity. J Neurol Sci 1972; 17: 149-66.
58. Romanul FCA, Fowler HL, Radvany ] et al. Azorean disease of the 
nervous system. N EnglJ Med 1977; 296: 1505-8.
59. Coutinho P, Guimaraes A, Scaravilli F. The pathology of 
machadojoseph disease. Report of a possible homozygous case. 
A eta Neuropathol 1982; 58: 48-54.
60. Iizuka R, Hirayama K, Maehara K. Dentato-rubro-pallido-luysian 
atrophy: a clinico-pathological study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychia­
try 1984; 47: 1288-98.
61. Hayashi Y, Kakita A, Yamada M et al. Hereditary dentatorubral- 
pallidoluysian atrophy: detection of widespread ubiquitinated neu­
ronal and glial intranuclear inclusions in the brain. A eta Neu­
ropathol 1998; 96: 547-52.
62. Kuzuhara S, Kanazawa I, Sasaki H et al. Gerstmann-Straussler- 
Scheinker’s disease. Ann Neurol 1983; 14: 216-25.
63. Conlon BJ, Smith DW. Supplemental iron exacerbates aminogly­
coside ototoxicity in vivo. Hear Res 1998; 115: 1-5.
64. Sone M, Schachem PA, Paparella MM. Loss of spiral ganglion 
cells as primary manifestation of aminoglycoside ototoxicity. Hear 
Res 1998; 115: 217-23.
65. Nakagawa T, Yamane H, Takayama M et al. Apoptosis of guinea 
pig cochlear hair cells following chronic aminoglycoside. Eur Arch 
Otorhinolaryngol 1998; 255: 127-31.
66. Nakagawa T, Yamane H, Shibata S, Nakai Y. Gentamycin ototox­
icity induced apoptosis of the vestibular hair cells of guinea pig. 
Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1997; 254: 9-14.
67. Matz GJ. The ototoxic effects of ethacrynic acid in man and 
animals. Laryngoscope 1976; 86: 1065-86.
68. Mathog RH, Capps MJ. Ototoxic interactions of ethacrynic acid 
and streptomycin. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1977; 86: 158-63.
69. Pickrell JA, Oehme FW, Cash WC. Ototoxicity in dogs and cats. 
Semin Vet Med Surg Small Anim 1993; 8: 42-9.
70. Kangsanarak J, Navacharoen N, Fooanant S, Ruckphpaopunt K. 
Intracranial complications of suppurative otitis media: 13 years’ 
experience. AmJ Otol 1995; 16: 104-9.
71. Merchant SN, Gopen Q. A human temporal lobe study of 
acute bacterial meningogenic labyrinthitis. Am J Otol 1996; 17: 
375-85.
72. Brandt T. Bilateral vestibulopathy revisited. Eur J Med Res 1996; 
1: 361-8.
73. Rinne T, Bronstein AM, Rudge P et al. Bilateral loss of vestibular 
function: clinical findings in 53 patients. J Neurol 1998; 245: 
314-21.
74. Hugosson S, Carlsson E, Borg E et al. Audiovestibular and neuro­
psychological outcome of adults who had recovered from childhood 
bacterial meningitis. Int J Pediatr Otolaryngol 1997; 42: 149-67.
75. Moss PD. Outcome of meningococcal group B meningitis. Arch 
Dis Child 1982; 57: 616-21.
76. Naess A, Halstensen A, Nyland H et al. Sequelae one year after 
meningococcal disease. Acta Neurol Scand 1994; 89: 139-42.
77. Koskiniemi M, Pettay O, Raivio M, Sama S. Haemophilus 
influenzae meningitis. A comparison between chloramphenicol 
and ampicillin therapy with special reference to impaired hearing. 
Acta Paediatr Scand 1978; 67: 17-24.
78. Wilson WR, Cockerill FR. Tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, ery­
thromycin and clindamycin. Mayo Clin Proc 1987; 62: 906-15.
79. Rasmussen N, Johnsen NJ, Bohr VA. Otologic sequelae after 
pneumococcal meningitis: a survey of 164 consecutive cases with 
follow-up of 94 survivors. Laryngoscope 1991; 101: 876-82.
80. Heininger U, Ries M, Christ P, Harms D. Simultaneous palsy of 
facial and vestibular nerve in a child with Lyme borreliosis. Eur 
J Pediatr 1990; 149: 781-2.
81. McNeil NI, Gordon T. Meningitis caused by Streptococcus suis 
type II. Postgrad Med] 1986; 62: 743-4.
82. Delaney P. Neurologic manifestations in sarcoidosis: review of the 
literature, with a report of 23 cases. Ann Intern Med 1977; 87: 
336-45.
83. Jahrsdoerfer RA, Thompson EG, Johns MM, Cantrell RW. 
Sarcoidosis and fluctuating hearing loss. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1981; 90: 161-3.
84. Briner VA, Muller A, Gebbers JO. Neuro Sarcoidosis Schweiz 
Med Wochenschr 1998; 128: 799-810.
85. Hooper R, Holden H. Acoustic and vestibular problems in sar­
coidosis. Arch Otolaryngol 1970; 92: 386-91.
86. Karmody CS, Schuknecht HF. Deafness in congenital syphilis. 
Arch Otolaryngol 1966; 83: 18-27.
87. Musher DM, Hamill RJ, Baughn RE. Effect of human immunode­
ficiency virus (HIV) infection on the course of syphilis and on the 
response to treatment. Ann Intern Med 1990; 113: 872-81.
88. Meyerhoff WL, Paparella MM, Oda M, Shea D. Mycotic infec­
tions of the inner ear. Laryngoscope 1979; 89: 1725-34.
89. Ashman RB, Papadimitriou JM, Fulurija A. Acute labyrinthitis 
associated with systemic Candida albicans infection in ageing mice. 
J Laryngol Otol 1996; 110: 13-18.
90. Papadimitriou JM, Ashman RB. The pathogenesis of acute sys­
temic candidiasis in a susceptible inbred mouse strain. J Pathol 
1986; 150: 257-65.
91. Scaravilli F, Cook GC. Parasitic and fungal infections. In: Graham 
DI, Lantos PL, eds. Greenfield’s Neuropathology, 6th edn, Vol. 2. 
London: Arnold, 1997: 65-111.
92. Burtch M. Granulomatous meningitis caused by Coccidioides 
immitis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212: 827-9.
93. Igarashi M, Weber SC, Alford BR et al. Temporal bone findings 
in cryptococcal meningitis. Arch Otolaryngol 1975; 101: 577-83.
94. Teuscher E, Vrins A, Lemaire T. A vestibular syndrome associated 
with Cryptococcus neoformans in a horse. Zentralbl Veterinarmed 
A 1984; 31: 132-9.
95. Ronge J, Aidoo GA, Kruger G. Cysticercosis of the brain. Fortschr 
Neurol Psychiat Grenzgeb 1978; 46: 269-86.
96. Palomico-Nicas ME, Pachon-Diaz J. Hydatidosis of the posterior 
fossa. An Med Interna 1989; 6: 257-9.
97. Adour KK, Byl FM, Hilsinger RL, Wilcox RD. Meniere disease as 
a form of cranial polyganglionitis. Laryngoscope 1980; 90: 392-8.
  

The pathology of the vestibular system 
663
98. Mangabeira-Albemaz PL, Gananca MM. Sudden vertigo of 
central origin. A eta Otolaryngol 1988; 105: 564-9.
99. Furuta Y, Takasu T, Fukuda S et al. Latent Herpes simplex type 1 
in human vestibular ganglia. A eta Otolaryngol Suppl 1993; 503: 
85-9.
100. Shimizu T, Sekitani T, Hirata T, Hara H. Serum viral antibody 
titer in vestibular neuronitis. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl 1993; 503:
74-8.
101. Thomke F, Hopf HC. Pontine lesions mimicking acute peripheral 
vestibulopathy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1999; 66: 340-9.
102. Friedman I, House W. Vestibular neuronitis. Electron microscopy 
of Scarpa’s ganglion. J Laryngol Otol 1980; 94: 877-83.
103. Kaji M, Kusuhara T, Ayabe M et al. Survey of Herpes simplex 
virus infections of the central nervous system, including acute 
disseminated encephalomyelitis in the Kyushu and Okinawa 
regions of Japan. Mult Scler 1996; 2: 83-7.
104. Schmidbauer M, Budka H, Ambros P. Herpes simplex virus 
(HSV) DNA in microglial nodular brainstem encephalitis. J 
Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1989; 48: 645-52.
105. Esiri MM, Kennedy PGE. Viral diseases. In: Graham DI, Lantos 
PL eds. Greenfield’s Neuropathology, 6th edn, Vol. 2. London: 
Arnold, 1997: 3-63.
106. Fuller GN, Guiloff RJ, Scaravilli F, Harcourt-Webster JN. Com- 
bined HIV-CMV encephalitis presenting with brainstem signs. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1989; 52: 975-9.
107. Gray F, Nordmann P. Bacterial infections. In: Graham DI, Lantos 
PL, eds. Greenfields Neuropathology, Vol. 2. London: Arnold, 
1997: 113-52.
108. Moench TR, Griffin DE, Obriecht CR et al. Acute measles in 
patients with or without neurological involvement: distribution 
of measles virus antigen and RNA. J Infect Dis 1988; 158: 
433-42.
109. Gendelman HE, Wolinsky JS, Johnson RT et al. Measles 
encephalomyelitis: lack of evidence of viral invasion of the 
central nervous system and quantitative study of the nature of 
demyelination. Ann Neurol 1984; 15: 353-60.
110. Levine S. Relationship of experimental allergic encephalo­
myelitis to human disease. In: Rowland LP, ed. Immunological 
Disorders of the Nervous System, Vol. 49. Baltimore: Research 
Publications, Association for Research in Nervous and Mental 
Diseases, Williams and Wilkins, 1971: 33-49.
111. Behan PO, Geschwind N, Lamarche JB et al. Delayed hyper­
sensitivity 
to 
encephalitogenic 
protein 
in 
disseminated 
encephalomyelitis. Lancet, 1968; 2: 1009-12.
112. Johnson RT, Griffin DE, Hirsch RL et al. Measles encephalo­
myelitis: clinical and immunologic studies. N Engl J Med 1984; 
310: 137-41.
113. Posey K, Alpert JN, Langford LA, Yeakley JW. Acute hemor­
rhagic leukoencephalitis: a cause of acute brainstem dysfunction. 
South Med J 1994; 87: 851-4.
114. Graham DI, Behan PO, More IA. Brain damage complicating 
septic shock: acute haemorrhagic leukoencephalitis as a compli­
cation of the generalized Schwartzman reaction. J Neurol Neuro­
surg Psychiatry 1979; 42: 19-28.
115. Sawashima Y, Sawashima K, Taura Y et al. Clinical and patho­
logical findings of a Yorkshire terrier affected with necrotizing 
encephalitis. J Vet Med Sci 1996; 58: 659-61.
116. Kalimo H, Kaste M, Haltia M. Vascular diseases. In: Graham DI, 
Lantos PL, eds. Greenfield’s Neuropathology, Vol. 1. London: 
Arnold, 1997: 315-96.
117. Keane JR. Eye movement abnormalities in systemic lupus 
erythematosus. Arch Neurol 1995; 52: 1145-9.
118. Smith RW, Ellison DW, Jenkins EA et al. Cerebellum and brain 
stem vasculopathy in systemic lupus erythematosus. Ann Rheum 
Dis 1994; 53: 327-30.
119. Bromberg MB, Junck L, Gebarski SS, McLean MJ, Gilman S. 
The Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome examined by computed 
tomography, magnetic resonance and 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D- 
glucose and positron emission tomography. Arch Neurol 1990; 47: 
1239-42.
120. Fukuyama H, Kameyama M, Nabatame H et al. Magnetic reso­
nance images of neuro-Behcet syndrome show precise brain 
stem lesions. Report of a case. Acta Neurol Scand 1987; 75: 
70-3.
121. Iwasaki Y, Kinoshita M, Ikeda K et al. Central nervous system 
magnetic resonance imaging findings in neuro-Behcet syndrome. 
Comput Med Imaging Graph 1990; 14: 85-7.
122. Forman HP, Levin S, Stewart B et al. Cerebral vasculitis and 
hemorrhage in an adolescent taking diet pills containing phenyl­
propanolamine: case report and review of the literature. Pediatrics 
1989; 83: 737-41.
123. Henson RA, Urich H. Cancer and the Nervous System. Oxford: 
Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1982.
124. Giometto B, Scaravilli F, eds. Symposium on paraneoplastic 
disorders. Brain Pathol 1999; 9: 220-3.
125. Scaravilli F, An SF, Groves M, Thom M. The neuropathology of 
paraneoplastic syndromes. Brain Pathol 1999; 9: 251-60.
126. Gulya AJ. Neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes with neurooto­
logic manifestations. Laryngoscope 1993; 103: 754-61.
127. Stebhens WE. Pathology of the Cerebral Blood Vessels. St Louis: 
Mosby, 1972: 98-130.
128. Fisher CM, Gore I, Okabe N, White PD. Atherosclerosis of the 
carotid and vertebral arteries — extracranial and intracranial. J 
Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1965; 24: 455-76.
129. Meyer WW, Beck H. Das rontgenanatomische und feingewe- 
bliche Bild der Arteriosklerose im intrakranielle Abschitt der A. 
Carotis interna. Virch Arch 1955; 326: 700.
130. Charcot J-M, Bouchard C. Nouvelles recherches sur la 
pathogenie de l’hemorrhagie cerebrale. Arch Physiol (Paris) 1869; 
1: 110, 643, 725.
131. Fisher CM. Cerebral miliary aneurysms in hypertension. Am J 
Pathol 1972; 66: 313-30.
132. Wakai S, Nagai M. Histological verification of microaneurysms 
as a cause of cerebral haemorrhage in surgical specimens. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry 1989; 52: 595-9.
133. Chalia VR, Moody DM, Bell MA. The Charcot-Bouchard 
aneurysms controversy: impact of a new histologic technique. 
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1992; 51: 264-71.
134. Binswanger O. Die Abgrenzung des allgemeinen progressiven 
Paralysie. Klin Wochenschr 1894; 31: 1103-5, 1137-9, 1180-6.
  

664 
Vestibular science
135. Janota 1. Dementia, deep white matter damage and hypertension: 
‘Binswanger’s disease’. Psychol Med 1981; 11: 39-48.
136. Sourander P, W&linder J. Hereditary multi-infarct dementia. 
Acta Neuropathol 1977; 39: 247-54.
137. Tournier-Lasserve E, Joutel A, Melki J et al. Cerebral autosomal 
dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoen- 
cephalopathy maps to chromosome 19ql2. Nature Genet 1993; 3: 
256-9.
138. Lammie GA, Rakshi ], Rossor MN et al. Cerebral autosomal 
dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoen- 
cephalopathy (CADASIL) — confirmation by cerebral biopsy in 
2 cases. Clin Neuropathol 1995; 14: 201-6.
139. Mayer M, Dichgans M, Gasser T et al. Hereditary CADASIL 
cerebral arteriopathy. Report of a family. Nervenharzt 1995; 66: 
927-32.
140. Masuda J, Yutani C, Waki R et al. Histopathological analysis of 
the mechanisms of intracranial hemorrhage complicating infec- 
tive endocarditis. Stroke 1992; 23: 843-50.
141. Weir B. Aneurysms Affecting the Nervous System. Baltimore: 
Williams and Wilkins, 1987.
142. Norrg£rd O, Angquist K-A, Fodstad H et al. Intracranial 
aneurysms and heredity. Neurosurgery 1987; 20: 236-9.
143. Ronkainen A, Hernesniemi J, Ryynanen M. Familial subarach- 
noid hemorrhage in East Finland 1977-90. Neurosurgery 1993; 
33: 787-97.
144. Challa VR, Moody DM, Brown WR. Vascular malformations of 
the central nervous system. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1995; 54: 
609-21.
145. Saygi S, Bolay H, Tekkok IH et al. Fibromuscular dysplasia of the 
basilar artery: a case with brain stem stroke. Angiology 1990; 41: 
658-61.
146. Oppenheimer DR, Griffith HB. Persistent intracranial bleeding 
as a complication of hemispherectomy. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry 1966; 29: 229-40.
147. Koeppen AH, Wood GW. Superficial siderosis of the central 
nervous system. In Proceedings of the 10th International Congress of 
Neuropathology, Stockholm, Gotab, 1986: 206.
148. Morita H, Ikeda S, Yamamoto K et al. Hereditary ceruloplasmin 
deficiency with hemosiderosis: a clinico-pathological study of a 
Japanese family. Ann Neurol 1995; 37: 646-56.
149. Iancu T. Iron overload. In: Baum J, Gerlely J, Fanburg BL, eds. 
Molecular Aspects of Medicine, Vol. 6. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 
1982: 1-100.
150. Chu LLH, Feinberg RA. On the mechanism of iron-induced 
synthesis of apoferritin in Hela cells. J Biol Chem 1969; 244: 
3847-54.
151. Zahringer J, Baliga BS, Munro HN. Novel mechanism for trans- 
lational control in regulation of ferritin synthesis by iron. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 1976; 73: 857-61.
152. Koeppen AH, Dickson AC, Chu RC, Thach RE. The pathogen­
esis of superficial siderosis of the central nervous system. Ann 
Neurol 1993; 34: 646-53.
153. Skinner HA. The origin of the acoustic nerve tumours. Br J Surg 
1928; 16: 440-63.
154. Rasmussen AT. Studies of the 8th cranial nerve in man. Laryngo­
scope 1940; 50: 67-83.
155. Barker DJP, Weller RO, Garfield JS. Epidemiology of primary 
tumours of the brain and spinal cord: a regional survey in 
southern England. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1976; 39: 
290-6.
156. Curley JW, Ramsden RT, Howell A et al. Oestrogen and proges­
terone receptors in acoustic neuroma. J Laryngol Otol 1990; 104: 
865-7.
157. Gould VE, Moll I, Lee I et al. The intermediate filament com­
plement of the spectrum of nerve sheath neoplasms. Lab Invest 
1986; 55: 463-4.
158. Gray MH, Rosenberg AE, Dickersin GR, Bhan AK. Glial 
fibrillary acidic protein and keratin expression by benign and 
malignant nerve sheath tumors. Hum Pathol 1989; 20: 
1089-96.
159. Carney JA. Psammomatous melanotic schwannoma. A distinc­
tive heritable tumor with special association, including cardiac 
myxoma and the Cushing syndrome. Am J Surg Pathol 1990; 14: 
206-22.
160. Font RL, Truong LD. Melanotic schwannoma of the soft tissues. 
Electron microscopic observations and review of the literature. 
Am J Surg Pathol 1984; 8: 129-38.
161. Miller RT, Sarikaya H, Sos A. Melanotic schwannoma of the 
acoustic nerve. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1986; 110: 153-4.
162. Earls JP, Robles HA, McAdams HP, Rao KC. General case of the 
day. Malignant melanotic schwannoma of the eighth cranial 
nerve. Radiographics 1994; 14: 1425-7.
163. Rouleau GA, Wertelecki W, Haines JL et al. Genetic linkage of 
bilateral acoustic neurofibromatosis to a DNA marker in chro­
mosome 22. Nature 1987; 329: 246-8.
164. Rouleau GA, Merel P, Lutchman M et al. Alteration in a new 
gene encoding a putative membrane-organizing protein causes 
neurofibromatosis type 2. Nature 1993; 363: 515-21.
165. Trofatter JA, MacCollin MM, Rutter JL et al. A novel moesin-, 
ezrin-, radixin-like gene is a candidate for the neurofibromatosis 
2 tumor suppressor. Cell 1993; 72: 791-800.
166. Malamed Sh, Sahar A, Beller AJ. The recurrence of intracranial 
meningiomas. Neurochirurgia 1979; 22: 47-51.
167. Baird M, Gallagher PJ. Recurrent intracranial and spinal menin­
giomas: clinical and histological features. Clin Neuropathol 1989; 
8: 41-4.
168. Lantos PL, Vandenberg SR, Kleihues P. Tumours of the nervous 
system. In: Graham DI, Lantos PL, eds. Greenfield’s Neuropathol­
ogy, London: Arnold, 1997: 583-879.
169. Heffelfinger MJ, Dahlin DC, MacCarthy CS, Beabout JW. Chor­
domas and cartilagineous tumours at the skull base. Cancer 1973; 
32: 410-20.
170. Charachon R. Signal symptoms in tumours of the petrous bone. 
Ann Otolaryngol Chir Cervicofac 1981; 98: 181-8.
  

I
aFunctiori and
dysfunction of the 
vestibular system
Herman Kingma
The vestibular system contributes to three major tasks: spatial 
orientation, gaze stabilization and balance control, including 
head stabilization. However, these tasks can only be fulfilled in 
combination with input from many other sensory systems 
(Figure 38.1). Reflexes associated with vestibular function are 
the vestibulo-ocular reflex, the vestibulospinal reflex and the 
vestibulo-collic reflex. The clinical implication of the fact that 
vestibular function is associated with spatial orientation, gaze 
stabilization and balance control is that a dysfunction of the 
system may result in a variety of complaints and is not restric­
ted to the classical rotatory vertigo, nausea or balance disor­
ders. Moreover, problems with sensorimotor control (eye- 
head-hand coordination) or visual inspection of moving targets 
(quality control of objects on an assembly line) and fear or anx­
iety in conditions where self-motion and motion of the envi­
ronment may be difficult to distinguish (e.g. busy supermarkets) 
from vestibular disorder. In addition, vestibular dysfunction 
may force patients to direct selective attention to otherwise 
subconscious reflexes and lead to faster fatigue.
Figure 38.2 shows the basic pathways that relate the 
vestibular, visual and proprioceptive systems with these tasks. 
To facilitate a basic understanding of vestibular function, a 
short introduction to these pathways is given. The labyrinths 
detect head orientation relative to gravity and head move­
ments. This information is transmitted to the vestibular nuclei 
(VN) and the cerebellum (CER). The labyrinths detect head 
movements through accelerations only, which makes the sys­
tem insensitive for movements with constant velocities. 
Information about the actual acceleration is therefore stored 
via the vestibular nuclei in the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi
Figure 38.1 Schematic representation of the multi-sensory control of image 
stabilization, balance control and spatial orientation. CNS: central nervous system.
Figure 38.2 Simplified schematic overview of the major pathways involved in 
image stabilization, balance control and spatial orientation. VN: vestibular 
nuclei. OMN: oculo-motor nuclei. THAL: thalamus. CGL: corpus geniculatum 
laterale. NOT: nucleus of the optic tract. Pons: parapontine reticular formation. 
CER: cerebellum, nph: nucleus prepositus hypoglossi.

666 
Vestibular science
(NPH) to expand the perception of movements in time by a 
factor of three (velocity storage mechanism). Perception of 
self-movement and spatial orientation are major cortical func­
tions of the vestibular system. The labyrinths project via the 
VN and the thalamus (THAL) to the vestibular cortex. The 
vestibular cortex function seems to be distributed among sev­
eral multisensory areas in the parietal and temporal cortices and 
is integrated in a larger network for spatial attention and sensori­
motor control. The parietoinsular vestibular cortex has been 
postulated to be the core region within the vestibular cortical 
system. Representation is bilateral, with a right-hemispheric 
dominance.1
Spatial orientation
Spatial orientation is a crucial ability for any animal: it is a pre­
requisite for postural control, locomotion and interaction with 
the environment. Optimal spatial orientation requires input 
from all senses (Figure 38.1). A fast and reliable interpretation 
of the multisensory input requires learning and preknowledge 
about what can be expected and may prevent erroneous inter­
pretation of exactly what is happening. Nevertheless, spatial 
orientation is difficult even under rather simple, frequently 
occurring conditions, despite the multisensorial input and our 
intelligence. For example, assume that you are sitting in a train, 
which is expected to leave soon. Through the window you look 
at the train standing beside yours. When that train starts to 
move, most people will have the sensation that their train is 
moving in the opposite direction (Figure 38.3b). A fraction of 
a second later, we will realize that our train did not move at all. 
The explanation of this phenomenon is relatively simple when 
we apply our current insights into spatial orientation. Our 
labyrinths sense head accelerations (canals and maculae) and 
the absolute orientation of the head relative to the gravitation 
vector (maculae). Proprioceptors and other graviceptors in the 
body, in concert with the internal body scheme, inform the 
brain about the orientation of the body (and body segments) 
relative to the contact surface of the body with the environ­
ment (feet on the ground, hands on the table, etc.). Cervical 
proprioception allows integration of detected spatial orienta­
tions of head and body. Hearing allows orientation of the head 
relative to external sound sources (this modality is highly devel­
oped in bats). However, spatial orientation is far from optimal 
without vision. When we walk with eyes closed, we lose the 
absolute sense of direction and distance within seconds. All 
other senses are apparently unable to provide the brain with 
accurate information about our absolute position in space. 
Labyrinthine input is especially inaccurate in this respect. As 
noted above, the labyrinths only sense acceleration, and the 
brain therefore has to integrate this input twice to calculate 
position; a slight offset in the signal or small error in integration 
will then result in a major error in position. Also, as the 
labyrinths do not sense constant velocity, substantial displace­
ment can occur without detection by the vestibular system. All 
these features point to the necessity to reorient us from time to 
time and to correct for the errors made in absolute position.
A similar problem is encountered with navigation of air­
planes: for detection of absolute position, external references 
are required (radar or satellites). We use vision as a source of 
external reference: frequent visual inspection of our orientation 
relative to the environment helps us to determine absolute 
position. Through experience, we learn to rely on visual orien­
tation. When we start walking in infancy, we learn that the 
whole visual scene is moving over the retina during self- 
motion. As a consequence, we interpret such a visual stimula­
tion as indicative of self-motion (Figure 38.3a). This also hap­
pened in the example of the train: the optokinetic stimulation 
of the retina with the moving neighboring train suggests self- 
motion. A fraction of a second later, we will realize that we were 
fooled by the visual input. The labyrinths will tell us that no 
acceleration occurred, no pressure of the seat or vibrations from 
the motors were sensed by proprioception, and we did not hear 
the noise that fits with the acceleration of our train. This exam­
ple indicates how difficult spatial orientation is, despite the 
multisensorial input and learning. It also stresses that every sen­
sory system contributing to spatial orientation plays a specific 
role and is highly relevant. Loss of any sensory system will 
therefore reduce performance, despite some overlap in function. 
Labyrinthine input is especially important as, in contrast to the 
other senses, it is very sensitive for fast, high-frequency head 
movements (1-10 Hz) and is characterized by short latencies 
(see below). These features allow fast detection and perception 
of motion in space and enable fast and adequate responses. 
Labyrinthine dysfunction, however, leads to impaired spatial 
orientation during fast head movements, which cannot be com­
pensated by input from other senses.
As indicated above, even a healthy labyrinth shows defi­
ciencies related to sensing motion due to specific limitations of 
the sensor. These drawbacks do not only relate to the semicir­
cular canals. Spatial orientation based upon vestibular input is 
also difficult, because the statolith system is unable to distin­
guish linear accelerations from tilts or rolls (Figure 38.4). For 
example, a forward acceleration and a retroflexion of the head
  

Function and dysfunction of the vestibular system 
667
1
Velocity
0
j m  
m| 
m nm
Fg 
Fg
Figure 38.4 Schematic representation of the statolith hair cell response to 
linear translation (two upper trace) and to head tilts (lower trace). Fg: 
gravitational force.
result in similar deflection patterns of the cilia in the maculae. 
Perception is also confusing: a pilot in a quickly accelerating 
plane senses both acceleration and upward tilt instead of pure 
acceleration. This, combined with constant accelerations 
sensed by the labyrinth, easily leads to spatial disorientation. 
Spatial disorientation at least partly accounts for motion sick­
ness. The example given below is a simplification of the actual 
problems, but nevertheless nicely demonstrates how spatial 
orientation can fail and lead to kinetosis (Figure 38.5).
First, we need to introduce the concept of the so-called 
efference copy.
An efference copy is a learned sensorimotor pattern that 
is stored in the brain and that reflects the sensory input 
and motor output signals that fit with a specific stimulus 
condition.
For example, in a stationary condition, standing on a stable 
floor, the corresponding efference copy contains relatively sta­
tionary input signals (minor movements) and output signals 
(minor corrections). Any movement made will be detected by 
the senses involved. The input signals will be compared with 
the efference copy, resulting in a fast interpretation of move­
ment and spatial orientation and generation of adequate, 
almost automatic, motor signals. As soon as we stand on a slow­
ly moving ship, still using the efference copy applicable for a 
stationary environment, errors will occur in the motor com­
mands that have to adjust posture and gate. We all know that it 
is not easy to keep balance while walking on a ship. We will 
therefore need to switch our selective attention to the most 
reliable sensory input for knowing how we move relative to 
gravity and how we move relative to the ship, features that are 
no longer correlated. The labyrinths are not reliable sensors, as
Figure 38.5 Motion sickness and spatial orientation: basic framework of 
thinking, (a) head motion in a stationary environment; (b) head fixed on a 
sailing boat; (c) head motion on a sailing boat; (d) head motion on a sailing 
boat after adaptation to the boat movement.
they detect the sum of boat and head motions, and are inca­
pable of distinguishing between linear accelerations and roll 
(see below). Therefore, we tend to rely on the relatively slow 
visual input. Looking at the horizon and the ship, we can detect 
self-motion and boat motion. In contrast, visual orientation 
below deck is worse and easily induces motion sickness. Despite 
this, most people will become disoriented when boat movement 
is complex, and we will be warned by vegetative symptoms that 
we are at risk of falling. As long as we stay on the boat, we will 
be able to try to leam the relatively regular movements of the 
boat and build up a new, specific efference copy. As soon as we 
have made such a copy, we will be able to compare the sensory 
input during stance and locomotion with the ‘known’ boat 
movement, will experience normal spatial orientation again, 
and will be able to generate the required muscle activity. Now, 
we will experience a problem when we get off the boat: still 
using the ‘moving’ efference copy, we will experience motion 
(sea legs) despite the fact that the sensory input is nil during 
stance. This phenomenon is called ‘mal de debarquement’ and 
decays in time and disappears completely as soon as we activate 
the correct ‘stationary’ efference copy again.
Although spatial orientation is hardly tested in the clinic, 
it relies, to a major extent, on vestibular function.
  

668 
Vestibular science
Gaze stabilization
Information about head acceleration passes from the VN via 
the oculomotor nuclei (OMN) to the extraocular muscles to 
generate compensatory eye movements. The velocities of these 
eye movements need to match the velocity of the head move­
ments within 3% accuracy. The image of the visual scene will 
then move over the retina (retinal slip) with a velocity of less 
than 3%. This is slow enough to allow the visual system to per­
ceive all the necessary details of the image. It also allows us to 
guide gaze accurately to any desired visual target during head 
movements. It must therefore be stressed that the VOR is a 
velocity-controlled system. The latency of this vestibulo-ocular 
reflex (VOR) is only 7-10 ms.
CHARACTERISTICS OF VOR
Velocity'control led system
Optimal frequency responses between 1 and 10 Hz
Latency of VOR 7-10 msec
Easy adaptation
The VOR is kept optimal by visual feedback: persistent poor 
gaze stabilization is detected on the retina and perceived in the 
visual cortex, and a correction signal is generated for both eyes 
in the horizontal gaze center in the pons, and transferred to the 
cerebellum; this decreases or increases the inhibition of the VN 
and thus the VOR. The VOR can be easily adapted. Adaptation 
of the VOR by visual feedback can occur within minutes. Melvil 
Jones even showed that the VOR could be inverted within 3 days 
by wearing inverted prisms.2 Proprioception seems to have an 
equivalent in the podokinetic adaptation reported by Melvil 
Jones and co-workers.3 They reported that subjects who are 
adapted to walking in circles lose their sense of direction as they 
adapt to an asymmetric proprioceptive input.
Most functional tests of the VOR are performed in the dark 
(caloric test, rotatory tests) to prevent optokinetic reflexes or 
visual suppression. However, the VOR is meant to stabilize 
images and is therefore not functional physiologically in the 
dark. In the dark, the mental setting and preknowledge of the 
patient influence the VOR marked: when the patient is almost 
asleep, hardly any VOR can be elicited, whereas the VOR is 
close to maximum when the patient is anxious or mentally fix­
ating an imaginary target in a stationary environment. One of 
the challenges of current vestibular testing is to overcome this 
problem.
The sensitivity of the vestibular apparatus depends on the 
stimulus frequency, similar to any other sensory system. Melvil 
Jones and Groen calculated the frequency dependence based 
upon a theoretical second-order model of the canals and the 
maculae.4,5 According to their findings, the canals are optimal­
ly sensitive to angular velocities with frequencies between 
roughly 1 and 10 Hz. How should we interpret this frequency 
dependence? As mentioned already, the labyrinths detect accel­
erations only, which implies that a constant velocity (0 Hz!) is 
not sensed. However, a change of angular velocity implies sub­
stantial angular acceleration. The faster the fluctuations in 
velocity, the higher the accelerations and the better the canals 
will sense the modulation of velocity. The fact that the 
labyrinthine sensitivity is limited to about 20 Hz is associated 
with the mechanical properties of the canal system. In delicate 
experiments Collewijn and co-workers showed that the VOR 
induced by passive head-shaking is indeed close to optimal in 
the range 1-10 Hz.6 Owing to several technical problems, most 
diagnostic tests evaluate the VOR below 1 Hz, and do not pic­
ture the relevant physiological working range of the canals.
Eye movements can also be induced by steadily moving 
visual targets. Such a movement is called smooth pursuit in the 
case of foveal fixation. A smooth pursuit movement needs to be 
very accurate, as the fovea has only 1° of arc, and the image on 
the fovea of the moving object may easily slip off this region 
with high spatial resolution. Therefore, in contrast to the 
VOR, the smooth pursuit needs to be a very accurate position- 
controlled system, and uses foveal visual input for eye position 
control. The cortical optokinetic reflex (OKR) is another visu­
ally guided eye movement and is a velocity-controlled system 
like the VOR, using visual input from the entire retina. This 
reflex is elicited, for example, when we look at a train that passes 
by. The image of the train moves over the retina, and the visual 
system calculates the velocity of the image in the visual cortex. 
Based upon this information, usual signals are processed in two 
ways. The cortical pathway is similar to that for the smooth pur­
suit system, and information passes via the corpus geniculatum 
laterale (CGL) in the thalamus (THAL), the visual cortex, the 
pons, the cerebellum, the VN and the OMN to the extraocular 
muscles to generate conjugated eye movements with a velocity 
that again matches the retinal image motion with an accuracy 
within 3%, to allow the visual system to perceive all the neces­
sary details of the image. Parallel to the cortical OKR, humans 
demonstrate a second subcortical OKR. Vision is poorly devel­
oped during the very first months of life: there is no smooth pur­
suit, and only large, attention-attracting targets seem to be 
observed. In this period, infants stabilize moving visual scenes 
on the retina by the subcortical OKR. The velocity of the image 
is now calculated for each eye separately in both nuclei of the 
optic tract (NOT), which, via the velocity storage memory 
(located in the NPH), the VN, the OMN, leads to an activa­
tion of the extraocular muscles. This pathway is also active in 
adults when we gaze at moving targets subconsciously. The sub­
cortical OKR needs time to build up; it needs to fill the veloci­
ty storage memory before eye movements can start. Also, the 
remaining activity stored in the memory accounts for the fact 
that eye movements (nystagmus) continue when the visual 
stimulus is suddenly switched off. This phenomenon is known 
as optokinetic after nystagmus (OKAN) and is frequently stud­
ied to investigate whether the velocity storage function is 
intact. Dysfunction of the velocity storage, or reduced input 
from the labyrinths (labyrinthine deficits), generally leads to a 
shortening of post-rotatory responses.
  

Function and dysfunction of the vestibular system 
669
Vestibular function loss leads to impaired gazed stahiliza- 
lion, especially during fast head movements*1 Smooth 
pursuit and optokinetic reflexes are too slow to compen­
sate for this functional loss above 2-3 Hz. Below 2-3 Hz, 
visually guided gaze stabilization can cake over.
As a consequence, many patients try to cope with their 
impaired gaze stabilization by preventing fast head movements. 
In the case of a unilateral vestibular deafferentation, central 
compensation can restore the tonic balance at the level of the 
vestibular nuclei. However, each labyrinth has a preponderance 
for stimulation to the ipsilateral side (Ewald’s law). In the case 
of a unilateral deafferentation, this direction preponderance 
remains, and is especially apparent at higher frequencies, where 
visually guided gaze stabilization cannot contribute. The diag­
nostic head-impulse test is based upon this principle: a fast head 
rotation to the affected side leads only to minimal gaze stabi­
lization and necessitates compensatory corrective saccade(s) 
that can be easily observed.
Balance control
Balance and postural control involves maintenance of 
the alignment of body posture, stability and bodily orien­
tation in the environment and also serves as a mechani­
cal support for action. We should be aware that postural 
control is a prerequisite for voluntary skills, because 
almost every movement that an individual makes is made 
of postural components that stabilize the body/
Labyrinthine input, predominantly from the statolith system, is 
relayed via both the VN (fast reflexes) and the cerebellum (pre­
cision of movement, adaptation, learning) to the postural mus­
cles and is used for balance control (Figure 38.2). This 
labyrinthine input regulates the tonic activity of the postural 
extensor muscles to control the joints of the limbs and the ori­
entation of the head in space, and provide appropriate body 
rigidity. Postural tone not only depends on the tonic 
labyrinthine input, but is also modulated through the myotatic 
reflex loop, neck reflexes, lumbar reflexes and positive support­
ing reactions.
In humans, where the supporting surface is narrow, there is 
a direct regulation of the center of body mass by displacement 
of body segments. This is in contrast to the situation in cats: 
here the brain does not control the orientation of the center of 
body mass, but regulates the orientation of the limbs. After a 
fall, the limbs will be oriented vertically as fast as possible to 
ensure that the cat will land on its feet. The main substrate as 
the basis for body orientation is the so-called postural body 
schema, an internal representation of body posture, which 
includes a representation of body geometry, body kinetics, and
the body orientation with respect to gravity (vertical). 
Information regarding orientation with respect to verticality 
comes from the labyrinths, vision and possibly body gravicep- 
tors.7,8 Visual and vestibular cues allow detection of the orien­
tation of the head in space, while somatosensory sensors are 
necessary to relate head orientation to body orientation. 
Balance control requires the detection of verticality and the 
orientation of the support phase. It seems unambiguous that the 
support-phase orientation can be detected with the somatosen­
sory sensors alone, specially those in the soles of the feet. 
However, the absolute support-phase orientation in space can 
only be estimated by relating the sensed support-phase orienta­
tion to the perceived subjective vertical, i.e. the direction of the 
gravitation vector. The multiple sensory inputs are integrated 
and resolved by the postural system to provide a coherent inter­
pretation of the body’s orientation and dynamic equilibrium to 
preserve balance. This information is then thought to be com­
pared to the above-mentioned internal model of the body. Any 
resulting error signals are used to generate motor commands in 
order to maintain and regain body equilibrium.
Many studies have tried to quantify the contributions of 
the various senses towards postural control. It was assumed that 
in the case of a vestibular deficit, subjects would rely more on 
the other intact senses. Although this might be true, motor 
strategies and sensory dependence vary too widely in healthy 
subjects to allow a simple discrimination between normal and 
abnormal dependence on any sensory input in cases of limited 
sensory deficits.
Postural control is not organized as a single unit. 
Independent control of the position or orientation of segments 
such as the head, trunk and forearm has been shown to exist. 
These segments serve as a reference frame for perception and 
action processes. The execution of destabilizing voluntary 
movements is preceded by activation of postural muscles, called 
anticipatory postural adjustments. These adjustments serve to 
compensate in advance for changes in equilibrium or posture 
caused by the movement. So, apart from feedback processes, the 
postural system is also able to anticipate center of body mass 
displacements and environmental conditions.7
As mentioned above, labyrinthine input is used to control 
postural tone and to control the orientation of the center of body 
mass relative to the supporting phase (the ground) to prevent 
falling. Balance control, particularly, is optimized by motor 
learning and varies widely between healthy subjects. A dysfunc­
tion of the labyrinth initially leads to a tendency to fall to the 
deafferented side but is normally centrally compensated within 
weeks to months. Then, due to the large inter-individual variabil­
ity, balance control may even be better in a well-trained, cen­
trally compensated patient with labyrinthine function loss than 
in an inactive healthy subject. Reduced motor abilities and mul­
tisensory deficit may be the primary cause of frequent falls in the 
elderly. The injuries associated with the falls, and the fear of 
falling, again reduce mobility and the quality of life consider­
ably. The role of vestibular dysfunction in this situation is still 
unclear.
  

670 
Vestibular science
References
1. Brandt T. Vertigo. Its Multisensory Syndromes. London: 
Springer Verlag, 1999.
2. Jones GM, Davies P. Adaptation of cat vestibulo'ocular 
reflex to 200 days of optically reversed vision. Brain Res 
1976; 103 (3): 551-4.
3. Weber KD, Fletcher WA, Gordon CR, MelvilLJones G, 
Block EW. Motor learning in the <podokinetic, system and 
its role in spatial orientation during locomotion. Exp Brain 
Res 1998; 120 (3): 377-85.
4. Wilson VJ, Melvill Jones G. Mammalian Vestibular 
Physiology. New York: Plenum Press, 1979.
5. Groen JJ, Lowenstein O, Vendrik AJH. The mechanical
analysis of the responses from the end organs of the horizon' 
tal canal in the isolated elasmobranch labyrinth. J Physiol 
(Lond) 1952;117:329-46.
6. Tabak S, Collewijn H. Evaluation of the human vestibuk> 
ocular reflex at high frequencies with a helmet, driven by 
reactive torque. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl 1995; 520 Pt 1: 
4-8.
7. Massion J, Woollacott MH. Posture and equilibrium. In: 
Bronstein AM, Brandt T, Woollacott MH, eds. Clinical 
Disorders of Balance, Posture and Gait London: Arnold 
Publishers, 1996: 1-19.
8. Mittelstaedt H. Interaction of eye*, head-, and trunk'bound 
information in spatial perception and control. J Vestib Res 
1997; 7: 283-302.
  

Effects of aging on 
control of stability
Brian E Maki, William E Mcllroy
Introduction
Postural instability and falling are among the most serious 
problems associated with aging.1
Age-related changes in the neural, sensory and musculoskeletal 
systems can lead to balance impairments that have a tremen­
dous impact on the ability to move about safely, and the conse­
quences of instability and falling, in terms of healthcare costs 
and quality of life, are extensive (Tables 39.1 and 39.2). Injuries 
due to falls, such as hip fractures, place an enormous burden on 
the healthcare system. For example, in the USA alone, there 
are 300000 hip fractures each year (90% due to falls), with 
associated healthcare costs estimated at $7-10 billion.4 Up to 
40% of hip-fracture victims die within 6 months of sustaining 
the injury,5 and those who survive seldom regain their former 
level of mobility. In addition to serious injury, instability and
Table 39.1 Age-related changes affecting falling risk.
Sensory systems 
Reduced visual acuity, contrast sensitivity, depth perception and 
dark adaptation 
Reduced vestibular function 
Reduced proprioception 
Reduced cutaneous sensation
Musculoskeletal system 
Reduced muscle strength 
Slowing of muscle contraction 
Increased muscle fatigue 
Increased joint stiffness 
Reduced range of motion
Nervous system 
Slowing of nerve conduction 
Slowing and impairment of information processing
Table 39.2 Medical risk factors for instability and falls.
Sensory disorders 
Cataracts, macular degeneration, glaucoma 
Labyrinthitis, vestibular neuritis, Meniere's disease, acoustical 
nerve tumor
Neurological disorders 
Parkinson's disease, hemiplegia (stroke), normal-pressure 
hydocephalus, dementia, peripheral neuropathy (diabetes, 
pernicious anemia, nutritional)
Disorders causing transient disturbances 
Cardiac arrhythmia, transient ischemic attack, ocular ischemia, 
orthostatic or postprandial hypotension
Other conditions 
Foot abnormalities, musculoskeletal disorders 
Acute illness, seizure, syncope, incontinence
Medications and drugs 
Antidepressants, benzodiazepines, alcohol
falling are often associated with fear of falling, which can lead 
to anxiety, social withdrawal and activity restriction and atten­
dant loss of quality of life.6-9 The net effect of fall-related injury 
or fear is often a loss of ability to live independently. In fact, 
over 40% of nursing-home admissions are related to falls.2,10
Identifying specific causes of instability in older adults and 
developing improved methods to diagnose and treat individuals 
with compromised balance will provide a significant opportu­
nity to reduce healthcare costs and improve independence and 
quality of life. The challenge in meeting this objective arises 
due to the multifactorial nature of falls, the complexity of the 
balance control mechanisms, and the variable effects of aging 
on the neural, sensory and musculoskeletal substrates of balance 
control. Age-related pathology, as well as medication use, can 
also have profound effects on balance control. Although dis­
tinctions betwen effects of aging and borderline pathology are

672 
Vestibular science
not always clear-cut,11,12 the focus of this chapter is on the 
effects of those age-related changes that do not appear to be 
associated with any specific disease or drug. Understanding the 
complex and interacting effects due to age-related changes in 
the neural, sensory and motor systems is likely to be one of the 
more challenging tasks facing the clinician who needs to man­
age instability in an older clientele.
Basic principles of balance control
To maintain upright stance in the presence of gravity, the cen­
tral nervous system (CNS) must regulate the static and 
dynamic relationship between the center of mass (COM) of the 
body and the base of support (BOS).13-16 The BOS is usually 
defined by the feet, but may include the arms when touching an 
object for support.17’19 In the absence of arm support, static 
equilibrium requires the COM to be positioned over the feet, 
and the perimeter of this foot area can be considered to repre­
sent the static stability limits associated with the BOS. If we 
model the body as an inverted pendulum that rotates about the 
ankle joint, then it becomes apparent that it is necessary to gen­
erate stabilizing ankle torque in order to counter the effects of 
gravity or other forces acting on the body (Figure 39.1a). The 
ability to maintain static equilibrium is dependent on the char­
acteristics of the BOS, because the dimensions of the BOS
Figure 39.1 Biomechanical requirements for static equilibrium. In (a), the 
center of mass (COM) is situated within the anterior and posterior limits of the 
base of support (BOS). In (b), the COM is located at the anterior static stability 
limit. Note that the muscle-generated ankle torque (f), which is equal to the 
product of the vertical ground reaction force (V = mg; m =  body mass; g =  
acceleration due to gravity) and the moment arm (/.), is limited by the finite 
length of the BOS (maximum torque is generated in the case shown in (b)).
(c) depicts a situation where grasping an object for support allows static 
equilibrium to be achieved even though the COM is outside the BOS limits. 
Although the examples shown depict stability requirements in the sagittal 
plane, analogous requirements apply in the frontal plane.
established by the feet limit the magnitude of stabilizing torque 
that can be generated (Figure 39.1b). By displacing the feet 
(Figure 39.2b) or using the arms to push against an object for 
support (Figure 39.2c), the stability limits of the BOS can be 
extended. Actual grasping of the object allows additional stabil­
izing forces to be generated and can extend the static stability 
limits beyond the perimeter of the BOS, provided that the grip 
is sufficiently strong to allow the necessary forces to be gener­
ated (Figure 39.1c).
In order to maintain upright stability, the CNS must reg­
ulate the relationship between the COM of the body and 
the BOS, by controlling movement of the COM or by 
changing the BOS.
Dynamic equilibrium takes into account the additional 
requirement of controlling the momentum associated with 
movement of the COM.20,21,198 If the COM is moving with suf­
ficient horizontal velocity, it is possible for the body to be 
dynamically unstable, even when the COM is positioned over 
the BOS. Conversely, it is possible for the body to be dynami­
cally stable even though the COM is located outside the static 
stability limits of the BOS, provided that the COM is moving 
toward the BOS with sufficient velocity that it can eventually 
be repositioned over the BOS. In a dynamic situation, horizon­
tal shear force must be generated at the foot-ground interface 
in order to decelerate the COM (Figure 39.2a). The biomech- 
anical capacity to generate this force is limited, again, by the 
dimensions of the BOS;22 inadequate surface friction may, in 
some situations, place additional limits on the force that can be 
generated.
In situations where the COM cannot be stabilized with 
respect to the existing BOS, it may be possible to re-establish 
stability by altering the BOS, e.g. by taking a step or by using 
the upper limbs to push against or grasp an object for support 
(Figures 39.2b,c). Ultimately, failure to re-establish dynamic 
equilibrium within the time available will result in a fall, which 
is most commonly defined as an unintentional impact of the 
body with a lower surface (e.g. the ground, a bed, a chair).
Given that the body is initially in a state of equilibrium, 
two things must happen in order for a fall to occur: (1) 
there must be a disturbance to postural equilibrium, i.e. a 
perturbation, that precipitates the loss of balance; and (2) 
there must be a failure of the balance control system to 
compensate adequately for the perturbation.
Precipitants of loss of balance
The perturbations that precipitate loss of balance are often 
inferred to involve mechanical effects, i.e. a change in the 
forces acting on the body. These mechanical perturbations act
  

Effects of aging on control of stability 
673
Direction 
of falling 
motion
Figure 39.2 Recovery of dynamic equilibrium: comparison of fixed-support 
reactions (a) and change-in-support reactions (b, c). In the dynamic situation, 
the postural reaction must generate a horizontal ground-reaction shear force 
(H) in order to decelerate the horizontal motion of the body's COM. Note that 
the stepping reaction (b) and reach-and-grasp reaction (c) both have the 
potential to greatly amplify the moment arm (D) between the COM and the 
contact force (V/), as well as the length of the BOS. This helps to decelerate the 
COM in two ways: (1) larger stabilizing shear force can be generated (this shear 
force is approximately proportional to the distance D);22 and (2) there is more 
time available to decelerate the COM (the COM has to travel a larger distance 
to reach the limit of the BOS). Although the examples shown depict stability 
requirements in the sagittal plane, analogous requirements apply in the frontal 
plane.
either to displace the COM beyond the BOS (e.g. a push or col­
lision) or to prevent the BOS from being appropriately aligned 
beneath the COM during ongoing movement (e.g. a slip, trip or 
misstep); see Figure 39.3. The destabilizing forces can be 
imposed by the environment (e.g. an impact from a swinging 
door or sliding door, a jostle from a crowd, standing in a mov­
ing vehicle) or may be self-induced, occurring during volitional 
movements such as walking, rising from a chair, bending over, 
reaching forward or pushing on a door. The destabilization asso­
ciated with volitional movement can arise from the motion of 
the COM, but can also be related to the control of the BOS. 
During gait, for example, the control of stability is highly 
dependent on the placement of the swingfoot;23 see Figure 39.4. 
It is also important to recognize that the upright body is inher­
ently unstable due to the force of gravity; hence, even a quiet 
unperturbed stance requires ongoing postural stabilization.
Perturbations may also involve transient changes in the 
nature of the orientational sensory information that is available 
to the CNS; we have termed such changes informational pertur­
bations.15 Such perturbations may create transient conflicts 
between the visual, vestibular and somatosensory inputs (e.g. 
moving visual fields that create an illusion of self-motion, or 
carpets that distort proprioceptive information from the foot
COM falls: perturbation to center of mass 
(displaces COM beyond BOS)
push or collision
upper extremity movement/activity 
turning
transfer to/from chair or bed
BOS falls: perturbation to base of support 
(disrupts alignment of BOS inderneath COM)
trip or slip 
misstep
overstep/understep curb or step 
tangle feet 
vehicle motion
NOP falls: no obvious mechanical 
perturbation
informational (sensory] perturbation 
transient physiological event
32% 
of falls
54%  
of falls
14% 
of falls
Figure 39.3 Precipitants of falls: mechanical (perturbations to COM and/or 
BOS) and non-mechanical (informational and physiological perturbations). The 
percentages of falls attributed to each category of perturbation were derived 
from interviews with 59 residents (age 62-96) of apartment-style self-care 
facilities who reported experiencing a total of 120 falls during a 1-year 
prospective monitoring period (18 of these falls could not be classified, due to 
insufficient information).72,73
Figure 39.4 An example of perturbation arising due to errors in BOS control, 
i.e. foot placement, during gait. Lateral motion of the COM toward the 
unsupported side occurs during each step. During gait, this lateral falling 
motion is normally decelerated by controlling the foot to land laterally with 
respect to the mid-line, so that the body weight generates a stabilizing 'torque', 
T =  mg d (a). Errors in control of the foot placement affect the magnitude of 
the torque, and can even result in a situation (b) where the torque Tacts to 
increase the lateral acceleration of the body.
  

674 
Vestibular science
and ankle), or may simply involve a transient change in the 
quality of the sensory input (e.g. dim lighting or glare which 
can interfere with visual inputs). In what appears to be a rela­
tively small proportion of falls, an internal physiological pertur­
bation may momentarily disrupt the operation of the balance 
control system itself,15 by interfering with perfusion of postural 
centers in the brain or brainstem (e.g. transient ischemic 
attacks, postural or postprandial hypotension, cardiac arrhyth­
mias) or by disrupting the sensorimotor systems (e.g. episodes of 
dizziness or vertigo).
Mechanisms for maintaining and recovering 
balance
The neural control of COM stability may be predictive (antici­
patory) or reactive24 (Figure 39.5). Predictive control is possible 
if the characteristics of the destabilization are known in 
advance, e.g. when compensating for the destabilizing effect of 
a planned voluntary movement. In general, however, sensory 
information about the body orientation and motion is also 
required, particularly when balance is disturbed unexpectedly. 
This sensory information is used to detect instability and to 
generate appropriate stabilizing reactions, either by triggering 
and scaling preprogrammed feedforward reactions or by contin­
uously updating ongoing feedback corrections. Because reactive
control is the only recourse in the event of unexpected pertur­
bation (e.g. slips, trips, pushes, errors in volitional movement), 
it is likely to play a critical role in preventing falls.15 In review­
ing the literature on reactive control, it is important to note 
that many studies have used relatively predictable perturba­
tions. This promotes the ability to preplan aspects of the 
response,25-28 which may not be applicable to situations in daily 
life, where balance is threatened unexpectedly.
The role of specific sensory sources in controlling postural 
reactions is somewhat controversial. It has been suggested that 
the visual, vestibular and somatosensory inputs are weighted, in 
an ‘adaptable hierarchy’, in order to optimize the feedback for 
given task conditions.29 This would be appropriate, since differ­
ent sensory modalities are more sensitive to specific stimulus 
bandwidths.30,31 Vision is generally thought to be limited to sta­
bilizing balance at low frequencies;32-34 however, there is evi­
dence that vision may also modulate responses to rapid 
perturbations.35-37 Although it has been suggested that the 
vestibular system serves primarily as a ‘comparator’ to resolve 
sensory conflicts,29 others have assigned it a more extensive role 
in generating stabilizing responses.38-40 Studies of somatosensory 
contributions have usually focused on ankle proprioception, an 
important role of muscle spindles. Many believe that such input 
is critical in initiating responses to perturbation.29,4(M2 Until 
recently, the contribution of cutaneous mechanoreceptors on
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Volitional movement commands -------
Postural commands:
predictive feedforward 
correction
reactive feedforward 
correction (triggered)
reactive feedback 
control (continuous)
PHYSIOLOGICAL
PERTURBATIONS
© -
MECHANICAL
PERTURBATIONS
MUSCULOSKELETAL
SYSTEM
SENSORY SYSTEMS
visual
vestibular
proprioceptive
cutaneous
INFORMATIONAL
PERTURBATIONS
COM
BOS
Figure 39.5 A conceptual model of the balance control system. The system acts to regulate the static and dynamic relationship between the body COM and the BOS 
established by the feet and/or arms, in the presence of: (1) mechanical perturbations (changes in forces acting on the body due to gravity, movement or interaction 
with the environment); (2) informational perturbations (transient changes in the nature of the orientational information available from the environment); or (3) 
physiological perturbations (transient internal events that disrupt the operation of the neural control system). Corrective changes to the COM are implemented via 
torque generation at the joints of the limbs and trunk; corrective changes to the BOS involve stepping or reach-and-grasp movements. In feedback control, sensory 
information is used to continuously update the corrections. In feedforward control, preprogrammed stabilizing reactions are released, either predictively (anticipatory 
postural adjustments) or in reaction to sensory information pertaining to the state of instability (triggered postural reactions). Anticipatory adjustments often 
precede volitional movements, and act to compensate for the destabilizing effects of the movement. (Adapted from Maki and Mcllroy. Clin Geriatr Med 1996; 12: 
635—58.1S)
  

Effects of aging on control of stability 
675
the plantar surface of the feet (‘pressoceptors’) to stabilization 
of posture has been largely discounted;43 however, a number of 
studies support the view that these receptors can play an impor- 
tant role in controlling specific aspects of balance.40,44-52 ‘Hap­
tic’ cues arising during light touch of the hands with external 
objects can also have a pronounced effect on stabilization.53
It is important to recognize that functional balancing reac­
tions are likely to involve multiple sensory inputs and highly 
adaptable triggered reactions, rather than stereotyped short- 
latency reflexive responses arising primarily from a single source 
of afferent drive (e.g. vestibulospinal reflex, myogenic stretch 
reflex). These sophisticated triggered reactions are believed to 
involve polysynaptic spinal and supraspinal neural pathways.54 
Furthermore, although balance control is often considered to be 
‘automated’, a number of studies have demonstrated involve­
ment of high-level cognitive and attentional systems. In dual­
task experiments, performance on cognitive tasks has been 
shown to deteriorate as postural demands increase,55-59,181 and 
reciprocal effects of cognitive task on control of balance have 
also been observed.60"62,138,182-184 Furthermore, it appears that the 
different phases of postural reactions have differing attentional 
demands, and that rapid switching of attention is used to real­
locate attentional resources as required.185-186 The timing and 
scaling of the initial ankle-muscle activation evoked by a per­
turbation appear to be unaffected by the cognitive task; how­
ever, later phases of the stabilizing reaction may be altered.185-188 
It appears that reactions to perturbation are not as stereotyped 
as once believed, but are in fact highly adaptable to the func­
tional demands of maintaining stability, i.e. regulating the rela­
tionship between COM and BOS.13,14,63"65 Although some have 
speculated that critical afferent information for determining the 
state of the COM may arise from load receptors such as Golgi
tendon organs,65 it is important to recognize that maintaining 
stability also requires information about the state of the BOS 
and the direction of a gravitational (or gravito-inertial) refer­
ence vector (Figure 39.6). In contrast to the traditional view 
that the vestibular otoliths provide the reference vector, others 
have suggested a construct based on multiple sensory modali­
ties.66,67 Determination of the BOS state is also probably depen­
dent on multiple sensory inputs, although it appears that the 
plantar cutaneous mechanoreceptors may play a particularly 
critical role in providing information pertaining to BOS stabil­
ity limits and the state of contact between foot and ground.50,52
Traditionally, studies of reactive control have tended to 
focus on fixed-support reactions that involve maintaining the 
COM over an unchanging BOS, during unperturbed stance or 
in response to perturbations delivered (most commonly) using 
moveable platforms. These fixed-support reactions involve 
coordinated patterns of muscle activation which serve to gen­
erate the necessary stabilizing torques at the joints of the sup­
porting limbs, trunk and neck. For stabilization in the 
anteroposterior direction, two fixed-support response ‘strategies’ 
have been identified: the ‘ankle strategy’, which relies primarily 
on ankle torque to stabilize the COM (see Figure 39.1), and the 
‘hip strategy’, which involves the use of the hip flexors or exten­
sors to generate shear forces at the feet in order to decelerate 
the COM.68 The ankle strategy appears to predominate at small 
levels of perturbation, whereas increasing levels of hip activa­
tion are added as the postural challenge increases.69 For stabi­
lization in the mediolateral direction, the hip musculature 
appears to play a predominant role.70,71 Although, historically, 
relatively little attention has been paid to lateral stability, it is 
particularly relevant to the falling problem, since a large pro­
portion of falls involve lateral motion (42 of 95 falls in one
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 39.6 Sensory information required to maintain postural stability. The central nervous system (CNS) could, in theory, utilize a chain of proprioceptive 
information (from the joints and associated musculature of the different limb and axial body segments), in conjunction with stored information about the mass and 
COM of each segment, to estimate the position of the whole-body COM relative to the feet (a). However, in order to determine the state of stability, the CNS must 
also have access to information about the state of the BOS, i.e. which limbs are in contact with the environment and the nature of that contact (b). In addition, the 
CNS must have information about the direction of gravity (or the 'gravito-inertial' vector if the whole body is accelerating, e.g. when standing in a moving vehicle) 
(c). Assumptions that the ground surface was horizontal, in (a), or that the direction of gravity was vertical, in (b), would lead to erroneous conclusions about the 
actual state of stability depicted in (c).
  

676 
Vestibular science
study72,73), and debilitating hip-fracture injuries are most likely 
to occur as a result of lateral falls.74
The emphasis on fixed-support reactions that dominates 
the balance control literature has evolved largely on the basis of 
studies in which there are implicit or explicit constraints on 
limb movement; that is, there is no space to step or handholds 
to grasp and/or subjects are instructed not to move their feet or 
arms. However, when subjects are allowed to respond naturally, 
it becomes apparent that they will often step or move their arms 
so as to alter their BOS, even when the level of instability is rel­
atively small.16,75,76 These change-in-support reactions, i.e. com­
pensatory stepping and grasping, ultimately have the potential 
to make a much greater contribution to stabilization, in com­
parison with fixed-support reactions, and are the only viable 
option in the event of large perturbation;16,21,77 see Figure 39.2. 
In contrast to the view that the fixed-support ‘hip strategy’ plays 
an important role in responding to anteroposterior perturba­
tion, it appears that individuals will normally elect to execute a 
change-in-support reaction, in preference to the hip strategy, 
when allowed to respond naturally.16 Control of change-in- 
support reactions appears to differ, in some fundamental ways, 
from volitional limb-movement control. Compensatory step­
ping and grasping reactions are initiated and executed much 
more rapidly 
than reaction-time volitional movements 
(elicited, for example, by a visual cue).16,75,78,79 In addition, rapid 
compensatory stepping reactions typically lack the large, func­
tional anticipatory postural adjustments that invariably precede 
lifting of the swing limb during gait initiation or volitional leg 
movement80-83 (the anticipatory adjustment acts to propel the 
COM toward the stance leg, prior to foot lift, in order to reduce 
the potential for the body to fall laterally toward the unsup­
ported side after lifting the leg). It should be noted, however, 
that large anticipatory adjustments can be included, at very 
rapid latency, when task conditions demand a long interval of 
single-limb support, e.g. when withdrawing the foot from a nox­
ious stimulus189 or when execution of the compensatory step­
ping reaction requires clearance of an obstacle.1 °
Although the vast majority of studies have investigated 
balance control under conditions where the initial posture 
involves quiet stance, a number of investigators have studied 
reactions of young adults to perturbation during gait, applied 
most commonly via treadmill acceleration or motion of a plat­
form or obstruction built into a walkway. These studies have 
revealed patterns of stabilizing muscle activation that are simi­
lar, in some respects, to the fixed-support reactions occurring 
during perturbation of quiet stance;84 however, there are also 
distinct differences, e.g. phase-dependent modulation of reflex 
gain or pattern of muscle activation (according to the phase of 
the gait cycle)85-87,199 and bilateral asymmetry in muscle activa­
tion.88,89 Studies that have addressed the stability of gait have 
typically examined control of the COM without giving explicit 
consideration to the BOS control, i.e. foot placement, although 
it has been noted that foot-placement control actually appears 
to be the most important factor affecting stability; ’ ’ 
see 
Figure 39.4.
Effects of aging on the substrates of 
balance control
The extent to which age-related balance impairment is due to 
sensory deficits, musculoskeletal factors or changes in CNS 
integrative mechanisms has not been well established. 
Although it appears that all of these factors are important,15 
some studies suggest that CNS factors are predominant.92-94 
Limitations due to CNS factors may manifest as an impaired 
ability to cope with heightened task demands. This is supported 
by studies showing that concurrent cognitive tasks have a 
greater effect on balance performance in older adults than in 
younger subjects.60,95 In addition, two recent studies have shown 
that falling risk is associated with the tendency to ‘stop walking 
when talking’96 and to slow down when performing concurrent 
mobility and manual tasks.97
Age-related changes in sensory systems, neural processing 
and musculoskeletal mechanics call all impact on the 
control of balancing reactions.
Sensory systems
Age-related changes, due primarily to loss of receptor cells and 
associated nerve cells or changes in receptor morphology, occur 
in all of the sensory systems that subserve balance control: 
visual, vestibular, proprioceptive and cutaneous.98-102 These 
sensory impairments are often cited as an important contribu­
tor to age-related instability.11,12,103,104 Sensory impairments 
could also lead to perceptual errors that increase the likelihood 
of experiencing perturbations, e.g. tripping on obstacles. 
Studies of associations between sensory function and falling 
risk in older adults have reported that individuals who experi­
ence falls are more likely to have decreased cutaneous sensa­
tion, proprioception, low-contrast visual acuity and contrast
. . 
. 
105
sensitivity.
Musculoskeletal systems
Loss of muscle strength, associated primarily with loss and atro­
phy of muscle fibers, as well as loss of motoneurons, is one of the 
most well-documented changes associated with aging.106 Slow­
ing of muscle contraction and increased susceptibility to fatigue 
have also been well documented.106 Whether these changes are 
a result of a biological aging process or are secondary to factors 
such as inactivity, impaired ability to generate muscle force is a 
fundamental biomechanical limitation that has the potential to 
affect the ability of the CNS to execute the stabilizing actions 
and reactions required to maintain upright stance. Relation­
ships to falling risk have, in fact, been demonstrated. Severe 
compromise in the strength of the ankle dorsiflexors has been 
documented in nursing-home residents with a history of 
falling.107 Other studies of less impaired individuals have also
  

Effects of aging on control of stability 
677
found evidence of associations between leg muscle weakness 
and increased falling risk.105,108-111 In addition to problems in 
generating adequate muscle force, there may be age-related 
increases in intrinsic muscle stiffness which could potentially 
interfere with control of balance and movement.112 Age-related 
decrease in flexibility and range of motion might also affect the 
ability to control volitional movement or compensatory pos­
tural responses. Although it appears that normal age-related 
loss of range of motion is actually rather small,113 there is some 
evidence that individuals with a history of falling may have a 
smaller range of motion, in comparison to ‘non-fallers’.114
Neural systems
Aging is associated with a number of changes to the CNS that 
could impact on balance control: loss of neurons, dendrite loss 
and reduced branching, impaired cerebral metabolism, reduced 
cerebral perfusion and altered transmitter metabolism.115 It is 
likely that such changes disrupt the mobilization of complex pos­
tural responses, as well as reducing the ability to compensate for 
age-related impairments in sensory input. In addition, a general 
slowing of information processing,92 in conjunction with an age- 
related decrease in nerve conduction velocity, may delay and fur­
ther disrupt postural reactions. The functional significance of 
such changes is supported, indirectly, by observed associations 
between increased reaction time and falling risk.105,111,116 To com­
pound the problem, older adults appear to exhibit increased 
dependence on using high-level CNS resources for controlling 
balance,59’60,182"184200 as well as impaired ability to inhibit (and 
redirect) attention allocated to distracting tasks;117,186 hence, 
they may experience particular difficulty in controlling balance 
in situations of daily life where attention is distracted from pos­
tural tasks. An impaired ability of the CNS to integrate sensory 
information is also thought to be an important contributor to 
increased risk of falling.92-94 In support of this, older subjects 
experienced greater instability than young adults when 
somatosensory and/or visual cues were disrupted experimen­
tally,94,103,118,11 and subjects with a history of falling were less able 
to suppress inappropriate compensatory responses elicited by 
movement of the visual field, in comparison to ‘non-fallers’.120 In 
addition to effects on the balance recovery mechanisms, CNS 
impairments may contribute to an increased risk of sustaining a 
loss of balance, as a result of destabilization arising from errors in 
motor control or effects of impaired cognitive function (e.g. 
engaging in destabilizing motor behavior, failing to take account 
of environmental hazards).
Effects of aging on precipitants of 
falling
Sufficiently severe perturbations will result in falls, even in 
healthy young adults, and the ability to avoid falling, in any 
given situation, is entirely dependent on the extent to which
the perturbation challenges the stabilizing capabilities of the 
individual’s balance control system. Older adults are at risk for 
two reasons. First, because of age-related deterioration in the 
balance recovery mechanisms, the magnitude of perturbation 
that can be tolerated by older adults is reduced. Second, the 
problem is exacerbated by the fact that older adults may be 
more likely to experience perturbations, due to: (1) destabiliza­
tion arising from impaired control of gait and volitional move­
ment; (2) impairments of the anticipatory postural adjustments 
that normally act to mitigate such destabilization; and (3) cog­
nitive or perceptual deficits that impair ability to identify and 
avoid environmental hazards, such as slippery surfaces and 
obstacles, during ongoing movement. The tendency to avoid 
more demanding activities, and to perform movements more 
slowly, may help to mitigate the risk of experiencing perturba­
tions that exceed the individual’s balancing capabilities. 
Nonetheless, the perturbations experienced by older adults may 
become problematic because of the decreased ability to com­
pensate for what would, in many cases, represent only a rela­
tively minor challenge for younger individuals.
Perturbation during gait
Perceptual errors could increase the likelihood of tripping over 
obstacles or slipping during gait. In addition, impaired control 
of toe clearance during the swing phase could increase the risk 
of tripping, and impaired control of foot velocity at heel con­
tact could increase the risk of slipping. The latter problem is 
supported by reports of higher heel-contact ‘skid velocity’ in 
older, versus young, subjects;121 however, at least one study has 
found no evidence of age-related differences in toe clearance 
during the swing phase, and in fact has shown that healthy 
older adults tend to exhibit less variability in the control of the 
toe clearance.122 Errors in control of the foot placement during 
gait, i.e. missteps, may also perturb stability; reports that 
increased stride-to-stride variability in the control of stride 
length is associated with an elevated falling risk123 could reflect 
such an effect. Conceivably, impaired ability to sense foot posi­
tion and pressure on the sole of the foot could affect the ability 
to adapt the gait to accommodate changing ground conditions 
(e.g. surface irregularities, slipperiness, floor compliance), 
which could also increase the risk of misplacing the foot or slip­
ping. In addition to problems associated with foot placement, 
impaired control of the COM during gait could also perturb sta­
bility. Such impairment (excessive lateral momentum) has 
been observed to occur in older adults who have vestibular 
hypofunction.124
Interestingly, it appears that older adults tend to modify 
their gait in a manner that actually acts to reduce many of these 
potential risk factors. Specifically, older adults tend to walk 
more slowly, with reduced stride length and increased duration 
of double-limb support,122 and these stabilizing modifications 
tend to be more pronounced in individuals who have a fear of 
falling.123 Additionally, in stepping over obstacles, older adults 
tend to exhibit greater toe clearance (thereby reducing risk of
  

678 
Vestibular science
tripping) and tend to avoid forward motion of the foot at time 
of landing (thereby reducing risk of slipping), in comparison to 
young adults.125 Age-related difficulty in stepping over or avoid­
ing obstacles becomes apparent, however, when the individual 
must react suddenly to an obstacle that appears unpre- 
dictably;126-128 these difficulties are exacerbated when subjects 
are distracted by a secondary cognitive task.129
Perturbation during volitional movement
In addition to problems in controlling gait, impairments in con­
trol of other volitional movements could act to increase the 
destabilizing effect of these movements. In general, however, it 
is difficult to dissect instability arising from errors in performing 
the movement from instability due to impaired ability to react 
to, and compensate for, the destabilizing effects of the move­
ment. Nonetheless, it can be noted that studies have demon­
strated age-related impairment in control of movements such as 
transferring from a chair.130 In addition, some studies have 
shown that clinical balance assessments that involve rating per­
formance on tasks such as rising from a chair, turning, bending 
and reaching can, to some degree, predict the risk of experien­
cing falls in older adults.131,132 Furthermore, impaired perfor­
mance on specific tasks—transfer, reaching and turning—was 
found to be predictive of increased risk of experiencing falls 
during the same types of activities in daily life.72 Although 
errors in the control of these movements could be responsible 
for heightened destabilization, it should also be noted that older 
adults often tend to perform movements more slowly than 
younger individuals,133 which may mitigate the destabilizing 
effect.
One potentially important aspect of this problem pertains 
to the control of the anticipatory postural adjustments that nor­
mally begin prior to the onset of the volitional movement. 
These anticipatory adjustments are widely believed to help 
compensate for the destabilizing effects of the volitional move­
ment, although it should be noted that recent simulation stud­
ies have raised questions about the functional importance of the 
anticipatory adjustments that occur during certain types of 
movements.134 Studies of the anticipatory activation of postural 
muscles that precedes movement of the arms have shown that 
older individuals are more likely to lack these anticipatory 
adjustments or to show changes in the relative timing of the 
postural and voluntary muscle activity.135,136 Another study pro­
vided evidence that the magnitude of the anticipatory change 
in ground-reaction force, relative to the destabilizing effect of 
the arm movement, was actually larger in subjects who were at 
highest risk of falling, suggesting perhaps a disordered motor 
programming in these individuals.1 7
Effects of aging on control of 
stabilizing reactions
Control of balance with respect to a fixed base 
of support
Unperturbed stance
The majority of studies of balance and aging have focused on 
the control of quiet, unperturbed stance. The small movements 
that occur during unperturbed stance, as well as the postural 
activity that acts to control these movements, are often referred 
to as ‘static* or ‘spontaneous’ postural sway. Spontaneous-sway 
measures are susceptible to confounding effects due to factors 
such as fear of falling and anxiety7,138 and the extent to which 
the subject strives to minimize the sway;139 therefore, one must 
be cautious in interpreting these measures. Nonetheless, 
spontaneous-sway tests are widely used, both clinically and 
experimentally, and it is commonly assumed that increases in 
the postural activity occurring during quiet stance are indica­
tive of deterioration in the balance control system.
Numerous studies have documented age-related changes in 
measures related to the control of spontaneous postural
11,94,98,118,140-147 
1
^
1
1
 
1 
• 
L *
sway, 
and others have shown associations between
1 
1 
. 1  
£ r 1 1 . 
72,73,98,105,109,111,140,143,148-151 X/f
these measures and risk or tailing. 
Most
commonly, these measures are derived in terms of the displace­
ment of the center of foot pressure (COP) (measured using 
force plates), which reflects the generation of stabilizing ankle 
torque (anteroposterior direction) and lateral ‘weight shift’ 
(mediolateral direction). Effects of aging are most pronounced 
in measures related to the rate at which the postural activity 
occurs,15,73,143,145,152 whereas measures that characterize the 
amplitude of the corrective activity seem to be better indicators 
of the actual level of stability attained and the risk of experi­
encing falls.73,143 Although, traditionally, relatively few studies 
of older adults have examined the control of lateral sway, one 
study in the early 1990s found the amplitude of mediolateral 
COP displacement, during blindfolded stance, to be the single 
best predictor of future falling risk, out of a wide range of static 
and dynamic balance measures.73 Furthermore, the impairments 
in control of mediolateral sway observed in ‘fallers’ versus ‘non- 
fallers’ were disproportionately large relative to the impair­
ments in control of anteroposterior sway;153 see Figure 39.7a. 
More recent studies have since found further evidence to sup­
port a strong association between falling risk and lateral insta-
Age-related difficulty in controlling lateral stability- 
evident during stance, during gait and during compen­
satory stepping-is of crucial importance because of the 
direct link between lateral falls and increased risk of sus­
taining a debilitating, and life-threatening, hip-fracture 
injury.
  

Effects of aging on control of stability 
679
(a)
(0
20
10
0
-10
- 2 0
RMS COP:
- AP: 3.4 mm 
ML: 1.4 mm
- 3 0  
—20 
—10 
0 
10 
20 
M-L center of pressure (mm)
30
20 r 
10 
0 
—10
-20
RMS COP:
AP: 5.2 mm J 
ML: 3.4 mm
-3 0  
-2 0  
-1 0  
0 
10 
20 
M-L center of pressure (mm)
30
2 _
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
-0*2
___  Time to peak -  450 ms
- A
-
Unit amplitude
acceleration pulse 
---------1---------1---------1---------1
Id)
2.0
1.0 J .
cQ
0.0 2 
ajU
-1.0 Jj 
£
- 2.0
-0.5 
0.0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
Time (seconds)
Time (seconds)
Figure 39.7 Changes in control of fixed-support reactions associated with risk of falling: spontaneous sway (a,b) and reactions to perturbation (c,d). Representative 
results are shown for elderly 'non-fallers' (a,c) and 'fallers' (b,d: falling status was based on 1 year of prospective fall monitoring), (a) and (b) show the 
anteroposterior (a-p) and mediolateral (m-l) displacement of the center of foot pressure (COP), relative to the mean location, recorded during 
75s of quiet standing (subjects blindfolded); the root-mean-square (RMS) COP displacement amplitudes are indicated on the graphs. Note that the COP 
displacement was larger in both directions in the 'faller'; however, the increase in the mediolateral direction was disproportionately large relative to the increase in 
the anteroposterior direction, (c) and (d) compare representative responses to mediolateral platform acceleration. The perturbation involved continuous 
pseudorandom platform motion (duration 96s); a transfer function model fitted to the measured m-l acceleration and m-l COP data was used to predict the 
response to a sudden transient pulse of platform acceleration, as shown. Note the larger, and slower, response in the 'faller'73 (Adapted from Maki and Mclroy.
Clin Geriatr Med 1996; 12: 635-58.15)
bility during unperturbed stance, as well as other postural
i 
196,201
tasks.
Efforts to model the control of spontaneous sway have sug­
gested that older adults tend to exhibit longer intervals of 
unstable ‘open'loop’ (feedforward) control, coupled with more 
vigorous ‘closed-loop’ (feedback) corrections.147 In addition, 
age-related reduction in the high-frequency content of the pos­
tural sway activity152 has been interpreted to reflect loss of‘com­
plexity* in the control mechanisms, which is thought to 
indicate a loss of adaptability.115 To increase the level of chal­
lenge, the control of static stance is often characterized under 
altered BOS conditions: standing with feet together, heel to toe 
or on one leg.154 Another approach is to instruct subjects to lean 
or reach as far as possible, in different directions, so as to char­
acterize the ‘functional BOS’.155-157 Although such studies have 
demonstrated age-related differences and associations with 
falling risk, it is important to recognize that tests that require 
subjects to challenge their own balance are susceptible to con­
founding effects due to fear of falling. Thus, for example, in tim­
ing the maximum duration of one-leg stance, fearful subjects
tend to ‘bail out’ early and hence perform poorly on the test; 
this poor performance may or may not be indicative of their 
physical ability to do the test.7,73 Analogous effects, in which 
subjects underestimate their BOS stability limits, can occur 
during maximal lean/reach tests.11
Fixed*support reactions to perturbation
Whereas spontaneous-sway measures reflect reactions to the 
intrinsic instability of the upright body (due to gravity), these 
measures relate only indirectly, at best, to the ability to respond 
to overt perturbation. To study this ability directly, controlled 
perturbations are applied to the subject, most commonly by 
means of motion of the supporting (platform) surface. Studies 
of fixed-support reactions to perturbation have demonstrated 
that the sequence of muscle activation that is normally evoked 
by sudden transient anteroposterior platform translation is 
often disordered in older subjects, that there may be greater 
co-contraction of antagonistic muscles, and that the onset of 
the muscle activation and associated joint torque may be 
slightly delayed.l2’94’103,119,158 Studies of responses to toes-up and
  

680 
Vestibular science
toes-down platform-tilt perturbations have also shown age- 
related increase in latency, as well as increased activation in 
certain muscles.159 For the platform translation perturbations, 
small but consistent age-related increases in magnitude of body 
segment motion and joint torque have been noted, particularly 
in the upper body.119,160,161 Older adults also tend to show less 
ability to control the head motion,162 which may impact on the 
ability to stabilize the visual field and to use the vestibular sys­
tem in controlling balancing responses. Observations of age- 
related increases in flex ion-ex tens ion hip torque and hip 
rotation119,160 appear to tie in with reports that older adults are 
more likely than the young to utilize the ‘hip strategy’;12 how­
ever, it should be reiterated that the natural preference (in the 
absence of instructions to try not to step) is to take a step to 
recover balance, rather than executing a hip strategy.16 Very few 
studies have examined whether falling risk is associated with an 
impaired control of fixed-support transient-perturbation reac­
tions; the studies to date have indicated that there is little or no 
difference, between subjects with and without a prior history of 
falling, in terms of the latency, magnitude or pattern of the early 
‘automatic’ muscle activation.114,163
Other studies have examined stabilizing reactions to con­
tinuous, rather than transient, perturbation. This approach 
facilitates the identification of control system models, which 
can provide insight into the nature of the control problem. 
Whereas responses to sudden transient perturbation are 
believed to involve the triggering (and scaling) of a prepro­
grammed response, the need to respond continuously to an 
ongoing, but unpredictable, perturbation demands a reliance on 
ongoing sensory feedback; hence, assessment of transient and 
continuous responses may provide complementary information 
about the integrity of the feedforward and feedback control 
processes, respectively. Older adults have been found to exhibit 
larger stabilizing responses to continuous pseudorandom 
platform motion, in comparison to young adults,139,143 and 
delays in the responses to mediolateral perturbations (predicted 
by control models fitted to the data) were found to be highly 
associated with future risk of falling;73 see Figure 39.7.
Causes of age-related changes in fixed-support control
Observed changes in fixed-support balance regulation and con­
trol may be due, in part, to age-related sensory loss. A number 
of studies have demonstrated small, but statistically significant, 
associations between sensory impairment and control of pos­
tural sway in older adults.98,104,141,164,165 Generally, these studies 
have found that measures of lower-limb cutaneous sensation 
and proprioception tend to show the strongest correlations with 
the postural measures. In support of the importance of cuta­
neous sensation, it appears that facilitation of plantar cutaneous 
sensation (i.e. standing on an array of small skin indentors) has 
the potential to increase the speed of stabilizing responses to 
lateral perturbation in older adults with impaired plantar sensi­
tivity.1 In addition, correlations between plantar insensitivity 
and the degree of head motion resulting from transient antero­
posterior platform perturbation have been reported.166 With
regard to other sensory modalities, at least one study of older 
adults has shown an association between visual acuity and pos­
tural sway,150 and others have shown that visual acuity, contrast 
sensitivity and/or stereopsis become important when ankle and 
plantar sensation (as well as joint stiffness) are disrupted by 
standing on a compliant (foam rubber) surface.104,146,197 In a 
study of community-dwelling females, the level of vestibular 
dysfunction was found to be associated with the amplitude of 
sway only when vision, as well as accurate ankle-foot somato- 
sensation, were both deprived during the sway measurements.146
As outlined earlier, age-related neural changes may also 
play an important role, although most experimental evidence 
pertains to adaptability to task conditions. One study found 
that postural sway actually increased in older subjects when 
sensory inputs were suddenly augmented (i.e. during transitions 
from absence to presence of vision), whereas young adults were 
able to adapt rapidly and use the visual information to reduce 
their sway.93 Analogous findings were reported for transitions 
between conditions where ankle proprioception was or was not 
disrupted (via tendon vibration).167 In addition, it appears that 
older adults are less able to adapt to predictable task conditions. 
In response to repeated presentations of small perturbations, 
older subjects did not show the progressive reduction in sway 
observed in young adults.168
The contribution of impaired musculoskeletal function to 
the control of fixed-support reactions is somewhat controversial. 
Some studies have demonstrated small, but statistically signifi­
cant, correlations between leg muscle strength and measures of 
postural sway;104,146 however, other evidence raises some ques­
tions about the extent to which normal age-related loss of mus­
cle strength directly affects the ability to execute fixed-support 
postural reactions. Studies of fixed-support reactions to antero­
posterior postural perturbation have indicated that the muscle 
force required to generate these reactions, as well as the range of 
joint motion, is well within the capabilities of healthy older 
adults,160 however, it appears that studies have not yet examined 
possible problems due to impaired speed of force generation.
Control of change-in-support reactions
To date, studies of age-related changes in change-in-support 
reactions have been largely limited to compensatory stepping. 
Studies of age-related changes in compensatory grasping, to 
date, have shown that older adults are more dependent on using 
arm reactions than younger subjects173,175 yet the speed at which 
they can initiate and execute the grasping movements is 
delayed.191 Increased dependence on arm reactions and slowing 
of these reactions are both predictive of increased risk of 
falling.191
Older adults tend to be more reliant than young adults 
on using the arms to recover balance, yet their grasping 
reactions are slower.
  

Effects of aging on control of stability 
681
Stepping behavior
A number of studies have demonstrated age-related difficulties 
in the ability to recover balance by stepping, and it has been 
reported that these difficulties appear to be more pronounced in 
individuals who have a history of falling.169,170
Rapid compensatory stepping and grasping reactions play 
a critical role in preventing falls.
In apparent support of age-related control difficulty, several 
studies have shown that older subjects are more likely than 
young adults to take multiple steps, rather than a single step, in 
responding to anteroposterior perturbation.169,171-173 It appears 
that these multiple-step responses may often emerge as a conse­
quence of events arising after the initiation of the first step, 
rather than as a strategy planned in advance.173 Impaired ability 
to control the tendency of the COM to fall laterally toward the 
unsupported side during step execution appears to be a particu­
lar problem. In one study,17 over 30% of the initial forward- or 
backward-stepping reactions in the older adults were followed 
by steps that were directed so as to recover lateral stability, a 
tendency that was rarely seen in young adults (Figure 39.8a).
Older adults often appear to experience difficulty in 
controlling lateral stability during the execution of step­
ping reactions, and there may be additional problems 
associated with the control of lateral leg movement (i.e. 
collisions with the stance limb) when stepping laterally.
Findings that older subjects with a history of falling tended to 
include lateral foot movement in the initial step of the reaction, 
when stepping in response to forward instability,82,174’192 would 
also appear to indicate difficulty in controlling lateral stability 
during anteroposterior step execution. Attempts to compensate 
for lateral instability in this manner could represent a predictive 
strategy, which may have been facilitated by the more pre­
dictable perturbation conditions used in that study. It is also 
possible that such an adaptation is specific to subjects with a 
recent history of unsteadiness and falling. A prospective study 
found that the tendency to take multiple steps to recover bal­
ance, to follow an initial forward or backward step with a lateral 
step and to experience collision between the swing foot and 
stance limb were predictive of increased risk of falling.191
Studies of stepping reactions evoked by lateral perturbation 
have revealed further age-related difficulty in conrolling lateral 
stability. Older adults were more likely than the young to step 
in response to lateral platform perturbation, and were also more 
likely to take multiple steps or to use arm reactions to regain 
equilibrium.175 Furthermore, there were age-related differences 
in the pattern of stepping. The predominant pattern of stabiliz­
ing response in young adults involved ‘crossing over’ with the
leg that tended to be unloaded by the lateral COM motion 
induced by the perturbation.176 This response required a long 
and relatively complex swing trajectory, and a prolonged swing 
duration, in order to move the foot across (either in front or 
behind) the body while circumventing the stance leg. Older 
subjects tended to avoid these demands by using instead a 
sequence of small ‘side-steps’ (Figure 39.8b). Nonetheless, older 
adults still experienced difficulty in avoiding collisions between 
the swing foot and stance limb. These difficulties were greatly 
exacerbated when the demands of controlling balance during 
gait were simulated by asking subjects to walk ‘in place’ on the 
platform prior to perturbation.
Figure 39.8 Age-related changes in patterns of compensatory stepping, in 
response to anteroposterior (a-p) perturbation (a, b) and mediolateral (m-l) 
perturbation (c, d) in young (a, c) and old (b, d). The feet outlines that are 
depicted with light shading represent the initial stance position. Although the 
examples shown only depict responses to instability in the forward (a-p) and 
leftward (m-l) directions, analogous behavior occurs for backward and 
rightward falls. Note that older adults are much more likely to take multiple 
steps in responding to anteroposterior instability (b), in contrast to the single- 
step response commonly exhibited by young adults (a). Although various 
patterns of multiple stepping can occur, the second step is often likely to 
include a lateral component, as shown here.173 In responding to lateral 
perturbation, young adults tend to use a crossover step (c), which requires a 
long and relatively complex swing trajectory, and a prolonged duration of 
single-leg support, in order to move the foot across the body while 
circumventing the stance leg.176 Even healthy and active older adults tend to 
avoid the demands associated with the crossover step, instead using a sequence 
of small side-steps (d); however, these older individuals are still more likely to 
require additional reactions (stepping or grasping) in order to recover 
equilibrium.175 Moreover, older adults often appear to experience difficulty in 
controlling the swing-foot motion and are more likely to sustain collisions 
between the swing foot and stance limb.
  

682 
Vestibular science
Control of step initiation
With regard to control of compensatory step initiation, it has 
been observed that older adults are less likely to execute an 
anticipatory postural adjustment, prior to lifting the swing leg, 
when stepping in response to anteroposterior perturbation. ’ 
This, however, is unlikely to jeopardize safety. The anticipatory 
postural adjustments that occur during rapid compensatory 
stepping reactions are typically too small or brief to provide 
much functional benefit with regard to lateral stabilization.83 In 
fact, the absence of the anticipatory phase is likely to be bene- 
ficial, because the delay in response associated with the inclu­
sion of the anticipatory phase could actually jeopardize safety. 
In general, it appears that age-related differences in the timing 
of step initiation tend to be small,173’177’193 suggesting instead 
that many of the difficulties are associated with control of the 
swing phase and/or landing. However, results to the contrary, 
i.e. earlier foot-lift in older subjects, have also been 
reported.171,172 The reason for this discrepancy may lie in differ­
ences in instructions given to the subjects. It may be that 
younger subjects are, in fact, able to respond more rapidly when 
allowed to respond naturally or when given prior instructions to 
step, but may be more willing to delay step initiation (and risk 
instability) when told to try not to step.
Causes of age-related changes in stepping
The age-related changes in stepping behavior that have been 
observed could be a consequence of decrements in musculo­
skeletal capacity, sensory function and/or neural processing. 
Again, the contribution of impaired musculoskeletal function is 
controversial. The flexion-extension joint torques, as well as 
range of joint motion, required to initiate rapid backward com­
pensatory steps appear to be well within the capabilities of 
healthy older adults.171,172 However, it appears that the torque 
demands in certain muscles (e.g. hip abductors, hip flexors, knee 
extensors) during later phases of the stepping response can actu­
ally be very close to the strength limits measured in older adults,77 
and loss of strength is associated with the tendency to take multi­
ple steps to recover balance.194 This raises the possibility that age- 
related strength loss may, in some older individuals, contribute 
to difficulty in controlling stability during the swing phase and 
landing. Rate of muscle-force production may also be an impor­
tant limiting factor. Although it appears that healthy older adults 
are well able to generate rapid anteroposterior stepping move­
ments in responding to moderate levels of perturbation,173’177 
they seem to be unable to generate the faster movements that 
are required to deal with more severe postural challenge.177
Studies pertaining to the effect of neural impairments on 
the control of compensatory stepping have addressed patholog­
ical changes associated with stroke-induced hemiparesis77’178 
and Parkinson’s disease.179’195 With regard to effects of normal 
age-related changes in neural function, it has been shown that 
delay in volitional reaction time is associated with the tendency 
to take multiple steps to recover balance.194 With regard to sen­
sory function, it appears quite likely that age-related loss of 
cutaneous sensation, from the plantar surface of the foot, is an
important factor contributing to impaired control of compen­
satory stepping. In support of this, facilitation of sensation from 
the boundaries of the plantar foot surface (using skin indentors) 
was found to decrease the frequency of multiple-step reactions, 
during forward ‘falls’, in older adults with moderate levels of 
cutaneous insensitivity.52 This finding is complemented by the 
results of a study involving young adults, whereby attenuation 
of plantar sensation, via hypothermic anesthesia (cooling the 
foot sole in ice water), led to an increased frequency of 
multiple-step reactions in responding to forward instability.50 
Results from another study suggest that the level of cutaneous 
sensitivity, in older adults, may be associated, in a complex way, 
with the propensity for taking ‘extra’ steps or executing addi­
tional arm reactions; age-related changes in vestibular, visual 
and proprioceptive function did not correlate with the observed 
stepping behavior.180’194 The observed effects of cutaneous facil­
itation/ attenuation on control of forward stepping appear to be 
related to the ability to sense and control heel contact and sub­
sequent weight transfer during step termination.77 Other 
observed contributions of the cutaneous receptors, in sensing 
the posterior stability limits and in maintaining stability during 
the prolonged swing phase of lateral crossover steps,50’52 may tie 
in with other age-related changes in stepping behavior, i.e. 
increased tendency to step in response to backward instability 
and avoiding use of crossover steps.
Loss of cutaneous sensation from the foot, impaired 
capacity to integrate multiple sensory inputs, slowing the 
reaction time, limits on strength and speed of muscle 
contraction, and impaired ability to rapidly switch atten­
tion to the balancing task appear to be amongst the most 
important contributors to age-related impairment in 
controlling various aspects of balance.
Summary
Clinical assessment and treatment of balance impairments 
should include a focus on lateral stability and control of 
compensatory stepping and grasping. Efforts should be 
directed, during assessment, at simulating the heightened 
demands of controlling balance in daily life, i.e. effects 
of ongoing physical and cognitive activity, as well as 
environmental constraints on movement.
In order to maintain upright stability, the CNS must regulate 
the relationship between the COM of the body and the BOS 
established by the feet (and, in some situations, the arms). 
Thus, the perturbations that precipitate falls must ultimately 
affect the COM and/or the BOS, and the stabilizing responses 
to these perturbations must involve a movement of the COM 
and/or a change in the BOS.
  

Effects of aging on control of stability 
683
To accomplish the task of maintaining stability, the CNS 
must rapidly integrate sensory information from visual, vestibu- 
lar, proprioceptive and cutaneous sources, and use this informa­
tion to generate complex motor responses that are appropriate, 
in terms of timing, direction and magnitude, to the characteris­
tics of the balance disturbance, the current postural state (e.g. 
foot position, ongoing movement) and the constraints of the 
surrounding environment (e.g. friction of the support surface, 
unobstructed space to step, availability of handholds to grasp). 
Age-related changes in sensory systems, neural processing and 
musculoskeletal mechanics could all impact on this process.
It is possible that older adults may be more likely than the 
young to experience perturbations during certain activities and 
movements due to errors in motor control, impaired control of 
anticipatory postural adjustments and/or perceptual/cognitive 
deficits; however, it appears that age-related slowing of move­
ment, and other adaptations, may help to limit the magnitude 
of the destabilizing effect in some situations. Nonetheless, the 
potential for increased frequency of experiencing perturbations 
is problematic because of the deterioration in the ability to 
compensate for balance disturbance.
Traditionally, researchers and clinicians have tended to 
focus on the control of the COM displacement over a fixed 
BOS, and numerous studies have documented age-related 
changes in the control of fixed-support balance regulation 
during quiet standing and fixed-support reactions to applied 
perturbation. There is, in general, a slowing and disordered 
control of fixed-support control in older adults, and difficulty 
in controlling lateral stability, in particular, appears to be a 
strong predictor of increased risk of falling. It is not yet clear 
to what extent these problems are due to sensory impairments 
versus problems in neural integration, although it is very likely 
that both factors are important. It does appear, however, that 
normal age-related reduction in muscle strength or range of 
motion is not typically a limiting factor in generating com­
pensatory fixed-support reactions during stance; possible effects 
due to limits on speed of muscle contraction need to be explored 
further.
Over the last several years, increasing attention has been 
directed toward the control of changes in the BOS, i.e. com­
pensatory limb movement, as an important element of the pos­
tural repertoire. By removing constraints on postural behavior, 
it becomes apparent that such limb movements are very often 
the predominant reaction to instability. Older adults appear to 
be more dependent than the young on using the arms to recover 
balance yet their grasping reactions are slower. There also 
appears to be a profound impairment in the control of compen­
satory stepping movements in older adults. Again, lateral insta­
bility appears to be a major problem, related to the challenge of 
controlling the COM during the movement and placement of 
the swing foot. Additional problems arise in attempting to con­
trol lateral movement of the swing foot, due to the challenge of 
avoiding collision with the stance limb. With regard to mecha­
nisms, early findings implicate age-related loss of cutaneous sen­
sation, from the plantar surface of the foot, as an important
contributing factor. Limits on strength and speed of muscle con­
traction could also play a role.
Older adults exhibit an impaired ability to adapt rapidly to 
changing environmental conditions, and this may also con­
tribute to increased falling risk. Studies also show a decreased 
ability to adapt to predictable testing conditions, but this is less 
likely to bear a relation to falls, which seem to occur most com­
monly when events happen unpredictably. Caution must be 
exercised in interpreting results derived from relatively pre­
dictable test conditions, since age-related differences recorded 
under such conditions could well be due to differences in adap­
tive capabilities, rather than other age-related factors. It also 
appears that older adults may attempt to compensate for deteri­
oration in sensorimotor systems by relying, to a greater extent 
than the young, on high-level CNS resources in order to control 
their balance; this may lead to difficulties in situations where 
attention is distracted by ongoing cognitive or physical tasks.
In attempting to extrapolate from the results of laboratory 
or clinical balance tests (Table 39.3) so as to understand the
Table 39.3 Techniques for balance assessment.
Semiquantitative tests 
Ability to adopt challenging postures (e.g. one-leg stance)
Ability to lean or reach 
Activity-based performance assessment
Traditional 'posturography'
Spontaneous postural sway
Fixed-support reactions to external perturbation
Anticipatory postural adjustments (during volitional movement)
Newer approaches 
Compensatory stepping reactions to external perturbation 
Compensatory grasping reactions to external perturbation 
Reactions to perturbations during ongoing movement
Table 39.4 Confounding effects due to fear of falling.
Clinical balance tests 
Poor score on timed one-leg stance test 
Poor scores on elements of activity-based performance 
assessments
Tendency to underestimate functional stability limits
Posturographic balance tests 
Large anteroposterior center-of-pressure displacement during 
blindfolded stance 
Tendency to lean forward 
Tendency to adopt a wider base of support
Gait assessment 
Small stride length 
Slow walking speed
Greater proportion of gait cycle spent in double-support
  

684 
Vestibular science
problems faced by older adults in controlling stability in their 
daily lives, future work will likely benefit by: (1) mimicking, as 
much as possible, the varied and unpredictable nature of the 
events that often precipitate falls in daily life; (2) simulating 
the heightened demands of maintaining balance while 
performing concurrent cognitive or motor tasks; (3) removing 
constraints on postural behavior that may artificially promote 
specific control strategies (e.g. hip strategy) in preference to 
others (e.g. stepping); and (4) delineating effects that are asso-
Table 39.5 Evidence of lateral instability in older adults.
Fixed-support balance control 
Large mediolateral center-of-pressure displacement during 
quiet stance
Larger and slow, response to mediolateral perturbation
Stepping to recover balance 
Anteroposterior perturbation 
Extra steps in the lateral direction 
The initial step may include a lateral component 
Lateral perturbation 
Avoidance of large crossover steps 
Extra stepping or grasping reactions required to recover 
equilibrium
Collisions between the swing foot and stance limb
Control of balance during gait 
Large stride width 
Increase in lateral momentum
Table 39.6 Prevention of falls and their consequences.
Identify the high-risk individual 
History of falling, unsteadiness or dizziness 
If no obvious problems, perform balance/gait screening tests
Identify/treat medical factors 
Diagnosis and treatment of specific disorders 
Correct visual impairment 
Review and adjust medications and dosages 
Treatment to reduce osteoporosis
Interventions
Train balance during volitional movement (e,g, Tai Chi) and 
functional balance recovery (including compensatory 
stepping and grasping)
Train balance confidence (self-efficacy)
Train how to get up after a fall
Education with regard to risk factors and risk-taking behavior 
Change footwear (low heels, moderate friction, minimal 
cushioning)
Prescribe walking aids, wheelchairs, hip padding
Use bed alarms, for high-risk patients in institutional settings
Environmental modifications (’fall-proof the home or room)
Table 39.7 
Environmental modifications to prevent falls and 
their consequences.
Floor coverings 
Non-skid wax on floors; non-skid strips in bathtub 
Avoid area rugs; tape down edges of rugs/carpets 
Avoid transitions (carpet-tile) or tie to visual cues (e.g. 
doorways)
Avoid carpets/tiles with misleading visual cues 
Eliminate trip hazards (even small edges), obstacles 
Use thin carpets to provide 'padding'
Lighting/vision 
Uniform and bright; no glare 
Night-lights in bedroom 
Wear properly prescribed lenses; avoid bifocals
Handrails and grab-bars 
Highly visible, graspable, securely mounted 
Install on all stairs (both sides) and in bathrooms 
Vertical poles near chairs, bed, toilet, bath
Seating
Armrests on chairs, stable base
Avoid low chairs, overly compliant cushions
Toilets and bathtubs 
Raise height of toilet base, add armrests 
Install bathtubs with low walls and/or transfer aids
Stairways
No visual distractions; edges of treads well marked 
Well lighted (always on, or switch at top and bottom)
No loose carpeting; no obstacles
New stairways: adequate tread size, no tread-to-tread variation 
in dimensions
Emergency response systems 
Always accessible and operable
ciated with fear, rather than risk, of falling (Table 39.4). Con­
trol of lateral stability should be a major focus (Table 39.5) in 
choosing techniques to assess balance and falling risk and in 
developing interventions to help prevent falls (Tables 39.6 and 
39.7). Addressing the difficulties that older adults appear to 
experience in controlling lateral stability may be of particular 
importance in reducing the risk of sustaining debilitating, and 
potentially life-threatening, hip-fracture injuries.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by Grants No. MT-10576 and 
MT-13355 from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research 
(CIHR; formerly, Medical Research Council) and Grants No. 
AG-06357 and AG-12165 from the National Institute on
  

Effects of aging on control of stability 
685
Aging (USA). B. E. M. holds a CIHR Senior Scientist career
award. The authors thank G. R. Femie for comments and
suggestions.
References
1. Baker SP, Harvey AH. Fall injuries in the elderly. Clin Geriatr Med 
1985; 1: 501-12.
2. Kennedy TE, Coppard LCE. The prevention of falls in later life 
(report of the Kellog International Work Group on the Prevention 
of Falls by the Elderly). Danish Med Bull 1987; 34(suppl 4): 1-24.
3. Black SE, Maki BE, Fernie GR. Aging, imbalance and falls. In: 
Barber H, Sharpe J, eds. Vestibulo-ocular Reflex, Nystagmus and 
Vertigo. New York: Raven Press, 1993: 317-35.
4- Hayes WC, Myers ER, Robinovitch SN et al. Etiology and pre- 
vention of age-related hip fractures. Bone 1996; 18: 77S-86S.
5. Grimley Evans ], Prudham D, Wandess I. A prospective study of 
fractured proximal femur: incidence and outcome. Public Health 
1979; 93: 235-41.
6. Murphy J, Isaacs B. The post-fall syndrome: a study of 36 elderly 
patients. Gerontology 1982; 28: 265-70.
7. Maki BE, Holliday PJ, Topper AK. Fear of falling and postural 
performance in the elderly. J Gerontol 1991; 46: M l23-31.
8. Arfken CL, Lach HW, Birge SJ et al. The prevalence and corre­
lates of fear of falling in elderly persons living in the community.
AmJ Publ Health 1994; 84: 565-70.
9. Tinetti ME, Mendes de Leon CF, Doucette JT et al. Fear of 
falling and fall-related efficacy in relationship to functioning 
among community-living elderly persons. J Gerontol 1994; 49: 
Ml 40-7.
10. Tinetti ME, Williams CS. Falls, injuries due to falls, and the risk 
of admission to a nursing home. New Engl J Med 1997; 337: 
1279-84.
11. Horak FB, Shupert CL, Mirka A. Components of postural dyscon- 
trol in the elderly: a review. Neurobiol Aging 1989; 10: 727-38.
12. Manchester D, Woollacott M, Zederbauer-Hylton N et al. Visual, 
vestibular and somatosensory contributions to balance control in 
the older adult. J Gerontol 1989; 44: Ml 18-27.
13. Gollhofer A, Horstmann GA, Berger W et al. Compensation of 
translational and rotational perturbations in human posture: sta­
bilization of the centre of gravity. Neurosci Lett 1989; 105: 73-8.
14. Horstmann GA, Dietz V. A basic posture control mechanism: the 
stabilization of the centre of gravity. Electroencephalogr Clin 
Neurophysiol 1990; 76: 165-76.
15. Maki BE, Mcllroy WE. Postural control in the older adult. Clin 
Geriatr Med 1996; 12: 635-58.
16. Maki BE, Mcllroy WE. The role of limb movements in maintain­
ing upright stance: the ‘change-in-support’ strategy. Phys Ther 
1997; 77: 488-507.
17. Marsden CD, Merton PA, Morton HB. Human postural responses. 
Brain 1981; 104: 513-34.
18. Nashner LM. Adaptation of human movement to altered envi- 
ronments. Trends Neurosci 1982; 5: 358-61.
19. Britton TC, Day BL, Brown P et al. Postural electromyographic
responses in the arm and leg following galvanic vestibular stimu­
lation in man. Exp Brain Res 1993; 94: 143-51.
20. Pai YC, Patton J. Center of mass velocity-position predictions for 
balance control. J Biomech 1997; 30: 347-54.
21. Maki BE, Mcllroy WE. The control of foot placement during com­
pensatory stepping reactions: does speed of response take prece­
dence over stability? IEEE Trans Rehabil Eng 1999; 7: 80-90.
22. Jian Y, Winter DA, Ishac MG et al. Trajectory of the body COG 
and COP during initiation and termination of gait. Gait Posture 
1993; 1: 9-22.
23. MacKinnon CD, Winter DA. Control of whole body balance in 
the frontal plane during human walking. J Biomech 1993; 26: 
633-44. 
j
24. Frank JS, fEarl M. Coordination of posture and movement. Phys 
Ther 1990; 70: 855-63.
25. Horak FB, Diener HC, Nashner LM. Influence of central set on 
human postural responses. J Neurophysiol 1989; 62: 841-53.
26. Beckley DJ, Bloem BR, Remler MP et al. Long latency postural 
responses 
are 
functionally 
modified 
by 
cognitive 
set. 
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1991; 81: 353-8.
27. Maki BE, Whitelaw RS. Influence of expectation and arousal on 
centre-of-pressure responses to transient postural perturbations. J 
Vestib Res 1993; 3: 25-39.
28. Mcllroy WE, Maki BE. The ‘deceleration response’ to transient 
perturbation of upright stance. Neurosci Lett 1994; 175: 13-16.
29. Nashner LM. Adaptation to altered support and visual conditions 
during stance patients with vestibular deficits. J Neurosci 1982; 2: 
536-44.
30. Nashner LM. Analysis of stance posture in humans. In: Towe AL, 
Luschei ES, eds. Handbook of Behavioral Neurobiology. New York: 
Plenum Press, 1981: 527-65.
31. Diener HC, Dichgans J. On the role of vestibular visual and 
somatosensory information for dynamic postural control in 
humans. Prog Brain Res 1988; 76: 253-61.
32. Dichgans J, Mauritz KH, Allum JHJ et al. Postural sway in normals 
and ataxic patients analysis of the stabilizing and destabilizing 
effects of vision. Agressologie 1976; 17: 15-24.
33. Lestienne F, Soechting], Berthoz A. Postural readjustments induced 
by linear motion of visual scenes. Exp Brain Res 1977; 28:363-84.
34. Diener HC, Dichgans J, Bruzek W et al. Stabilization of human 
posture during induced oscillations of the body. Exp Brain Res 
1982; 45: 126-32.
35. Nashner LM, Berthoz A. Visual contribution to rapid motor 
responses during postural control. Brain Res 1978; 150: 403-7.
36. Ledin T, Odkvist M. Visual influence on postural reactions to sud­
den antero-posterior support surface movements. A eta Otolaryngol 
Stockh 1991; 111:813-19.
37. Timmann D, Belting C, Schwarz M et al. Influence of visual and 
somatosensory input on leg EMG responses in dynamic posturo- 
graphy in normals. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1994; 93: 
7-14.
38. Allum JHJ, Pfaltz CR. Visual and vestibular contributions to pitch 
sway stabilization in the ankle muscles of normals and patients 
with bilateral peripheral vestibular deficits. Exp Brain Res 1985; 
58: 82-94.
  

686 
Vestibular science
39. Allum JHJ, Keshner EA, Honegger F et al. Organization of 
leg-trunk-head equilibrium movements in normals and patients 
with peripheral vestibular deficits. Prog Brain Res 1988; 76: 
34-45.
40. Horak FB, Nashner LM, Diener HC. Postural strategies associated 
with somatosensory and vestibular loss. Exp Brain Res 1990; 82: 
167-77.
41. Dietz V, Quintem J, Berger W. Afferent control of human stance 
and gait: evidence for blocking of group I afferents during gait. Exp 
Brain Res 1985; 61: 153-63.
42. Inglis JT, Horak FB, Shupert CL et al. The importance of 
somatosensory information in triggering and scaling automatic 
postural responses in humans. Exp Brain Res 1994; 
101:
159-64.
43. Diener HC, Dichgans J, Guschlbauer B et al. The significance of 
proprioception on postural stabilization as assessed by ischemia. 
Brain Res 1984; 296: 103-9.
44. Watanabe I, Okubo J. The role of the plantar mechanoreceptor in 
equilibrium control. Ann NY A cad Sci 1981; 374: 855-64.
45. Magnusson M, Enbom H, Johansson R et al. Significance of pres- 
sor input from the human feet in anterior-posterior postural con- 
trol. Acta Otolaryngol Stockh 1990; 110: 182-8.
46. Do MC, Bussel B, Breniere Y. Influence of plantar cutaneous after- 
ents on early compensatory reactions to forward fall. Exp Brain Res 
1990; 79: 319-24.
47. Do MC, Roby-Brami A. The influence of a reduced plantar sup' 
port surface area on the compensatory reactions to a forward fall. 
Exp Brain Res 1991; 84: 439-43.
48. Asai H, Fujiwara K, Tachino K. Limiting factor for movable range 
of the centre of foot pressure in backward direction. In: Taguchi K, 
Igarashi M, Mori S, eds. Vestibular and Neural Front. Tokyo: 
Elsevier, 1994: 525-8.
49. Wu G, Chiang JH. Hie significance of somatosensory stimulations 
to the human foot in the control of postural reflexes. Exp Brain Res 
1997; 114: 163-9.
50. Perry SD, Mcllroy WE, Maki BE. The role of cutaneous 
mechanoreceptors in the control of compensatory stepping reac- 
tions evoked by unpredictable, multi-directional perturbation. 
Brain Res 2000; 877: 401-6.
51. Thoumie P, Do MC. Changes in motor activity and biomechanics 
during balance recovery following cutaneous and muscular deaf- 
ferentation. Exp Brain Res 1996; 110: 289-97.
52. Maki BE, Perry SD, Norrie RG et al. Effect of facilitation of 
sensation from plantar foot-surface boundaries on postural 
stabilization in young and older adults. J Gerontol 1999; 54A: 
M281-7.
53. Jeka JJ. Light touch contact as a balance aid. Phys Ther 1997; 77: 
476-87.
54. Dietz V. Human neuronal control of automatic functional move­
ments: interaction between central programs and afferent input. 
Physio Rev 1992; 72: 33-69.
55. Kerr B, Condon SM, McDonald LA. Cognitive spatial processing 
and the regulation of posture. J Exp Psychol 1985; 11: 617-22.
56. Teasdale N, Bard C, LaRue J et al. On the cognitive penetrability 
of posture control. Exp Aging Res 1993; 19: 1-13.
57. Lajoie Y, Teasdale N, Bard C et al. Attentional demands for static 
and dynamic equilibrium. Exp Brain Res 1993; 97: 139-44.
58. Lassau-Wray ER, Parker AW. Neuromuscular responses of elderly 
women to tasks of increasing complexity imposed during walking. 
Eur] Appl Physiol Occupat Physiol 1993; 67: 476-80.
59. Lajoie Y, Teasdale N, Bard C et al. Upright standing and gait: are 
there changes in attentional requirements related to normal 
aging? Exp Aging Res 1996; 22: 185-98.
60. Stelmach GE, Zelaznik HN, Lowe D. The influence of aging and 
attentional demands on recovery from postural instability. Aging 
1990; 2: 155-61.
61. Geurts CH, Mulder TW, Ninhuis B et al. Dual-task assessment of 
reorganization of postural control in persons with lower limb 
amputation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1991; 72: 1059-64.
62. Schlesinger A, Redfem MS, Dahl RE et al. Postural control, 
attention and sleep deprivation. Neuroreport 1998; 9: 49-52.
63. Clement G, Gurfinkel VS, Lestienne F et al. Changes of posture 
during transient perturbations in microgravity. Aviat Space Environ 
Med 1985; 56: 666-71.
64. Dietz V, Horstman GA, Trippel M et al. Human postural reflexes 
and gravity—an under water simulation. Neurosci Lett 1989; 106: 
350-5.
65. Dietz V, Gollhofer A, Klieber M et al. Regulation of bipedal 
stance: dependency on ‘load’ receptors. Exp Brain Res 1992; 89: 
229-31.
66. Stoffregen TA, Riccio GE. An ecological theory of orientation 
and the vestibular system. Psychol Rev 1988; 95: 3-14.
67. Gurfinkel VS, Ivanenko YP, Levik YS et al. Kinesthetic reference 
for human orthograde posture. Neuroscience 1995; 68: 229-43.
68. Horak FB, Nashner LM. Central programming of postural move­
ments: adaptation to altered support-surface configurations. J 
Neurophysiol 1986; 55: 1369-81.
69. Runge CF, Shupert CL, Horak FB et al. Ankle and hip postural 
strategies defined by joint torques. Gait Posture 1999; 10: 161-70.
70. Winter DA, Prince F, Frank JS et al. Unified theory regarding a/p 
and m/1 balance in quiet stance. ] Neurophysiol 1996; 75: 2334-43.
71. Henry SM, Fung J, Horak FB. Control of stance during lateral and 
anterior/posterior surface translations. IEEE Trans Rehabil Eng 
1998; 6: 32-42.
72. Topper AK, Maki BE, Holliday PJ. Are activity-based assessments 
of balance and gait in the elderly predictive of risk of falling and/or 
type of fall? J Am Geriatr Soc 1993; 41: 479-87.
73. Maki BE, Holliday PJ, Topper AK. A prospective study of postural 
balance and risk of falling in an ambulatory and independent 
elderly population. ] Gerontol 1994; 49: M72-84.
74. Cummings SR, Nevitt MC. Non-skeletal determinants of frac­
tures: the potential importance of the mechanics of falls. 
Osteoporosis Int 1994; 1: S67-70.
75. Mcllroy WE, Maki BE. Task constraints on foot movement and 
the incidence of compensatory stepping following perturbation of 
upright stance. Brain Res 1993; 616: 30-8.
76. Rogers MW, Hain TC, Hanke TA et al. Stimulus parameters and 
inertial load: effects on the incidence of protective stepping 
responses in healthy human subjects. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 
1996; 77: 363-8.
  

Effects of aging on control of stability 
687
77. Maki BE, Mcllroy WE. Control of compensatory stepping reac- 
tions: age-related impairment and the potential for remedial 
intervention. Physiother Theory Pract 1999; 15: 69-90.
78. Burleigh AL, Horak FB, Malouin F. Modification of postural 
responses and step initiation: evidence for goal-directed postural 
interactions. J Neurophysiol 1994; 72: 2892-902.
79. Mcllroy WE, Maki BE. Early activation of arm muscles follows 
external perturbations of upright stance. Neurosci Lett 1995; 184:
177-80.
80. Mcllroy WE, Maki BE. Do anticipatory postural adjustments pre­
cede compensatory stepping reactions evoked by perturbation? 
Neurosci Lett 1993; 164: 199-204.
81. Mcllroy WE, Maki BE. Adaptive changes to compensatory step­
ping responses. Gait Posture 1995; 3: 43-50.
82. Rogers MW. Disorders of posture, balance and gait in Parkinson’s 
disease. Clin Geriatr Med 1996; 12: 825-45.
83. Mcllroy WE, Maki BE. The control of lateral stability during 
rapid stepping reactions evoked by antero-posterior perturbation: 
does anticipatory control play a role? Gait Posture 1999; 9: 190-8.
84. Nashner LM. Balance adjustments of humans perturbed while 
walking. J Neuropkysiol 1980; 44: 650-64.
85. Yang JF, Stein RB. Phase-dependent reflex reversal in human leg 
muscles during walking. J Neurophysiol 1990; 63: 1109-17.
86. Duysens J, Tax AAM, Nawijn S et al. Gating of sensation and 
evoked potentials following foot stimulation during human gait. 
Exp Brain Res 1995; 105: 423-31.
87. Sinkjaer T, Andersen JB, Larsen B. Soleus stretch reflex modula­
tion during gait in humans. J Neurophysiol 1996; 76: 1112-20.
88. Berger W, Dietz V, Quintem J. Corrective reactions to stumbling 
in man: neuronal co-ordination of bilateral leg muscle activity 
during gait. J Physiol 1984; 357: 109-25.
89. Eng JJ, Winter DA, Patla AE. Strategies for recovery from a trip 
in early and late swing during human walking. Exp Brain Res 
1994; 102: 339-49.
90. Townsend MA. Biped gait stabilization via foot placement. J 
Biomech 1985; 18: 21-38.
91. Redfem MS, Schumann T. A model of foot placement during 
gait. J Biomech 1994; 27: 1339-46.
92. Stelmach GE, Worringham CJ. Sensorimotor deficits related to 
postural stability: implications for falling in the elderly. Clin 
Geriatr Med 1985; 1: 679-4.
93. Teasdale N, Stelmach GE, Breunig A et al. Age differences in 
visual sensory integration. Exp Brain Res 1991; 85: 691-6.
94. Wolfson L, Whipple R, Derby CA et al. A dynamic posturogra­
phy study of balance in healthy elderly. Neorology 1992; 42: 
2069-75.
95. May lor EA, Wing AM. Age differences in postural stability are 
increased by additional cognitive demands. J Gerontol 1996; 51: 
PI 43-54.
96. Lundin-Olsson L, Nyberg L, Gustafson Y. ‘Stops walking when 
talking’ as a predictor of falls in elderly people. Lancet 1997; 349: 
617.
97. Lundin-Olsson L, Nyberg L, Gustafson Y. Attention, frailty, and 
falls: the effect of a manual task on basic mobility. J Am Geriatr 
Soc 1998; 46: 758-61.
98. Brocklehurst J, Robertson D, James-Groom P. Clinical correlates 
of sway in old age—sensory modalities. Age Ageing 1982; 11:1-10.
99. Skinner HB, Barrack RL, Cook SD. Age-related declines in pro­
prioception. Clin Orthop Related Res 1984; 184: 208-11.
100. Verrillo RT, Verrillo V. Sensory and perceptual performance. In: 
Chames N, ed. Aging and Human Performance. New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, 1985: 1-46.
101. Kenshalo DR. Somesthetic sensitivity in young and elderly 
humans. J Gerontol 1986; 41: 732-42.
102. Paige GD. The aging vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) and adaptive 
plasticity. Acta Otolaryngol Stockh 1991; 481 (suppl): 297-300.
103. Woollacott M, Shumway-Cook A, Nashner LM. Aging and 
posture control: changes in sensory organization and muscular 
coordination. IntJ Aging Hum Dev 1986; 23: 97-114.
104. Lord SR, Clark RD, Webster IW. Postural stability and associated 
physiological factors in a population of aged persons. J Gerontol 
1991; 46: M69-76.
105. Lord SR, Ward JA, Williams P et al. Physiological factors associ­
ated with falls in older community-dwelling women. J Am Geriatr 
Soc 1994; 42: 1110-17.
106. Vandervoort AA. Effects of ageing on human neuromuscular 
function: implications for exercise. Can J Spt Sci 1992; 17:
178-84.
107. Whipple RH, Wolfson LI, Amerman RN. The relationship of 
knee and ankle weakness to falls in nursing home residents. J Am 
Geriatr Soc 1987; 35: 13-20.
108. Tinetti ME, Williams TF, Mayewski R. Fall risk index for elderly 
patients based on number of chronic disabilities. AmJ Med 1986; 
80: 429-34.
109. Campbell AJ, Borrie MJ, Spears GF. Risk factors for falls in a 
community-based prospective study of people 70 years and older. 
J Gerontol 1989; 44: Ml 12-17.
110. Robbins AS, Rubenstein LZ, Josephson KR et al. Predictors of 
falls among elderly people—results of two population-based 
studies. Arch Intern Med 1989; 149: 1628-33.
111. Lord SR, Clark RD, Webster IW. Physiological factors associated 
with falls in an elderly population. J Am Geriatr Soc 1991; 39: 
1194-200.
112. Blanpied P, Smidt GL. The difference in stiffness of the active 
plantarflexors between young and elderly human females. J 
Gerontol 1993; 48: M58-63.
113. Roach KE, Miles TP. Normal hip and knee active range of 
motion: the relationship to age. Phys Ther 1991; 71: 656-65.
114. Studenski S, Duncan PW, Chandler J. Postural response and 
effector factors in persons with unexplained falls: results and 
methodologic issues. J Am Geriatr Soc 1991; 39: 229-34.
115. Lipsitz LA, Goldberger AL. Loss of ‘complexity’ and aging. 
JAMA 1992; 267: 1806-9.
116. Grabiner MD, Jahnigen DW. Modeling recovery from stumbles: 
preliminary data on variable selection and classification efficacy. 
J Am Geriatr Soc 1992; 40: 910-13.
117. McDowd JM. Inhibition in attention and aging. J Gerontol 1997; 
52: P265-73.
118. Peterka RJ, Black FO. Age-related changes in human posture 
control: sensory organization tests. J Vestib Res 1990; 1: 73-85.
  

688 
Vestibular science
119. Shepard N, Schultz A, Alexander NB et al. Postural control in 
young and elderly adults when stance is challenged: clinical ver- 
sus laboratory measurements. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1993; 
102: 508-17.
120. Ring C, Nayak USL, Isaacs B. Balance function in elderly people 
who have and who have not fallen. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1988; 
69: 261-4.
121. Winter DA. The Biomechanics and Motor Control of Human Gait: 
Normal, Elderly and Pathological Vol. 2 Waterloo: University of 
Waterloo Press, 1991.
122. Winter D, Patla A, Frank J et al. Biomechanical walking pattern 
changes in the fit and healthy elderly. Phys Ther 1990; 70: 340-7.
123. Maki BE. Gait changes in older adults: predictors of falls or indi- 
cators of fear? J Am Geriatr Soc 1997; 45: 313-20.
124. Kaya BK, Krebs DE, Riley PO. Dynamic stability in elders: 
momentum control in locomotor ADL. J Gerontol 1998; 53: 
Ml 26-34.
125. Patla AE, Prentice SD, Gobbi LT. Visual control of obstacle 
avoidance during locomotion: strategies in young children, 
young and older adults. In: Ferrandez AM, Teasdale N, eds. 
Changes in Sensory Motor Behavior in Aging. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 
1996: 257-77.
126. Chen HC, Ashton-Miller JA, Alexander NB et al. Effects of age 
and available response time on ability to step over an obstacle. J 
Gerontol 1994; 49: M227-33.
127. Cao C, Ashton-Miller JA, Schultz AB et al. Abilities to turn sud- 
denly while walking: effects of age, gender, and available response 
time. J Gerontol 1997; 52: M88-93.
128. Cao C, Ashton-Miller JA, Schultz AB et al. Effects of age, avail- 
able response time and gender on ability to stop suddenly when 
walking. Gait Posture 1998; 8: 103-9.
129. Chen HC, Schultz AB, Ashton-Miller JA et al. Stepping over 
obstacles: dividing attention impairs performance of old more 
than young adults. J Gerontol 1996; 51: Ml 16-22.
130. Riley PO, Krebs DE, Popat RA. Biomechanical analysis of failed 
sit-to-stand. IEEE Trans Rehabil Eng 1997; 5: 353-9.
131. Tinetti ME, Speechley M, Ginter SF. Risk factors for falls among 
elderly persons living in the community. N  EnglJ Med 1988; 319: 
1701-7.
132. Berg KO, Wood-Dauphinee SL, Williams JT et al. Measuring 
balance in the elderly: validation of an instrument. Can J Publ 
Health 1992; 42: 75-9.
133. Bennett KMB, Castiello U. Reach to grasp: changes with age. J 
Gerontol 1994; 49: PI-7.
134. Ramos CF, Stark LW. Simulation experiments can shed light on 
the functional aspects of postural adjustments related to volun­
tary movements. In: Winters JM, Woo SL-Y, eds. Multiple Muscle 
Systems: Biomechanics and Movement Organization. New York: 
Springer-Verlag, 1990: 507-17.
135. Inglis B, Woollacott M. Age-related changes in anticipatory pos­
tural adjustments associated with arm movements. J Gerontol 
1988; 43: M105-13.
136. Rogers MW, Kukulka CG, Soderberg GL. Age-related changes in 
postural responses preceding rapid self-paced and reaction time 
arm movements. J Gerontol 1992; 47: M159-65.
137. Maki BE. A biomechanical approach to quantifying anticipatory 
postural adjustments in the elderly. Med Biol Eng Comput 1993; 
31:355-62.
138. Maki BE, Mcllroy WE. Influence of arousal and attention on the 
control of postural sway. J Vestib Res 1996; 6: 53-9.
139. Maki BE, Holliday PJ, Femie GR. A posture control model and 
balance test for the prediction of relative postural stability. IEEE 
Trans Biomed Eng 1987; BME-34: 797-810.
140. Overstall PW, Exton-Smith AN, Imms FJ et al. Falls in the 
elderly related to postural imbalance. BMJ 1977; 1: 261-4.
141. Era P, Heikkinen E. Postural sway during standing and unex­
pected disturbance of balance in random samples of men of dif­
ferent ages. J Gerontol 1985; 40: 287-95.
142. Hayes KC, Spencer JD, Lucy SD et al. Age-related changes in 
postural sway. In: Winter DA, Norman RW, Wells RP et al. eds. 
Biomechanics IX-A. Champaign, Illinois: Human Kinetics 
Publishers, 1985: 383-7.
143. Maki BE, Holliday PJ, Femie GR. Aging and postural control: a 
comparison of spontaneous- and induced-sway balance tests. J 
Am Geriatr Soc 1990; 38: 1-9.
144. Prieto TE, Myklebust JB, Myklebust BM. Characterization and 
modelling of postural steadiness in the elderly: a review. IEEE 
Trans Rehabil Eng 1993; 1: 26-34.
145. Baloh RW, Fife TD, Zwerling L et al. Comparison of static and 
dynamic posturography in young and older normal people. J Am 
Geriatr Soc 1994; 42: 405-12.
146. Lord SR, Ward JA. Age-associated differences in sensori-motor 
function and balance in community dwelling women. Age Ageing 
1994; 23: 452-60.
147. Collins JJ, DeLuca CJ, Lipsitz LA. Age-related changes in open- 
loop and closed-loop postural control mechanisms. Exp Brain Res 
1995; 104: 480-92.
148. Fernie GR, Gryfe Cl, Holliday PJ et al. The relationship of pos­
tural sway in standing to the incidence of falls in geriatric sub­
jects. Age Ageing 1982; 11: 11-16.
149. Kirshen AJ, Cape RDT, Hayes HC et al. Postural sway and car­
diovascular parameters associated with falls in the elderly. ] Clin 
Exp Gerontol 1984; 6: 291-307.
150. Lichtenstein MJ, Shields SL, Shiavi RG et al. Clinical determi­
nants of biomechanics platform measures of balance in aged 
women. J Am Geriatr Soc 1988; 36: 996-1002.
151. Thapa PB, Gideon P, Brockman KG et al. Clinical and biome­
chanical measures of balance as fall predictors in ambulatory 
nursing home residents. J Gerontol 1996; 51: M239-46.
152. McClenaghan BA, Williams HG, Dickerson J et al. Spectral char­
acteristics of ageing postural control. Gait Posture 1995; 3:123-31.
153. Maki BE. Direction- and vision-dependence of postural responses 
in elderly ‘fallers’ and ‘non-fallers’. Facts Res Gerontol (Lannee 
gerontologique) 1995; 9 (suppl): 83-96.
154. Rossiter-Fomoff JE, Wolf SL, Wolfson LI et al. A cross-sectional 
validation study of the FICSIT common data base static balance 
measures. J Gerontol 1995; 50A: M291-7.
155. Duncan PW, Weiner DK, Chandler J et al. Functional reach: 
a new clinical measure of balance. ] Gerontol 1990; 45: 
M192-7.
  

Effects of aging on control of stability 
689
156. Blaszczyk JW, Lowe DL, Hansen PD. Ranges of postural stabil- 
ity and their changes in the elderly. Gait Posture 1994; 2: 
11-17.
157. King MB, Judge JO, Wolfson L. Functional base of support 
decreases with age. J Gerontol 1994; 49: M258-63.
158. Stelmach GE, Phillips J, DiFabio RP et al. Age, functional pos- 
tural reflexes, and voluntary sway. J Gerontol 1989; 44: B100-6.
159. Nardone A, Siliotto R, Grasso M et al. Influence of aging on leg 
muscle reflex responses to stance perturbation. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil 1995; 76: 158-65.
160. Alexander NB, Shepard N, Gu MJ et al. Postural control in 
young and elderly adults when stance is perturbed: kinematics. J 
Gerontol 1992; 47: M79-87.
161. Wu G. Age-related differences in body segmental movement 
during perturbed stance in humans. Clin Biomech 1998; 13: 
300-7.
162. Keshner EA, Chen KJ. Mechanisms controlling head stabiliza­
tion in the elderly during random rotations in the vertical plane. 
J Motor Behav 1996; 28: 324-36.
163. Smith BN, Segal RL, Wolf SL. Long latency ankle responses to 
dynamic perturbation in older fallers and non-fallers. J Am 
Geriatr Soc 1996; 44: 1447-54.
164. Duncan G, Wilson JA, MacLennan WJ et al. Clinical correlates 
of sway in elderly people living at home. Gerontology 1992; 38:
160-6.
165. Hughes MA, Duncan PW, Rose DK et al. The relationship of 
postural sway to sensorimotor function, functional performance, 
and disability in the elderly. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1996; 77: 
567-72.
166. Wu G. The relation between age-related changes in neuromus- 
culoskeletal system and dynamic postural responses to balance 
disturbance. J Gerontol 1998; 53A: M320-6.
167. Hay L, Bard C, Fleury M et al. Availability of visual and propri­
oceptive afferent messages and postural control in elderly adults. 
Exp Brain Res 1996; 108: 129-39.
168. Stelmach G, Teasdale N, DiFabio RP et al. Age related decline 
in postural control mechanisms. Int J Aging Hum Dev 1989; 29: 
205-23.
169. Wolfson LI, Whipple R, Amerman P et al. Stressing the postural 
response: a quantitative method for testing balance. J Am Geriatr 
Soc 1986; 34: 845-50.
170. Chandler JM, Duncan PW, Studenski SA. Balance performance 
on the postural stress test: comparison of young adults, healthy 
elderly, and fallers. Phys Ther 1990; 70: 410-15.
171. Luchies CW. Fall arrest biomechanics: sway and stepping 
responses in healthy young and old adults. Doctoral dissertation. 
Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan, 1991.
172. Luchies CW, Alexander NB, Schultz AB et al. Stepping 
responses of young and old adults to postural disturbances: kine­
matics. J Am Geriatr Soc 1994; 42: 506-12.
173. Mcllroy WE, Maki BE. Age-related changes in compensatory 
stepping in response to unpredictable perturbations. ] Gerontol 
1996; 51 A: M289-96.
174. Rogers MW, Cain TD, Hanke TA. Association of age and fall risk 
with changes in lateral stance control during induced forward
stepping. In: McGill S, Gross M, Patia A, eds. Proceedings of the 
Third North American Congress on Biomechanics, Waterloo, 
Canada: University of Waterloo, 1998: 23-4.
175. Maki BE, Edmondstone MA, Mcllroy WE. Age-related differ­
ences in laterally directed compensatory stepping behavior. J 
Gerontol 2000; 55A: M270-7.
176. Maki BE, Mcllroy WE, Perry SD. Influence of lateral destabilization 
on compensatory stepping responses. J Biomech 1996; 29:343-53.
177. Thelen DG, Wojcik LA, Schultz AB et al. Age differences in 
using a rapid step to regain balance during a forward fall. J 
Gerontol 1997; 52A: M8-13.
178. Jiang N, Mcllroy WE, Black WE et al. Control of compensatory 
limb movement in chronic hemiparesis. In: McGill S, Gross M, 
Patia A, eds. Proceedings of the Third North American Congress on 
Biomechanics, Waterloo, Canada: University of Waterloo, 1998: 
263-4.
179. Burleigh-Jacobs A, Horak FB, Nutt JC et al. Step initiation in 
Parkinson’s disease: influence of levodopa and external sensory 
triggers. Movement Disord 1997; 12: 206-15.
180. Perry SD, Edmondstone MA, Mcllroy WE et al. Sensory corre­
lates of impaired compensatory stepping performance in healthy 
older adults. In: McGill S, Gross M, Patia A, eds. Proceedings of 
the Third North American Congress on Biomechanics, Waterloo, 
Canada: University of Waterloo, 1998: 285-6.
181. Yardley L, Gardner M, Bronstein A et al. Interference between 
postural control and mental task performance in patients with 
vestibular disorder and healthy controls. J Neurology, Neuro­
surgery and Psychiatry 2001; (in press).
182. Maylor EA, Wing AM. Age differences in postural stability are 
increased by additional cognitive demands. J Gerontol 1996; 51: 
PI 43-54.
183. Shumway-Cook A, Woollacott M, Kerns KA et al. The effects of 
two types of cognitive tasks on postural stability in older adults with 
and without a history of falling. J Gerontol 1997; 52 A: M232-40.
184. Shumway-Cook A, Woollacott M. Attentional demands and 
postural control: the effect of sensory context. J Gerontol 2000; 
55A: M10-16.
185. Mcllroy WE, Norrie RG, Brooke JD et al. Temporal properties of 
attention sharing consequent to disturbed balance. NeuroReport 
1999; 10: 2895-9.
186. Maki BE, Zecevic A, Bateni H et al. Cognitive demands of exe­
cuting rapid postural reactions: does aging impede attentional 
switching? NeuroReport 2001; 12: 3583-7.
187. Brown LA, Shumway-Cook A, Woollacott MH. Attentional 
demands and postural recovery: the effects of aging. J Gerontol 
1999; 54A: M l65-71.
188. Rankin J, Woollacott MH, Shumway-Cook A et al. Cognitive 
influence on postural stability: a neuromuscular analysis in young 
and elders. J Gerontol 2000; 55A: Ml 12-19.
189. Mcllroy WE, Bent LR, Potvin JR et al. Anticipatory balance 
control precedes withdrawal response to noxious stimulation. 
Neurosci Lett 1999; 267: 197-200.
190. Zettel JL, Maki BE, Mcllroy WE. Can features of triggered step­
ping reactions be modulated to meet environmental constraints? 
Exp Brain Res 2002; 145: 397-308.
  

690 
Vestibular science
191. Maki BE, Edmondstone MA, Perry SD et al. Control of rapid 
limb movements for balance recovery: do age-related changes 
predict falling risk? In: Duysens J, Smits-Engelsman BCM, 
Kingma H (eds) Control of Posture and Gait. International Soci­
ety for Posture and Gait Research, Maastricht, Netherlands, 
2001: 126-9.
192. Rogers MW, Hedman LD, Johnson ME et al. Lateral stability dur­
ing forward-induced stepping for dynamic balance recovery in 
young and older adults. J Gerontol 2001; 56: M589-94.
193. Luchies CW, Wallace D, Pazdur R et al. Effects of age on balance 
assessment using voluntary and involuntary step tasks. J Gerontol 
1999; 54: M140-4.
194. Perry SD, Mcllroy WE, Maki BE. Does neural, musculoskeletal or 
sensory impairment predict compensatory stepping behavior in 
the older adult? Submitted for publication.
195. Damiano NK, Mcllroy WE, Maki BE et al. Compensatory step­
ping in Parkinson’s Disease: Do PD patients use external cues 
to decrease postural instability? Soc Neurosci Abstr 2000; 26:
164.
196. Lord SR, Rogers MW, Howland A et al. Lateral stability, sensori­
motor function and falls in older people. J Amer Geriat Soc 1999; 
47: 1077-81.
197. Lord SR, Menz HB. Visual contributions to postural stability in 
older adults. Gerontology 2000; 46: 306-10.
198. Pai YC, Maki BE, Iqbal K et al. Thresholds for step initiation 
induced by support-surface translation: a dynamic center-of-mass 
model provides much better prediction than a static model. J Bio­
mech 2000; 33: 387-92.
199. Tang PF, Woollacott MH. Phase-dependent modulation of poxi- 
mal and distal postural responses to slips in young and older 
adults. ] Gerontol 1999; 54: M89-102.
200. Brauer SG, Woollacott M, Shumway-Cook A. The interacting 
effects of cognitive demand and recovery of postural stability 
in balance-impaired elderly persons. ] Gerontol 2001; 56: 
M489-96.
201. Brauer SG, Bums YR, Galley P. A prospective study of laboratory 
and clinical measures of postural stability to predict community- 
dwelling fallers. J Gerontol 2000; 55: M469-76.
  

Vestibular influences 
H I 'on cardiovascular 
control during 
movement
Bill J Yates, Michael J Holmes, Brian J Jian, Man A Kerman
Introduction
Vestibular dysfunction and/or stimulation has long been known 
to evoke autonomic responses, including nausea and vomiting 
(see Yates et al1 for a recent review). Because these autonomic 
responses appeared to be maladaptive responses to unusual con­
ditions in which conflicting multiple sensory cues regarding 
body position in space were available, it was difficult to assign 
the responses a physiological role. More recently, however, evi­
dence has accumulated to suggest that vestibular inputs, which 
signal body position in space and the direction and velocity of 
movements, may be important in eliciting compensatory auto­
nomic responses during movement. For example, standing in 
humans and nose-up rotations during climbing maneuvers in 
quadrupeds place the body’s long axis parallel with the gravito- 
inertial vector, and can induce peripheral blood pooling if com­
pensation does not occur quickly.3 Since a particular pattern of 
vestibular inputs occurs during these postures, it would seem 
practical for vestibular signals to trigger compensatory cardio­
vascular responses that prevent orthostatic hypotension from 
occurring. A stereotyped pattern of vestibular inputs may also 
occur during locomotion and exercise, and thus labyrinthine 
signals could also potentially contribute to ‘exercise pressor
> 4
responses.
This chapter will review the evidence suggesting that 
vestibular signals comprise one of several sensory inputs that 
induce cardiovascular responses during movement and changes 
in posture. In particular, this chapter will highlight recent 
research indicating that: (1) a particular ‘pattern’ of changes in 
sympathetic nervous system activity is elicited by vestibular 
stimulation; (2) cardiovascular responses can be induced by
vestibular stimulation in humans; (3) vestibular lesions impair 
the ability to correct blood pressure precisely during movement; 
and (4) the cerebellum may be an important component of 
the neural circuitry that mediates vestibulocardiovascular 
responses.
Although this chapter will concentrate on vestibular influ­
ences on cardiovascular control, both classical and recent stud­
ies have shown that additional autonomic responses are also 
affected by vestibular stimulation. The reader is referred to 
other reviews and manuscripts that discuss the role of the 
vestibular system in triggering changes in respiratory activity 
during movement,5,6 influencing alertness and arousal through 
actions on brainstem monoaminergic neurons,7-10 controlling 
background excitability of brainstem neurons that regulate 
sleep-waking cycles,11 and eliciting nausea and vomiting during 
motion sickness.1,12 Table 40.1 summarizes some of the facets of 
autonomic control that may be influenced by the vestibular 
system.
Table 40.1 Autonom ic responses elicited by vestibular 
stimulation.
Changes in blood pressure 
Changes in respiratory muscle activity 
Changes in alertness and arousal 
Changes in sleep-wake cycles 
Nausea and vomiting

G92 
Vestibular science
Evidence suggesting that the 
vestibular system influences control 
of blood pressure
Two general types of experiment have been conducted to show 
that the vestibular system influences the control of blood pres- 
sure: those that observe cardiovascular responses to selective 
stimulation of vestibular afferents, and those that monitor 
orthostatic hypotension that occurs during whole-body move- 
ments following vestibular lesions. Some of the first expert 
ments demonstrating a role of the vestibular system in 
cardiovascular control involved recording responses from sym- 
pathetic nerves during electrical stimulation of the vestibular 
nerve. Examples of these ‘vestibulosympathetic reflexes’ are 
illustrated in Figure 40.1. The sympathetic nerves that have 
been shown to respond to electrical vestibular stimulation are 
listed in Table 40.2. All of these nerves contain efferents that
Celiac n.
(gastrointestinal tract)
dgastmintes
P- vtpf n n I 
t
External carotid n.
(blood vessels in head)
Hypogastric n.
(bladder and pelvic organs)
colonic n.
(gastrointestinal tract)
I 
- Lumbar color 
Jfiigastrointest
Renal n. 
[kidneyl
[ 
| 
Superior mesenteric n. 
| If 
[gastrointestinal tract)
250 msec
Figure 40.1 Examples of sympathetic nerve responses to electrical stimulation 
of vestibular afferents (5-shock train with a 3-ms interpulse interval delivered 
at the time of the arrow). Upward deflections represent an increase in nerve 
activity, whereas downward deflections represent an inhibition of activity. Traces 
are the average of over 100 sweeps. The stimulation intensity used was 
350-500 pA. The onset latency of the responses was 100-140 ms, which is due 
to the slow conduction velocities of sympathetic efferents. All of the 
sympathetic nerves whose responses are illustrated innervate blood vessels, 
although some (celiac n., hypogastric n., lumbar colonic n., superior mesenteric 
n.) also innervate motility-regulating smooth muscle. (Adapted from Kerman 
and Yates. AmJ Physiol 1998; 275: R824-35.13)
Table 40.2 Sympathetic nerves whose activity is altered by 
electrical vestibular stimulation.
Nerve
Adrenal
Celiac
Cervical sympathetic 
External carotid 
Hypogastric 
Inferior cardiac 
Lumbar colonic 
Renal
Splanchnic 
Superior mesenteric
Reference
[13]
113]
[30]
[13]
[13]
[64]
[13]
[13, 65, 66] 
[14, 64, 67] 
[13]
innervate structures involved in cardiovascular control, includ­
ing the heart, blood vessels, and adrenal gland. Control experi­
ments have indicated that these responses are the result of 
activation of vestibular afferents, and not non-target afferents 
outside of the vestibular nerve, as they are abolished by lesions 
of the medial and inferior vestibular nuclei.13-15 Despite the fact 
that the activity of many sympathetic nerves is affected by 
vestibular stimulation, the relative sizes of responses in different 
nerves vary greatly. This issue is discussed below.
Recently, cardiovascular responses elicited by selective nat­
ural vestibular stimulation have been reported. Vestibular stim­
ulation was produced by rotation of the head on a fixed body 
following denervations to remove non-vestibular inputs that 
might be elicited by head movement. These denervations 
included transection of the IXth, Xth and sometimes the Vth 
cranial nerves and the upper cervical dorsal roots.15-17 Nose-up 
rotations in this preparation elicited an increase in sympathetic 
nervous system activity (Figure 40.2a), blood pressure (Figure 
40.2b), and blood catecholamine levels18,19 (Figure 40.2c). How­
ever, changes in blood pressure and sympathetic nervous system 
activity are not elicited by ear-down rotations in quadrupeds, 
indicating that these responses have directional specificity.15,17 
Because nose-up vestibular stimulation signals the attainment of 
a posture that should result in an orthostatic challenge in a 
quadruped, vestibulosympathetic responses appear to be a prac­
tical adaptation to maintain stable blood pressure.
Other evidence that the vestibular system participates in 
adjusting blood pressure comes from experiments that record 
the effects of selective electrical or natural vestibular stimula­
tion on the activity of brainstem neurons that control sympa­
thetic nervous system activity. The neural circuitry necessary 
for the production of vestibulosympathetic reflexes, as indicated 
by anatomical, electrophysiological and lesion studies in animal 
preparations,14,15,20-26 is shown in Figure 40.3. Over 70% of 
the putative cardiovascular-regulatory neurons in the major 
‘pressor’ area of the cat brainstem, which is located in a con­
fined region of the rostral ventrolateral medulla,27-29 receive 
labyrinthine signals.20,21 Lesions of this region abolish vestibulo­
sympathetic reflexes,22 indicating that the rostral ventrolateral
  

Vestibular influences on cardiovascular control during movement 
693
Sympathetic nerve responses
clockwise rotation
(b)
Nose 
Right 
Down 
Ear 
Oown
counterclockwise
rotation
Left 
Nose 
Ear 
Down 
Down
Left 
Nose 
Right 
Ear 
Down 
Ear 
Down 
Down
F
o
140
120
100
140
120
100
50°
Blood pressure responses
pitch tilt 
Vlllth nerves intact
(c)
Blood catecholamine levels
Nerve Cut
seconds
40 
80
roll tilt
2.5 r
1.5
0.5
0
0.3
Head up Tilt
-1 0  - 5
5 
15 
30 
35 
40 
Time (min.)
—  
0.2
8 
o.i
—10 - 5  
5 
15 
30 
35 
40 
Time (min.)
Figure 40.2 Cardiovascular responses to natural vestibular stimulation, (a) Averaged changes in activity of a sympathetic nerve (the splanchnic nerve) in response to 
15° sinusoidal head rotations that incorporated roll and pitch. The responses were recorded from cats whose upper cervical dorsal roots were transected to remove 
inputs from the neck, and whose IXth and Xth cranial nerves were transected to remove autonomic inputs that might be elicited by head movement. In this 
preparation, head rotations presumably mainly stimulated vestibular afferents. Activity in this sympathetic nerve was dependent on head position, and was maximal 
during nose-up rotations and minimal during nose-down rotations. (From Yates and Miller.15) (b) Increases in blood pressure elicited by static head tilts in animals 
whose upper cervical dorsal roots and IXth and Xth cranial nerves were transected. Nose-up tilts elicited an increase in blood pressure of approximately 20mmHg; 
these responses were abolished by transection of the Vlllth cranial nerves, indicating that they were due to stimulation of the vestibular system. In contrast, ear- 
down (roll) tilt had little effect on blood pressure. (From Woodring et al.17) (c) Blood norepinephrine (NE, top panel) and epinephrine (E, bottom panel) concentrations 
before, during and after 50° nose-up head tilt in the preparation described above. From 0 to 30 min the head was tilted nose-up by 50°, and blood was sampled at 
the indicated times. Nose-up head tilt produced over a two-fold increase in blood catecholamine levels. (From Yates and Kerman. Brain Res Rev 1998; 28: 73-82.19)
medulla is critical for transmitting vestibular signals to sympa­
thetic ‘output’ neurons in the spinal cord. Lesions of the rostral 
ventrolateral medulla also abolish or greatly attenuate sympa­
thetic nervous system responses to baroreceptor stimula­
tion,27-29 which suggests that baroreceptor and vestibular signals 
may converge on common neurons in this region. This hypoth­
esis has been supported by recording studies, which demon­
strated that rostral ventrolateral medulla neurons respond to 
electrical stimulation of both the carotid sinus nerve (which 
carries baroreceptor afferents) and the vestibular nerve.20 How­
ever, not all neurons in the brainstem that are part of the 
baroreceptor reflex arc have activity that is modulated by 
labyrinthine signals. For example, neurons in the nucleus trac- 
tus solitarius that receive primary baroreceptor inputs, as well as 
inhibitory neurons in the baroreceptor reflex arc located in the 
caudal ventrolateral medulla, fail to respond to vestibular nerve 
stimulation.23,24 The implications of this pattern of convergence
of vestibular and baroreceptor inputs are not yet known. 
Vestibular signals also differ from many other inputs that affect 
blood pressure, in that they appear to affect mainly sympathetic 
outflow to the blood vessels, but not parasympathetic outflow to 
the heart. Tang and Gernandt30 showed that electrical stimula­
tion of the vestibular nerve produced robust changes in sympa­
thetic nerve activity, but no change in vagus nerve activity 
other than in branches innervating upper airway muscles. 
Because all parasympathetic outflow to the heart is carried by 
the vagus nerve,31 this experiment suggests that the parasympa­
thetic and sympathetic systems are differentially affected by 
labyrinthine inputs. Cumulatively, these observations show 
that the vestibular system has influences on only some of the 
central nervous system circuitry responsible for the control of 
blood pressure. These selective influences may form the neural 
substrate of the ‘patterning’ of sympathetic nervous system 
activity elicited by vestibular stimulation (see next section).
  

694 
Vestibular science
Vestibular 
Baroreceptor
Inputs 
Inputs
i
Vestibular
Nuclei
- ► 
Heart
Blood
Vessels
Caudal Ventrolateral 
Medullary 
Reticular Formation
Lateral Medullary 
Reticular Formation
Rostral Ventrolateral 
Medullary 
Reticular Formation
Sympathetic 
Intermediolaterai 
Cell Column
___  
___  
Mediates Vestibular
1 1 1  
Influences on
Sympathetic Outflow
Negligible Vestibular 
Influences
Figure 40.3 Schematic diagram of the brainstem and spinal cord pathways required for production of vestibulo-sympathetic and baroreceptor reflexes. Baroreceptor 
afferents terminate in the nucleus tractus solitarius. Baroreceptor effects on the sympathetic nervous system are mediated by inhibitory interneurons in the caudal 
ventrolateral medulla and pre-sympathetic neurons in the rostral ventrolateral medulla that directly innervate sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord. 
In addition, baroreceptor-sensitive neurons in the nucleus tractus solitarius make direct connections with cardiac parasympathetic preganglionic neurons located in 
and near the nucleus ambiguus. Vestibular signals affect sympathetic outflow through a neural circuit including the vestibular nuclei, neurons in the lateral 
medullary reticular formation (but excluding cells with powerful baroreceptor inputs in the caudal ventrolateral medulla), and pre-sympathetic neurons in the rostral 
ventrolateral medulla. Thus, neurons in the rostral ventrolateral medulla represent the first site of convergence between baroreceptor and vestibular signals in 
pathways that control sympathetic outflow. The vestibular system appears to have negligible effects on parasympathetic outflow to the heart, which is mediated 
through parasympathetic preganglionic neurons located in and around the nucleus ambiguus. (Adapted from Yates and Kerman. Brain Res Rev 1998; 28: 73-82.19)
It should be noted, however, that the circuitry illustrated in 
Figure 40.3 probably does not reflect the entirety of connections 
involved in producing vestibular-induced or motion-induced 
cardiovascular responses in awake animals. For example, it is 
likely that the cerebellum is involved in modulating these 
responses (see below). Additionally, vestibular signals are inte­
grated with many other inputs reflecting body position in space, 
including proprioceptive, visual and visceral signals, in order to 
produce precise cardiovascular adjustments during movement. 
For example, removal of neck inputs through transection of the 
upper cervical dorsal roots has been shown to potentiate greatly 
the effects of head rotation on sympathetic outflow.32 This find­
ing suggests that neck and vestibular inputs are integrated in a 
manner such that cardiovascular responses are elicited by 
whole-body movement (which only stimulates vestibular recep­
tors), but not head movements on a stable body that elicit both 
neck and vestibular inputs. Furthermore, as discussed below, 
removal of vestibular inputs only produces a severe deficit in 
correcting blood pressure when other sensory signals regarding 
body orientation are also eliminated. Thus, vestibular influences 
on blood pressure should not be considered as isolated responses, 
but as a component of other highly integrative responses.
Patterns of sympathetic nerve 
responses to vestibular stimulation
The classical ideas regarding the function of the sympathetic 
nervous system were first proposed by Walter Cannon.
Cannon33,34 postulated that the sympathetic nervous system dis­
charges in a unitary fashion so as to activate all of its outflows 
simultaneously in response to a variety of stimuli. Though the 
model proposed by Cannon is appealing and is still presented in 
many medical textbooks, more recent experimental evidence 
suggests that it is not entirely correct. There are numerous 
experimental examples that demonstrate that the sympathetic 
nervous system responds in a finely tuned and specific manner 
to various environmental challenges. Such responses are advan­
tageous, as specific patterning of sympathetic outflow to address 
particular challenges is the most efficient way of maintaining 
homeostasis. For instance, during exposure to cold, one of the 
primary goals of the organism is to minimize heat loss. This is 
accomplished by increased piloerection and redistribution of 
blood away from the skin to the mesentery. Activity of cuta­
neous sympathetic nerves has been shown to increase during 
exposure to cold, while that of the splanchnic nerve (which 
innervates structures in the abdomen) simultaneously de­
creases; the opposite responses are observed during warming.35,36 
Many other examples of ‘patterned’ sympathetic nervous system 
responses to particular stimuli have also been observed.31
The idea that sympathetic efferents innervating different 
target tissues and organs are controlled individually is reflected 
by the fact that each type of sympathetic nerve efferent pos­
sesses an individual ‘physiological signature’, and only responds 
to a unique set of stimuli. For example, sympathetic nerves pro­
jecting to the gastrointestinal tract contain fibers that innervate 
blood vessels and those that innervate motility-regulating 
smooth muscle. However, these two classes of sympathetic 
efferents respond in different manners to different stimuli.
  

Vestibular influences on cardiovascular control during movement 
695
Vasoconstrictor efferents, which regulate blood flow to the gut, 
are silenced by increases in blood pressure and have discharges 
that are synchronized with the respiratory rhythm, but their 
excitability is unaffected by distension of the gut wall.37,38 In 
contrast, motility-regulating fibers, which play no role in con­
trol of blood flow, are unresponsive to blood pressure alterations 
but are strongly excited by distension of the gut wall.38,39 
Clearly, these data demonstrate that the sympathetic nervous 
system is not controlled in an ‘all-or-none’ fashion such that 
each sympathetic efferent is excited or inhibited by the same 
stimuli.
The patterning of vestibulosympathetic reflexes has been 
investigated in anesthetized or decerebrate cats using electrical 
stimulation to activate vestibular afferents. As discussed above 
(see Table 40.2 and Figure 40.1), sympathetic nerves innervat­
ing many different target tissues and organs respond to vestibu­
lar stimulation. However, the sympathetic nerves whose 
activity is influenced by vestibular stimulation all contain vaso­
constrictor efferents. Because excitability of vasoconstrictor 
efferents can be selectively inhibited by increasing blood 
pressure,37”39 the role of these fibers in mediating vestibulo­
sympathetic reflexes can be evaluated by comparing vestibular- 
elicited sympathetic nerve responses when blood pressure is 
normal versus when it is elevated. As illustrated in Figure 40.4, 
the magnitude of vestibulosympathetic reflexes is profoundly 
reduced when blood pressure is elevated.13 Thus, it is likely that 
vestibulo-sympathetic reflexes are predominantly mediated by 
sympathetic fibers innervating blood vessels.
During postural changes, blood flow to the head and brain 
must remain adequate to prevent orthostatic hypotension. 
Because standing in humans and nose-up rotations in 
quadrupeds tend to pull blood towards the lower extremities, it 
would be expected that vasoconstriction in the lower body
would be stronger than in the upper body during these move­
ments. If vestibulosympathetic reflexes participate in orthosta­
tic responses, it would be anticipated that the excitability of 
sympathetic efferents innervating the lower body would be 
more powerfully affected by vestibular inputs than sympathetic 
efferents innervating blood vessels of the upper body. To inves­
tigate this possibility, the relative amplitudes of vestibulo­
sympathetic responses in two nerves known to be made up only 
of vasoconstrictor efferents, the renal40 and external carotid41 
nerves, were compared. Renal nerve responses to vestibular 
stimulation (as a fraction of the maximal nerve response 
elicited by stimulation of the preganglionic part of the nerve) 
were much larger than those of the external carotid nerve.13 
This finding suggests that vasoconstrictor fibers located more 
caudally along the neuraxis may be preferentially influenced by 
vestibular inputs. However, this hypothesis must be explored in 
a more systematic manner in order to be verified.
The demonstration that a precise pattern of sympathetic 
outflow is induced by vestibular stimulation has specific func­
tional implications. Clearly, vestibular signals are not simply 
‘non-specific inputs’ that alter background excitability in the 
sympathetic nervous system. Instead, it appears that vestibulo­
sympathetic reflexes are part of a carefully augmented auto­
nomic response that serves to maintain homeostasis.
Human cardiovascular responses to 
vestibular stimulation
Far fewer data concerning vestibulo-cardiovascular effects are 
available from humans than from animals. This paucity of data 
is mainly a result of the difficulty in performing the appropriate
Figure 40.4 Effects of alterations in blood pressure (BP) on the magnitude of vestibulosympathetic reflexes. BP was increased using an intravenous infusion of the 
a-adrenergic agonist Aramine. (a) Effect of increasing mean BP on averaged vestibulosympathetic responses recorded from the superior mesenteric nerve. The 
five-shock stimulus to the vestibular nerve that elicited the responses was delivered at the latency indicated by the arrow. Note that when BP was high (132mmHg), 
the magnitude of the vestibulo-sympathetic response was markedly less than when BP was near normal (98mmHg). Vertical calibration, 1 pV; time scale, 100 ms.
(b) Correlation between amplitude of the vestibulosympathetic reflex recorded from the superior mesenteric nerve and mean BP. Response amplitudes were 
expressed as a percentage of the maximal response recorded. Different symbols indicate measurements from different animals. The correlation between magnitude 
of responses and BP levels was examined using a linear regression analysis, and shown to be statistically significant (p< 0.05). (Adapted from Kerman and Yates. Am J 
Physiol 1998; 275: R824-35.'3)
  

696 
Vestibular science
control experiments to prove that the apparent effects on the 
sympathetic nervous system are due to activation of 
labyrinthine receptors, and not visceral receptors or baro- 
receptors.42 For example, a number of studies have shown that 
caloric vestibular stimulation can induce changes in blood 
pressure,43 but this stimulus can also result in nausea and dis­
comfort that might lead to psychologically induced cardiovas­
cular effects. Hemmingway44 showed that 150° swinging of 
human subjects has effects on both heart rate and blood pres­
sure, but did not account for the possibility that activation of 
baroreceptors or other visceral receptors could have produced 
the responses. However, this scarcity of evidence from older 
experiments does not suggest that vestibular effects on the car­
diovascular system are absent in humans, but only that these 
responses are difficult to study. Some anecdotal evidence does 
in fact suggest that vestibular actions on the sympathetic 
nervous system may be clinically relevant in humans. In one 
study, blood pressure was monitored in patients with periph­
eral vestibular disease after standing from a supine position, 
and it was noted that a significant fraction of these patients 
were more susceptible to orthostatic hypotension than normal 
subjects.45
Several recent studies have attempted to demonstrate that 
vestibulocardiovascular influences occur in humans. Shortt and 
Ray showed that static head-down neck flexion in prone sub­
jects elicits marked increases in muscle sympathetic nerve 
activity and calf vascular resistance.46 Similarly, Normand et 
al47 showed that the same maneuver triggered decreases in both 
calf and forearm bloodflow. However, unlike most ‘non-specific’ 
stimuli that act on the sympathetic nervous system, head-down 
neck flexion does not produce changes in skin sympathetic out­
flow.48 Alterations in sympathetic outflow do not occur during 
horizontal movements of the head or neck flexion in subjects 
lying on their side; these maneuvers activate receptors in the 
neck, but elicit a different pattern of vestibular inputs than is 
produced during head-down neck flexion in prone subjects. 
Thus, the prominent cardiovascular effects during head flexion 
in prone subjects are not due to stimulation of neck proprio­
ceptors.49,50 Unfortunately, however, these studies have not yet 
fully demonstrated that the responses to head-down neck flex­
ion are due to labyrinthine stimulation. For example, they have 
not discounted the possibility that blood pooling in the head 
during static head-down tilt could have triggered the observed 
cardiovascular changes. Further control experiments will be 
necessary to verify that vestibular stimulation produced by head- 
down neck flexion in humans can affect the cardiovascular 
system.
Another approach that has been used to study potential 
vestibulocardiovascular responses in humans is to record blood 
pressure and heart rate changes during brief pulses of linear 
acceleration. As illustrated in Figure 40.5a, forward and back­
ward linear acceleration of 0.2 g  can induce changes in blood 
pressure of over 15mmHg in some subjects.51 Figure 40.5b 
shows that the interval between heartbeats becomes shorter just 
after acceleration onset (i.e. the heart rate increases), but then
(a)
Time from Acceleration Onset (Sec)
Time from Acceleration Onset (Sec)
Figure 40.5 Cardiovascular responses to linear acceleration in a human subject 
Cardiovascular responses were induced by a forward linear acceleration of 0.2 g, 
attaining a velocity of 2 m/s in 900 ms, and then deaccelerating for 3 s at 
approximately 0.07 g. The subject was seated facing the direction of acceleration 
with head restrained in the upright position, (a) Change in blood pressure 
induced by linear acceleration; note that blood pressure is plotted with respect 
to mean pressure before the onset of the stimulus. The acceleration profile (red 
trace) is superimposed on the blood pressure response (black trace), (b) ECG 
recording during linear acceleration; the acceleration profile (red trace) is 
superimposed on the recording (black trace). Note that the R-R interval (period 
between heartbeats) becomes shorter during the forward acceleration (i.e., the 
heart speeds up), and then becomes longer. (Adapted from Yates et al. Exp Brain 
Res 1999; 125: 476-84.51)
increases after the acceleration is complete. However, linear 
acceleration produces minimal cardiovascular effects in 
labyrinthine-defective subjects, indicating that the responses in 
labyrinth-intact individuals are due to activation of the vestibu­
lar system. The cardiovascular responses to linear acceleration 
do not adapt (become smaller) with repeated stimulus expo­
sures, suggesting that they are not due to non-specific effects 
such as startle. Furthermore, there was no correlation between 
the magnitude of cardiovascular responses to linear acceleration 
and motion sickness susceptibility. These data thus support the 
hypothesis that vestibular influences on cardiovascular control 
in humans are not the result of motion discomfort, but instead 
occur as part of a reflex that acts to stabilize blood pressure 
during changes in posture.
  

Vestibular influences on cardiovascular control during movement 
697
Effects of vestibular lesions on 
orthostatic tolerance
Some of the first evidence suggesting that the vestibular system 
plays an important role in cardiovascular control during move­
ment came from lesion experiments. Doba and Reis52 analyzed 
the effects of transecting the Vlllth cranial nerves on blood 
pressure stability during nose-up tilt in anesthetized, paralyzed 
cats. As shown in Figure 40.6, this experiment demonstrated 
that orthostatic tolerance was drastically reduced by removal of 
vestibular inputs. However, alert animals have more sensory 
inputs (proprioceptive, visual, etc.) available that indicate body 
position in space, and thus may not experience the same deficits 
following vestibular lesions. To examine this possibility, blood 
pressure was monitored during static nose-up rotations up to 
60° in amplitude in alert cats that were trained to lie on a tilt 
table. Changes in blood pressure during tilts were compared 
before and after the Vlllth cranial nerves were transected. As 
illustrated in Figure 40.7, these lesions impaired orthostatic 
tolerance significantly, particularly when the visual environ­
ment also rotated with the animal (thereby eliminating visual 
cues indicating body position in space). However, the deficit in 
adjusting blood pressure during tilt only persisted for about 1 
week after removal of labyrinthine signals, perhaps because the 
animals learned to use other sensory inputs to determine body 
position in space. These findings are consistent with the 
hypothesis that vestibular inputs comprise one of several sen­
sory cues used to trigger compensatory cardiovascular responses 
during movement.
200
150
100
S 
50
Vlllth nerves intact
□ Vlllth nerves transected
10
15
Time Following Tilt 
Onset (sec)
Figure 40.6 Effects of 60° nose-up tilt on blood pressure, in paralyzed and 
anesthetized animals before and after the Vlllth cranial nerves were transected. 
Solid bars represent the averaged results from eight animals, and error bars 
indicate one standard error of the mean. Elimination of vestibular inputs 
significantly (p<0.05, paired Student's f-test) compromised the ability of the 
animals to adjust blood pressure during nose-up tilt. These significant 
differences are indicated by asterisks. (Adapted from Doba and Reis. Circulation 
Res 1974; 34: 9-18.“ )
Pre-Lesion
Post-Lesion 
First Week
Visual Cues Present
Post-Lesion 
Subsequent
e
>
 
*
 
•
Visual Cues Absent
<  10 mm Hg 
1
10-20 mm Hg
□
 >  20 mm Hg
Figure 40.7 Percentage of experimental trials, before and after bilateral 
transection of the Vlllth cranial nerves, in which the maximal change in mean 
blood pressure during 60° nose-up tilt was small (< 10mmHg; depicted by green 
areas), moderate (10-20mmHg; depicted by purple areas), or large (>20mmHg; 
depicted by red areas). Responses recorded before the vestibular lesion, in the 
first week following the lesion, and at subsequent times are shown in different 
columns. Responses from trials in which visual cues concerning body position in 
space were present or eliminated are shown in separate rows. These graphs 
reflect the pooled data from five animals. Before the vestibular lesion, a change 
in blood pressure >20 mmHg (red area in figures) occurred in only a small 
fraction of trials. However, after the vestibular lesion, blood pressure was 
unstable during tilt, particularly when animals were also deprived of visual cues 
regarding body position in space. This deficit in correcting blood pressure during 
body rotations persisted for only about 1 week. (Adapted from Jian et al. JAppI 
Physiol 1999; 86: 1552-60.53)
Cerebellar modulation of 
vestibulosympathetic reflexes
The results discussed above suggest that vestibular signals 
comprise one input to a brainstem ‘integrator’ that evaluates 
parameters of ongoing movements, determines the challenges 
to maintenance of homeostasis provided by those movements, 
and elicits appropriate compensatory autonomic responses. 
Furthermore, this integrator appears to exhibit a great deal of 
plasticity, as evidenced by the observation that recovery from 
the effects of vestibular lesions on cardiovascular control occurs 
over a period of days to weeks.53 Although the neural circuitry 
involved in modulating vestibulo-cardiovascular responses is 
yet to be elucidated, there is considerable evidence to suggest 
that regions of the cerebellum form part of that circuitry. Some 
of this evidence comes from an analysis of the role of the 
cerebellum in modulating other vestibular-elicited reflexes.
  

698 
Vestibular science
Although the cerebellum is not required for the production of 
vestibulo-ocular and vestibulospinal reflexes, it is known to 
modulate the gain of these responses.54 For example, adaptive 
plasticity in the vestibulo-ocular reflex is lost following 
ablations of the flocculonodular lobe of the cerebellum.55 Further 
more, regions of the cerebellum that influence vestibulo­
spinal and vestibulo-ocular reflexes integrate a variety of 
sensory inputs, including vestibular, visual and somatosensory 
signals, such that the reflex characteristics are more complex 
than can be attributed to processing vestibular inputs alone.56 
These observations suggest that cerebellar circuits may also have 
the proper characteristics to modify vestibulocardiovascular 
responses.
Several studies have shown that portions of the cerebellar 
vermis both receive visceral inputs and influence the activity of 
brainstem cardiovascular regulatory circuitry. Most of these 
studies have focused on the role of the caudal cerebellar vermis 
(including the uvula) in autonomic control, although there is 
some evidence that more rostral portions of the vermis and the 
fastigial nucleus may also participate in autonomic regulation 
(see Balaban57 and Balaban and Yates58 for reviews). In anes­
thetized and decerebrate rabbits, electrical stimulation of vis­
ceral afferents in the vagus nerve elicits evoked potentials in 
both the uvula and nodulus.59 The same study also demon­
strated that the nodulus and uvula receive blood pressure- 
related signals from aortic baroreceptors. Anatomical studies 
have suggested that the uvula has direct projections to the 
parabrachial nucleus, which is involved in autonomic control.60 
Stimulation of the uvula, and perhaps the nodulus, also evokes 
changes in heart rate and blood pressure.61-63 Because the uvula 
and other regions of the cerebellar vermis receive powerful 
vestibular inputs and influence cardiovascular control, it is rea­
sonable to speculate that these areas participate in modulating 
vestibulocardiovascular responses. Nonetheless, these is no 
direct evidence to demonstrate that the uvula or other regions 
of the cerebellum that integrate multiple sensory inputs and 
influence cardiovascular control are responsible for triggering 
autonomic adjustments during movement. Future studies will 
be required to elucidate the role of the cerebellum in cardio­
vascular regulation.
Summary and conclusions
Stimulation of vestibular receptors, and in particular otolith 
receptors, during nose-up tilt in quadrupeds (and presumably 
during standing in humans) induces a ‘pattern’ of activation of 
sympathetic efferents innervating vascular smooth muscle. 
Vestibular stimulation has an especially strong effect on the 
excitability of sympathetic fibers innervating blood vessels of 
the lower body. Because standing in human and nose-up tilt in 
quadrupeds tend to induce orthostatic hypotension, vestibulo­
sympathetic reflexes appear to form part of a homeostatic mech­
anism to maintain stable blood pressure during changes in 
posture. In accordance with this hypothesis, animals and
perhaps humans lacking vestibular inputs are more susceptible 
to orthostatic hypotension than normal subjects. However, 
vestibular inputs comprise only one of several sensory inputs 
that are integrated in order to trigger compensatory cardiovas­
cular responses during movement. The cerebellum may play a 
role in controlling blood pressure during movement, as this 
structure receives the appropriate inputs, has the appropriate 
integrative circuitry, and possesses the pertinent outputs to 
accomplish this function.
Acknowledgements
The authors’ research is supported by the National Institutes 
of Health of the United States, grants R01 DC00693, 
R01 
DC03732, and P01 DC03417. M.J.H, B.J.J, I.A.K 
are supported by NASA’s Graduate Student Researcher’s 
Program.
References
1. Yates BJ, Miller AD, Lucot JB. Physiological basis and pharmacology 
of motion sickness: an update. Brain Res Bull 1998; 47: 395-406.
2. Wilson VJ, Melvill Jones G. Mammalian Vestibular Physiology. New 
York: Plenum Press, 1979.
3. Yates BJ. Vestibular influences on cardiovascular control. In: Yates 
BJ, Miller AD, eds. Vestibular Autonomic Regulation. Boca Raton, 
FL:CRC Press, 1996: 97-111.
4. Kramer JM, Waldrop TG. Neural control of the cardiovascular 
system during exercise: an integrative role for the vestibular 
system. J Vestib Res 1998; 8: 71-80.
5. Yates BJ, Miller AD. Physiological evidence that the vestibular 
system participates in autonomic and respiratory control. J Vest 
Res 1998; 8: 17-25.
6. Yates BJ, Miller AD. Vestibular respiratory regulation. In: Miller 
AD, Bianchi AL, Bishop BP, eds. Neural Control of the Respiratory 
Muscles. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1996: 271-83.
7. Furman JM, Jacob RG, Redfem MS. Clinical evidence that the 
vestibular system participates in autonomic control. J Vestib Res
1998; 8: 27-34.
8. Jacob RG, Furman JM, Perel JM. Panic, phobia and vestibular 
dysfunction. In: Yates BJ, Miller AD, eds. Vestibular Autonomic 
Regulation. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1996: 197-227.
9. Jacob RG, Furman JM, Durrant JD, Turner SM. Panic, agorapho­
bia, and vestibular dysfunction. Am J Psychiatry 1996; 153: 
503-12.
10. Furman JM, Jacob RG. Psychiatric dizziness. Neurology 1997; 48: 
1161-6.
11. Hobson JA, Stickgold R, Pace-Schott EF, Leslie KR. Sleep and 
vestibular adaptation: implications for function in microgravity. J 
Vestib Res 1998; 8: 81-94.
12. Money KE, Lackner JR, Cheung RSK. The autonomic nervous 
system and motion sickness. In: Yates BJ, Miller AD, eds. Vestibular 
Autonomic Regulation. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1996:147-73.
  

Vestibular influences on cardiovascular control during movement 
699
13. Kerman I A, Yates BJ. Regional and functional differences in the 
distribution of vestibulosympathetic reflexes. Am J Physiol 1998; 
275: R824-35.
14. Yates BJ, Jakus J, Miller AD. Vestibular effects on respiratory out­
flow in the decerebrate cat. Brain Res 1993; 629: 209-17.
15. Yates BJ, Miller AD. Properties of sympathetic reflexes elicited by 
natural vestibular stimulation: implications for cardiovascular 
control. J Neurophysiol 1994; 71: 2087-92.
16. Rossiter CD, Hayden NL, Stocker SD, Yates BJ. Changes in out­
flow to respiratory pump muscles produced by natural vestibular 
stimulation. J Neurophysiol 1996; 76: 3274-84.
17. Woodring SF, Rossiter CD, Yates BJ. Pressor response elicited by 
nose-up vestibular stimulation in cats. Exp Brain Res 1997; 113: 
165-8.
18. Kerman I A, Yates BJ. Adrenal nerve responses to vestibular nerve 
stimulation in the cat. Soc Neurosci Abst 1996; 22: 92.
19. Yates BJ, Kerman I A. Post-spaceflight orthostatic intolerance: 
possible relationship to microgravity-induced plasticity in the 
vestibular system. Brain Res Rev 1998; 28: 73-82.
20. Yates BJ, Yamagata Y, Bolton PS. The ventrolateral medulla of the 
cat mediates vestibulosympathetic reflexes. Brain Res 1991; 552: 
265-72.
21. Yates BJ, Goto T, Bolton PS. Responses of neurons in the rostral 
ventrolateral medulla of the cat to natural vestibular stimulation. 
Brain Res 1993; 601: 255-64.
22. Yates BJ, Siniaia MS, Miller AD. Descending pathways necessary 
for vestibular influences on sympathetic and inspiratory outflow. 
AmJ Physiol 1995; 268: R1381-5.
23. Yates BJ, Grelot L, Kerman I A, Balaban CD, Jakus J, Miller AD. 
Organization of vestibular inputs to nucleus tractus solitarius and 
adjacent structures in cat brain stem. Am J Physiol 1994; 267: 
R974-83.
24. Steinbacher BC, Yates BJ. Processing of vestibular and other 
inputs by the caudal ventrolateral medullary reticular formation. 
AmJ Physiol 1996; 271: R1070-7.
25. Steinbacher BC, Yates BJ. Brainstem intemeurons necessary for 
vestibular influences on sympathetic outflow. Brain Research 1996; 
720: 204-10.
26. Yates BJ, Balaban CD, Miller AD, Endo K, Yamaguchi Y. Vestibu­
lar inputs to the lateral tegmental field of the cat: potential role in 
autonomic control. Brain Res 1995; 689: 197-206.
27. McAllen RM, Dampney RAL. The selectivity of descending vaso­
motor control by subretrofacial neurons. Prog Brain Res 1989; 81: 
233-42.
28. Dampney RAL, Goodchild AK, McAllen RM. Vasomotor control 
by subretrofacial neurons in the rostral ventrolateral medulla. Can 
J Physiol Pharmacol 1987; 65: 1572-9.
29. Dampney RAL. The subretrofacial vasomotor nucleus—anatomi­
cal, chemical and pharmacological properties and role in cardio­
vascular regulation. Prog Neurobiol 1994; 42: 197-227.
30. Tang PC, Gernandt BE. Autonomic responses to vestibular 
stimulation. Exp Neurol 1969; 24: 558-78.
31. Loewy AD, Spyer KM. Central Regulation of Autonomic Functions. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
32. Bolton PS, Kerman I A, Woodring SF, Yates BJ. Influences of neck
afferents on sympathetic and respiratory nerve activity. Brain Res 
Bull 1998; 47: 413-19.
33. Cannon WB. Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage. New 
York: Harper Torcbooks, 1929.
34. Cannon WB. The Wisdom of the Body. New York: W. W. Norton, 
1963.
35. Iriki M, Simon E. Differential autonomic control of regional cir­
culatory reflexes evoked by thermal stimulation and by hypoxia. 
Austj Exp Biol Med Sci 1973; 51: 283-93.
36. Walther O-E, Iriki M, Simon E. Antagonistic changes of 
blood flow and sympathetic activity in different vascular beds 
following central thermal stimulation. II. Cutaneous and 
visceral sympathetic activity during spinal cord heating and 
cooling in anesthetized rabbits and cats. Pflugers Arch 1970; 319: 
162-84.
37. Bahr R, Bartel B, Blumberg H, Janig W. Functional characteriza­
tion of preganglionic neurons projecting in the lumbar splanchnic 
nerves: vasoconstrictor neurons. J Autonomic Nervous System 
1986; 15: 131-40.
38. Janig W. Spinal cord reflex organization of sympathetic systems. 
Prog Brain Res 1996; 107: 43-77.
39. Bahr R, Bartel B, Blumberg H, Janig W. Functional characteriza­
tion of preganglionic neurons projecting in the lumbar splanchnic 
nerves: neurons regulating motility. J Autonomic Nervous System 
1986; 15: 109-30.
40. Dorward PK, Burke SL, Janig W, Cassell J. Reflex responses to 
baroreceptor, chemoreceptor and nociceptor inputs in single renal 
sympathetic neurones in the rabbit and the effects of anaesthesia 
on them. J Autonomic Nervous System 1987; 18: 39-54.
41. Weaver LC. Organization of sympathetic responses to distension 
of urinary bladder. Am J Physiol 1985; 248: R236-40.
42. Mittelstaedt H. Somatic versus vestibular gravity reception in 
man. Ann N Y A cad Sci 1992; 656: 124-39.
43. Preber L. Vegetative reactions in caloric and rotatory tests. Acta 
Otolaryngol 1958; Suppl 144: 1-119.
44. Hemmingway A. Cardiovascular changes in motion sickness. J 
Aviation Med 1945; 16: 417-21.
45. Ohashi N, Imamura J, Nakagawa H, Mizukoshi K. Blood pressure 
abnormalities as background roles for vertigo, dizziness and 
disequilibrium. Otorhinolaryngology 1990; 52: 355-9.
46. Shortt TL, Ray CA. Sympathetic and vascular responses to 
head-down neck flexion in humans. Am J Physiol 1997; 272: 
HI 780-4.
47. Normand H, Etard O, Denise P. Otolithic and tonic neck recep­
tors control of limb blood flow in humans. J Appl Physiol 1997; 82: 
1734-8.
48. Ray CA, Hume KM, Shortt TL. Skin sympathetic outflow during 
head-down neck flexion in humans. Am J Physiol 1997; 273: 
R1142-6.
49. Ray CA, Hume KM. Neck afferents and muscle sympathetic 
activity in humans: implications for the vestibulosympathetic 
reflex. J Appl Physiol 1998; 84: 450-3.
50. Ray CA, Hume KM, Steele SL. Sympathetic nerve activity during 
natural stimulation of horizontal semicircular canals in humans. 
Am J Physiol 1998; 275: R1274-8.
  

700 
Vestibular science
51. Yates BJ, Aoki M, Burchill P, Bronstein AM, Gresty MA. Cardio­
vascular responses elicited by linear acceleration in humans. Exp 
Brain Res 1999; 125: 476-84.
52. Doba N, Reis DJ. Role of the cerebellum and vestibular apparatus 
in regulation of orthostatic reflexes in the cat. Circulation Res 
1974; 34: 9-18.
53. Jian BJ, Cotter LA, Emanuel BA, Cass SP, Yates BJ. Effects of 
bilateral vestibular lesions on orthostatic tolerance in awake cats. 
J Appl Physiol 1999; 86: 1552-60.
54. MacKay WA, Murphy JT. Cerebellar modulation of reflex gain. 
Prog Neurobiol 1979; 13: 361-417.
55. Robinson DA. Adaptive gain control of vestibuloocular reflex by 
the cerebellum. J Neurophysiol 1976; 39: 954-69.
56. Ito M. The Cerebellum and Neural Control New York: Raven Press, 
1984.
57. Balaban CD. The role of the cerebellum in vestibular autonomic 
function. In: Yates BJ, Miller AD, eds. Vestibular Autonomic 
Regulation. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1996: 127-44.
58. Balaban CD, Yates BJ. Vestibulo-autonomic interactions: a teleo- 
logic perspective. In: Highstein SM, Fay RR, Popper AN, eds. 
Anatomy and Physiology of the Central and Peripheral Vestibular 
System. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2002: in press.
59. Nisimaru N, Katayama S. Projection of cardiovascular afferents to 
the lateral nodulus-uvula of the cerebellum in rabbits. Neurosci 
Res 1995; 21: 343-50.
60. Paton JF, La Noce A, Sykes RM et al. Efferent connections of lobule 
IX of the posterior cerebellar cortex in the rabbit—some functional 
considerations. J Autonomic Nervous System 1991; 36: 209-24.
61. Henry RT, Connor JD, Balaban CD. Nodulus-uvula depressor 
response: central GABA-mediated inhibition of alpha-adrenergic 
outflow. AmJ Physiol 1989; 256: H1601-8.
62. Bradley DJ, Ghelarducci B, Paton JFR, Spyer KM. The cardio­
vascular responses elicited from the posterior cerebellar cortex in 
the anesthetized and decerebrate rabbit. J Physiol 1987; 383: 
537-50.
63. Bradley DJ, Pascoe JP, Paton JFR, Spyer KM. Cardiovascular and 
respiratory responses evoked from the posterior cerebellar cortex 
and fastigial nucleus in the cat. J Physiol 1987; 393: 107-21.
64 Cobbold AF, Megirian D, Sherrey JH. Vestibular evoked activ- 
ity in autonomic motor outflows. Arch ltal Biol 1968; 106: 
113-23.
65 Ishikawa T, Miyazawa T. Sympathetic responses evoked by 
vestibular stimulation and their interactions with somato- 
sympathetic reflexes. J Autonomic Nervous System 1980; 1: 
243-54.
66 Uchino Y, Kudo N, Tsuda K, Iwamura Y. Vestibular inhibition of 
sympathetic nerve activities. Brain Res 1970; 22: 195-206.
67 Megirian D, Manning J W. Input-output relations in the vestibular 
system. Arch ltal Biol 1967; 105: 15-30.
  

The physiology of the 
vestibulo-ocular reflex
Bernard Cohen, Martin Gizzi
Overview
Angular and linear accelerations are encountered with virtually 
every movement. The vestibular system senses these accelera­
tions and uses the information to perform a number of clearly 
defined functions that maintain stability of the body, head and 
eyes in three-dimensional space. The vestibulo-ocular reflex 
(VOR) acts as a guidance system for the visual system. Utilizing 
both angular and linear components, the VOR stabilizes gaze by 
moving the eyes so that they compensate for head and body 
movement. This ‘fixes’ images on the retina, enabling clear 
sight. The VOR also ‘orients’ the eyes toward linear accelera­
tion, which tends to maintain the position of the retina with 
regard to the spatial or gravitational vertical and aligns them 
with the linear acceleration generated during movement. The 
visual and somatosensory systems interact with the vestibular 
system and contribute to the perception of movement and to 
the production of compensatory eye movements. From the 
combined input of these sensory systems, the brain fashions a 
sense of spatial orientation. Vestibulospinal and vestibulocollic 
(neck) reflexes provide postural control during standing and 
help stabilize the body during walking and running. There are 
also important vestibular-autonomic functions. Heart and res­
piratory rates are altered to maintain blood pressure every time 
we stand erect. It is not surprising, therefore, that lesions of a 
system that has such protean functions can cause frightening or 
disabling symptoms or that physicians have been intrigued by 
the causes and treatment of vertigo for thousands of years. The 
purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview of the physi­
ology of the VOR to provide a basis for understanding its func­
tions and its disorders.
The vestibular labyrinth
The vestibular apparatus and the cochlea make up the inner 
ear, and are contained within the bony labyrinth in the petrous 
portion of the temporal bone (Figure 41.1). There are three 
principal portions of the labyrinth: the semicircular canals, the
otolith organs and the cochlea. The central vestibule contains 
the otolith organs, the utricle and saccule. The membranous 
canals, which are filled with the viscous endolymph, lie in the 
bony canals surrounded by perilymph. At one end of each semi­
circular canal is a bulge known as the ampulla, which holds 
the sensory apparatus. At the base of the ampulla is the crista, 
which contains the neurons and the sensory epithelium. The 
sensory epithelium—made up of hair cells and supporting 
cells—is covered by a gelatinous mass, called the cupula, which 
extends across the diameter of the ampulla (Figure 41.2a). The 
cupula closes the canal, restricting the flow of endolymph. 
When the head is turned, the motion of the endolymph within 
the semicircular canals causes the cupula to move like a 
diaphragm, deflecting the hair cells embedded in the cupula 
(Figure 41.2b). This process underlies sensing angular move­
ment of the head (Figure 41.2b, c).
The maculae of the otolith organs, the utricle and saccule, 
resemble inertial accelerometers. Each consists of hair cells, 
nerve fibers that innervate them, and an overlying gelatinous 
substance in which the otoliths are embedded (Figure 41.2d). 
The structure of the otolith organs differs significantly from the 
crista of the semicircular canals in that calcium carbonate 
C a(C 03)2 crystals, which form the otoliths or otoconia, are 
embedded over the hair cells in the gelatinous mucopolysac­
charide matrix. Initially during development, the calcium car­
bonate is laid down as calcite,1 but in the adult it is converted 
to aragonite, a denser form of the mineral. A scanning elec- 
tronmicrograph of the otoconia of a ground squirrel with poly­
morphic aragonite crystals is shown in Figure 41.3. Since the 
specific gravity of the crystals is greater than that of the 
endolymph, they are displaced in the direction of the gravity 
when the head is tilted, bending the hair cells (Figure 41.2e). 
Their inertia and the fluid in which they are embedded also 
cause them to lag and bend the hair cells away from the direc­
tion of linear acceleration when the head is translated (moved 
linearly) forward-and-back, side-to-side or up-and-down (Fig­
ure 41.2f). The utricular macula is oriented roughly horizon­
tally, and the saccular macula is roughly vertical (Figure 41.42), 
although both have substantial curvature.3 Thus, the saccule is

702 
Vestibular science
Right labyrinth
(a)
Anterior
canal
Lateral canal
Posterior canal 
Rouncj
window
Ductus reunions 
Pars inferior
Cochlea
Posterior
canal
Central
vestibule
Oval window
Utricle
Pars superior
Lateral
canal
Bony labyrinth
Membranous labyrinth 
Anterior canal 
Ampulla
duct
Cochlea
Figure 41.1 Bony structure of the right labyrinth (a), exploded in (b) to show membranous canals and the otolith organs, the saccule and utricle. (Adapted from 
Hudspeth. 5c/ Am 1983; 248: 54-64.89).
well equipped to sense vertical head acceleration and the con­
stant pull of gravity, whereas the utricles sense linear head 
motion in the horizontal plane. The utricles also play an impor­
tant role in signaling the spatial upright when the head is tilted 
with regard to gravity.
Hair cells
There are two general classes of hair cells in both the canals and 
otolith organs. These are the goblet-shaped, type 1 hair cells, 
and the cylindrical, type 2 hair cells (Figure 41.5). Type 1 hair 
cells are surrounded by chalice-like nerve endings that ensure 
secure synaptic transmission.4 Type 1 cells tend to be clustered 
at the top of the cristae of the canals or along the striola on the 
surface of the maculae of the utricle and saccule (Figure 41.6). 
Type 2 hair cells lie along the slopes of the crista and laterally 
on the maculae. Whether a stimulus raises or lowers the resting 
potential of a hair cell depends on the orientation of that cell 
with regard to the stimulus. Each hair cell has a cluster of stereo- 
cilia that are short on one end of the cell and gradually 
increase in length on the opposite end. The stereocilia create a 
surface that slopes upward and ends at the solitary kinocilium 
(Figure 41.5). Deflection of the stereocilia toward the kinocil­
ium leads to depolarization and an increased firing rate in the 
eighth nerve; deflection away from the kinocilium leads to 
hyperpolarization and a decreased firing rate in the nerve;
orthogonal deflections have no effect.5-7 This principle of exci­
tation holds for hair cells in both the cristae of the semicircular 
canals and maculae of the otolith organs. The hair cells of the 
semicircular canals have the same orientation on the crista so 
that they are all excited or inhibited by the flow of endolymph 
in the same direction (Figure 41.6a). This is in contrast to the 
hair cells on the maculae of the utricle and saccule, which have 
different orientations. The striola, the region where the excita­
tory direction of polarization of the hair cells is reversed (Figure 
41.6b), forms a line across the middle of both of the otolith 
organs. Uchino et al8 have shown that cells with opposite polar­
ization vectors, which lie on opposite sides of the striola, are 
simultaneously excited or inhibited when the head is moved. 
An interposed neuron in the vestibular nuclei converts the 
inhibition from the hair cells on one side of the striola to exci­
tation in the vestibular nuclei and feeds back the activity onto 
cells receiving input from the other side of the macula. Thus, 
the inputs from both sides of the striola are coordinated in the 
central vestibular system, and a common excitatory or 
inhibitory direction is produced from each macula.
An extensive network of nerve fibers connects the various 
types of hair cells in most parts of the crista as well as in the 
maculae (Figure 41.6)9,10 This pattern of connectivity may 
account for some of the discharge characteristics of the hair 
cells.11,12 The discharge of type 1 cells tends to be irregular, 
whereas type 2 cells exhibit a more regular discharge rate. This 
difference has been formalized using a coefficient of variation
  

The physiology of the vestibulo-ocular reflex 
703
Comp, eye mov't
Translation
acceleration
Figure 41.2 (a-c) Representation of the semicircular canal with stereocilia and kinocilia of hair cells on crista embedded in the cupula, (a) Position of the hair cells 
and cupula with the head stationary, (b) During head acceleration in the clockwise direction, the inertia of the endolymph causes the cupula and hair cell cilia to 
deflect in the counterclockwise direction, (c) Head rotation to the right about the yaw or long body axis produces a compensatory eye movement to the left over 
the angular vestibulo-ocular reflex (aVOR). (d) Representation of the utricular macula with the head upright, showing hair cells, otolithic membrane and otoconia, (e) 
Head tilt to the left causes movement of the otoconia in the direction of gravitational force (g), deflecting the sterocilia and kinocilia of the hair cells. The eyes 
counter-roll against the head tilt, which tends to maintain the relative position of the retina in space, (f) Linear translation of the head to the right (arrow over 
head) causes similar deflection of the otoconia and hair cells to the left. For sudden, high-frequency head movements, the linear vestibulo-ocular reflex (IVOR) 
produces a compensatory eye movement to the left. (Adapted from Hudspeth. Sci Am 1983; 248: B4-64.89)
based on the resting frequency.13,14 It has been postulated that 
the irregularly firing type 1 hair cells, which lie along central 
portions of the crista (Figure 41.6a, CENT), are largely respon­
sible for producing bursts or pulses of activity that help initiate 
compensatory head movement when the canals are stimulated.15 
The regularly firing type 2 hair cells, which are located more 
peripherally on the crista (Figure 41.6a, PER), appear to be 
more important for generating eye movements through the 
VOR.16 Type 1 hair cells are more seriously damaged by oto­
toxic drugs than are type 2 cells. This may explain why it is 
relatively rare for vestibulo-ocular function to be completely 
lost after administration of ototoxic drugs.
Both type 1 and 2 hair cells receive efferent feedback from 
the brain. The efferent fibers synapse on the chalice-type nerve 
endings that innervate type 1 hair cells, whereas they make 
direct synaptic contact with type 2 hair cells (Figure 41.5). 
Although the functional significance of this difference in 
efferent endings is unknown, both excitatory and inhibitory 
effects on afferent input from the semicircular canals have 
been produced by stimulation of the efferent system. There is 
broad divergence in the efferent system, with 150000 fibers 
originating from just 15000 cells. This would appear to pre­
clude specificity and to favor a general effect when the system 
is excited.
  

704 
Vestibular science
Figure 41.3 Scanning electronmicrograph of otoconia of the ground squirrel, 
showing polymorphic aragonite crystals of calcium carbonate (Ca(C03)2). 
(Courtesy of Anna Lysakowski.)
Angular vestibulo-ocular reflex 
(a VOR)
Ocular compensation for angular head movement originates in 
the semicircular canals. When the head turns, angular acceler­
ation induces movement of the endolymph relative to the walls 
of the membranous canals. The fluid presses against the cupula, 
causing it to bend and deflect the stereocilia and kinocilia of 
the hair cells embedded in the cupula. In turn, this opens or 
closes ion channels at the tips of the stereocilia through tiplinks 
(Figure 41.5).17 K+, Ca2+ and Cl currents are generated in the 
hair cells and raise or lower the resting potential of the hair 
cells, activating synapses between the hair cells and fibers in the 
vestibular portion of the eighth nerve. This activation causes an 
increase or decrease in the resting discharge of the afferent 
fibers, signaling to the brain that the head is moving. Compen­
satory eye movements are then generated over the angular 
VOR (aVOR) to counter angular head movements and hold 
gaze stable in space. Vestibulocollic (neck) reflexes produce 
compensatory head movements and vestibulospinal reflexes
Figure 41.5 Type 1 and type 2 hair cells. (Adapted from Wersall and Bagger- 
Sjoback. In: Kornhubar, ed. Handbook of Sensory Physiology. Berlin: Springer 
Verlag, 1974; 123-70.90)
readjust the position of the limbs to counter these accelerations 
and maintain postural stability.
The canal-ocular reflex is uniquely suited to respond 
rapidly and with precision over a wide range of angular acceler-
Figure 41.4 Orientation of the utricles and saccules in the head. (From Miller. 
Acta otolaryngol 1962; 54: 479-501.2)
Kinocilium
Sterocilia 
Tip link
Cuticle
Type I hair cell 
Type II hair cell
Efferent
nerve
ending
Afferent
nerve
ending
Supporting
cell
Nerve chalice 
Synaptic bar
Efferent 
nerve ending
  

The physiology of the vestibulo-ocular reflex 
705
Figure 41.6 Diagram of innervation of semicircular canal crista (a) and 
utricular macula (b). (a) The crista is divided into central (CENT), intermediate 
(INT) and peripheral (PER) zones, as shown in the diagram on the right. The 
horizontal line in the diagram shows the plane of section, (b) The macula of the 
utricle is divided into striolar and juxtastriolar zones and an extrastriolar zone. 
The plane of section is shown by the line in the diagram below. The striola is the 
region where the hair cells reverse their orientation on the macula (dashed 
vertical line). The arrows on each side of the dashed line show the direction of 
deflection of the sterocilia and kinocilia that causes excitation. As with the 
semicircular canals, afferent fibers are excited when the stereocilia are bent 
toward the kinocilium. In both the crista (a) and macula (b), fibers terminate in 
boutons (b) or calyces (c). Type 1 hair cells and calyces (black) are more 
commonly located over the crest of the ampulla and near the striola. Type 2 
(cylindrical) hair cells (white) and boutons are present in higher density 
eccentrically on both structures. (Adapted from Goldberg et al. Ann NY Acad Sci 
1992; 656: 92-107.91)
ations, from about 1%2 to 10000%2. Low accelerations are nor­
mally present while swaying when standing erect, and higher 
accelerations are present during lateral gaze shifts when the 
head moves rapidly to the side. Normal head movements gen­
erally fall in a frequency range from 0.1 to 8-10 Hz (0.1 Hz indi­
cates a movement repetition rate of once in 10 s, while 8 Hz is 
a repetition rate of 8/s). Compensatory eye movements can 
either be smooth or interspersed with oppositely directed rapid 
eye movements. When there are slow and rapid eye move­
ments, they form a pattern that is known as nystagmus. The 
slow phases represent the sensory portion of the movement, 
because vestibular input related to head motion is processed
during the slow phases, and the induced slow-phase eye velocity 
is a function of the velocity of the stimulus. The quick phases are 
largely restorative, resetting the eyes for the next slow phase. 
They also function to direct gaze in the direction of turning. 
Thus, during vestibular nystagmus, the average position of the 
eyes during the slow and quick phases is usually toward the 
direction in which the subject is moving. The same principle 
holds for nystagmus induced by visual motion, known as opto­
kinetic nystagmus (OKN). Slow phases are produced in 
response to motion of the visual surround, and quick phases are 
restorative. The velocity of the eyes during the quick phases is 
determined solely by the size of the movement, and the brain is 
insensitive to visual input while they are in progress. Typical 
horizontal OKN in response to a horizontally moving, visual 
stimulus is shown in Figure 41.7b. This is similar to the 
‘parade’ nystagmus originally described by Purkinje.18,19 Vestibu­
lar nystagmus induced by rotation about a vertical axis in light 
has similar characteristics.
When the head is rotated, each canal that has a vector 
of angular acceleration along its canal axis responds. Because 
of the mechanical characteristics of the endolymph and 
cupula of the canals, an integration is performed on the head 
acceleration in the canals and the frequency of firing in the 
vestibular nerve is related to head velocity, not to head acceler­
ation.13,20 The mean resting discharge of semicircular canal 
nerves in many species, including the monkey, is about 90 
impulses/s.21 It is likely to be about the same in humans. When 
the head is stationary, both nerves should have approximately 
the same discharge rate. When the discharge rates between the 
two nerves are balanced, their inputs cancel, and the sum rep­
resents zero velocity, signaling to the brain that the head is 
motionless. As the head moves in the excitatory direction of 
one of the canals, impulse rates in that canal rise, reaching 
saturation frequencies of approximately 400-450 impulses/s. 
This covers rates of angular head velocities up to 800%. For 
movement in the inhibitory direction, impulse rates fall from 
90 impulses/s toward zero. Since the resting discharge is not 
midway between 0 and 450 impulses/s, there is potentially a 
much larger representation of velocities in the excitatory direc­
tion. This asymmetry is not apparent when the reciprocal pairs 
of canals are functioning in a normal individual, because of 
their push-pull interaction. That is, when the head moves to 
one side, excitation from the canal on that side is supplemented 
by inhibition in the canal in the same plane on the other side. 
After a unilateral lesion has inactivated the labyrinth on one 
side, however, head movements to the side ipsilateral to the 
lesion will be sensed only by inhibition of the resting discharge 
rate on the contralateral side. Consequently, the range of fre­
quencies sensing such stimulation will be more limited than for 
movements in the contralateral direction. This asymmetry was 
first noted by Ewald in his classic monograph on effects of canal 
stimulation and canal plugging in pigeons.22 It forms the basis 
for a useful bedside test for detecting unilateral lesions that has 
been proposed by Halmagyi and colleagues23-25 and is described 
below.
  

706 
Vestibular science
(a)
(d)
(b)
25
-25
25
.tJ Q-
8 ^  
o
“25
(c)
If)
Yaw eye velocity 
(head frame)
Pitch eye velocity 
(head frame)
Yaw eye velocity 
(head frame)
35d/s
Pitch eye velocity 
1 
(head frame)
Spatial
vertical
35d/s
Direction of 
motion
Velocity vector
Figure 41.7 Movement of the visual surround at 35°/s about the head yaw axis when this axis is aligned with gravity (a) produced the optokinetic nystagmus shown 
in (b). The slow phases of nystagmus had no vertical component, and the eyes rotated about a spatially vertical axis. Thus, the slow-phase velocity vectors (dots) 
aligned with the spatial vertical (c). When the same stimulus was given with regard to the yaw axis of the head, but the head was tilted 45° with regard to gravity
(d), a vertical component appeared in the nystagmus (e, bottom trace). This caused the axis of eye rotation and the vector of eye velocity to shift toward the 
gravitational vertical. In (f), the tilt of the head is shown by the directions of yaw and pitch eye velocity axes in a head coordinate frame (solid lines) with regard to 
the spatial vertical (dashed vertical line). The dots represent the slow-phase velocity vectors of the nystagmus in (d) with regard to both the head tilt and spatial 
vertical. The solid oblique line shows the mean vector. Note that the slow-phase eye velocity vector tended to alignment with the gravito-inertial acceleration 
(spatial vertical) (From Gizzi et al. Exp Brain Res 1994; 99: 347-60.47)
Planar organization of the canal 
system
Although there are six semicircular canals, both lateral canals 
and each anterior and the contralateral posterior canal lie in 
planes that are approximately parallel (Figure 41.8). Thus, the
canals form three reciprocal pairs that sense head angular 
movement in planes, which are approximately orthogonal to 
each other. These have been called the lateral, RALP (right 
anterior-left posterior) and LARP (left anterior-right poste­
rior) planes.26 When the head rotates in a direction that causes 
excitation in the fibers of the nerve from one lateral canal, for
  

The physiology of the vestibulo-ocular reflex 
707
A  N°se
/ 
\
t 
\
Figure 41.8 Approximate planes of the semicircular canals in the head. The 
lateral canals lie approximately parallel to each other, as do the left anterior 
and right posterior canal (LARP) and the right anterior and left posterior canals 
(RALP). The arrows show the direction of head movement that causes excitation 
in each canal. (From Yakushin. Labyrinthine Control of the Vestibular-Ocular Reflex 
in Three Dimensions. Brooklyn, New York: CUNY, 1996: p 241,92)
instance, the reciprocal lateral canal nerve in the same plane in 
the contralateral labyrinth has a decrease in activity. The same 
is true for each anterior and contralateral posterior canal. All 
angular head movements are coded in the vestibular nuclei and 
vestibulocerebellum in these three semicircular canal planes. 
The planar organization was obviously highly successful in an 
evolutionary sense, and the six-canal system is highly conserved 
and present over a wide range of phytogeny. The same canal 
structure is present is cartilaginous fish (sharks and rays) and 
primates, a span of development covering several hundred mil­
lion years. Even dinosaur skulls have a similar three-canal struc­
ture (Clarke, personal communication).
The excitatory directions for eye movements induced 
from the individual canals were derived by electrically stimu­
lating the canals and recording the induced eye and head 
movements.27,28 Data from the cat are shown in Figure 41.9. 
For the lateral canals, activity increases in the canal nerve 
when the head is turned toward the same side, causing a 
movement to the contralateral side. Thus, moving the head 
to the left causes an increase in activity in the nerve from the 
left lateral canal (LLC) and a decrease in activity in the nerve 
from the right lateral canal (RLC), and vice versa. The anterior 
and posterior canals, which also receive a component of angular 
acceleration during a lateral head movement, have reciprocal 
increases and decreases in the activity of their canal nerves. 
Together, all six canals drive the eyes to the right for leftward 
head movement, so that gaze is constant in space. The anterior
Figure 41.9 Directions of head movement that cause excitation of individual 
i. When the head moves to the left, the left lateral canal (LLC) is excited, 
with the vertical canals. When the head moves up and to the left, the left 
posterior canal (LPC) is excited, and when it moves down, the left anterior canal 
is excited (LAC). The reciprocal canal on the other side is inhibited. Other 
combinations are shown for upward head movement (RPC + LPC), downward 
head movement (RAC + LAC) and tilt of the head to the left in roll (LAC + LPC). 
(From Suzuki et al. Exp Neurol 1964; 9: 137-60.28)
canals are primarily activated when the forehead moves down 
during a head movement in the sagittal plane, and activity from 
the posterior canals is inhibited (RAC & LAC). The reverse 
occurs when the forehead moves up (RPC & LPC).
The three reciprocal canal planes are only approximately 
orthogonal. In humans, the lateral canals are tilted up anteri­
orly about 30° from the horizontal stereotaxic plane (the plane 
made by the line between the inferior orbital ridge of the eye 
and the external auditory canal) and from Reid’s line. (Reid’s 
line is the plane defined by the lateral canthus of the eye and 
the external auditory meatus.) The vertical canals are tilted 
posteriorly about 40° from the horizontal stereotaxic plane. 
Therefore, they are about 10° from being perpendicular to the 
lateral canals. As a result of the upward tilt of the lateral and 
vertical canals relative to the head horizontal, the vertical 
canals receive a component of force during all horizontal head 
movements and actively participate in producing the horizon­
tal aVOR.13,20,22 There is very little participation of the lateral 
canals, however, during pitch head movements.
In practice, it is possible to move the head in specific direc­
tions to test for the function of specific pairs of semicircular 
canals. Halmagyi and Curthoys23 developed a bedside maneuver 
utilizing such movements. The basis for the test lies in Ewald’s 
‘Second Law’, i.e. in the asymmetry between firing rates in the 
excitatory and inhibitory directions, described above. Rotating 
the head back and forth around the long axis of the body, as if 
to say ‘No’ (yaw rotation), activates primarily the lateral canals
  

708 
Vestibular science
(a)
PRIMARY AFEERENTS
(b)
VESTIBULO-OCULAR PATHWAYS
Horiz + Ant canal 
Post canal 
Saccule
O  
Utricle
Modulus
Figure 41.10 (a) Pattern of termination of the left vestibular nerve in the left vestibular nuclei. Canal projections are represented by stripes (LC and AC) and dots (PC). 
Utricular input is shown by open circles, and saccular input by triangles. Zone I is the only area receiving input from all canals and otoliths. In the superior vestibular 
nucleus (sv), canal afferents have individual sites of termination and project to the interstitial nucleus of the vestibular nerve (int). Fibers supplying peripheral sv 
continue on to the nodulus and uvula. The utricle terminates mainly in the medial vestibular nuclei (mv) and the sacculus in the ventral y-group. Additional 
abbreviations: ppH, prepositus hypoglossi nucleus; iv, inferior vestibular nucleus; Iv, lateral vestibular nucleus, (b) Direct pathways from the vestibular nuclei with 
dominant canal inputs, and their projections to individual eye muscle motoneurons. In monkey and cat, there are also collaterals to other motoneurons. The crossing 
pathways are excitatory and, with the exception of the ascending tract of Deiters (ATD), the ipsilateral projections are inhibitory. Additional abbreviations: n, nerve; 
IR, inferior rectus; 10, inferior oblique; SR, superior rectus; MR, medial rectus; SO, superior oblique; MLF, medial longitudinal fasciculus; H, horizontal or lateral; P, 
posterior; A, anterior; BC, brachium conjunctivum; CVTT, crossing ventral tegmental tract. (From Buettner-Ennever. Ann NYAcadSci 1992; 656: 363-78.30)
(Figure 41.9, LLC). Nodding the head forward, around an 
interaural axis, as if to say ‘Yes’ (pitch rotation), activates all 
four vertical canals plus the otolith organs, which also respond 
to changes in head position with regard to gravity. Nodding the 
head around an axis shifted 45° from the interaural axis, so that 
one temple moves down and the contralateral mastoid moves 
up, moves the head in the plane of one anterior and contra­
lateral posterior canal. The opposite movement activates the 
reverse anterior and posterior canal pair. If the horizontal, 
vertical and torsional components of the movement of each eye 
are recorded during brief head movements of high angular 
acceleration (5000-10 000°/s2), it is possible to identify mal­
function of single canals, based on an absence of compensatory
movement in the plane of a single canal or of a canal pair.24,25 
The same is not true for the otolith organs, where the directions 
of polarization of the hair cells vary widely over each receptor. 
This gives each otolith organ the potential for sensing gravito- 
inertial acceleration in many directions, but it complicates the 
understanding of central vestibular processing of otolith infor­
mation as well as detection of lesions of the otolith organs.
The central vestibular system
A detailed description of the central vestibular system is beyond 
the scope of this chapter (see Brodal, Buettner-Ennever, and
  

The physiology of the vestibulo-ocular reflex 
709
Highstein and McCrea31 for reviews). Some salient features of 
central vestibular organization and connectivity will be men­
tioned, however. The vestibular nuclei are generally separated 
into four main divisions, the superior, medial, lateral and infe­
rior (or descending) vestibular nuclei—SVN, MVN, LVN and 
IVN, respectively. Afferent axons from the semicircular canals 
and otolith organs are widely distributed in the vestibular 
nuclei (Figure 41.10a). When the axons enter the vestibular 
nuclei, they bifurcate and send one axon rostrally and another 
caudally. The anterior canal projects heavily into the SVN, and 
all six canals send afferents into the MVN, ventral LVN and 
IVN. The otolith organs also send axons into the SVN, MVN, 
and IVN. There is some spatial separation between the parts of 
the vestibular nuclei that control various functions. The VOR 
is processed through rostral portions of the MVN and SVN. 
Vestibulospinal pathways arise from more caudal portions of the 
MVN, from dorsal portions of the LVN, and from the IVN. 
Vestibular-autonomic pathways are clustered in caudal parts of 
the MVN and IVN. There are also extensive connections 
between the vestibular nuclei and the flocculus, paraflocculus, 
nodulus and uvula. In fact, the vestibular nuclei have frequently 
been thought of as the deep cerebellar nuclei for these portions 
of the cerebellar cortex.
The classic vestibulo-ocular arc is composed of three neu­
rons,32 one from the semicircular canals, a secondary neuron in 
the vestibular nuclei, which transmits the information to the 
eye muscle motor nuclei, and the motor neuron itself. The loca­
tion of second-order neurons in the vestibular nuclei, which are 
responsible for producing the aVOR, and the projections of 
their axons to the various oculomotor nuclei are shown in Fig­
ure 41.10b. One of these pathways will be illustrated here. Yaw 
or horizontal head movement causes the eyes to move conju­
gate^ to the opposite side to oppose the angular deviation of 
the head. Activity primarily from the lateral canals, but also 
from the anterior and posterior canals, excites ‘tonic-vestibular- 
pause neurons’ which lie in the rostral portions of the MVN. 
These TVP neurons project directly to the contralateral 
abducens nucleus onto lateral rectus motoneurons,31 which 
cause the contralateral eye to abduct. The TVP neurons also 
send activity to abducens intemuclear neurons in the con­
tralateral abducens nucleus. Abducens intemuclear neurons 
send their axons back across the mid-line in the medial longi­
tudinal fasciculus (MLF) to the medial rectus motor neurons in 
the ipsilateral oculomotor (Illrd) nucleus. This causes the ipsi­
lateral eye to adduct to complete the contralateral compen­
satory movement. Abducens intemuclear neurons also receive 
activity from burst neurons in the pontine reticular formation 
that produce adduction during saccadic eye movements. 
Lesions of the MLF cause paresis or paralysis of adduction or 
inter-nuclear ophthalmoplegia (INO). The medial longitudinal 
fasciculus also carries activity from secondary vestibular neu­
rons to the vertical and oblique eye muscles, and lesions in this 
region also cause deficits in the vertical aVOR.
LVN also receives canal input in its ventral portion, but 
only the otoliths project into the dorsal portions of the LVN,
which is known as Deiter’s nucleus. Deiter’s cells are very large, 
and their axons form the lateral vestibulospinal tract that pro­
duces extension of the ipsilateral limbs. The Deiter’s cells 
receive heavy inhibitory input from the anterior lobe of the 
cerebellum that modulates and relaxes limb extension.33 After 
anterior lobe lesions, the inhibitory input is reduced, and there 
is characteristic extension of the limbs, causing ‘decerebrate 
rigidity’.
Velocity-to-position integration
It has been postulated that signals related to angular velocity 
from the semicircular canals, coding head velocity in space, are 
mathematically integrated in the vestibular nuclei or the adja­
cent brainstem to produce a signal for the eye muscle motor 
neurons that is related to eye position in the orbit.34 This 
process has been called ‘velocity-to-position integration’. The 
velocity-to-position integrator is critical for holding the eyes in 
eccentric positions in the orbit after saccades and is probably 
utilized by the linear VOR to convert signals related to linear 
head velocity in the central vestibular system to signals related 
to eye position in the orbit.35 Deficits in velocity-to-position 
integration are manifest by a characteristic deficit in holding 
eccentric gaze, known as gaze-evoked nystagmus. When 
patients with this deficit look eccentrically (laterally, up, or 
down), instead of the eyes being maintained in the eccentric 
position, they drift slowly back toward the mid-line due to the 
unopposed mechanical stiffness of the eye muscles. These drifts 
are the slow phases of gaze-evoked nystagmus, which are inter­
spersed with quick phases that restore the eccentric position. 
Such nystagmus is a function of the position of the eyes in 
the orbit, and the nystagmus is more vigorous, i.e. of greater 
amplitude and frequency, the further the eyes are from the mid­
line. Gaze-evoked nystagmus is in contrast to spontaneous 
nystagmus, which is usually due to an underlying vestibular 
imbalance that causes the eyes to drift to one side, regardless of 
their orbital position. Eye velocity is quite different during these 
different types of nystagmus. The slow phases of spontaneous 
nystagmus are linear, and eye velocity is generally constant, 
whereas during gaze-evoked nystagmus, the slow phases are 
curved, and eye velocity decreases in an exponential fashion as 
the eyes move toward the mid-position.
Velocity storage
During constant-velocity rotation, the hair cells are initially 
deflected but soon return to their resting position. This has 
been modeled by a second-order system with a time constant of 
3.5-5 s.36 When activity of axons in the semicircular canal 
nerves was recorded, it became clear that the firing rates of the 
afferent axons, which provide the input to the VOR from the 
semicircular canals, decayed more rapidly during constant- 
velocity rotation than did the nystagmus that was induced by
  

710 
Vestibular science
the same stimulus.13,37,38 Comparative time constants of decline 
in the monkey are 4-5 s for activity from the canals and 15-20 
s for the decline in nystagmus slow-phase velocity in response 
to the same stimulus. Recent evidence indicates that the 
human canal time constant is also ~4 s,39 while the nystagmus 
time constant is usually 12-20 s. This has led to the recognition 
that there is a central neural network that holds or stores activ­
ity coming from the labyrinth, prolonging the response to low- 
frequency rotation.
From modeling, it has been shown that the aVOR can be 
considered to be composed of two components. The first is the 
short-latency response that stabilizes gaze for high-frequency 
head movements, which has been considered in some detail 
above. A second, slower component has been modeled as a 
leaky integrator that stores eighth nerve activity and outputs a 
velocity command to produce slow-phase velocity, called 
Velocity storage’.37,38,40 This integrator is separate from that 
which produces velocity-to-position integration.41 The domi­
nant time constant of the aVOR largely reflects the velocity 
storage time constant, not the time constant of afferent activity 
coming from the semicircular canals, which is shorter. Velocity 
storage aids ocular compensation during low-frequency head or 
head-and-body movements, either in light or in the absence of 
vision.35,38,40 When subjects rotate in light at a constant veloc­
ity, for example, vestibular input at the onset of rotation moves 
the eyes rapidly to an appropriate compensatory velocity. As 
rotation continues, however, the input from the canals ceases, 
and visual input, related to slip of the surround on the retina, 
generates OKN. This stabilizes images on the retina while the 
head is moving, and produces optokinetic after-nystagmus 
(OKAN) that counteracts the after-response of the semicircu­
lar canals when rotation ceases. Velocity storage is also acti­
vated by the somatosensory system42 and by otolithic input 
during rotation about tilted axes43 to provide a signal related to 
head and body velocity in space. Such activity is used to gener­
ate compensatory gaze velocity during locomotion when there 
is an angular component.
An interesting aspect of velocity storage is that it is spa­
tially oriented.35,44”46 If subjects are upright so that their yaw or 
body axis is aligned with gravity (Figure 41.7a), visual or 
vestibular stimuli around the long axis of the body produce 
purely horizontal eye movements (Figure 41.7b). Since eye 
movements are rotations of a globe in the orbit, these are rota­
tions of the eyeballs around axes that are close to the spatial 
vertical (Figure 41.7c). If subjects are tilted when the stimuli 
around the yaw axis are given (Figure 41.7d), however, a ver­
tical component appears (Figure 41.7e). This shifts the axis of 
rotation of the eyes so that it tends to align with the spatial ver­
tical rather than with the yaw axis of the head and body (Fig­
ure 41.70* Alignment toward the vector sum of the linear 
accelerations acting on the head, labeled gravito-inertial accel­
eration (GIA) occurs during both vestibular-induced nystag­
mus46 and OKN.47 In both cases, it depends on the spatial 
orientation of velocity storage in the vestibular nuclei (see 
Raphan and Cohen ’ for review). Alignment of eye velocity
or of the axis of eye rotation to the GIA is important for 
stabilization of gaze during locomotion along a curved path. 
During walking or running around an angular track, the GIA 
swings away from the subject’s yaw or long body axis as a result 
of the addition of centripetal and gravitational linear accelera­
tions. In response, the body is tilted inward as one leans into 
the turn, so that the long body axis coincides with the GIA. 
The head and eyes rotate to match this shift of the GIA.48 The 
spatial orientation of velocity storage is under control of the 
nodulus and uvula of the vestibulocerebellum, and the eyes no 
longer reorient to the GIA vector when these structures are 
damaged.49-53
Linear vestibulo-ocular reflex (IVOR)
The vector sum of linear accelerations acting on the head 
(GIA) is the stimulus that induces the IVOR. The GIA encom­
passes the linear acceleration of gravity as well as that generated 
during forward-backward, side-to-side, or up-and-down transla­
tional head movements. The presence of a near target is also 
essential for producing a compensatory IVOR, since there is no 
need for ocular compensation against translation if the point of 
regard is at infinity. 4-56 The IVOR has both compensatory and 
orienting functions. At high frequencies of head translation 
(1-8 Hz), the IVOR produces compensatory conjugate eye 
movements for side-to-side and up-down translation of the 
head.57^60 When subjects are moving toward or away from a tar­
get (naso-occipital translation), the IVOR also causes the eyes 
to converge or diverge to help maintain ocular fixation.
Orienting otolith-ocular reflexes, such as ocular counter- 
rolling (OCR), stabilize the position of the retina in space with 
respect to gravity during lateral head tilt. OCR also helps to ori­
ent gaze toward the GIA during locomotion when turning. This 
reflex has a low gain, so that there is usually not more than 5-7° 
of ocular counter-torsion for tilts of the head as large as 60-90°. 
The tendency of the axis of eye rotation to align with the GIA 
during vestibular nystagmus and OKN (Figure 41.7d-f) is 
another example of an orienting function of the IVOR.
Since all linear acceleration is equivalent, theoretically the 
brain cannot distinguish between tilts due to the linear acceler­
ation of gravity and those due to translational movements. 
Aside from using other linear acceleration-sensing somatic 
inputs to make the decision, it has been postulated that this 
decision is made on the basis of the frequency of the head 
movement.61 Tilts of the head with regard to gravity are gener­
ally of much lower frequency than translational movements 
during locomotion. More recently, it has been postulated that 
canal input, if present, helps also to make this decision.62
Gain and phase
An important and useful concept for describing the goodness of 
function of the VOR is its gain. Gain is defined as the ratio
  

The physiology of the vestibulo-ocular reflex 
711
between stimulus input and oculomotor output about a specific 
axis. Since central processing in the vestibular nuclei, vestibulo- 
cerebellum and brainstem is largely in terms of head and eye 
velocity, VOR gain (GVOR) is generally expressed as a ratio of 
induced slow-phase eye velocity (VE) divided by the stimulus 
(head) velocity (VH):
Gvor = Ve/Vh
Gain can also be expressed in terms of head position or head 
acceleration, as long as the terms of the numerator and denom­
inator are consistent. Note that gain does not specify the veloc­
ity at which the subject was rotated. For the angular VOR, the 
vestibular system is linear within broad limits; that is the gains 
calculated from eye position, eye velocity and eye acceleration 
are all the same, and the responses induced by the various fre­
quencies of rotation superpose. The gain of the a VOR of nor­
mal humans during rotation in the dark generally lies between 
0.4 and 0.7. This is low, considering that compensation must be 
within several %  when viewing targets moving with relation to 
the head if objects are to be fixated on the retina.63 However, 
the gain of the aVOR is generally close to unity during active 
head rotation in darkness. The same is true for rotation in light, 
where visual input adds eye velocity that accurately compen­
sates for head velocity.
If one attempts to fixate an imaginary target while in dark­
ness, the G Vo r  becomes close to unity. This demonstrates the 
powerful effect of cognitive ‘set’ in determining vestibular 
reflexes. A unity aVOR gain may not always be desirable, how­
ever. If subjects are moving toward or away from objects, the 
aVOR gains will be lower or higher, to take the combined lin­
ear and angular accelerations into account. In addition, view­
ing distance is of great importance in determining gain of both 
the aVOR and the IVOR. If the head is rotated with a target at 
optical infinity, an aVOR gain of 1 is ideal. However, as targets 
come closer and the eyes converge, higher aVOR gains are nec­
essary to compensate for head movements. Consequently, the 
aVOR gain rises. In contrast, compensatory IVOR gains are 
zero when viewing targets at infinity, since there is little or no 
movement of targets on the retina due to translation of the 
head. As nearer targets are viewed, however, demands on gain 
to stabilize vision during translational head and body move­
ments become much higher, and the p in  of the compensatory 
IVOR rises to meet these demands.54- 6
During testing, head angular velocity is usually induced by 
rotating the head or the head and body sinusoidally at frequen­
cies from 0.05 to 0.5 Hz. These stimuli cause compensatory 
changes in eye position and/or nystagmus. As head velocity 
increases in one direction, slow-phase eye velocity increases in 
the opposite direction. During sinusoids, the gain is determined 
from the amplitude of the sinusoidal response, and the phase of 
the response is expressed relative to the stimulus. Since com­
pensatory eye velocity is oppositely directed, eye and head 
velocity are generally out of phase by about one half-cycle 
(180°). There may be shifts in the relationship between the 
head and eye velocity due to peripheral response time, central
neural processing and biases introduced by vestibular lesions. 
Alternatively, subjects can be rotated at a constant velocity 
using sudden acceleration at onset and sudden deceleration at 
the end of rotation (step changes in angular velocity). Because 
the semicircular canals sense angular acceleration, they only 
respond to changes in angular velocity, not to angular velocity 
itself. Thus, during constant-velocity rotation, the cupula and 
hair cells return to their resting positions. If subjects are in the 
dark, per-rotatory nystagmus elicited by this rotation declines to 
zero, and individuals no longer feel that they are rotating. At the 
end of rotation, the hair cells are deflected in the opposite direc­
tion, causing oppositely directed, post-rotatory nystagmus, 
which declines over the same time-course as the per-rotatory 
nystagmus. The gain (initial slow-phase eye velocity at the onset 
or end of rotation divided by head velocity (Ve/Vh)) and the rate 
of decline in eye velocity, expressed as a time constant, are usu­
ally the parameters of interest for constant-velocity rotation.
The gain of the IVOR is generally expressed as a function 
of angular movement of the eyes (in %) in response to transla­
tional movement of the head (in m/s). In contrast to the gain 
of the aVOR, which tends to be constant over a wide range of 
frequencies, the gain of the compensatory IVOR is low for fre­
quencies of head oscillation below 1 Hz and rises dramatically 
for higher frequencies of oscillation. Orienting movements, 
induced by alignment to the GIA, have the reverse frequency 
characteristics. During constant-velocity centrifugation, for 
example, there are vertical, horizontal and/or torsional changes 
in eye position that tend to move the eyes in the direction of 
linear acceleration. Ocular counter-rolling is an example of 
such a response to lateral head tilt with regard to gravity. The 
gain of the reflex falls for oscillations above 0.2 Hz, and is 
approximately constant for oscillations at lower frequencies 
and for static tilts of the head.
Vision and the VOR
The importance of compensatory eye movements produced by 
the VOR is perhaps best appreciated when the VOR is acutely 
lost after hair cell damage due to ototoxic effects of antibiotics 
such as gentamicin or streptomycin. Vision is normal when the 
head is held stationary or if the patient is moved smoothly for­
ward with the head held stable in a wheelchair. As soon as the 
patient begins to walk, however, vision becomes ‘jumbled’, and 
the patient is unable to see clearly or to recognize faces. The 
implication is that natural motion involving the body and head 
must ultimately be used to test the vestibular system, and that 
visual tasks that measure the goodness of compensation also 
form an important part of assessing vestibular function.
Visual information is taken in solely during compensatory 
movements or the slow phases of nystagmus, and there is no 
perception during the quick phases. This appears to be largely 
due to a backward masking effect of a large visual evoked 
response that accompanies each saccade. The absence of per­
ception during saccades or quick phases is obvious when one
  

712 
Vestibular science
looks in a mirror and moves the head back and forth sinu­
soidally or looks at different points on the image of the eyes in 
the mirror. It is possible to see the eyes move smoothly with 
regard to the head, but one never observes the eyes jumping 
from one position to another in the orbit. As a result of this, 
patients with peripheral or central vestibular lesions who have 
spontaneous nystagmus frequently have the illusion of the room 
moving, and it always moves in the same direction. Patients 
almost never sense that the visual surround is jumping back 
during the quick phases. By comparing the perception of move­
ment with the associated nystagmus, it will be noted that the 
visual surround appears to be moving in a direction opposite to 
the direction of the slow phases. The reason for this is that the 
movement of the eyes causes a drift of the visual surround on 
the retina during the slow phases.
Processing in the VOR is essentially a concatenation of 
three subsystems. Motion is first sensed in the peripheral 
vestibular system, which includes the semicircular canals and 
otolith organs. This activity then reaches central neural cir­
cuitry in the vestibular nuclei, which also receives input from 
the cerebellum, the visual system, and other sensory systems 
that sense the motion of the body in space. A compensatory 
movement is generated in the vestibular nuclei, and the activ­
ity is passed to the third subsystem, the ocular motor system, for 
execution. There is no direct feedback from the eye muscles to 
the semicircular canals to inform them how well the eyes have 
compensated for head movement. In engineering terms, the job 
operates in an ‘open-loop’ fashion. This is an inadequate mode 
of operation for a system finely tuned to move the eyes to main­
tain the eyes on target. It is critical that the brain have a con­
stant source of information about the goodness of ocular 
compensation.
This feedback is provided by vision through pathways 
involving the flocculus and paraflocculus of the vestibulo- 
cerebellum.64-69 If a target is not stabilized on the retina, there 
will be an error in eye position (retinal error) and targets will 
drift across the retina at some velocity (retinal slip). Retinal 
error induces saccadic eye movements which bring the fovea to 
the target. Retinal slip induces a pursuit or optokinetic eye 
movement, causing the eyes to change speed. By changing the 
amplitude or speed of the eye movement, the target is brought 
back to the fovea and stabilized on the retina.
There are times when it is advantageous to turn off the 
aVOR, particularly when one is watching a target moving with 
the head. In this circumstance, signals generated in the floccu­
lus and paraflocculus counteract the aVOR. The ability to sup­
press the aVOR during head movement is dependent on the 
integrity of the systems for ocular pursuit and/or OKN. These 
have virtually the same characteristics and limitations, namely 
a latency of about 200 ms, a maximum velocity of about 60% 
and the ability to cancel frequencies only up to about 1 Hz. 
When the system that produces ocular pursuit or OKN is defec­
tive, subjects cannot suppress the aVOR. Thus, patients with 
cerebellar cortical degeneration may have vigorous nystagmus 
when they attempt to watch a target moving with the head.
Adaptation of the VOR
Since suppressive drugs are frequently of only limited value in 
reducing nystagmus and vertigo after lesions, adaptation and 
VOR plasticity are of great importance in recovery after 
vestibular lesions. VOR adaptation is produced by the presence 
of a mismatch between vestibular output and visual input. For 
example, if the gain of the VOR is low, there is persistent reti­
nal slip when the head moves. Visual input related to this reti­
nal slip activates pursuit and optokinetic pathways to the 
flocculus and paraflocculus of the vestibulocerebellum. This 
alters firing patterns of cerebellar Purkinje cells and their target 
neurons in the vestibular nuclei which project to the eye mus­
cle motor neurons, raising the gain of the VOR.65-69 As a result, 
the eyes move faster in response to the same input to hold gaze 
stable. Adaptive changes can be rapid, but frequently take 
hours or days to develop and persist for long periods. The 
amount of adaptation can be striking, and it is even possible to 
reverse the direction of aVOR at certain frequencies of head 
movement by wearing reversing prisms.70 This is remarkable, 
because the hard-wired aVOR is present from birth, and can 
even be elicited with caloric stimulation in deep coma. In fact, 
the absence of ocular deviation in response to head movement 
or caloric stimulation of the labyrinths over the aVOR is one of 
the signs used to determine brain death.
There is considerable redundancy across the systems used 
for ocular compensation for head movement. Vision, vestibular 
sensation and somatosensory input from the neck and limbs are 
all utilized. This process also depends on the integrity of the 
cerebellum and its inputs, the inferior olive and the sources of 
climbing fiber input to the cerebellum. Exercise and active 
motion can enhance adaptation of the aVOR and IVOR after 
central or peripheral lesions.71-73 VOR gain adaptation does not 
take place when the flocculus and paraflocculus of the vestibu­
locerebellum are damaged. The way in which plasticity is real­
ized at the cellular level is still unknown, but possibilities 
include a change in receptor density or in the amount of trans­
mitter release among others. N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) 
glutaminergic receptors74,75 and nitric oxide (NO) acting on 
second messenger systems76,77 have also been implicated in this 
process.
Afterword
This chapter is only meant to serve as an introduction to the 
physiology of the vestibular system, which sits at the heart of 
the motion-sensing apparatus of the brain. A large body of work 
was done in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, nicely sum­
marized by Camis and Creed.78 There has been an explosion of 
new information in this area since the mid-20th century.20,79,80 
As we have begun to explore vestibular function in freely mov­
ing individuals, new physiology and understanding of the 
vestibular system is beginning to emerge. The reader is referred 
to a large body of work on vestibular anatomy, physiology and
  

The physiology of the vestibulo-ocular reflex 
713
function in recent years, at both peripheral and central levels,
for further information on this subject. This includes both gen-
eral treatments of the subjects81-83 and symposium volumes.84-88
References
1. 
Okuda M, Bautz A, Membre H et al. Appearance and evolution of 
calcitic and aragonitic otoconia during plurodeles waltl develop- 
ment. Hear Res 1999; 137: 114-26.
2. 
Miller EFI. Counterrolling of the human eyes produced by head 
tilt with respect to gravity. Acta Otolaryngol 1962; 54: 479-501.
3. 
Curthoys IS, Betts GA, Burgess AM et al. The planes of the utric­
ular and saccular maculae of the guinea pig. Ann NY Acad Med. 
1999; 871:27-34.
4. 
Goldberg J. Transmission between the type 1 hair cell and its calyx 
ending. Ann NY Acad Sci 1996; 781: 474-88.
5. 
Hudspeth AJ, Corey DP. Sensitivity, polarity and conduction 
change in the response of vertebrate hair cells to controlled 
mechanical stimuli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1977; 746: 2407-11.
6. 
Hudspeth AJ, Jacobs R. Stereocillia mediate transduction in ver­
tebrate hair cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1979; 76: 1506-9.
7. 
Hudspeth AJ. Extracellular current flow and the site of transduc­
tion by vertebrate hair cells. J Neurosci 1982; 2: 1-10.
8. 
Uchino Y, Sato H, Kushiro K et al. Cross-striolar and commissural 
inhibition in the otolith system. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1999; 871: 
162-72.
9. 
Brichta AM, Goldberg JM. Afferent and efferent responses from 
morphological fiber classes in the turtle posterior crista. Ann NY 
Acad Sci 1996; 781: 183-95.
10. Ross MD, Chimento T, Doshay D, Rei C. Computer-assisted 
three-dimensional reconstruction and simulations of vestibular 
macular neural connectivities. Ann NY Acad Sci 1992; 656: 
75-91.
11. Goldberg JM, Lysakowski A, Fernandez C. Structure and function 
of vestibular nerve fibers in the chinchilla and squirrel monkey. 
Ann NY A cad Sci 1992; 656: 92-107.
12. Chimento TC, Ross MD. Evidence of a sensory processing unit in 
the mammalian macula. Ann NY A cad Sci 1996; 781: 196-212.
13. Goldberg JM, Fernandez C. Physiology of peripheral neurons 
innervating semicircular canals of the squirrel monkey. I. Resting 
discharge and response to angular accelerations. J Neurophysiol
1971; 34: 635-60.
14. Goldberg JM, Fernandez C. Physiology of peripheral neurons 
innervating semicircular canals of the squirrel monkey. III. Varia­
tions among units in their discharge properties. J Neurophysiol
1971; 34: 676-84.
15. Goldberg JM, Highstein SM, Moschovakis AK, Fernandez C. 
Inputs from regularly and irregularly discharging vestibular nerve 
afferents to secondary neurons in the vestibular nuclei of the 
squirrel monkey. I. An electrophysiological analysis. J Neurophys­
iol 1987; 58: 700-18.
16. Minor LB, Goldberg JM. Vestibular nerve inputs to the vestibulo- 
ocular reflex: a functional ablation study in the squirrel monkey. J 
Neuroscience 1991; 11: 1636-48.
17. Hudspeth AJ. The cellular basis of hearing: the biophysics of hair 
cells. Science 1985; 230: 745-52.
18. Purkinje JE. Beitrage zur naheren Kenntnis des Sehens in subjectiver 
Hinsicht} Vol. 6. Prague: Calve, 1819; 79-125.
19. Gruesser O-J. J. E. Purkyne’s contributions to the physiology of the 
visual, the vestibular and the oculomotor systems. Human Neuro-
biol 1984; 3: 129-44.
20. Wilson VJ, Melvill-Jones G. Mammalian Vestibular Physiology. 
New York: Plenum Press, 1979.
21. Henn V, Cohen B, Young LR. Visual-vestibular interaction in 
motion perception and the generation of nystagmus. Neurosci Res 
Prog Bull 1980; 18: 651.
22. Ewald JR. Physiologische Untersuchungen fiber das Endorgan des 
Nervus Octavus.Wiesbaden: Bergmann, 1892.
23. Halmagyi G, Curthoys I. A clinical sign of canal paresis. Arch 
Neurol 1988; 45: 737-9.
24. Aw S, Haslwanter Th, Halmagyi GM et al. Three-dimensional 
vector analysis of the human vestibuloocular reflex in response to 
high-acceleration head rotations. 1. Responses in normal subjects. 
J Neurophysiol 1996; 76: 4009-20.
25. Cremer P, Halmagyi GM, Aw ST et al. Semicircular canal plane 
head impulses detect absent function of individual semicircular 
canals. Brain 1998; 121: 699-716.
26. Henn V, Straumann D, Hess BJM et al. Three-dimensional trans­
formation from vestibular and visual input to oculomotor output. 
Ann NY A cad Sci 1992; 656: 166-80.
27. Cohen B, Suzuki J, Bender MB. Eye movements from semicircular 
canal nerve stimulation in the cat. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1964; 
73: 153-69.
28. Suzuki J, Cohen B, Bender MB. Compensatory eye movements 
induced by vertical semicircular canal stimulation. Exp Neurol 
1964; 9: 137-60.
29. Brodal A. Anatomy of the vestibular nuclei and their connections, 
In: Kornhuber HH, ed. Handbook of Sensory Physiology. Vestibular 
System. Basic Mechanisms. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1974: 239-352.
30. Buettner-Ennever JA. Patterns of connectivity in the vestibular 
nuclei. Ann NY Acad Sci 1992; 656: 363-78.
31. Highstein SM, McCrea RA. The anatomy of the vestibular nuclei. 
In: Buttner-Ennever JA, ed. Neuroanatomy of the Oculomotor Sys­
tem (Reviews of Oculomotor Research). Amsterdam: Elsevier 1988: 
177-202.
32. Lorente de No R. Vestibular ocular reflex arc. Arch Neurol 
Psychiatry 1933; 30: 245-91.
33. Ito M. The control mechanisms of cerebellar motor systems. In: 
Schmitt FO, Worden FG, eds. The Neurosciences: Third Study Pro­
gram. Cambridge Mass: MIT Press, 1974: 293-303.
34. Robinson DA. Oculomotor control signals. In: Lennerstrand G, 
Bach-y-Rita P. eds. Basic Mechanisms of Ocular Motility and Their 
Clinical Implications. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1975: 337-74.
35. Raphan T, Cohen B. How does the vestibulo-ocular reflex work? 
In: Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM eds. Disorders of the Vestibular System. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1996: 20-47.
36. Steinhausen W. Uber die Beobachtung der Cupula in den Bogen- 
gansampullen des Labyrinths des lebenden Hechts. Arch Ges 
Physiol 1933; 232: 500-12.
  

714 
Vestibular science
37. Robinson D. Vestibular and optokinetic symbiosis: an example of 
explaining by modeling. In: Baker R, Berthoz A, eds. Control of 
Gaze by Brain Stem Neurons. Amsterdam: Elsevier/North Holland, 
1977: 49-58.
38. Raphan T, Matsuo V, Cohen B. Velocity storage in the vestibulo- 
ocular reflex arc (VOR). Exp Brain Res 1979; 35: 229-48.
39. Dai M, Klein A, Cohen B, Raphan T. Model-based study of 
the human cupular time constant. J Vestib Res 1999; 9: 
293-301.
40. Raphan T, Cohen B. Velocity storage and the ocular response to 
multidimensional vestibular stimuli. In: Berthoz A, Melvill Jones 
G, eds. Adaptive Mechanisms in Gaze Control; Facts and Theories, 
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1985: 123-43.
41. Yokota Jl, Reisine H, Cohen B. Nystagmus induced by electrical 
microstimulation of the vestibular and prepositus hypoglossi 
nuclei in the monkey. Exp Brain Res 1992; 92: 123-38.
42. Solomon D, Cohen B. Stabilization of gaze during circular loco­
motion in darkness; II. Contribution of velocity storage to com­
pensatory eye and head nystagmus in the running monkey. 
J Neurophysiol 1992; 67: 1158-70.
43. Cohen B, Suzuki Jl, Raphan T. Role of the otolith organs in gen­
eration of horizontal nystagmus: effects of selective labyrinthine 
lesions. Brain Res 1983; 276: 159-64.
44. Raphan T, Cohen B. Organizational principles of velocity stor­
age in three dimensions: the effect of gravity on cross-coupling 
of optokinetic after-nystagmus. Ann NY Acad Sci 1988; 545: 
74-92.
45. Dai M, Raphan T, Cohen B. Spatial orientation of the vestibular 
system: dependence of optokinetic after nystagmus on gravity. 
J Neurophysiol 1991; 66: 1422-38.
46. Raphan T, Dai M, Cohen B. Spatial orientation of the vestibular 
system. Ann NY A cad Sci 1992; 656: 140-57.
47. Gizzi M, Raphan T, Rudolph S, Cohen B. Orientation of human 
optokinetic nystagmus to gravity: a model based approach. Exp 
Brain Res 1994; 99: 347-60.
48. Imai T, Moore ST, Raphan T, Cohen B. Stabilization of gaze when 
turning comers during overground walking. Soc Neurosci Abstr 
1998; 24: 415.
49. Waespe W, Cohen B, Raphan T. Dynamic modification of the 
vestibulo-ocular reflex by the nodulus and uvula. Science 1985; 
228: 199-201.
50. Angelaki DE, Hess BJM. The cerebellar nodulus and ventral uvula 
control the torsional vestibulo-ocular reflex. ] Neurophysiol 1994; 
72: 1443-7.
51. Angelaki DE, Hess BJM. Organizational principles of otolith and 
semicircular canal-ocular reflexes in rhesus monkeys. Ann NY 
Acad Sci 1996; 781:332-47.
52. Weame S, Raphan T, Cohen B. Contribution of vestibular com­
missural pathways to velocity storage and spatial orientation of the 
angular vestibulo-ocular reflex. J Neurophysiol 1997; 78: 1193-7.
53. Weame S, Raphan T, Cohen B. Control of spatial orientation of 
the angular vestibulo-ocular reflex by the nodulus and uvula. 
J Neurophysiol 1998; 79: 2690-715.
54. Miles FA, Busettini C, Schwarz U. Ocular responses to linear 
motion. In: Shimazu H, Shinoda Y, eds. Vestibular and Brain Stem
Control of Eye, Head, and Body Movements. Tokyo: Japan Scientific 
Societies Press, 1992: 379-95.
55. Schwarz C, Busettini C, Miles FA. Ocular responses to linear 
motion are inversely proportional to viewing distance. Science, 
1989; 245: 1394-6.
56. Schwarz C, Miles FA. Ocular responses to translation and their 
dependence on viewing distance. I. Motion of the observer. 
J Neurophysiol 1991; 66: 851-64.
57. Paige GD, Tomko DL. Eye movement responses to linear head 
motion in the squirrel monkey. I. Basic characteristics. 
J Neurophysiol 1991; 65: 1170-82.
58. Paige GD, Tomko DL. Eye movement responses to linear head 
motion in the squirrel monkey. II. Visual-vestibular interactions 
and kinematic considerations. J Neurophysiol 1991; 65: 1183-96.
59. Telford L, Seidman SH, Paige GD. Dynamics of squirrel monkey 
linear vestibuloocular reflex and interactions with fixation dis­
tance. J Neurophysiol 1997; 78: 1769-90.
60. Telford L, Seidman SH, Paige GD. Canal-otolith interactions 
driving vertical and horizontal eye movements in the squirrel 
monkey. Exp Brain Res 1996; 109: 407-18.
61. Mayne R. A systems concept of the vestibular organs. In: 
Komhuber HH, ed. Handbook of Vestibular Physiology. Vestibular 
System. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1974: 493-580.
62. Hess BJM, Angelaki DE. Inertial processing of vestibulo-ocular 
signals. Ann NY A cad Sci 1999; 871: 148-61.
63. Collewijn H, Martins A, Steinman R. Natural retinal image 
motion: origin and change. Ann NY A cad Sci 1981; 374: 312-29.
64. Ito M. Neural design of the cerebellar motor control system. Brain 
Res 1972; 40: 81-4.
65. Lisberger SG, Pavelko TA, Broussard DM. Neural basis for motor 
learning in the vestibuloocular reflex of primates. I. Changes in 
the responses of brain stem neurons. J Neurophysiol 1994; 72: 
928-53.
66. Lisberger SG, Pavelko TA, Bronte-Steward HM, Stone LS. Neural 
basis for motor learning in the vestibuloocular reflex of primates.
II. Changes in the responses of horizontal gaze velocity Purkinje 
cells in the cerebellar flocculus and ventral paraflocculus. J Neuro- 
physiol 1994; 72: 954-73.
67. Lisberger SG, Pavelko TA, Broussard DM. Responses during eye 
movements of brain stem neurons that receive monosynaptic inhi­
bition from the flocculus and ventral paraflocculus in monkeys. 
J Neurophysiol 1994; 72: 909-27.
68. Zhang Y, Partisalis AM, Highstein SM. Properties of superior 
vestibular nucleus flocculus target neurons in the squirrel monkey.
I. General properties in comparison with flocculus projecting neu­
rons. J Neurophysiol 1995; 73: 2261-78.
69. Zhang Y, Partisalis A, Highstein SM. Properties of superior 
vestibular nucleus flocculus target neurons in the squirrel monkey.
II. Signal components revealed by reversible flocculus inactiva­
tion. J Neurophysiol 1995; 73: 2279-92.
70. Melvill Jones G. Adaptive modulation of VOR parameters by 
vision. In: Berthoz A, Melvill Jones G, eds. Adaptive Mechanisms 
in Gaze Control. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1985: 21-50.
71. Igarashi M, Levy JK, Takahashi M et al. Effect of exercise upon 
locomotor balance modification after peripheral vestibular lesions
  

The physiology of the vestibulo-ocular reflex 
715
(unilateral utriacular neurotomy) in squirrel monkeys. Adv Otorhi­
nolaryngol 1979; 25: 82.
72. Igarashi M, Levy JK, O-Uchi T, Reschke MF. Further study of 
physical exercise and locomotor balance compensation after 
unilateral labyrinthectomy in squirrel monkey. A eta Otolaryngol 
1981; 92: 101-5.
73. Igarashi M, Ishiwaka K, Ishii M, Yamane H. Physical exercise and 
balance compensation after total ablation of vestibular organs. 
Prog Brain Res 1988; 76: 395-401.
74. Broussard DM, Bronte-Stewart HM, Lisberger SG. Expression of 
motor learning in the response of the primate vestibulo-ocular 
reflex pathway to electrical stimulation. J Neurophysiol 1992; 67: 
1493-508.
75. Kinney GA, Peterson BW, Slater NT. The synaptic activation of 
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors in the rat medial vestibular 
nucleus. J Neurophysiol 1994; 72: 1588-95.
76. Nagao S, Ito M. Subdural application of hemoglobin to the cere­
bellum blocks vestibuloocular reflex adaptation. NeuroReport 
1991; 2: 193-6.
77. Li J, Smith S, McElligott JG. Cerebellar nitric oxide is necessary 
for vestibulo-ocular reflex adaptation, a sensorimotor model of 
learning. J Neurophysiol 1995; 74: 489-94.
78. Camis M, Creed RS. The Physiology of the Vestibular Apparatus. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1930.
79. Komhuber HH, ed. Vestibular System, Basic Mechanisms. Handbook 
of Sensory Physiology, Vol. VI/1. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1974.
80. Komhuber HH, ed. Vestibular System; Psychophysics, Applied 
Aspects and General Interpretations. Handbook of Sensory Physiology, 
Vol. VI/2. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1974.
81. Buettner-Ennever J A, ed. Neuroanatomy of the Oculomotor System.
Reviews of Oculomotor Research, Vol. 2. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1988.
82. Leigh RJ, Zee DS. The Neurology of Eye Movements. Contempo­
rary Neurology Series. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1983.
83. Baloh R, Halmagyi G, eds. Disorders of the Vestibular System. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1996: 687.
84. Cohen B, ed. Vestibular and Oculomotor Physiology. Ann NY 
A cad Sci. 1981; 374.
85. Cohen B, Henn V (eds). Representation of three-dimensional 
space in the vestibular, oculomotor, and visual systems. Ann NY 
A cad Sci 1988; 545: 239-47.
86. Cohen B, Tomko D, Guedry F eds. Sensing and controlling 
motion—vestibular and sensorimotor function. Ann NY Acad Sci. 
1992; 656.
87. Highstein SM, Cohen B, Buettner-Ennever JA eds. New direc­
tions in vestibular research. Ann NY A cad Sci 1996; 781.
88. Cohen B, Hess BJM, eds. Otolith function in spatial orientation 
and movement. Ann NY A cad Sci. 1999; 871.
89. Hudspeth AJ. The hair cells of the inner ear. Sci Am 1983; 248: 
54-64.
90. Wersall J, Bagger-Sjoback D. Morphology of the vestibular sense 
organ. In: Komhuber HH, ed. Handbook of Sensory Physiology, Vol. 
VI/1. Vestibular System. Part 1. Basic Mechanisms, Berlin: Springer- 
Verlag, 1974: 123-70.
91. Goldberg JM, Lysakowski A, Fernandez C. Structure and function 
of vestibular nerve fibers in the chinchilla and squirrel monkey. 
Ann NY Acad Sci 1992; 656: 92-107.
92. Yakushin S. Labyrinthine Control of the Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex in 
Three Dimensions. Brooklyn, New York: CUNY, 1996: p 241.
93. Raphan T, Cohen B. The vestibulo-ocular reflex in three 
dimensions. Exp Brain Res 2002; 145: 1-27.
  

Instrumentation and 
principles of vestibular 
testing
Floris L Wuyts, Joseph M Furman, Paul Van de Heyning
Introduction
The purpose of vestibular testing is to assess with objective lab­
oratory measures the peripheral and central vestibular func­
tioning of patients suffering from vertigo or disequilibrium. 
Together with a history and additional investigations such as 
audiometric data and possibly also imaging, the clinician can 
better establish a medical diagnosis and hence propose a med­
ical or surgical therapy or a rehabilitative management 
program.
Since a large number of physiopathological processes 
underlie symptoms of vertigo and imbalance, the vestibular 
investigation should primarily enable the differentiation 
between vestibular system pathologies (central or peripheral) 
and non-vestibular pathologies, such as cardiovascular or psy­
chogenic disorders. The second most important goal of vestibu­
lar testing is the site-of-lesion localization, i.e. which sensory 
elements, motor output elements or neural pathways are 
responsible for the reported symptoms. Is the lesion peripheral 
vestibular, central vestibular, or a mixed type? Is the lesion on 
the left or right side? Is it recently acquired or has it been pre­
sent for a long time? What is the degree of function alteration? 
What is the state of central nervous system compensation, i.e. 
the alterations made by the central nervous system to account 
for the flawed information provided by faulty peripheral sensors 
or neural pathways? It should be noted that this compensatory 
process may cause the patient’s perception of the disease not to 
correlate closely with the objective measures obtained in the 
laboratory.
Until recently, most of the vestibular testing has been based 
on the assessment of the horizontal vestibulo-ocular reflex 
(VOR). The clinician should be conscious, however, that the 
vestibular test results only apply to a part of the VOR. Never­
theless, new emerging technologies such as video-oculography 
enable a more detailed investigation of the VOR.
In addition to the vestibular testing, the authors strongly 
advocate the assessment of the patient’s perspective of his lost 
quality of life and his psychogenic condition. This is often 
achieved with validated questionnaires, such as the SF361 or 
the Dizziness Handicap Inventory (DHI).2
This chapter focuses on the registration of the VOR with 
laboratory techniques. Additionally, the chapter provides sug­
gestions to improve the clarity of a quantitative vestibular lab­
oratory examination, by reducing the artefacts that lead to 
false-positive or false-negative conclusions. Finally, a normative 
table and meta-analysis is offered for the quantitative outcomes 
of different vestibular tests.
Recording techniques
Electronystaginography
Electronystagmography (ENG), also called electro-oculography 
(EOG) has been for many decades the primary technique for 
eye-movement recording in a clinical setting. It is based on the 
dipole property of the eyeball, the front of which is positive 
with reference to the back (Figure 42.1). This comeo-retinal 
potential is generated by the metabolic processes in the retina. 
When the eye moves in its orbit, the surrounding electric field 
is proportionally altered. Thus electrodes (eg. Ag/AgCl) that 
are placed near the eyeball can record eye position. Either both 
eyes can be recorded with one pair of electrodes, or each eye 
can be recorded separately (Figure 42.2). In the latter case, the 
signals of both eyes are either added together after amplifica­
tion, which results in a higher signal/noise ratio, or plotted sep­
arately. A common ground electrode is usually placed on the 
forehead. The electrodes should not be placed too close to the 
lateral canthi, since they can irritate the patient, which leads to 
more frequent eye blinking.

718 
Vestibular science
Figure 42.1 The comeo-retinal dipole potential has a magnitude of 
approximately 1 jiV, with the cornea being positive with respect to the retina.
The diamonds represent the electrodes. A rightward deviation makes the right 
electrode more positive, resulting in a positive deflection on the recording.
Prior to the application of the electrodes, the skin should 
be thoroughly cleansed by the technician to remove skin oil 
and cosmetics, by using a fat solvent. Next, the most superficial 
layer of the squamous epithelium of the epidermis has to be 
removed, e.g. with a roughened swab. Without these precau- 
tions, the electrode-skin impedance will be too high. This 
decreases the signal/noise ratio, and leads to a direct current 
(DC) drift. Impedances below 25 kQ  are usually acceptable. 
Additionally, the impedance difference between the different 
electrodes should not exceed 10kQ.
Proper amplification of the eye signals is preferentially 
amplified using DC-coupling, since this gives a reliable mea- 
surement of eye position, especially during fixation.
Often, an electrode is placed above and below one eye for 
vertical eye-movement registrations. The information obtained 
from these vertically placed electrodes is largely qualitative, 
since eyelid movement, muscular activity near the eyebrow, and 
eye-blink artefacts cause interference with the dipole potential 
and render quantitative analysis of vertical EOG questionable 
(Figure 42.3). Vertical recording can identify artefacts. Fre­
quent blinks can also make the EOG difficult to interpret, as 
the blinks can be misjudged as quick components of nystagmus. 
This effect is much enhanced if the horizontal electrodes are 
misaligned, i.e. not perfectly placed on the inter-pupil line.
The comeo-retinal potential may vary greatly during the 
examination, especially if the ambient luminance varies during 
the examination. Additionally, perspiration may alter the skin
Figure 42.2 Placement of electrodes for horizontal and vertical electro- 
oculographic eye-movement recording. For horizontal recordings, each eye is 
recorded separately. The two horizontal signals can be summed by the recording 
equipment to enhance the signal/noise ratio. The forehead electrode serves as a 
common ground electrode. The vertical electrodes are typically used for artefact 
identification only.
impedance near the electrodes. Therefore, it is of major impor­
tance to perform calibrations repeatedly throughout the entire 
test, and preferably prior to each sub-test. Calibration is 
achieved by asking the patient to perform saccades by alterna­
tively fixating dots on a screen. The dots can be placed at 10° 
left and right of the center, in which case these dots should be 
placed at Itan 10°(expressed in meters) from the center dot, 
where I represents the distance in meters between patient and 
screen. The output of the recorder can now be adjusted so that 
the deflection indicates 10° left and right. This yields the cali­
bration factor.
Changing light conditions dramatically alters the 
calibration factors.
It is crucial to perform calibrations repeatedly 
throughout the entire ENG.
Before the test begins, the patient should be kept in a semi­
darkened room for at least 5 min so that the electrode paste or 
gel can react properly with the skin and the eyes can adapt to 
the near-darkness. Figure 42.4 shows the comeo-retinal poten­
tial during a 105-min-long experiment in one subject where 
only the light conditions were changed. The results in other 
subjects were very similar to the presented data. It is striking
  

Instrumentation and principles of vestibular testing 719
Figure 42.3 The effect of eye blinks on the horizontal electro-oculographic 
recording (upper trace). The synchrony between the horizontal and vertical 
peaks as well as the sharpness of the peaks suggest that the apparent horizontal 
nystagmus is actually artefactual.
Time (minutes)
Figure 42.4 Corneo-retinal potential variation during 105 min of recording in 
one subject. EO, eyes open, EC, eyes closed. A change in ambient luminance 
produces a change in the corneo-retinal dipole potential of up to 100 °/o. Note 
that the eyes did not change equally.
that the calibration alters by 100% throughout the 20 min that 
follow a lights-out condition or lights-on condition. Metabolic 
changes in the retina are not controllable, and even under sta­
ble light conditions, maintained for 30 min, the potential 
changed by up to 100%. It is therefore of major importance to 
calibrate repeatedly throughout the vestibular examination.
Moreover, if a test outcome is based on the analysis of sev­
eral sub-tests, such as the caloric test that is based on four con­
secutive sub-tests, it is of great importance to calibrate prior to 
each individual sub-test. Otherwise, false results may emerge.
Whereas for many years ENG recording systems consisted 
of amplifiers and chart recorders, most manufacturers now offer
PC-based systems with DC-coupled amplifiers. Using a com­
puter, ENG signals can be digitally filtered for noise reduction. 
Also, a quantitative analysis becomes possible for the calcula­
tion of clinically relevant parameters such as rotational gain 
(response/stimulus), phase (time delay between response and 
stimulus) or the time constant of the response decay. Moreover, 
patient traces from the entire test can be stored on digital stor­
age devices for post hoc analysis or archival purposes.
Unfortunately, commercial systems do not adhere to a stan­
dardized method of stimulus delivery, response measurement or 
analysis. It is highly recommended that laboratories use the 
standards proposed by the ASEM protocol.3 Additionally, the 
clinician should never rely blindly on the computer output 
without inspecting the traces and the calculation results. With 
very weak responses, in particular, the computer results can be 
quite misleading.
The clinician should never blindly rely on the computer 
output, without inspecting the traces and the calculation 
results.
Video-oculography
The main component of a video-oculography (VOG) system, 
also sometimes called video-ENG or VNG, is a small video 
camera that is placed on a specific mount so that a frontal view 
of the eye is obtained. The movement of the eye is deduced by 
means of image processing. Two-dimensional systems (2D) 
extract horizontal and vertical movements from the video 
images; three-dimensional systems (3D) additionally extract 
the torsional component of the eye movements. Most VOG sys­
tems function in total darkness by the use of infrared light. 
VOG systems may be monocular or binocular. Some VOG sys­
tems use goggles like ski glasses, where the camera is placed in 
front of the eye. Others allow unobstructed vision, where the 
camera can image the eye via a specialized mirror (Figure 42.5).
Most commercial VOG systems have a standard frame rate 
of 50 or 60 Hz, which may limit the use of VOG for some ocu­
lar motor tests such as saccades. Some manufacturers offer high- 
frame-rate (>200 Hz) cameras, but these are considerably more 
expensive.
2D VOG, with its reliable vertical movement detection, 
has the advantage over conventional ENG of enabling an accu­
rate measurement of the vertical eye movements. 3D VOG adds 
the ability to record torsional eye movements.
2D VOG extracts the horizontal and vertical movements of 
the eye by exaggeration of the image contrast so that the pupil 
becomes totally black in an otherwise white field. Extraction of 
the horizontal and vertical coordinates of the pupil center is 
then straightforward. To assure accuracy, VOG systems must 
account for the shape of the pupil when the eyelids are partially 
closed or when the eye looks eccentrically. With mirror systems 
that are characterized by a long eye-camera distance, the image
  

720 
Vestibular science
Figure 42.5 A video-oculographic device for eye-movement recording.
(a) See-through system, (b) Monocular ski-goggles-type system.
become less deformed4 with eccentric gaze, as compared to 
devices that place the camera directly in front of the eye.
3D VOG systems estimate torsional eye movements using 
either cross-correlation or neural network techniques. Both sys­
tems depend upon adequate contrast in the patient’s iris. Thus, 
in some individuals, the estimate of the torsional eye movement 
is unreliable. Also, in 3D VOG systems, artefacts due to partial 
eyelid closure and eccentric deflection must be considered.4,5 
With VOG, it is of great importance that the goggles be 
attached firmly to the patient’s head, since any relative move­
ment of the camera with respect to the head will result in a false 
impression of eye translation or rotation. Thus, some systems 
are attached to the patient’s skull by means of a bite board, but 
this reduces clinical applicability.6
VOG is a new technique that has been developed in the 
last two decades. 2D VOG is currently evolving from a research 
tool into a clinical tool, since the evolution in PC technology 
has reduced the calculation time tremendously. Several manu­
facturers of standard ENG equipment offer 2D VOG systems at 
prices that are comparable to those of ENG. Also, the image- 
processing algorithms are considerably improved to take into 
account different sources of error, mainly due to geometrical 
and alignment issues.7 Most likely, 2D VOG will coexist with 
ENG for several years, since each technique has its strengths 
and weaknesses. 3D VOG systems, however, are currently still 
limited to research facilities, due to the much greater complex­
ity of this technique. Because VOG is new, the need for stan­
dardization is again an important issue.
Table 42.1 summarizes the specific properties of ENG, 2D 
and 3D VOG systems.
Scleral coil
The scleral search coil (SSC) method developed by Robinson8 
is based on the measurement of electric current induced in a 
small coil of wire placed on the eye by a magnetic field that sur­
rounds the patient. The SSC method has emerged as the gold 
standard for the accurate recording of eye movements. How­
ever, it is an invasive technique that requires that a wired con­
tact lens be placed on the patient’s eye. It causes discomfort for 
the patient, and recording time is limited to approximately 30 
min. Consequently, the SSC technique for vestibular testing in 
general is confined to research rather than clinical settings.
Nystagmus definition
By convention, when eye position is displayed on a computer 
screen or a chart recorder, a rightward eye movement is 
reported as an upward deflection and a leftward eye movement 
as a downward deflection. For the vertical channel, the con­
vention is straightforward, i.e. an upward deflection means an 
upward eye movement. For torsional eye movements, there is 
no convention. Therefore, we suggest the following rules: (1) 
torsional movements are described from the patient’s view­
point; (2) a rightward movement of the upper pole of the eye 
corresponds with a positive, i.e. upward, deflection on the 
recording (similar to the corkscrew rule in physics being 
positive).
A slow eye movement followed by a fast opposite move­
ment is called jerk nystagmus, which is, by convention, named 
after its fast component. The slow component velocity (SCV) 
is the parameter of interest, as it reflects the portion of the nys­
tagmus that is generated by the VOR. The fast component is 
merely a saccadic reset.
  

Instrumentation and principles of vestibular testing 721
Table 42.1 Comparison between ENG, 2D VOG and 3D VOG.
Characteristics
ENG
2D VOG
3D VOG
Recording device
Paste-on electrodes 
(AgCI/Ag)
Video camera
Video camera
Principle
Corneo-retinal dipole potential
Image processing 
Contrast enhancement of pupil
Image processing
Pupil and iris structure analysis
Cross-correlation or neural network
Horizontal eye movement
Reliable
Very reliable
Very reliable
Vertical eye movement
Unreliable
Very reliable
Very reliable
Torsional eye movement
Not possible
Not possible
Reliable
Approximate accuracy
1-2°
r
r
Head movement resistant
High
If properly secured
If properly secured
Sampling rate
> 1 5 0  Hz
25-60 Hz
25-60 Hz
Iris structure dependence
No
No
Yes
Amplifier drift
Yes
No
No
Calibration 
Sensitive to
Repeatedly
Once
Once
Blink artefacts
Yes
Yes
Yes
Changes in room lighting
Yes
No
No
Myogenic activity
Yes
No
No
Vestibular stimuli possible
Yes
Yes
Yes
Functions in total darkness
Yes
Yes
Yes
Patient tolerance
About 1 h
About 30min
About 30 min
Vestibular function assessment
Effect of medication on the vestibular function 
assessment
Most patients undergoing testing in the vestibular laboratory 
use medications either to treat an unrelated medical condition 
or to treat their dizziness. Unfortunately, many commonly used 
medications can interfere with vestibular function testing. 
Some medications, even in therapeutic doses, can produce 
abnormal eye movements that could be misinterpreted as a sign 
of vestibular or central nervous system pathology. Moreover, 
many medications impair alertness, reduce normal nystagmic 
responses, or suppress abnormal nystagmus, thereby producing 
misleading laboratory findings. The three most common pat­
terns of medication-related vestibular function test alterations 
are: (1) the brainstem-cerebellar dysfunction pattern; (2) the 
central nervous system sedation pattern; and (3) the vestibular 
system dysfunction pattern.
The vestibular system dysfunction pattern includes eye- 
movement abnormalities such as reduced caloric and rotational 
responses associated with bilateral labyrinthine hypofimction
and 
positional 
nystagmus. 
Medication-induced 
bilateral 
labyrinthine hypofunction may occur as an acute and reversible 
effect (e.g. aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) ototoxicity) or as a 
chronic and irreversible effect (e.g. as a result of gentamicin 
ototoxicity). Drugs that cause vestibular system toxicity can 
also produce a pattern of eye-movement abnormalities similar 
to those caused by central sedation, and it can be difficult to dis­
tinguish central nervous system sedation from bilateral 
labyrinthine hypofunction. Thus, it is critical to maintain alert­
ness in patients who are using or who have used medications 
capable of producing labyrinthine hypofunction.
Because of the widespread and diverse effects that drugs can 
have on vestibular function testing, patients referred for ENG 
examination should be instructed not to take any tranquilizers, 
sedatives, vestibular suppressants or alcohol for 48 h before test­
ing. Patients should continue to take medications for heart 
problems, high blood pressure, diabetes, seizure prevention, or 
other medical conditions. In hospitalized patients for whom it 
may be impractical to discontinue medications, and patients 
using medications for serious medical conditions, it is usually 
best to perform the ENG examination and note the patient’s 
medications. The records should then be reviewed carefully for
  

722 
Vestibular science
evidence of any drug effect. Any doubts about the interpreta- 
tion can then be noted on the report and, if possible, the exam­
ination can be repeated again after withdrawal of the 
presumptive offending medication.
Patients referred for ENG should not take tranquilizers, 
sedatives or alcohol for 48 h before testing.
Test battery
Depending on the clinical setting and availability of equip- 
ment, vestibular testing consists of several different sub-tests. In 
most clinical settings throughout the world, the larger part of 
the following test battery is performed: (1) ocular motor test 
battery; (2) positional testing; and (3) vestibular test battery, 
which includes caloric and rotational testing. Each of these 
tests has its own purpose (Chapter 43). Table 42.2 lists the 
different tests as well as the relevant outcome parameters to 
report. The order of tests is designed to reduce possible interfer­
ence of one test with another. Testing is started with the ocular 
motor screening battery. First, there is a search for spontaneous 
(i.e. vestibular) nystagmus, since its presence may greatly influ­
ence all the other tests. Next, the ocular motor test battery 
investigates the integrity of the eye movements in the absence
of any vestibular stimulus. Because later tests such as positional 
and vestibular tests rely upon eye movements, abnormalities of 
the ocular motor system itself may interfere with other test 
results. Thus, without an ocular motor screening battery, some 
vestibular tests can be misinterpreted. The positioning tests 
should precede the positional test, and both should precede the 
vestibular tests. The main purpose of performing the position­
ing test is the detection of paroxysmal positional nystagmus, 
which might disappear upon repeated positioning. Thus, any 
maneuver that can reduce paroxysmal positioning nystagmus 
should be avoided.
Continuous visualization of the patient and monitor­
ing of the eye recordings are essential for test 
accuracy as well as for patient comfort and safety.
Patients alertness greatly influences the VOR. Ensure 
optimal alertness of the patient throughout the ENG 
exam.
A clinically significant spontaneous nystagmus should 
appear consistently throughout the ENG test.
It is of great importance that close contact between the 
investigator and the patient exists in the vestibular function 
laboratory.
Table 42.2 Main parameters of interest of the standard 
vestibular test protocol
Protocol item
Ocular motor screening battery 
Spontaneous nystagmus detection 
Gaze-evoked test (center, 30° 
left/right, 15* up/down) 
Saccades
Optokinetic nystagmus 
Smooth pursuit
Position tests 
Positioning testing
Positional testing
Vestibular tests 
Rotatory chair test
Caloric test
Parameters of interest
Nystagmus direction, SCV 
Nystagmus at different 
positions 
Velocity, latency accuracy, 
binocular asymmetry 
Gain, left-right asymmetry 
Gain, left-right asymmetry, 
morphology
Nystagmus direction, 
latency, fatigability 
Nystagmus SCV, 
fixation suppression
Gain, phase, time constant, 
asymmetry 
Maximum SCV, labyrinth 
asymmetry, nystagmus 
asymmetry, total 
responsiveness
Eyes open in the dark versus eyes closed
When a test requires the absence of visual input, two conditions 
can be used: (1) eyes open in the dark (EOD); or (2) eyes closed 
(EC) in a semi-darkened room. The former condition is recom­
mended by the ASEM,3 since it produces more reliable and 
reproducible results. Also, closing the eyes induces Bell’s phe­
nomenon (transient upward movement of the eyes), which may 
slightly reduce the nystagmus. However, testing with EOD may 
lead to excessive eye blinking, which may produce artefacts 
that should not be confused with ocular movements (see Figure 
42.3). Moreover, clinical circumstances do not always allow for 
a totally darkened room, and it imposes additional problems for 
the tester. Thus, in some facilities for EOD testing, patients 
wear darkened goggles that completely occlude the eyes.
In either condition, it is the state of alertness that is most 
important, since there is a large influence of drowsiness on the 
vestibulo-ocular reflex.9 Because drowsiness reduces the magni­
tude and consistency of the VOR, the patient’s alertness should 
be maintained throughout the tests. This is often accomplished 
by asking patients to perform simple mental tasks during the 
non-visual tests.
Ocular motor screening battery
Search for vestibular nystagmus
Spontaneous nystagmus refers to unprovoked nystagmus of 
vestibular origin, but, for reasons of simplicity, the search for it 
is incorporated in the ocular motor test battery. To detect a
  

Instrumentation and principles of vestibular testing 723
spontaneous nystagmus, the patient is observed while seated in 
the dark. It is essential that the patient cannot fixate any visual 
target, since fixation largely reduces nystagmus of vestibular ori- 
gin. Additionally, the patient should not ‘fixate’ an imaginary 
object nearby, since this also suppresses nystagmus. Therefore, 
instructions to ‘look’ into the distance are preferable. The 
patient should be asked to perform some appropriate mental 
task (e.g. non-trivial multiplications). In our experience, in 
many cases, especially a few days after the onset of a vestibular 
neuritis, arousal has elicited a clear nystagmus that was not 
observed prior to the arousal (Figure 42.6).
Additionally, the patient can be asked to look in the dark 
at imaginary points left and right. This enables the investigator 
to see whether the nystagmus changes its amplitude according 
to Alexander’s law. Spontaneous nystagmus can be observed in 
normal individuals, but the SCV should not exceed 4-7%, in 
which case it is considered as abnormal. Table 42.3 lists normal 
limits as adopted by several authors. Proctor et al10 state that a 
nystagmus frequency of 6 beats per 10 s is the limit for normal- 
ity. A clinically significant spontaneous nystagmus would be 
expected to be observed consistently throughout the entire 
ENG test. A few isolated nystagmus beats should therefore not 
be considered as abnormal.
Fixation
To investigate the integrity of the ocular motor system and the 
ability to hold specific eye positions, it is common practice to 
assess the normal eye movements that are continuously used for 
our vision, i.e. fixation, saccades, smooth pursuit, and optoki­
netic movement. Fixation serves to hold the eye on a given 
point of interest; saccades are used to rapidly jump to a new tar­
get; smooth pursuit is needed to follow slowly moving targets; 
and optokinetic eye movements are induced by fiill-field 
movement of the surrounding world, such as occurs when the 
head moves in space.
In addition to a search for spontaneous nystagmus, the 
ability to hold the eye fixed on a stationary target that is eccen­
trically positioned is tested. Traditionally, this property is tested 
at the beginning of the ocular motor screening battery by the 
gaze-evoked nystagmus test. The patient is asked to fixate sev­
eral points at a given distance (at least as far as 1 m away to 
eliminate convergence, since this reduces nystagmus, if pre-
Figure 42.6 The effect of alerting the patient is clearly illustrated by the 
sudden appearance of a spontaneous nystagmus. At the time indicated by the 
arrow, the patient was asked 'How much is 12 times 13?'.
sent). These visual targets are in the primary position, i.e. in 
front of the patient, and 30° left and right, and 15° up and 
down. If the visual targets are farther away, such as 45° hori­
zontally, a physiological end-point nystagmus may be found. 
Abnormal findings in the gaze-evoked nystagmus test that 
occur in the absence of a spontaneous nystagmus strongly sug­
gest central nervous system pathology. See Chapter 47 for a fur­
ther description of lesions that result in gaze-evoked nystagmus.
Saccades
Saccades are tested by asking the patient to look at small visual 
targets that move abruptly left and right. To avoid anticipation, 
the amplitude of the moving target is random, or when a fixed 
distance is used (e.g. 10° left of the center to 10° right) the 
pauses between the jumps are random in duration. Attention 
from the patient is vital for optimum performance. Parameters 
of interest are latency (time in milliseconds between the stim­
ulus onset and the response), accuracy (if the patient looks sys­
tematically too far or too short, followed by a small reset 
saccade) and velocity. If an inaccuracy is systematically present 
without the proper correction saccade, the observer should con­
sider a faulty calibration. Table 42.3 lists normal values for peak 
velocity and latency. Abnormal findings suggest central nervous 
system pathology, but proper interpretation requires that the 
patient’s age be considered as an important influence, especially 
for an increase in latency.
If saccades are consistently overshooting or undershooting 
the target, without subsequent correction saccades, a 
faulty calibration is very likely.
Smooth pursuit
During the smooth pursuit test, the patient is asked to follow a 
gradually moving target, e.g. a small horizontally moving object 
on a projection screen. The target can move sinusoidally or may 
follow a triangle wave with speeds that do not exceed 10-30°/s. 
The total excursion of the target should be restricted to 30°.n 
Attention has a great influence, and often the patient needs 
encouragement, such as ‘please follow carefully the moving dot 
on the screen, and if you look carefully you can see a small red 
dot within the yellow one’. The effect of such an instruction is 
shown in Figure 42.7. Without proper instruction, the traces 
may suggest central nervous system lesions, especially when the 
errors are somewhat systematic. Next to the overall shape, the 
gain (eye velocity/target velocity) is often used as a quantitative 
measure for abnormality. Table 42.3 represents normal values 
for the gain of smooth pursuit testing.
Optokinetic test
The optokinetic test is performed by presenting a large visual 
moving stimulus, such as random dots or stripes, that nearly fills 
the patient’s entire visual field, so that the peripheral retina is 
stimulated. The stimulus, which typically consists of movement
  

724 
Vestibular science
Table 42.3 Normative data of different papers and reports
Test items
Spontaneous nystagmus
Ocular motor testing 
Saccades
Peak velocity for 20° saccade: lower limit
Latency for 20° saccade
Smooth pursuit gain at 0,3 Hz 
Optokinetic nystagmus asymmetry
Positional testing 
Rotary chair testing 
Sinusoidal harmonic acceleration test 
Gain 
0.05 Hz, 60°/s 
0.05 Hzr 60°/s 
0.05 Hz, 507s 
0.05 Hz, 60a/s 
Phase 
0.05 Hz, 60e/s 
0.05 Hz, 60°/s 
0.05 Hz, 507s 
0.05 Hz, 507s 
0,05 Hz, 607s
Directional preponderance 
0.05 Hz, 607s 
0.05 Hz, 507s
Velocity step 907s 
Gain
Time constant 
Directional preponderance
Velocity step 1007s 
Gain
Time constant 
Caloric testing 
Labyrinth asymmetry (%)
Normative limits (ji ±  2s]
<47s
<57s
<67s
<77s
<6 beats/lOs
2107s
2527s
2837s
104-365 ms 
128-255 ms 
>0.80 
< 1 3 %  
<16%
<67s
0.20-0.80
0.13-0.77
0.24-0.85
0.38-0.98
6-14°
2 - 20°
-1-18"
-1,9-24*
0,8-20.2
<18%
<24%
0.33-0.72 
11-26 s 
< 22%
0,27-0.99 
5-19.4 s
< 2 5 %
< 19 .8 %
< 1 9 %
< 1 5 %
Reference, number of cases
14,21
10,12
11,25
3,26,27
10
12,28
29, N =  20 
24, N =  38
30, N =  34 [IR method) 
24, /V= 38
14,22,31 
24, N =  38 
14r N =  43
11
32, N =  20
33, A/ =  10 
24, N = 3 8
34, N =  167
32, A/=20
33, N =  10 
24, N = 3 8
35, N=  50
34, A/ =  167
34, N =  208 
24, /V =  38
36, N = 2 0  
36, N = 2 0  
36, N =  20
14, N =  43 
14, N =  43
11, N =  114
10, N = 3 0
24, N = 3 8  
37, A/= 47
  

Instrumentation and principles of vestibular testing 725
Table 42,3 continued
Test items 
Caloric testing
General labyrinth asymmetry limit 
Directional preponderance (%)
Normative limits 
±  2s)
Reference, number of cases
General directional preponderance limit
< 2 2 %
14,21, N = 4 3
£ 2 0 %
26, N =  58
£ 2 0 %
38, N = 4 9
£ 2 5 %
34, N =  167
£ 2 2 %
Meta-analysis
£ 2 3 %
1 1 ,N = 1 1 4
£ 2 2 .7 %
10. N =  30
£ 1 6 %
24. W =  38
£ 1 8 %
37, W =  47
£ 2 8 %
14,21, W =  43
£ 2 6 %
26, W =  58
£ 2 7 %
38, W = 49
£ 31 ,8 %
34, N =  167
£ 2 6 %
Meta-analysis
at a constant velocity, should induce circular vection, i.e. the 
illusion that the patient is moving, not the surrounding world. 
Both clockwise (CW) and counterclockwise (CCW) stimuli 
are used. Testing of optokinetic nystagmus by use of a light bar 
or hand-held rotating drum does not provide true optokinetic 
stimulation and is really a smooth pursuit task. Asymmetry (see 
normal values in Table 42.3) and gain of the response to CW 
and CCW movements are best achieved with stimuli between 
20° and 60° per second.12 Ideally, the patient is gazing straight 
ahead, so that the passing stripes will produce a small-amplitude 
‘stare’ nystagmus. Both the foveal and retinal pathways are 
involved in this test. If the patient, however, follows the stripes,
Figure 42.7 Effect of encouragement (after the vertical line) of a patient 
during smooth pursuit tracking. Apparently consistent saccadic movements to 
one side can be particularly misleading, as in the first half of the figure. The 
bottom trace represents the visual target.
then a ‘look’ nystagmus is induced, which predominantly tests 
the foveal pathways. According to Honrubia,13 there is, so far, 
little evidence in species with a well-developed retinal macula 
that smooth pursuit and optokinetic nystagmus depend upon 
very different pathways. Therefore, abnormalities in smooth 
pursuit should be partially found also in the optokinetic test and 
vice versa. If this is not the case, either the stimulus was not 
properly delivered or the cooperation of the patient might be 
questioned. If both tests are abnormal, there is strong evidence 
for central nervous system pathology.
A general principle in the administration of the ocular 
motor test battery is to repeat trials for a given test until maxi­
mum performance is achieved from the patient. The rationale 
is that these tests are looking for signs of failure in the ocular 
motor pathways. If such a faulty pathway is present, it should be 
consistent. When a patient is less cooperative, however, an 
abnormal response could be a false-positive one.
Failure in the ocular motor pathways lead usually to 
consistent abnormal patterns. Therefore, either the 
patient can do it properly, or not at all. Decreased 
alertness hampers the repeatability.
Positioning and positional tests
The positioning test refers to movement of the patient, while 
the positional test refers to the sustained position of the patient 
with respect to gravity. Both tests look for slightly different phe­
nomena. Positioning tests aim to investigate paroxysmal posi­
tional nystagmus by means of the Dix-Hallpike maneuver 
(Chapter 48), whereas positional testing focuses on recording 
persistent positional nystagmus.
  

726 
Vestibular science
The procedure for positioning tests is as follows. The head 
of the patient is turned 45° to the right or left while the patient 
is seated and with eyes opened behind FrenzePs glasses or prefer­
ably VOG goggles. Next, the patient is placed supine, rather 
abruptly, with the head on the bench or head hanging slightly 
(supported by the examiner). The eye movements also recorded 
with ENG or VOG are inspected for nystagmus, especially nys­
tagmus that is paroxysmal, i.e. that appears and then decreases, 
or nystagmus that persists throughout the entire time that the 
patient is lying in that position. Next, the patient is returned to 
the seated position. During the test, the patient is asked 
whether he or she feels dizzy, and if so, when the dizziness 
occurred, for how long, and whether this dizziness corresponds 
with the complaint that prompted the visit to the specialist. 
The same procedure is then repeated for the other side. When 
the patient’s history suggests benign paroxysmal positional ver­
tigo (BPPV), testing should begin with the involved side. Oth­
erwise, the response might be reduced through fatigue and the 
effect missed.
Additionally, supine, left lateral and right lateral positions 
can be investigated. For these positional tests the patient is 
placed in several positions and investigated for persistent 
response, lasting for as long as the position is maintained. The 
most frequently used positions are supine, decubitus left and 
decubitus right, where each position is maintained for at least 
30 s. When otoconical debris is adherent to the cupula, the 
cupula is transformed from a rotational detector into a transla­
tion and gravitation detector. This altered physiological state of 
the cupula may result in persistent positional nystagmus. This 
nystagmus can be either ageotropic (beating away from the 
earth), or geotropic (beating towards the earth). VOG is of 
great use for positional and positioning tests, since vertical and 
torsional nystagmus may be evident in different positions.
Vestibular tests
Rotary chair test
The major aim of rotary chair tests is the study of the VOR by 
application of measurable, repeatable and physiological stimuli 
to the vestibular system. From a systems engineering stand­
point, the input is acceleration while the output is slow 
component eye velocity. The relationship between stimulus 
and response can be described by gain (response eye 
velocity/stimulus velocity), phase (time-lag between response 
and stimulus), and symmetry. These parameters reveal how the 
entire vestibular system, i.e. end organs, eighth cranial nerve 
and central pathways, react to the rotational stimulation. More 
specifically, the rotary chair test demonstrates how clockwise 
and counterclockwise stimuli are similarly processed by the 
entire vestibular system. For proper gain and phase calculation, 
it is strongly recommended to record also the stimulus by means 
of an accelerometer placed on the patient’s head.
During rotary chair testing, which is performed in darkness, 
mental alertness plays a great role. For this purpose, patients 
should be systematically asked to perform mental tasks, e.g. to 
count aloud backwards from 200 to 0 in steps of 3. Speaking to
the patient, except through headphones, should be avoided, 
since this will provide auditory clues regarding orientation, 
which may jeopardize the validity of the test. Figure 42.8 
illustrates the effect of alerting the patient on the response.
During rotational testing, let the patient perform 
mental tasks, such as counting backwards in steps of 3. 
Do not talk continuously to the patient because that 
provides orientation clues that influence the VOR.
Rotary chair tests can be categorized according to the 
vestibular subsystem that they test, which in general is achieved 
by changing the axis of rotation with respect to gravity and 
changing the orientation of the head with respect to the axis of 
rotation.
Earth vertical axis rotation stimulates both horizontal semi­
circular canal systems. Some experts14,15 underline the need for 
the head to be tilted forward 30° during rotation to bring the 
horizontal semicircular canals into the plane of rotation. Oth­
ers remain vague about which head position is preferred for the 
rotation test. We performed an experiment where 24 normal 
subjects were rotated (0.05 Hz, 50%) in both the upright posi­
tion and the pitched-down position, in a random order.16 When 
analyzed pairwise, the gain was significantly higher in the 
upright position than in the pitched position. The variances of 
both conditions were not significantly different. Therefore, 
since the upright position is also a more natural condition, we 
recommend rotating the patient in the head-upright position.
Off-vertical axis rotation and eccentric rotation (off-axis 
vertical rotation) investigate both otoliths and the semicircular 
canal systems. See Chapter 45 for a further description of this. 
A mixed type of paradigm exists in a few centers (e.g. Berlin 
and Antwerp), where during earth vertical axis rotation the 
axis is displaced gradually 4 cm to each side so that the rotation 
axis coincides alternately with one of the peripheral vestibular 
systems of the patient. This stimulus enables the excitation of 
the otolith organs of one labyrinth at a time.6,39
Rotary chair tests differ by their stimulus frequency. Based 
on the viscoelastic properties of the endolymph and the semi­
circular canal geometry, the VOR works optimally between 0.1 
and 5 Hz,17 wherein the gain is nearly unity and the phase near 
zero degrees. That is, between 0.1 and 5 Hz, vestibular-induced 
eye movement is compensatory, i.e. instantaneous and fully 
matching the head movement. The predominant frequencies of 
rotational head perturbations during walking and running are 
indeed between 0.5 and 5 Hz.18 At lower frequencies, i.e. below 
0.1 Hz, the gain decreases and the phase lead increases. During 
natural head movements outside the laboratory, visual input 
works synergistically with vestibular input, resulting again in 
optimal gaze stabilization.
The optimal stimulus for VOR testing includes stimuli at 
high frequencies, i.e. above 0.1 Hz, and preferentially above 1 
Hz, but the construction of such rotary chair units is mechani-
  

Instrumentation and principles of vestibular testing 727
30
20
10
0
“ 10
-2 0
-3 0
r c°i
- (Hor)
60
40
20
0
-2 0
-40
-6 0
r (°)
- (Hor)
78 
82 
86 
90 
94 
98 
102 106 110 114 118 122(s)
23 
27 
31 
35 
39 
43 
47 
51 
55 
59 
63 
67 (s)
80
60
40
20n
m
‘ (Hor)
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-4 0
-6 0
-80
r(°)
; ,H°" 
_
 
/
\
-20
-40
-60
-80
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i
w
/
 
\ y  vy
•
1 
1 
1
1
*
1
 
I
I
 
1 
I 
k
a 
78 
82 
86 
90 
94 
98 
102 106 110 114 118 I22(s)
l_SJ 
23 
27 
31 
35 
39 
43 
47 
51 
55 
59 
63 
67 (s)
cally cumbersome and expensive, which is the reason why only 
a few centers have this kind of equipment.19,20
Different paradigms have been developed for use with the 
standard earth vertical axis rotation chairs. The most com- 
monly used stimulus is sinusoidal harmonic acceleration, 
wherein the patient is rotated alternately to the left and right 
following a sinusoidal pattern. Usually, the frequency ranges 
from 0.01 to 1.0 Hz, with a maximum velocity of 50-60%. Such 
a stimulus is usually very well tolerated even by dizzy patients. 
It should be noted that when the response is too low, charac­
terized by a gain below 0.1, the phase and asymmetry should be 
interpreted cautiously, since in that case the noise level is too 
high for proper calculation of phase and asymmetry.
If the gain is too low, measures of asymmetry or phase are 
inaccurate, and should be interpreted with caution.
A sinusoidal harmonic acceleration test battery often con­
sists of a combination of successive rotations at different fre-
Figure 42.8 The effect of alertness on the rotary chair test is illustrated by the 
change in gain and asymmetry. The top trace shows the nystagmus, and the 
bottom trace the slow component velocity. The solid line through the dots is 
obtained after median filtering. This line should be a simple sinusoid since the 
stimulus is a simple sinusoid. All tests were at 0.05 Hz with a maximum velocity 
of 50°/s. (a) During the first part of the test, the patient counted to herself, 
whereas after second 102 she started counting aloud. Note the effect on the 
amplitude (i.e. gain), (b) The rotary chair test response where a patient stopped 
counting after 95s. The second half of the recording shows that there was no 
coherent nystagmus response and the gain decreased significantly. The chair, 
however, did continue rotating, (c) The effect of alertness on response 
asymmetry. During the first part (until 50s), the patient did not count, while she 
did count aloud backward after second 50. The asymmetry during the first part 
is about 50°/o whereas in the second part it is about 10%. Caloric testing 
revealed that the left labyrinth was 38% less active than the right labyrinth.
The alertness facilitated the central compensation mechanism so as to make the 
response more symmetric.
quencies, depending on the performance of the rotary chair 
unit. This test only approaches the frequency at which the 
VOR really functions optimally. Another disadvantage is that 
the test is lengthy and the patient’s level of alertness may 
decline towards the end of the test, resulting in less reliable 
responses. To mitigate this problem, a pseudorandom test can 
be used, where the chair is rotated according to a sum of 3-4 
sinusoids with different frequencies. The result is a pseudoran­
dom stimulus in which, for every epoch, all frequencies are pre­
sent. Fourier analysis allows gain and phase at different 
frequencies to be computed. However, a frequency-dependent 
measure of asymmetry cannot be extracted from the results. 
Also, the reliability of the data at each frequency may be less 
than that achieved with single-frequency sinusoids.
The velocity step test consists of rotation of the patient at 
a constant velocity, typically 60-120%, until no nystagmus is 
observed, and then an abrupt stop. The initial acceleration is 
sometimes chosen to be subliminal (<1 to 2%2) but the brake 
yields decelerations of 120%2 up to 500%2. This procedure is 
performed in both CW and CCW directions. When turning 
CW at suprathreshold acceleration, the nystagmus will beat to
  

728 
Vestibular science
the right, since the right labyrinth is excited and the left inhib­
ited. When the rotational velocity remains constant, the nys­
tagmus fades away, due to the relaxing cupula of both horizontal 
SCCs, although the eye-movement response is prolonged by 
the velocity storage mechanism (see Chapter 41). When nys­
tagmus is no longer present, the chair is briskly stopped, after 
which, if the chair was spinning clockwise, the left vestibular 
system is highly stimulated at high acceleration. The velocity 
step stimulus has a broad frequency content, which helps ren­
der it a relevant VOR stimulus. Following deceleration, nystag­
mus is observed in which the slow component velocity 
decreases exponentially over time. When plotted on a log-lin­
ear diagram, the SCV follows a linear relationship in time. The 
intercept with the vertical axis denotes the initial SCV, from 
which the gain can be calculated. The time at which the 
response level declines to 37% of its initial response is defined 
as the time constant. This value is reflected in the slope of the 
log-linear diagram of the SCV over time. The time constant is 
analogous to the phase of the sinusoidal response.
Table 42.4 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of 
the different rotary chair tests.
Since part of the methodology to obtain the most reliable 
test results pertains to the instructions given to the patient, 
examples of instructions for the spontaneous nystagmus detec­
tion and the ocular motor test battery are listed in Table 42.5.
Visual-vestibular interaction test
Visual-vestibular interaction testing is performed by asking 
patients to look at a small target that rotates with them during 
earth vertical axis rotation or by having them view earth-fixed 
full-field stripes or dots while undergoing earth vertical axis
rotation. In this way, vision is used to either reduce or augment 
the vestibular response, respectively. Visual-vestibular interac­
tion testing is particularly useful when assessing central vestibu­
lar abnormalities, as appropriately combining visual and 
vestibular information depends on the normal functioning of 
brainstem and cerebellar structures. Typically, patients are 
rotated at a single sinusoidal frequency (e.g. 0.05 Hz): (1) in the 
dark; (2) with a fixation target; and (3) with earth-fixed stripes. 
A sinusoidal optokinetic stimulus while the patient is station­
ary may be used as a pure visual stimulus. The responses to these 
visual, vestibular stimuli are recorded and analyzed in a manner 
similar to that for measuring the response to sinusoidal rotation 
tests in darkness, yielding gain and phase.
Caloric test
The caloric test is the preferred test to lateralize a peripheral 
vestibular lesion. In general, it is used to assess the function of the 
horizontal semicircular canal. For this test, the patient is placed 
supine with the head inclined at approximately 30°, such that the 
horizontal semicircular canal is positioned vertically. After care­
ful inspection of the external auditory canals to exclude perfora­
tion or other adverse conditions such as impacted cerumen, both 
ear canals are consecutively irrigated with warm (44°C) and cool 
(30°C) water for 30-40 s. This induces a thermal gradient in the 
vestibular system, and mainly affects the horizontal semicircular 
canal, which lies closest to the external ear. When the patient is 
placed properly, this thermal gradient produces a convection 
current of the endolymph in the horizontal semicircular canal 
(Figure 42.9). The warm (44°C) irrigation induces a utriculo- 
petal endolymph flow, which corresponds to an excitation of 
hair cells of the crista in the ipsilateral horizontal canal, resulting
Table 42,4 VOR investigation by rotatory chair tests
Stimulus type 
Torsion swing
Sinusoidal harmonic 
acceleration (SHA) test
Pseudorandom test
Velocity step
Whole body high- 
frequency test
Frequency 
Typically 0.05 Hz
e.g. 0.01,0.05,0.1,0.5 Hz
Combination of for example,
0,01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5 Hz in 
pseudorandom waveform
High frequency
1,0-3.0 Hz
Advantage
Short examination (2 min) 
Easy to perform (chair)
Broadband test of the VOR
Broadband test of the VOR 
Alertness is equal for all 
frequencies
High frequency stimulus, i.e.
close to physiological 
Less time-consuming than 
SHA or pseudorandom 
Time constant is comparable to phase
Test VOR at its appropriate frequency 
No neck input 
No anticipation input
Disadvantage
Only one frequency, 
which may be too low
Time-consuming
Alertness may not be 
equal for all 
frequencies
Time-consuming
Technically difficult
Two tests must be
performed (CW and 
CCW)
Expensive equipment 
Patient has to be 
fastened thoroughly
  

Instrumentation and principles of vestibular testing 729
Table 42.5 Instructions given to the patient during vestibular testing
Protocol item 
Comments and instructions to the patients
1. Ocular motor screening battery 
Spontaneous nystagmus detection
Gaze-evoked nystagmus 
Saccades
Optokinetic nystagmus 
Smooth pursuit
2. Positioning and positional test battery 
Positioning-positional
In semi-darkened room: 'Please close your eyes, and look in the distance'
If eyes open in a total darkened room: ‘Please look in the distance'
After ±20s, To maintain your alertness: how much is 12 times 13?'
'Please fixate carefully on the dot straight ahead' (10s)( lo ok at the left 
dot' (I0s)p and so on for all targets.
'The dot will jump back and forth now for a while. Please follow it carefully. 
Do not jump too soon or too late'
'Look at the stripes and count them as they move past your eyes Please, 
do not stare'
'Follow carefully the moving dot Do not run ahead and do not stay behind'
Keep your eyes wide open throughout the maneuver' (if using Frenzel's or 
VOG goggles). 'Tell us if you are dizzy during the different stages of the 
maneuver, and for how long'
3. Vestibular tests 
Rotation test
Caloric test
The chair will turn back and forth. It might make you a bit dizzy. Keep your 
eyes closed (or open as appropriate). Look to an imaginary horizon and 
count aloud backward from 200 to 0 in steps of 3 during the entire test1 
'We'll put consecutively for 30 to 40 seconds warm and cool water in your 
ears. This might generate some dizziness, which is perfectly normal. Do 
not be alarmed. It lasts for nearly half a minute after the irrigation has 
stopped. This test serves to compare the health of your inner ears with 
one another. Keep your eyes closed (or open if appropriate) and count 
aloud from 100 to 0 by T
in a nystagmus that beats towards the irrigated ear. The cool 
(30°C) irrigation induces a utriculofugal movement of the 
endolymph, resulting in a hyperpolarization of the hair cells in 
the horizontal semicircular canal crista. Therefore, cool irrigation 
corresponds to rotational movement to the opposite side, pro­
voking a nystagmus that beats away from the irrigated ear. The 
mnemonic COWS (Cold Opposite, Warm Same) summarizes 
the nystagmus direction with caloric stimulation. Although ther­
mal convection accounts for the larger portion of the caloric 
response, two additional causes for the nystagmus response are to 
be noted; direct thermal stimulation of the vestibular end organ 
and neural elements, as shown by microgravity experiments as 
well as volume expansion of the endolymph.
The caloric stimulation is equivalent to a very low- 
frequency rotation (0.002-0.004 Hz),12 in the upright position. 
During caloric stimulation, the contralateral labyrinth is not 
simultaneously stimulated. Thus, the patient’s central vestibu­
lar system is confronted with contradictory information and a 
false sensation of movement. Therefore, during caloric testing, 
vertigo may arise. It is very important that the patient is 
informed about this physiologically normal effect so that he or 
she does not react with panic or anxiety. Most patients undergo 
caloric testing with little discomfort. Both open-loop and 
closed-loop systems are used; the former is inappropriate in the
Ampullopetal deviation 
of cupula
Ampulla
Middle
ear
44g Water
External canal
canal
Figure 42.9 Biophysical basis for the caloric test. The thermal gradient (along 
the line abc) across the semicircular canal produces a convection current, 
deflecting the ampula. The cupular deflection is exaggerated, since it only 
deflects 1.5-2.6 pm for cold (10°C) water irrigation. (Adapted from Baloh and 
Honrubia. Clinical Neurophysiology of the Vestibular System, 2nd edn. Philadelphia. 
FA Davis Company, 1990.14).
  

730 
Vestibular science
case of a perforated eardrum. Alternatively, warm and cool air 
can be used, although this can result in paradoxical results, 
since air flow across a moist surface such as the ear mucosa cre­
ates a cooling effect, even with warm air. Water is a better 
medium for heat exchange and is preferable.3 Since warm water 
induces vasodilatation of the blood vessels in the irrigated 
region, the thermal conductivity will increase. More heat is 
delivered to the horizontal semicircular canal as long as the irri­
gation lasts, but when the irrigation is ceased, the heat will be 
dissipated faster to the surrounding tissue. Cold water will 
induce vasoconstriction of the surrounding blood vessels, so 
that the stimulus is less efficiently transferred to the horizontal 
semicircular canal but the response will last longer. This bio­
physical approach explains why the response to the warm stim­
ulus is often higher than that to the cold stimulus. The cold 
stimulus, however, provokes nystagmus reponses for a longer 
period.21
As an order of irrigation, we suggest warm right, warm left, 
cold right and finally cold left. A few organizations propose this 
order (The Dutch Vestibular Society3). If a warm irrigation does 
not induce any nystagmus, that peripheral system is suspected 
to be hypo- or areflexic. In such a case, cool irrigation with 
water of 30°C may produce little or no response. In order to 
ascertain the difference between total absence of excitability 
and reduced excitability, irrigation with iced water can be cho­
sen as a very strong stimulus. When no nystagmus response is 
still measured, the probability that the horizontal semicircular 
canal is entirely areflexic increases considerably. Since an 
appropriately directed nystagmus may in fact represent an 
unmasked spontaneous nystagmus, it is critical, if possible, to 
immediately place the patient in the prone position to search 
for a reversal in the direction of the nystagmus. In this case, the 
horizontal canal is likely to be hypoactive but still active.
The amount of water used as well as the duration of irriga­
tion varies in the literature, but in general it consists of 30-40- 
s irrigation with water of 30° and 44°C, with a flow rate of 350 
±  35 ml/min.3
The instructions to the patient are again of great impor­
tance, especially those that alter the level of alertness. Differ­
ent mental tasks are asked, such as naming surnames, cities, 
flowers etc. starting with the letter ‘A’, then with ‘B’ etc. We 
prefer to ask the patient to count aloud backwards, such as 
100, 98, 96 etc., since this is a very constant mental task that 
most people can perform. Mental tasks also help the patient 
not to think excessively about his or her possible vertigo, 
which may be induced by the irrigation. After each irrigation, 
at least 5 min are needed to allow temperature stabilization in 
the labyrinth.
Warm irrigation corresponds with upright rotation 
to the right side, for that semi circular canal. Cold 
irrigation to rotation in the opposite direction.
Preferred order of irrigation: warm right, warm left, 
cold right, cold left.
Maintain alertness throughout the caloric test. 
Calibrate prior to irrigation.
Caloric responses should be consistent. If one out of 
four irrigations is not in agreement, it should be 
repeated.
Most studies agree upon the fact that the most informative 
variable consists of the maximum SCV. It is determined as the 
average SCV during a time window of, for example, 5-10 s 
around the peak response. Other methods of determination 
consist of a fit of the SCV curve over time to a predicted 
response. Labyrinth and nystagmus asymmetry are calculated 
using Jongkees’ formula, which has the form: (A — B)/(A +  B) 
X 100. The ‘normalization’ (i.e. dividing by (A +  B)) reduces 
the typical biological variability among different individuals. 
Labyrinth asymmetry is then calculated as [(RW + RC) — (LW 
+  LC)]/(RW +  RC +  LW + LC) X 100 with RW =  right warm, 
LW =  left warm, RC =  right cold, and LC =  left cold. Table 
42.3 provides a list of different limits for asymmetry, according 
to different authors. In order to provide the reader with a value 
that takes into account the different studies, we offer a weighted 
mean, where the weight is determined by the number of cases 
in each normative group. This approach is used because we did 
not have access to all the individual measurements. With this 
method, we obtain a general limit for labyrinth asymmetry of 
22%. Nystagmus asymmetry (directional preponderance) is cal­
culated as [(RW +  LC) -  (LW +  RC)]/(RW +  RC +  LW +  LC) 
X 100. Here the general limit for abnormality, based on the 
weighted mean of the different studies (see Table 42.3), is cal­
culated as 26%. See Chapter 43 for clinical interpretation of 
labyrinth and nystagmus asymmetries.
Anatomical temporal bone differences, bloodflow and 
middle ear fluid differences between the left and right ear are 
uncontrollable factors that cause variations in the caloric test 
outcome. Other issues are more controllable, such as calibration 
(to be performed prior to each irrigation), arousal state of the 
patient, ensured by the assertive attitude of the technician, 
identical application of the stimuli, and temperature control of 
the applied stimulus. If one out of four responses is not in agree­
ment with the other three, it is highly recommended to repeat 
the ‘faulty’ irrigation. Otherwise, false conclusions may be 
drawn from this investigation. Figure 42.10a illustrates four 
responses, of which one was not in accordance with the other 
three. The butterfly representation of these reponses is depicted 
in Figure 42.10b. The resulting labyrinth asymmetry was in this 
case 19%, which is considered as borderline abnormal. Repeat­
ing the irrigation resulted in the traces on Figures 42.10c and 
42.10d. These responses revealed no labyrinth asymmetry at all 
(2%).
A caloric fixation-suppression index is obtained by having 
the patient fixate a visual target, more than 1 m away to avoid
  

Instrumentation and principles of vestibular testing 731
suppression due to eye convergence, shortly after the peak 
response. The fixation-suppression index is defined as the aver- 
age SC V  during fixation divided by the average SC V  without 
fixation. For a further detailed description of caloric testing, see 
Jacobson et al.
Since the caloric test remains the only tool to evaluate the 
function of each labyrinth separately, it is very strongly recom­
mended that each laboratory establishes its own set of norma­
tive data, to obtain proper normative limits.
Nonnative data
Although it is repeatedly stated that each vestibular depart­
ment should establish its own normative limits based on a nor­
mative study, it is not common practice, since it is a time-con- 
suming and costly enterprise. However, several studies have 
reported on normative data. The results of the larger part of 
these studies are reported in Table 42.3. It is obvious that a con­
siderable variation exists among the different studies. Therefore 
we performed a meta-analysis on the data for caloric testing, for 
which there is the most variability. Using this meta-analysis, we 
determined that a general upper normal limit for labyrinth 
asymmetry (reduced vestibular response) of 22% is obtained, 
and a general upper normal limit for directional preponderance 
of 26% is obtained.
0
Figure 42.10 (a,b) Caloric responses for which the left cold irrigation is not in accordance with the others. Both raw data traces and butterfly diagrams are shown. 
The labyrinth asymmetry indicated a left labyrinthine hypofunction of 19%, which in our setting is considered as abnormal. The directional preponderance yielded 
2%. The vertical lines indicate the time during which the patient was asked to fixate a point in darkness. The fixation indexes for right and left warm were 10%  and 
22%, respectively (below 5 0 %  is normal). (c,d) The left cold irrigation was repeated, resulting in a normal bilateral response. The labyrinth preponderance yielded 2 %  
and the directional preponderance 12%  nystagmus to the right.
  

732 
Vestibular science
100
Right Ear 
Cold
ou
60
40
- SCV (°/9)
Warm 
Left Ear
CO
o . 
i
100^88** 60 
40 
20 
0
"
V
i l  
! 
/
-
° Left 
| 
• f "
 
60 
• Right 
1 I
a  Inverse 
80 
Warm
100
E
* • *  
^ a a r ^ Q  
T W M 20 
140 
w
Cold
41 
43 
45 
47 
49 
51 
53 
55 
57 
59 
61 
63 
(s)
0
  

Instrumentation and principles of vestibular testing 733
It is strongly recommended that each laboratory 
establishes its own normative data.
Meta-analysis indicates an upper normal limit for 
labyrinth asymmetry of 22% and for directional 
labyrinth preponderance of 26%.
A dedicated and well trained technician is crucial for 
the reliability of vestibular tests.
Conclusion
Both methodological and biological issues, such as calibration 
or the anatomical differences between the left and right ears, 
can influence the outcome of vestibular function assessment. 
These factors should be taken into account so that each labora­
tory has a standard measurement protocol and a consistent 
methodology. Apart from the above-discussed methodological 
issues, it is of major importance that the tests are executed by a 
well-informed, attentive and dedicated technician. Without 
the certainty that the vestibular tests are performed by such a 
well-trained technician, many vestibular test results will be 
unreliable. Additionally, each vestibular function laboratory 
should, if possible, establish its own normative data, and follow 
a strict protocol. Under these constraints, vestibular function 
testing can reveal crucial information for the clinician to aid in 
the development of a management strategy for the patient with 
a suspected vestibular disorder.
Acknowledgement
We wish to thank Mrs Anja Van der Stappen, MD, for her con­
tribution to the normative study. Part of the normative research 
was funded by FWO grant 3.0305.96.
References
1. Stewart AL, Ware JE. Measuring Functioning and Well-being: The 
Medical Outcomes Study Approach. Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 1992.
2. Jacobson GP, Newman CW. The development of the Dizziness 
Handicap Inventory. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1990; 
116(4): 424-7.
3. Committee on Hearing, 
Bioacoustics, 
and 
Biomechanics. 
Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. 
National Research Council. Evaluation of tests for vestibular 
function. Aviat Space Environ Med 1992; 63(2 suppl): A 1-34.
4. Moore ST, Haslwanter T, Curthoys IS, Smith ST. A geometric 
basis for measurement of three-dimensional eye position using 
image processing. Vision Res 1996; 36(3): 445-59.
5. Haslwanter T, Moore ST. A theoretical analysis of three-dimen- 
sional eye position measurement using polar cross-correlation. 
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 1995; 42(11): 1053-61.
6. Clarke AH, Engelhom A. Unilateral testing of utricular function. 
Exp Brain Res 1998; 121(4): 457-64.
7. Haslwanter T. Measurement and analysis techniques for three- 
dimensional eye movements. In: Fetter M, Haslwanter T, 
Misslisch H, Tweed D, eds. Three-dimensional Kinematics of Eye, 
Head and Limb Movements. Amsterdam: Harwood Academic 
Publishers, 1997: 401-12.
8. Robinson DA. A method of measuring eye movement using a scle­
ral search coil in a magnetic field. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 1963; 
10: 137-45.
9. Moller C, Odkvist L, White V, Cyr D. The plasticity of 
compensatory eye movements in rotatory tests. I. The effect of 
alertness and eye closure. Acta Otolaryngol Stockh 1990; 
109(1-2): 15-24.
10. Proctor L, Glackin R, Shimizu H, Smith C, Lietman P. Reference 
values for serial vestibular testing. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1986; 
95(1 Pt 1): 83-90.
  

734 
Vestibular science
11. Barber HO, Stockwell CW. Manual of Electronystagmography, 2nd 
edn. St Louis: Mosby, 1980.
12. Shepard NT, Telian SA. Practical Management of the Balance 
Disorder Patient, 1st edn. San Diego, London: Singular Publishing 
Group, 1996.
13. Honrubia V. Contemporary vestibular function testing: accom­
plishments and future perspectives. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1995; 112(1): 64-77.
14. Baloh RW, Honrubia V. Clinical Neurophysiology of the Vestibular 
System, 2nd edn. Philadelphia: FA Davis Company, 1990.
15. Savundra P, Luxon LM. The physiology of equilibrium and its 
application to the dizzy patient. In: Kerr A, ed. Scott-Brown’s 
Otolaryngology: Basic Sciences. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, 
1997: 1-65.
16. Van der Stappen A, Wuyts FL, Van de Heyning P. Head position 
influence on the vestibulo-ocular reflex during rotational testing. 
Acta Otolaryngol Stockh 1999; 119: 892-4.
17. Wilson BJ, Melville Jones G. Mammalian Vestibular Physiology. 
New York: Plenum Press, 1979.
18. Grossman GE, Leigh RJ, Abel LA, Lanska DJ, Thurston SE. Fre- 
quency and velocity of rotational head perturbations during loco­
motion. Exp Brain Res 1988; 70(3): 470-6.
19. Hyden D, Larsby B, Odkvist LM. Broad-frequency rotatory test- 
ing. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl Stockh 1988; 455: 48-52.
20. Dayal VS, Mai M, Tomlinson RD. High frequency rotation test: 
clinical and research application. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1988; 41: 
40-43.
21. Sills AW, Baloh RW, Honrubia V. Caloric testing 2. Results in nor- 
mal subjects. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol Suppl 1977; 86(5 Pt 3 Suppl 
43): 7-23.
22. Jacobson GP, Newman CW, Kartush JM. Handbook of Balance 
Function Testing. 1st edn. San Diego: Singular, 1997.
23. Harada Y, Ariki T. A new theory for thermal influences on 
endolymphatic flow. Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1985; 242(1): 13-17.
24. Van der Stappen A, Wuyts FL, Van de Heyning P. Computerised 
electronystagmography: normative data revisited. Acta Otolaryngol 
2000; 120: 724-30.
25. Mulch G, Lewitzki W. Spontaneous and positional nystagmus in 
healthy persons demonstrated only by electronystagmography:
physiological spontaneous nystagmus or ‘functional scar’? Arch 
Otorhinolaryngol 1977; 215(2): 135-45.
26. Coats AC. Directional preponderance and spontaneous nystag- 
mus. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1966; 75: 1135-59.
27. Fischer AJ, Huygen PL, Folgering HT, Verhagen WI, Theunissen 
EJ. Vestibular hyperreactivity and hyperventilation after whiplash 
injury. J Neurol Sci 1995; 132(1): 35-43.
28. Baloh RW, Konrad HR, Sills AW, Honrubia V. The saccade veloc­
ity test. Neurology 1975; 25(11): 1071-6.
29. Henriksson NG, Pyykko I, Schalen L, Wennmo C. Velocity pat­
terns of rapid eye movements. Acta Otolaryngol Stockh 1980; 
89(5-6): 504-12.
30. Abel LA, Troost BT, DelPOsso LF. The effects of age on normal 
saccadic characteristics and their variability. Vision Res 1983; 
23(1): 33-7.
31. Leigh RJ, Zee DS. The Neurology of Eye Movements, 2nd edn. 
Philadelphia: Davis, 1991.
32. Baloh RW, Sakala SM, Yee RD, Langhofer L, Honrubia V. 
Quantitative vestibular testing. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1984; 
92(2): 145-50.
33. Hess K, Baloh RW, Honrubia V, Yee RD. Rotational testing in 
patients with bilateral peripheral vestibular disease. Laryngoscope 
1985; 95(1): 85-8.
34. Peterka RJ, Black FO, Schoenhoff MB. Age-related changes in 
human vestibulo-ocular reflexes: sinusoidal rotation and caloric 
tests. J Vestib Res 1990; 1(1): 49-59.
35. Wall C, Black FO, Hunt AE. Effects of age, sex and stimulus para­
meters upon vestibulo-ocular responses to sinusoidal rotation. 
Acta Otolaryngol Stockh 1984; 98(3-4): 270-8.
36. Theunissen EJ, Huygen PL, Folgering HT. Vestibular hyperreac­
tivity and hyperventilation. Clin Otolaryngol 1986; 11(3): 161-9.
37. Jongkees LBW, Philipszoon AJ. Electronystagmography. Acta 
Otolaryngol Stockh Suppl 1964; 189.
38. Boniver-R, Demanez JP. Epreuves rotatoires et caloriques chez le 
sujet normal. Med Pharm, 1975.
39. Wuyts FL, Hoppenbrouwers M, Van de Heyning PH. Unilateral 
Otolith function testing. In Lacour M, ed. Posture et Equilibre. Dys- 
functionnements da Systeme vestibulaire, compensation et reeducation. 
Marseille: Solal, 2001: 257-65.
  

Clinical application of 
vestibular laboratory 
testing
Joseph M Furman, Floris L Wuyts
Introduction
This chapter discusses the clinical application of vestibular 
laboratory testing and focuses on the test techniques discussed 
in Chapter 42. To make the material more accessible to the 
reader, the organization of this chapter will follow the organi­
zation of Chapter 42. Posturography, discussed in Chapter 44 
and emerging technologies, discussed in Chapter 45 will not 
be addressed in this chapter. First, there will be a discussion of 
the eye-movement recording techniques that are useful in the 
clinical setting. Then, there will be discussion of the indica­
tions for vestibular laboratory testing. Subsequently, there will 
be a discussion of the clinical significance of individual 
vestibular laboratory test abnormalities that may be uncovered 
during ocular-motor screening, positional and positioning 
tests, caloric testing, and rotational testing. Various patterns of 
vestibular laboratory test abnormalities will be discussed. The 
chapter will conclude with a discussion of laboratory testing 
abnormalities likely to be encountered in several common 
balance disorders.
Choice of eye-movement recording 
technique
As discussed in Chapter 19, vestibular laboratory testing relies 
almost entirely upon recording eye position. Posturography 
and some of the emerging technologies (see Chapters 44 and 
45) are notable exceptions. Electro-oculography (EOG) has 
for many decades been the standard eye-movement measure­
ment technique. EOG is a safe, convenient and efficient 
means of recording eye position in persons of all ages. The
primary limitation of EOG relates to its inability to provide 
consistently reliable vertical eye-movement recording and 
problematic artefacts caused by eye blinks. Also, fluctuations 
in the relationship between EOG voltage and eye position can 
reduce the accuracy and reliability of vestibular laboratory 
testing. Another drawback of EOG recordings is that a certain 
level of experience and expertise is required in order to obtain 
reliable recordings. In particular, electrode impedance can be 
problematic.
Video-oculography (VOG) will eventually replace EOG as 
the method of choice for recording eye movements during 
vestibular laboratory testing. VOG has the advantage of allow­
ing both horizontal and vertical eye-movement recordings with 
currently available technology. As with EOG, eye-blink 
artefacts can be problematic. Moreover, relative movement 
between the VOG goggles and the head can produce artefacts. 
As with EOG, some expertise is required to obtain reliable 
recordings, but overall, the ability to record eye position with­
out actually affixing electrodes to the face is a definite advan­
tage. 
Neither 
EOG 
nor 
currently 
routinely 
available 
two-dimensional VOG provides the ability to record torsional 
eye movements. However, with advanced image processing, 
VOG is almost certainly going to be able to provide three- 
dimensional eye-movement recordings. This ability may allow 
some of the emerging technologies discussed in Chapter 46 to 
become clinically useful.
At present, EOG and VOG are alternative techniques that 
are very comparable. However, as image-processing capabilities 
improve and camera speeds increase, it is likely that VOG will 
eventually replace EOG as the preferred eye-movement record­
ing technique during vestibular laboratory testing. Indeed, aside 
from the ability to record with eyes closed with EOG and not 
with VOG, and a limited frame rate of VOG, there is no rela­
tive advantage of EOG over VOG.

736 
Vestibular science
Indications for vestibular laboratory 
testing
Table 43.1 lists the uses of vestibular laboratory testing. 
Vestibular laboratory testing is typically ordered by a specialist 
who has a high level of suspicion that a vestibular disorder may 
underlie a patient’s symptoms. Because of the type of informa­
tion that can be obtained from such testing, diagnostic accuracy 
can be improved. In particular, vestibular laboratory testing can 
aid the clinician in determining whether or not a vestibular 
system abnormality is present and, if so, whether the problem 
can be localized to the central or peripheral vestibular system. 
For patients with peripheral vestibular ailments, laboratory test­
ing can aid in lateralizing the lesion.
Certainly, not all patients with symptoms of dizziness and 
dysequilibrium should undergo vestibular laboratory testing. 
However, following a review of appropriate historical and 
physical examination data, the clinician may determine that 
vestibular laboratory testing is necessary. Vestibular laboratory 
testing can provide quantitative information allowing docu­
mentation of an abnormality only suspected by bedside evalua­
tion. Moreover, eye movements can be recorded in the 
laboratory during loss of visual fixation and during stimulation 
of the labyrinth that is not possible during routine physical 
examination. Some types of vestibular laboratory testing 
provide information that may be useful in designing treatment 
plans, particularly treatment with balance rehabilitation 
therapy (see Chapter 53). Moreover, some vestibular laboratory 
tests such as positional testing, rotational testing and posturog- 
raphy can be helpful in the long-term management of patients, 
because these tests can be repeated intermittently with minimal 
discomfort to the patient. As noted in Chapter 19 and further 
described below, vestibular laboratory testing consists of several 
component parts that may be performed in various combina­
tions. Table 43.2 lists the vestibular test batteries that may be 
considered, depending upon the suspicions of the clinician 
regarding the localization of the vestibular system abnormality. 
If the clinician has a high suspicion of a vestibular system 
abnormality but does not have a particular idea regarding local­
ization, a more complete vestibular laboratory test battery can 
be obtained. Overall, as discussed in Chapter 19, vestibular lab­
oratory testing has a somewhat poor sensitivity and specificity.
Table 43.1 Uses of vestibular laboratory testing
Aids in diagnosis
-  Localization: central versus peripheral localization
-  Lateralization
Documentation of an abnormality suspected by bedside evaluation
Aids in devising a treatment plan
Aids in long-term management
From, Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM, eds. Disorders of the Vestibular System. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1996, by permission.
Table 43,2 Vestibular test batteries
Suspected peripheral vestibular abnormality
- Ocular motor screening battery
-  Search for vestibular nystagmus
-  Positional testing
-  Caloric testing
-  Rotational testing
Suspected central vestibular abnormality
- Ocular motor screening battery
-  Search for vestibular nystagmus
- Positional testing
- Rotational testing: visual-vestibular interaction
From, Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM, eds. Disorders of the Vestibular System. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1996, by permission.
Despite this limitation, vestibular laboratory testing may signif­
icantly augment the clinical assessment of the dizzy patient.
Significance of individual vestibular 
laboratory test abnormalities
Ocular-motor screening battery
Primarily, the ocular-motor screening battery is a means for 
uncovering ocular-motor system abnormalities that may inter­
fere with the reliability of the vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) as 
a means of assessing peripheral and central vestibular function. 
Additionally, the ocular-motor screening battery can provide 
information directly concerning vestibular system abnormali­
ties and, moreover, can provide ancillary information regarding 
central nervous system structures important for balance 
function.
Spontaneous nystagmus
The term ‘spontaneous nystagmus* is sometimes used to 
denote a nystagmus that occurs during visual fixation and 
sometimes used to denote nystagmus that occurs only with 
loss of visual fixation through eye closure or darkness. How­
ever, the term ‘spontaneous vestibular nystagmus’ is preferred 
for nystagmus seen only with loss of visual fixation or for nys­
tagmus that is significantly greater in magnitude than that 
seen with visual fixation (Figure 43.1). The term ‘sponta­
neous nystagmus’ is preferred for nystagmus seen with (and 
without) visual fixation. Spontaneous nystagmus may be 
either pendular, in which case there are no clearly defined 
fast and slow components, or jerk, in which there are clearly 
defined fast and slow components. Pendular nystagmus may 
be congenital or acquired, and is seen infrequently. Sponta­
neous nystagmus with clearly defined fast and slow compo­
nents, i.e. spontaneous jerk nystagmus, is most commonly a
  

Clinical application of vestibular laboratory testing 
737
Figure 43.1 Example of spontaneous vestibular nystagmus seen only with loss 
of fixation. Note that the left side of the figure illustrates right-beating 
nystagmus recorded with the patient's eyes open in the dark. At timing marker 
70s, the patient was asked to look at a fixation target. Note that the nystagmus 
is extinguished.
result of an acute vestibular imbalance. In this case, it will 
have a larger magnitude when visual fixation is absent, and 
thus should be considered as a spontaneous vestibular nystag­
mus. A caveat is as follows: patients may manifest sponta­
neous jerk nystagmus of vestibular origin during visual 
fixation in the setting of low vision or poor visual fixation 
abilities or in a very acute phase of neuritis. In these cases, a 
vestibular nystagmus will be seen with fixation in a manner 
similar to that seen when a patient with normal visual fixa­
tion is placed in darkness.
Spontaneous vestibular nystagmus is typically horizontal 
or horizontal-torsional. Both EOG and two-dimensional VOG 
will only record the horizontal component of this nystagmus. 
The presence of a horizontal-torsional spontaneous vestibular 
nystagmus does not provide reliable information regarding 
localization of the abnormality to the peripheral or central 
vestibular system, and nor does the presence of spontaneous 
vestibular nystagmus provide reliable information regarding 
laterality. However, in acute peripheral vestibular lesions, 
spontaneous vestibular nystagmus typically beats away the 
impaired labyrinth. For example, an acute right-sided periph­
eral vestibular lesion will usually be associated with a left- 
beating spontaneous vestibular nystagmus, because the brain 
receives a tonic input from the intact (left) labyrinth (about 
90 spikes/s) that is not balanced by a tonic input from the 
impaired (right) labyrinth. The difference is interpreted by the 
brain as a rotation to the left, so a left-beating nystagmus 
emerges.
Vertical nystagmus may also be seen both with and without 
visual fixation. The presence of vertical nystagmus during 
ocular-motor screening strongly suggests the presence of a 
central nervous system abnormality. Note that artefacts in the 
eye-movement recording may simulate vertical nystagmus, 
especially with EOG.
Gaze-evoked nystagmus
Another component of the ocular-motor screening battery is a 
search for nystagmus with gaze deviation away from the primary 
position. That is, it is essential to search for ‘gaze-evoked 
nystagmus’. Gaze-evoked nystagmus may be a result of poor gaze 
holding on the basis of an abnormal ‘ocular-motor integrator’. 
In this case, gaze-evoked nystagmus will typically be seen with 
both leftward and rightward gaze and may be seen with upward 
gaze. The fast component of the nystagmus will be in the direc­
tion of gaze. Another type of nystagmus that may be seen with 
gaze deviation is actually a type of vestibular nystagmus. In 
particular, because of Alexander’s law, a spontaneous vestibular 
nystagmus may only be evident with gaze deviation. For 
example, a patient with a recent, but not an acute, right-sided 
peripheral vestibular lesion may manifest left-beating nystag­
mus only with gaze to the left, which would accentuate an 
otherwise unobservable left-beating nystagmus (Figure 43.2). 
For this reason, it is helpful to search for nystagmus during gaze 
deviation, both with fixation and in darkness.
Saccadic eye movements
Saccadic eye movements are typically recorded monocularly to 
uncover abnormalities in voluntary gaze, limitations of gaze and 
dysconjugacies. Any of the saccadic abnormalities in ocular- 
motor function may influence vestibular laboratory tests that 
rely on the VOR. Additionally, an assessment of saccadic eye 
movements may provide information that is useful in diagnos­
ing specific central nervous system disorders. For further discus­
sion of such saccadic abnormalities, see Chapter 41. Any 
limitation in eye movements must be noted, since this will 
obviously influence all subsequent eye-movement recordings 
during the vestibular laboratory test battery. Moreover, such 
testing may uncover a previously undiscovered cranial neuropa­
thy or intemuclear ophthalmoplegia. A finding of dysconjugate 
eye movements influences how subsequent data are analyzed. 
When using EOG recordings, significant ocular-motor dyscon­
jugacies preclude the use of bitemporal EOG, which averages 
movements of the two eyes. For VOG, the presence of either a 
limitation of gaze or a dysconjugacy will influence the selection 
of which eye should be used for subsequent vestibular testing.
Typically, vestibular system abnormalities do not alter 
saccades. However, in the setting of an acute unilateral periph­
eral vestibular lesion, there may be a superimposed spontaneous 
nystagmus seen during attempted gaze holding after completion 
of each saccade.
Ocular pursuit
Ocular pursuit testing, like saccadic testing, can provide 
information that supports a diagnosis of a vestibular system 
abnormality or information that may suggest a central nervous 
system abnormality. Abnormalities of ocular pursuit are dis­
cussed thoroughly in Chapter 47. In the setting of an acute
  

738 
Vestibular science
Time (s)
Figure 43.2 Comparison of gaze-evoked nystagmus and third-degree vestibular 
nystagmus, (a) Gaze-evoked nystagmus. Note right-beating nystagmus on 
rightward gaze and left-beating nystagmus on leftward gaze, with an absence 
of nystagmus when looking straight ahead, (b) Third-degree vestibular 
nystagmus. Note the presence of left-beating nystagmus in leftward gaze, 
center gaze, and rightward gaze. Note that gaze-evoked nystagmus (a) is 
bidirectional, whereas third-degree vestibular nystagmus (b) is unidirectional.
peripheral vestibular ailment, patients may show asymmetric 
pursuit such that the patient has difficulty pursuing away from 
the side of the lesion (Figure 43.3). This is particularly the case 
when patients manifest a spontaneous vestibular nystagmus. In 
this circumstance, the asymmetric pursuit is such that the 
patient has difficulty pursuing in the direction of the quick 
component of the spontaneous nystagmus. Without a concomi- 
tant spontaneous nystagmus or a history of a recent vestibular 
insult, asymmetric pursuit, like symmetrically impaired pursuit, 
indicates a central nervous system abnormality.
Figure 43.3 Example of asymmetric smooth pursuit eye movements. The lower 
trace illustrates the position of a small LED target. The upper trace illustrates 
horizontal eye position and indicates difficulty with pursuit of the target when 
it is moving to the right.
Optokinetic nystagmus
Optokinetic nystagmus, even when performed using full-field 
visual stimuli, provides information that largely overlaps that 
provided by the assessment of ocular pursuit. The clinical sig­
nificance of abnormal optokinetic nystagmus is comparable to 
the significance of abnormal ocular pursuit. However, because 
optokinetic nystagmus induces a large number of quick compo­
nents, specific information regarding quick component genera­
tion can be obtained from optokinetic nystagmus testing
Positional and positioning testing
During positional testing, i.e. searching for a persistent nystag­
mus with the patient in various fixed positions with respect to 
gravity, there are several patterns of nystagmus that can be 
observed. These patterns include direction-fixed positional nys­
tagmus and direction-changing positional nystagmus. With 
direction-fixed positional nystagmus, the nystagmus beats in 
the same direction in all positions and often is seen in patients 
who also manifest a spontaneous nystagmus. Direction- 
changing positional nystagmus is either geotropic, i.e. the 
nystagmus beats towards the down ear, or ageotropic, i.e. nys­
tagmus beats away from the down ear. Thus, with geotropic 
direction-changing positional nystagmus, there is left-beating 
nystagmus in the head-left and left-lateral positions and right- 
beating nystagmus in the head-right and right-lateral positions. 
In some patients, nystagmus may only be seen in a subset of 
positions, e.g. only in the head-right and right-lateral positions 
or only in the head-left and left-lateral positions. In such cases, 
the distinction between direction-fixed and direction-changing 
becomes less meaningful, unless the patient also manifests a 
spontaneous nystagmus. In this case, if the spontaneous nystag­
mus and the positional nystagmus beat in the same direction, 
the nystagmus can be considered direction-fixed.
  

Clinical application of vestibular laboratory testing 
739
The clinical significance of a persistent positional nystag- 
mus is often uncertain.1 The mechanism of persistent positional 
nystagmus is uncertain. The change in orientation of the head 
with respect to gravity necessarily stimulates the otolith organs 
and may cause nystagmus. Generally, persistent positional 
nystagmus provides non-specific, non-localizing information, 
equally suggesting a central or peripheral vestibular abnormality. 
The ability to suppress positional nystagmus with visual fixation 
is a useful indicator of central nervous system function. Thus, it 
is important to assess a patient’s ability to suppress positional 
nystagmus with visual fixation.
It is important to remember that positional nystagmus of 
low magnitude is seen in normal subjects, especially older 
individuals.2 The upper limits of normal for the magnitude of 
positional nystagmus is 6% .2 Persistent ageotropic horizontal 
nystagmus, especially when of high magnitude and clearly seen 
in all ear-down positions, may suggest horizontal semicircular 
canal cupulolithiasis3 (Figure 43.4). Paroxysmal, rather than 
persistent, geotropic horizontal nystagmus seen in the ear-down 
positions (i.e. left-beating on head-left and left-lateral and 
right-beating on head-right and right-lateral positions) suggests 
horizontal semicircular canal canalithiasis4,5 (Figure 43.5).
Paroxysmal positional nystagmus may be observed during 
positioning tests, i.e. using the Dix-Hallpike maneuver. The 
most common type of paroxysmal positional nystagmus is 
known as benign paroxysmal positional nystagmus, which is 
considered to be a result of movement of free-floating debris in 
the posterior semicircular canal, i.e. canalithiasis.6,7 This 
nystagmus is largely torsional but also has a vertical upbeating 
component; that is, the nystagmus beats torsionally, with the 
upper pole towards the down ear and vertically towards the 
patient’s forehead. Benign paroxysmal positional nystagmus 
may have a small horizontal component. Because the presence
Figure 43.4 Example of persistent positional nystagmus, possibly caused by 
horizontal semicircular canal cupulolithiasis. The upper trace illustrates left- 
beating nystagmus in the right-lateral position. The lower trace illustrates right- 
beating nystagmus in the left-lateral position. Note the persistence of the 
nystagmus with minimal fluctuation in slow component velocity.
Right Lateral
Figure 43.5 An example of paroxysmal horizontal nystagmus in a patient with 
horizontal semicircular canal benign paroxysmal positional vertigo caused by 
horizontal semicircular canal canalithiasis. The upper trace illustrates a 
paroxysmal horizontal right-beating nystagmus seen immediately after the 
patient's head was rotated from the supine position to the right-ear-down 
position. The lower trace illustrates a paroxysmal horizontal left-beating 
nystagmus seen immediately following rotation of the patient's head from the 
supine position to the left-ear-down position. Note that the right-beating 
nystagmus seen with the right ear down is of higher magnitude than the left- 
beating nystagmus seen with the left ear down, suggesting involvement of the 
right lateral semicircular canal.
of a torsional component is critical for diagnosis, the nystagmus 
most commonly seen with the Dix-Hallpike positioning test 
cannot be adequately recorded with EOG or with two- 
dimensional VOG. Only with three-dimensional VOG can the 
nystagmus associated with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
be recorded adequately. However, using EOG, recording a 
paroxysmal upbeating nystagmus can be highly suggestive of 
benign paroxysmal positional nystagmus, especially if the 
nystagmus begins shortly (1—2 s) after completion of the 
Dix-Hallpike maneuver. With some two-dimensional VOG 
devices, a video tape recording can be reviewed for evidence of 
torsional nystagmus.
As noted briefly above, a paroxysmal geotropic horizontal 
nystagmus suggests horizontal semicircular canalithiasis, i.e. 
free-floating debris in the horizontal semicircular canal. This 
condition can be diagnosed with a specialized maneuver that has 
characteristics of both persistent positional testing and the 
Dix-Hallpike maneuver. Specifically, in patients who are sus­
pected of having paroxysmal positional vertigo, but who have 
negative Dix-Hallpike tests, a search for horizontal semicircular 
canal canalithiasis should be undertaken. To do this, the patient 
should be placed in the supine position and, once any nystagmus 
or vertigo has subsided, the patient’s head should be rapidly 
turned into the left-ear-down or right-ear-down position. The 
patient’s eye movements are observed for horizontal nystagmus 
that lasts longer than the maneuver. Then, the patient is
  

740 
Vestibular science
returned to the supine position, again waiting for any nystagmus 
or vertigo to subside. Then, the patient is rapidly moved from 
the supine position to the opposite-ear-down position, again 
looking for a horizontal nystagmus.5 If the induced nystagmus is 
horizontal, geotropic, and paroxysmal, a diagnosis of horizontal 
semicircular canal canalithiasis is confirmed.
Rotational testing
As discussed in Chapter 42, the most common type of rota­
tional testing performed clinically is earth-vertical axis rotation 
using both sinusoidal motion and abrupt decelerations (so- 
called velocity trapezoids or impulses). Also, rotational stimuli 
can be combined with visual stimuli to assess visual-vestibular 
interaction. Both sinusoidal and trapezoidal rotational stimuli 
can be used to assess the overall sensitivity of the horizontal 
VOR (gain and magnitude), the dynamics of the VOR (phase 
lead and time constant), and the left-right asymmetry of the 
VOR (i.e. directional preponderance). The magnitude of the 
response to earth-vertical axis rotation, expressed either as gain 
for sinusoidal stimuli or magnitude for trapezoidal stimuli, 
reflects the overall sensitivity of the VOR. A modest decrease 
of gain or magnitude suggests either a significant unilateral 
peripheral vestibular loss or a mild bilateral loss. When the 
sensitivity of the VOR is severely reduced, this suggests a bilat­
eral peripheral vestibular loss. These inferences regarding 
unilateral versus bilateral peripheral vestibular loss can be sub­
stantiated by responses during caloric testing (see Chapter 42 
and below), except that caloric responses are more variable 
than rotational testing. It is essential when interpreting 
responses of low magnitude that the examiner be certain that 
the patient has a high level of alertness during testing and is not 
under the influence of vestibular suppressant medication. The 
gain of the response to rotational sinusoids changes as a func­
tion of rotational frequency, typically increasing with increased 
frequency. This is particularly the case for patients with 
markedly reduced sensitivity, wherein low-frequency responses 
(0.02 Hz) may be nearly absent, and high-frequency responses 
(1 Hz) may be virtually normal.8 This frequency-dependent 
behavior reflects the dynamic characteristics of the VOR, 
which normally works best at about 1 Hz.
Infrequently, the sensitivity of the VOR is found to be 
increased, as evidenced by high gain and large magnitudes. In 
such cases, it likely that the normal inhibition of the VOR by 
the cerebellum is impaired.9,10
The dynamics of the VOR, as measured by phase lead for 
sinusoidal stimuli and time constant for trapezoidal stimuli, pro­
vide a non-specific and non-localizing measure reflecting the 
overall integrity of the vestibulo-ocular system. Increased phase 
lead and shortened time constant can be seen with unilateral 
peripheral vestibular loss, bilateral peripheral vestibular loss, 
(Figure 43.6) and some central vestibular disorders.8,11
The symmetry of the VOR can be measured using sinusoidal 
rotations or trapezoidal rotations. Asymmetry, typically reported 
as directional preponderance, can reflect the state of central
O'!
o <y
Q_ -O
10
5
0
- 5
-1 0
30 
20 
10 
0 
—  10
100
80
60
40
20
0
-2 0
____ 1____ 1___
0 
2 
4
H
_i___i 
j 
i 
.1--------- 1—
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16
J____ 1__
18 
20
i----- j — i 
i 
i 
i 
l 
l
j 
i
0 
2 
4 
: 
\
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
\
18 
20
i 
i
> 
i 
-»— 
i-------i-------1--
I 
i
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20 
Time (sec)
Figure 43.6 Example of a response to an abrupt cessation of constant-velocity 
rotation, a so-called trapezoidal rotational stimulus. In this example, the time 
constant of the response is short as compared to normal. The upper trace shows 
the nystagmoid response. The middle trace shows the slow component velocity 
of the nystagmus. The bottom trace illustrates the rotational chair velocity.
nervous system compensation for a unilateral peripheral ves­
tibular ailment (Figure 43.7). In patients with a spontaneous 
vestibular nystagmus (and possibly a direction-fixed persistent 
positional nystagmus), an asymmetric rotational response is 
quite common. However, some patients with a peripheral 
vestibular disorder have an asymmetry on rotational testing but 
do not manifest a spontaneous or a positional nystagmus.12 Such 
patients, therefore, manifest a dynamic VOR asymmetry without 
a static VOR asymmetry. This suggests incomplete central ner­
vous system compensation. An asymmetry on rotational testing 
in patients with no evidence of a peripheral vestibular disorder 
should alert the clinician to a possible central vestibular imbal­
ance. This can be seen in patients with migraine,1315 patients with 
anxiety disorders,16 and patients without a recognized disorder.
Visual-vestibular interaction testing provides somewhat 
redundant information with that obtained during ocular-motor 
screening. In particular, the ability of a patient to inhibit vestibu­
lar nystagmus while fixating a head-stationary visual target cor­
relates closely with the ability to pursue a small moving target. 
Similarly, a patient’s ability to augment the VOR with vision 
correlates with their ability to generate optokinetic nystagmus in 
response to movement of a visual scene that nearly fills the visual 
field. An inability to suppress rotational-induced nystagmus sug­
gests a central nervous system abnormality.17 Such a finding is 
comparable to an inability to suppress a persistent positional 
nystagmus with visual fixation (see above) and an inability to 
suppress caloric-induced nystagmus (see below). When inter­
preting visual-vestibular interaction, it is essential to be certain 
that the patient has adequate vision to fixate the target and was 
alert and cooperative at the time of testing.
  

Clinical application of vestibular laboratory testing 
741
MYSTAG US PREP
SDO left 61% Faster (<° 25%)
VELOCITY PREP
RIGHT 63% Faster (<D 22%)
Figure 43.7 Example of directional preponderance seen with rotational testing. The middle trace illustrates the rotational velocity of the patient in a rotational test 
chair with a frequency of 0.05 Hz and a peak amplitude of 50°/s. The upper trace illustrates the horizontal nystagmus induced by the rotational stimulus. The lower 
trace illustrates the slow component velocity of the nystagmus. Note the preponderance of right-beating nystagmus in the upper trace and the concomitant 
asymmetric slow component velocity shown in the lower trace with a preponderance of leftward slow component velocity.
Caloric testing
Caloric testing remains the backbone of vestibular laboratory 
testing. As discussed in Chapter 42, caloric testing provides 
information regarding the function of each labyrinth separately. 
This distinguishes caloric testing from rotational vestibular 
testing and accounts for its continued popularity. The most 
physiologically relevant and commonly measured parameter of 
a patient’s response to caloric stimulation is the peak magnitude 
of the slow component velocity obtained following each irriga­
tion.18 By comparing the responsiveness of the left and right 
labyrinths and by comparing the magnitudes of left-beating and 
right-beating nystagmus, caloric test results can be reduced to a 
measure of labyrinthine preponderance and a measure of direc­
tional preponderance. Additionally, the sum total of responses 
to each of the four standard caloric stimuli, i.e. left warm, right 
warm, left cool, and right cool, provides a measure of overall 
VOR sensitivity. It must be remembered that caloric testing is 
plagued by high variability, which necessarily reduces its ability 
to clearly distinguish between normal and abnormal function. 
By selecting the appropriate threshold for the limits of normal­
ity, each laboratory can adjust their false-positive and false- 
negative rates appropriately.19,20
A unilateral caloric reduction outside of normal limits 
(Figure 43.8) is typically thought to correspond to a unilateral 
reduction in function. A unilaterally reduced vestibular 
response is considered, by definition, to represent a peripheral 
vestibular ailment. In fact, a caloric reduction can be the result
of an abnormality in the end organ, the vestibular nerve, or 
even the vestibular nucleus. However, it must be remembered 
that caloric testing merely compares the left with the right 
labyrinth in terms of responsiveness and thus, in patients who 
have well-defined responses bilaterally, an apparent reduction 
in responsiveness on one side may, in fact, represent an abnor­
mally increased response contralaterally. In those patients in 
whom there is no consistent response from an ear, iced-water 
irrigations should be considered. This matter is discussed in 
Chapter 19.
A bilaterally reduced response to caloric testing suggests 
bilateral vestibular loss. However, it must be noted that, 
because the caloric stimulus is non-physiological and has an 
equivalent frequency of the order of 0.003 Hz,21 some individu­
als who have absent caloric responses, even absent responses 
to iced-water irrigations, can have preserved rotational 
responses, especially at higher frequencies.22 Thus, a diagnosis 
of bilateral vestibular loss based on caloric testing alone should 
be made with caution and should be confirmed with rotational 
testing.
A directional preponderance on caloric testing was at one 
time considered to represent a central nervous system abnor­
mality.23 Current thinking, however, has relegated a finding of 
an isolated directional preponderance on caloric testing to a 
non-specific, non-localizing abnormality. However, the pres­
ence of a directional preponderance on caloric testing (Figure 
43.9) may provide additional confirmatory evidence for an 
ongoing vestibulo-ocular system imbalance. For example, in a
  

742 
Vestibular science
[b) 
100 
Right Ear 
Cold
80
60
(comp_hor) 
4Q
- SCV (°/9)
Warm 
Left Ear
eu 
(eomp_hor)
Time (s) 
20
°o 
t 
--------------
Time w
*  * \ . 
.
20
40
(comp_hor)
(comp_hor) 
Spontan. NYST.: 0.00°/s
Cumulation : coldright =  4°/s
coldleft =  18°/s (3/33°/s) 
warmright =  ll°/s 
warmleft = 35°/s (7/55°/s)
0 
Nystagmus prep: SCU right 14% faster (<16%) 
*■ 
Labyrinth prep: right 56% less sensitive{<19%)
o Left 
60
• Right
A Inverse 
80 
Warm
100
Figure 43.8 Example of caloric responses in a patient with a unilateral reduced vestibular response, (a) Horizontal nystagmus recorded with warm and cold 
stimulation of the right and left ears. Note the obvious reduction in the magnitude of the response to stimulation of the right ear. (b) 'Butterfly* plots of the slow 
component velocity response. Again, note the marked reduction of responsiveness of the right ear.
patient who has a spontaneous nystagmus, a direction-fixed 
positional nystagmus, and/or a directional preponderance on 
rotational testing, a directional preponderance on caloric test­
ing corroborates the presence of an ongoing vestibular system 
imbalance. Some electro-nystagmography (ENG) analysis pro­
grams allow for a correction of the spontaneous nystagmus by 
subtracting the slow component velocity (SCV) of the sponta­
neous nystagmus from the SCV of the four caloric responses. 
With use of this technique, the directional preponderance may 
not entirely obscure left-right ear differences.
  

Clinical application of vestibular laboratory testing 
743
M  1S -d 
10
5 
0
- 5  
-10 
-1 5
(COMP_HOR)
____ J
_
___________________________ [WARM FjlGHT) 
[s]
_____ L
20
15
10
5
0
- 5
10
24 
26 
28 
30 
32 
34 
36 
38 
40 
50 
52 
54 
(°)
[COMP HOR)
(W A R M E R ] (s)
15
10
5
0
- 5
-10
15
32 
34 
36 
38 
40 
42 
44 
46 
48 
50 
52 
54
n
1 C 0 M P  HOR),
...................................................................... ................................(COLD RIGHT) (s)
10
50
- 5
10
-1 5
31 
33 
35 
37 
39 
41 
43 
45 
47 
49 
51
hO
53
(COMP HOR) 
. 
K
-I_______ !__ 
_L.
[COLO LEFT] (s)
25 
27 
29 
31 
33 
35 
37 
39 
41 
43 
45 
47
(b) 
100
Rinht Ear 
Cold 
3 
8u
60
(comp_hor) 
j
i
f
l
----------4 5-
[Time s) 
° 
j ^  
20
09 
^
 
^  
#  ^
SCV [°/9)
Warm 
Left Ear
(comp, hor)
^ 
\ V v
.
140 
n o  
l o e r a o  ^  
41*1 
20^
jp  
S
20
40
[comp_hor)
° Left 
60 
» Riqht
A  Inverse 
80 
Wa rn>
100
“  
8o*f5o 
120 
140 
••
Spontan, NYST. : 0.00c/s 
Cumulation : ccldright =  42°/s
coldleft -  23"/s (3/33 Vs) 
warmright = 20°/s 
warmleft =  57°/s (7/55°/s) 
Nystagm us prep: SCU right 3 9 %  faster (<18%>) 
Labyrinth prep; right 1 3 %  less sensitive(<16%)
Figure 43.9 Example of a directional preponderance in the response to caloric stimulation, (a) Horizontal nystagmus recorded with warm and cold irrigation of the 
right and left ears. Note the preponderance of left-beating nystagmus as compared to right-beating nystagmus, (b) ‘Butterfly’ plots of the responses shown in (a). 
Again, note the preponderance of the right-cold and left-warm responses as compared to the right-warm and left-cold responses, indicating a left directional 
preponderance.
Patterns of testing abnormalities
Because vestibular laboratory testing is often performed as a 
battery of tests, several patterns of test abnormalities have been 
identified. Combining the results from several test modalities
provides more information than any single test result alone. As 
indicated in Table 43.2, these patterns can help distinguish 
between central and peripheral vestibular disorders and, in 
cases of unilateral peripheral vestibular lesions, can help deter­
mine the state of central nervous system compensation for the
  

744 
Vestibular science
unilateral peripheral vestibular loss. There follows a discussion 
on the test abnormalities that would be expected with several 
specific balance disorders.
Laboratory test abnormalities seen 
with specific balance disorders
This brief discussion of the laboratory test abnormalities often 
seen with selected balance disorders will attempt to place 
vestibular laboratory testing in some perspective with regard to 
its relative usefulness in establishing a diagnosis and in judging 
the severity of the disorder. Typically, a patient’s diagnosis is not 
known when vestibular laboratory testing is requested. Indeed, 
as noted earlier in this chapter, vestibular laboratory testing is 
typically requested when there is a high level of suspicion of a 
vestibular abnormality but the diagnosis is uncertain. It should 
be noted that, although in some of the disorders to be discussed 
below vestibular laboratory testing may be normal, a normal 
result may still be considered useful in helping to establish a 
diagnosis, by ruling out other conditions.
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) can be diagnosed 
definitively by observing the characteristic torsional-vertical 
nystagmus provoked by the Dix-Hallpike maneuver. Unfortu­
nately, unless a laboratory is equipped with three-dimensional 
VOG, such nystagmus cannot be quantitated in the vestibular 
laboratory. With use of a two-dimensional VOG system that 
includes video recording, the patient’s eye movements can be 
evaluated by reviewing the video tape. Although not quantita­
tive, this can aid with diagnosis. With EOG, only the vertical 
(upbeating) and inconstant horizontal components of the 
nystagmus associated with BPPV can be recorded. Even if it 
does not help in obtaining a definitive diagnosis, vestibular lab­
oratory testing can be useful in the assessment of patients with 
BPPV. That is, a significant percentage of patients with BPPV 
manifest laboratory abnormalities other than the characteristic 
paroxysmal positional nystagmus.24,25 These laboratory abnor­
malities may include a unilateral reduction of responsiveness to 
caloric irrigation, a spontaneous nystagmus, and/or a directional 
preponderance on rotational testing. BPPV is considered to be 
a disorder localized to the posterior semicircular canal,26 whereas 
caloric and earth-vertical axis rotation assess the horizontal 
semicircular canal. Thus, vestibular laboratory abnormalities 
other than paroxysmal positional nystagmus in patients with 
BPPV may suggest a more widespread vestibular disorder 
beyond simply a posterior semicircular canal abnormality.
Meniere’s disease
Typically, patients with unilateral Meniere’s disease will show a 
unilateral reduction in caloric sensitivity.27 However, depending 
upon the clinical progression of the patient’s disorder and the
time at which laboratory testing is obtained, patients may have 
normal vestibular testing, much as they may have normal audio­
metric testing between episodes, especially early in the course of 
the disorder. Over time, a caloric reduction may or may not be 
seen.28 Also, vestibular laboratory testing can provide some 
inferences regarding either how recently a patient has suffered 
from a Meniere’s attack or how well they have compensated for 
a recent vestibular insult. Specifically, a spontaneous nystagmus 
and/or a directional preponderance on caloric or rotational test­
ing suggests an incomplete state of central nervous system com­
pensation for peripheral vestibular loss, which is often the case 
in the early stages of the disease, due to the changing functional 
status of the peripheral vestibular system. In patients with bilat­
eral Meniere’s disease, there may be evidence of bilateral vestibu­
lar loss. This includes a reduction in the total slow component 
velocity obtained with binaural bithermal caloric testing and a 
reduced gain on rotational testing.
In general, vestibular laboratory testing is not particularly 
helpful for establishing a diagnosis of Meniere’s disease, because 
the diagnosis is based primarily on the history and the presence 
of a characteristic low-frequency hearing loss.
However, vestibular laboratory testing does indicate the 
functional status of the impaired vestibular system and can be 
particularly helpful in the management of patients with 
Meniere’s disease who are being treated with chemical ablation. 
For example, following treatment with transtympanic genta­
micin, caloric testing of the involved ear may provide informa­
tion regarding the presence of remaining vestibular function in 
that ear. It must be remembered, of course, that caloric testing 
only assesses the horizontal semicircular canal at a very low 
equivalent frequency.21 Thus, even in the absence of a response 
to iced-water irrigation, vestibular function in the involved, 
treated ear still may be present.
Migraine
There have been several studies that have assessed vestibular 
function in patients with migraine.13”15 These studies have sug­
gested a high prevalence of vestibular laboratory abnormalities. 
The rate of vestibular laboratory abnormalities is high in 
migraine sufferers who do not have dizziness as well as in those 
who do have dizziness. A study of patients with migraine- 
associated dizziness15 reported a variety of laboratory abnormal­
ities. The authors note that there is no pathognomonic pattern 
of vestibular laboratory abnormalities in patients with migraine- 
associated dizziness. 
Moreover, 
patients with migraine- 
associated dizziness may have normal vestibular laboratory 
testing, evidence of peripheral vestibular abnormality, or evi­
dence of a VOR asymmetry without evidence of a peripheral 
vestibular abnormality. Despite this wide variability in test 
results, vestibular laboratory testing can be helpful both 
diagnostically and with treatment. For example, the presence of 
a directional preponderance on rotational testing may suggest 
that a low dose of a vestibular suppressant medication or a 
course of balance rehabilitation therapy may be beneficial.
  

Clinical application of vestibular laboratory testing 
745
Anxiety disorders
Vestibular laboratory abnormalities have been demonstrated in 
patients with anxiety disorders.16 Certainly, not all patients 
with anxiety disorders have a vestibular system abnormality, but 
there does appear to be an association between anxiety disor­
ders and balance disorders, as evidenced by a particularly high 
prevalence of vestibular laboratory abnormalities in patients 
with panic disorder or panic disorder with agoraphobia. Specif­
ically, unilateral caloric reductions have been reported in 
patients with agoraphobia, as has directional preponderance on 
rotational testing.16 The basis for the vestibular laboratory 
abnormalities in anxiety disorders is unknown.
Cerebellopontine angle tumors
Patients with cerebellopontine angle tumors, including individ­
uals suffering from vestibular schwannomas (acoustical neu­
roma), may manifest a unilateral caloric reduction on the side 
of the lesion.29,30 Often, such patients have minimal, if any, 
vestibular-related symptoms, because of the gradual nature of 
the peripheral vestibular loss, which allows central compensa­
tion mechanisms to perform optimally. Thus, patients may be 
found to have a unilateral caloric reduction even if they have 
no vestibular symptoms. With large cerebellopontine angle 
tumors, particularly those associated with compression of the 
cerebellum, patients may exhibit abnormalities on ocular-motor 
testing, including abnormal smooth pursuit, gaze-evoked 
nystagmus, and, in some patients, Brun’s nystagmus, which con­
sists of a combination of gaze-evoked nystagmus when looking 
towards the side of the lesion and vestibular nystagmus when 
looking towards the uninvolved ear.31 Additionally, torsional 
eye movements may be present. Thus, although vestibular 
laboratory testing cannot be considered particularly useful in 
establishing a diagnosis of an Vlllth nerve tumor, information 
regarding the amount of remaining peripheral vestibular 
function may be useful in planning management. Specifically, 
with surgical treatment, postoperative vertigo would be 
expected to be more severe in patients with relatively preserved 
vestibular function preoperatively. However, unilateral caloric 
areflexia does not necessarily guarantee that postoperatively 
there will be little to no vertigo. Also, the evolution of VOR 
gain after surgery is particularly useful for monitoring the reha­
bilitation process. The role of vestibular laboratory testing in 
the management of acoustical neuroma patients treated with 
radiosurgery (gamma knife) is unknown.
Lateral medullary infarction
Patients who have suffered from a lateral medullary infarction,
i.e. Wallenberg’s syndrome, usually manifest a characteristic 
pattern of eye-movement abnormalities, including a sponta­
neous nystagmus, saccadic lateropulsion, and asymmetric ocular 
pursuit.32 Vestibular laboratory testing is not particularly use­
ful diagnostically in cases of Wallenberg’s syndrome, as the
history, neurological examination and brain imaging provide 
the necessary information. However, vestibular laboratory 
testing can provide quantitative information regarding how 
extensively a patient’s central vestibular system has been 
damaged by the infarction.
Ototoxic drug exposure
Patients who have been treated systemically with ototoxic drugs 
such as aminoglycoside antibiotics or certain chemotherapeutic 
agents such as cisplatinum may complain of dysequilibrium if 
they have lost significant peripheral vestibular function bilater­
ally. During the course of treatment, however, patients may be 
asymptomatic, since most vestibular symptoms, including ver­
tigo, result from asymmetric vestibular function. Moreover, 
patients typically adapt quickly to even moderate bilateral 
peripheral vestibular loss and thus remain essentially asympto­
matic. Occasionally, patients exposed to ototoxic drugs systemi- 
cally may experience vertigo, suggesting asymmetric vestibular 
involvement. The most common vestibular laboratory abnor­
malities with ototoxic drug exposure include bilateral caloric 
reduction and reduced gain on rotational testing.33 When these 
are severe, patients with bilateral vestibular loss may have 
entirely absent responses. Frequently, patients have preservation 
of high-frequency rotational responses despite absent caloric 
responses, including absent response to iced-water irrigations. If 
the magnitude of rotational responses is large enough to obtain a 
reliable estimate of VOR dynamics, the phase lead of the VOR 
during sinusoidal stimulation will be increased. Comparably, 
patients with bilateral vestibular loss, when tested with trape­
zoidal rotation, will have a reduced magnitude of response and a 
shortened VOR time constant. Occasionally, patients suffering 
from ototoxic drug exposure demonstrate an asymmetric 
vestibular response, i.e. a difference in responsiveness on caloric 
testing or a directional preponderance on rotational testing. This 
may relate to asymmetric involvement of the labyrinth and/or 
reflect some aspect of the compensation process.
Overall, vestibular laboratory testing in patients exposed to 
ototoxic medications provides highly useful information regard­
ing the severity of the damage and the status of the patient’s 
compensation, including the presence or absence of a VOR 
asymmetry. Recently, it has been reported that some patients 
with bilateral vestibular loss may have relatively preserved 
otolith-ocular responses. The information from vestibular labo­
ratory testing in patients with ototoxic drug exposure may be 
useful to physical therapists who are designing rehabilitation
34
regimens.
References
1. 
Brandt T. Background, technique, interpretation, and useful­
ness of positional and positioning testing. In: Jacobson GP, 
Newman CW, Kartush JM, eds. Handbook of Balance Function 
Testing. St Louis, MO: Mosby Year Book, 1993: 123-55.
  

74G 
Vestibular science
2. Barber HO, Stockwell CW. Manual of Electronystagmography, 2nd 
edn. St. Louis: C.V. Mosby, 1980.
3. Baloh RW, Yue Q, Jacobson K, Honrubia V. Persistent direction- 
changing positional nystagmus: another variant of benign 
positional nystagmus? Neurology 1995; 45: 1297-301.
4. McClure JA. Horizontal canal BPV. J Otolaryngol 1985; 14: 30-5.
5. Fife T. Recognition and management of horizontal canal benign 
positional vertigo. AmJ Otol 1998; 19: 345-51.
6. Hall S, Ruby R, McClure J. The mechanics of benign paroxysmal 
vertigo. J Otolaryngol 1979; 8: 151-8.
7. Epley J. Positional vertigo related to semicircular canalithiasis. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995; 112: 154-61.
8. Baloh RW, Honrubia V, Yee RD, Hess K. Changes in the human 
vestibulo-ocular reflex after loss of peripheral sensitivity. Ann 
Neurol 1984; 16: 222.
9. Baloh RW, Demer JL. Optokinetic-vestibular interaction in 
patients with increased gain of the vestibulo-ocular reflex. Exp 
Brain Res 1993; 97: 334-42.
10. Thurston SE, Leigh RJ, Abel LA, Dell’Osso LF. Hyperactive 
vestibulo-ocular reflex in cerebellar degeneration: pathogenesis 
and treatment. Neurology 1987; 37: 53-7.
11. Furman JM, Becker JT. Vestibular responses in Wernicke’s 
encephalopathy. Ann Neurol 1989; 26: 669-74.
12. Jenkins HA. Long-term adaptive changes of the vestibulo-ocular 
reflex in patients following acoustic neuroma surgery. Laryngoscope 
1985; 95(10): 1224-34.
13. Toglia JU, Thomas D, Kuritzky A. Common migraine and vestibu­
lar function electronystagmographic study and pathogenesis. Ann 
Otol 1981; 90: 267-71.
14. Kayan A, Hood JD. Neuro-otological manifestations of migraine. 
Brain 1984; 107: 1123-42.
15. Cass SP, Furman JM, Ankerstjeme J, Balaban C, Yetiser S, 
Aydogan B. Migraine-related vestibulopathy. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1997; 106: 181-9.
16. Jacob RG, Furman JM, Durrant JD, Turner SM. Panic, agora­
phobia and vestibular dysfunction: clinical test results. Am J 
Psychiatry 1996; 153: 503-12.
17. Baloh RW, Jenkins H, Honrubia V, Yee R, Lau C. Visual-vestibular 
interaction and cerebellar atrophy. Neurology 1979; 29( 1): 116-19.
18. Luxon LM. Comparison of assessment of caloric nystagmus by 
observation of duration and by electronystagmographic measure­
ment of slow-phase velocity. BrJ Audiol 1995; 29: 107-16.
19. Furman JM, Wall III C, Kamerer DB: Alternate and simultaneous 
binaural bithermal caloric test: a comparison. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1988; 97(4): 359-64.
20. Jacobson GP, Newman CW, Peterson EL. Interpretation and 
usefulness of caloric testing. In: Jacobson GP, Newman CW, 
Kartush JM eds. Handbook of Balance Function Testing. St Louis, 
MO: Mosby Year Book, 1993: 101-22.
21. Hamid M, Hughes G, Kinney, S. Criteria for diagnosing bilateral 
vestibular dysfunction. In: Graham MD, Kemink JL, eds. The 
Vestibular System: Neurophysicobgic and Clinical Research. New 
York: Raven Press, 1987; 115-18.
22. Furman JM, Kamerer DB. Rotational responses in patients with 
bilateral caloric reduction. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1989; 108: 
355-61.
23. Fitzgerald G, Hallpike CS. Studies in human vestibular function.
I. Observations on the directional preponderance (‘nystagmus- 
bereitschaft’) of caloric nystagmus resulting from cerebral lesions. 
Brain, 1942; 62(part 2): 115-17.
24. Baloh R, Honrubia V, Jacobson K. Benign positional vertigo: 
clinical and oculographic features in 240 cases. Neurobgy} 1987; 
37: 371-8.
25. McClure J, Lycett P, Rounthwaite J. Vestibular dysfunction 
associated with benign paroxysmal vertigo. Laryngoscope 1977; 
137: 1-9.
26. Furman JM, Cass SP. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. N Engl 
J Med 1999; 341(21): 1590-6.
27. Hulshof JH, Baarsma EA. Vestibular investigations in Meniere’s 
disease. Acta Otolaryngol 1981; 92: 75-81.
28. Hulshof JH, Baarsma EA. Vestibular investigations in Meniere’s 
disease. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1981; 92: 379-401.
29. Tos M, Thomsen J. Epidemiology of acoustic neuromas. J Laryngol 
Otol 1984; 98: 685-92.
30. Baloh RW, Konrad HR, Dirks D, Honrubia V. Cerebellopontine 
angle tumors. Arch Neurol 1976; 33: 507-12.
31. Nedzelski JM. Cerebellopontine angle tumors: bilateral flocculus 
compression as a cause of associated oculomotor abnormalities. 
Laryngoscope 1983; 93: 1251-60.
32. Leigh RJ, Zee DS. The Neurobgy of Eye Movements, 3rd edn. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
33. Hess K. Vestibulotoxic drugs and other causes of acquired bilateral 
peripheral vestibulopathy. In: Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM, eds. 
Disorders of the Vestibular System. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1996: 360-73.
34. Peterka RJ, Shupert CL, Horak FB. Ocular counterrolling and 
OVAR tests identify preserved otolith function in some subjects 
with bilateral vestibular deficits. Abstract. ARO Midwinter 
Meeting, St Petersburg Beach, FL, 1998.
  

44 Posturography
Adolfo M Bronstein
Vertigo, dizziness and unsteadiness are common complaints and 
almost all medical practitioners are likely to encounter patients 
with these symptoms in their practice. Clinicians with a special 
interest in these patients, oto-neurologists or neuro-otologists, 
have different training backgrounds, usually neurology, oto­
laryngology or audiology. In practice, this introduces a bias in 
the type of patients seen and in the emphasis placed on differ­
ent aspects of the clinical examination. It is thus expected that 
the laboratory investigation of these patients, including postur­
ography, will also be influenced by the clinician’s own back­
ground.
A ‘Medline’ literature survey conducted in 1999 with the 
key words ‘posturography’ and ‘value’ (for clinical value), iden­
tified 20 papers published between 1984 and 1998. According 
to the address identifier, 11 of these papers originated from 
otolaryngology (ORL) departments, three from physical/ 
occupational therapy departments, three from various institu­
tions (psychiatry, basic sciences, orthopaedics) but only two 
from neurological departments. This limited survey certainly 
agrees with my impression that ORL/audiology departments are 
more keen on the use of posturography for clinical purposes 
than are neurology departments. This could indicate that ORL 
specialists are either more interested in dizziness or see more 
dizzy patients than other specialists, but I believe that it indicates 
that neurologists tend to rely on their own clinical assessment 
of posture and gait.
Undergraduate and postgraduate neurological teaching 
places strong emphasis on clinical inspection of postural bal­
ance and gait as an important part of the routine neurological 
examination. Almost all neurological diseases impair gait and 
posture—common ones such as stroke, spasticity, multiple 
sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease and polyneuropathies, and not so 
common ones such as the dystonias, and degenerative and 
inherited disorders. The assessment of posture and gait has been 
traditionally valued in neurology and is a source of anecdotes. 
Pierre Marie, one of the masters of early French neurology, was 
said to be able to diagnose gait disorders by the sound of the 
patients’ gait before they entered the consulting room. This 
prompted his students to find more and more difficult cases to
test Pierre Marie’s unusual skill to the limit. Eventually, a 
French nun with a wooden leg proved too much for the old 
master (J.E. Burucua, personal communication).
This anecdote, by way of introduction, is just to emphasize 
the value of the clinical investigation of gait and posture in 
patients with unsteadiness. I will first summarize the clinical 
examination of posture and gait, and then address the contri­
bution of posturography.
Clinical examination of balance, 
posture and gait
Gait unsteadiness is associated with a wide range of disorders.1 If 
it has never been associated with vertigo, dizziness, oscillopsia or 
a hearing disorder it is unlikely to be due to vestibular disease.2 It 
is usually possible to establish a topographical diagnosis (site of 
lesion) in a gait disorder on the basis of clinical observation of 
gait and a formal neurological examination (Table 44.1).3”5
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to describe the many 
individual diseases with gait disorder. However, the mental 
‘checklist’ required when examining a patient with gait 
unsteadiness will be reviewed (Table 44.2).
Posture
Observation of head and trunk posture can give immediate use­
ful information. There are abnormal tilts or rotations in dysto­
nia, flexed posture in Parkinson’s disease, hyperextension in 
progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and titubation in cerebel­
lar disease. Observation of stance will reveal a broadening of 
the base of support in diffuse vascular disease, frontal lesions, 
cerebellar lesions, sensory ataxia, acute vestibular lesions and 
patients with a cautious gait. Minor degrees of unsteadiness can 
be brought about by asking the patient to put the feet together 
or in the heel-to-toe position. A ‘bouncy’ stance, with 
head-trunk oscillations c. 2-3 Hz, may be observed in ataxic or 
ataxic-spastic disorders, typically in multiple sclerosis. A shaky

748 
Vestibular science
Table 44.1 
Topographical classification of lesions causing
stance and gait abnormalities.3"5
Lower levels
Peripheral lesions: mono/polyneuropathies, root lesions and 
myopathies 
Vestibular and visual lesions
Medium levels 
Spinal and brainstem lesions
Higher levels 
Cerebellar syndromes
Subcortical disorders (basal ganglia and internal capsule): 
Parkinson's disease, orthostatic tremor, choreas and 
corticospinal tract lesions
Highest levels
Frontal lesions of the cerebral cortex, white matter in the 
semioval centre and periventricular area (vascular, 
degenerative diseases, demyelinating diseases, tumours and 
hydrocephalus)
Cautious gait and psychogenic gait disorders
Table 44.2 
Examination of posture and gait.3' 5
1. Posture
Head and neck 
Trunk
Stance and Romberg test 
Postural reflexes
2. Walking
Step initiation 
Stepping pattern
Associated trunk and arm movements 
Eyes closed walking
3. Neurological and relevant skeletal examination
‘tremulous’ stance with higher-frequency oscillations, can be 
seen in some patients with Parkinson’s disease and orthostatic 
tremor (Figure 44.1). The Romberg test, originally described for 
patients with tabes dorsalis, is positive in patients with dorsal 
column or severe afferent polyneuropathy. A positive Romberg 
test means that the patient shows a tendency to actually fall, 
unlike normal subjects and almost all patients with balance 
problems, who show a small-to-moderate increase in body sway 
on eye closure. In a patient with either cerebellar degeneration 
or polyneuropathy, a high level of unsteadiness on eye closure 
may indicate the presence of additional bilateral vestibular fail­
ure.6 Patients with anterior lobe cerebellar degeneration may 
show the characteristic trunk oscillation or titubation only on 
eye closure; when mild, this may just be visible as a tremor of 
the ankle extensors (‘dancing tendons’). Of practical note, any­
one who can stand on either foot unaided, with eyes closed, is 
unlikely to have any objective postural balance problem. 
Postural reflexes are examined by gently pushing the upper 
trunk. This can be done standing behind the patient so that
Figure 44.1 Tremulous stance in extra pyramidal disorders. The upper box 
depicts a patient with orthostatic tremor, showing high-frequency body tremor 
at 13 Hz and samples of lower-limb EMG. The lower box shows a patient with 
Parkinson's disease with slight tremor at c. 5.5 Hz. (Modified from Yarrow et al. 
Gait Posture 2001; 13: 27-34.88)
they cannot anticipate the precise timing and direction of the 
push (forwards or backwards) to the shoulders. In akinetic 
syndromes, these responses may be completely absent, e.g. 
advanced Parkinson’s disease or early PSP, then patients fall 
rigidly like a log. A few shuffling steps backwards (retropulsion) 
or forwards can be seen in the early stages. In cerebellar syn­
dromes, particularly anterior lobe disease, the trunk pushes may 
unmask a trunk titubation, observable as a ‘trunk rebound’ in 
response to the push. In the elderly with fear of falling or a 
cautious gait, trunk pushes trigger a startle, panic-like response.
Walking
Step initiation can be impaired in frontal lesions, including the 
gait ignition failure syndrome3,4 and as part of the akinesia in 
the Parkinsonian syndromes. Initiation of gait is hesitant, the
  

Post urography 
749
feet appearing to be stuck to the ground (magnetic feet; slipping 
clutch phenomenon). The steady-state stepping pattern may be 
less disturbed in patients with difficulty in step initiation, once 
they are off. In akinetic-rigid Parkinsonian syndromes, steps are 
often shallow, short and slow but with preserved rhythm. In 
contrast, cerebellar patients show irregular rhythm, variable 
length, oscillations and a wide base, giving a lurching, 
‘drunken’ appearance to their walking. Patients with severe loss 
of sensory information from the lower limbs (sensory ataxia) lift 
the feet high and place them on the ground under intense 
visual control; in dorsal column lesions, the heel strikes the 
ground first (tabetic gait); in cases with ankle extensor weak­
ness (foot drop), the toes make contact first (steppage). In 
spasticity, the knee extensor and ankle flexor hypertonus leads 
to the characteristic slow gait with circumduction movements 
of the leg during the swing phase. The normal associated 
movements of the arms while walking are lost in Parkinson’s 
disease. Unilateral loss of arm swing can be a useful early sign 
in Parkinson’s disease and hemiparesis. In arteriosclerotic 
Parkinsonism due to frontal vascular lesions, associated move­
ments and facial expression tend to remain unaffected. Since 
these patients have a shuffling gait, the condition is sometimes 
called ‘lower-half’ Parkinsonism. Patients with cautious gait 
reach out with their arms as if expecting to fall, and step with 
apparently unnecessary care, giving the appearance of ‘walking 
on ice’; this gait pattern can be triggered by a vestibular or 
vascular episode or by a fall, but sometimes is the only finding 
in elderly patients. Walking with eyes closed in a straight line 
can reveal a previously unsuspected degree of unsteadiness or a 
cautious gait in patients with bilateral loss of vestibular func­
tion. In unilateral vestibular lesions, at least in the acute stage, 
patients veer in the same direction as the lesion. In somatosen­
sory ataxia, this task is often impossible.
Summary of the relevant neurological 
examination
We present a summary of the neurological examination rele­
vant to balance and gait disorders, in the hope that it may guide 
the non-neurologist who suspects a neurological cause for 
unsteadiness or gait disorder. Weakness of the legs can be doc­
umented by asking the patient to push against the examiner’s 
hands with different muscle groups or by asking the patient to 
stand/walk on tiptoes and heels, and crouch and rise. Identifi­
cation of weakness of the ankle extensors is paramount, as these 
muscles are responsible for toe clearance during the swing phase 
of the gait cycle. Even if a foot drop is not clinically observed, 
weakness can cause the toes to get caught when the patient 
walks fast or under pressure, on uneven ground or with inap­
propriate footware. Lower-limb weakness is a major contributor 
to the gait disorder in muscle, root and peripheral nerve disease, 
and motoneurone and pyramidal tract disease. The osteo- 
tendinous reflexes will be exaggerated in pyramidal tract disease 
and depressed or absent in all the others; extensor cutaneous 
plantar responses (Babinski sign) can be found in pyramidal
lesions. Normal somatosensory function is needed for voluntary 
placing of the feet while walking, as well as for the propriocep­
tive reflexes controlling upright posture. At least pin-prick, 
tuning fork and joint position sense must be examined in the 
lower limbs. If large fibres carrying proprioceptive input are 
involved, the ankle and sometimes patella jerks will be absent 
and the Romberg test will be positive. In peripheral polyneu­
ropathies, the degree of unsteadiness correlates with the 
decrease in vibration perception rather than with weakness, 
which testifies to the significance of the somatosensory input in 
postural control.7
NEUROLOGICAL CHECKLIST FOR BALANCE 
AND GAIT DISORDERS.
Weakness of legs 
Somatosensory function
-  
principle
-  
vibration
-  
joint position sensation
Sphincter disturbance 
Cranial nerve dysfunction 
Cellebellar signs
-  
nystagmus
-  
trunk titubation
-  
intention tremor
-  
past pointing
■ 
Basal ganglia signs
-  
bradykinisia
-  
rigidity
-  
dytonia
Gait disorders due to neurological involvement at medium 
or high levels (Table 44.1) will have associated clinical neuro­
logical features. In spinal cord compression or lesions, there are 
often sphincter dysfunction and sensory disturbances in the 
limbs. At the brainstem level, there is cranial nerve involve­
ment, including central vestibular and ocular-motor disorders; 
at the cerebellar level, there is trunk titubation, intentional 
tremor, and abnormal eye movements, including nystagmus; at 
the basal ganglia level, there are Parkinsonian features (includ­
ing tremor, cogwheel rigidity, hypomimia, bradykinesia, loss of 
postural reflexes), dystonic limb or neck posturing and choreo- 
athetosis. It is important to keep in mind the current, unabated 
weight of the clinical neurological examination in the assess­
ment of balance and gait disorders. Normal CT and MRI scans 
do not exclude neurological disease (e.g. Parkinson’s disease), 
and posturography findings usually lack topographical and aeti- 
ological specificity. In addition, skeletal and cardiovascular 
examination are mandatory in the elderly. There is an emerging 
body of evidence that cardiovascular syncope is a major cause 
for unexplained dizzy spells and falls in the elderly, regardless of 
whether the patient reports loss of consciousness.8,9
  

750 
Vestibular science
Posturography
Strictly speaking, posturography is any means of recording 
postural activity, not only sway or force platforms, which are 
indeed the most convenient way. The need for other recording 
devices arises because ‘sway’ platforms do not actually measure 
body sway but only measure foot torque (Nm), conveniently 
expressed as movement of the centre of foot pressure (cm). The 
dissociation between sway and centre of pressure is customarily 
illustrated with examples of the type shown in Figure 44.2. 
Imagine a subject standing still on a platform; he suddenly 
increases activity in his ankle flexor muscles, i.e. he pushes 
down hard with the ball of his feet and toes. His centre of pres­
sure will move forwards, and this is the signal that a ‘sway’ plat­
form will initially record. It is clear, however, that, as a result of 
pushing down on his toes, the subject’s centre of mass, its verti­
cal projection (centre of gravity) and the subject as a whole will 
move backwards. In order to capture the real sway, additional 
recordings of head or trunk motion would be needed. Simulta­
neous EMG recordings from the lower limbs would improve the 
picture, as they would identify the burst of activity preceding 
the movement of the centre of foot pressure. Goniometric 
(angle) measurements of the ankle joint would confirm that the 
ankle moved in flexion rather than extension, thus completing 
the full postural motion picture.
Although for some standard clinical purposes platform 
signals alone are acceptable, e.g. comparing a group of patients 
before and after a treatment, specific questions on the mecha­
nisms involved in postural control require some or all of the 
recordings mentioned above. Some of the more commonly used 
in practice are: photo-electrical or electromagnetic recordings 
of head sway, accelerometric measurements of head or trunk
Centre of Pressure
0.6 mV
Soleus
hiii
1
I 0.4 mV
Figure 44.2 Dissociation between centre of pressure and actual body sway. 
Recordings of a subject's anteroposterior displacement of the centre of foot 
pressure when standing on a posturography platform during a sudden push­
down of toes and ball of the feet. The earliest activity is registered in soleus 
EMG. Note that although the subject swayed backwards, as shown by head 
position and late centre of foot pressure traces, the initial movement of the 
centre of foot pressure was forwards. Upward deflections in the centre of foot 
pressure and head position displacement indicate displacement forwards; 
downward deflections indicate displacement backwards.
motion, and EMG signals from the lower limbs, alone or in 
combination with trunk, abdominal and cervical muscle 
recordings.
If the patient just stands quietly on the platform, with 
eyes open or closed, the procedure is called static posmr- 
ograph)1* When additional balance perturbations or 
stimuli (e.g. moving platform, visual stimuli, muscle 
vibration) are added, it is called dynamic posturograpfry.
Three general questions can be asked in the area of postur­
ography: has posturography advanced the knowledge of how 
postural mechanisms work, has posturography taught us how 
posture is impaired in patient groups, and does posturography 
help in the management of an individual patient complaining 
of a balance problem? The answer to the first two questions is 
certainly yes, but opinions are divided as to the third.
A detailed discussion on posture and balance mechanisms 
can be found in Chapters 38 and 46. Posturographic techniques 
have been useful in defining the contribution of the different 
sensori-motor components to postural control. The first 
attempts to generate a comprehensive system approach to 
postural control were led by Nashner and co-workers.10-13 They 
suggested that postural balance is maintained on the basis of a 
limited repertoire of centrally generated muscle synergies. 
During slight perturbations to balance, the body behaves essen­
tially as an inverted pendulum, pivoting around the ankle 
joints. Muscular responses are organized in a distal-to-proximal 
manner, with activation of distal muscles such as tibialis ante­
rior and soleus occurring earlier than that of proximal ones; this 
is the ‘ankle strategy’. Larger perturbations to balance or lesser 
possibility of response (e.g. standing on a narrow beam) led to 
movements around the hip joints and earlier activation of prox­
imal muscles, such as abdominal, paraspinalis, quadriceps and 
hamstrings; this was called the ‘hip strategy’.
These studies were also of value in quantifying adaptability 
and sensory ‘redundancy’ in the postural system. The posturog­
raphy system designed by Nashner consists of a support platform 
and a visual surround which can be moved angularly about an 
approximate inter-ankle axis. This setting allows for the ankle 
and visual information available to the subject to be, at least 
partly, neutralized by means of coupling the visual surround or 
the support surface to the anteroposterior sway movements of 
the subject. This set-up formed the basis of the commercial 
product ‘Equitest’, a computerized dynamic posturography 
(CDP) system, particularly the testing protocol known as the 
sensory organization test. If patients with vestibular deficits are 
allowed to stand freely on this system, they show little or no 
difficulty if the platform is stationary, with normal visual informa­
tion (e.g. stable surrounds) or with eyes closed. When either or 
both the platform and visual surround are sway coupled, patients 
have poor balance performance.14,15 This led to the hypothesis 
that the vestibular signal is normally used in postural control as
  

Posturography 
751
an inertial-gravitational reference system against which con­
flicts in the other sensory inputs are resolved, i.e. a kind of 
plumb line. Adaptability of the postural system to stimuli evok­
ing unhelpful postural reactions (toe-up platform rotations 
which trigger unwanted EMG responses in gastrocnemius) was 
thought to depend on cerebellar function.16 A summary of the 
testing conditions available in the sensory-organization test 
part of the CDP system is given in Figure 44.3.
Many findings and concepts emanating from the work of 
Nashner have since been challenged or disproved. Experiments 
have shown that an important role played by the vestibular sys­
tem is not ‘referentiaP but in generating fast, short-latency 
descending vestibulospinal postural responses.17,18 The role of 
ankle afferents, as a main afferent source, has also been ques­
tioned; trunk and hip movements and proximal EMG responses 
are critical components in postural stability and seem to be 
independent of ankle input.1 20
In addition, the assumption that torque signals from the 
ankles can be used to couple the visual surround to head sway, 
based on the debated concept that the body sways as an ‘in­
verted pendulum’, does not seem realistic.21 Further, cerebellar 
patients show a number of postural deficiencies but they do not
Q 
§
Q
£
Q
0
P
Q
P
Sensory organization: 
1
Patterns of postural disorientation 
Visually dependent 
Surface dependent 
Vestibular loss 
Sensory selection
*  =  Body sway excessive or falls 
? =  May or may not show abnormal sway
*
*
*
*
Figure 44.3 Diagram illustrating the testing conditions encountered in the 
sensory organization test of the CDP. In (1), all sensory inputs are normally 
available; in (2), subjects close their eyes; in (3), the visual surround is 'sway 
referenced' (i.e. driven by the movements of the centre of foot pressure and 
thus providing inaccurate feedback about sway to the subject); in (4), the 
platform is ‘sway referenced'; in (5), the platform is 'sway referenced’ and the 
eyes are closed; and in (6), both the supporting platform and the visual 
surround are 'sway referenced'. Several of the assumptions underlying this 
approach have been questioned (see text for details). Underneath, the various 
patterns of postural disorientation which may be encountered are listed. 
Identification of these patterns may be useful for rehabilitation but this has not 
been firmly proven. (From Shumway-Cook et al. In: Bronstein, Brandt and 
Wollacolt, eds. Clinical Disorders of Balance Posture and Gait. London: Arnold 
1996: 211-35.71)
have adaptive difficulties with suppressing ‘unwanted’ postural
i 2 2  
2 3 ’2 4  
«-• 
1* 
responses to visual 
or support-surrace motion 
stimuli.
Finally, when presented in a historical context, the findings in 
vestibular patients seem trivial. Clinicians have known for 
decades that vestibular patients are usually normal in static 
conditions and that the way to unveil their unsteadiness is to 
examine them with eyes closed under conditions of reduced 
proprioceptive accuracy, e.g. on a mattress.25 In spite of these 
criticisms, the systematic approach of the work by Nashner and 
co-workers was the initial driving force which triggered enor­
mous physiological, clinical and also commercial interest in the 
field of posturography.
Posturography in peripheral 
vestibular disorders
Clinical observation of patients with severe acute, unilateral 
vestibular disorders, e.g. vestibular neuritis, shows that they 
tend to fall towards the side of the lesion on eye closure—i.e. in 
the direction of the slow phase of nystagmus.26 This can be 
documented by posturography but with little practical clinical 
benefit for the individual patient. In the compensated state, 
static posturography with eyes open or closed is usually normal. 
CDP shows increased sway in conditions in which the support 
surface, the visual surroundings or both simultaneously are 
unstable (sway referenced). In some early series, 100% of 
patients were reported to be abnormal when both visual sur­
round and support surface were sway referenced;15 in others, this 
figure dropped to around 50%.27 In a small but carefully con­
trolled series, 10 patients with severe unilateral caloric reduc­
tion were abnormal when tested in the acute stage only under 
unstable support/visual surroundings.28 Within 2 weeks, all 
patients regained total normality in all test conditions. The 
reasons for these discrepancies are not clear, but the inability to 
confirm the earlier reports is one of the reasons underlying the 
current disaffection with the technique.
A problem that is relevant to clinicians is what is the added 
value of posturography in comparison with traditional testing of 
the vestibular system. A comparison between posturography 
and the caloric test showed that the caloric test correlates bet­
ter with a history of vertigo and that CDP can show abnormal­
ities in patients with normal caloric function.29 This finding can 
be interpreted essentially in two ways: either posturography is 
capable of detecting abnormalities that caloric tests cannot, or 
posturography can give false-positive results. There is no simple 
solution to this problem, and, as outlined above, the clinician’s 
beliefs, training background and interests will influence his 
decision.
A similar problem arises when comparing CDP with inex­
pensive alternatives. To a large extent, the sophistication of the 
commercially available CDP systems arises from the fact that 
the support surface and the visual surround can be moved. 
Clinical examination of a subject’s balance while standing on
  

752 
Vestibular science
rubber foam (which makes lower-limb proprioceptive input 
inaccurate) and with either optically reversing goggles or a 
Chinese lamp (dome) on their head (which makes visual input 
unreliable) makes a reasonable, inexpensive approximation to 
CDP. This is sometimes called the ‘clinical test of sensory inte­
gration and balance’ or simply the ‘foam and dome’ test (Figure
44.4). A recent study compared CDP with its clinical counter­
part and found an excellent correlation between the two sets of 
results.30 This is good news for clinicians, particularly in reha­
bilitation, who may want to assess postural control thoroughly 
but are not prepared to make a large investment. There was, 
however, a lower rate of detection of abnormalities in the clin­
ical version of the test. As with the discrepancies observed 
between caloric tests and posturography, this can be interpreted
Figure 44.4 The 'clinical test for sensory interaction in balance’ or 'foam and 
dome’ test. The conditions increase in complexity from top left (all sensory input 
available) to bottom right (foam and dome), and are comparable to those 
shown for CDP in Figure 44.3. (From Shumway-Cook et al. In: Bronstein, Brandt 
and Wollacolt, eds. Clinical Disorders of Balance Posture and Gait London: Arnold 
1996: 211-35.71)
in two opposite ways. Another comparison between results in 
moving-platform posturography and clinical analysis of posture 
with subjects standing on foam also reported significant corre­
lation, with sensitivity and specificity of 90% and over.31 
Surprisingly, static posturography has been reported to have 
good predictive value in identifying elderly subjects at risk of 
falls.3
Bilateral vestibular lesions are easily diagnosed with con­
ventional caloric or rotational tests. Posturography in these 
patients has limited value in diagnosis, but studies have been of 
interest in defining the contribution of the vestibular system to 
postural control. Static posturography is normal in most 
patients with bilateral vestibular failure.33,34 It has been known 
for more than 70 years25 that a sudden tilt, particularly if the 
patient is on a mattress and blindfolded, throws these patients 
off balance. This observation has been confirmed with dynamic 
posturography, including the fact that rotation of the base of 
support is more effective than translation in unmasking the 
postural deficit.35,36 Although patients tend to use more hip 
strategy,36 latencies and muscle synergies are not essentially 
different from normal. The specific deficit in these patients, 
which explains why they actually fall during platform tilts, was 
identified by Allum et al:1719,20 EMG amplitudes in lower-limb 
musculature are reduced by more than 50% during platform 
tilts. This lack of muscle power is in turn responsible for the 
reduced ankle torque observed. If the postural responses to 
movements of the support surface are indeed centrally 
patterned, these findings indicate that vestibular input is essen­
tial for adequate gain setting of early muscular components 
operating at 80-120 ms.20 The alternative explanation that 
independent vestibulospinal or vestibuloreticulospinal path­
ways mediate the observed effects is equally possible and 
compatible with known latencies following direct vestibular 
activation.18,37 Answering this question may prove difficult 
when dealing with whole-body postural responses as investi­
gated by posturography. Isolated motion stimuli to the head, 
which elicit a vestibulocollic response at 20-25 ms before 
proprioceptive responses take place,38 may be useful to address 
this question, and studies in bilateral vestibular patients have 
shown that short-latency vestibulocollic responses do play a 
specific role in righting the head during sudden perturbations.18
Posturography in neurological 
disorders
As already emphasized, it would be naive, impractical and 
expensive to think that a posturography assessment could 
screen for a neurological deficit. Even if results were abnormal, 
the topographical and aetiological specificity of the finding 
would be very low.
  

Posturography 
753
Peripheral polyneuropathy
Since the days of Romberg, who reported that patients with 
tabes dorsallis fall over when closing the eyes, we have known 
that proprioceptive input is crucial for postural balance in 
humans. The same cannot be said of the other relevant inputs, 
visual and vestibular. Patients with peripheral neuropathy have 
increased sway, and this cannot be compensated for by vestibu­
lar and visual input.7,39,40 The amount of sway correlates with 
the loss of vibration sense in the lower limbs as measured with 
calibrated vibration devices (including the bone probe of an 
audiometer41) or with a tuning fork and increases with disease 
progression.42 The findings may be clinically relevant, as dia­
betic patients with neuropathy are at a higher risk of falling 
than those without.39 It must be borne in mind that patients 
with peripheral neuropathy can have involvement of the 
vestibular nerve and this can contribute to their unsteadiness.6
Cerebellum
Early in the twentieth century, views of the postural problem in 
cerebellar disease were influenced by Gordon Holmes, who saw 
that ‘the main function of the cerebellum was the control of 
muscular contractions’.43 The balance disorder was considered 
solely a consequence of a lack of coordination in the muscles 
responsible for bringing the centre of gravity of the body within 
the base of support. We now know that the cerebellum is also a 
station and a modulatory structure involved in reflex gain 
control,44 including vestibular and somatosensory mechanisms 
involved in postural control, plastic neural adaptation to 
vestibular loss,45 recalibration and learning processes.46
A comprehensive study with static posturography in large 
numbers of cerebellar patients was conducted by Diener, 
Dichgans and co-workers.47,48 On the basis of comparisons 
between lateral versus anteroposterior sway, eyes closed versus 
eyes open (EC/EO, sometimes called Romberg quotient, in 
order to see the degree of visual stabilization of body sway) and 
the frequencies of sway involved, these authors defined four 
sway patterns (Figure 44.5; Table 44.3): lower vermis (vestibu- 
locerebellum), anterior lobe, cerebellar hemisphere and spinal- 
cerebellar (e.g. Friedreich’s ataxia) syndromes. Perhaps the 
single most useful finding is the presence of a body tremor at 
about 3 Hz in patients with anterior lobe degeneration, either
alcohol-induced or degenerative. The origin of this tremor may 
lie in disinhibited long-latency stretch reflexes, as elicited by 
toe-up rotation of a tilting platform.49 In neurological practice, 
however, this tremor can be detected clinically, and the value 
of posturography in its diagnosis has been questioned.50
Tilting and translating platforms have been used to exam­
ine adaptability in the postural control system of cerebellar 
patients. If someone standing on a platform is pushed forwards 
from his back, his gastrocnemius experiences a stretch, in turn 
leading to a stretch response which contributes to restoration of 
the postural upright. The same effect will be seen if the platform 
upon which the subject is standing is suddenly translated back­
wards. If the platform is rotated toes-up, there also is stretch of 
the gastrocnemius, but, in this case, the resulting stretch
Figure 44.5 Posturography in cerebellar lesions. Recording of sway path (SP) in 
anterior-posterior and lateral directions and the calculated sway direction 
histogram (SDH), (a) Normal subject, (b) Increased omnidirectional sway in a 
patient with haemorrhage of the vestibulocerebellar vermis, (c) Predominantly 
lateral sway in a patient with Freidreich's ataxia, (d) Predominantly 
anterior-posterior sway in a chronic alcoholic with atrophy of the anterior lobe. 
Note the different scalings (a versus b-d) of the axes of the sway direction 
histogram summing the instantaneous sway directions within each of eight 
directional bins. (From Diener and Dichgans. In: Bronstein, Brandt and Wollacolt, 
eds. Clinical Disorders of Balance Posture and Gait. London: Arnold 1996: 
211-35.48)
Table 44.3 
Results from static posturography in cerebellar diseases.48
Lesion 
Amount of body 
Visual stabilization 
Directional preference
sway 
of body sway 
of sway
Lower vermis 
+ + +  
Absent 
None
Anterior lobe 
+ + + +  
Present 
Anterior-posterior
Cerebellar hemisphere 
+ 
Absent 
None
Spinal lesion 
+ + +  
Present 
Lateral
  

754 
Vestibular science
response contributes further to the subject’s instability: toes-up 
tilt pushes the subject backwards, and contraction of the gas­
trocnemius has the same effect. Thus, the response in gastroc­
nemius is quickly tuned down by central mechanisms to adjust 
to the new situation. Nashner and Grimm16 initially reported 
that this adaptability was impaired in cerebellar patients, but 
this was not confirmed by Mummel et al,24 who concluded that 
the cerebellum is not essential for adaptability to type of surface 
movement. Adaptability to dynamic conditions is required 
during full-field visual stimuli. Bronstein et al22 observed that 
normal subjects subjected to discrete, full-field, low-velocity 
visual stimuli sway in the direction of the visual stimulus. This 
postural response, which is unstabilizing with respect to the real 
(gravito-inertial) world, is immediately suppressed by normal 
subjects and cerebellar patients alike but not by patients with 
Parkinson’s disease. It was concluded that the basal ganglia 
rather than the cerebellum is involved in the suppression of this 
response. The cerebellum does not appear to be essential for fast 
adaptability of postural responses.
Parkinson’s disease and other basal 
ganglia disorders
Parkinson’s disease is the most common basal ganglia disorder, 
and approximately one-third of patients report falls. Falls, how­
ever, are not common in the early phases of conventional, idio­
pathic Parkinson’s disease, in contrast to other ‘parkinsonisms’ 
such as PSP (Steel-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome).4 There 
are many contributing factors to the postural instability in 
Parkinson’s disease, and these cannot be reviewed here. Abnor­
malities during tilting reactions led Purdon Martin to postulate 
a disorder of central vestibulopostural responses,25 but direct 
vestibular (galvanic) stimulation produced normal or even 
enhanced postural responses.52 Visual motion stimuli also 
induced larger than normal responses which patients found 
difficult to suppress,22 in agreement with platform motion 
studies indicating lack of flexibility in switching strategies and 
scaling responses.53-55 This fundamental problem in Parkinson’s 
disease suggests that the basal ganglia are implicated in re­
weighting the different sensorimotor loops involved in postural 
control and, more generally, in adaptability in the postural 
system during changing conditions.22
In spite of the significant contribution made by posturog­
raphy in understanding the nature of the postural disorder in 
Parkinson’s disease, there is very little room for the technique 
in the practical management of patients. Of possible interest is 
the fact that the posture and gait problem is not very responsive 
to L-dopa therapy, and, therefore, in the future, there may be 
room for objective posturography measurements of the response 
to new treatments aimed at these specific components of the 
disease. Another practical point is that in some patients the 
tremor is recorded by the platform,22 in which case frequency
analysis will show a peak of tremor activity at frequencies 
between 4 and 6 Hz, well beyond those of body sway (<1-2 Hz).
Other conditions with unsteadiness and high-frequency 
peaks in posturography recordings include some cerebellar 
ataxias, with a 3-Hz tremor discussed before,47,48 and orthostatic 
tremor.56 Orthostatic tremor is a relatively newly described con­
dition, so that only the neurologist specializing in movement 
disorders is very familiar with it.57 For this reason, these patients 
do turn up in neuro-otology clinics. This is not surprising, 
because the chief symptoms in these patients are discomfort 
while standing up, unsteadiness and ‘shakiness’ during upright 
stance due to the leg-trunk tremor. Patients have great diffi­
culty in waiting, e.g. bus stops, and, remarkably, walking often 
alleviates this discomfort. There are minor or no conventional 
neurological signs. The standing tremor may just be visible and 
there are no ‘central’ vestibulo-oculomotor signs. For these rea­
sons, most of the patients I have seen were initially diagnosed 
as ‘psychogenic’. Keeping the diagnosis of orthostatic tremor in 
mind is rewarding, since conventional surface EMG record­
ings—or sway platforms—easily identify the pathognomonic 
high-frequency tremor (12-20 Hz, typically 16 Hz).56 It has 
been suggested58 that orthostatic tremor deserves to be investi­
gated in all patients with unexplained instability or postural 
phobia. In that case, Fourier analysis of the sway signals must 
incorporate frequencies of up to 20 Hz in order to detect the 
specific tremor peak. This is of practical importance for diagno­
sis, since an increase in sway frequencies of up to 8 Hz has been 
reported in some patients with psychogenic unsteadiness.59 No 
definitive aetiology for orthostatic tremor has been identified, 
but some overlap with essential tremor has been suggested.57 
Alcohol and beta-blockers, however, are usually ineffective, 
whereas primidone and clonazepam can be helpful treatments.
Non-specific abnormalities in dynamic j)osturography have 
also been reported in Huntington’s disease and in spasmodic 
torticollis.61 A possible confounding effect introduced by the 
excessive abnormal movement in these patients is difficult to 
exclude, but more specific findings have been described. In 
Huntington’s patients, responses to surface displacements are 
either delayed or absent.62,63 In torticollis patients, the normal 
forwards sway response to dorsal neck vibration is abolished, 
suggesting that neck-afferent input from the dystonic muscles 
does not participate in postural control.64
Psychological unsteadiness
The relationship between psychological disorders and balance 
is extremely complex.
Anxiety can create dizziness and vice-versa, and no clin­
ician can claim to have an easy solution to this common 
clinical dilemma.
  

Posturography 
755
Only a few topics in which posturography has helped to further 
our knowledge in this area will be mentioned here. As with 
other patient groups, however, posturography is of less value in 
the management of the individual patient. Andersson et al65 
examined 16 patients with defined vestibular disorders with 
posturography during specific and non-specific balance pertur- 
bations (calf and arm muscle vibration respectively). Subjective 
unsteadiness (self-rating), and levels of worry, discomfort, anx­
iety and arousal (blood pressure and heart rate) were also mea­
sured. There was good agreement between subjective and 
objective unsteadiness and, as expected, the patients had 
increased levels of coping difficulty, less positive thoughts and 
increased sensitivity to somatic symptoms. In this group of 
patients, no evidence of undifferentiated postural responses or 
disproportionate levels of subjective reporting of unsteadiness 
was found, in spite of the increased psychological difficulties. 
This suggests that the psychological findings were genuinely 
secondary to the vestibular disorder. Both vestibular66 and anx­
iety patients67 show increased sway in response to visual 
motion. Another study using CDP in patients with symptoms of 
panic and agoraphobia also showed excessive sensitivity to plat­
form or visual surround motion.68
Interestingly, these findings were not correlated with 
anxiety-related measures, suggesting that they relate more to 
specific difficulties in postural control than to the anxiety dis­
order.68 Some patients report dizziness in surroundings with 
intense visual motion or repetitive visual patterns, such as 
driving, supermarkets, crowds, disco lights or ironing striped 
shirts. We use the term visual vertigo to describe these patients, 
when there is clinical and/or laboratory evidence of a vestibular 
lesion without clinically obvious psychiatric disorder.69 Some of 
these patients are significantly more unsteady than unilateral 
vestibular neurectomized patients during visual motion stimuli, 
particularly if the vestibular disorder is due to a central nervous 
system lesion or if there is additional strabismus. It was postu­
lated that visual vertigo patients may have pre-morbid high 
visual dependence for orientation and posture which would 
interfere with the normal process of vestibular compensation.69 
A recent study by Guerraz et al confirmed that an essential 
problem in patients with visual vertigo symptoms is one of 
increased visual dependence.70 This was documented both at a 
perceptual and postural level, e.g. by measuring the tilt of the 
subjective visual vertical and postural responses, respectively 
induced by a visual stimulus rotating in the frontal plane. In 
certain conditions, e.g. viewing the rotating disk, the level of 
unsteadiness induced in these patients was larger than in 
control patients with complete absence of vestibular function. 
In contrast, conventional questionnaire assessment of trait 
anxiety and somatic anxiety showed no difference between 
these two patient groups, suggesting that primary psychological 
factors are not the primary problem in the visual vertigo
„ 70
patients.
Visual dependence can also be identified with CDP, or its 
clinical version the foam and dome test, during testing condi­
tions with sway-referenced visual surroundings.71 Whether
visual dependence identified with CPD correlates with per­
ceptual measures and, in turn, whether they correlate with 
particular clinical features or outcome in patients has not been 
established.
It has been reported that posturography can also identify 
inconsistent and incoherent responses in patients with non- 
organic dizziness.35,72-74 In practice, most clinicians rely on a 
constellation of negative findings (e.g. normal neurological, 
vestibular and imaging examination), positive malingering or 
hysteric (conversion) features as well as an appropriate psy­
chological profile of the patient. The tradition of differenti­
ating ‘functional’ (psychogenic) from organic disease is 
strongly emphasized in neurological teaching, and, recently, 
video-taping of patients has helped in establishing clinical 
criteria for the diagnosis of psychogenic gait disorder.75 In a 
difficult patient where the question of organicity arises, it 
would be unwise to try to find an answer by means of 
posturography.
Clinical applications of 
posturography: unfortunately, a 
personal view
There is intense debate as to the clinical usefulness of postur­
ography for the day-to-day management of patients.76-79 This is 
partly due to different medical backgrounds, different interests 
(e.g. purely clinical or research) and, possibly, financial consid­
erations. Clinicians or researchers linked to the manufacturing 
companies, clinical departments which have invested relatively 
large sums from their budget in posturography equipment, and 
private practitioners, might be biased in their judgement. 
Admittedly, this is difficult to prove, so the reader will have 
to reach their own conclusions. In any case, some care with 
views too enthusiastic about any new technique in medicine— 
particularly when the claims may come directly or indirectly 
from the manufacturers—must be exercised.
Probably the first article to appear in a neurological jour­
nal with potential to attract the general readership was the 
‘Special Article’ in Neurology with the Report on the Thera­
peutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the 
American Academy of Neurology.80 This article remains a 
good and objective introduction to the topic for non­
subspecialized clinicians. The specialist panel concluded in 
1993 that dynamic posturography had a promising role in the 
assessment of balance disorder patients, but the ensuing dis­
cussion 8 years later testifies that such potential has not been 
fully developed. It is my personal experience, shared by many 
practitioners in academic medicine, that the technique is of 
no or very limited immediate value for the patient. I am only 
able to make one diagnosis with posturography which I cannot 
make by other means, that of orthostatic tremor (and this 
because I feel it is easier to stand a patient on a platform for
  

756 
Vestibular science
2 min than to obtain surface EMG recordings). However, this 
is a rare condition. Similarly, good specificity is also seen with 
the 3-Hz body postural tremor in certain cerebellar lesions but, 
in agreement with Baloh et al,50 the tremor is also observed 
clinically. Unfortunately, all too often papers conclude that a 
technique is a useful clinical tool when all that it is doing is 
finding statistically significant differences between normal sub­
jects and a particular patient group or a correlation with dis­
ease severity. The rationale behind clinical posturography is 
that it tests postural control as a whole, with the various sen­
sory inputs interacting in physiological ways or mimicking 
potential real-life challenges to upright balance. This is its 
strength and its weakness at the same time, because of its lack 
of specificity: the findings of a meta-analysis of platform pos­
turography indicated that its overall sensitivity and specificity 
is of the order of 50%.81 As expected, the diagnostic aid pro­
vided was enhanced if patients with central nervous system 
lesions were included in the studies. Further debate on this 
meta-analysis, which was positively reviewed by the NHS 
CRD database in 1999, can be found in Dobie,82 Black and 
Homer83 and Di Fabio.84
It can be argued that posturography can be useful for reha­
bilitation, and this avenue deserves to be fully explored. Indeed, 
posturography has been instrumental in proving the value of 
vestibular rehabilitation.85,86 However, the daily problem in 
neuro-otology is the patient who is not particularly unsteady in 
an objective way but still reports off-balance sensations and 
dizziness. This is often reflected in the lack of correlation 
between questionnaire data, such as the Dizziness Handicap 
Inventory, and posturography data.87 It can then be argued that 
what should guide the physiotherapist is not so much how 
much a vestibular patient sways but how he actually feels. If 
there was a need for a measure of a clinical outcome, then pre­
sumably a questionnaire could be at least as effective and almost 
certainly cheaper than a posturography system.
References
1. Bronstein AM, Brandt T, Woollacott M (eds). Clinical Disorders of 
Balance Posture and Gait. London: Arnold, 1996.
2. Bronstein AM, Gresty MA, Rudge P. Neuro-otological assessment 
in the patient with balance and gait disorders. In: Bronstein AM, 
Brandt T, Woollacott M, eds. Clinical Disorders of Balance Posture 
and Gait. London: Arnold, 1996: 85-113.
3. Nutt JG, Marsden CD, Thompson PD. Human walking and 
higher-level gait disorders, particularly in the elderly. ’Neurology 
1993; 43: 268-79.
4. Marsden CD, Thompson PD. Frontal gait disorders. In: Bronstein 
AM, Brandt T, Woollacott M, eds. Clinical Disorders of Balance 
Posture and Gait. London: Arnold, 1996: 188-93.
5. Dominguez RO, Bronstein AM. Assessment of unexplained 
falls and gait unsteadiness. The impact of age. In: Shepard N, 
Solomon D, eds. Practical Issues in Management of Dizzy and 
Balance Disorder Patient. ORL Clin North Am 33: 637-57.
6. Rinne T, Bronstein AM, Rudge P, Gresty MA, Luxon LM. 
Bilateral loss of vestibular function: clinical findings in 53 
patients. J Neurol 1998; 245(6-7): 314-21.
7. Bergin PS, Bronstein AM, Murray NMF et al. Body sway and vibra­
tion perception thresholds in normal aging and in patients with 
polyneuropathy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1995; 58: 335-40.
8. Dey AB, Kenny RA. Orthostatic hypotension in the elderly: 
aetiology, manifestations and management. J Ir Coll Phys Surg 
1998; 14: 182-7.
9. Lawson J, Fitzgerald J, Birchall J et al. Diagnosis of geriatric 
patients with severe dizziness. J Am Geriatr Soc 1999; 47: 12-17.
10. Nashner LM. A model describing vestibular detection of body 
sway motion. A eta Otolaryngol 1971; 72: 429-36.
11. Nashner LM. Analysis of movement control in man using the 
movable platform. In: Desmedt JE, ed. Motor Control Mechanisms 
in Health and Disease. New York: Raven Press, 1983.
12. Nashner LM, McCollum G. The organization of human postural 
movements: a formal basis and experimental synthesis. Behav 
Brain Sci 1985; 8: 135-72.
13. Horak FB, Nashner LM. Central programming of postural 
movements: adaptation to altered support-surface configurations. 
J Neurophysiol 1986; 55: 1369-81.
14. Black FO, Wall III C, Nashner LM. Effects of visual and support 
surface orientation references upon postural control in vestibular 
deficient subjects. Acta Otolaringol 1983; 95: 199-210.
15. Black FO, Nashner LM. Postural control in four classes of vestibu­
lar abnormalities. In: Igarashi M, Black FO ed. Vestibular and 
Visual Control on Posture and Locomotor Equilibrium. Basel: Karger, 
1985: 271-81.
16. Nashner LM, Grimm RJ. Analysis of multiloop dyscontrols in 
standing cerebellar patients. In: Desmedt JE, ed. Cerebral Motor 
Control in Man: Long Loop Mechanisms. Basel: Karger, 1996: 
300-19.
17. Allum JHJ, Pfaltz CR. Visual and vestibular contribution to pitch 
sway stabilization in the ankle muscles of normal subjects and 
patients with bilateral peripheral vestibular deficit. Exp Brain Res 
1985; 58: 82-94.
18. Ito Y, Coma S, Von Breven M et al. The functional effectiveness 
of neck muscle reflexes for the head-righting in response to sudden 
fall. Exp Brain Res 1997; 117: 266-72.
19. Allum JHJ, Bloem BR, Carpenter MG et al. Proprioceptive control 
of posture: a review of new concepts. Gait Posture 1998; 8: 214-42.
20. Allum JHJ, Honegger F. Interactions between vestibular and pro­
prioceptive inputs triggering and modulating human balance-cor- 
recting responses differ across muscles. Exp Brain Res 1998; 121: 
478-94.
21. Di Fabio RP, Emasithi A, Paul S. Validity of visual stabilization 
conditions used with computerized dynamic platform posturog­
raphy. Acta Otolaringol 1998; 118: 449-54.
22. Bronstein AM, Hood JD, Gresty MA et al. Visual control of 
balance in cerebellar and parkinsonian patients. Brain 1990; 113: 
767-9.
23. Timmann D, Horak FB. Prediction and set-dependent scaling of 
early postural responses in cerebellar patients. Brain 1997; 120: 
327-37.
  

Posturography 
757
24. Mummel P, Timmann D, Krause UWH et al. Postural responses 
to changing task conditions in patients with cerebellar lesions. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1998; 65: 734-42.
25. Martin JP. Tilting reactions and disorders of the basal ganglia. 
Brain 1965; 88: 855-74.
26. Brandt T, Dieterich M, Woollacott M, eds. Clinical Disorders of 
Balance Posture and Gait. London: Arnold, 1996, 131-46.
27. Burgneay J, Munro KJ. Computerised dynamic posturography: a 
retrospective analysis of the first 2000 patients tested at the ISVR 
Hearing and Balance Centre. J Audiol Med 1997; 6: 79-87.
28. Fetter M, Diener HC, Dichgans ]. Recovery of postural control 
after an acute unilateral vestibular lesion in humans. J Vestib Res 
1991; 1:373-83.
29. Goebel JA, Paige GD. Dynamic posturography and caloric test 
results in patients with and without vertigo. Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1989; 100: 553-8.
30. El-Kashlan HK, Shepard NT, Asher AM et al. Evaluation of clin- 
ical measures of equilibrium. Laryngoscope 1998; 108: 311-19.
31. Weber PC, Cass SP. Clinical assessment of postural stability. Am J 
Otol 1993; 14: 566-9.
32. Topper AK, Maki BE, Holliday PJ. Are activity-based assessments 
of balance and gait in the elderly predictive of risk of falling and/or 
type of fall? J Am Geriatr Soc 1993; 41: 479-87.
33. Lekhel H, Popov K, Bronstein AM et al. Postural responses to 
vibration of neck muscles in patients with uni- and bilateral 
vestibular loss. Gait Posture 1998; 7: 228-36.
34. Sakellari V, Bronstein AM. Hyperventilation effect on postural 
sway. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1997; 78: 730-6.
35. Allum JHJ, Shepard NT. An overview of the clinical use of 
dynamic posturography in the differential diagnosis of balance dis­
orders. ] Vestib Res 1999; 1: 11-40.
36. Herdman SJ, Sandusky AL, Hain TC et al. Characteristics of 
postural stability in patients with aminoglycoside toxicity. J Vestib 
Equilibrium Orientation 1994; 4: 71-80.
37. Colebatch JG, Day BL, Bronstein AM et al. Vestibular hyper­
sensitivity to clicks is characteristic of the Tullio phenomenon. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1998; 65: 670-8.
38. Ito Y, Coma S, Von Brevem M, Bronstein A, Rothwell J, 
Gresty M. Neck muscle responses to abrupt free fall of the head: 
comparison of normal with labyrinthine-defective human sub­
jects. J Physiol 1995; 489: 911-16.
39. Cavanagh PR, Simoneau GG, Ulbrecht JS. Ulceration, unsteadi­
ness, and uncertainty: the biomechanical consequences of dia­
betes mellitus. ] Biomechanics 1993; 26: 23-40.
40. Vrethem M, Ledin T, Emerudh J et al. Correlation between 
dynamic posturography, clinical investigation, and neurography 
in patients with polyneuropathy. Otorhinolaryngol 1991; 53: 
294-8.
41. Bronstein AM. Audiometry of the ankles. A quick check on the 
single most important sensory input for balance control. Br J 
Audiol 1996; 30: 63.
42. Jauregui-Renaud 
K, 
Kovacsovics 
B, 
Vrethem 
M 
et 
al. 
Dynamic and randomized perturbed posturography in the 
follow-up of patients with polyneuropathy. Arch Med Res 
1998; 29: 39-44.
43. Holmes G. The Croonian lectures on the clinical symptoms of 
cerebellar disease and their interpretation. In: Phillips CG, ed. 
Selected Papers of Gordon Holmes. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1979: 186-247.
44. MacKay WA, Murphy JT. Cerebellar modulation of reflex gain. 
Prog Neurobiol 1979; 13: 361-417.
45. Bronstein AM, Mossman SS, Luxon LM. The neck-eye reflex in 
patients with reduced vestibular and optokinetic function. Brain 
1991; 114: 1-11.
46. Ito M. The Cerebellum and Neural Control. New York: Raven Press, 
1984.
47. Diener HC, Dichgans J, Bacher M et al. Quantification of postural 
sway in normals and patients with cerebellar diseases. Electron- 
encephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1984; 57: 134-42.
48. Diener HC, Dichgans J. Cerebellar and spinocerebellar disorders. 
In: Bronstein AM, Brandt T, Woollacott M, eds. Clinical Disorders 
of Balance Posture and Gait. London: Arnold, 1996: 147-55.
49. Mauritz KA, Scmitt C, Dichgans J. Delayed and enhanced long 
latency reflexes as the possible cause of postural tremor in late 
cerebellar atrophy. Brain 1981; 104: 97-116.
50. Baloh RW, Jacobson KM, Beykirch K et al. Static and dynamic 
posturography in patients with vestibular and cerebellar lesions. 
Arch Neurol 1998; 55: 646-54.
51. Koller WC, Glatt S, Vetere-Overfield B et al. Falls and Parkinson’s 
disease. Clin Neuropharmacol 1989; 12: 98-105.
52. Pastor MA, Day BL, Marsden CD. Vestibular induced postural 
responses in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 1993; 116: 1177-90.
53. Schieppati M, Nardone A. Free and support stance in Parkinson’s 
disease. Brain 1991; 114: 1227-44.
54. Beckley DJ, Bloem BR, Remler MP. Impaired scaling of long 
latency postural reflexes in patients with Parkinson’s disease. 
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1993; 89: 22-8.
55. Bloem BR, Beckley DJ, Remler MP et al. Postural reflexes in 
Parkinson’s disease during ‘resist’ and ‘yield’ tasks. J Neurol Sci
1994;
56. Bronstein AM, Guerraz M. Visual-vestibular control of posture 
and gait: physiological mechanisms and disorders. Current Opin 
Neurol 1999; 12: 5-11.
57. Thompson PD. Primary orthostatic tremor. In: Findley LJ, Koller 
WC, eds. Handbook of Tremor Disorders. New York: Marcel 
Dekker, 1995; 387-99.
58. Mastain B, Cassim F, Guieu JD et al. Primary orthostatic tremor. 
Rev Neurol 1998; 154: 322-9.
59. Krafczyk S, Schlamp V, Dieterich M et al. Increased body sway at 
3.5-8 Hz in patients with phobic postural vertigo. Neurosci Lett 
1999; 259: 149-52.
60. Tian JR, Herdman SJ, Zee DS et al. Postural control in Hunting­
ton’s disease. Acta Otolaryngol 1991; 481: 333-6.
61. Moreau MS, Cauquil AS, Salon MCC. Static and dynamic bal­
ance function in spasmodic torticollis. Move Disord 1999; 14: 
87-94.
62. Dichgans J, Diener HC. The use of short- and long-latency reflex 
testing in leg muscles of neurological patients. In: Struppler A, 
Weindl A, eds. Clinical Aspects of Sensory Motor Integration. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag, 1987; 165-75.
  

758 
Vestibular science
63. Fetter M, Dichgans J. Vestibular tests in evolution. II. Posturogra- 
phy. In: Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM, eds. Disorders of the Vestibular 
System. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996; 256-73.
64- Lekhel H, Popov K, Anastasopoulos D et al. Postural responses to 
vibration of neck muscles in patients with idiopathic torticollis. 
Brain 1997; 120: 583-91.
65. Andersson G, Persson K, Melin L et al. Actual and perceived pos- 
tural sway during balance specific and non-specific proprioceptive 
stimulation. Acta Otolaryngol 1998; 118: 461-5.
66. Redfem MS, Furman JM. Postural sway of patients with vestibular 
disorders during optic flow. J Vestib Res 1994; 4: 221-30.
67. Jacob RG, Redfem MS, Furman JM. Optic flow-induced sway in 
anxiety disorders associated with space and motion discomfort. 
J Anxiety Disord 1995; 9: 411-25.
68. Yardley L, Luxon L, Bird J et al. Vestibular and posturographic test 
results in people with symptoms of panic and agoraphobia. J Audiol 
Med 1994; 3: 48-65.
69. Bronstein AM. The visual vertigo syndrome. Clinical and postur­
ography findings. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1995; 59: 472-6.
70. Guerraz M, Yardley L, Bertholon P et al. Visual vertigo: symptom 
assessment, spatial orientation and postural control. Brain 2001; 
124: 1646-56.
71. Shumway-Cook A, Horak FB, Yardley L, Bronstein AM. Rehabil­
itation of balance disorders in the patient with vestibular pathology. 
In: Bronstein AM, Brandt T, Woollacott M, eds. Clinical Disorders 
of Balance Posture and Gait. London: Arnold, 1996: 211-35.
72. Allum JHJ, Huwiler M, Honegger F. Identifying cases of non- 
organic vertigo using dynamic posturography. Gait Posture 1996; 4: 
52-61.
73. Fitzgerald JE, Birchall JP, Murray A. Identification of non-organic 
instability by sway magnetometry. BrJ Audiol 1997; 31: 275-82.
74. Uimonen S, Laitakari K, Kiukaanniemi H et al. Does posturogra­
phy differentiate malingerers from vertiginous patients? J Vestib 
Res Equilibrium Orientation 1995; 5: 117-24.
75. Lempert T, Brandt T, Dieterich M et al. How to identify psy­
chogenic disorders of stance and gait, a video study in 37 patients. 
J Neurol 1991; 238: 140-6.
76. Dobie RA. Does computerized dynamic posturography help us 
care for your patients? Am Otol 1997; 18: 108-12.
77. Hart CW. Does computerized dynamic posturography help us care 
for our patients? AmJ Otol 1997; 18: 535-7.
78. Stockwell CW. Vestibular testing: past, present, future. BrJ Audiol 
1997;31:387-98.
79. Black FO. Response to Stockwell CW. Vestibular testing: past, 
present, future. BrJ Audiol 1998; 32: 255.
80. American Academy of Neurology. Assessment-posturography. 
Report of the therapeutics and technology assessment subcommit­
tee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology 1993; 43: 
1261-4.
81. Di Fabio RP. Meta-analysis of the sensitivity and specificity of 
platform posturography. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1996; 
122: 150-6.
82. Dobie RA. Platform posturography. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 1996; 122: 1273.
83. Black FO, Homer LH. Platform posturography. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1996; 122: 1273-4.
84- Di Fabio RP. Platform posturography. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 1996; 122: 1274-6.
85. Cass S, Borello-France D, Furman JM. Functional outcome of 
vestibular rehabilitation in patients with abnormal sensory- 
organization testing. AmJ Otol 1996; 17: 581-894.
86. Brandt T. Vestibular exercises improve central vestibulospinal 
compensation after vestibular neuritis. Neurology 1998; 51: 
838-44.
87. Robertson DD, Ireland DJ. Dizziness handicap inventory corre­
lates of computerized dynamic posturography. J Otolaryngol 1995; 
24: 118-24.
88. Yarrow K, Brown P, Gresty MA, Bronstein AM. Force platform 
recordings in the diagnosis of primary orthostatic tremor. Gait 
Posture 2001; 13: 27-34.
  

45 Emerging technologies
Joseph M Furman, Izumi Koizuka
Introduction
This chapter aims to bring the reader up to date regarding 
several currently promising emerging technologies. The first 
section concerns assessment of the otolith organs. There are 
no clinically validated tests for the otolith organs. Discussed 
in this section are linear acceleration using sleds, eccentric 
rotation, off-vertical axis rotation, vestibular evoked myo­
genic potentials, and perception of the subjective visual ver­
tical and horizontal. The second section concerns head-only 
rotation. The third section concerns galvanic stimulation. 
The fourth section concerns effects of moving visual scenes 
on postural sway, and the fifth section concerns high- 
resolution magnetic resonance imaging of the inner ear. 
Thus, these technologies span various methodologies looking 
at the vestibulo-ocular reflex, the vestibulospinal reflex, per­
ception, and new clinical anatomic studies. References are 
provided so that the reader can delve into these topics more 
thoroughly, if desired. An attempt was made to approach 
each of the emerging technologies uniformly. Following a 
brief description of what the technology entails, each section 
or sub-section discusses what the technology aims to test, 
what are its positive attributes, why it might be useful in the 
future, and what aspect of balance function the technology 
assesses that is not currently assessed adequately by other 
techniques. As far as is feasible, the chapter includes a brief 
description of how the technology is applied, including the 
current state of development of the technique. Examples of 
how the technology has been used and what new findings 
have arisen from the technology are discussed. Additionally, 
the limitations of the technology are described to account for 
why the technology is emerging and has not yet ‘emerged’. 
Where possible, some mention is given to whether or not 
these limitations are surmountable, what improvements are 
possible, and what other technologies currently available or 
emerging might be better. Last, the chapter gives an overall 
opinion as to the likelihood that the technology might 
become generally available.
Assessment of the otolith organs
Linear translation
Linear translation refers to the use of linear sleds to stimulate 
the otolith organs. Typically, eye movements and sometimes 
perceptual responses are measured. Most sleds are horizontal 
and thus stimulate primarily the utricles if the subject is seated 
upright. With the subject oriented such that the motion is 
along the interaural axis, eye movements will be predominantly 
horizontal. This is the most typically used orientation. With the 
subject supine, with the motion of the subject along their ros­
tral caudal body axis, the motion will stimulate predominantly 
the sacculus, with the eye-movement response being predomi­
nantly vertical. The advantages of linear translation include 
the fact that it stimulates the otolith organs directly and natu­
rally, with no concomitant semicircular canal stimulation. In 
this regard, linear translation has the potential to provide addi­
tional information clinically, in that there is no commonly used 
otolithic stimulus available. Figure 45.1 illustrates a linear sled 
that has been used primarily for research purposes. Alternative 
technologies to deliver linear acceleration include the parallel 
swing1 and a rotating linear sled that effectively lengthens the 
sled. Sled length is typically the limiting factor in terms of the 
lowest frequency of motion that can be applied. Sled length also 
limits the duration of a step change in linear velocity.
To date, linear translation has been used for research pur­
poses to deduce how otolith stimulation is processed to yield 
eye movements2 and perception13-8 of motion using pure 
otolithic stimuli. Linear translation has been combined with 
visual stimuli,7 with vergence eye movements,5,6 and with the 
use of imaginary visual targets.9 These studies have suggested 
that the point of visual regard greatly influences the eye- 
movement response to linear translation and that both real and 
imagined visual targets influence the eye movement response to 
linear translation. Additionally, linear translation has been 
used to assess the impact of both peripheral and central vestibu­
lar disorders on the otolith-ocular reflex.10-16 These studies

760 
Vestibular science
U \U
Figure 45.1 Photograph of a linear sled device in Nagoya, Japan. The sled is powered by a magnetic rail. The sled length is 21 m. Translational frequencies of this 
device range from 0.05 Hz to 0.16 Hz.
have indicated that unilateral peripheral vestibular disease does 
not significantly influence the otolith-ocular reflex. That is, it 
appears that a single labyrinth is sufficient to produce the eye 
movements that result from linear translation. However, with 
acute unilateral peripheral vestibular loss, asymmetric responses 
to linear translation have been recorded.16 Patients with bilat­
eral vestibular loss have been shown to have reduced responses 
to linear translation. Patients with cerebellar disease have been 
found to have abnormal visual-vestibular interaction using 
linear translation.14
The limitations of linear translation are many. They 
include the size and expense of the equipment required to 
deliver a linear translation stimulus, and the difficulty of 
coupling the head to the motion device and accurately record­
ing eye movements during the stimulus. Because of the complex 
nature of the induced eye movements, which may include 
horizontal, vertical and torsional positions, recording eye 
movements is difficult. Also, the eye movements induced by 
linear translation are of small magnitude, further reducing the 
reliability of the measures. A further limitation of linear trans­
lation is that studies to date have indicated that patients with 
unilateral peripheral vestibular abnormalities exhibit normal
responses. Some of these limitations might be overcome with 
improvements in eye-movement recording methods and devel­
opment of novel stimuli. However, the likelihood that linear 
acceleration will be used in routine clinical basis is low. Further­
more, other means of stimulating the otolith organs may be 
more practical, including eccentric rotation or off-vertical axis 
rotation. For now, linear translation is a useful stimulus in the 
research setting to uncover basic information regarding the 
influence of otolithic stimulation on eye movements and per­
ception of spatial orientation and possibly the influence of 
vestibular disease on otolithic-dependent responses.
LINEAR ACCELERATION
Major strength
Stimulates the otolith organs directly without stimu­
lating the semicircular canals.
Major weakness
It is technically difficult to deliver a linear acceleration 
and simultaneously record eye movements.
  

Emerging technologies 
761
Eccentric rotation
Eccentric rotation refers to off-axis rotation (not to be confused 
with off'vertical axis rotation). Eccentric rotation is performed 
with the subject displaced from the axis of rotation in a manner 
comparable to a centrifuge. In fact, even with conventional 
vertical axis rotation, the vestibular labyrinth is typically ‘off' 
axis’ because of the location of the labyrinths within the skull. 
That is, with earth-vertical axis rotation with the subject sitting 
upright, the axis of rotation cannot physically intersect both 
labyrinths. Typically, with the patient seated such that the axis 
of rotation passes through the center of the head, both vestibu- 
lar labyrinths are eccentric. In a technique popularized by Clarke 
and Engelhom17, the subject is positioned such that the axis of 
rotation intersects with one or the other labyrinth. In this way, 
one labyrinth can be subjected to eccentric rotation while the 
other is subjected only to rotational motion. The physics under- 
lying eccentric rotation is as follows: centripetal accelerations 
caused by the off-axis location of the labyrinth result in a linear 
acceleration directed toward the axis. Also, if the rotational 
velocity is not constant, a tangential linear acceleration is 
delivered. As a result, eccentric rotation combines a rotational 
motion with a linear acceleration. Depending upon the orien­
tation of the subject with respect to the axis of rotation and the 
trajectory of the rotational velocity versus time, various combi­
nations of rotational acceleration and linear acceleration can 
be delivered. Also, depending upon the particular rotational 
and linear acceleration delivered to the subject, various types of 
eye movements are produced. That is, semicircular canal-based 
responses resulting from the rotational acceleration and otolith 
organ-based responses based upon the linear acceleration will 
combine.18,19 Several studies have suggested that the eye move­
ments induced by this combination of semicircular canal and 
otolith organ stimulation represent a linear summation of the 
two effects. For example, the semicircular canal- and otolith 
organ-induced eye movements can be synergistic or in con­
flict.20-22 Alternatively, the two types of eye movements can be 
in different planes and thus combine, somewhat independently. 
Eccentric rotational responses can also consist of a perceptual 
change in the perceived vertical or perceived horizontal.
An advantage of eccentric rotation is that it constitutes an 
otolith stimulus that can be combined with a semicircular canal 
stimulus. Also, a visual stimulus can be combined with these 
various signals. A further positive attribute of eccentric rotation 
is that the precise nature of the stimulus can be changed by ori­
enting the subject in different ways. Figure 45.2 illustrates an 
eccentric rotation device with the subject about to undergo a 
yaw rotational motion. In Figure 45.2a, the subject is either fac­
ing the motion or facing away from the motion, whereas in Fig­
ure 45.2b, the subject is facing away from the axis of rotation. 
Thus, the centripetal forces in Figure 45.2a will be oriented 
through the ears, i.e. they will be interaural. The tangential lin­
ear acceleration force, however, will be naso-occipital. Con­
versely, in Figure 45.2b, the centripetal forces will be 
naso-occipital, whereas the tangential linear acceleration forces 
will be interaural.
Eccentric rotation is typically performed using one of two 
different rotational modalities, either constant-velocity rota­
tion17 or sinusoidal rotation.18 With sinusoidal rotation, not only 
the otolith organs, but also the horizontal semicircular canals, 
are stimulated simultaneously, and thus the otolith- ocular reflex 
cannot be evaluated in isolation. The responses obtained during 
sinusoidal eccentric rotation can be compared with responses 
obtained during sinusoidal earth-vertical axis rotation. With 
constant-velocity rotation, it is possible to evaluate the otolith- 
ocular reflex in isolation, but once constant velocity has been 
reached, the eye movement induced is essentially the equivalent 
of just having the patient tilted with respect to gravity.
Studies to date have suggested that eccentric rotation is a 
complex stimulus producing complex responses that has obvi­
ous clinical utility. Responses in patients with unilateral periph­
eral vestibular disease are not clearly different from responses in 
normal subjects.23,24 A study of patients with Meniere’s disease 
suggests that there is an abnormal enhancement of eccentric 
rotational responses in this disorder.25 Other studies have 
evaluated conflict between otolith and semicircular canal stim­
uli and the effects of imagined visual targets. Studies by Clarke 
and Engelhom17 have suggested the possibility of using eccen­
tric rotation to assess otolith organs individually. This aspect of 
eccentric rotation is promising but requires highly specialized 
equipment.
The limitations of eccentric rotation include the expensive 
technology required to deliver such a stimulus and the difficulty 
in recording the complex eye movements elicited by the stimu­
lus. Moreover, clinical studies performed to date have not 
suggested clear abnormalities, but eccentric rotation has not 
been evaluated thoroughly. Eccentric rotation, at this time, is 
one of the candidate methods that might become useful in the 
clinical setting to evaluate otolith function. The potential 
technical challenges in delivering eccentric rotation in a clini­
cal setting would appear to preclude this type of stimulus for 
routine clinical assessment. However, technological advances 
in eye-movement recording and further research, particularly 
using very small eccentric distances,17 may help overcome some 
of these limitations.
ECCENTRIC ROTATION
Major strength
Both the otolith organs and semicircular canals can be 
stimulated simultaneously.
Major weakness
Eccentric rotation is technically challenging.
Off-vertical axis rotation
Off-vertical axis rotation (OVAR) is a stimulus wherein persons 
are rotated while the axis about which they are rotating is tilted 
with respect to gravity.26-28 OVAR should not be confused with 
off-axis rotation, which is another name for eccentric rotation 
(discussed above). The term OVAR can correctly be used to
  

762 
Vestibular science
Figure 45.2 Photograph of an eccentric rotation device, (a) Subject is positioned such that the centripetal forces are interaural. Note that the subject may be either 
facing the motion or have their back to the motion, (b) Subject is positioned on the eccentric rotator with the centripetal acceleration naso-occipital.
describe tilts of the axis of rotation of up to 90°, i.e. so-called 
‘barbeque’ rotation.29 However, OVAR employs tilts of the axis 
of rotation of 30° or less.
OVAR has the capability of assessing the otolith-ocular 
reflex, semicircular canal-otolith interaction, and visual-otolith 
interaction. In particular, by rotating an individual at constant 
velocity for a long enough period of time for the semicircular 
canal responses to decay, OVAR can be used to deliver a pure 
otolithic stimulus. The most popular OVAR stimulus uses yaw 
rotation, that is, the subject is rotated in their own horizontal
plane, i.e. about a rostral-caudal body axis. In this case, it is 
probably the utricular organs that are stimulated maximally.
Figure 45.3 shows a diagram of a typical OVAR test device. 
Note that the orientation of the subject with respect to the axis 
of rotation produces a yaw stimulus even though the orienta­
tion of the axis of rotation is tilted with respect to gravity. 
Figure 45.4 illustrates a rotate-then-tilt protocol for constant- 
velocity rotation. The slow-component eye velocity induced by 
such a stimulus includes the so-called bias and modulation com­
ponents, each of which reflects the otolith-ocular response.
  

Emerging technologies 
763
Counterweight
Turntable
Linear
actuator
Figure 45.3 Diagram of an off-vertical axis rotation (OVAR) device. Note that 
the axis of rotation is tilted with respect to gravity.
M
T,R Constant Velocity
60
40
20
* *
v* 
.
* iC
20
40
60
80
100
ocular processing. Also, patients with bilaterally reduced 
vestibular responses, even patients with absent responses to ice 
water caloric stimulation, may have preserved responses to 
OVAR, suggesting preserved otolith function in patients with 
severely impaired semicircular canal responses.32
Despite the encouraging findings from clinical applica­
tions of OVAR, there are several shortcomings of the tech­
nique that may limit its widespread applicability. The 
equipment requirements are somewhat complex. OVAR test­
ing requires a rotational device and a tilt stand with appropri­
ate electronics and safety features. An additional complexity 
of OVAR is that the induced eye movements are a combina­
tion of horizontal, vertical and torsional movements.33 Further, 
OVAR is nausea-provoking. Also, since OVAR responses have 
been shown to be essentially normal in patients with complete 
unilateral peripheral vestibular loss except for an asymmetry 
that may be seen with conventional rotation, i.e. earth- 
vertical axis, the applicability of the technique to patients 
with partial vestibular disorders is uncertain. This limitation 
arises from the fact that OVAR stimulates the otolith organs 
bilaterally. Several areas of research may help to determine the 
ultimate clinical usefulness of OVAR. In particular, by com­
bining OVAR with certain visual stimuli, important insights 
may be gained regarding otolith-visual interaction.34 The 
clinical usefulness of such information is unknown at the pre­
sent time. Also, by recording the eye movements induced by 
OVAR using video-oculography, other aspects of the response 
to OVAR, i.e. the non-horizontal components, may be uncov­
ered that are clinically useful. Other technologies, some of 
which are discussed in this chapter, are also designed to assess 
otolith function. OVAR is relatively easy to perform, certainly 
as compared to the use of linear sleds, and can be combined 
easily with visual stimuli.
Overall, OVAR appears to be a promising technology 
because of its relative ease of use and the ability to combine an 
otolithic stimulus with vision. Limitations include the some­
what cumbersome equipment required and the nausea produced 
by the stimulus.
Figure 45.4 Slow-component eye velocity in response to off-vertical axis 
rotation. A rotate-then-tilt protocol was used to generate purely otolithic- 
induced eye movements following the tilt. Note the presence of both a bias and 
a modulation component.
OVAR has been used to assess otolith-ocular function in 
patients with disorders of the peripheral30 and central vestibular 
systems.31 These studies have suggested that OVAR has the 
potential to provide clinically useful data. Studies using OVAR 
have shown that patients with a single functioning labyrinth, 
e.g. patients with unilateral peripheral vestibular disease, have 
asymmetric otolith-ocular responses.30 Patients with central 
vestibular disease, particularly disease of the vestibulo- 
cerebellum, have been found to have a reduction in the bias 
component and an abnormally large modulation component.31 
These studies have provided insights regarding central otolith-
OFF-VERTICAL AXIS ROTATION
Major strength
Both pure otolith organ stimulation and combined 
semicircular canal and otolith organ stimulation can be 
delivered.
Major weakness
Off-vertical axis rotation requires a complex device 
and produces complex eye movements that may be 
difficult to record.
Vestibular evoked myogenic potentials
Vestibular evoked myogenic potentials VEMPs refer to electri­
cal activity recorded from neck muscles in response to intense 
auditory clicks.35”40 VEMPs have been hypothesized to reflect
  

764 
Vestibular science
stimulation of the sacculus unilaterally.39 As a result of this 
presumed ability of VEMPs to assess the sacculus unilaterally, it 
has possible clinical applicability. There are no other tests avail" 
able that are known to assess the sacculus in isolation. As with 
the other tests of otolith function described in this chapter, the 
clinical usefulness of VEMP is limited, since otolithic disease in 
the absence of disease elsewhere in the labyrinth is probably 
infrequent.
Figure 45.5 provides an example of a VEMP. Studies to date 
have indicated definite abnormalities in the VEMP in individ­
uals with known peripheral vestibular loss.35-37,39,40 Moreover, 
VEMP magnitudes have been found to be elevated in certain 
unusual inner ear disorders.38 However, a pure vestibular origin 
for the VEMP remains controversial. Data are not yet available 
regarding alterations in VEMPs as a result of partial saccular 
lesions and it is uncertain how such data can be obtained.
One of the limitations of VEMPs is the technical challenge 
of obtaining an electromyographic recording from a muscle that 
has the appropriate amount of background activity. That is, the 
muscle from which the VEMP is being recorded must be pre- 
activated. Other technical issues that are not resolved include 
the type of auditory stimulus, the position of the patient, and 
the exact site of recording. Also, the test may produce unac- 
ceptable discomfort in many patients with otologic disorders.
Overall, VEMPs, because they presumably assess function 
of the sacculus unilaterally, may become more widespread 
clinically. However, it is likely that even once some of the tech- 
nical issues surrounding VEMPs, including its test-retest relia­
bility, sensitivity, and specificity, are determined, its usefulness 
will be limited to special circumstances in which it is clinically 
necessary to assess saccular function specifically.
VESTIBULAR EVOKED MYOGENIC 
POTENTIALS
Major strength
Vestibular-evoked myogenic potentials appear to allow 
an assessment of the sacculus, unlike other techniques. 
Major weakness
It is technically difficult to adjust the background 
muscle activity to obtain a useful electromyographic 
recording; the test may produce unacceptable auditory 
discomfort.
Perception of the subjective visual vertical/ 
subjective visual horizontal
Perceptual tests to determine whether or not a patient can 
accurately judge their orientation with respect to gravity have 
been available for many years.41,42 Using very simple instru- 
ments, the ability of an individual to judge vertical or horizon- 
tal can be assessed. Several perceptual tasks related to vestibular 
function have been studied, including the subjective visual 
vertical and horizontal, subjective haptic vertical and horizon-
Figure 45.5 The vestibular evoked myogenic potential before and after right 
vestibular nerve section. (From Colebatch and Halmagyi. Neurology 1992; 42: 
1635-6,35 with permission.)
tal, subjective body vertical, and perceptions of motion and 
gravito-inertial force during rotation and translation. As with 
many perceptual tests, precisely which aspects of the balance 
system are being measured is uncertain. In the case of subjective 
visual vertical (S W ) and subjective visual horizontal (SVH), 
there are influences from both the labyrinth and the visual 
system. Presumably, the labyrinthine sensors most important for 
accurately setting a test object vertical or horizontal include the 
otolith organs, i.e. the utricle and saccule. Since the issues 
pertaining to the S W  and the SVH are identical, further 
discussion will refer to the SW .
The technique of assessing S W  in some sense is fully 
developed, in that no technological advances are required to 
improve the test technique. However, the use of the S W  has 
not become widespread, for several reasons. Despite the fact 
that the S W  is abnormal in acute peripheral vestibular 
lesions,43-46 the S W  is normal in chronic lesions.43,45,47 Central 
vestibular disorders can also be assessed using SW .41,48 The 
influence of partial vestibular lesions on the S W  is unknown. 
Also, because of the multifactorial nature of the test technique, 
the S W  may not provide additional information useful in the 
clinical setting beyond the information that can be obtained 
from other methods. A definite advantage, however, of the 
S W  is its simplicity. Possibly, with future research, S W  will be 
shown to be a useful adjunct to other clinical techniques. For 
example, by combining S W  with eccentric rotation, a more 
sensitive measure of unilateral otolith function may be 
available.
PERCEPTION OF THE SUBJECTIVE VISUAL 
VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL
Major strength
Using simple techniques, a patient’s ability to judge 
spatial orientation can be assessed.
Major weakness
Studies have indicated that the subjective visual verti­
cal is normal in chronic lesions and it relies upon a high 
level of patient cooperation.
  

Emerging technologies 
765
Overall, the measurement of S W  and SVH is a low- 
technology technique that can be applied easily in the clinical 
setting. However, because it relies upon the perceptions of the 
patient and is thus by definition subjective, it is likely to be of 
limited usefulness clinically.
Head-only rotational testing
Head-only rotational testing is a technique that assesses the 
vestibulo-ocular reflex using rotation only of the head rather 
than rotation of the entire body.49-53 Since the vestibular system 
is anatomically found in the head, the vestibular stimulus in 
head-only rotation and in whole-body rotation is identical. As 
in whole-body rotation, during head-only rotation, eye move­
ments are recorded either with electro-oculography or video­
oculography in order to assess the vestibulo-ocular reflex 
(VOR). Both horizontal and vertical head and eye movements 
can be recorded, although technical challenges limit the relia­
bility of the test, especially for vertical eye movements. Figure 
45.6 illustrates some data obtained using head-only rotational 
testing. An apparent advantage of head-only rotational testing 
is that the VOR can be assessed in a frequency range that coin­
cides with natural head movements. This capability is difficult to
Figure 45.6 Eye movements induced by head-only rotation. Illustrated are eye 
position, eye velocity and head velocity during head-only rotation. (From 
Furman and Durrant with permission. J Vestib Res 1995; 5: 323-9.34)
achieve using whole-body rotation, because of the large moment 
of inertia of the body and thus the high torque required to rotate 
an individual at greater than one cycle per second. Also, with 
whole-body rotation at higher frequencies, it is difficult to assure 
adequate coupling of the rotational stimulus to the head. Despite 
these relative advantages, head-only rotational testing, like 
whole-body rotation, stimulates both labyrinths simultaneously 
and thus cannot consistently provide information regarding the 
laterality of a vestibular abnormality. Also, head-only rotational 
testing may be of limited value in patients with partial vestibular 
lesions unilaterally.
Some of the limitations of applying head-only rotational 
testing clinically can be found in the literature.54 Advantages of 
head-only rotational testing include the relatively simple equip­
ment that can be used to perform the test, the ability to perform 
the test at the bedside because the equipment is transportable, 
and the ability to assess the VOR in its natural frequency range. 
Limitations include technical problems that can be encoun­
tered in rotating the head at high frequency, either actively or 
passively, the analysis of eye-movement data that contain many 
small saccadic eye movements, and the possible influence of sig­
nals from the neck. Despite these limitations, head-only rota­
tional testing may develop into a clinically useful technique. In 
particular, head-only rotation may be useful for the assessment 
of bilateral peripheral vestibular loss, e.g. in patients receiving 
ototoxic medications such as aminoglycoside antibiotics or cer­
tain chemotherapeutic agents.55 Further research will be 
required to determine the ultimate clinical applicability of 
head-only rotational testing.
HEAD-ONLY ROTATIONAL TESTING
Major strength
The vestibulo-ocular reflex can be assessed at the 
bedside using a stimulus that mimics natural head 
movements.
Major weakness
There are technical problems in rotating the head at 
high frequency while measuring the small eye movements 
produced.
Galvanic vestibular stimulation
Galvanic vestibular stimulation is a technique that has been 
used since the time of Barany, but it has not become a routine 
clinical measure. Galvanic vestibular stimulation is performed 
by passing small currents through the vestibular labyrinth using 
surface electrodes while recording either eye movements56-60 or 
postural 
movements.61-68 Typical 
stimulus 
configurations 
include placing an electrode on each mastoid, one positive and 
one negative, to produce medial-lateral sway or horizontal/tor­
sional eye movements. Previous research and clinical applica­
tion have been limited by the requirement for relatively high, 
sometimes painful, electric currents to produce recordable
  

766 
Vestibular science
horizontal eye movements.56 More recent studies using lower- 
intensity currents while recording non-horizontal (i.e. tor­
sional) eye movements60 or postural movements66 have led to 
renewed interest in this technique. A significant advantage of 
galvanic stimulation is that each labyrinth can be tested sepa­
rately. However, it is not yet certain which vestibular end 
organs are responsible for either the eye movements or postural 
movements induced by such a stimulus. Offsetting this limita­
tion, however, is the fact that galvanic stimulation is believed to 
excite the synapse between the hair cell and the eighth cranial 
nerve afferent. As a result, galvanic stimulation can provide 
information regarding ‘neural’ versus ‘sensory’ function. That is, 
individuals with hair cell damage with preserved eighth nerve 
function may have normal or increased responses to galvanic 
stimulation. Thus, galvanic stimulation has promise as an assess­
ment tool for unilateral eighth nerve function. However, it is 
technically challenging to deliver a well-controlled galvanic 
stimulus while recording eye movements or postural sway.
A limitation of galvanic stimulation when recording eye 
movements is similar to the limitation of all previously dis­
cussed techniques that rely on eye movements, namely that 
the technique provides a derived measure of vestibular func­
tion that relies upon the ocular motor system. When recording 
postural responses during galvanic stimulation, there is an 
additional difficulty based on the complexity of the postural 
control system, which is neither linear nor time invariant. As 
for VOR tests, recording postural sway during galvanic stimu­
lation provides only a derived measure of peripheral vestibular 
function. Further, the stimulus may produce a skin sensation 
that cues the patient. Additional unresolved issues concerning 
the effect of galvanic stimulation on postural sway include the 
influence of head-on-torso position, the waveform of the elec­
trical stimulus, i.e. constant versus sinusoidal, and the timing 
of the galvanic stimulus with respect to the patient’s own sway. 
Despite these limitations and unresolved issues, however, with 
the advent of three-dimensional video-oculography and lower- 
cost motion analysis systems galvanic stimulation may emerge 
as a clinically useful tool. That is, low-intensity galvanic 
currents may produce small but recordable non-horizontal 
eye movements and/or small but recordable postural move­
ments that can be measured reliably using sensitive recording 
instruments.
GALVANIC VESTIBULAR STIMULATION
Major strength
Galvanic stimulation can assess eighth nerve function 
unilaterally.
Major weakness
It is uncertain which vestibular end organs are 
responsive to galvanic stimulation.
Effects of moving visual scenes on 
postural sway
In response to optic flow stimuli, upright human subjects have 
been found to alter their postural sway.69,70 In particular, sinu­
soidally moving visual scenes have been found to induce periodic 
postural sway that is of abnormally large magnitude in patients 
with vestibular disease.71-73 A limitation of optic flow stimuli is 
that responses depend upon the postural control system. Addi­
tionally, visual influences on postural sway do not directly 
involve labyrinthine stimulation. Thus, this technique does not 
assess peripheral vestibular function. Rather, visual effects on 
postural sway may be influenced indirectly by vestibular function 
centrally or peripherally. Figure 45.7 shows how visual effects on 
posture can be assessed in the laboratory. Studies to date have 
suggested that certain patient groups have abnormal responses to 
visual stimuli, including patients with vestibular dysfunc­
tion,71-73 children suffering from otitis media,74 and patients with 
anxiety disorders.75 Much research remains to be performed, 
however. Research issues include the specifics of the visual stim­
uli that may be most useful in eliciting postural responses and the 
analysis techniques that may be most useful.
Visual influences on posture may also be important in the 
nascent field of vestibular rehabilitation using virtual reality.76-78 
Studies of the effects of moving visual stimuli on postural sway 
may direct the choice of virtual reality scene that is most useful 
for rehabilitation purposes. Numerous technical and scientific 
issues remain to be addressed, including the importance of 
peripheral versus central vision, the direction, speed and com­
plexity of the flow fields, and which aspects of postural sway are 
most useful to record.
Overall, because of the potential to contribute to both 
diagnosis and treatment, the use of moving visual stimuli while
Figure 45.7 Apparatus that can be used for assessing the postural sway 
response during optic flow stimulation.
  

Emerging technologies 
767
\
1
/
(D
(2)
recording postural sway is likely to emerge in one form or 
another as a clinically useful technology.
EFFECTS OF MOVING VISUAL SCENES ON 
POSTURAL SWAY
Major strength
Postural sway during exposure to moving visual scenes 
appears to be particularly sensiti%Te to disorders such as 
anxiety and otitis media.
Major weakness
Multiple neural pathways are involved in the postural 
response to visual scenes and there are many potential 
confounding factors that are difficult to control.
High-resolution imaging of the 
inner ear
High-resolution MRI to assess endolymphatic 
hydrops
Although the main pathological finding in patients with 
Meniere’s disease is distention of the entire endolymphatic 
system, i.e. endolymphatic hydrops, its diagnosis depends 
primarily upon a history of fluctuating hearing loss and tinnitus, 
and episodic vertigo. Therefore, development of a practical tool 
to obtain objective evidence of the existence of endolymphatic 
hydrops is important.
Obtaining clear images of the auditory portion of the inner 
ear is challenging, because the cochlea consists of very small 
compartments, i.e. the scala vestibuli, scala tympani, and 
cochlear duct. Moreover, these compartments are separated by 
thin walls. The scala tympani and cochlear duct are separated 
by the basilar membrane, which is about 100pm thick, and the 
scala vestibuli and cochlear duct are separated by Reissner’s 
membrane, which is only two cells thick (about 10pm).
The different protein compositions of the cochlear duct 
versus the scala vestibuli/scala tympani accentuate of the differ- 
ences in signal intensities from the endolymph and perilymph. 
This allows the basilar membrane and Reissner’s membrane to 
be located.79-81 Using such technology, it is possible that 
Meniere’s disease can be diagnosed using high-resolution 
MRI.82
The fine structure of the inner ear of a fixed, decalcified, 
celloidin-embedded human temporal bone determined using 
high-resolution MRI, including the basilar membrane of each 
turn of the cochlea, is shown in Figure 45.8. Note that the loca­
tions of both the basilar membrane and Reissner’s membrane 
were based on the different protein concentrations of the 
endolymph versus the perilymph, the scala vestibuli, scala tym­
pani, and cochlear ducts.
A major limitation of high-resolution MRI of the inner ear 
in the living human is that movement of the head caused by
Figure 45.8 High-resolution MR image of the human temporal bone obtained 
with spin echo (spin echo, time of echo (TE) =  80 ms, time of repetition (TR) =  
2500 ms, field of view, (FOV) =  50 mm). (1) The basilar membrane of the basal 
turn of the cochlea. (2) The internal auditory meatus.
respiration creates movement artefact. Also, to obtain a high- 
resolution image, the strength of the magnetic field must be 
high and the frequency of the field must be in the GHz range. 
Such fields may be dangerous for living humans.
If movement of the subject during MRI scanning could be 
overcome, it is possible that Reissner’s membrane could be imaged 
and high-resolution MRI could become clinically feasible.
High-resolution CT to assess dehiscence of the 
superior semicircular canal
Dehiscence of the superior semicircular canal83 is best identified 
on parasagittal projections (in the plane of the superior canal) 
from temporal bone CT scans performed with 0.5-mm collima- 
tion. CT scans performed with lower resolution (1.0- or 1.5-mm 
collimation) are sensitive for identification of a possible dehis­
cence but are of lower specificity, due to partial volume averag­
ing. Recently, helical CT scans of the temporal bone using a 
Marconi Medical MxTwin CT scanner (Cleveland, OH, USA) 
have been used to identify dehiscence of the superior semicircular 
canal (L Minor, personal communication).
HIGH RESOLUTION IMAGING OF THE INNER 
EAR
Major strength 
Assessment of endolymphatic hydrops and dehiscence 
of the superior semicircular canal 
Major weakness
Technical issues currently limit the use of high- 
resolution MRI in vivo.
  

768 
Vestibular science
References
1. Baloh RW, Beykirch K, Honrubia V, Yee RD. Eye movements 
induced by linear acceleration on a parallel swing. J Neurophysiol 
1988; 60: 2000-13.
2. Seidman SH, Telford L, Paige GD. Tilt perception during dynamic 
linear acceleration. Exp Brain Res 1998; 119: 307-14.
3. Bronstein AM, Gresty MA. Short latency compensatory eye 
movement responses to transient linear head acceleration: a 
specific function of the otolith-ocular reflex. Exp Brain Res 1988; 
71:406-10.
4. Watanabe Y, Mizukoshi K, Wasuda K, Ishii M, Sekiguchi C. Eye 
movement elicited by linear acceleration. A eta Otolaryngol 
(Stockh) 1991; Suppl 481: 34-6.
5. Busettini C, Miles FA, Schwarz U, Carl JR. Human ocular 
responses to translation of the observer and of the scene: depen­
dence on viewing distance. Exp Brain Res 1994; 60: 2000-13.
6. Gianna CC, Gresty MA, Bronstein AM. Influence of target dis- 
tance and acceleration level and eye movements evoked by lateral 
acceleration steps. A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1995; Suppl 520, 
Part I: 65-7.
7. Lathan CE, Wall C, Harris LR. Human eye movement response to 
z-axis linear acceleration: the effect of varying the phase relation^ 
ships between visual and vestibular inputs. Exp Brain Res 1995; 
103: 256-66.
8. Merfeld DM, Teiwes W, Clarke AH, Scherer H, Young LR. The 
dynamic contributions of the otolith organs to human ocular 
torsion. Exp Brain Res 1996; 110: 315-21.
9. Skipper JJ, Barnes GR. Eye movements induced by linear acceler­
ation are modified by visualization of imaginary targets. A eta 
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1989; Suppl 468: 289-93.
10. Brookes GB, Bronstein AM, Gresty MA. Otolith-ocular reflexes 
in patients with unilateral and bilateral loss of labyrinthine func- 
tion. In: Sacristan T, Alvarex-Vicent JJ, Bartual J et al., eds. 
Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Amsterdam: Kugler & 
Ghedini Publications, 1990: 805-8.
11. Fujino A, Tokumasu K, Yosio S, Naganuma H. Sinusoidal linear 
accelerations test on peripheral vestibular disturbances. Acta 
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1991; Suppl 481: 67-8.
12. Gresty MA, Bronstein AM. Testing otolith function. BrJ Audiol 
1992; 26: 125-36.
13. Zee DS, Hain TC. Clinical implications of otolith-ocular reflexes. 
Am J Otol 1992; 13: 152-7.
14. Baloh RW, Yue Q, Demer JL. The linear vestibulo-ocular reflex in 
normal subjects and patients with vestibular and cerebellar 
lesions. J Vestib Res 1995; 5: 349-61.
15. Anastasopoulos D, Lempert T, Gianna C, Gresty MA, Bronstein 
AM. Horizontal otolith-ocular responses to lateral translation in 
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 
1997; 117: 468-71.
16. Lempert T, Gianna C, Brookes G, Bronstein A, Gresty M. 
Horizontal otolith-ocular responses in humans after unilateral 
vestibular deafferentation. Exp Brain Res 1998; 118: 533-40.
17. Clarke AH, Engelhom A. Unilateral testing of utricular function. 
Exp Brain Res 1998; 121: 457-64.
18. Koizuka I, Takeda N, Sato S, Kubo T, Matsunaga T. Nystagmus 
responses in normal subjects during eccentric sinusoidal rotation. 
Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1993; Suppl 501: 34-7.
19. Seidman SH, Paige GD. Perception and eye movement during 
low-frequency centripetal acceleration. Ann NY Acad Sci 1996; 
781: 693-5.
20. Bronstein AM, Gresty MA. Compensatory eye movements in the 
presence of conflicting canal and otolith signals. Exp Brain Res 
1991: 85: 697-700.
21. Bronstein AM, Gresty MA. Eye movements in response to canal 
and otolith signals in opposing directions. Ann NY A cad Sci 1992; 
656: 814-16.
22. Viirre ES, Demer JL. The vestibulo-ocular reflex during horizontal 
axis eccentric rotation and near target fixation. Ann NY A cad Sci 
1996; 781: 706-8.
23. Barratt H, Bronstein AM, Gresty MA. Testing the vestibular- 
ocular reflexes: abnormalities of the otolith contribution in 
patients with neuro-otological disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
1987; 50: 1029-35.
24. Odkvist LM, Gripmark MA, Larsby B, Ledin T. The subjective 
horizontal in eccentric rotation influenced by peripheral vestibu­
lar lesion. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1996; 116: 181-4.
25. Koizuka I, Takeda N, Sato S. Sakagami M, Matsunaga T. Centric 
and eccentric VOR tests in the patients with Meniere’s disease 
and vestibular Meniere’s disease. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1991; 
suppl: 55-8.
26. Guedry F. Orientation of the rotation-axis relative to gravity: its 
influence on nystagmus and the sensation of rotation. Acta 
Otolaryngol 1964; 60: 30-48.
27. Darlot C, Denise P, Droulez J, Berthoz A. Eye movements induced 
by off-vertical axis rotation (OVAR) at small angles of tilt. Exp 
Brain Res 1988; 73: 91-105.
28. Furman JM, Schor R, Schumann T. Off-vertical axis rotation: a 
test of the otolith-ocular-reflex. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1992; 
101(8): 643-50.
29. Wall III C, Furman JM. Nystagmus responses in a group of normal 
humans during earth horizontal axis rotation. Acta Otolaryngol 
(Stockh) 1989; 108: 327-35.
30. Furman JM, Schor RH, Kamerer DB. Off-vertical axis rotational 
responses in patients with unilateral peripheral vestibular lesions. 
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1993; 102: 137-43.
31. Furman JM, Balaban CD, Pollack IF. Vestibular compensation 
following cerebellar infarction. Neurology 1997; 48(4): 916-20.
32. Peterka RJ, Shupert CL, Horak FB. Ocular counterrolling and 
OVAR tests identify preserved otolith function in some subjects 
with bilateral vestibular deficits. Abstract, Association for 
Research in Otolaryngology Mid-Winter meeting, St Petersburg 
Beach, FL, 1998.
33. Angelaki DE, Hess BJM. Three-dimensional organization of 
otolith-ocular reflexes in rhesus monkeys. I. Linear acceleration 
responses during off-vertical axis rotation. J Neurophysiol 1996; 
75: 2405-24.
34. Furman JM, Mendoza J. Visual-vestibular interaction during off- 
vertical axis rotation. J Vestib Res 1996; 6(2): 93-103.
35. Colebatch JG, Halmagyi GM. Vestibular evoked potentials in
  

Emerging technologies 
769
human neck muscles before and after unilateral vestibular 
deafferentation. Neurology 1992; 42: 1635-6.
36. Robertson DD, 
Ireland 
DJ. Vestibular evoked myogenic 
potentials. J Otolaryngol 1995; 24: 3-8.
37. Murofushi T, Matsuzaki M, Mizuno M. Vestibular evoked 
myogenic potentials in patients with acoustic neuromas. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 124: 509-12.
38. Ferber-Viart C, Dubreuil C, Duclaux R. Vestibular evoked myo- 
genic potentials in humans: a review. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 
1999; 119: 6-15.
39. Heide G, Freitag S, Wollenberg I, Iro H, Schimrigk K, Dillmann 
U. Click evoked myogenic potentials in the differential diagnosis 
of acute vertigo. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1999; 66: 787-90.
40. Murofusko T, Matsuzaki M, Wu CH. Short tone burst-evoked 
myogenic potentials on the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1999; 125: 660-4.
41. Friedmann G. The judgment of the visual vertical and horizontal 
with peripheral and central vestibular lesions. Brain 1970; 93: 
313-28.
42. Friedmann G. The influence of unilateral labyrinthectomy on 
orientation in space. Acta Otolaryngol 1971; 71: 289-98.
43. Day MJ, Curthoys IS, Halmagyi GM. Linear acceleration percep- 
tion in the roll plane before and after unilateral vestibular neurec- 
tomy. Exp Brain Res 1989; 77: 315-28.
44. Bergenius J, Tribukait A, Brantberg K. The subjective horizontal 
at different angles of roll-tilt in patients with unilateral vestibular 
impairment. Brain Res Bull 1996; 40: 385-91.
45. Bohmer A. The subjective visual vertical as a clinical parameter 
for acute and chronic vestibular (otolith) disorders. Acta 
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1999; 119: 126-7.
46. Bohmer A, Mast F. Assessing otolith function by the subjective 
visual vertical. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1999; 871(5): 221-31.
47. Bohmer A, Rickenmann J. The subjective visual vertical as a 
clinical parameter of vestibular function in peripheral vestibular 
diseases. J Vestib Res 1995; 5: 35-45.
48. Dieterich M, Brandt T. Ocular torsion and tilt of subjective visual 
vertical are sensitive brainstem signs. Ann Neurol 1993; 33: 292-9.
49. Jell RM, Guedry FE, Hixson WC. The vestibulo-ocular reflex 
in man during voluntary head oscillation under three visual 
conditions. Aviation Space Environ Med 1982; 53: 541-8.
50. Fineberg R, O’Leary DB, Davis LL. Use of active head movements 
for computerized vestibular testing. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 1987; 113: 1063-5.
51. Geobel JA, Fortin M, Paige GD. Headshake versus whole-body 
rotation testing of the vestibulo-ocular reflex. Laryngoscope 1991; 
101: 695-8.
52. Demer JL, Oas JG, Baloh RW. Visual-vestibular interaction dur­
ing high-frequency, active head movements in pitch and yaw. Ann 
NY Acad Sci 1992; 656: 832-5.
53. Hoshowsky B, Tomlinson D, Nedzelski J. The horizontal 
vestibulo-ocular reflex gain during active and passive high- 
frequency head movements. Laryngoscope 1994; 104: 140-5.
54. Chueng B, Money K, Sarkar P. Visual influence on head shaking 
using the vestibular autorotation test. J Vestib Res 1996; 6: 
411-22.
55. Kitsigianis G, O’Leary DB, Davis LL. Active head-movement 
analysis of cisplatin-induced vestibulotoxicity. Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1988; 98: 82-7.
56. Moore DM, Hoffman LF, Beykirch K, Honrubia V, Baloh RW. The 
electrically evoked vestibulo-ocular reflex: I. Normal subjects. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1991; 104: 219-24.
57. Straub RH, Thoden U. A modified method of electronystagmog­
raphy for recording eye movement during the galvanic vestibular 
test. ORK 1992; 54: 21-4.
58. Zink R, Steddin S, Weiss A, Brandt T, Dieterich M. Galvanic 
vestibular stimulation in humans: effects on otolith function in 
roll. Neurosci Lett 1997; 232: 171-4.
59. Zink R, Bucher SF, Weiss A, Brandt T, Dieterich M. Effects of 
galvanic vestibular stimulation on otolithic and semicircular canal 
eye movements and perceived vertical. Electroencephalogr Clin 
Neurophysiol 1998; 107: 200-5.
60. Kleine JF, Guldin WO, Clarke AH. Variable otolith contribution 
to the galvanically induced vestibulo-ocular reflex. Neuroreport 
1999; 10: 1143-8.
61. Coats AC. Limit of normal of the galvanic body-sway test. Ann 
Otol 1972; 81: 410-16.
62. Benson AJ, Jobson PH. Body sway induced by a low frequency 
alternating current. Equilibrium Res 1973; 3: 55-61.
63. Nashner LM, Wolfson P. Influence of head position and proprio­
ceptive cures on short latency postural reflexes evoked by 
galvanic stimulation of he human labyrinth. Brain Res 1974; 76: 
255-68.
64. Hlavacka F, Njiokiktjieri CH. Postural responses evoked by sinu­
soidal galvanic stimulation of the labyrinth. Acta Otolaryngol 
(Stockh) 1985; 99: 107-12.
65. Tokita T, Ito Y, Takagi K. Modulation by head and trunk posi­
tions of the vestibulo-spinal reflexes evoked by galvanic stimula­
tion of the labyrinth. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1989; 107: 
327-32.
66. Cass SP, Redfem MS, Furman JM, DiPasquale JJ. Galvanic- 
induced postural movements as a test of vestibular function in 
humans. Laryngoscope 1996; 106: 423-30.
67. Johansson R, Magnusson M, Fransson PA. Galvanic vestibular 
stimulation for analysis of postural adaptation and stability. IEEE 
Trans Biomed Engng 1995; 42: 282-91.
68. Cauquil AS, Gervet MFT, Ouaknine M. Body response to binau­
ral monopolar galvanic vestibular stimulation in humans. Neurosci 
Lett 1998; 245: 37-40.
69. Lee DN, Lishman JR. Visual proprioceptive control of stance. 
J Human Movement Sci 1975; 1: 87-95.
70. Bertenthal BI, Dai DL. Infant’s postural compensations induced by 
central versus peripheral optic flow. Paper presented at the 28th 
meeting of Psychonomic Society, 1987.
71. Bles JMB, de Jong V, de Wil G. Compensation for labyrinthine 
defects examined by use of a tilting room. Acta Otolaryngol 1983; 
95: 576-9.
72. Peterka RJ, Benolken, MS. Role of somatosensory and vestibular 
cures in attenuating visually-induced human postural sway. In: 
Woolacot M, Horak F, eds. Posture and Gait: Control Mechanisms. 
Oregon: University of Oregon, 1992: 272-5.
  

770 
Vestibular science
73. Redfem MS, Furman JM. Postural sway of patients with vestibular 
disorders during optic flow. J Vestib Res 1994; 4(3): 221-30.
74. Casselbrant ML, Furman JM, Rubenstein E, Mandel EM. The 
effect of otitis media on the vestibular system in children. Ann 
Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1995; 104(8): 620-4.
75. Jacob RG, Redfem MS, Furman JM. Optic flow-induced sway in 
anxiety disorders associated with space and motion discomfort. 
J Anxiety Disorders 1995; 9: 411-25.
76. Viirre ES. Virtual environments: a new technology for vestibular 
research. J Vestib Res 1996; 6: S74.
77. Kramer PD, Roberts DC, Shelhamer M, Zee DS. A versatile 
stereoscopic visual display system for vestibular and oculomotor 
research. J Vestib Res 1998; 8: 363-79.
78. Kim NG, Yoo CK, Im JJ. A new rehabilitation training system for 
postural balance control using virtual reality technology. IEEE 
Trans Rehab Engng 1999; 7: 482-5.
79. Koizuka I, Sano M, Kubo et al. Magnetic resonance image of the 
human temporal bone. Plact Otolaryngol (Kyoto) 1990; 83: 549-55.
80. Koizuka I, Seo R, Sano M et al. High-resolution magnetic reso­
nance imaging of the human temporal bone. ORL 1991; 53: 
357-61.
81. Henson MM, Henson OW Jr. Gewalt SL, Wilson JL, Johnson GA. 
Imaging the cochlea by magnetic resonance microscopy. Hear Res 
1994; 75: 75-80.
82. Salt AN, Henson MM, Gewalt SL, Keating AW, DeMott JE, 
Henson OW Jr. Detection and quantification of endolymphatic 
hydrops in the guinea pig cochlea by magnetic resonance 
microscopy. Hear Res 1995; 88: 79-86.
83. Minor LB. Superior canal dehiscence syndrome. A m ] Otol 2000; 
21:9-19.
84. Furman JM, Durrant JD. Head-only rotational testing: influence of 
volition and vision. J Vestib Res 1995; 5: 323-9.
  

Section V
Vestibular disorders 
and their management

46 Mormal and abnormal 
balance
Robert W Baloh
Overview
The control of body equilibrium and posture in everyday life is 
a complex function involving multiple receptor organs and 
neuronal centers. In particular, vestibular, visual and proprio- 
ceptive reflexes must be integrated to ensure postural stability. 
The prominent role of sensory interaction in orientation can 
already be appreciated in the behavior of gastropods. The inver­
tebrate Hermissenda has only rudimentary vestibular and visual 
receptors, yet the two systems fully interact to control behav­
ior.1 Afferent signals from photoreceptors in the eye and from 
hair cells in the statocyst converge on intemeurons in the cere­
bral plural ganglia, which control a putative motor neuron in 
each pedal ganglion. Excitation of the motor neuron produces 
turning of the animal’s foot in the ipsilateral direction, consis­
tent with the animal’s turning behavior toward light.
The block diagram in Figure 46.1 illustrates the organiza­
tion of sensorimotor integration within the human brain.2 Each 
of the primary sensory systems provides information to a first 
line of individual central processors which, in turn, pass this 
information on to a common central processor which provides 
command signals for eye movements and postural reflexes. The
Inputs
Vestibular - 
Visual —
Controllers
Output
Proprioceptive
Auditory -----
Other ---------
Figure 46.1 Block diagram illustrating the organization of sensorimotor 
integration within the brain. (From Baloh RW, Honrubia V. Clinical 
Neurophysiology of the Vestibular System, 3rd edn. New York: Oxford, 2001:19, 
with permission.)
functioning of the overall system is under adaptive control in a 
manner similar to that involved in other aspects of brain func­
tion and behavior. The adaptive processor uses information 
from cross-sensory modalities in executing automated tasks, 
such as the repetitive execution of an athletic skill or the 
adjustment of eye movements to the use of magnifying or mini­
fying lenses.3 Adaptive mechanisms are also important in 
selecting orienting strategies, such as maintaining equilibrium 
after a shift in one’s center of gravity by moving knees, hips, 
arms, or all together. The clinical importance of these adaptive 
mechanisms is becoming more and more clear, particularly with 
regard to developing rehabilitative strategies for patients with 
lesions involving the different sensory systems.4
Vestibular, visual and proprioceptive reflexes must be 
integrated in neuronal centers to ensure normal posture.
Organization of postural reflexes
The basic element for the control of tone in the trunk and 
extremity skeletal muscles is the myotatic reflex or deep tendon 
reflex. The myotatic reflexes of the antigravity muscles are 
under the combined excitatory and inhibitory influence of mul­
tiple supraspinal neuronal centers (Figure 46.2). In the cat, 
there are two main facilitatory centers (the lateral vestibular 
nucleus and rostral reticular formation) and four main 
inhibitory centers (frontal cortex, basal ganglia, cerebellum, 
and caudal reticular formation). The balance of input from 
these different brain areas determines the degree of tone in the 
antigravity muscles. If one removes the inhibitory influence of 
the frontal cortex and basal ganglia by sectioning the animal’s 
midbrain, one produces a characteristic state of contraction in 
the antigravity muscles known as decerebrate rigidity. The 
extensor muscles increase their resistance to lengthening, and 
the deep tendon reflexes become hyperactive. The vestibular 
system is the main contributor to this increase in extensor tone, 
since bilateral destruction of the inner ears markedly decreases

774 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Figure 46.2 Facilitory (+) and inhibitory (-) pathways influencing the 
myotatic spinal reflex in the cat. Inhibitory pathways are:
(1) corticobulboreticular, (2) caudospinal, (3) cerebelloreticular, and (4) 
reticulospinal. Facilitory pathways are: (5) reticulospinal; and (6) vestibulospinal. 
(From Lindsley DB, Scheiner LH, Magoun HW. An electromyographic study of 
spasticity. J Neurophysiol 1949; 12: 197, with permission.)
the tone.5 Destniction of one inner ear or the lateral vestibular 
nucleus on that side results in an ipsilateral decrease in tone, 
indicating that the main excitatory input to the anterior horn 
cells arises from the ipsilateral vestibular nucleus.6
Our earliest understanding of the role of the vestibular sys­
tem on postural tone was derived from the study of decerebrate 
animals.7 The extensor tone in a decerebrate cat can be modu- 
lated in a specific way by changing the position of the head in 
space. The tone is maximal when the animal is in the supine 
position with the angle of the mouth 45° above horizontal, and 
minimal when the animal is prone with the angle of the mouth 
45° below the horizontal. Intermediate positions of rotation of 
the animal’s body about the transverse or longitudinal axis 
result in intermediate degrees of extensor tone. If the head of 
the upright animal is tilted upward (without neck extension), 
extensor tone in the forelegs increases; downward tilting of the 
head causes decreased extensor tone and flexion of the forelegs. 
Lateral tilt produces extension of the extremities on the 
opposite side.
These tonic inner ear reflexes, mediated by way of the 
otolith organs, seldom occur in intact animals or human sub- 
jects, because of the inhibitory influence of the higher cortical 
and subcortical centers (as shown in Figure 46.2). They can be 
seen in premature infants, however, and in adults with lesions 
releasing the brainstem from the higher neural centers.
The history in a patient with 
imbalance
Patients often use the term dizziness to describe a sensation of 
imbalance or disequilibrium that occurs only when they are
Both unilateral and bilateral vestibular lesions can 
present with imbalance without dizziness.
standing or walking and is unrelated to an abnormal head sen- 
sation. Both dizziness and imbalance are commonly associated 
with lesions involving peripheral and central vestibular struc- 
tures. The severity of symptoms following a vestibular lesion 
depends on: (1) the extent of the lesion; (2) whether the lesion 
is unilateral or bilateral; and (3) the rapidity with which the 
functional loss occurs. Patients who slowly lose vestibular func­
tion bilaterally (e.g. secondary to ototoxic drugs) often do not 
complain of dizziness but will report oscillopsia with head 
movements and instability when walking (due to loss of 
vestibulo-ocular and vestibulospinal reflexes, respectively). If 
the patient slowly loses vestibular function on one side over a 
period of months to years (e.g. with an acoustic neuroma), 
symptoms and signs may be minimal. Such patients often 
describe a vague feeling of imbalance and unsteadiness on their 
feet and rarely complain of dizziness. On the other hand, a sud- 
den unilateral loss of vestibular function is usually a dramatic 
event.8 The patient complains of severe dizziness and nausea, is 
pale and perspiring, and usually vomits repeatedly. A brisk 
spontaneous nystagmus interferes with vision. These symptoms 
and signs are transient, however, and the process of compensa­
tion begins almost immediately. Over time, the patient adapts 
to the imbalance through a process of compensation that 
requires intact vision and depth perception, normal proprio­
ception in the neck and limbs, and intact sensation in the lower 
extremities.9 Central vestibular pathways are integral to com­
pensation, and damage to these areas results in less effective 
recovery.
The patient’s general state of health prior to the onset of 
imbalance should be carefully investigated. Most systemic dis­
orders can be associated with dizziness and imbalance, due to 
either partial involvement of all the body orienting systems or 
a decreased capacity of the central nervous system to deal with 
information from these systems. A careful drug history is crucial 
for evaluating any patient complaining of imbalance. Ototoxic 
drugs such as the aminoglycosides and salicylates produce 
abnormalities in gait and balance and oscillopsia from bilateral 
symmetrical vestibular end-organ damage. Antihypertensive 
medications can produce dizziness and imbalance after stand­
ing, due to postural hypotension. Alcohol and phenytoin pro­
duce acute reversible imbalance and chronic irreversible 
imbalance from cerebellar dysfunction. Sedative drugs (e.g. 
barbiturates, benzodiazepines and phenothiazines) cause a non­
specific dizziness and imbalance, typically described as a foggi­
ness, cloudiness, or giddiness, that is presumably due to a diffuse 
depression of the central sensory integrating centers.
Psychiatric illnesses are commonly associated with sensa­
tions of dizziness and imbalance. Feelings of dissociation, as 
though one has left one’s own body, are common. Patients use 
terms such as ‘floating’, ‘swimming’, and ‘giddiness’ to describe 
the sensation. They may report a feeling of imbalance (com­
monly a rocking or falling sensation) or even a spinning inside 
the head—a sensation that can be differentiated from vertigo 
because it is not associated with an illusion of movement of the 
environment or with nystagmus. Episodes of dizziness and
  

Normal and abnormal balance 
775
imbalance can be provoked by certain sensory stimuli (e.g. 
driving over the brow of a hill, walking on a brightly polished 
floor, watching a train go by) or by social situations (e.g. eating 
in a restaurant, shopping in a department store, attending a 
reception). Symptoms may begin after a period of stress, espe­
cially after the death of a loved one or after a patient has been 
through a severe illness, and may continue for months or years.
Clinical assessment of gait and 
balance
Maintenance of balance and equilibrium is a complex process 
requiring integration of diverse sensory signals and multiple 
brain centers. Considering the many possible loci of dysfunc­
tion, the examination of a patient complaining of disequilib­
rium must include a careful assessment of gait, strength, 
coordination, reflexes, and sensory function.
Examination of a patient complaining of imbalance 
should include a careful assessment of gait, strength, 
coordination, reflexes and sensory function.
Examination of gait and balance should begin by having 
the patient walk normally in an open area where there is room 
for normal stride without fear of bumping into objects. The 
patient should be asked to walk normally from one end to the 
other with normal quick turns. One should observe for stride 
length, base width, overall posture, associated movements, and 
balance on turning. Having the patient walk heel-to-toe nar­
rows the base and can accentuate imbalance associated with 
central nervous system disorders, particularly cerebellar lesions 
(Figure 46.3). However, it is important to keep in mind that 
normal older people have trouble walking in tandem with eyes 
open. Romberg10 first noted that patients with proprioceptive 
loss from tabes dorsalis were unable to stand with the feet 
together and eyes closed. Barany11 later emphasized the impor­
tance of vestibular influences in maintaining the Romberg posi­
tion with eyes closed. Patients with cerebellar lesions are often 
unable to stand in the Romberg position even with eyes open.
Damage to the vestibular, somatosensory or visual sys­
tems typically produces subtle gait abnormalities such as 
slight widening of the base, shortening of the stride, and 
slow, careful turns.
A variety of semiquantitative bedside measurements of gait 
and balance have been developed, such as counting the number 
of steps made in tandem without a side step, timing the subject’s 
ability to stand in the Romberg position or on one foot with
Romberg test
Tandem walking
Figure 46.3 Bedside tests of vestibulospinal function.
eyes open and with eyes closed, and timing the subject’s ability 
to walk through a designed obstacle course. Performance on 
these measurements tends to deteriorate with age, although 
there is large individual variability, and the sensitivity for iden­
tifying balance disorders in a specific patient population has yet 
to be established. Probably the most widely used semiquantita­
tive bedside test for evaluating gait and balance disorders in 
older people is the Tinetti gait and balance scale.12 This scale 
grades such features as gait speed, stride length and symmetry, 
and balance on standing, turning, following a nudge and with 
eye closure. Performance on the Tinetti scale has been corre­
lated with the incidence of falls and other measurements of 
disequilibrium and imbalance in older people.
Gait and balance features associated 
with lesions at different sites
Sensory disorders
Since the somatosensory, vestibular and visual systems provide 
the main source of information about the position of the head 
and body in space, damage to any of these afferent systems can 
lead to disequilibrium and gait imbalance. As a general rule, the 
gait disorders associated with loss of sensory input are milder 
than other gait disorders and are therefore more difficult to 
identify on examination. Common features include slight 
widening of the base, shortening of the stride, and slow careful 
turns (Table 46.1). Nutt et al13 called this a ‘cautious gait’, 
which they felt was a non-specific response to any cause of dis­
equilibrium. Patients with proprioceptive or vestibular loss 
become ‘visual dependent’, so that symptoms and signs are 
much worse in the dark or with eyes closed (basis of the 
Romberg test).
  

776 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Table 46.1 Features of gait disorders in older people
Category 
Sensory loss
Musculoskeletal 
Cerebellar lesions 
Basal ganglia lesions
Frontal cortex and 
subcortical white 
matter lesions
Characteristic features of gait
'Cautious gait', slightly widened base, 
shortened stride, slow turns
Difficulty arising, general slowness, 
limp, decreased elevation of feet, 
locking of knees
'Atactic gait*, markedly widened base, 
truncal instability, overactive postural 
reflexes
Difficulty starting, freezing, rigidity, 
lack of associated movements, turns 
en bloc
‘Apractic gait', small shuffling steps, 
feet adhere to the floor, poor reflex 
control
Somatosensory and visual function are routinely measured 
as part of the neurological examination. The characteristic 
stocking/glove distribution sensory loss of a peripheral neuropa­
thy is easily identified. Visual acuity is best measured with the 
standard Snellen visual acuity chart. Bedside measurement of 
vestibular function is more difficult, because of overlap of the 
vestibular system with other sensorimotor systems. Vestibular 
function testing is extensively reviewed in other chapters but, 
in my experience, the two most useful bedside tests are the 
head-thrust test and the dynamic visual acuity test. With the 
head-thrust test, the patient fixates on the examiner’s nose 
while the head is quickly turned to one side and then the 
other.14 Normally, the eyes move smoothly in the orbits, main­
taining fixation on the target. Patients with vestibular loss 
require several quick catch-up saccades to maintain fixation (to 
one side with unilateral lesions and to both sides with bilateral 
lesions). For the dynamic visual acuity test, the patient rapidly 
oscillates the head back and forth (greater than one cycle per 
second) while reading a standard visual acuity chart.15 A drop 
in visual acuity with head-shaking of greater than two lines on 
the acuity chart suggests bilateral vestibular loss.
Two useful bedside tests of vestibular function are the 
head-thrust test and the dynamic visual acuity test.
ated with numerous neurological disorders and general systemic 
illnesses. Musculoskeletal disorders are ubiquitous in older peo­
ple. The musculoskeletal system is less pliable and there is a 
general decrease in strength. Deconditioning due to lack of 
physical exercise can lead to a classic vicious cycle, whereby 
joint stiffness and decreased strength lead to less activity, which 
in turn leads to more weakness and stiffness. Patients with mus­
culoskeletal disorders have difficulty arising from a sitting posi­
tion, and walk in a slow, deliberate fashion. They may show a 
characteristic limp or lock their knees to overcome proximal 
weakness (Table 46.1).
Cerebellar disorders
The cerebellum is commonly considered the balance center of 
the brain, yet how it achieves this function is only partially
Gait disorders associated with cerebellar lesions are usu­
ally much more pronounced than those associated with 
peripheral sensory loss.
understood. Cerebellectomized animals retain postural reflexes, 
although their ability to control these reflexes is impaired. 
Functionally, the cerebellum can be divided into two major 
components: the midline structures—the vermis and flocculo- 
nodular lobes—which are critical for maintaining equilibrium, 
and the hemispheres, which control coordination of the limbs. 
Lesions which produce truncal imbalance invariably involve 
the midline structures, particularly the anterior vermis or the 
flocculonodular regions.
The characteristic wide-based ataxic gait of cerebellar 
lesions is usually easily differentiated from other gait disorders 
(Table 46.1). Unlike patients with peripheral neuropathy and 
bilateral vestibular loss, patients with cerebellar lesions are 
unable to use vision to stabilize their balance, so that walking is 
severely impaired, even with vision. Some patients with lesions 
involving the anterior lobe of the cerebellum show a character­
istic three cycle per second postural tremor.16
Basal ganglia lesions
The dopaminergic system of the basal ganglia is critical for initia­
tion of gait and for maintaining postural responses. Monkeys who
Musculoskeletal disorders
Examination of any patient complaining of imbalance should 
include a careful assessment of strength and joint mobility of 
the lower extremities. In addition to testing the strength of 
individual muscles, have the patient arise from a chair without 
using the arms, walk up and down steps, and walk on the toes 
and heels. Proximal muscle weakness and stiffness are associ-
The characteristic gait in patients with basal ganglia 
lesions is dominated by akinesia and rigidity.
have had this system damaged by the toxin MPTP exhibit a flexed 
posture, deficient postural reflexes, and freezing.17 Not infre­
quently, patients with basal ganglia disorders, particularly 
patients with Parkinson’s disease, will present with frequent falls
  

Normal and abnormal balance 
777
due to disturbed postural responses. The characteristic gait is 
dominated by akinesia and rigidity (Table 46.1). There is diffi­
culty in starting, freezing, lack of associated movement, and turn­
ing en bloc. Festination, retropulsion or propulsion can also occur.
The diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease is apparent if one 
observes the typical gait features along with a pill-rolling tremor, 
generalized rigidity, and a mask-like facies. On the other hand, 
early in the disease process, subtle abnormalities of gait may be 
the only abnormality. Progressive supranuclear palsy is a multi­
system disorder that may initially resemble Parkinson’s disease, 
but eventually patients develop other features, including 
impaired vertical gaze, pseudobulbar signs, and cerebellar signs. 
An important early differential feature between Parkinson’s 
disease and progressive supranuclear palsy is the posture when 
walking. Patients with Parkinson’s disease have a stooped- 
forward posture, while patients with progressive supranuclear 
palsy have increased tone in the extensors of the neck, so that 
the head and neck are extended backward. The combination of 
neck extension and impaired down gaze leads to frequent severe 
falls in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy.
Frontal cortex and subcortical white matter 
lesions
The characteristic gait associated with frontal cortex and sub- 
cortical white matter lesions is the apraxic gait, characterized by 
small shuffling steps with the feet adhering to the floor almost 
as though they were stuck to it (Table 46.1). Such patients typ­
ically have poor postural reflex control, so that, once they start 
to fall, they are unable to compensate and often suffer severe 
injuries. On neurological examination, such patients often 
exhibit cortical release signs and are unable to relax their limbs 
voluntarily, a phenomenon called paratonic rigidity. In late 
stages, such patients cannot walk unassisted and may have dif­
ficulty in sitting down from a standing position. They land on 
the edge of the chair and fall off. Ultimately, they are confined 
to bed. Although many of these features are similar to those 
seen with basal ganglia disorders, the apraxia along with para- 
tonia and cortical release signs suggest more generalized 
involvement, particularly frontal lobe involvement.
Patients with an apraxic gait shuffle their feet almost as 
though they are stuck to the floor.
Aging and balance control
The effect of aging on the peripheral and central pathways con­
trolling gait and balance is usually a very subtle process that 
parallels similar slight changes in memory and other cognitive 
functions and is generally considered part of the normal aging 
process. The gait of normal elderly men is characterized by 
slight anterior flexion of the upper torso with flexion of the 
arms and knees, diminished arm swing, and shorter step
length;18 the gait of older women tends to be narrow-based, 
with a waddling quality.19 The majority of older people recog­
nize that they must walk more slowly, turn more carefully and 
expect their balance to be less steady than it was in young 
adulthood. These normal older individuals do not generally 
present to physicians complaining of imbalance. Only when 
one or more disease processes occur do overt symptoms develop. 
It is inappropriate to dismiss symptoms of dizziness and imbal­
ance as due to normal aging or to such non-specific entities as 
presbyastasis or multisensory dizziness.
As a rule, dizziness and imbalance in older people should 
not be attributed to normal aging.
Age-related changes have been identified in each of the 
special senses and in the cortical centers that integrate these 
signals. Changes in vestibular function have been documented 
by numerous investigators.20 Degeneration of peripheral 
vestibular structures is known to occur with aging, and neuronal 
loss has been found in the vestibular nuclei and their cortical 
projections with aging.21 Impairment of peripheral sensation of 
the lower limbs correlates with postural instability, and age- 
dependent proprioceptive loss has been identified.22 Visual per­
ception is altered with age, and poor near visual acuity also 
correlates with postural instability. Slowing of central process­
ing of sensory information may also lead to imbalance in older 
people,24 and there is a loss of cerebellar Purkinje cells with age 
that can reduce coordination and adaptability of visual- 
vestibular interactions.25 Cerebral and cerebellar atrophy, ven- 
triculomegaly and subcortical white matter lesions have all 
been associated with imbalance in older people.26-28 Cognitive 
impairment, muscle weakness and the use of certain sedating 
drugs increase the risk of falls and may play a role in gait 
disorders in some older people.29
Rehabilitation strategies in patients 
with gait disorders
The treatment of patients with imbalance due to sensory loss is 
aimed at improving overall sensory function when possible and 
at training the brain to adjust to the sensory loss. Prevention is 
the best strategy in managing ototoxic vestibular loss. Poten­
tially ototoxic drugs should be used with great caution, particu­
larly in those with renal impairment. When such drugs are used, 
patients should be carefully monitored, with daily examinations 
of gait and balance. Some ototoxic drugs, such as streptomycin 
and gentamicin, are remarkably selective for the vestibular sys­
tem, so that monitoring hearing is of little use. Physical therapy 
programs are aimed at gait and balance training.30 The goal of 
these programs is to retrain the brain to use remaining sensory 
signals to compensate for the areas lost. Patients are taught to
  

778 
Vestibular disorders and their management
understand the nature of their deficits and simple tricks to help 
overcome them. For example, patients with bilateral vestibular 
loss cannot see clearly while they are walking, so they are 
taught to stop and hold their head still whenever they want to 
read a sign or see the face of a passerby. They are taught which 
circumstances to avoid and the proper use of aids such as a cane.
Physical therapy can be very beneficial in patients with 
musculoskeletal disorders. Joint range of movement and 
strength can be improved, and the vicious cycle associated 
with deconditioning can be reversed.
Management of cerebellar gait disorders is usually restricted 
to helping patients learn to protect themselves from dangerous 
falls. Gait and balance training often have little effect, since the 
cerebellum is the key center for adapting postural reflexes. 
Patients with alcoholic cerebellar degeneration can stop the 
progression and may even show some improvement after 
stopping alcohol.
Treatment of Parkinson’s disease is aimed at replenishing 
the damaged dopaminergic system of the basal ganglia. The 
combination of L-dopa plus a peripheral decarboxylase 
inhibitor is usually the treatment of choice. The gait disorder is 
often dramatically responsive to L-dopa therapy. Patients with 
progressive supranuclear palsy may respond to L-dopa, although 
the benefit is often minimal. Physical therapy aimed at main­
taining strength and joint mobility may slow the rate of pro­
gression. With the exception of hydrocephalus, which can be 
dramatically reversed with the placement of a shunt, most 
frontal gait disorders are not reversible. They can be helped by 
improving support with canes or a walker. Tranquilizing med­
ications should be scrupulously avoided, since they can further 
impair the central integration of sensory information.
References
1. 
Goh Y, Alkon DL. Sensory, intemeuronal, and motor interactions 
within Hermissenda visual pathway. ] Neurophysiol 1984; 52: 
156-69.
2. 
Baloh RW, Honrubia V. Clinical Neurophysiology of the Vestibular 
System. 3rd edn. New York: Oxford, 2001: 17-20.
3. 
Melvill Jones G. How and why does the vestibulo-ocular reflex 
adapt? In: Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM, eds. Disorders of the Vestibular 
System. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996; 85-92.
4. 
Herdman SJ. Role of vestibular adaptation in vestibular rehabili­
tation. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 119: 49-54.
5. 
Bach LMN, Magoun HW. The vestibular nuclei as an excitatory 
mechanism for the cord. J Neurophysiol 1947; 10: 331-47.
6. Fulton JF, Liddell EGT, Rioch DM. The influence of unilateral 
destruction of the vestibular nuclei upon posture and the knee 
jerk. Brain 1930; 53: 327-48.
7. Fetter M, Dichgans J. How do the vestibulospinal reflexes work? 
In: Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM, eds. Disorders of the Vestibular 
System. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996: 105-12.
8. Hotson JR, Baloh RW. Acute vestibular syndrome. N Engl ] Med 
1998; 339: 680-5.
9. Vidal P-P, De Waele C, Vibert N, Muhlethaler M. Vestibular com­
pensation revisited. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 19: 34-42.
10. Romberg MH. Lehrbuch der Nervenkrankheit des Menschen. Berlin: 
A. Dunker, 1846.
11. Barany R. Neue Untersuchungsmethoden, die Beziehungen 
zwichen Vestibularapparat, Kleinhim, Grosshim und Riichenmark 
betreffend. Wien Med Wochenschrift 1910; 60: 2033.
12. Tinetti ME, Williams TF, Mayewski R. Fall risk index for elderly 
patients based on number of chronic disabilities, AmJ Med 1986; 
80: 429-34.
13. Nutt JG, Marsden CD, Thompson PD. Human walking and 
higher-level gait disorders, particularly in the elderly. Neurology 
1993; 43: 268-79.
14. Halmagyi GM, Curthoys IS. A clinical sign of canal paresis. Arch 
Neurol 1988; 45: 737-9.
15. Demer JL, Honrubia V, Baloh RW. Dynamic visual acuity: a test 
for oscillopsia and vestibulo-ocular reflex function. Am J Otol 
1994; 15: 340-7.
16. Baloh RW, Jacobson KM, Beykirch K, Honrubia V. Static and 
dynamic posturography in patients with vestibular and cerebellar 
lesions. Arch Neurol 1998; 55: 649-54.
17. Bums RS, Phillips JM, Chuang CC, et al. The MPTP-treated 
monkey model of Parkinson’s disease. In: Markey SP, Castagnoli 
N, Trevor AJ, Kopin IJ, eds. MPTP: A Neurotoxin Producing a 
Parkinsonian Syndrome. New York: Academic Press, 1986: 23-46.
18. Murray MP, Kory RC, Clarkson BH. Walking patterns in healthy 
old men. J Gerontol 1969; 24: 169-78.
19. Finley FR, Cody KA, Finizie RV. Locomotion patterns in elderly 
women. Arch Phys Med Rehab 1969; 50: 140-6.
20. Baloh RW, Jacobson KM, Socotch TM. The effect of aging on 
visual-vestibulo-ocular responses. Exp Brain Res 1993; 95: 509-16.
21. Lopez I, Honrubia V, Baloh RW. Aging and the human vestibular 
nucleus. J Vestib Res 1997; 7: 77-85.
22. Lord SR, Clark RD, Webster IW. Postural stability and associated 
physiological factors in a population of aged persons. J Gerontol 
1991; 46: M69-76.
23. Teasdale N, Stelmach GE, Breunig A et al. Age differences in 
visual sensory integration. Exp Brain Res 1991; 85: 691-6.
24. Wolfson L, Whipple R, Derby CA et al. A dynamic posturography 
study of balance in healthy elderly. Neurology 1992; 42: 2069-75.
25. Hall TC, Miller AKH, Corsellis JAN. Variations in the human 
Purkinje cell population according to age and sex. Neuropathol 
Appl Neurobiol 1975; 1: 267-92.
26. Thompson PD, Marsden CD. Gait disorder of subcortical arte­
riosclerotic encephalopathy in Binswanger’s disease. Movement 
Disord 1987; 2: 1-8.
27. Kerber KA, Enrietto JA, Jacobson KM, Baloh RW. Disequilib­
Although treatments for specific balance disorders are 
limited, most patients will benefit from physical therapy 
aimed at improving joint mobility and strength and at 
gait and balance training.
  

Normal and abnormal balance 
779
rium in older people. A prospective study. Neurology 1998; 51: 
574-80.
28. Whitman GT, Tang Y, Lin A, Baloh RW. A prospective study of 
cerebral white matter abnormalities in older people with gait dys­
function. Neurology 2001; 57: 990-4.
29. Wild D, Nayak USL, Isaacs B. Prognosis of falls in old people at 
home. J Epidemiol Commun Health 1981; 35: 200-4.
30. Shumway-Cook A, Horak FB. Rehabilitation strategies for 
patients with vestibular deficits. Neurol Clin North Am 1990; 8: 
441-57.
  

47 Normal and abnormal 
eye movements
Christopher Kennard
Introduction
A wide variety of disease processes affecting the central nervous 
system, from the brainstem to the cortex, can lead to disorders of 
eye movements. Examination of eye movements at the bedside 
can often contribute to determining a neurological diagnosis, or 
provide information regarding anatomical, physiological and 
neurochemical lesions. This is best achieved with a basic knowl­
edge of the neuroanatomy and neurophysiological concepts of 
the neural control of the different types of eye movements.
Functional classes of eye movements
The various types of functional classes of eye movements all 
subserve the same goal, the projection of an image of the object 
of interest onto the most sensitive part of the retina, the fovea 
(Table 47.1). Rapid conjugate eye movements, saccades, enable 
the line of gaze to be redirected to bring the image of a new 
object of interest onto the fovea, and the dysjunctive or ver- 
gence eye movements ensure that these images are simultane­
ously placed on both foveae regardless of their distance from the 
observer. There is also a need to stabilize the image of the object 
of interest on the fovea when the object itself moves, achieved 
by the smooth pursuit system, or when the subject’s head or 
body moves, as occurs during locomotion, when the vestibular 
and optokinetic ocular motor reflexes are activated. These 
different functional types of eye movements can each be rapidly 
tested at the bedside.1
Table 47.1 
Goals of various types of eye movements.
To bring the image of a target to the fovea 
Saccades 
Vergence
To keep the image on the fovea 
Pursuit
Vestibular/optokinetic
Saccades
Voluntary saccade initiation should be assessed by instructing 
the patient to look to the left and then to the right and up and 
down. The patient is then asked to fixate two targets alter­
nately—e.g. a pen in one hand and a raised finger of the 
other—so that between each refixation they are briefly moved 
and their distance from each other varied. This generates reflex­
ive saccades, which are tested in the horizontal and vertical 
planes, and the examiner should observe saccadic variables 
such as speed of initiation (latency), velocity and accuracy. Any 
slowing of saccades can be accentuated by using an optokinetic 
striped drum or tape, when the repositioning saccades will 
appear slowed. This is of particular help when showing slowed 
adducting saccades in a partial intemuclear ophthalmoplegia. 
Another method to accentuate this abnormality is to use 
oblique targets. Because the velocity is slowed in the horizontal 
and not the vertical plane, the resulting saccade is L-shaped. 
Predictive saccades can be tested by alternately raising a finger 
of one hand and then the other in a predictable regular pattern, 
and asking the patient to make saccades to the target. Finally, 
the patient should be observed for any head movements or 
blinks before making a saccade, as occurs in Huntington’s 
disease and ocular motor apraxia.
Smooth pursuit
Both horizontal and vertical smooth pursuit can be tested by 
asking the patient to track a small target at a distance of about
1 m while keeping their head still. The target should be moved 
initially at a slow uniform speed and the pursuit eye movements 
observed to determine whether they are smooth, or broken up by 
catch-up saccades. This is a non-specific sign if present in both 
directions—e.g. due to ageing, drugs or cerebellar disease—or it 
may indicate a focal posterior cortical lesion if only present in 
one direction, in which case the abnormal pursuit is in the 
direction of the lesion. The speed should be gradually increased, 
but at high velocities all smooth pursuit eye movements will be 
broken up by saccades even in normal subjects. The OKN drum

782 
Vestibular disorders and their management
and tape is a useful method to elicit a series of pursuit move­
ments, and does not elicit true optokinetic eye movements.
Optokinetic nystagmus
The optokinetic system cannot be tested as part of the clinical 
examination, because the OKN drum and tape commonly used 
tests smooth pursuit and not the optokinetic system. A full-field 
revolving striped drum is required to elicit OKN.
Vestibular system
If the vestibulo-ocular system is functioning normally, passive 
rotation of the patient’s head should result in a slow eye move­
ment, so that the eyes deviate in the opposite direction to that 
of the head movement. This is known as the doll’s head 
(oculocephalic) manoeuvre and should be performed both 
horizontally and vertically. This technique is valuable not only 
for assessing vestibular function, but also for differentiating 
between infranuclear and nuclear from supranuclear gaze 
palsies, and in the evaluation of brainstem function in 
comatose patients. It should be noted that the eye movements 
elicited in unconscious patients by this procedure largely reflect 
the integrity of the semicircular canals and their central connec­
tions, although in conscious patients the effects of visual input 
on eye movements may influence the response to head rotation.
A rough estimate of any deterioration of vestibular gain 
(head velocity divided by eye velocity) can be obtained by ask­
ing the patient to read a Snellen chart while their head is being 
passively rotated. If there is an abnormality, the visual acuity 
will show a deterioration compared with the acuity obtained 
when the head is stationary. Another bedside test of the hori­
zontal vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) is for the examiner to 
observe the patient’s optic disc with an ophthalmoscope while 
the patient tries to fixate a distant object and shake their head 
from side to side at the same time. If the gain of the VOR is 
normal (unity), the examiner will not obscure any movement 
of the optic disc, and if abnormal the disc will repeatedly slip 
from view. A further method to test the integrity of the VOR is 
the head thrust test described by Halmagyi and Curthoys.2 The 
patient sits directly in front of the examiner and is instructed to 
maintain fixation of the examiner’s nose, while he or she briefly 
and rapidly rotates the patient’s head first to the left and then 
to the right. If the VOR is intact, the patient’s eyes move 
smoothly to maintain fixation. However, if there is a unilateral 
defect, a smooth eye movement interrupted by a refixation 
saccade is observed.
The VOR can be suppressed by activating the smooth pur­
suit system. This is tested by asking the patient to hold their arms 
outstretched and fixate their thumbnail while rotating their 
head and trunk in harmony. Impaired cancellation of the VOR 
and hence abnormal smooth pursuit are shown by observing the 
eye repeatedly moving off fixation due to the VOR, followed by 
refixation saccades. This is a particularly useful technique for 
testing pursuit in patients with gaze-evoked nystagmus.
Abnormalities of horizontal and 
vertical gaze due to brainstem and 
cerebellar disorders
Anatomy and physiology of horizontal and 
vertical gaze
There are two main features of the brainstem neural control of 
horizontal and vertical gaze: an anatomical separation, so that 
the neural substrate for horizontal gaze is located in the pons 
and that for vertical gaze in the midbrain, and the requirement 
to overcome viscous drag and resist elastic restoring forces in 
the orbit when making dynamic eye movements (Figure 47.1). 
An understanding of the neural mechanisms which generate a 
horizontal saccade will serve as an illustration of the principles 
involved. A rapid phasic contraction of the extraocular muscle 
e.g. lateral rectus muscle, is required to overcome the orbital 
viscosity, and a rapid, high-frequency burst of nerve impulses, 
the pulse, is transmitted to the muscle via the ocular motor 
nerve (Figure 47.2). The premotor inputs to the motor 
neurones in the abducens nucleus arise from neurones in a 
region of the reticular formation that lies ventral and anterior 
to the nucleus, the paramedian pontine reticular formation 
(PPRF). The equivalent premotor region for vertical gaze is the 
rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus 
(riMLF) in the midbrain, rostral to the oculomotor nucleus at 
the level of the red nucleus. The pulse, a velocity signal, is 
generated by cells called burst neurones, and must be of an 
appropriate size to ensure that the eye is brought to the target. 
Once the saccade has been completed, it is necessary to 
maintain the new position of the globe against orbital elastic 
restoring forces, which will pull the globe back towards the mid­
position. The muscle must, therefore, maintain a sustained
Figure 47.1 Diagrammatic sagittal section of the human brainstem showing a 
summary of major pathways involved in horizontal and vertical saccade 
generation. (From Buttner-Ennever and Buttner. In: Buttner-Ennever, ed.
Neuroanatomy of the Oculomotor System. New York: Elsevier 1988:119-76.45)
Rostral mesencephalic 
reticular formation
Vertical eye movements
rostral interstitial 
nucleus of MLF
Pontine reticular formation
Horizontal and vertical 
eye movements
Saccadic trigger
  

Normal and abnormal eye movements 
783
I I I M I I l llllllllllllll
Nl |-------
Figure 47.2 The relationship between pause cells (P), burst cells (B), and the 
cells of the neural integrator (Nl), in the generation of the saccade pulse and 
step. Pause cells cease discharging just before each saccade, allowing the burst 
cells to generate the pulse. The pulse is integrated by the neural integrator (Nl) 
to produce the step. The pulse and step combine to produce the innervational 
change on the ocular motor neurones (OMN) that produces the saccadic eye 
movement (E). Vertical lines represent individual discharges of neurones. 
Underneath the schematized neural (spike) discharge is a plot of discharge rate 
versus time. (Redrawn from Leigh and Zee. The Neurology of Eye Movements.
New York: Oxford University Press ©  1999.43 Used by permission of Oxford 
University Press, Inc.)
tonic contraction, and this is achieved by the tonic innervation, 
the step, which is a position signal the motor neurone receives 
from so-called integrator neurones lying in the nucleus preposi­
tus hypoglossi and the medial vestibular nucleus. The pulse and 
step must be perfectly matched to prevent drift of the eye back 
to the primary position at the end of the saccade. Abnormali­
ties of either lead to easily defined eye movement disorders (Fig­
ure 47.3). Faulty neural integration leads to an inadequately 
maintained step, so that after a saccade the eye drifts back in an 
exponential manner, due to the unopposed orbital elastic 
restoring forces, followed by a saccade to refixate the target. 
This pattern leads to gaze-evoked nystagmus and is observed in 
cerebellar disease and anticonvulsant or sedative intoxication. 
An abnormal pulse may either be of reduced duration or of 
reduced firing frequency. If the step is appropriately matched, 
the former will result in a reduced amplitude (hypometric) sac­
cade and the latter a saccade of reduced velocity which 
nonetheless has a normal amplitude.
Abnormalities of horizontal eye movements
The abducens nucleus contains two populations of neurones, 
motor neurones innervating the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle 
and intemeurones. The axons from the intemeurones cross the 
midline and ascend in the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF)
Figure 47.3 Disorders of the saccadic pulse and step. Innervation patterns are 
shown on the left, eye movements on the right. Dashed lines indicate the normal 
response, (a) Normal saccade. (b) Hypometric saccade: pulse amplitude 
(width X height) is too small, but pulse and step are matched appropriately.
(c) Slow saccade: decreased pulse height with normal pulse amplitude and normal 
pulse-step match, (d) Gaze-evoked nystagmus: normal pulse, poorly sustained 
step, (e) Pulse-step mismatch (glissade): step is relatively smaller than pulse. 
(Redrawn from Leigh and Zee. The Neurology of Eye Movements. New York: Oxford 
University Press© 1999.43 used by permission of Oxford University Press, Inc.)
to the contralateral medial rectus subdivision of the oculomo­
tor nerve nucleus (Figure 47.4a). The final instructions for 
horizontal conjugate eye movements, therefore, lie within the 
abducens nucleus itself, so that its activation results in an ipsi- 
laterally directed horizontal conjugate gaze movement.
Unilateral horizontal gaze palsy
A lesion of the abducens nucleus will, therefore, result in an 
ipsilateral horizontal gaze palsy for all types of conjugate move­
ments (saccades, pursuit and vestibular). Vergence movements 
of the eyes are spared, however, so that adduction is possible 
with a near stimulus.3 The palsy is usually associated with an 
ipsilateral lower motor neurone facial nerve palsy due to 
involvement of the genu of the facial nerve, which passes 
around the abducens nerve (Figure 47.5). A selective horizon­
tal gaze palsy involving only saccades, including the quick 
phases of vestibular and optokinetic nystagmus, occurs when 
the lesion involves the PRRF in isolation, since the vestibular 
and pursuit inputs pass directly to the abducens nucleus. The
  

784 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Figure 47.4 Summary of eye movement control, (a) The brainstem pathways 
for horizontal gaze. Axons from the cell bodies located in the abducens nucleus 
(VI) travel to the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle (LR), and the axons of abducens 
intemuclear neurones cross the midline and travel in the medial longitudinal 
fasciculus (MLF) to the portion(s) of the oculomotor nucleus (III) concerned with 
the medial rectus (MR) function (in the contralateral eye), (b) The brainstem 
pathways for vertical gaze. Important structures include the rostral interstitial 
nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus (riMLF), the paramedial pontine 
reticular formation (PPRF), the interstitial nucleus of Cajal (INC), and the 
posterior commissure (PC). Note that axons from cell bodies located in the 
vestibular nuclei (VN) travel directly to the abducens nuclei and, mostly via the 
MLF, to the oculomotor nuclei. IV, trochlear nucleus; NPH, nucleus prepositus 
hypoglossi.
commonest causes of horizontal gaze palsies are either vascular 
infarction and haemorrhage or demyelination.
Bilateral horizontal gaze palsy
A bilateral pontine lesion involving the PPRF can cause a bilat­
eral selective saccadic palsy with preservation of vestibular and 
optokinetic eye movements.4 Such a lesion may impair vertical 
eye movements, since signals for vertical vestibular and smooth 
pursuit eye movements ascend in the MLF and other pathways 
through the pons. The commonest causes for a bilateral 
horizontal gaze palsy, with sparing of vertical gaze, are neuro­
degenerative diseases such as Huntington’s disease or Gaucher’s 
disease.
Intemuclear ophthalmoplegia
A lesion of the MLF produces an intemuclear ophthalmoplegia 
(INO), in which there is a disturbance of adduction ipsilateral 
to the side of the lesion5 (Figure 47.6). In a partial INO, adduc­
tion will be slowed, but it will be completely absent in a com­
plete lesion (Table 47.2). Since the fibres of the MLF carry the 
horizontal gaze commands subserving all types of conjugate eye 
movements, this adduction paresis involves not only saccades 
but also pursuit and vestibular eye movements. The presence of 
intact convergence in the absence of voluntary adduction 
implies that the medial rectus subdivision of the oculomotor 
nerve is intact, and that the INO is likely to be due to a caudal 
lesion. Cogan6 called this a posterior INO, in contrast to an 
INO and absent convergence, which he called ‘anterior’. How­
ever, such patients do not necessarily have a lesion involving 
the medial rectus subdivision of the oculomotor nucleus.
The second major feature of an INO is the nystagmus on 
abduction in the contralateral eye. This consists of a centripetal 
(inward) drift, followed by a corrective saccade. Several differ-
Figure 47.5 Transverse section through the pons at the level of the abducens nucleus to show the relationship of the abducens nucleus to the fascicle of the facial 
nerve which encircles it.
  

Normal and abnormal eye movements 
785
Figure 47.6 (a) A right intemuclear ophthalmolplegia showing impaired 
adduction of the right eye with abducting nystagmus, (b) The eye movement 
recording of the same patient shows the abducting nystagmus in the left eye 
and the slowed adducting saccade in the right eye.
ent mechanisms have been proposed to explain the abducting 
nystagmus.5 These include: (1) a gaze-evoked nystagmus; (2) 
impaired inhibition of the medial rectus contralateral to the 
lesion; (3) an increase in convergence tone; and (4) adaptation 
to the contralateral medial rectus weakness. The latter is gener­
ally considered the most appropriate explanation.
A skew deviation (a vertical misalignment of the visual 
axes due to a disturbance of supranuclear inputs) is often 
observed in patients with a unilateral INO, with the higher eye 
usually on the side of the lesion. However, the eyes are usually
orthotropic, even in a complete INO, and if there is any 
esotropia in the primary position this supports an infranuclear 
ophthalmoplegia. Patients with bilateral INOs have bilateral 
adduction weakness and abducting nystagmus. In addition, they 
also have impaired vertical pursuit and vestibular eye move­
ments, and impaired vertical gaze holding with gaze-evoked 
nystagmus on looking up or down.7
Patients with an INO are usually asymptomatic, although if 
there is a complete adduction failure they may complain of 
diplopia, especially during shifts of horizontal gaze. Occasion­
ally, they may complain of oscillopsia. A number of different 
aetiologies lead to an INO (Table 47.3), but if unilateral the 
commonest is ischaemia, and if bilateral the commonest is 
demyelination associated with multiple sclerosis.
A rarer so-called posterior intemuclear ophthalmoplegia 
of Lutz has been described in which there is an impairment 
of abduction (not adduction) of saccades and pursuit, but 
not vestibular eye movements. This is different to the pos­
terior INO described by Cogan, in which convergence is 
intact. The pathogenesis of the posterior INO of Lutz is 
unclear.8
One^and-a-'half syndrome
A combined lesion of the abducens nucleus or PPRF and the 
adjacent MLF on one side of the brainstem results in both an 
ipsilateral horizontal gaze palsy and INO.9 The only preserved 
horizontal eye movement is abduction of the contralateral eye, 
and the condition is therefore termed the ‘one-and-a-half’ 
syndrome. Although the majority of patients have no ocular 
deviation or an esotropia (convergent deviation) in the primary 
position of gaze, some patients may habitually fixate with the 
horizontally immobile ipsilesional eye, which results in 
exotropia (divergent deviation) of the contralesional eye, 
which still has an intact lateral rectus innervation. This condi­
tion is called paralytic pontine exotropia10 (Figure 47.7). Some 
MLF lesions cause an adduction palsy due to INO that is bilat­
eral and isotropic in the primary position, termed a ‘wall-eyed’ 
bilateral INO (WEBINO).11
The main causes of a one-and-a-half syndrome are brain­
stem ischaemia, haemorrhage and tumour. The syndrome can 
be mimicked by a bilateral INO with an ipsilateral abducens 
nerve palsy.
Table 47,2 
Pathogenesis of different signs in intemuclear ophthalmoplegia.
Eye
Ipsilateral eye 
Contralateral eye 
Bilateral eyes
Ocular motor defect
Adduction weakness 
Abduction nystagmus
Vertical gaze-evoked nystagmus
Vertical pursuit and vestibular 
movements impaired
Possible pathophysiology
Interruption of axons of abducens intemuclear neurones
Adaptation to impaired (slowed or absent) contralateral medial rectus action
Vertical eye position signal inadequate 
Interruptions of MLF axons carrying these signals
  

786 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Table 47,3 
Aetiology of internuclear ophthalmoplegia.
Multiple sclerosis (commonly bilateral)
Brainstem infarction (commonly unilateral)
Brainstem and fourth ventricular tumours 
Arnold-Chiari malformations 
Infection 
Syphilis
Nutritional disorders, e.g. Wernicke's encephalopathy and 
pernicious anaemia 
Metabolic disorders, e.g. abetalipoproteinaemia, maple syrup urine 
disease, hepatic encephalopathy 
Head trauma 
Hydrocephalus
Progressive supranuclear palsy 
Drug intoxications: phenothiazines, narcotics, tricyclic 
antidepressants, lithium, barbiturates 
Cancer: carcinomatosis infiltration or paraneoplastic 
Pseudointernuclear ophthalmoplegia due to myasthaenia gravis 
and Fisher's syndrome
Figure 47.7 Paralytic pontine exotropia. In the primary position, the patient 
fixates with the horizontally immobile left eye; the right eye is moderately 
exotropic. On attempted rightward gaze, the right eye abducts normally, but the 
left eye fails to move. On attempted leftward gaze, the right eye moves to the 
midline, but the left eye again fails to move. Vertical saccadic movements and 
vergence movements can be normal. The lesion in this case involves the left 
pontine paramedian reticular formation and the adjacent left medial 
longitudinal fasciculus. (From Sharpe et al. Neurology 1974; 24: 1076-81.10)
Lateropulsion
This is a feature of lateral medullary infarction (Wallenberg’s 
syndrome), in which there is a compelling sensation of being 
pulled toward the side of the lesion, accompanied by appro­
priate eye movement signs. During voluntary eye closure and 
sometimes even during blinks, the eyes deviate toward the 
side of the lesion, and have to make corrective saccades to 
refixate the target on eye opening (Figure 47.8). All ipsiver- 
sive saccadic eye movements overshoot the target (hyperme­
tric), and saccades directed away from the side of the lesion 
undershoot the target (hypometric).12 Vertical saccades have 
a parabolic ipsiversive trajectory. This ipsipulsion is in con­
trast to the overshooting of contralateral saccades (saccadic 
contrapulsion) observed in patients with infarction in the 
territory of the superior cerebellar artery. The eye signs of 
lateropulsion are considered to be due to damage to 
olivocerebellar projections.13
Abnormalities of vertical eye movements
Disturbances of vertical gaze are usually associated with damage 
to one or more of three structures in the mesencephalon, the 
posterior commisure, the riMLF and the interstitial nucleus of 
Cajal (INC) (Figure 47.4b). The only exceptions are: an 
apparent vertical gaze palsy due to mechanical restriction of 
extraocular muscles in orbital disorders such as thyroid eye dis­
ease; large acute pontine lesions involving the PPRF bilaterally 
producing a temporary vertical saccadic palsy, in addition to the 
permanent horizontal saccadic palsy; and certain degenerative 
disorders of the nervous system such as progressive supranuclear 
palsy or adult Niemann-Pick disease.
Dorsal midbrain syndrome (Parinaud’s syndrome)
This syndrome is due to a lesion which involves the posterior 
commisure and is associated with a variety of aetiologies (Table
47.4) and clinical features (Table 47.5), some of which may not 
be present in an individual patient.14 The essential sign is a loss 
of upward gaze involving all types of eye movement, although 
the VOR and Bell’s phenomenon may sometimes be spared.
Table 47.4 
Aetiology of vertical gaze palsy,
Tumour: pineal germinoma or teratoma 
Hydrocephalus
Vascular: midbrain and thalamic haemorrhage or infarction 
Drug-induced: barbiturates, neuroleptics, carbamazepine 
Degenerative: progressive supranuclear palsy, Huntington's disease, 
corticobasal degeneration, Lytico-Bodig syndrome, diffuse Lewy 
body disease
Metabolic: Niem ann-Pick variants, Tay-Sach's disease, Gaueber's 
disease, W ilson's disease 
Miscellaneous: multiple sclerosis, Whipple's disease, hypoxia, 
syphilis, encephalitis
  

Normal and abnormal eye movements 
787
Table 47.5 
Clinical features of the dorsal midbrain syndrome.
Impairment of upward eye movements (Parinaud's syndrome)
Lid retraction (Collier's sign)
Disturbance of downward eye movements 
Disturbance of vergence eye movements 
Convergence-retraction nystagmus 
Paralysis of convergence 
Skew deviation
Pupillary abnormalities (light-near dissociation)
When the syndrome is acute, the eyes may be deviated down­
wards (the setting-sun sign), and may be observed in premature 
infants following intraventricular haemorrhage, and when a 
ventricular shunt becomes acutely blocked. Downward saccades 
may be of reduced velocity.
The dorsal midbrain syndrome may also be associated with 
an impairment of convergence, which is usually paralysed but 
may rarely be excessive and cause convergence spasm, conver­
gence-retraction nystagmus, eyelid retraction (Collier’s sign), 
and a pupillary light-near dissociation.
Selective vertical gaze palsy due to riMLF lesion
A unilateral or bilateral lesion of the riMLF produces a 
downgaze palsy, mainly affecting saccades, or, more rarely, a 
complete vertical gaze palsy.15 Patients with unilateral midbrain 
lesions can develop combined upgaze and downgaze palsies, iso­
lated upgaze palsies, a uniocular upward ophthalmoplegia with 
no primary position hypotropia (monocular double elevator 
palsy), and a vertical one-and-a-half syndrome which describes 
the combination of a vertical gaze palsy in one direction and a 
monocular vertical ophthalmoplegia in the other direction, 
with no primary position heterotropia (ocular misalignments).16
(a)
Figure 47.8 Lateropulsion. (a) Leftward lateropulsion in a patient with a left lateral medullary infarct. (Only the left eye is shown, with the direction of gaze 
indicated by the black arrow.) The single leftward saccade in response to a 20° leftward target overshot the target, so that a single rightward corrective saccade was 
required in order to fixate the target. Saccades to a 20° rightward target undershot the target, so that three small rightward saccades (each white arrow indicating a 
saccade) were required in order to fixate the target Vertical saccades to 20° upward and 20° downward targets also had an unintended leftward component, so that 
several small rightward saccadic components were required in order to fixate the target. (Adapted from Kommerell G, Hoyt WF.46) (b) Rightward lateropulsion in a 
patient with a left cerebellar infarct: the upward saccade in response to the 20° upward target had an unintended 5° rightward component, which was then 
corrected by two leftward saccades. U, up: D, down; R, right; L, left; RE H0RIZ, right eye horizontal position; RE VERT, right eye vertical position. (From Ranalli and 
Sharpe. Ann Neurol 1986; 20: 311.44 Reprinted by permission of John Wiley ft Sons, Inc.)
  

788 
Vestibular disorders and their management
The ocular tilt reaction and lesions of the INC
A lesion of the INC, which lies immediately caudal to the 
riMLF and rostral to the oculomotor nucleus, produces two 
distinct deficits: an ocular tilt reaction (OTR), and a deficit in 
vertical pursuit and vertical gaze holding.17 The OTR is a 
head-eye postural synkinesis that consists of a skew deviation 
with a head tilt (towards the side of the hypometric eye), and 
torsion of the eyes (incyclotropia of the hypermetric eye and 
excyclotropia of the hypometric eye) (Figure 47.9). Such 
patients also show a deviation of their subjective vertical. 
Although the OTR is produced by a lesion of the INC, it can 
be found whenever peripheral or central lesions cause an imbal­
ance of otolithic inputs.18
Abnormalities of horizontal and vertical eye 
movements due to thalamic lesions
Lesions of the thalamus can give rise to disorders of both hor­
izontal and vertical eye movements.19 Conjugate deviation of 
the eyes contralateral to the lesion (so-called wrong-way devi­
ation) is associated with haemorrhage in the medial thalamus.
Thalamic haemorrhage may also lead to forced downward 
deviation of the eyes, associated with convergence and miosis. 
Caudal lesions in the thalamus have been associated with 
unilateral esotropia, which, although usually associated with a 
downward gaze deviation, may be present as an isolated 
finding. A paralysis of downgaze is associated with a caudal 
thalamic infarction, due to occlusion of the proximal portion 
of the posterior cerebral artery or its perforator branch, the 
thalamosubthalamic paramedian artery. However, the ocular 
motor deficit may well be due to damage to the riMLF or its 
immediate premotor inputs.
The effect of cerebellar lesions upon eye 
movements
Although it is generally accepted that the cerebellum plays 
an important role in the control of eye movements in 
humans, pure lesions of the cerebellum without some brain­
stem involvement are unusual.20 This creates some difficulty 
in determining eye movement abnormalities specific for cere­
bellar dysfunction. It is appropriate to segregate lesions into
(b)
Figure 47.9 Tonic contraversive ocular tilt reaction caused by a unilateral 
midbrain-thalamic lesion, (a) The patient had a leftward ocular tilt reaction 
consisting of a leftward head tilt, left hypotropia, and leftward torsion of each 
eye, as shown in the fundus photographs, (b) The lesion, a haemorrhage caused 
by a right (R) midbrain-thalamic arteriovenous malformation, is shown on 
T,-weighted parasagittal MRI. (From Halmagyi et al. Neurol 1990; 40: 1503-9.17)
  

Normal and abnormal eye movements 
789
three main regions of the cerebellum, each of which has a 
particular ocular motor syndrome: the dorsal vermis and 
underlying fastigial nucleus, the nodulus and ventral uvula, 
and the flocculus and paraflocculus. The dorsal vermis and 
underlying fastigial nucleus are involved in controlling sac- 
cadic accuracy and smooth pursuit. Lesions in this region lead 
to saccadic dysmetria and mild deficits of smooth pursuit. The 
nodulus and ventral uvula are involved in the control of the 
low-frequency response of the VOR, and disorders in this 
region give rise to periodic alternating nystagmus, positional 
nystagmus and impaired habituation of the VOR, with 
increased duration of the vestibular responses. The flocculus 
and paraflocculus are concerned with retinal-image stabiliza­
tion, e.g. smooth tracking with the head still, gaze holding, 
control of the VOR and its suppression, and pulse-step 
matching. Lesions of this region, therefore, lead to impaired 
pursuit and VOR cancellation with gaze-evoked, rebound, 
centripetal and downbeat nystagmus, and inappropriate 
amplitude of the VOR. Other signs which have been associ­
ated with cerebellar lesions, although precise localization is 
not available, include torsional nystagmus during vertical 
pursuit (lesion in the middle cerebellar peduncle), square 
wave jerks, esotropia with alternating skew deviation, diver­
gent nystagmus, primary position upbeating nystagmus, and 
centripetal nystagmus.
The cerebellum is also important in generating long-term 
adaptive responses that enable eye movements to be kept 
appropriate to the visual stimulus. For example, when wearing 
lens corrections there is a magnifying or minifying effect which 
requires adaptive changes in the gain of the VOR. These take a 
few hours to days to occur and explain why some individuals 
experience difficulties when prescribed new lens prescriptions.
Disorders of the voluntary control of 
gaze
Anatomy and physiology of voluntary gaze
The cerebral hemispheres are extremely important for the pro­
gramming and coordination of both saccadic and pursuit conju­
gate eye movements. Since different areas are involved in these 
two types of eye movements, they will be dealt with separately, 
always realizing that for fully effective ocular motor control, 
coordination between these subtypes of eye movement is 
essential.
Saccadic system
There appear to be four main cortical areas in the cerebral 
hemispheres involved in the generation of saccades (Figure
47.10). In the frontal lobe in humans there is the frontal eye 
field (FEF), which lies laterally at the caudal end of the second 
frontal gyrus in the premotor cortex (Brodmann area 8), and 
the supplementary eye field (SEF), which lies mesially at the
Figure 47.10 Cortical and brainstem saccade centres. The supranuclear 
connections from the frontal eye fields (FEF) and the posterior parietal cortex 
(PPC) to the superior colliculus (SC), riMLF and the PPRF are shown. The PPC to 
SC projection is mainly involved with reflexive saccades, whereas the FEF to SC 
projection is involved in the production of voluntary saccades.
anterior region of the supplementary motor area in the first 
frontal gyrus (Brodmann area 6). The third area is in the 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), which lies anterior to 
the FEF in the second frontal gyrus (Brodmann area 46). 
Finally, a posterior eye field (PEF) lies in the parietal lobe, 
possibly in the superior part of the angular gyrus (Brodmann 
area 39) and the adjacent lateral intraparietal sulcus. Studies in 
monkeys reveal that these areas are all interconnected with 
each other, and they all send projections to the superior 
colliculus (SC) and the premotor areas in the brainstem con­
trolling saccades.
It appears that there are two parallel pathways involved in 
the cortical generation of saccades. The first is an anterior 
system originating in the FEF projecting both directly, and via 
the SC, to the brainstem saccadic generators. This pathway also 
passes indirectly via the basal ganglia to the SC. The second or 
posterior pathway originates in the PEF, passing to the brain­
stem saccadic generators via the SC. Only after bilateral lesions 
to both the FEF and SC in monkeys is there a failure to trigger 
saccades.
Although the precise functions of these various cortical 
areas in saccade generation have not been determined, a number 
of general statements can be made. The FEF is involved in trig­
gering volitional saccades, which, for example, may be predictive 
(in anticipation of the appearance of a target), memory-guided 
(to a previously seen target), or scanning (searching for a
  

790 
Vestibular disorders and their management
particular target of interest). The PEF is involved in triggering 
reflexive saccades to the sudden appearance of novel visual or 
auditory stimuli, and appears to be involved in visuospatial 
integration. The DLPFC may be responsible for maintaining 
a spatial map of the environment in short-term memory, 
providing spatial information for memory-guided saccades and 
other volitional saccades. There is also evidence that it con­
tains circuits responsible for inhibiting unwanted reflexive sac­
cades made in response to unattended novel visual stimuli. The 
SEF appears to be involved in the generation of sequences of 
saccades.
A subsidiary neural circuit related to saccade generation is 
from the frontal lobe to the SC via the basal ganglia. Projec­
tions from the frontal cortex pass to the substantia nigra, pars 
reticulata (SNpr), via a relay in the caudate nucleus. An 
inhibitory pathway from the SNpr projects directly to the SC. 
This appears to be a gating circuit related to volitional saccades, 
especially of the memory-guided type.
Smooth pursuit system
To maintain foveation of a moving target, the smooth pursuit 
system has developed relatively independently of the saccadic 
oculomotor system, although it is essential that there are 
interconnections between the two. It is first necessary to 
identify and code the velocity and direction of a moving 
target. This is carried out in the extrastriate visual area 
known as the middle temporal visual area (MT) (also called 
visual area V5), which contains neurones sensitive to visual 
target motion. In humans, this lies immediately posterior to 
the ascending limb of the inferior temporal sulcus at the 
occipitotemporal border (Brodmann area 19/37 junction). 
Area MT sends this motion signal to the medial superior 
temporal visual area (MST), which in monkeys is located on 
the anterior bank of the superior temporal sulcus, but in 
humans is considered to lie superior and a little anterior to area 
MT within the inferior parietal lobe. Damage to this area results 
in an impairment of smooth pursuit of targets moving towards 
the damaged hemisphere. Evidence of a possible contribution of 
the FEF to the generation of smooth pursuit has recently been 
obtained.
Both area MST and the FEF send direct projections to a 
group of nuclei which lie in the basis pontis of the pons. In 
the monkey, the dorsolateral and lateral groups of pontine 
nuclei receive direct cortical inputs related to smooth pursuit. 
Lesions of similarly located nuclei in humans result in abnor­
mal pursuit. These nuclei transfer the pursuit signal bilaterally 
to the posterior vermis, contralateral flocculus and fastigial 
nuclei of the cerebellum. Finally, the pursuit signal passes 
from the cerebellum to the brainstem, specifically the medial 
vestibular nucleus and nucleus prepositus hypoglossi, and 
thence to the PPRF and possibly directly to the ocular motor 
nuclei. This circuitry, therefore, involves a double decussa­
tion, first at the level of the mid-pons (ponto-cerebellar neu­
rone) and second in the lower pons (vestibulo-abducens 
neurone).
The diagnosis of specific disorders of 
eye movements
Disorders of saccadic eye movements
Disorders of saccades can be considered in terms of abnormali­
ties of the saccadic pulse-step innervation pattern described 
previously. A change in the amplitude (width X  height) of the 
pulse, either too big or too small, leads to saccadic hypermetria 
(overshoot) or hypometria (undershoot), respectively. Such a 
saccadic pulse dysmetria is associated with a lesion of the dorsal 
vermis in the cerebellum. A decrease in the height of the pulse, 
which implies disturbed function of the burst neurones in the 
PPRF or riMLF, leads to slow saccades. Many causes of slow 
saccades, several of which involve these areas, have been 
described (Table 47.6). A mismatch between the size of the 
pulse and the step (pulse-step mismatch) results in postsaccadic 
drifts and glissades. They are observed in diseases involving the 
vestibulocerebellum. If the pulse is not followed by a step (a 
saccadic pulse), the eye drifts back to its previous position in a 
decreasing velocity exponential smooth eye movement. Both 
conjugate and monocular saccadic pulses occur in patients with 
multiple sclerosis.
Disturbances in the initiation of saccades may lead to a pro­
longed latency, or the addition of a head movement or blink to 
initiate the saccade. This may be seen in congenital or acquired 
oculomotor apraxia, and various degenerative conditions 
including Parkinson’s disease,21 Huntington’s disease22 and 
Alzheimer’s disease.23
Saccades may also occur inappropriately, particularly dur­
ing attempted fixation. Square wave jerks (SWJ) are small- 
amplitude (up to 5°) saccades that take the eyes off fixation, 
followed some 200 ms later by a corrective saccade (Figure 
47.11). Many normal subjects have low-frequency SWJ 
(< 15/min), but elderly subjects often have a higher frequency. 
They are most prominent in cerebellar disease, progressive supra­
nuclear palsy and multiple system atrophy. Macrosquare wave 
jerks (5-40°) are encountered in multiple sclerosis and olivo­
pontocerebellar degeneration. Patients with diffuse cerebral
Table 47.6 
Causes of slow saccades.
Olivopontocerebellar atrophy
Huntington's chorea
Wilson’s disease
Parkinson's disease
Ataxia telangiectasia
Lipid storage disease
Progressive supranuclear palsy
Lesions of the paramedian pontine reticular formation
Intemuclear ophthalmoplegia
Peripheral nerve palsy or muscle weakness
Drug intoxications
  

Normal and abnormal eye movements 
791
Figure 47.11 (a) A normal eye movement recording of a subject fixating a 
stationary target, (b) An eye movement recording from a patient with 
progressive supranuclear palsy fixating a target showing multiple square wave 
jerks. (Reproduced from Rascol et al. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1991; 54: 
602 with permission from the BMJ Publishing Group.47)
cortex damage often exhibit large-amplitude with permission 
from the BMJ Publishing Group saccades away from the object 
of regard. After an interval of several hundred milliseconds, the 
patient makes a saccade back to the target. These anticipatory 
saccades are particularly observed in Alzheimer’s disease.
Ocular motor apraxia is a term used for failure to generate 
saccades to commands, and may be of a congenital (COMA)24 
or acquired type.25 COMA may be recognized shortly after 
birth, when the child does not appear to be fixating upon 
objects normally. At around 4-6 months, the child develops the 
characteristic thrusting horizontal head movements, sometimes 
with blinking, when the child wants to change fixation. This 
manoeuvre serves to use the intact VOR to drive the eyes into 
an extreme eccentric position in the orbit. As the head moves 
past the target, the eyes are dragged along in space until they 
align with the target. The head then rotates back, and the VOR 
ensures that fixation is maintained until the eye is in the pri­
mary position.26 The cause of COMA is unknown. It is some­
times associated with developmental abnormalities such as 
delayed psychomotor development and infantile hypotonia, 
and with associated anomalies such as agenesis of the corpus 
callosum, and cerebellar dysplasia and hypoplasia (e.g. as part of 
Joubert’s syndrome). Patients with COMA usually improve 
with age. In certain diseases affecting the brainstem, a similar 
clinical syndrome to COMA may occur. These include ataxia- 
telangectasia, cerebral Whipple’s disease, Gaucher’s disease, 
Niemann-Pick disease, vitamin E deficiency and many other 
storage diseases and aminoacidureas.
Disorders of smooth pursuit
A number of different disturbances of smooth pursuit are 
found.27 The commonest abnormality is a low gain (gain = eye 
velocity/target velocity), which appears as deficient pursuit in 
which pursuit is broken by small catch-up saccades. Low-gain 
pursuit can occur as a result of tiredness and inattention, as a 
side-effect of medications such as sedatives and anticonvul­
sants, or due to lesions in the vestibulocerebellum. Generally, 
bilateral low-gain pursuit has no localizing value. This is not the 
case with asymmetrical low-gain pursuit, which usually occurs 
as a result of a lesion in the ipsilateral parietal lobe, thalamus, 
midbrain tegmentum, dorsolateral nucleus of the pons and 
vestibulocerebellum.28 Occasionally, a disturbance of pursuit 
‘tone’ (balance) occurs due to cerebral hemisphere lesions, 
when the eyes drift towards the side of the lesion. Disturbances 
of direction can occur, for example, in congenital nystagmus, in 
which there is an apparent ‘inversion’ of pursuit when the eyes 
move in an opposite direction to the motion of the target.
Disorders of vergence eye movements
The commonest causes of disturbed vergence are congenital 
abnormalities. Various forms of convergence or divergence 
excess or insufficiency are usually accompanied by a concomi­
tant strabismus. Although this may not give rise to diplopia in 
childhood, it can present as intermittent diplopia later in life. 
Acquired forms of vergence disorders commonly occur in 
association with disturbances of vertical gaze, as in the dorsal 
midbrain syndrome, and in Parkinson’s disease and progressive 
supranuclear palsy. Spasm of the near triad (convergence 
spasm) is only rarely due to organic disease and is usually a 
voluntary convergence in patients with a conversion syn­
drome.29 The patients often complain of discomfort, and the 
convergence, which only lasts for a brief period on each 
occasion, may be associated with visual blurring, diplopia and 
‘eye strain’. An important clue to this diagnosis is the strong 
pupillary miosis which accompanies the convergence.
The diagnosis of saccadic oscillations 
and nystagmus
There is an important distinction between saccadic oscillations, 
which are sustained oscillations that are initiated by fast sac­
cadic eye movements, and nystagmus, where the oscillations are 
initiated by smooth eye movements; that is, the fast phase in 
jerk nystagmus is corrective and not primary (Figure 47.12).
Saccadic oscillations
Saccadic oscillations are bursts of saccades, which may be inter­
mittent or continuous, causing a disruption of fixation. Two 
main types can be identified, those with normal intersaccadic 
intervals and those composed of back-to-back saccades with 
abnormally brief or no intersaccadic intervals.
The oscillations with intersaccadic intervals include square 
wave oscillations consisting of sequences of SWJ which can 
occur in Parkinson’s disease and progressive supranuclear palsy 
(Figure 47.13). 
Macrosaccadic 
oscillations straddle 
the 
intended fixation position. The amplitudes (up to 40°) of
  

792 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Time
Figure 47.12 Four common slow-phase waveforms of nystagmus, (a) Constant 
velocity drift of the eyes. This occurs in nystagmus caused by peripheral or 
central vestibular disease and also with lesions of the cerebral hemispheres. The 
added quick phases give a sawtooth appearance, (b) Drift of the eyes back from 
an eccentric orbital position toward the midline (gaze-evoked nystagmus). The 
drift shows a negative exponential time-course, with decreasing velocity. This 
waveform reflects an unsustained eye position signal caused by an impaired 
neural integrator, (c) Drift of the eyes away from the primary position with a 
positive exponential time-course (increasing velocity). This waveform suggests 
an unstable neural integrator and is encountered horizontally in congenital 
nystagmus and vertically in cerebellar disease, (d) Pendular nystagmus, which is 
encountered as a type of congenital nystagmus and with acquired disease. 
(Redrawn from Leigh and Zee. The Neurology of Eye Movements. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1999.43)
sequential saccades increase in amplitude and then decrease in 
a crescendo-decrescendo pattern. 
This type of oscillation is 
usually observed in acute damage to the dorsal cerebellum 
involving the deep cerebellar nuclei, as in demyelination, 
tumour or haematoma.
Oscillations without any intersaccadic interval (back-to- 
back) include opsoclonus, ocular flutter and convergence- 
retraction saccadic pulses. Opsoclonus consists of multidirec­
tional (including oblique and torsional) back-to-back saccades 
of varying amplitude. 
It has been suggested that the disorder 
arises due to disordered pause cell function in the PPRF. A 
variety of posterior fossa disorders can give rise to the condition, 
including infective agents such as Coxsackie B virus and 
Haemophilus influenza meningitis (Table 47.7). It can also occur 
in neonates, associated with myoclonus—‘dancing eye and 
dancing feet’. This appears to be a maturational deficit which 
resolves over approximately 6 weeks. Opsoclonus also occurs as 
a paraneoplastic (non-metastatic) disorder, which in children is
Figure 47.13 Saccadic oscillations, (a) Dysmetria: inaccurate saccades.
(b) Macrosaccadic oscillations: hypermetric saccades about the position of the 
target, (c) Square wave jerks: small, uncalled-for saccades away from and back 
to the position of the target, (d) Macrosquare wave jerks: large, uncalled-for 
saccades away from and back to the position of the target, (e) Ocular flutter: 
to-and-fro, back-to-back saccades without an intersaccadic interval. (Redrawn 
from Leigh and Zee. The Neurology of Eye Movements. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1999.43)
associated with occult neuroblastoma and in adults with small 
cell carcinoma of the lung and carcinoma of the breast and 
uterus. Various autoantibodies can be detected in the sera of 
some patients with opsoclonus, most commonly the anti-Ri 
antibody. Ocular flutter consists of bursts of back-to-back 
saccades in the horizontal plane only. It can therefore be 
observed in patients recovering from opsoclonus. Isolated 
ocular flutter is most often observed in patients with multiple 
sclerosis and signs of cerebellar disease. A voluntary form of 
flutter (voluntary flutter) can be induced by about 8% of the 
population, usually by convergence. It consists of salvoes of 
horizontal back-to-back saccades. Lesions of the dorsal midbrain 
are often associated with upward gaze palsies and convergence- 
retraction nystagmus.32 This is incorrectly termed a nystagmus, 
since it actually consists of adducting saccades and should be
  

Normal and abnormal eye movements 
793
redesignated convergence-retraction saccadic pulses. Finally, a 
further type of saccadic oscillation is ocular bobbing.33 This 
consists of rhythmic, sudden, downward jerks of the eyes fol- 
lowed by a slow return to the midposition, either immediately 
or after a short delay. The typical type, associated with pontine 
haemorrhage or infarction, is associated with paralysis of hori­
zontal eye movements. Atypical bobbing is similar, except that 
horizontal eye movements are intact, and occurs in metabolic 
encephalopathy, 
obstructive hydrocephalus or cerebellar
Table 47.7 
Aetiology of opsoclonus and ocular flutter.
Viral encephalitis 
Paraneoplastic 
Neuroblastoma
Other tumours, e.g, small cell lung carcinoma, ovarian 
carcinoma
Trauma (in association with hypoxia and sepsis)
Meningitis 
Intracranial tumours 
Hydrocephalus 
Thalamic haemorrhage 
Multiple sclerosis 
Hyperosmolar coma
Associated with systemic disease, e.g. viral hepatitis, sarcoid, AIDS. 
Side-effects of drugs: lithium, amitriptyline, phenytoin, and 
diazepam. Toxins: chlordecone, thallium, strychnine, toluene, 
and organophosphates 
Transient phenomenon of healthy neonates ('dancing eyes and 
dancing feet')
haematoma. When the fast movement is upward followed by a 
delayed slow return, the condition is known as reverse bobbing. 
Several of these types of ocular bobbing and others are observed 
in unconscious patients, and these are summarized in Table 47.8.
Nystagmus
Nystagmus is an oscillation which is initiated by a slow eye 
movement. When this slow movement is accompanied by a fast 
(saccadic) eye movement, it is called jerk nystagmus. Although 
the direction of the nystagmus is conventionally determined by 
the direction of the quick phases, it is important to remember 
that it is the smooth eye movement imbalance which is respon­
sible for the nystagmus. If both phases are smooth eye move­
ments, pendular nystagmus is observed.
The commonest form of jerk nystagmus is vestibular 
nystagmus, which most frequently results from labyrinth or 
vestibular nerve dysfunction, but also occurs with central brain­
stem lesions.
Peripheral vestibular nystagmus
Vestibular nystagmus due to a disturbance of the peripheral 
vestibular apparatus has a number of typical characteristics, as 
follows: the form of the nystagmus is usually mixed, i.e. various 
combinations of horizontal, vertical and torsional components; 
pure vertical or torsional nystagmus almost never occurs with 
peripheral vestibular disease; it is always unidirectional, the 
quick phases beating away from the underactive labyrinth; its 
intensity increases when the eyes are turned in the direction of 
the quick phase—Alexander’s law; it is markedly suppressed by
Table 47.8 
Spontaneous eye movements in unconscious patients.
Term
Ocular bobbing
Ocular dipping or inverse 
ocular bobbing
Reverse ocular bobbing
Reverse ocular dipping or 
converse bobbing
Ping-pong gaze
Periodic alternating gaze 
deviation
Vertical myoclonus
Monocular movements
Description
Rapid, conjugate, downward movement: 
slow return to primary position
Slow downward movement; 
rapid return to primary position
Rapid upward movement; 
slow return to primary position
Slow upward movement; 
rapid return to primary position
Horizontal conjugate deviation of the eyes, 
alternating every few seconds
Horizontal conjugate deviation of the eyesr 
alternating every 2 min
Vertical pendular oscillations
Small, intermittent, rapid monocular horizontal, 
vertical, or torsional movements
Causes
Pontine strokes; other structural, metabolic or toxic 
disorders
Unreliable for localization; follows hypoxic-ischemic 
insult or metabolic disorder
Unreliable for localization; may occur with metabolic 
disorders
Unreliable for localization; pontine infarction and 
with AIDS
Bilateral cerebral hemispheric dysfunction
Hepatic encephalopathy; disorders causing periodic 
alternating nystagmus and unconsciousness
Pontine strokes
Pontine or midbrain destructive lesions, perhaps 
with coexistent seizures
  

794 
Vestibular disorders and their management
visual fixation and therefore is accentuated by Frenzel glasses; 
and it always indicates unilateral or asymmetric bilateral 
vestibular lesions and is usually associated with vertigo.
Central vestibular nystagmus
Several different types of central vestibular nystagmus are 
described, all of which show no change in intensity with the 
removal of fixation (by using Frenzel glasses), in contrast to 
peripheral vestibular nystagmus. These forms of vestibular 
nystagmus are often unidirectional, i.e. up- or downbeat, 
torsional.
Downbeat nystagmus may or may not be present in the pri­
mary position. The nystagmus shows a fast phase beating down­
ward which may accentuate in upgaze or downgaze, but 
particularly in lateral gaze.34 When it is present in the primary 
position (even if only apparent on ophthalmoscopy), a bilateral 
disturbance of the cerebellar flocculus is often found, commonly 
due to a disturbance at the craniocervical junction, such as a 
type 1 Chiari malformation (Table 47.9). Other causes include 
cerebellar degenerations, anticonvulsant drugs, lithium intoxi­
cation and intra-axial brainstem lesions. In about half of the 
patients with downbeat nystagmus, no cause can be found. Many 
patients with this form of nystagmus experience oscillopsia and 
postural instability.
Upbeat nystagmus, when present in the primary position, is 
usually associated with focal brainstem lesions in the tegmental 
grey matter, either at the pontomesencephalic junction or at 
the pontomedullary junction, involving the nucleus prepositus 
hypoglossi or the ventral tegmental pathway of the upward 
vestibulo-ocular reflex.35 The commonest causes are multiple
Table 47.9 
Aetiology of downbeat nystagmus.
Cerebellar degeneration, including familial periodic ataxia, and 
paraneoplastic degeneration 
Craniocervical anomalies, including Arnold-Chiari malformation, 
Paget's disease, basilar invagination 
Infarction of brainstem or cerebellum 
Dolichoectasia of the vertebrobasilar artery 
Multiple sclerosis
Cerebellar tumour, including haemangioblastoma 
Syringobulbia 
Encephalitis 
Head trauma 
Toxic-metabolic 
Anticonvulsant medication 
Lithium intoxication 
Alcohol
Wernicke's encephalopathy 
Magnesium depletion 
Vitamin B1? deficiency 
Toluene abuse 
Congenital
Transient finding in otherwise normal infants
sclerosis, tumour, infarction and cerebellar degeneration (Table
47.10).
Torsional nystagmus is a jerk nystagmus around the antero­
posterior axis. It is commonly associated with other types of 
nystagmus. However, when it is pure it indicates a lesion of the 
lateral medulla involving the vestibular nuclei. Occasionally it 
may be due to a midbrain-thalamic lesion, involving the INC 
(Table 47.11).
Periodic alternating nystagmus (PAN) is a primary position 
horizontal nystagmus that changes direction in a crescendo- 
decrescendo manner, characteristically approximately every 
90 s.36 Between each directional change there is a null period of 
0-10 s. There is a congenital form, and acquired forms are due 
to Chiari malformations, multiple sclerosis, fourth ventricle 
tumours, spinocerebellar degenerations and anticonvulsant 
intoxication. Baclofen has been shown to be an effective
37
treatment.
Gaze-evoked nystagmus is a common clinical observation 
with limited localizing value. It is a jerk nystagmus which is 
absent in the primary position and is only present on eccentric 
gaze. It usually signifies cerebellar parenchymal disease, partic­
ularly involving the flocculus or its projections to the brain-
Table 47.10 
Aetiology of upbeat nystagmus.
Cerebellar degenerations 
Multiple sclerosis
Infarction of medulla, midbrain, or cerebellum
Tumours of the medulla, midbrain, or cerebellum
Wernicke's encephalopathy
Brainstem encephalitis
Behcet's syndrome
Meningitis
Leber's congenital amaurosis or other congenital disorder of the
anterior visual pathways 
Thalamic arteriovenous malformation 
Organophosphate poisoning 
Tobacco
Associated with middle ear disease 
Congenital
Transient finding in otherwise normal infants
Table 47.11 
Aetiology of torsional nystagmus.
Syringobulbia, with or without syringomyelia and Chiari 
malformation
Brainstem stroke (Wallenberg s syndrome) or arteriovenous 
malformation 
Brainstem tumour 
Multiple sclerosis 
Oculopalatal myoclonus 
Head trauma 
Congenital
Associated with the ocular tilt reaction
  

Normal and abnormal eye movements 
795
stem. Bilateral horizontal, together with vertical, gaze-evoked 
nystagmus commonly occurs with structural brainstem and 
cerebellar lesions, diffuse metabolic disorders and drug intoxi­
cation. A variant of gaze-evoked nystagmus is rebound nystag­
mus, in which gaze-evoked jerk nystagmus changes direction 
when gaze is returned to the primary position, persisting for
3-25 s. It is also associated with parenchymal cerebellar disease.
Table 47.12 
Aetiology of pendular nystagmus.
Visual loss (including unilateral disease of the optic nerve)
Disorders of central myelin 
Multiple sclerosis 
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease 
Cockayne's syndrome 
Toluene abuse 
Oculopalatal myoclonus 
Acute brainstem stroke 
Whipple's disease 
Spinocerebellar degenerations 
Congenital nystagmus
Pendular nystagmus is either congenital or acquired due to 
cerebellar and brainstem disease, usually multiple sclerosis36 
(Table 47.12). Acquired pendular nystagmus may have both 
horizontal and vertical components, and the amplitude and 
phase relationships of the two sine waves determine the trajec­
tory of the eyes, e.g. oblique, circular or elliptical. It can affect 
one eye or both, equally or unequally, and is often symptomatic, 
resulting in oscillopsia. It may be associated with oscillations of 
other structures, such as the palate, head or limbs. When it is 
present in association with palatal myoclonus, oculopalatal 
myoclonus, the lesion is usually in Mollaret’s triangle, which 
consists of the red nucleus, dentate nucleus and inferior olivary 
nucleus.38 The latter nucleus usually shows pseudohypertrophic 
degeneration. A combination of a convergence-induced 
pendular nystagmus and synchronous jaw contractions, called 
oculomasticatory myorhythmia, is characteristic of Whipple’s 
disease.39 In see-saw nystagmus, one eye intorts and rises while 
the other eye extorts and falls in a rapidly alternating sequence. 
In this pendular form, there is often a bitemporal hemianopia, 
and the condition is associated with large parasellar masses 
which have expanded up into the third ventricle and are dis­
torting structures in the mesencephalic-diencephalic region.40
Congenital nystagmus is almost invariably a horizontal 
conjugate nystagmus which is unaltered by vertical position. It 
is generally of jerk type with accelerating slow phases, and has 
an eccentric null position. Fixation effort enhances congenital 
nystagmus, and the patient rarely complains of oscillopsia. Less 
commonly, the nystagmus is of a pendular type or has a 
torsional component. Reversed optokinetic nystagmus, beating 
in the direction of the target motion, is a feature of congenital 
nystagmus, as is induction of the nystagmus by smooth pursuit 
or by atttempted VOR suppression. Patients may show a head 
turn or occasionally a head oscillation.41
Latent nystagmus is a type of congenital nystagmus that is 
only present on monocular viewing and which then beats 
toward the viewing eye.42 It is absent on binocular viewing. If 
the patient has amblyopia in one eye, latent nystagmus is 
present with both eyes viewing, when it is called manifest latent 
nystagmus.
References
1. Shaunak S, O’Sullivan E, Kennard C. Eye movements. In: Hughes 
JAC, ed. Neurological Investigations. London: British Medical 
Journal, 1997: 253-82.
2. Halmagyi GM, Curthoys IS. A clinical sign of canal paresis. Arch 
Neurol 1988; 45: 737-9.
3. Miiri RM, Chermann JF, Kohen L et al. Ocular motor conse­
quences of damage to the abducens nucleus area in humans. 
J Neurol Ophthalmol 1996; 16: 191-5.
4. Hanson MR, Hamid MA, Thomsak RL et al. Selective saccadic 
palsy caused by pontine lesions: clinical, physiological and patho- 
logical correlations. Ann Neurol 1986; 20: 209-17.
5. Zee DS. Intemuclear ophthalmoplegia: clinical and pathophysio­
logical consideration. In: Biittner U, Brandt T, eds. Ocular Motor 
Disorders in the Brainstem. London: WB Saunders, 1992: 455-70.
6. Cogan TG. Intemuclear ophthalmoplegia: typical and atypical. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1970; 84: 583-9.
7. Ranalli PJ, Sharpe JA. Vertical vestibulo-ocular reflex smooth 
pursuit and eye head tracking dysfunction in intemuclear 
ophthalmoplegia. Brain 1988; 111: 1299-317.
8. Thomke F, Hopf HC, Kramer G. Intemuclear ophthalmoplegia of 
abduction: clinical and electrophysiological data on the existence 
of abduction paresis of prenuclear origin. J Neurol Neurosurg Psy­
chiatry 1992; 55: 105-11.
9. Wall M, Wray SH. The one-and-a-half syndrome—a unilateral 
disorder of the pontine tegmentum: a study of 20 cases and review 
of the literature. Neurology 1983; 33: 971-80.
10. Sharpe JA, Rosenberg MA, Hoyt WF et al. Paralytic pontine 
exotropia. A sign of acute unilateral gaze palsy and intemuclear 
ophthalmoplegia. Neurology 1974; 24: 1076-81.
11. Komiyama A, Takamatsu K, Johkura K et al. Intemuclear ophthal- 
moplegia and controlled exotropia. Non paralytic pontine 
exotropia and WEBINO syndrome. Neuroophthalmology 1998; 19: 
33-44.
12. Baloh RW, Yee RD, Honrubia V. Eye movements with 
Wallenberg’s syndrome. Ann NY Acad Sci 1981; 374: 600-13.
13. Solomon D, Galetta SL, Liu GT. Possible mechanisms for hori- 
zontal gaze deviation and lateropulsion in the lateral medullary 
syndrome. J Neuroophthalmol 1995; 15: 26-30.
14. Baloh RW, Furman JN, Yee RD. Dorsal midbrain syndrome: clini­
cal and oculographic finding. Neurology 1985; 35: 54-60.
15. Buttner-Ennever JA, Biittner U, Cohen B et al. Vertical gaze 
paralysis and the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitu­
dinal faxiculus. Brain 1982; 105: 25-49.
16. Hommel B, Bogousslavsky J. The spectrum of vertical gaze palsy fol­
lowing unilateral brainstem stroke. Neurology 1991; 41: 1229-34.
  

796 
Vestibular disorders and their management
17. Halmagyi GM, Brandt T, Dieterich M et al. Tonic controversive 
ocular tilt reaction due to unilateral mesodiencephalic lesions. 
Neurol 1990; 40: 1503-9.
18. Brandt T, Dieterich M. Skew deviation with ocular torsion: a 
vestibular brainstem sign of topographic diagnostic value. Ann 
Neurol 1993; 33: 528-34.
19. Clark JM, Albert GW. Vertical gaze palsies from medial thalamic 
infarctions without mid-brain involvement. Stroke 1995; 26: 
1467-70.
20. Lewis RF, Zee DS. Ocular motor disorders associated with cerebel- 
lar lesions: pathophysiology and topical diagnosis. Rev Neurol 
1993; 149: 665-77.
21. O’Sullivan EP, Kennard C. Neuro-ophthalmology of movement 
disorders. In: Jankovic J, Tolosa E, eds. Parkinson’s Disease and 
Movement Disorders. Williams and Wilkins, 1998: 869-86.
22. Lasker AG, Zee DS. Ocular motor abnormalities in Huntington’s 
disease. Vis Res 1997; 37: 3639-45.
23. Fletcher WA, Sharpe JA. Saccadic eye movement dysfunction in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol 1986; 20: 464-71.
24. Cogan CG. A type of congenital ocular motor apraxia presenting 
with jerky head movements. Trans Am Acad Ophthalmol 1952; 56: 
853-62.
25. Pierrot-Deseilligny C, Gautier JC, Loron P. Acquired ocular motor 
apraxia due to bilateral fronto-parietal infarcts. Ann Neurol 1988; 
23: 199-202.
26. Hanis C, Shawkat F, Russell-Eggitt I et al. Intermittent horizontal 
saccade failure, ‘ocular motor apraxia’, in children. BrJ Ophthalmol 
1996; 80: 151-8.
27. Morrow MJ, Sharpe JA. Smooth pursuit eye movements. In: 
Sharpe JA, Barber HO, eds. The Vestibular-Ocular Reflex and 
Vertigo. New York: Raven Press, 1993: 141-62.
28. Heide W, Kurzidin K, Kompf D. Deficits in smooth pursuit eye 
movements after frontal and parietal lesions. Brain 1996; 119: 
1951-69.
29. Sarkies NJC, Sanders MD. Convergence spasm. Trans Ophthalmol 
Soc 1985; 104: 782-6.
30. Selhorst JB, Hoyt WF, Feinsord M et al. Midbrain correctopia. 
Arch Neurol 1976; 33: 193-5.
31. Averbuch-Heller L, Remler B. Opsoclonus. Semin Neurol 1996; 
16: 21-6.
32. Ochs AL, Stark L, Hoyt WF et al. Opposed adducting saccades in 
convergence-retraction nystagmus. A patient with Sylvian aque­
duct syndrome. Brain 1979; 102: 497-508.
33. Susac JO, Hoyt WF, Daroff RD et al. Clinical spectrum of ocular 
bobbing. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1970; 33: 771-5.
34. Halmagyi GM, Rudge P, Gresty MA et al. Down-beating 
nystagmus: a review of 62 cases. Arch Neurol 1983; 40: 
777-84.
35. Fisher A, Gresty M, Chambers B et al. Primary position up­
beating nystagmus. A variety of central positional nystagmus. 
Brain 1983; 106: 949-64.
36. Fletcher WA. Nystagmus: an overview. In: Sharpe J A, Barber HO. 
The Vestibular-Ocular-Reflex and Vertigo. New York: Raven Press, 
1983; 195-215.
37. Halmagyi GM, Rudge P, Gresty M et al. Treatment of periodic 
alternating nystragmus. Ann Neurol 1980; 8: 609-11.
38. Nakada T, Kwee IL. Oculo-palato-myoclonus. Brain 1986; 109: 
431-41.
39. Schwartz MA, Selhorst JB, Ochs AL et al. Oculomasticatory 
myorhythmia: a unique movement disorder occurring in 
Whipple’s disease. Ann Neurol 1986; 20: 677-83.
40. Daroff RB. See-saw nystagmus. Neurology 1965; 15: 874-7.
41. Dell’Osso LF, Daroff RB. Congenital nystagmus waveforms and 
foveation strategy. Doc Ophthalmol 1975 39: 155-82.
42. Gresty MA, Metcalfe T, Timms C et al. Neurology of latent nys­
tagmus. Brain 1992; 115: 1303-21.
43. Leigh RJ, Zee DS. The Neurology of Eye Movements, 3rd edn. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
44. Ranalli PJ, Sharpe JA. Contrapulsion of saccades and ipsilateral 
ataxia; a unilateral disorder of the rostral cerebellum. Ann Neurol 
1986; 20:311.
45. Biittner-Ennever JA, Biittner U. The reticular formation. In: 
Buttner-Ennever JA, ed. Neuroanatomy of the Oculomotor System. 
New York: Elsevier, 1988:119-76.
46. Kommerell G, Hoyt WF. Lateropulsion of saccadic eye move­
ments. Electro-oculographic studies in a patient with Wallenberg’s 
syndrome. Arch Neurol 1973; 28: 313-20.
47. Rascol O, Sabatini U, Simouetta-Moreau M et al. Square wave 
jerks in parkinsonian syndromes. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
1991; 54: 599-602.
  

48 Peripheral vestibular 
disorders and diseases 
in adults
G Michael Halmagyi, Phillip D Cremer, Ian S Curthoys
The symptoms and signs of any lesion involving the nervous 
system, which includes the vestibular system, are determined by 
where the lesion is and not by what the lesion is.
It is the site and not the nature of the lesion that 
determines the pattern of the functional deficit.
While this is the truth, it is not the whole truth. Two other 
factors also determine the exact pattern of the functional 
deficit: the age of the lesion—adaptive processes are particu­
larly vigorous in the vestibular system—and the activity of 
the lesion—whether the lesion produces underactivity or 
overactivity of neurones. To illustrate these principles, con­
sider the effects of acute total permanent destruction of one 
labyrinth. The symptoms and signs at any particular time will 
depend on whether the lesion has come on suddenly or 
slowly, and, if it came on suddenly, then the time elapsed 
since it did. On the other hand, the symptoms and signs will 
not depend on the nature of the lesion—how the labyrinth 
was destroyed or damaged will be immaterial to the deficit 
that is produced.
What happens if one labyrinth is 
destroyed
Acute destruction or deafferentation of one entire intact 
labyrinth, in an animal or in a human, by disease or by design, 
invariably produces an acute, temporary, stereotyped, clinical 
syndrome of profound motor and sensory abnormalities—for 
reviews see Curthoys and Halmagyi1 and Vidal et al.2 There is, 
due to otolith deafferentation, a complete, or more often a par­
tial, ocular tilt reaction that is always ipsiversive, i.e. always 
towards the side of the lesion.
CLINICAL FEATURES OF THE OCULAR TILT 
REACTION
A leftward complete ocular tilt reaction due to a left
peripheral vestibular lesion comprises:
1. A skew deviation with the left eye hypotropic 
(deviated downwards) producing vertical diplopia.
2. A leftwards head tilt producing no symptoms.
3. Conjugate counterclockwise (from the patient’s 
point of view) torsion of the eyes, evident on 
fundus photography, producing no symptoms but a 
leftwards deviation of the visual horizontal or 
vertical.
The complete ocular tilt reaction (OTR) consists of head tor­
sion, conjugate binocular eye torsion and a hypotropia due to 
skew deviation—all towards the one side. Owing to semicircular 
canal (SCC) deafferentation, there is also a spontaneous hori­
zontal-torsional nystagmus with the slow phases toward the side 
of the lesion, as well as vomiting. Humans, and perhaps animals, 
experience an illusion of rotation (i.e. vertigo) as well as nausea.
CLINICAL FEATURES OF AN ACUTE 
UNILATERAL PERIPHERAL 
VESTIBULOPATHY
1. An illusion of rotation, i.e. vertigo.
2. Nausea.
3. Vomiting.

798 
Vestibular disorders and their management
In a patient with a left vestibulopathy there is:
4< A leftward partial or complete ocular tilt reaction.
5. Horizontal-torsional spontaneous nystagmus with 
the quick phases to the right, more vigorous with 
reduced vision (e.g. Frenzel glasses).
6. Leftwards rotation when marching on the spot with 
the eyes closed (Unterberger test).
7. A positive leftwards horizontal head impulse test.
8* Nos. 1-6 are temporary and recover within 1 week;
no. 7 is permanent.
These symptoms and signs make up the syndrome of acute 
unilateral vestibular deafferentation, which is the same irre­
spective of the cause. Although normally both humans and 
animals recover, more or less completely, from the acute 
unilateral vestibular deafferentation (uVD) syndrome by the 
process of vestibular compensation, the vestibulo-ocular 
reflex (VOR) is permanently damaged. From studies of the 
acute uVD syndrome and of the processes of vestibular com­
pensation in experimental animals, one could infer that 
peripheral vestibular disorders produce vertigo when they 
cause asymmetric neural activity between corresponding 
parts of the left and right vestibular nuclei, and that recov­
ery from the acute uVD syndrome is due to rebalancing of 
the neural activity in the vestibular nuclei on the two sides. 
One could also infer that a person not experiencing vertigo, 
should, at that time, have symmetrical vestibular nucleus 
activity.
Once vestibular compensation is complete, i.e. there is 
a chronic, stable uVD, the patient will no longer expe­
rience vertigo and most patients will experience no 
symptoms at all.
In other words, most patients cannot tell whether they have 
one or two functioning labyrinths. A minority of patients, 
about 20%, with a chronic stable total uVD will experience 
ataxia and oscillopsia, symptoms experienced by all patients 
with bilateral vestibular deafferentation and described in more 
detail later.
In contrast, chronic progressive unilateral vestibular de­
afferentation—as would occur with a slowly growing tumour 
such as a vestibular schwannoma—does not produce the acute 
uVD syndrome of vertigo, vomiting, OTR and nystagmus. This 
is presumably because there is never a period of significantly 
asymmetric neural activity in the vestibular nucleus on each 
side. In fact, if a patient presents with signs of uVD and cate­
gorically denies ever having experienced an attack of acute 
spontaneous vertigo, one can be almost sure that the uVD has 
not been acute, and one should therefore look for a potential 
progressive cause of uVD.
The neural events behind acute 
unilateral vestibular deafferentation 
and vestibular compensation
In order to appreciate the mechanisms of vestibular compensa­
tion, one needs to consider the changes in vestibular nucleus 
neural activity that occur after uVD. ’
Normal medial vestibular nucleus activity
Two types of lateral SCC-driven neurones have been found in 
the medial vestibular nuclei of monkeys, cats and guinea pigs. 
Both types of vestibular nucleus neurones, just like primary 
vestibular neurones, discharge spontaneously, i.e. at rest, at 
rates sometimes in excess of 80 impulses/s. The discharge rate of 
type 1 neurones increases when the head accelerates ipsilater- 
ally, and decreases when the head accelerates contralaterally. 
The reverse applies to type 2 neurones; they increase their dis­
charge rate in response to contralateral head accelerations and 
decrease their discharge rate in response to ipsilateral head 
accelerations (Figure 48.1). The reason why type 1 and type 2 
neurones respond oppositely is that, whereas type 1 neurones are 
excited by ipsilateral lateral SCC primary afferent neurones and 
are inhibited by ipsilateral type 2 neurones, type 2 neurones 
themselves are excited by contralateral type 1 neurones via 
commissural pathways. Motor and sensory equilibrium requires 
equal resting activity of type 1 neurones in the two medial 
vestibular nuclei. Type 1 neurones drive the horizontal VOR by 
excitatory projections to abducens motomeurones and inter- 
nuclear neurones in the contralateral abducens nucleus.
Ipsilesional medial vestibular nucleus activity
Immediately after uVD there are changes in the activity of both 
type 1 and type 2 neurones in the medial vestibular nucleus on 
the damaged side.3”10 The resting activity of type 1 neurones de­
creases, whereas the resting activity of type 2 neurones 
increases. The decrease in resting activity of type 1 neurones 
reflects the loss of excitatory drive by lateral SCC primary 
afferent neurones. The increase in resting activity of type 2 
neurones reflects increased excitatory drive by contralesional 
type 1 neurones which have become disinhibited by the 
decrease in the activity of contralesional type 2 neurones, 
which are themselves normally excited by ipsilesional type 1 
neurones. As well as showing a reduced resting discharge rate, 
immediately after uVD, ipsilesional type 1 neurones show a 
decrease in sensitivity to angular acceleration. The sensitivity 
of type 2 neurones to angular acceleration remains unchanged.
In the days and weeks that follow, a remarkable series of 
changes occur in the resting activity of ipsilesional medial 
vestibular nucleus neurones. The resting discharge rates of both 
type 1 and 2 neurones are restored to normal even though the 
medial vestibular nucleus no longer receives any afferent drive
  

Peripheral vestibular disorders and diseases in adults 
799
Figure 48.1 
Schematic representation of brainstem 
neurones responsible for the direct, disynaptic vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR). The activity of these neurones is shown during (a) head rotation to the left, 
(b) after a right vestibular deafferentation , and (c) during right-ear cold caloric stimulation. In all three situations, there is left-beating nystagmus which is generated by the same pattern of activation and 
inactivation in two medial vestibular nucleus neurones, type 1 and type 2 neurones. (Courtesy of Dr A. Cartwright, Sydney.)
  

800 
Vestibular disorders and their management
from its labyrinth. Data so far, mainly from the guinea pig and 
the gerbil, have shown a limited restoration of sensitivity of 
type 1 neurones to angular accelerations. This restoration of 
resting activity in type 1 neurones could also underlie the recov­
ery of humans from the disabling consequences of uVD and the 
restoration of static equilibrium.
The abrupt loss of peripheral afferent input after uVD 
results in a large imbalance in average neural resting activity 
between the two vestibular nuclei. Many neurones in the ipsile­
sional nucleus become silent, whereas many neurones in the 
contralesional nucleus fire vigorously, and in so doing indirectly 
exert greater inhibition than usual of the neurones in the ipsile­
sional nucleus, via the commissural fibres interconnecting the 
nuclei. There are widespread changes throughout the brain 
accompanying this neural imbalance between the vestibular 
nuclei. In the rat and the guinea pig, the restoration of balanced 
activity is fast (about 24-48 h) and a host of possible mecha­
nisms have been suggested by which activity returns. That long 
list is narrowed because balanced activity returns so quickly. 
Since the initial process is so fast, it suggests that intracellular 
changes such as adaptation of the high firing rate of the con­
tralesional neurones or changes in the membrane characteris­
tics of neurones in the ipsilesional vestibular nuclei,11 possibly 
combined with changes (e.g. downregulation of GABA sensi­
tivity),12 probably contribute most to the initial recovery 
process of the recovery of neural activity in the ipsilesional 
vestibular nucleus.
Contralesional medial vestibular nucleus 
activity
Immediately after uVD, there is an increase in the resting activ­
ity of contralesional type 1 neurones without much change in 
their sensitivity.5-10 There is also a decrease in the sensitivity of 
contralesional type 2 neurones without much change in resting 
activity. This increase in resting activity of type 1 neurones is 
due to decreased inhibition by type 2 neurones, which are 
themselves normally excited by ipsilesional type 1 neurones, 
now silenced. In the following days and weeks, the resting 
activity of contralesional type 1 neurones is restored to normal, 
and the resting activity of contralesional type 2 neurones 
increases to above normal. These changes in the resting activ­
ity of contralesional medial vestibular nucleus neurones occur 
despite the fact that the ipsilesional vestibular nucleus remains 
isolated from its labyrinth. However, the remarkable restoration 
of resting activity in ipsilesional type 1 neurones described 
above can account for the changes in activity of contralesional 
medial vestibular nucleus neurones. The restoration of 
contralesional type 1 resting activity to normal is presumably 
the result of the increased inhibition by contralesional type 2 
neurones, now excited by the restored resting activity of ipsile­
sional type 1 neurones. Together with the decrease of contrale­
sional type I resting activity to normal, there is a late decrease
in contralesional type 1 sensitivity, whereas contralesional type
2 sensitivity remains low.
Normal lateral vestibular nucleus activity
Primary otolithic neurones project to secondary vestibular 
neurones, mainly in the lateral and the descending vestibular 
nuclei. The predominant response of lateral vestibular 
nucleus neurones is an increase in firing rate in response to 
ipsilateral tilts, i.e. laterally directed linear accelerations, the 
alpha response. The commissural connections between sec­
ondary otolithic neurones are poorly understood. Unlike the 
commissural connections of the lateral SCC secondary neu­
rones in the medial vestibular nucleus, which are direct and 
functionally inhibitory, it appears that the commissural con­
nections between the secondary otolithic neurones in the lat­
eral 
vestibular 
nucleus 
are 
indirect 
and 
functionally 
excitatory. There are also interconnections between the lat­
eral and the medial vestibular nuclei, and some medial 
vestibular nucleus neurones respond to both semicircular 
canal and to otolithic stimulation. The changes that occur in 
the lateral vestibular nucleus after uVD vary between the ros- 
troventral and dorsocaudal areas of the nucleus, which pro­
ject to the cervicothoracic and lumbosacral segments of the 
spinal cord respectively.
Ipsilesional lateral vestibular nucleus activity
There is a decrease in the proportion of roll-tilt responsive neu­
rones in the rostroventral area but not in the dorsocaudal area, 
as well as an overall decrease in the average resting activity of 
neurones.13 In contrast, there are increases in the number of 
position-sensitive neurones, in the tilt sensitivity of dorso­
caudal neurones and in the number of beta responses (increases 
in firing with medially directed linear acceleration). With com­
pensation, there is little recovery in the resting activity of either 
alpha or beta neurones. The proportion of neurones in the 
rostroventral areas responsive to roll-tilt increases to normal, 
while the sensitivity remains normal. The sensitivity of 
dorsocaudal neurones decreases to normal. The proportions of 
position-sensitive neurones and beta responses do not change.
Contralesional lateral vestibular nucleus 
activity
The proportion of roll-tilt sensitive neurones is normal. The 
overall resting activity is slightly reduced. As in the ipsilesional 
lateral vestibular nucleus, there is an increase in position- 
sensitive neurones and in beta responses and a decrease in the 
roll-tilt sensitivity of neurones in the rostroventral areas. There 
are scanty data on the changes with compensation, but there 
appear to be few differences in the contralesional neuronal 
activity in normal and in uncompensated cats.14
  

Peripheral vestibular disorders and diseases in adults 
801
What happens if both labyrinths are 
destroyed
So long as there has been adequate time—about 3 days to have 
occurred, in a guinea pig and about 1 week in a human—for 
compensation to have occurred for the first uVD, acute deaf­
ferentation of both labyrinths, one after the other, produces two 
attacks of the acute uVD syndrome. If, however, the second 
uVD is carried out soon after the first, before there has been a 
chance for compensation to have occurred, a second uVD syn­
drome will not develop. In fact, if the second uVD is carried out 
while the symptoms of the first are at their peak, the uVD symp­
toms will abruptly terminate. This is called the Bechterew 
effect.2,15 It is also important to note that if the two labyrinths 
are deafferented simultaneously, either suddenly or slowly, the 
patient will not experience vertigo, since there is never any left- 
right asymmetry in vestibular nucleus activity.
The long-term effects of bilateral vestibular deafferentation 
are the same irrespective of whether it has been simultaneous or 
sequential.16
CLINICAL FEATURES OF CHRONIC 
VESTIBULAR INSUFFICIENCY
L Sense of imbalance only when standing or walking, 
especially on uneven surfaces and especially in the 
dark.
2. A positive modified Romberg test: the patient 
cannot stand with the feet together and eyes closed 
on a thick foam mat.
3. Vertical bouncing or simply blurring of vision while 
the patient is in motion, i.e. oscillopsia.
4- More than three lines’ decrement in visual acuity 
while the patient’s head is being vigorously shaken 
up and down.
The patient will experience the syndrome of chronic vestibu­
lar insufficiency (CVI), which has also been called Dandy 
syndrome,17 after the American neurosurgeon who pioneered 
therapeutic vestibular neurectomy, in some cases bilateral, for 
the treatment of intractable Meniere’s disease. The three cardi­
nal symptoms and signs of the CVI syndrome derive from the 
lack of input to vestibulo-ocular, vestibulospinal and vestibulo­
cortical pathways rather than from any asymmetry in input to 
these pathways, as in patients with vertigo. First, the patient 
with CVI cannot walk securely in the dark, particularly if the 
ground is uneven, because there is no input to his vestibu­
lospinal pathways. Second, the patient cannot see clearly while 
her head is moving quickly, because there is no input to 
vestibulo-ocular pathways, and she will experience retinal 
image movement, i.e. oscillopsia on head movement (Figure
48.2). Third, she will be disoriented when visual and proprio­
ceptive sensory input is ambiguous. For example, she will
£
«
’
I<0‘
— 1401
Sum (E+H)
- ■' 
-S'I i':f 
;V  
"  
I 40
l^sec
t—  oscillopsia--------- *
Figure 48.2 Horizontal eye rotations in response to voluntary horizontal head 
rotations in a patient with bilateral loss of vestibular function. While the 
patient oscillates the head (H) only slowly, there are adequate compensatory eye 
rotations (E) generated by the visual system, so that gaze (E+H), called here 
SUM, remains reasonably stable. When the head oscillates faster, compensatory 
eye rotations become inadequate since the gain of the visual pursuit reflex 
declines above 1 Hz and the patient has no vestibulo-ocular reflex.
Consequently, gaze moves with head and the patient experiences retinal image 
movement, i.e. 'oscillopsia'. (From Atkin A, Bender MB. Ocular stabilization 
during oscillatory head movements. Arch Neurol 1968; 19: 559-66.)
have trouble walking in the dark, particularly if the ground is 
uneven, and in coming to the surface after she dives underwa­
ter, because in these situations there is lack of visual input, 
ambiguous proprioceptive input and no input to vestibulocorti­
cal pathways. It might be some consolation that she will, how­
ever, be a fine ship’s cook, because she will never be motion sick 
again, no matter how rough the weather. The difficulty in see­
ing clearly when the head is rotating quickly is due to retinal 
image movement, which, fortunately, not every patient with 
absent vestibular function is aware of in daily life. While some 
patients will volunteer that their vision bounces up and down 
when they walk and this is a source of considerable misery, 
many will deny oscillopsia and will only report blurred vision 
and only when their head is shaken rapidly by an examiner and 
not in daily life. How some subjects without vestibular function 
adapt so quickly and so completely to a degree of image motion 
that other subjects with the same deficit find intolerable is 
still an enigma.18 Some patients with severe unilateral loss of 
vestibular function will also develop symptoms of CVI.19,20
What happens if one labyrinth is 
stimulated
Just as acute deafferentation of one labyrinth invariably produces 
a stereotyped temporary syndrome of profound ocular-motor 
abnormalities, mechanical stimulation of one SCC or electrical 
stimulation of its afferent nerve in an alert animal invariably pro­
duces a stereotyped reflex rotation of the head and eyes, in the 
plane of the stimulated SCC—for a review see Cohen.21
For example, stimulation of the left lateral SCC or its nerve 
produces predominantly horizontal left-beating (i.e. rightward 
slow-phase) nystagmus, corresponding to the orientation of the 
lateral SCC within the temporal bone.22 Similarly, stimulation 
of the left posterior SCC or its nerve produces upbeating, and,
  

802 
Vestibular disorders and their management
from the patient’s point of view, counterclockwise torsional 
nystagmus, corresponding to the diagonal orientation of the 
posterior SCCs within the temporal bone.23 When the entire 
labyrinth is stimulated, the resulting nystagmus is predomi­
nantly horizontal-torsional, since any vertical component is 
cancelled by the opposing actions of the anterior and posterior 
SCCs on the same side.
Consequently, each SCC has its signature nystagmus, so 
that it is possible in some patients, particularly those with irri­
tative peripheral vestibular disorders such as benign paroxysmal 
positioning vertigo (BPPV) or the Tullio phenomenon, to 
deduce from an analysis of the nystagmus plane the exact SCC 
which gives rise to the nystagmus.
For example, in patients with BPPV paroxysmal nystagmus 
develops in the Dix-Hallpike position, because the ampullary 
hair cells in one SCC are mechanically stimulated by stray oto­
conia. If the nystagmus is predominantly horizontal, then the 
otoconia are in the lateral SCC. If the trajectory of that nys­
tagmus is upbeat and torsional, then the otoconia are in the 
posterior SCC. Three-dimensional eye-movement recordings 
confirm that the rotation axis of the nystagmus is orthogonal to 
the plane of the posterior SCC of the lowermost ear.24
In patients with sound-induced vestibular symptoms (the 
Tullio phenomenon), the axis of the induced nystagmus corre­
sponds to the axis of the anterior SCC on one side; in other 
words, it has downbeat-torsional quick phases25-27—see Figure 
48.3A. The problem in these patients appears to be a bony 
defect or ‘dehiscence’ in the roof of the superior (i.e. anterior) 
SCC,27”29 creating a third window for the membranous 
labyrinth, so that sound energy is able to deflect the cupula 
and stimulate ampullary hair cells—see Figure 48.3B.
The standard caloric test is also based on labyrinthine stim­
ulation. Warm or cool water (at 30°C or 44°C) infused into the 
patient’s external auditory canal creates a thermal gradient 
across the labyrinth and generates a convective movement of 
endolymph which then deflects the cupula and either increases 
or decreases the firing rate of SCC primary afferent neurones. 
The caloric test is mainly a test of lateral SCC function, 
because the lateral SCC is the closest to the thermal stimulus, 
and with the patient supine and the head elevated 30° from 
horizontal, the convective effect is the largest in the lateral 
SCC canal, since it is earth-vertical.30 If however, the patient is 
positioned so that the anterior SCC is earth-vertical, then the 
axis of the nystagmus becomes more vertical and torsional. The 
posterior canal is less able to be stimulated by caloric stimuli, 
perhaps due to its orientation and distance from the heat 
source. The caloric test can be used to test all three semicircu­
lar canals, by positioning the patient so that the canal of inter­
est is earth-vertical, and measuring nystagmus components in 
each canal plane.31
It is also possible to stimulate the otoliths on one side, par­
ticularly the utricle. In the cat, electrical stimulation of the 
utricular nerve produces a contraversive ocular tilt reaction 
comprising head tilt, conjugate eye torsion and skew deviation 
with contralateral hypotropia.32 In humans, galvanic (i.e. DC)
(A) 
. 
5 seconds
----------
i
750Hz tone at 1 lOdB presented to the right ear
(B)
A
7
«
?
Figure 48.3 (A) Tullio phenomenon from the right ear. A 750-Hz tone at 110 dB 
produces nystagmus with downward and clockwise (from the patient's point of 
view) quick phases in darkness, indicating excitation of the right anterior (i.e. 
superior) semicircular canal by the sound. A three-dimensional search coil 
recording; H, horizontal, V, vertical, T, torsional. In accordance with the right- 
hand rule for rotations, the positive direction is leftward, downward and 
clockwise. The patient had a dehiscence of the right superior (i.e. anterior) 
semicircular canal. (Courtesy of Dr L Minor, Baltimore.) (B) Coronal high- 
resolution CT images of the temporal bone of a patient with Tullio phenomenon 
of the right ear. There is a deficient bony roof over the superior (i.e. anterior) 
semicircular canal (curved open arrow). The top left image is most anterior and 
the bottom right image is most posterior. Other, normal, structures identified 
are: the head of the malleus (m); the basal turn of the cochlea (b); the jugular 
bulb (j); the oval window (large solid curved arrow); the tympanic membrane 
(small straight open arrow); the tympanic segment of the facial nerve (small 
arrowhead); and the internal auditory canal (large arrowhead). There is normal 
bony covering over the lateral semicircular canal (small solid curved arrow). The 
letters ‘R' and 1' refer to the right and left of each image. Compare with Figure 
48.12a, which shows the normal bony covering of the superior semicircular 
canal. (From Watson SRD, Halmagyi GM, Colebatch JG. Vestibular 
hypersensitivity to sound (Tullio phenomenon). Structural and functional 
assessment. Neurology 2000; 54: 722-8.)
  

Peripheral vestibular disorders and diseases in adults 
803
mastoid stimulation produces a similar, but only partial, OTR 
comprising conjugate eye torsion and head tilt but no skew 
deviation.33,34 Some patients with the Tullio phenomenon have 
predominantly a contraversive paroxysmal OTR, presumably 
due to utricular rather than superior (i.e. anterior) SCC activa­
tion by sound.35
Summary
1. Vertigo is due to asymmetrical vestibular nucleus activity, 
either an increase in vestibular activity on one side or a 
decrease on the other.
2. Vertigo is temporary; if it is present all the time and is 
always the same, then it is not vertigo.
3. Acute total unilateral vestibular deafferentation produces a 
temporary asymmetry in vestibular nucleus activity and 
therefore a temporary vertigo.
4. A slowly progressive total unilateral vestibular deafferenta­
tion does not produce vertigo, presumably because it does 
not at any time produce asymmetrical vestibular nucleus 
activity.
5. A chronic stable total unilateral vestibular deafferentation 
does not produce vertigo. If the unilateral vestibular deaf­
ferentation was acute, then it no longer produces vertigo; if 
the unilateral vestibular deafferentation was slowly progres­
sive, it never produced vertigo.
6. Bilateral symmetrical vestibular deafferentation does not 
produce vertigo, but the syndrome of chronic vestibular 
insufficiency—ataxia and oscillopsia.
7. In some patients, chronic unilateral vestibular deafferenta­
tion also produces chronic vestibular insufficiency.
Some common peripheral vestibular 
diseases
Disorders of the vestibular system produce three main syn­
dromes: the syndrome of acute spontaneous vertigo, the 
syndrome of provoked vertigo, and the syndrome of imbalance. 
Each syndrome can be caused by many different diseases. Here 
we review the diseases most frequently encountered in clinical 
practice. For the diagnosis of vertigo, the history is critically 
important, as the patient rarely presents during vertigo attack. 
The clinical examination of the vestibular system is a special­
ized skill that requires regular practice. Details of how to take a 
history and how to examine a patient with a suspected vestibu­
lar disorder can be found elsewhere.36,37
Acute vestibular neuritis 
Definition
Sudden spontaneous, isolated, total or subtotal loss of periph­
eral vestibular function of one labyrinth is a frequent and usu­
ally dramatic clinical event. It is usually ascribed to a viral 
infection or to a parainfectious event and has been called ‘acute 
vestibular neuritis’ as well as ‘vestibular neuronitis’, ‘labyrinthi­
tis’ or ‘neuro-labyrinthitis’. Some prefer to call it simply ‘acute 
unilateral peripheral vestibulopathy’—for reviews see Strupp 
and Arbusow38 or Strupp and Brandt.39 From the point of view 
of pathophysiology, vestibular neuritis is a spontaneous acute 
uVD, and as long as no recovery of peripheral vestibular 
function occurs, its functional short- and long-term effects are 
indistinguishable from those of a vestibular neurectomy or 
labyrinthectomy.
Clinical features
The patient with acute vestibular neuritis experiences sponta­
neous vertigo as well as nausea and vomiting that can be so 
intense that she or he cannot get to a doctor and requires 
either a home visit or admission to an emergency room. The 
audiological physician is unlikely to see the patient at this 
stage. The objective vestibular signs are exactly the same as 
those that occur after a labyrinthectomy or a vestibular 
neurectomy.
There is a horizontal-torsional spontaneous nystagmus 
with the slow phases towards the side of the affected ear. The 
nystagmus is always strictly unidirectional; bidirectional gaze- 
evoked nystagmus excludes the diagnosis. The nystagmus is to 
some extent always suppressed by visual fixation, and for that 
reason it might not be detected on the standard clinical exam­
ination but only when some means are used to view the eyes 
in the absence of visual fixation. This can be done either by 
ophthalmoscopy with the other eye covered,40 or with Frenzel’s 
glasses, optical or infrared video. The head impulse test is 
invariably positive towards the affected side and indicates 
absent lateral SCC function.41 Interpretation of the head- 
impulse test is not confounded by the presence of spontaneous 
nystagmus. This is because the compensatory saccade, which 
occurs with a head impulse towards the affected side, will be 
almost the same size as the head impulse, 20-30°, and there­
fore much larger than the quick phases of the spontaneous 
nystagmus, which are usually 3-5° in the presence of visual 
fixation.
The patient, although unsteady, can, with the eyes open, 
stand without support, but rotates towards the side of the lesion 
when trying to march on the spot with the eyes closed—called 
a positive Fukuda or Unterberger test.
There is also a partial or complete ocular tilt reaction 
towards the affected side but it is rarely obvious clinically. This 
is because the head tilt towards the affected side and the skew 
deviation with the higher image coming from the eye on the 
side of the affected ear are often absent,42-46 and the cardinal 
sign of the ocular tilt reaction, a conjugate ocular torsion 
towards the affected side, cannot be seen without indirect oph­
thalmoscopy or fundus photography (Figure 48.4). However, 
the conjugate ocular torsion can be inferred by testing the sub­
jective visual horizontal.
  

804 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Before right vestibular neurectomy
After right vestibular neurectomy
Immediately after acute uVD, patients set the bar towards the 
side of the lesion. They offset the bar by the same amount as the 
torsional position at which the eye is offset towards the side of 
the lesion (Figure 48.5). In other words, the SVH is simply an 
indirect but accurate means of measuring the conjugate ocular 
torsion, which is the hallmark of the ocular tilt reaction, and 
which invariably occurs after acute uVD. The conjugate ocular 
torsion after acute uVD can be thought of as equivalent in the 
otolithic system to the spontaneous nystagmus in the SCC 
system. Since the setting of the SVH depends on relative rest­
ing activity in the left and right vestibular nuclei, as the 
patient’s brainstem compensates for the uVD, the SVH returns 
towards normal, although a small offset of the SVH appears to 
be a permanent stigma of uVD.51 Therefore, by analogy with 
spontaneous nystagmus, a return of the SVH towards normal is 
inevitable, whether or not the labyrinth recovers. It is of inter­
est that after acute uVD in frogs there is head torsion, which 
follows exactly the same time course as conjugate eye torsion in 
humans, and has been used to monitor drug effects on vestibu­
lar compensation.58
Electronystagmography at this stage adds little to clinical 
observation with Frenzel glasses, but it does create a permanent 
record in case questions are asked later about whether the 
nystagmus was really unidirectional and whether it was really 
suppressed by visual fixation. Caloric testing contributes nothing
Figure 48.4 The change in torsional eye position before and after unilateral 
vestibular deafferentation. Fundus photographs of the left and right eye of a 
patient before (top row) and after (bottom row) right vestibular neurectomy. 
The right fundus is on the left of the figure, and the left fundus is on the right 
of the figure. After the operation, there is conjugate tonic rightwards torsion 
(i.e. clockwise from the patient's point of view) of the 12 o'clock point of each 
eye. The change in torsional eye position measures 17° in the right eye (from 7° 
rightwards torsion to 24° rightwards torsion) and 15° on the left (from 5° 
leftwards torsion to 10° rightwards torsion). The conjugate torsion is part of the 
ocular tilt reaction.
Investigations
The subjective visual horizontal (SVH) test is the single most 
useful investigation in the acute phase of suspected vestibular 
neuritis. Often, perhaps even always, there is a deviation of the 
SVH, sometimes by more than 20°, and this is always towards 
the side of the lesion.47-55 In our laboratory, this test is per­
formed in a dark room, and the seated patient is asked to set, 
using a push-button controller, a dim-illuminated light-bar 
until it looks to be aligned with her or his perceived gravita­
tional horizontal. In some laboratories, patients are asked to set 
a bar to the gravitational vertical, but we find that most patients 
have a better intuitive understanding of the horizontal than of 
the vertical and that the settings of the vertical are not the 
same as those of the horizontal.56 In any case, in order for the 
test to be valid, either the room must be totally dark, apart from 
the light-bar, or there must be some other way that all visual 
clues are excluded, such as a ganzfeld or a rotating dome.57
A normal subject can set such a light-bar within 2-3° of the 
true gravitational horizontal, every time, and with either eye.
1 week post-operative
Change in Ocular Torsion (deg)
Figure 48.5 Ocular torsion and the subjective visual horizontal. The 
relationship between the change of ocular torsion and the corresponding 
change in the subjective visual horizontal (SVH) 1 week after unilateral 
vestibular neurectomy in 22 patients. The average value of the change in ocular 
torsion was calculated for each patient and correlated with that patient's 
average change in the SVH. The correlation (r = 0.95) is significant. (From 
Curthoys et al. Exp Brain Res 1991; 85: 218-25.49)
  

Peripheral vestibular disorders and diseases in adults 
805
in the acute stage, and it might even produce misleading results. 
The spontaneous nystagmus might be so vigorous and the adap- 
tive VOR suppression so effective that there might be no 
response even to 0°C irrigation of either ear. The caloric test 
will become useful after about 3-4 days.
Natural history
The acute uVD syndrome that occurs with acute vestibular 
neuritis, i.e. the vertigo, the vomiting, the nystagmus and the 
ocular tilt reaction, largely resolves within a few days by the 
process of vestibular compensation. In fact, one can be confi­
dent that if the uVD syndrome does not resolve, then the 
patient has not had acute vestibular neuritis. The uVD syn­
drome resolves, i.e. the patient gets better, even if the labyrinth 
does not. That is, a caloric test done at any time after the 
patient has recovered from the uVD syndrome could show 
absent or severely depressed warm and cool responses from the 
affected ear. Superficially, it is as if the patient had a vestibular 
nerve section. In this regard, sudden unilateral vestibular loss is 
fundamentally different from sudden unilateral hearing loss. 
The patient with sudden unilateral hearing loss can tell if his 
bad ear has not recovered because his hearing would be no 
better. In contrast, the patient with sudden unilateral vestibular 
loss cannot tell that his ear has recovered, since his balance will 
get better, i.e. the acute uVD syndrome will resolve, whether or 
not the ear itself recovers.
After acute vestibular neuritis, as after surgical uVD, about 
20% of patients experience continuing vestibular symptoms, 
not vertigo but oscillopsia and a persistent subjective imbal­
ance, particularly in the dark and particularly on uneven sur­
faces. That is, they develop CVI, which is qualitatively the 
same as that which patients with bilateral loss of vestibular 
function experience.19 It seems that, for some patients, one 
labyrinth is not enough to avoid retinal image slip during head 
movement and to provide perfect balance in the dark or on 
uneven ground. Vestibular rehabilitation can be helpful.59
As shown by caloric testing, lateral SCC function will pro­
gressively recover in only about 50% of patients60”63 (Figure 
48.6). In a few there will be more attacks of acute peripheral 
vestibulopathy, either on the same side or on the opposite side, 
a condition called bilateral sequential vestibular neuritis.64 If 
the repeated attacks are all on the same side, it will be difficult 
to be sure that the patient is not developing Meniere’s disease, 
especially if there is recovery of vestibular function on caloric 
tests between the attacks.
After acute vestibular neuritis, about 20% of patients will 
develop typical posterior SCC-type BPPV. This is of some inter­
est, since it implies that in these patients there must be surviv­
ing, functioning receptors and neurones innervating the 
ampulla of the posterior SCC.65,66 It is important to distinguish 
this positional vertigo from the spontaneous vertigo of recur­
rent vestibular neuritis and from the ataxia that those patients 
who develop CVI after acute vestibular neuritis experience.
The observation that some patients develop posterior SCC 
BPPV after acute vestibular neuritis has recently led to work
showing that in some, perhaps even in most, patients with 
acute vestibular neuritis, anterior and lateral SCC function is 
lost while posterior SCC function is preserved. The most parsi­
monious explanation of this finding is that in most cases of 
acute vestibular neuritis only the superior vestibular nerve, 
innervating the anterior and lateral SCCs and the utricle, is 
affected, while the inferior vestibular nerve, innervating the 
posterior SCC and the saccule, is spared.67,68
Treatment
There is no effective treatment for acute vestibular neuritis. 
Despite the fact that peripheral vestibular function will recover 
in only about half of the patients, they will all recover from the 
acute uVD syndrome without any treatment. In particular, 
there is no convincing evidence that corticosteroids shorten or 
ameliorate the uVD syndrome, help peripheral vestibular func­
tion to recover or reduce the chance of the patient developing 
CVI. Nonetheless, it appears that early mobilization and early 
vestibular rehabilitation might reduce the incidence of disabil­
ity from the CVI, which will develop in about 20% of those 
patients with acute vestibular neuritis whose peripheral vestibu­
lar function fails to recover.59 Like acute facial palsy and some 
cases of sudden hearing loss, acute vestibular neuritis might be 
due to viral infection, perhaps with herpes simplex.69-71
Differential diagnosis
Cerebellar infarction
The main differential diagnosis of acute vestibular neuritis is 
acute cerebellar infarction.72,73 There are several ways to tell the 
difference clinically. First and foremost is the head-impulse test. 
In a patient with acute spontaneous vertigo, if the head-impulse 
test is positive, then the patient has acute vestibular neuritis, 
and if the head-impulse test is negative, the patient definitely 
does not have acute vestibular neuritis but might well have had 
a cerebellar infarct (Figure 48.7).
Second, with a cerebellar infarct the nystagmus might be 
bidirectional and might not be well suppressed by visual fixa­
tion—that is, it will be obvious even without Frenzel glasses. 
Third, a patient with a cerebellar infarct usually cannot stand 
without support even with eyes open, whereas the patient with 
acute vestibular neuritis usually can. If it is not possible to be 
sure clinically that the patient has acute vestibular neuritis, 
then it is usually because the examining clinician is insuffi­
ciently familiar with the technique of the head-impulse test to 
show that it is convincingly positive. In that case, imaging will 
be required, and since many acute cerebellar infarcts are 
missed by CT, this means MRI (Figure 48.8). Nonetheless, 
cerebellar infarction is worth diagnosing, for two reasons: first, 
because about one-third of cases will develop swelling causing 
potentially lethal, posterior fossa intracranial hypertension 
requiring urgent neurosurgical decompression, and second, 
because many cases are due to vertebral artery dissection74 or 
cardiogenic embolism and they might require long-term oral 
anticoagulation or even cardiac surgery in order to prevent 
recurrences—for a review see Amarenco.75
  

806 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Spontaneous nystagmus record (Subject Supine)
Fixation light on 
Time (sec) 
Fixation light on 
Time (sec)
Caloric stimuli
Right ear
60
40
20
+20
-20
\ i
0 I 
20 
40 
I 
60 
80
Time (sec)
Left ear
60
40
.€  
20
+20
20
40
60
80
Time (sec)
60
<-> 
40
CT>
£
nj5
20
0
+20
I 
l
D 
20 
40 
60
80
Time (sec)
-20
-20
SPON
R30
R44
L30
L44
CP%
DP%
STIMULATOR
<1
8
7
20
14
39
10
Open 25 secs
Figure 48.6 Caloric test in recovered vestibular neuritis. There is a 39% impairment of right lateral semicircular canal function ('canal paresis’ or ’CP'), but no 
spontaneous nystagmus even in the dark and no directional preponderance. The patient had presented to an emergency room 3 months previously with an attack of 
acute spontaneous vertigo with nausea and vomiting. There had been no loss of hearing, no headache and no other symptoms suggesting brainstem dysfunction. At 
the time, there was third-degree left-beating nystagmus, and the head impulse test (see Figure 48.7) had been positive to the right. The patient was admitted to 
hospital but was well enough to go home 3 days later. A caloric test a week later showed a total right canal paresis, but the patient was well enough to return to 
work. When this caloric test was done 3 months later, there were no clinical abnormalities and the patient was feeling ’lOOo/o’.
  

Peripheral vestibular disorders and diseases in adults 
807
Figure 48.7 (A) Clinical method of the horizontal head-impulse test in a 
patient who has had a right vestibular nerve section. The examiner turns the 
patient's head, as rapidly as possible, only about 15° to one side and observes 
the ability of the patient to keep fixating on a distant target. While the 
examiner turns the patient's head towards the normal left side (top row), the 
patient is able to keep fixating on the target. In contrast, when the examiner 
turns the patient's head to the right, the horizontal vestibuo-ocular reflex fails: 
the patient cannot keep fixating on the target (e), so that she needs to make a 
voluntary rapid eye movement, i.e. a saccade, back to target (f) after the head 
impulse has finished; this can be easily observed by the examiner. This indicates 
severe loss of right lateral semicircular functions. In doing the test, it is essential 
that the head be turned as rapidly as possible, as otherwise smooth pursuit eye 
movements will compensate for the head turn. (From Halmagyi GM, Cremer PD. 
Assessment and treatment of dizziness. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2000; 68: 
129-36.) (B) Scleral search coil recordings of a positive-head impulse test in a 
patient who has had a right vestibular nerve section. Horizontal position (top 
row) and velocity (bottom row) of the left eye and of the head during a 
leftwards head impulse (left column) and during a rightwards head impulse 
(right column). During the leftwards head rotation, the eye rotates by exactly 
the same amount and at the same velocity as the head, so that the line of sight 
(gaze) remains almost perfectly stable. In contrast, during the rightwards head 
rotation, the eye rotates much more slowly, so that gaze shifts with the head, 
away from the target. The patient needs to make three saccades (arrows) in 
order to refixate the target. Note that the eye traces have been inverted for 
ease of comparison with the head traces. (Courtesy of Dr ST Aw, Sydney.)
Labyrinthine infarction
This should not be confused with acute vestibular neuritis, 
because the internal auditory artery, a branch of the anterior 
inferior cerebellar artery, also supplies the cochlea, so there 
should always be a severe or total acute unilateral hearing loss 
due to cochlear infarction in cases of labyrinthine infarction. 
That notwithstanding, there are rare cases of acute unilateral 
vestibulopathy, attributed by some to a branch occlusion of the 
internal auditory artery, producing infarction of only the 
labyrinth but sparing the cochlea.76
Autoimmune inner ear disease
This is an increasingly popular explanation for obscure cases 
of bilateral, asynchronous, asymmetrical cochlear hearing 
loss usually without but sometimes with vestibular involve- 
ment.77 While entities such as Cogan’s syndrome have been 
clearly defined and present with a clinical picture resembling 
acute vestibular neuritis,78 autoimmune inner ear disease is 
not a diagnosis that should be entertained in a patient 
with acute unilateral loss of vestibular function and normal 
hearing.
100 
200 
300 
400
100 
200 
300 
400
Time (ms)
Yaw Impulse
Intact side
Lesioned side
& 200
2r 100
  

808 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Figure 48.8 Cerebellar infarction. T2-weighted axial (A) and T1 -weighted parasagittal (B) MRI scans showing extensive infarction in the territory of the left 
posterior inferior cerebellar artery. The patient had presented to an emergency room with an attack of acute spontaneous vertigo with nausea and vomiting a week 
after a 24-h aeroplane flight. At the time, the patient was unable to stand and had third-degree left-beating nystagmus but a negative head-impulse test. A CT scan 
was normal. The patient was admitted to hospital, and MRI the next day showed not only this cerebellar infarct but also a small right parietal infarct which 
appeared to be older than the cerebellar infarct. The patient did recall a 4-day episode of numbness in the left hand some three years previously. Note that there is 
no brainstem infarction but there is compresson of the medulla. The patient made a full functional recovery in a month. Transoesophageal echocardiocardiography 
showed a small atrial septal defect which was successfully patched non-invasively. This case illustrates the importance of recognizing paradoxical embolism, which 
can present as a cerebellar infarct, with acute spontaneous vertigo.
Meniere’s disease
In some patients with Meniere’s disease, the tinnitus and deaf­
ness only begin after many years of repeated vertigo attacks. In 
our clinic, one patient had recurrent attacks of spontaneous 
vertigo, with fluctuating lateral SCC function in one ear on 
caloric testing for 16 years before she developed tinnitus and a 
fluctuating hearing loss with a positive transtympanic electro- 
cochleogram in the same ear. In general terms, if peripheral 
vestibular function does not recover after acute unilateral 
vestibular loss, it is not likely to have been due to Meniere’s 
disease.
Meniere’s disease 
Clinical features
Repeated attacks of spontaneous vertigo with nausea and 
vomiting represent the characteristic early clinical feature of 
Meniere’s disease, together with a low-frequency hearing loss 
(Figure 48.9) a low-frequency tinnitus and fullness, all in the 
one ear. The vertigo attacks usually last a few hours, but the 
tinnitus and hearing loss might continue for days. The attacks 
might occur days, months or even years apart. At first, after 
each attack of vertigo is over, both vestibular function and 
cochlear function recover, so that the caloric test and the
Figure 48.9 Audiogram in Meniere's disease. Patient SW, a female aged 44, 
began to have attacks of acute spontaneous vertigo and left aural fullness 
and then tinnitus in May 1999. When she was first seen, in between two 
attacks, in July 1999, the pure-tone audiogram showed only a high-frequency 
loss, probably due to noise exposure. Two weeks later, she had developed a 
low-frequency loss on the left. A low-sodium diet was recommended, and the 
low-frequency loss resolved within 6 weeks and the attacks of vertigo stopped. 
(Courtesy of Dr M Karlberg, Sydney and Lund.)
  

Peripheral vestibular disorders and diseases in adults 
809
pure-tone audiogram will be normal in between attacks. Later, 
after more attacks of vertigo, a permanent loss of auditory and 
of vestibular function in the affected ear becomes apparent, 
even in between attacks. While Meniere’s disease can remit 
permanently at any stage, if it does progress, then in the late 
stages the patient still has vertigo attacks as well as continual 
tinnitus in a deaf ear that distorts and recruits.
A Meniere’s attack can have three phases, each defined by 
the direction of the spontaneous nystagmus.79 The first is the so- 
called ‘irritative’ phase, in which the nystagmus, usually just 
horizontal, sometimes horizontal-torsional, beats towards the 
affected ear. This phase lasts less than 1 h, and few physicians 
ever get to see it. The second is the ‘ablative’ phase, in which 
the nystagmus beats away from the affected ear. This phase lasts 
several hours, sometimes even a day or two. The third is the 
‘recovery’ phase, in which the nystagmus again beats towards 
the affected side and which lasts about as long as the second 
phase.
An interesting explanation, based on the nature of vestibu­
lar compensation, has been proposed for the recovery phase. 
Consider a patient with right-sided Meniere’s disease. During 
the second phase, the stage of peripheral hypofunction, sponta­
neous neural activity in the right vestibular nucleus is reduced 
relative to the left, so that the nystagmus will beat towards the 
left. After some hours, brainstem compensation will have partly 
restored the level of spontaneous activity in the right vestibular 
nucleus, so that the left-beating nystagmus will have abated 
even though right peripheral vestibular function has not yet 
begun to recover. As the attack remits and right peripheral 
vestibular function does recover, the resting activity in the right 
vestibular nucleus will now be higher than on the unaffected 
left side so that the nystagmus will now beat towards the right,
i.e. there will be a recovery-phase nystagmus.80
Some patients, particularly those with advanced Meniere’s 
disease, develop drop attacks, also called Tumarkin or otolithic 
crises. In these, the patient simply drops to the ground without 
warning, ‘like a sack of potatoes’, and can sustain a fracture or 
other injury.81,82 Lermoyez described patients with Meniere’s 
disease whose hearing improved temporarily following a vertigo 
attack.83,84
Natural history
The natural history of Meniere’s disease is variable. Some 
patients have a single bout lasting only a few months, with 
multiple attacks, and never develop any permanent loss of 
cochlear or vestibular function. Others have a relentlessly pro­
gressive course and end up with no useful hearing in one ear. If 
they are fortunate, they will have no more vertigo attacks and 
will not have much tinnitus—the so-called bumt-out Meniere’s 
disease. Unfortunately, the second ear eventually becomes 
involved in about half of the patients.85”87
Diagnosis
A common clinical problem is the patient presenting with 
repeated attacks of spontaneous vertigo who is unaware of any
temporary hearing loss, or of any temporary tinnitus or any full­
ness in one ear at the time of the vertigo attacks, and who has 
no clinical abnormalities, a normal audiogram and a normal 
caloric test. Could this patient have Meniere’s disease? The 
answer is yes. The patient might in fact have had a temporary 
low-frequency hearing loss during the vertigo attack but would 
not have noticed it. Patients often do not notice a slight hear­
ing loss in one ear, particularly if the loss is mainly below 1 kHz, 
the centre of the speech spectrum, and particularly during an 
incapacitating attack of vertigo and vomiting. On the other 
hand, there are patients who have repeated spontaneous vertigo 
attacks for many years before they develop unilateral tinnitus 
and hearing loss, and the diagnosis finally becomes obvious. 
The American Academy of Otolaryngology Head and Neck 
Surgery has published diagnostic criteria for Meniere’s disease, 
criteria which are more useful for clinical trials of proposed 
treatments for Meniere’s disease than for management of indi­
vidual patients.88
In a patient with repeated attacks of acute spontaneous ver­
tigo, the diagnosis of definite Meniere’s disease can be made by 
showing an improvement, either spontaneous or in response to 
a dehydrating agent such as glycerol—the Klockhoff test—in 
the unilateral low-frequency hearing loss. It can also be made 
by showing an improvement in the unilateral vestibular loss 
on at least two occasions, or by obtaining a positive electro- 
cochleogram. Electrocochleography is most sensitive and most 
specific for Meniere’s disease when tone-burst as well as click 
stimuli are used and when the responses are recorded transtym- 
panically at the promontory (Figure 48.10).89,90 Giving patients 
4 g of oral sodium chloride for 3 days before the ECOG might 
increase the sensitivity of the test.91 In the authors’ view, the 
diagnosis of probable Meniere’s disease can be made if the 
patient reports two or more attacks of fluctuating unilateral tin­
nitus, fullness and hearing loss with vertigo all at the same time; 
the diagnosis of possible Meniere’s disease is valid even with 
normal hearing if the patient has had two or more attacks of 
acute spontaneous vertigo and has a canal paresis on caloric 
testing, especially if the canal paresis recovers.92 The patient 
with many attacks of acute spontaneous vertigo and normal 
caloric tests is more likely to have vestibular migraine.
Treatment
Strict sodium restriction (urinary sodium less than 50 mmol/day) 
can be effective in some patients. In our experience, diuretics 
are not as useful and can produce unwanted side-effects, such as 
postural hypotension and hypokalaemia.93 Local pressure treat­
ment might work.94 Endolymphatic sac surgery (shunting, 
removal, etc.) is popular but not always effective in stopping 
either the vertigo attacks or the tinnitus, or in saving the hear­
ing.95,96 A labyrinthectomy, surgical or preferably pharmaco- 
toxic with intratympanic gentamicin,97-99 can stop the vertigo 
attacks and sometimes even the tinnitus.100 A vestibular nerve 
section stops the vertigo attacks and also preserves the hearing. 
Systemic aminoglycosides such as streptomycin or gentamicin 
have been used in patients with advanced bilateral Meniere’s
  

810 
Vestibular disorders and their management
(ms)
Figure 48.10 (A) Transtympanic electrocochleogram showing averaged 
responses to 90-dB clicks in August 1999 from the patient whose audiogram is 
shown in Figure 48.9. The amplitude of the action potential (AP) is 7.5 |iV, and 
the latency is 2.3 ms; the amplitude of the summating potential (SP) is 3.0 nV, 
giving an SP/AP ratio of 40%. The patient whose audiogram is shown in Figure 
48.9 had a subjective threshold of 25dB nHL for the click stimulus. The mean 
SP/AP ratio of patients with definite Meniere's disease who have subjective 
click thresholds below 40dBnHL is 37%  (Adapted from Gibson WPR, Arenberg 
IK. Electrocochleography in the electrophysiologic diagnosis of endolymphatic 
hydrops. In: Kaufman I, Arenberg IK, eds. Dizziness and Balance Disorders. 
Amsterdam: Kugler, 1993: 477-85).
(B) Transtympanic electrocochleogram showing large negative summating 
potentials (SP), in response to 16 ms, 1 kHz and 2 kHz tone-bursts at 80 and 
100dB nHL in the same patient as in (A). The mean absolute negative SP levels 
in patients with definitive Meniere's disease, who have subjective thresholds 
below 40dB nHL are as follows: 2 kHz, 100dB > 6nV; 2 kHz, 80dB > 4 pV; 1 kHz, 
100 dB > 4nV. These results show that tone burst ECOG responses are more 
likely to be abnormal in patients with Meniere's disease than click-evoked 
responses.90 (Courtesy of Prof W Gibson, Sydney.)
disease in order to ablate vestibular function.101 All ablative 
procedures on the labyrinth, even if unilateral, carry the risk of 
producing a mild but permanent chronic vestibular insuffi­
ciency, and it is advisable to begin vestibular prehabilitation 
before any ablative procedures are performed. Those whose 
hearing is below the reach of standard hearing aids can be 
helped by cochlear implantation.
Mechanism and aetiology
Endolymphatic hypertension causing enlargement of the 
cochlear and vestibular ducts, ‘endolymphatic hydrops’, is gen­
erally accepted as the common mechanism of Meniere’s disease. 
The endolymph has a total volume of about 100 ml, and is, like 
intracellular fluid, rich in potassium, while the surrounding 
perilymph is rich in sodium.102 The endolymphatic sac, situated 
under the endosteum of the temporal bone, connects with the 
cochlea and labyrinth via the endolymphatic duct, which 
traverses the bony vestibular aqueduct. One theory of the 
attacks is that the longitudinal flow of endolymph along the 
cochlear duct103 becomes obstructed by some ‘metabolic debris’. 
In response, the endolymphatic sac increases its secretion of a
(ms)
hormone called saccin, which in turn increases endolymphatic 
fluid secretion in the cochlear duct. Endolymphatic pressure 
builds up, and finally the obstruction is overcome, leading to 
the vertigo attack.104 Endolymphatic hydrops supposedly pushes 
on the basilar membrane and produces an offset of the cochlear 
summating potential which can be detected by electro­
cochleography (Figure 48.10).
Many different inner ear or temporal bone diseases such as 
syphilis, mumps, Cogan’s syndrome, trauma, and even chronic 
suppurative otitis media, can, after many years, produce the 
clinical picture of Meniere’s disease. The clinical picture is that 
of attacks of spontaneous vertigo developing in a patient with a 
known, often long-standing, unilateral hearing loss. This has 
been ascribed to delayed endolymphatic hydrops in the deaf 
ear 105 106 Sometimes the vertigo develops at the same time as a 
fluctuating hearing loss in the other previously normal ear, and 
then this is called contralateral delayed endolymphatic 
hydrops, and the mechanism is thought to be the development 
of autoimmunity to inner ear antigens.107,108 There might also 
be some evidence that autoimmunity has some role in ordinary 
Meniere’s disease, as either cause or effect.109
  

Peripheral vestibular disorders and diseases in adults 
811
Differential diagnosis
A number of other diseases can produce a clinical picture 
resembling Meniere’s disease. Perilymph fistula is a difficult and 
contentious diagnosis, even at tympanotomy.110 Some would 
not make the diagnosis in the absence of obvious trauma or a 
history of stapes surgery and in the absence of an objective 
hearing loss, which is usually at the high frequencies. Auto­
immune inner ear disease can produce a picture indistinguish­
able from advanced bilateral Meniere’s disease, but the vertigo 
attacks are generally not as violent and the vestibular symptoms 
are not as obvious. 
However, the major differential diagnosis 
of early Meniere’s disease, before any permanent auditory or 
vestibular loss has developed, is vestibular migraine.
Vestibular migraine (also called migrainous vertigo)
Those who have migraine headaches have more vertigo than 
those who do not. Some migraineurs will sometimes have 
vertigo as their migrainous aura, and will then go on to develop 
a typical hemicranial headache with nausea and vomiting.111,112 
A few will have a more florid form, with brainstem symptoms 
and signs including coma and this has been called basilar 
migraine.113 Most will have, apart from the attacks of headache, 
repeated attacks of spontaneous vertigo, typically lasting less 
than 1 h, with nausea and even vomiting, but without any hear­
ing disturbance or headache at the time.114,115 The potential 
mechanism by which migraine might produce vertigo attacks is 
as contentious as the mechanism of migraine itself. Neverthe­
less, vertigo attacks in migraineurs can respond to medications
used to treat migraine headaches, such as an ergot or a triptan, 
or even to aspirin. Some patients respond to regular preventa­
tive therapy with a beta-blocker, a tricyclic, a calcium channel 
blocker, sodium valproate or methysergide.116-118 Since transient 
neurological events of obscure origin, in the absence of 
migraine headaches, are common enough in young people,119 it 
is likely that migraine can cause vertigo attacks in patients who 
have never had migraine headaches. Migraine can cause a 
stroke and a permanent neurological deficit, and there are 
reports of migraine producing a permanent unilateral loss of 
vestibular function 
and of auditory function. 
There is 
also a rare dominantly inherited disorder in which patients 
have migraine headaches as well as repeated attacks of acute 
spontaneous vertigo which eventually lead to severe or total 
bilateral loss of vestibular function.122 Those with migraine 
appear more likely to develop BPPV than those without.123
Benign paroxysmal positioning vertigo
BPPV is the single most frequent cause of vertigo, and in many 
patients the diagnosis can be made on the history alone.
To understand the mechanism of BPPV and its treatment, 
it is important to consider what happens if there are otoconia 
in the duct or on the cupula of an SCC. The otolithic mem­
brane, structurally similar to the tectorial membrane which 
overlies the organ of Corti, is a gelatinous sheet containing 
calcium carbonate crystals (relative density 2.7), i.e. otoconia 
(Figure 48.11). The cilia of the macular hair cells are embedded
Figure 48.11 (A) Scanning electronmicrograph of human otoconia. Otoconia are 3-5 pm in length; their bodies are rounded and each end is pyramidal. The angle 
between the faces is about 110-120°. Otoconia in the semicircular canal duct produce benign paroxysmal positioning vertigo. (Courtesy of Professor Y. Harada, 
Hiroshima.) (B) Scanning electronmicrograph showing otolothic layer of the utricular macula from guinea pig. The thickness of the layer is not even-it is 
particularly thin at the striola (arrows). Small otoconia predominate on the surface. (From Harada Y. Atlas of the Ear by Scanning Electron Microscopy. Lancaster: 
MTP Press, 1983.)
  

812 
Vestibular disorders and their management
in this membrane and are displaced by shearing forces applied 
to the membrane. The shearing forces are produced by linear 
acceleration, in particular by gravity. If some of these otoconia 
find their way into a SCC, either the duct (canalolithiasis) or 
the cupula (cupulolithiasis), changes in head position will shift 
the otoconia and displace the cupula, either directly in the case 
of cupulolithiasis, or indirectly by fluid movement in the case of 
canalolithiasis—for review see Lanska and Remler124 or Furman 
and Cass.125 The cupular displacement produces a sense of rota­
tion, i.e. paroxysmal positioning vertigo, and the paroxysmal 
positioning nystagmus. The nystagmus will be in the plane of 
the stimulated SCC.24 Since the otoconia are almost always in 
the posterior SCC duct, the nystagmus is almost always verti­
cal-torsional, with the quick phases upwards and towards the 
affected ear; in gaze towards the affected ear, the nystagmus is 
mainly torsional, while in gaze away it is mainly vertical. Since 
the nystagmus produced by otoconia in the posterior SCC is not 
only torsional but often very vigorous, it is not much suppressed 
by vision and so is obvious even without Frenzel glasses. If the 
otoconia are in the lateral SCC, the nystagmus is horizontal.
CLINICAL FEATURES OF BENIGN 
PAROXYSMAL POSITIONING VERTIGO
A. Left posterior semicircular canal
1. Brief vertigo on turning in bed or on looking up,
2. Paroxysmal vertigo with left Dix-Hallpike test.
3. Paroxysmal nystagmus with left Dix-Hallpike test: 
torsional-vertical quick phases are counterclockwise 
(from the patient’s point of view) and upwards.
4. No vertigo or nystagmus in the right Dix-Hallpike 
test.
B. Left lateral semicircular canal
1. More prolonged vertigo aggravated as well as 
triggered by lying down.
2. Severe paroxysmal vertigo on turning from right 
Dix-Hallpike to left Dix-Hallpike position.
3. Prolonged horizontal nystagmus on turning from 
right to left Dix-Hallpike position—can be left- 
beating (geotropic—canalolithiasis) or right-beating 
(ageotropic—cupulolithiasis).
4< Briefer less severe vertigo and horizontal nystagmus 
on rolling from left to right Dix-Hallpike position; 
the nystagmus can be right-beating or left-beating.
The history is often unmistakable: ‘Doctor, I feel dizzy 
whenever I turn in bed at night, or I hang out washing on the 
clothes-line, or look under my car.’ Some patients say that they 
are dizzy all the time, but what they usually mean is that the 
attacks of BPPV are so frequent and so unpleasant that they still 
feel unwell in between the attacks. In most patients, the BPPV 
will occur in bouts lasting several weeks and then it sponta­
neously remits, only to return weeks, months or even years
later.126 The patient with repeated bouts of vertigo over several 
decades with no abnormalities on examination most likely has 
BPPV.
In most patients with BPPV, there are no other symptoms 
and there is no relevant abnormality of vestibular or auditory 
function. In a few, BPPV occurs during the course of a 
progressive inner ear disease such as Meniere’s disease or 
Cogan’s syndrome.127 Only rarely is a clinical picture similar 
to BPPV produced by a posterior fossa tumour, malformation 
or degeneration.128
The positional test, as described by Barany, developed by 
Dix, and popularized by Hallpike,103 is the cornerstone of diag­
nosis. The principle of the test is to make any otoconia in the 
posterior SCC move, and so provoke vertigo and nystagmus. 
Consider a patient with right posterior SCC BPPV, seated on a 
bed (Figure 48.13). In this position, the posterior SCC is 
gravitationally vertical, and its ampulla is its lowermost part 
(Figure 48.12); any otoconia in the duct will have come to rest 
next to the cupula. The patient’s head is now turned to the 
right and the patient is suddenly pitched backwards (in the 
plane of the posterior SCC) until the head is hanging over 
the end of the bed; now the midpoint of the posterior SCC 
duct, rather than the ampulla, is the lowermost point. The oto­
conia will now fall down from the cupula and come to rest at 
the midpoint of the duct. As they fall away from the cupula, 
they create a negative fluid pressure and so pull on the cupula, 
producing an ampullofugal deflection, which is excitatory for 
posterior SCC primary afferent neurones. As a result, there is 
not only a brief—20 s or so—paroxysm of vertigo but also of 
nystagmus with upbeating and clockwise quick phases (from the 
patient’s point of view). If the patient is now slowly rotated by 
180° about the body long axis towards his left until the left side 
of his face is on the bed, the posterior SCC will have been 
inverted, so that the crus communis is now the lowermost 
point. At this stage, the otoconia should move further along the 
SCC duct and produce another, less severe, paroxysm of vertigo 
and clockwise upbeating nystagmus. The patient, still face 
down, now stands up, and the otoconia will continue along the 
crus communis back into the vestibule. This is in essence the 
particle repositioning manoeuvre as described by Epley.129 Both 
Epley’s130 and Semont’s131 manoeuvre will stop the BPPV 
attacks in most patients.132,133 Patients can even learn to treat 
themselves.134 Those who are resistant to repeated repositioning 
manoeuvres can be cured by surgical occlusion of the posterior 
SCC.135,136 Post-traumatic cases in particular can be bilateral 
and difficult to cure. It is possible, but can be difficult in some 
patients, to distinguish unilateral from bilateral BPPV.137
Lateral canal BPPV is a variant in which the nystagmus 
is horizontal and usually geotropic—that is, it beats towards 
the lowermost ear, indicating that the otoconia in the duct 
are falling towards the cupula.138 They also fall away from the 
cupula when the patient rolls onto the normal side, and this 
produces a less severe vertigo and a less marked, again geo­
tropic, nystagmus. Occasionally, the nystagmus is so brisk in each 
side as to make it difficult to be certain of the side of the problem.
  

Peripheral vestibular disorders and diseases in adults 
813
Figure 48.12 (a) Normal human bony labyrinth. Dissection of the right 
labyrinth in a dry skull showing the relationships of the lateral (L), posterior (P) 
and anterior (i.e. superior) (A) semicircular canal ducts and the common crus (C) 
of the anterior and posterior semicircular canals, (b) Normal human 
membranous labyrinth. Shown in a three-dimensional CISS (Constructive 
Interference in the Steady State) MR image of the right inner ear, showing the 
relationships of the lateral (L), posterior (P) and anterior (i.e. superior) (S) 
semicircular canals, the common crus (CC), the vestibule (V), and the basal, 
middle and apical turns of the cochlea (C). (Courtesy of M. Todd, Sydney.)
Figure 48.13 The Epley particle repositioning manoeuvre for left posterior SCC BPPV. The patient is rapidly reclined into the left Dix-Hallpike position (1) and remains 
in that position until both the vertigo and nystagmus have well and truly disappeared and the otoconial particles have settled into the lowest portion of the posterior 
SCC duct. The patient's head is slowly turned by 90° into the right Dix-Hallpike position (2-5) so that the particles are guided into the common crus. Then the patient 
slowly rolls onto the right shoulder and the head is turned another 90° so that the particles fall via the common crus back into the vestibule. (From Halmagyi GM, 
Cremer PD. Assessment and treatment of dizziness. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2000; 68:129-36 with permission from the BMJ Publishing Group.)
Identifying a null head position helps.139 Treatment of lateral 
SCC BPPV is less successful than that of posterior SCC BPPV 
and largely consists of having the patient sleep only on the unaf- 
fected side so that the otoconia can find their way out of the lat­
eral SCC back into the vestibule.140 Sometimes there is a mixed 
picture, with a conversion of lateral to posterior SCC BPPV or 
vice versa. Sometimes the otoconia adhere to the lateral SCC
cupula, so that the nystagmus and vertigo are persistent and the 
quick phases are ageotropic—a clinical picture that can suggest 
a central rather than peripheral vestibulopathy.141
Bilateral vestibulopathy
Bilateral loss of vestibular function causes not vertigo but ataxia 
and oscillopsia, i.e. chronic vestibular insufficiency.16,142 In the
  

814 
Vestibular disorders and their management
absence of any significant and relevant hearing loss, it can cause 
some diagnostic difficulties, since an aural cause might not be 
considered in the differential diagnosis of ataxia.143 In fact, the 
patient does not have a cerebellar ataxia, and will be able to 
walk well heel-to-toe. Thus although the patient will complain 
of imbalance while walking, the only abnormality will be an 
inability to keep standing on a soft yielding surface such as a 
mattress, with the eyes closed, without falling. A bidirectionally 
positive horizontal and vertical head-impulse test will make the 
diagnosis on the spot; otherwise, caloric and rotational tests will 
show bilaterally absent or severely impaired responses. The 
most common known cause of bilateral vestibular loss without 
hearing loss is gentamicin toxicity. While systemic gentamicin 
is not very cochleotoxic in humans, as far as the vestibular 
system is concerned there is no safe dose, and any patient who 
notices imbalance after a hospital admission has gentamicin 
vestibulotoxicity until proven otherwise.144 In a few patients 
bilateral vestibular loss is inherited, sometimes in combination 
with a spinocerebellar ataxia. Their hearing is usually normal. 
While it will be difficult to recognize a bilateral vestibulopathy 
in a patient who already has imbalance due to cerebellar ataxia, 
from examining stance and gait, the compensatory eye move­
ments in response to slow head turning are pathognomonic.145 
Since smooth pursuit is absent due to the cerebellar ataxia, and 
the vestibulo-ocular reflex is absent due to the peripheral 
vestibulopathy, even in response to slow head rotations the 
patient will be unable to make smooth compensatory eye move­
ments and can only produce a series of saccades. The differen­
tial diagnosis of the ataxia caused by bilateral vestibulopathy 
also includes a severe unilateral vestibulopathy, a sensory 
peripheral neuropathy, hydrocephalus and an early extra- 
pyramidal disorder such as Progressive Supranuclear Palsy or 
Parkinson’s disease.
Diagnoses unlikely to be correct in a 
patient presenting with vertigo
The purpose of this section is to draw attention to diagnoses 
that should be made with caution in any patient who has ver­
tigo, and with great caution in a patient who has only vertigo 
and no fixed loss of auditory or vestibular function and no neu­
rological symptoms or signs.
Middle ear disease
Acute otitis media does not cause vertigo unless there is a 
suppurative labyrinthitis. Chronic otitis media can, rarely, pro­
duce a Meniere-like picture due to secondary endolymphatic 
hydrops or Valsalva-induced vertigo due to perilymph fistula 
from a cholesteotoma. An oval or round window, post- 
traumatic or postoperative perilymph fistula can, now and 
then, produce vertigo, always with a hearing loss, and the 
cause is always obvious.
Acoustic neuroma
Only rarely does a vestibular schwannoma produce attacks of 
spontaneous vertigo, and even more rarely without some uni­
lateral loss of auditory or vestibular function.146
Vascular compression
Vascular loop compression is a validated cause of paroxysmal 
symptoms related to the trigeminal and to the facial nerve. 
While opinions are divided,147 the evidence that microvascular 
compression of the vestibular nerve causes paroxysmal vestibu­
lar symptoms or any symptoms at all is scanty.148 The anterior 
inferior cerebellar artery can normally loop into the internal 
auditory canal and is not a cause of symptoms. While patients 
with paroxysmal vertigo and simultaneous paroxysmal tinnitus 
might respond to treatment with carbamazepine,149 this does 
not prove that the cause of the vertigo is compression of the 
vestibulocochlear nerve.
Perilymph fistula
In almost all patients with perilymph fistula, there will have been 
an obvious surgical accidental cause or barotrauma and they will 
all have a unilateral or asymmetrical hearing loss in the affected 
ear. Spontaneous perilymph fistula is a dubious entity.110
Autoimmune ear disease
Autoimmune ear disease is a recognized although difficult-to- 
prove cause of bilateral, asymmetrical, progressive hearing 
loss.66 Patients with immune inner ear disease might also 
develop vestibular problems but not without hearing problems.
Transient vertebrobasilar ischaemia
Vertebrobasilar ischaemia is a difficult clinical diagnosis to make 
at any time but unlikely to be correct in a patient whose attacks 
consist only of vertigo without any other neurological symp­
toms either at the time of the vertigo or at any other time.150
Psychological aspects of vertigo and 
other vestibular disorders
In all this, it is important to remember that patients with 
chronic vestibular disorders, especially if the problem remains 
undiagnosed, untreated and unexplained, and especially if it is 
all attributed by the doctors to anxiety, tend to oblige and 
develop major problems with anxiety, panic and even agora­
phobia. While the psychological aspects of vestibular disorders 
are fully discussed in Chapter 53, it is worth emphasizing here 
that in the anxious dizzy patient one should ask why the patient 
is anxious, and if one can answer that and treat the cause of the 
dizziness, one will often relieve the anxiety as well.
  

Peripheral vestibular disorders and diseases in adults 
815
Acknowledgements
The long-standing, on-going support of the National Health 
and Medical Research Council, The Garnett Passe and 
Rodney Williams Memorial Foundation and the Royal Prince 
Alfred Hospital Neurology Department trustees is gratefully 
acknowledged.
References
1. Curthoys IS, Halmagyi GM. Vestibular compensation: a review of 
the oculomotor, neural, and clinical consequences of unilateral 
vestibular loss. ] Vestib Res 1995; 5: 67-107.
2. Vidal PP, de Waele C, Vibert N, Muhlethaler M. Vestibular com­
pensation revisited. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 119: 34-42.
3. Precht W, Shimazu H, Markham CH. A mechanism of central 
compensation of vestibular function following hemilabyrinthec- 
tomy. J Neurophysiol 1966; 29: 996-1010.
4. Graham BP, Dutia MB. Cellular basis of vestibular compensation: 
analysis and modelling of the role of the commissural inhibitory 
system. Exp Brain Res 2001; 137: 387-96.
5. Smith PF, Curthoys IS. Neuronal activity in the contralateral 
medial vestibular nucleus of the guinea pig following unilateral 
labyrinthectomy. Brain Res 1988; 444: 295-307.
6. Smith PF, Curthoys IS. Neuronal activity in the ipsilateral medial 
vestibular nucleus of the guinea pig following unilateral 
labyrinthectomy. Brain Res 1988; 444: 308-19.
7. Ris L, deWaele C, Serafin M, Vidal PP, Godaux E. Neuronal activ­
ity in the ipsilateral vestibular nucleus following unilateral 
labyrinthectomy in the alert guinea pig. J Neurophysiol 1995; 74: 
2087-99.
8. Ris L, Capron B, de Waele C, Vidal PP, Godaux E. Dissociations 
between behavioural recovery and restoration of vestibular activ­
ity in the unilabyrinthectomized guinea pig. J Physiol 1997; 500: 
509-22.
9. Newlands SD, Perachio AA. Compensation of horizontal canal 
related activity in the medial vestibular nucleus following unilat­
eral labyrinth ablation in the decerebrate gerbil. I. Type I neurons. 
Exp Brain Res 1990; 82: 359-72.
10. Newlands SD, Perachio AA. Compensation of horizontal canal 
related activity in the medial vestibular nucleus following unilat­
eral labyrinth ablation in the decerebrate gerbil. II. Type II 
neurons. Exp Brain Res 1990; 82: 373-83.
11. Peusner KD, Gamkrelidze G, Giaume C. Potassium currents 
and excitability in second-order auditory and vestibular neurons. 
J Neurosci Res 1998; 53: 511-20.
12. Yamanaka T, Him A, Cameron SA, Dutia MB. Rapid compen­
satory changes in GABA receptor efficacy in rat vestibular neu­
rones after unilateral labyrinthectomy. J Physiol (Lond) 2000; 523: 
413-24.
13. Xerri C, Gianni S, Manzoni D, Pompeiano O. Central compensa­
tion of vestibular deficits. I. Response characteristics of lateral 
vestibular neurons to roll tilt after ipsilateral labyrinth deaf­
ferentation. J Neurophysiol 1983; 50: 428-48.
14. Lacour M, Manzoni D, Pompeiano O, Xerri C. Central compen­
sation of vestibular deficits. III. Response characteristics of lateral 
vestibular neurons to roll tilt after contralateral labyrinth deaf­
ferentation. J Neurophysiol 1985; 54: 988-1005.
15. Zee DS, Preziosi T], Proctor LR. Bechterew’s phenomenon in a 
human patient. Ann Neurol 1982; 12: 495-6.
16. Hess K. Vestibulotoxic drugs and other causes of bilateral 
vestibulopathy. In: Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM, eds. Disorders of the 
Vestibular System. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996: 
360-73.
17. Syms CA, House JW. Idiopathic Dandy’s syndrome. Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1997; 116: 75-8.
18. Morland AB, Bronstein AM, Ruddock KH, Wooding DS. Oscil­
lopsia: visual function during motion in the absence of vestibulo­
ocular reflex. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiat 1998; 65: 828-35.
19. Reid CB, Eisenberg R, Halmagyi GM, Fagan PA. The outcome of 
vestibular nerve section for intractable vertigo: the patients’ point 
of view. Laryngoscope 1996; 106: 1553-6.
20. Waterston JA, Halmagyi GM. Unilateral vestibulotoxicity due to 
systemic gentamicin therapy. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1998; 118: 
474-8.
21. Cohen B. Hie vestibulo-ocular reflex arc. In: Komhuber HH, ed. 
Handbook of Sensory Physiology, vol. 11/2. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 
1974: 477-540.
22. Suzuki J-I, Cohen B. Head, eye, body and limb movements from 
semicircular canal nerves. Exp Neurol 1964; 10: 393-405.
23. Suzuki J-I, Cohen B, Bender MB. Compensatory eye movements 
induced by vertical semicircular canal stimulation. Exp Neurol 
1964; 10: 137-60.
24. Fetter M, Sievering F. Three-dimensional eye movement analysis 
in benign paroxysmal positioning vertigo and nystagmus. Acta 
Otolaryngol 1995; 115: 353-7.
25. Rottach KG, von Maydell RD, DiScenna AO, Zivotofsky AZ, 
Averbuch-Heller L, Leigh RJ. Quantitative measurements of eye 
movements in a patient with Tullio phenomenon. J Vestib Res 
1996; 6: 255-9.
26. Cremer PD, Minor LB, Carey JP, Della Santina CC. Eye move­
ments in patients with superior canal dehiscence syndrome align 
with the abnormal canal. Neurology 2000; 55: 1833-41.
27. Minor LB, Solomon D, Zinreich JS, Zee DS. Sound- and/or 
pressure-induced vertigo due to bone dehiscence of the superior 
semicircular canal. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 124: 
249-58.
28. Minor LB. Superior canal dehiscence syndrome. Am J Otol 2000; 
21: 9-19.
29. Brantberg K, Bergenius J, Mendel L, Witt H, Tribukait A, Ygge J. 
Symptoms, findings and treatment in patients with dehiscence of 
the superior semicircular canal. Acta Otolaryngol 2001; 121: 
68-75.
30. Gentine A, Eichorn J-L, Kopp C, Conraux C. Modelling the 
action of caloric stimulation of the vestibule. Acta Otolaryngol 
(Stockh) 1990; 110: 328-33.
31. Aw ST, Haslwanter T, Fetter M, Heimberger J, Todd MJ. Contri­
bution of the vertical semicircular canals to the caloric nystagmus. 
Acta Otolaryngol 1998; 118:618-2 7.
  

816 
Vestibular disorders and their management
32. Suzuki J-I, Tokumasu K, Goto K. Eye movements from single 
utricular nerve stimulation in the cat. A eta Otolaryngol 1969; 68: 
350-62.
33. MacDougall HG, Brizuela AE, Burgess AM, Curthoys IS. 
Be tween-subject variability and within-subject reliability of the 
human eye-movement response to bilateral galvanic (DC) 
vestibular stimulation. Exp Brain Res 2002; 144: 69-78.
34. Schneider E, Glasauer S, Dieterich M. Comparison of human ocu­
lar torsion patterns during natural and galvanic vestibular stimu­
lation. J Neurophysiol 2002; 87: 2064-73.
35. Dieterich M, Brandt T, Fries W. Otolith function in man. Results 
from a case of otolith Tullio phenomenon. Brain 1989; 112: 
1377-92.
36. Halmagyi GM. The history in the patient with vertigo. In: Baloh 
RW, Halmagyi GM, eds. Disorders of the Vestibular System. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1996: 171-7.
37. Zee DS, Fletcher W. Examination of the patient with vertigo. In: 
Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM, eds. Disorders of the Vestibular System. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1996: 178-90.
38. Strupp M, Arbusow V. Acute vestibulopathy. Curr Opin Neurol 
2001; 14: 11-20.
39. Strupp M, Brandt T. Vestibular neuritis. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 
1999; 55: 111-36.
40. Zee DS. Ophthalmoscopy in examination of patients with 
vestibular disorders. Ann Neurol 1978; 3: 373-4.
41. Halmagyi GM, Curthoys IS. A clinical sign of canal paresis. Arch 
Neurol 1988; 45: 737-9.
42. Halmagyi GM, Gresty MA, Gibson WPR. Ocular tilt reaction due 
to peripheral vestibular lesion. Ann Neurol 1979; 5: 80-3.
43. Riordan-Eva P, Harcourt JP, Faldon M, Brookes GB, Gresty MA. 
Skew deviation following vestibular nerve surgery. Ann Neurol 
1997; 41: 94-9.
44. Safran AB, Vibert D, Issoua D, Hausler R. Skew deviation 
following 
vestibular 
neuritis. 
Am J 
Opthal 
1994; 
118: 
238-45.
45. Vibert D, Hausler R, Safran AB, Koerner F. Ocular tilt reaction 
associated in sudden idiopathic unilateral peripheral cochleo­
vestibular loss. ORL 1995; 57: 310-15.
46. Vibert D, Hausler R, Safran AB, Koerner F. Diplopia from skew 
deviation in unilateral peripheral vestibular lesions. Acta 
Otolaryngol 1996; 116: 170-6.
47. Friedmann G. The judgement of the visual vertical and horizontal 
with peripheral and central vestibular lesions. Brain 1970; 93: 
313-28.
48. Friedmann G. The influence of unilateral labyrinthectomy on 
orientation in space. Acta Otolaryngol 1971; 71: 289-98.
49. Curthoys IS, Dai MJ, Halmagyi GM. Human torsional ocular posi­
tion before and after unilateral vestibular neurectomy. Exp Brain 
Res 1991; 85: 218-25.
50. Bohmer A, Richenmann J. The subjective visual vertical as a 
clinical parameter of vestibular function in peripheral vestibular 
disease. J Vestib Res 1995; 5: 35-45.
51. Tabak S, Collewijn H, Boumans LJJM. Deviation of the subjective 
vertical in long-standing unilateral vestibular loss. Acta Otolaryn­
gol (Stockh) 1997; 117: 1-6.
52. Tribukait A, Bergenius J, Brantberg K. Subjective visual horizon­
tal during follow-up after unilateral vestibular deafferentation 
with gentamicin. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1998; 118: 479-87.
53. Vibert D, Hausler R, Safran AB. Subjective visual vertical in 
unilateral peripheral vestibular diseases. J Vestib Res 1999; 9: 
145-52.
54. Vibert D, Hausler R. Long-term evolution of subjective visual ver­
tical after vestibular neurectomy and labyrinthectomy. Acta Oto­
laryngol 2000; 120: 620-2.
55. Borel L, Harlay F, Magnan J, Lacour M. How changes in vestibu­
lar and visual reference frames combine to modify body orienta­
tion in space. NeuroReport 2001; 12: 3137-41.
56. Betts GA, Curthoys IS. Visually perceived vertical and visually 
perceived horizontal are not orthogonal. Vision Res 1998; 38: 
1989-99.
57. Dieterich M, Brandt T. Ocular torsion and tilt of the subjective 
visual vertical are sensitive brainstem signs. Ann Neurol 1993; 33: 
292-9.
58. Flohr H, Bienhold H, Abe In W, Macskovics I. Concepts of 
vestibular compensation. In: Flohr H, Precht W, eds. Lesion-induced 
Neuronal Plasticity in Sensorimotor Systems. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 
1981: 153-72.
59. Strupp M, Arbusow V, Maag KP, Gall C, Brandt T. Vestibular 
exercises improve central vestibulospinal compensation after 
vestibular neuritis. Neurology 1998; 51: 838-44.
60. Bergenius J, Perols O. Vestibular neuritis: a follow-up study. Acta 
Otolaryngol 1999; 119: 895-9.
61. Okinaka Y, Sekitani T, Okazaki H, Miura M, Tahara T. Progress of 
caloric response of vestibular neuritis. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl 
(Stockh) 1993; 503: 18-22.
62. Herzog N, Allum JH, Probst R. Follow-up of caloric test response 
after acute peripheral vestibular dysfunction. HNO 1997; 45: 
123-7 [in German].
63. Schmid-Priscoveanu A, Bohmer A, Obzina H, Straumann D. 
Caloric and search-coil head-impulse testing in patients after 
vestibular neuritis. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol 2001; 2: 72-8.
64. Schuknecht HF, Witt RL. Acute bilateral sequential vestibular 
neuritis. Am J Otolaryngol 1985; 6: 255-7.
65. Buchele W, Brandt T. Vestibular neuritis—horizontal semicircular 
canal paresis? Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1988; 42: 157-61.
66. Murofushi T, Halmagyi GM, Yavor RA, Colebatch JG. Vestibular 
evoked myogenic potentials in vestibular neuritis: an indicator of 
inferior vestibular nerve involvement. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 1996; 122: 845-8.
67. Fetter M, Dichgans J. Vestibular neuritis spares the inferior 
division of the vestibular nerve. Brain 1996; 119: 755-63.
68. Aw ST, Fetter M, Cremer PD, Karlberg M, Halmagyi GM. Indi­
vidual semicircular canal function in superior and inferior vestibu­
lar neuritis. Neurology 2001; 57: 768-74.
69. Arbusow V, Schulz P, Strupp M et al. Distribution of herpes 
simplex virus type 1 in human geniculate and vestibular ganglia: 
implications for vestibular neuritis. Ann Neurol 1999; 46: 416-19.
70. Arbusow V, Theil D, Strupp M, Mascolo A, Brandt T. HSV-1 not 
only in human vestibular ganglia but also in the vestibular 
labyrinth. Audiol Neurootol 2001; 6: 259-62.
  

Peripheral vestibular disorders and diseases in adults 
817
71. Gacek RR, Gacek MR. The three faces of vestibular ganglionitis. 
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 2002; 111: 103-14.
72. Huang CY, Yu YL. Small cerebellar strokes may mimic labyrinthine 
lesions. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1985; 48: 263-5.
73. Norvving B, Magnusson M, Holtas S. Isolated vertigo in the 
elderly; vestibular or vascular disease? Acta Neurol Scand 1995; 91: 
43-8.
74. Iwase H, Kobayashi M, Kurata A, Inoue S. Clinically unidentified 
dissection of vertebral artery as a cause of cerebellar infarction. 
Stroke 2001; 32: 1422-4.
75. Amarenco P. The spectrum of cerebellar infarctions. Neurology 
1991;41:973-9.
76. Kim JS, Lopez I, DiPatre PL, Liu F, Ishiyama A, Baloh RW. 
Internal auditory artery infarction. Clinicopathologic correlation. 
Neurology 1999; 52: 40-4.
77. Ryan AF, Keithley EM, Harris ]P. Autoimmune inner ear disor­
ders. Curr Opin Neurol 2001; 14: 35-40.
78. Helmchen C, Arbusow V, Jager L, Strupp M, Stocker W, Schulz P. 
Cogan’s syndrome: clinical significance of antibodies against the 
inner ear and cornea. Acta Otolaryngol 1999; 119: 528-36.
79. Bance M, Nai M, Tomlinson D, Rutka J. The changing direction 
of nystagmus in acute Meniere’s disease: pathophysiological impli­
cations, Laryngoscope 1991; 101: 197-201.
80. Jacobson GP, Pearlstein R, Henderson J, Calder JH, Rock J. 
Recovery nystagmus revisited. J Am Acad Audiol 1998; 9: 263-71.
81. Ishiyama G, Ishiyama A, Jacobson K, Baloh RW. Drop attacks in 
older patients secondary to an otologic cause. Neurology 2001; 57: 
1103-6.
82. Kentala E, Havia M, Pyykko I. Short-lasting drop attacks in 
Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2001; 124: 
526-30.
83. Schoonhoven R, Schmidt PH, Eggermont JJ. A longitudinal elec- 
trocochleographic study of a case of long-standing Lermoyez’s syn­
drome. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1990; 247: 333-9.
84. Young YJ, Wu CH. Electronystagmographic findings in a case of 
Lermoyez’s syndrome. Auris Nasus Larynx 1994; 21: 118-21.
85. Stahle J, Friberg U, Svedberg A. Long-term progression of 
Meniere’s disease. Am J Otol 1989; 10: 170-3.
86. Green JD, Blum DJ, Hamer SG. Longitudinal follow-up of 
patients with Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1991; 
104: 783-8.
87. Conlon BJ, Gibson WP. Meniere’s disease: incidence in the con­
tralateral asymptomatic ear. Laryngoscope 1999; 109: 1800-2.
88. Committee on Hearing and Equilibrium. Guidelines for the diag­
nosis and evaluation of therapy in Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1995; 113: 181-5.
89. Sass K. Sensitivity and specificity of transtympanic electro- 
cochleography in Meniere’s disease. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 
1998; 118: 150-6.
90. Conlon BJ, Gibson WP. Hie electrocochleographic diagnosis of 
Meniere’s disease. Acta Otolaryngol 2000; 120: 480-3.
91. Gamble BA, Meyerhoff WL, Shoup AG, Schwade ND. Salt-load 
electrocochleography. AmJ Otol 1999; 20: 325-30.
92. Proctor LR. Results of serial vestibular testing in unilateral 
Meniere’s disease. AmJ Otol 2000; 21: 552-8.
93. Santos PM, Hall RA, Snyder JM, Hughes LF, Dobie RA. Diuretic 
and diet effects on Meniere’s disease evaluated by the 1985 Com­
mittee on Hearing and Equilibrium guidelines. Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1993; 109: 680-9.
94. Barbara M, Consagra C, Monini S, Nostro G, Harguindey A, 
Vestri A, Filipo R. Local pressure protocol, including meniett, in 
the treatment of Meniere’s disease: short-term results during the 
active stage. Acta Otolaryngol 2001; 121: 939-44.
95. Pensak ML, Friedman RA. The role of endolymphatic shunt 
surgery in the managed care ear. Am J Otol 1998; 19: 337-40.
96. Thomsen J, Bonding P, Becker B, Stage J, Tos M. The non-specific 
effect of endolymphatic sac surgery in treatment of Meniere’s 
disease: a prospective, randomized controlled study comparing the 
‘classic’ endolymphatic sac surgery with the insertion of a venti­
lating tube in the tympanic membrane. Acta Otolaryngol 1998; 
118: 769-73.
97. Murofushi T, Halmagyi GM, Yavor RA. Intratympanic gentamicin 
in Meniere’s disease: results of therapy. AmJ Otol 1997; 18:52-7.
98. Minor LB. Intratympanic gentamicin for control of vertigo in 
Meniere’s disease: vestibular signs that specify completion of 
therapy. AmJ Otol 1999; 20: 209-19.
99. Kaplan DM, Nedzelski JM, Al-Abidi A, Chen JM, Shipp DB. 
Hearing loss following intratypanic instillation of gentamicin for 
the treatment fo unilateral Meniere’s disease. J Otolaryngol 2002; 
31: 106-11.
100. Eklund S, Pyykko I, Aalto H, Ishikazi H, Vasama JP. Effect of 
intratympanic gentamicin on hearing and tinnitus in Meniere’s 
disease. AmJ Otol 1999; 20: 350-6.
101. Balyan FR, Taibah A, De Donato G et al. Titration streptomycin 
therapy in Meniere’s disease: long-term results. Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1998; 118: 261-6.
102. Sauer G, Richter CP, Klinke R. Sodium, potassium, chloride and 
calcium concentrations measured in pigeon perilymph and 
endolymph. Hear Res 1999; 129: 1-6.
103. Salt AN, Thalmann R. Interpretation of endolymph flow results. 
Hear Res 1988; 33: 279-81.
104. Gibson WPR, Arenberg IK. Pathophysiologic theories in the 
etiology of Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1997; 
30: 961-8.
105. Schuknecht H, Suzuka Y, Zimmermann C. Delayed endolym­
phatic hydrops and its relationship to Meniere’s disease. Ann Otol 
Rhinol Laryngol 1990; 99: 843-53.
106. Harcourt JP, Brookes GB. Delayed endolymphatic hydrops: clin­
ical manifestations and treatment outcome. Clin Otolaryngol 
1995; 20:318-22.
107. Harris JP, Aframian D. Role of autoimmunity in contralateral 
delayed endolymphatic hydrops. Am J Otol 1994; 15: 710-16.
108. Schulz P, Arbusow V, Strupp M, Dieterich M, Sautier W, Brandt 
T. Sympathetic contralateral vestibulopathy after unilateral 
zoster oticus. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1999; 66: 672-6.
109. Atlas MD, Chai F, Boscato L. Meniere’s disease: evidence of an 
immune process. AmJ Otol 1998; 19: 628-31.
110. Friedland DR, Wackym P. A critical appraisal of spontaneous 
perilymphatic fistulas of the inner ear. Am J Otol 1999; 20: 
261-76.
  

818 
Vestibular disorders and their management
111. Baloh RW, Neurotology of migraine. Headache 1997; 37: 615-21.
112. Savundra PA, Carroll JD, Davies, Luxon LM. Migraine-associ- 
ated vertigo. Cephalalgia 1997; 1 7 : 505-10.
113. Bickerstaff E. Basilar artery migraine. Lancet 1961; 1: 15-17.
114. Thakar A, Anjaneyulu C, Deka RC. Vertigo syndromes and 
mechanisms in migraine. J Laryngol Otol 2001; 115: 782-87.
115. Neuhauser H, Leopold M, von Brevem M, Arnold G, Lempert T. 
The interrelations of migraine, vertigo, and migrainous vertigo. 
Neurobgy. 2001; 56: 436-41.
116. Bikhazi P, Jackson C, Ruckenstein MJ. Efficacy of antimigrainous 
therapy in the treatment of migraine-associated dizziness. Am J
Otol 1997; 18: 350-4.
117. Johnson GD. Medical management of migraine-related dizziness 
and vertigo. Laryngoscope 1998; 108: 1-28.
118. Reploeg MD, Goebel JA. Migraine-associated Dizziness: Patient 
Characteristics and Management Options. Otol Neurotol 2002; 
23: 364-71.
119. Levy D. Transient CNS deficits: a common benign syndrome in 
young adults. Neurobgy 1988; 38: 831-6.
120. Kayan A, Hood JD. Neuro-otological manifestations of migraine. 
Brain 1984; 107: 1123-42.
121. Viiree ES, Baloh RW. Migraine as a cause of sudden hearing loss. 
Headache 1996; 36: 24-8.
122. Kim JS, Yue Q, Jen JC, Nelson SF, Baloh RW. Familial migraine 
with vertigo: no mutations found in CACNAA1A. Am J Med 
Genet 1998; 7 9 : 148-51.
123. Ishiyama A, Jacobson KM, Baloh RW. Migraine and benign posi­
tional vertigo. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 2000; 109: 377-80.
124. Lanska DJ, Remler B. Benign paroxysmal positioning vertigo: 
classic descriptions, origins of the provocative technique and 
conceptual developments. Neurobgy 1997; 48: 1167-77.
125. Furman JM, Cass SP. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. N 
EnglJ Med 1999; 341: 1590-6.
126. Zucca G, Valli S, Valli P, Perin P, Mira E. Why do benign parox­
ysmal vertigo episodes recover spontaneously? J Vestib Res 1998; 
8: 325-9.
127. Karlberg M, Hall K, Quickert N, Hinson J, Halmagyi GM. What 
inner ear diseases cause benign paroxysmal positioninal vertigo? 
Acta Otolaryngol 2000; 120: 380-5.
128. Biittner U, Helmchen C, Brandt T. Diagnostic criteria for central 
versus peripheral positioning nystagmus and vertigo: a review. 
A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1999; 119: 1-5.
129. Epley J. The canalith respositioning procedure for treatment of 
BPPV. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992; 107: 399-404.
130. Epley JM. Human experience with canalith repositioning 
maneuvers. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2001; 942: 179-91.
131. Semont A, Freyss G, Vitte E. Curing BPPV with a liberatory 
maneuver. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1988; 42: 290-3.
132. Ruckenstein MJ. Therapeutic efficacy of the Epley canalith repo­
sitioning maneuver. Laryngoscope 2001; 111: 940-5.
133. Wolf JS, Boyev KP, Manokey BJ, Mattox DE. Success of the mod­
ified Epley maneuver in treating benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo. Laryngoscope 1999; 109: 900-3.
134. Radtke A, Neuhauser H, von Brevem M, Lempert T. A modified 
Epley’s procedure for self-treatment of benign paroxysmal posi­
tional vertigo. Neurobgy 1999; 53: 1358-60.
135. Pohl DV. Surgical treatment of benign positional vertigo. In: 
Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM, eds. Disorders of the Vestibular System. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1996: 563-74.
136. Walsh RM, Bath AP, Cullen JR, Rutka JA. Long-term results of 
posterior semicircular canal occlusion for intractable benign 
paroxysmal positioning vertigo. Clin Otolaryngol 1999; 24: 
316-23.
137. Steddin S, Brandt T. Unilateral mimicking bilateral benign 
paroxysmal positioning vertigo. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1994; 120: 1339-41.
138. Baloh RW, Jacobson K, Honrubia V. Horizontal semicircular 
canal variant of benign positional vertigo. Neurobgy 1993; 43: 
2542-9.
139. Bisdorff AR, Debatisse D. Localizing signs in positional ver­
tigo due to lateral canal cupulolithiasis. Neurobgy 2001; 57: 
1085-8.
140. Nuti D, Agus G, Barbieri M-T, Passali D. The management of 
horizontal canal paroxysmal positional vertigo. Acta Otolaryngol 
(Stockh) 1998; 118: 455-60.
141. Fife T. Recognition and management of horizontal canal benign 
positional vertigo. AmJ Otol 1998; 19: 345-51.
142. Brandt T. Bilateral vestibulopathy revisited. EurJ Med Res 1996; 
24: 361-8.
143. Rinne T, Bronstein AM, Rudge P, Gresty MA, Luxon LM. 
Bilateral loss of vestibular function: clinical findings in 53 
patients. J Neurol 1998; 245: 314-21.
144. Halmagyi GM, Fattore CM, Curthoys IS, Wade S. Gentamicin 
vestibulotoxicity. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994; 111: 571-4.
145. Migliaccio A, Halmagyi GM, Cremer PD, McGarvie LA, Minor 
LB. Clinical signs of visual-vestibulo-ocular reflex impairment 
(submitted).
146. Morrison GA, Sterkers JM. Unusual presentations of acoustic 
tumor. Clin Otolaryngol 1996; 21: 80-3.
147. Ryu H, Yamamoto S, Sugiyama K, Nishizawa S, Nozue M. Neu­
rovascular compression syndromes of the eighth cranial nerve. 
Can the site of compression explain the symptoms? Acta Neu- 
rochir (Wien) 1999; 141: 495-501.
148. Bergsneider M, Becker DP. Vascular compression syndrome of 
the vestibular nerve: a critical analysis. Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 1995; 112: 118-24.
149. Brandt TH, Dieterich M. Vestibular paroxysmia: vascular com­
pression of the eighth nerve? Lancet 1994; 343: 798-9.
150. Oas JG, Baloh RW. Vertigo and the anterior inferior cerebellar 
artery syndrome. Neurobgy 1992; 42: 2274-9.
  

49 Neurological causes of 
balance disorders
Thomas Brandt
Clinical studies of the differential effects of lesions of the 
central vestibular pathways have increasingly shown that 
vestibular syndromes are accurate indicators for a topographic 
diagnosis.1,2 These pathways run from the eighth nerve and the 
vestibular nuclei through ascending fibres, such as the ipsilat- 
eral or contralateral medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF), the 
brachium conjunctivum, or the ventral tegmental tract to 
the oculomotor nuclei, the supranuclear integration centres in 
the rostral midbrain, and the vestibular thalamic subnuclei. 
From there they reach several cortex areas through the thala­
mic projection. Another relevant ascending projection reaches 
the cortex from the vestibular nuclei via vestibular cerebellum 
structures, in particular the fastigial nucleus.
In the majority of cases, central vestibular syndromes are 
caused by dysfunction or a deficit of sensory input induced by a 
lesion. In a small proportion of cases, they are due to patholog­
ical excitation of various structures, extending from the periph­
eral vestibular organ to the vestibular cortex. Since peripheral 
vestibular disorders are always characterized by a combination 
of perceptual, ocular motor and postural signs and symptoms, 
central vestibular disorders may manifest as ‘a complete 
syndrome’ or with only single components. The ocular motor 
aspect, for example, predominates in the syndromes of upbeat 
or downbeat nystagmus. Lateral falls may occur without vertigo 
in vestibular thalamic lesions (thalamic astasia) or as lateropul- 
sion in Wallenberg’s syndrome.
Clinical classification of central 
vestibular disorders
The ‘elementary’ neuronal network of the vestibular system is 
the di- or trisynaptic vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR). VOR prop­
erties are routinely tested in all patients who complain of dizzi­
ness3 and form part of the examination of the unconscious 
patient. There is evidence for a useful clinical classification of 
central vestibular syndromes according to the three major planes 
of action of the VOR (Figure 49. 1): yaw, roll, and pitch.4,5
Figure 49.1 Schematic representation of the three major planes of action of 
the vestibulo-ocular reflex. Horizontal rotation about the vertical z axis = yaw; 
vertical rotation about the binaural y axis = pitch; vertical rotation about the x 
axis ('line of sight') = roll.
The plane-specific vestibular syndromes are determined 
by ocular motor, postural, and perceptual signs (Figure 
49.2):
Roll plane signs are torsional nystagmus, skew devia­
tion, ocular torsion, tilts of head, body, and perceived 
vertical, and the ocular tilt reaction.
Pitch plane signs are upbeat/downbeat nystagmus, 
forward/ backward tilts and falls, and vertical 
deviation of perceived straight-ahead.
Yaw plane signs are horizontal nystagmus, past 
pointing, rotational and lateral body falls, deviation 
of perceived straight-ahead.
YAW
ROLL

820 
Vestibular disorders and their management
torsional nystagmus
skew deviation
ocular torsion (skew torsion)
head and body (roll) tilt and 
falls (ipsi or contra)
tilt of perceived vertical 
(ipsi or contra)
vertical nystagmus (up/down) 
up/down ocular deviation
fore - aft body sway and falls
upbeat: downward deviation of 
subjective straight ahead
downbeat: upbeat deviation of 
subjective straight ahead
horizontal nystagmus 
horizontal ocular deviation
caloric hyporesponsiveness 
[ipsilateral)
horizontal body rotation, 
lateral falls (ipsiversive)
past - pointing
horizontal deviation of 
subjective straight ahead
Figure 49.2 Topographic diagnosis of vestibular syndromes 
in roll, pitch and yaw planes: schematic presentation of the 
distinct areas within the brainstem and vestibulocerebellum 
(frontal and sagittal views) in which a lesion induces a 
vestibulo-ocular tone imbalance in the roll, pitch or yaw 
plane. Typical ocular motor, postural and perceptual signs are 
torsional, vertical (up/downbeat) or horizontal nystagmus. A 
tone imbalance in roll indicates unilateral 'graviceptive' 
pathway lesions from the medial or superior vestibular 
nuclei (inducing ipsiversive signs), crossing midline to the 
contralateral MLF and the rostral integration centres for 
vertical and torsional eye movements, the INC and riMLF 
(inducing contraversive signs). A tone imbalance in pitch 
indicates paramedian bilateral brainstem lesions at the 
pontomesencephalic or pontomedullary level, the brachium 
conjunctivum, or the flocculi. It is striking that 
pontomedullary lesions may induce either upbeat or 
downbeat nystagmus or transitions between the two, 
whereas binocular flocculus lesions result only in downbeat 
nystagmus and a pontomesencephalic lesion only in upbeat 
nystagmus. A tone imbalance in yaw indicates a unilateral 
pontomedullary lesion involving the medial and superior 
vestibular nucleus. This area overlaps with the roll and pitch 
function of the VOR, which explains the frequency of mixed 
vestibular syndromes in more than one plane. riMLF, rostral 
interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus; INC, 
interstitial nucleus of Cajal; III, oculomotor nucleus; IV, 
trochlear nucleus; VI, abducens nucleus; VIII, vestibular 
nucleus. (Adapted from Brandt. Neuroopthamology 1995; 15: 
291-303.5)
The thus defined VOR syndromes allow for a precise topo- 
graphic diagnosis of brainstem lesions with regard to their level 
and side (Figure 49.3).
■ 
A tone imbalance in roll indicates unilateral lesions 
(ipsiversive at pontomedullary level, contraversive at 
pontomesencephalic level).
■ 
A tone imbalance in pitch indicates bilateral (paramedian) 
lesions or bilateral dysfunction of the flocculus.
■ 
A tone imbalance in yaw indicates lesions of the lateral 
medulla, including the root entry zone of the eighth nerve 
and/or the vestibular nuclei.
It is hypothesized that signal processing of the VOR in roll 
and pitch is conveyed by the same rather than separate ascend­
ing pathways in the medial longitudinal fasciculus and the 
brachium conjunctivum. A unilateral lesion (or stimulation) of 
these ‘graviceptive’ pathways (which transduce input from 
vertical semicircular canals and otoliths) affects function in 
roll, whereas bilateral lesions (or stimulation) affect function in 
pitch (Figure 49.3). Thus, the vestibular system is able to
change its functional plane of action from roll to pitch by 
switching from a unilateral to a bilateral mode of operation.5 
Pure syndromes in yaw are rare, since the small causative area 
covering the medial and superior vestibular nucleus is not only 
adjacent to but overlapped by the structures also subserving roll 
and pitch function (Figure 49.3). A lesion frequently results in 
mixed (e.g. torsional and horizontal) nystagmus. The lesional 
sites of yaw syndromes are restricted to the pontomedullary 
level because of the short distance between the vestibular 
nuclei and the integration centre for horizontal eye movements 
in the paramedian pontine reticular formation. Syndromes in 
roll and pitch, however, may arise from brainstem lesions 
located in an area extending from the medulla to the mesen­
cephalon, an area corresponding to the large distance between 
the vestibular nuclei and the integration centres for vertical 
and torsional eye movements in the rostral midbrain. Whereas 
vestibular tone imbalances in pitch — which involve bilateral 
pathways — may occur with various intoxications or metabolic 
disorders, this is an unusual aetiology for tone imbalances in 
yaw or roll which involve vestibular pathways unilaterally.
  

Neurological causes of balance disorders 
821
□ up 
^
□ yaw
(3 down ~-
pitch
■ roll
Figure 49.3 Vestibular syndromes in roll, pitch and yaw planes: critical areas 
are schematically represented based on our current knowledge of vestibular and 
ocular motor structures and pathways, a lesion of which causes a vestibular 
tone imbalance in one of the three major planes of action. The mere clinical 
sign of a vertical, torsional or horizontal nystagmus-if central-vestibular- 
allows a topographic diagnosis of the lesion, although the particular vestibular 
structures involved are still under discussion. Whereas a vestibular tone 
imbalance in the roll plane indicates unilateral brainstem lesions (a crossing in 
the pons), vertical nystagmus indicates bilateral lesions. Two separate causative 
loci are known for upbeat nystagmus: medullary or pontomesencephalic. 
Downbeat nystagmus indicates a bilateral paramedian lesion of the commissural 
fibres between the vestibular nuclei or a bilateral flocculus lesion. Horizontal 
nystagmus indicates unilateral pontomedullary lesions involving the vestibular 
nuclei. The differentiation of vestibular ocular motor signs according to the 
three major planes of action of the VOR and their mapping to distinct and 
separate areas in the brainstem are helpful for topographic diagnosis and for 
avoiding incorrect assignment of clinical signs to brainstem lesions identified 
with imaging techniques. INC, interstitial nucleus of Cajal; MLF, medial 
longitudinal fasciculus; VN, vestibular nucleus. (Adapted from Brandt. Ann 
Neurol 1994; 36: 337-47/)
Some vestibular disorders are characterized by a simultane­
ously peripheral and central vestibular involvement. Examples 
are large acoustical neurinomas, infarctions of the anterior 
inferior cerebellar artery, head trauma, and syndromes induced 
by alcohol intoxication. Others may affect the vestibular nerve 
root in the brainstem, where the transition between the 
peripheral and central nervous system has been defined as the 
Redlich-Oberstein zone (lacunar infarction, focal demyelina- 
tion in MS).
Cortical vestibular syndromes include vestibular excitation 
(vestibular epilepsy) and dysfunction due to a lesion, which 
may manifest with tilt of the perceived vertical, contraversive 
lateropulsion, and, rarely, rotational vertigo. There is no 
primary vestibular cortex, but cortical vestibular function is
imbedded in a network of multisensory visual-vestibular- 
somatosensory functions and distributed over several separate 
and distinct areas in the temporoparietal region. The parieto- 
insular vestibular cortex6 seems to act as a kind of main 
integration centre. Dysfunction of this multisensory and 
sensorimotor cortex for spatial orientation and self-motion 
perception may be involved in spatial hemineglect and rare 
paroxysmal room-tilt illusions.
Most central vertigo syndromes have a specific locus (Table 
49.1) but not a specific aetiology. The aetiology may, for example, 
be vascular, inflammatory, neoplastic, toxic, or traumatic.
Vestibular falls
The following conditions may give rise to s^mptorruitic 
/atfs: cardiovascular cerebral hypoxia, epilepsy, intoxica­
tion, ataxia, movement disorders, paresis, or severe 
sensory loss. Vestibular dysfunction is, however, a signifi­
cant differential diagnosis for patients presenting with 
unpreven table or unexpected /ails.
Both peripheral and central vestibular disorders cause postural 
instability with preferred directions of falling. The particular 
pathological mechanisms that provoke postural instability and 
cause vestibular falls differ considerably, because they may result 
from changes in otolith or in horizontal or vertical semicircular 
canal function.
Vestibular falls may be attributed to either the particular 
plane of the affected semicircular canal or a central pathway 
that mediates the three-dimensional VOR in yaw, pitch, and roll. 
Ipsiversive falls occur in vestibular neuritis or in Wallenberg’s 
syndrome — where they are known as lateropulsion. Contra­
versive falls are typical for the otolith Tullio phenomenon, 
vestibular epilepsy, and thalamic astasia. Fore-aft instability is 
predominantly observed in bilateral vestibulopathy, benign 
paroxysmal positioning vertigo, and downbeat or upbeat 
nystagmus syndrome. Falls can be diagonally forward (or back­
ward) and toward or away from the side of the lesion, depend­
ing on the site of the lesion (the ocular tilt reaction is 
ipsiversive in peripheral vestibular and medullary lesions, but 
contraversive in mesencephalic lesions) and on whether 
vestibular structures are excited or inhibited.
Peripheral vestibular falls (Table 49.2)
Vestibular neuritis: contraversive rotational 
vertigo with ipsiversive falls
In vestibular neuritis — due to a vestibular tone imbalance 
— the fast phase of the spontaneous rotational nystagmus 
and the initial perception of apparent body motion are
  

822 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Table 49.1 
Central vestibular syndromes.
S i t e
Vestibular cortex 
(multisensory)
Thalamus
Mesodiencephalic
brainstem
Mesencephalic
brainstem
Pontomedullary
brainstem
Medulla
Vestibular
cerebellum
Syndrome
Vestibular epilepsy 
Voivular epilepsy 
Non-epileptic cortical vertigo 
Spatial hemineglect (contraversive) 
Transient room-tilt illusions
Tilt of perceived vertical with body 
lateropulsion (mostly contraversive)
Thalamic astasia
Tilt of perceived vertical (ipsiversive or 
contraversive) with body lateropulsion
Ocular tilt reaction (OTR)
(contraversive; ipsiversive if paroxysmal)
Torsional nystagmus 
(ipsiversive or contraversive)
Skew deviation with ocular torsion, 
i.e. skew torsion (contraversive)
Upbeat nystagmus
Tilt of perceived vertical lateropulsion, 
ocular tilt reaction 
Pseudo Vestibular neuritis'
Downbeat nystagmus 
Transient room-tilt illusion 
Paroxysmal room-tilt illusion in MS* 
Paroxysmal dysarthria/ataxia in M S 
Paroxysmal vertigo evoked by lateral gaze
Upbeat nystagmus
Downbeat nystagmus
Positional downbeat nystagmus 
Familial episodic ataxia (EAl with 
Myokymia and EA2 with vertigo) 
Encephalitis with predominant vertigo 
Epidemic vertigo
Mechanism/Aetiology
Vestibular seizures are auras (simple or complex partial multisensory 
seizures)
Sensorimotor Vestibular1 rotatory seizures with walking in small 
circles
Rare rotatory vertigo in acute lesions of the parieto-insular vestibular 
cortex
Multisensory horizontal deviation of spatial attention with (non­
dominant) parietal or frontal cortex lesions
Paroxysmal or transient mismatch of visual- and vestibular three- 
dimensional spatial coordinate maps in vestibular brainstem, 
parietal, or frontal cortex lesions
Vestibular tone imbalance in roll with acute lesions of the parieto- 
insular vestibular cortex
Dorsolateral vestibular thalamic lesions
Vestibular tone imbalance in roll
Vestibular tone imbalance in roll (integrator-OTR with lesions of the 
interstitial nucleus of Cajal (INC))
Ipsiversive in INC lesions 
Contraversive in riMLF lesions
Vestibular tone imbalance in roll with MLF lesions
Vestibular tone imbalance in pitch in bilateral brachium conjunctivum 
lesions
Vestibular tone imbalance in roll with medial and/or superior 
vestibular nuclei lesions 
Lacunar infarction or M S plaque at the root entry zone of the eighth 
nerve
Vestibular tone imbalance in pitch 
Acute severe vestibular tone imbalance in roll or pitch 
Transversally spreading ephaptic axona! activity 
Transversally spreading ephaptic axonal activation 
Vestibular nuclei lesion
Vestibular tone imbalance in pitch (nucleus prepositus hypoglossi)
Vestibular tone imbalance in pitch caused by bilateral flocculus 
lesions (disinhibition)
Disinhibited otolith-canal interaction in nodulus lesions 
EA1 =autosomally dominant inherited potassium channefopathy 
EA2 = autosomally dominant inherited calcium channelopathy 
Viral infection of cerebellum 
Viral infection of cerebellum
WMS, multiple sclerosis.
directed away from the side of the lesion, and the postural 
reactions initiated by vestibulospinal reflexes are usually in a 
direction opposite to the direction of apparent body motion. 
These result both in the Romberg fall and in pastpointing
toward the side of the lesion. There are two sensations, oppo­
site in direction, and the patient may be describing either 
one (Figure 49.4). The first is the purely subjective sense of 
self-motion in the direction of the nystagmus fast phases,
  

Neurological causes of balance disorders 
823
which is not associated with any measurable body sway. The 
second is the compensatory vestibulospinal reaction resulting in 
objective, measurable destabilization in the direction opposite 
to the fast phases.7
Benign paroxysmal positioning vertigo 
(BPPV): forward falls produced by 
canalolithiasis of the posterior semicircular 
canal
Posturographic measurements in patients with BPPV, in whom 
attacks were elicited by head tilt while standing on a force- 
measuring platform, reveal a characteristic pattern of postural 
instability. After a short latency, patients exhibit large sway 
amplitudes, predominantly in the fore-aft direction, with a 
mean sway frequency range <3 Hz. Instability decreases over 
10-30 s parallel to the reduction of nystagmus and the sensation 
of vertigo.8 When subjects close their eyes, the acute destabiliza­
tion may lead to an almost irresistible tendency to fall. 
Posturographic data show a shift of the mean position of the cen­
tre of gravity forward and toward the direction of the head tilt. 
The measurable shift of the centre of gravity in the forward direc­
tion and ipsiversive to the tilted head can be interpreted as the 
motor compensation for the initial subjective vertigo in the 
opposite direction, the diagonal plane corresponding to the 
spatial plane and working range of the ipsilateral posterior canal.
Meniere’s drop attacks (Tumarkin’s otolithic 
crisis)
In Meniere’s disease, periodic endolymphatic membrane rup­
tures with subsequent transient potassium excitation and palsy 
of vestibular nerve fibres cause vertigo attacks and postural
Figure 49.4 Ocular signs, perception and posture in the acute stage of right­
sided vestibular neuritis. Spontaneous vestibular nystagmus is always 
horizontal-rotatory away from the side of the lesion (best observed with 
Frenzel's glasses). The initial perception of apparent body motion (vertigo) is also 
directed away from the side of the lesion, whereas measurable ocular torsion 
and body destabilization (Romberg fall) are always toward the side of the lesion. 
The latter are the compensatory vestibulo-ocular and vestibulospinal reactions 
to the apparent tilt. The same is true for adjustments of perceived vertical and 
subjective straight-ahead.
Table 49.2 
Peripheral vestibular falls.
Disorder 
Direction
Vestibular neuritis 
Lateral ipsiversive
Benign paroxysmal 
positioning 
vertigo (BPPV)
Meniere's drop attacks 
(Tumarkin’s otolithic crisis]
Otolith Tullio phenomenon
Vestibular paroxysmia
Forward ipsiversive 
Vertical
Backward contraversive 
Forward contraversive
Mechanism
Vestibular tone imbalance (yaw, roll) due to horizontal and anterior 
semicircular canal paresis and paresis of utricle
Ampullofugal stimulation of posterior canal by canalolithiasis 
and a heavy clot-induced endolymph flow
Loss of postural tone due to abnormal otolith stimulation in sudden 
endolymphatic fluid pressure changes
Sound’induced mechanical stimulation of utricle by luxated 
stapes footplate (diagonal)
Neurovascular cross compression causing ephaptic stimulation of 
vestibular nerve (multidirectional)
Bilateral vestibulopathy
Multidirectional fore-aft
Impaired postural reflexes, particularly in darkness
  

824 
Vestibular disorders and their management
instability with characteristics similar to those in vestibular 
neuritis. The direction of nystagmus and vertigo changes during 
the attack and also depends on the location of the membranous 
leakage in relation to either the posterior or horizontal 
ampullary nerve.
Rarely, vestibular drop attacks (Tu mark in’s otolithic 
crisis/) occur in early and late stages of endolymphatic 
hydrops,k when sudden changes in endolymphatic 
fluid pressure cause non-physiological end-organ stimu­
lation (deformation of utricle or saccule membrane?) 
with a reflex-like vestibulospinal loss of postural tone.
Patients fall without warning; they remain conscious but lose 
voluntary control of balance. Sometimes during a vestibular 
drop attack patients have the feeling that they are being pushed 
or thrown to the ground. However, slower sensations involving 
apparent tilts of the surroundings also occur, possibly resulting 
in forward, backward or lateral body tilt.
Otolith Tullio phenomenon: contraversive 
ocular tilt reaction (OTR) and fall
Sound-induced vestibular symptoms such as vertigo, 
nystagmus, oscillopsia and postural imbalance in patients 
with perilymph fistulas are commonly known as the 
Tullio phenomenon.11
An otolith Tullio phenomenon due to a hypermobile stapes 
footplate typically manifests with the pattern of sound-induced 
paroxysms of OTR.12 The patients complain of distressing 
attacks of vertical oblique and rotatory oscillopsia (apparent tilt 
of the visual scene) and of falls toward the unaffected ear and 
backward which are elicited by loud sounds (Figure 49.5).13 The 
cause is a non-physiological mechanical stimulation of the 
otolith. Surgical exploration of the middle ear may reveal a sub­
luxated stapes footplate with a hypertrophic stapedius muscle 
causing pathologically large-amplitude movements during the 
stapedius reflex. The otolith lies adjacent to the stapes footplate.
Bilateral vestibulopathy with predominant 
forward and backward falls
Bilateral loss of vestibular function causes unsteadiness of 
gait, particularly in the dark, and — because of the insuf­
ficiency of the VOR at higher frequencies — oscillopsia, 
associated with head movements or when walking.
These patients complain of oscillopsia and imbalance, and the 
condition can be identified by the decreased ocular motor
Figure 49.5 An otolith Tullio phenomenon (left) is characterized by a sound- 
induced ocular tilt reaction (skew deviation with ipsilateral over contralateral 
hypertropia), ocular torsion counterclockwise, head tilt with ipsilateral ear up 
(top), and increased body sway predominantly from right-backward to 
left-forward (bottom). Latencies of dysconjugated eye movements were 22 ms 
for the left eye; latencies for the vestibulospinal reflex at upright stance were 
47 ms in the left tibialis anterior muscle and 52 ms in the left gastrocnemius 
muscle (centre). Measurable postural sway had a minimal latency of about 
80 ms (bottom). (Adapted from Brandt et al. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1988; 42: 
153-6.13)
responses to caloric irrigation and angular acceleration.14 Mea­
surements of postural instability show the largest amplitude in 
the fore-aft direction, corresponding to the predominant direc­
tion of fall. In cases of body perturbations, falls may also occur 
sideways, particularly in darkness when vision cannot compen­
sate sufficiently for the vestibular deficit. The lack of one chan­
nel of sensory input — important as it is for demanding 
balancing tasks in sport — rarely manifests as clinically signifi­
cant instability. In the absence of sensory information from two 
of the stabilizing systems, postural control may be severely 
impaired, as, for example, in a patient with sensory polyneu­
ropathy and/or with bilateral vestibulopathy (Figure 49.6)15 
under restricted visual conditions (darkness).
eye movements 
latency: 22ms
EMG latency:
gastrocn, m, 52ms
tib, ant. m. 52ms
postural sway 
latency: ^ 80ms
10mm
  

Neurological causes of balance disorders 
825
Figure 49.6 Postural imbalance in combined bilateral vestibular failure and 
sensory polyneuropathy. Original recordings of fore-aft and lateral body sway in 
a patient (48-year-old male) with almost complete loss of labyrinth function 
(due to gentamicin treatment) and lower-limb joint position sense (due to 
sensory polyneuropathy). In contrast to steady room illumination (top), body 
sway increases with decreasing flicker frequency under stroboscopic 
illumination. At 16 Hz, balance cannot be maintained even for seconds, as was 
the case with eyes closed (bottom). (Adapted from Paulus et al. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry 1987; 50: 1542-5.15)
Central vestibular falls
Vestibular epilepsy with contraversive vertigo 
and falls
From the few detailed reports on the direction of apparent self- 
motion and surround motion in patients with vestibular 
epilepsy, it is most likely that the direction of perceived self- 
motion, measurable body motion and eye deviation is contra­
versive to the epileptic focus, whereas simultaneously perceived 
surround motion may be ipsiversive.16 Actual body movements 
do not represent vestibulospinal compensations of perceived 
vertigo but an epileptic response. Rotatory seizures in rare 
‘volvular epilepsy’ are characterized by paroxysmal, repetitive 
walking in small circles. Vestibular seizures can manifest with­
out any objective eye and body movements, as Foerster16 
described in his stimulation experiments.
Thalamic astasia with contraversive or 
ipsiversive falls?
There are a few instances of presumed central vestibular dys­
function in which patients without paresis or sensory or cere­
bellar deficits are unable to maintain an unsupported, upright 
posture. The conditions are thalamic astasia, lateropulsion in 
Wallenberg’s syndrome, and OTR. Postural imbalance with a 
transient tendency to fall has been noted following therapeutic 
thalamotomy and thalamic haemorrhages.17 Thalamic astasia, 
as described by Masdeu and Gorelick,18 occurred as a result of 
lesions with different causes, all primarily involving superopos- 
terolateral portions of the thalamus but sparing the rubral 
region. It is our own experience in some 30 patients with 
thalamic infarctions that the posterolateral type may cause both 
contraversive and ipsiversive postural instability.19
Ocular tilt reaction (OTR): ipsiversive in 
caudal, contraversive in upper brainstem 
lesions
OTR is a vestibular tone imbalance involving the vertical VOR 
in the roll plane (Figure 49.7). It represents a fundamental 
pattern of coordinated eye-head roll motion and body tilt, is 
based on both otolith and vertical canal input, and is mediated 
by the graviceptive pathways from the labyrinths via the rostral 
medial and superior vestibular nuclei and the contralateral 
medial longitudinal fascicle to the rostral midbrain tegmentum.
The OTR consists of lateral head tilt, skew deviation of 
the eyes (hypotropia of the undermost eye), ocular tor­
sion (clockwise with head tilt left; counterclockwise with 
head tilt right), and tilt of perceived vertical.
It was first clearly delineated during electrical stimulation of the 
interstitial nucleus of Cajal.20
OTR is not a rare condition. In acute unilateral brainstem 
infarctions, it can be detected in about 20% of cases if a careful 
examination for ocular torsion of the eyes (fundus photo­
graphs), subtle skew deviation and subjective visual vertical21 is 
carried out. OTR and concurrent body tilt are always ipsiver­
sive in patients with pontomedullary lesions,22 whereas OTR 
and concurrent body tilt are always contraversive in patients 
with pontomesencephalic lesions.23
Lateropulsion in Wallenberg’s syndrome: 
ipsiversive falls and adjustments of perceived 
vertical
Lateropulsion of the body is a well'known transient fea­
ture of lateral medullary infarction in which patients can­
not prevent ipsiversive lateral falls.
  

826 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Figure 49.7 Vestibular syndromes in roll plane: graviceptive pathways from 
otoliths and vertical semicircular canals mediating vestibular function in roll 
plane. The projections from the otoliths and the vertical semicircular canals to 
the ocular motor nuclei (trochlear nucleus IV, oculomotor nucleus III, abducens 
nucleus VI), the supranuclear centres of the INC and the rostral interstitial 
nucleus of the MLF (riMLF) are shown. They subserve VOR in three planes. The 
VOR is part of a more complex vestibular reaction which also involves 
vestibulospinal connections via the medial and lateral vestibulospinal tracts for 
head and body posture control. Furthermore, connections to the assumed 
vestibular cortex (areas 2v and 3a and the parietoinsular vestibular cortex, PIVC) 
via the vestibular nuclei of the thalamus (Vim, nucleus ventro-oralis 
intermedius; Vce, nucleus ventrocaudalis externus) are depicted. 'Graviceptive* 
vestibular pathways for the roll plane cross at the pontine level. Ocular tilt 
reaction (OTR: skew torsion, head tilt, and tilt of perceived vertical, i.e. the 
subjective visual vertical (SW)) is depicted schematically on the right in relation 
to the level of the lesion: ipsiversive OTR with peripheral and pontomedullary 
lesions; contraversive OTR with pontomesencephalic lesions. In vestibular 
thalamic lesions, the tilts of SW  may be contraversive or ipsiversive; in 
vestibular cortex lesions, they are preferably contraversive. OTR is not induced 
by supratentorial lesions above the level of INC.5
We believe that subjective vertigo is usually absent in these 
patients, because there is no sensory mismatch. The lesion 
causes a deviation of the perceived vertical. Individual multi- 
sensory regulation of posture is then adjusted not to the true 
vertical but to the pathologically deviated internal representa­
tion of verticality produced by the lesion. The more pro­
nounced the lateropulsion, the greater the deviations of 
subjective visual vertical adjustments. Thus, these patients fall 
without realizing that it is their active shift of the centre of
gravity (lateropulsion) which causes the imbalance. Here also it 
is the incorrect central computation of verticality (despite 
correct peripheral sensory signals from the otoliths) that is 
responsible for postural imbalance.24
Downbeat nystagmus syndrome with 
backward falls
Downbeat nystagmus in the primary gaze position,25 or in 
particular on lateral gaze, is often accompanied by oscillopsia 
and postural instability. Posturographic measurements show a 
typical postural imbalance with a striking fore-aft body sway26,27 
and a tendency to fall backwards (Figure 49.8). This fore-aft
EYES OPEN 
EYES CLOSED
normal
Vestibular Neuritis
Downbeat Nystagmus Syndrome
Figure 49.8 Postural instability in vestibular neuritis and in downbeat 
nystagmus. Histograms for fore-aft (A-P) and lateral (R,L) postural sway during 
upright stance with eyes open (left) and eyes closed (right) obtained with a 
force-measuring platform. For comparison, see registrations of body sway in a 
normal subject (top). The preferred direction of postural instability and body 
sway is in the lateral direction in patients with vestibular neuritis and in the 
fore-aft direction in patients with downbeat nystagmus. (Adapted from Brandt 
and Dieterich. J Vestib Res 1993; 3: 3-14.27)
  

Neurological causes of balance disorders 
827
postural instability can be interpreted as a direction-specific 
tone imbalance of the VOR in pitch, due either to a lesion in 
the floor of the fourth ventricle or to a bilateral lesion of the 
flocculus. Thus, downbeat nystagmus is not simply an ocular 
motor syndrome but a central vestibular syndrome comprising 
ocular motor, postural and perceptual effects.
Cautious senile gait and ‘highest- 
level gait disorders’
Walking is one of the most common of all human movements; 
it is learned during the first year of life and perfected by around 
age 7. After age 60, this ability starts to decline, and the 
elderly gradually slow down.28
A population-based study showed that 15% of the 
subjects over age 60 had some abnormality of gait,"' and 
postural imbalance and gait disorders significantly 
contributed to the risk of falling. ^
The so-called senile gait is more appropriately called cautious 
gait. Many older people adopt it to a greater or lesser degree to
Table 49.3 
Classification of gait syndromes.35
I Lowest-level gait disorders
A. Peripheral skeletomuscle problems
Arthritic gait 
Myopathic gait 
Peripheral neuropathic gait
B, Peripheral sensory problems
Sensory ataxic gait 
Vestibular ataxic gait 
Visual ataxic gait
II Middle-level gait disorders 
Hemiplegic gait 
Paraplegic gait 
Cerebellar ataxic gait 
Parkinsonian gait
Choreic gait 
Dystonic gait
III Highest-level gait disorders 
Cautious gait
Subcortical disequilibrium 
Frontal disequilibrium 
Isolated gait ignition failure 
Frontal gait disorder 
Psychogenic gait disorder
Table 49.4 Terminology used to descibe the clinical patterns of gait in this chapter compared with those in previous 
publications.35
Proposed terminology 
Cautious
Subcortical disequilibrium 
Frontal disequilibrium 
Isolated gait ignition failure
Frontal gait disorder
Previous terms
Elderly gait 
Senile gait
Tottering 
Astasia-abasia 
Thalamic astasia
Gait apraxia 
Frontal ataxia 
Astasia-abasia
Gait apraxia 
Magnetic gait 
Slipping clutch gait 
Lower-half parkinsonism 
Arteriosclerotic parkinsonism 
Trepidant abasia (Petren's gait)
Marche a petits pas 
Magnetic gait apraxia 
Arteriosclerotic parkinsonism 
Parkinsonian ataxia 
Lower-half parkinsonism 
Lower body parkinsonism
Lesions
Musculoskeletal 
Peripheral nervous lesions 
Central nervous lesions
Midbrain 
Basal ganglia 
Thalamus
Frontal lobe and white matter connections
Frontal lobe, white matter connections, and basal ganglia
Frontal lobe and white matter lesions
  

828 
Vestibular disorders and their management
compensate for arthritis, pain, sensory or vestibular impair- 
ment, or simply from fear of falling.31 When walking, elderly 
persons responded to a probe auditory reaction time task with 
greater delays than young adults. This suggests that the elderly 
have to allocate a greater proportion of attentional resources to 
the demands of balance.32
‘Anyone whose balance is insecure, for whatever reason, 
will attempt to compensate. Normal compensation is best illus­
trated by our natural reaction to walking on ice. The feet are 
placed apart to widen the base; the body, hips, and knees are 
bent to place the centre of gravity firmly over the widened base; 
the arms are held somewhat abducted and flexed in anticipation 
of unexpected threats to balance. Locomotion proceeds with 
small steps on this wide base with a flexed posture. We walk the 
same way on a rolling deck of a ship.’31
Using analysis of covariants, Elble et al33 found that these 
changes in gait were distinctly attributable to the reduced stride 
of older people and not to age per se; they suggest that many 
gait disturbances in elderly people are similar, regardless of aeti­
ology, because the characteristics of these gait disturbances are 
heavily veiled by non-specific stride-dependent changes that 
comprise the syndrome of senile gait. It was also speculated that 
changes in gait pattern with increasing age are associated with 
decreasing muscle strength.34
Nevertheless, as clinicians we feel that we are able to 
differentiate the cautious gait of the elderly from other ‘highest- 
level gait disorders’35 such as frontal disequilibrium, isolated gait 
ignition failure,36 or frontal gait disorder (see Table 49.3 for 
classification and Table 49.4 for terminology). Subcortical dis­
equilibrium has been reported to be an acute consequence of 
thalamic basal ganglia or midbrain stroke (see thalamic astasia). 
In frontal disequilibrium there appears to be a breakdown of the 
organization of leg movements required for locomotion, so that 
the gait is often bizarre and the feet frequently cross or move in 
the wrong direction.31 Frontal disequilibrium is also described as 
gait apraxia (e.g. in normal-pressure hydrocephalus), frontal 
ataxia, or astasia-abasia, which indicates dysfunction of the 
frontal lobe and white matter connections. Isolated gait initia­
tion failure describes an inability to initiate and sustain loco­
motion with start-and-tum hesitation, shuffling, and freezing, 
but relatively normal gait once locomotion is initiated; the 
posture is upright, and there is good arm swing, a normal stride 
length, and no festination.36 This makes it different from pos­
ture and gait in Parkinson’s syndrome.35,37,38 The so-called 
frontal gait disorder shares some features of frontal disequilib­
rium and gait ignition failure; it is characterized by a variable 
base (narrow-to-wide), difficulty in starting to walk, short steps, 
shuffling, and hesitation on turns with freezing and moderate 
disequilibrium.
The crucial questions about these syndromes of highest- 
level gait disorders are to what extent they are separate entities 
and how much overlap there is among them.31,33
References
1. Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM. Disorders of the Vestibular System. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.
2. Brandt Th. Vertigo: Its Multisensory Syndromes, 2nd edn. London: 
Springer-Verlag, 1999.
3. Leigh J, Brandt T. A reevaluation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex: 
new ideas of its purpose, properties, neural substrate, and disorders. 
Neurology 1993; 43: 1288-95.
4. Brandt T, Dieterich M. Vestibular syndromes in the roll plane: 
topographic diagnosis from brainstem to cortex. Ann Neurol 1994; 
36: 337-47.
5. Brandt T, Dieterich M. Central vestibular syndromes in the roll, 
pitch, and yaw planes: topographic diagnosis of brainstem dis­
orders. Neuroophthalmology 1995; 15: 291-303.
6. Guldin W, Griisser O-I. The anatomy of the vestibular cortices of 
primates. In: Collard M, Jeannerod M, Christen Y, eds. Le Cortex 
Vestibulaire. Boulogne: Ipsen, 1996: 17-26.
7. Brandt Th, Daroff RB. The multisensory physiological and patho­
logical vertigo syndromes. Ann Neurol 1980; 7: 195-203.
8. Buchele W, Brandt Th. Vestibulo-spinal ataxia in benign paroxsy- 
mal positional vertigo. Agressologie 1979; 20: 221-2.
9. Tumarkin A. The otolithic catastrophe: a new syndrome. Br Med 
J 1936; 1: 175-7.
10. Baloh RW, Jacobson K, Winder T. Drop attacks with Meniere’s 
syndrome. Ann Neurol 1990; 28: 384-7.
11. Tullio P. Das Ohr und die Entstehung der Sprache und Schrift. 
Miinchen: Urban und Schwarzenberg, 1929.
12. Dieterich M, Brandt Th, Fries W. Otolith function in man: results 
from a case of otolith Tullio phenomenon. Brain 1989; 112: 
1377-92.
13. Brandt Th, Dieterich M, Fries W. Otolithic Tullio phenomenon 
typically presents as paroxysmal ocular tilt reaction. Adv Otorhino­
laryngol 1988; 42: 153-6.
14. Baloh RW, Jacobson K, Honrubia V. Idiopathic bilateral vestibu­
lopathy. Neurology 1989; 39: 272-5.
15. Paulus W, Straube A, Brandt Th. Visual postural performance 
after loss of somatosensory and vestibular function. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry 1987; 50: 1542-5.
16. Foerster O. Sensible corticale Felder. In: Bumke O, Foerster O, eds. 
Handbuch der Neurologie, Vol. VI. Berlin: Springer, 1936: 358-448.
17. Verma AK, Maheshwari MC. Hyperesthetic-ataxic-hemiparesis in 
thalamic haemorrhage. Stroke 1986; 17: 49-51.
18. Masdeu JC, Gorelick PB. Thalamic astasia: inability to stand after 
unilateral thalamic lesions. Ann Neurol 1988; 23: 586-603.
19. Dieterich M, Brandt T. Vestibulo-ocular reflex. Current Opin 
Neurol 1995; 8: 83-8.
20. Westerheimer G, Blair SM. The ocular tilt reaction: a brainstem 
oculomotor routine. Invest Ophthalmol 1975; 14: 833-9.
21. Brandt T, Dieterich M. Cyclorotation of the eyes and subjective 
visual vertical in acute vascular (vestibular) brainstem lesions. 
Ann NY Acad Sci 1992; 658: 537-49.
  

Neurological causes of balance disorders 
829
22. Brandt T, Dieterich M. Pathological eye-head coordination in 
roll: tonic ocular tilt reaction in mesencephalic and medullary 
lesions. Brain 1987; 110: 649-66.
23. Halmagyi GM, Curthoys IS, Cremer PD et al. The human hori­
zontal vestibulo-ocular reflex in response to high-acceleration 
stimulation before and after unilateral vestibular neurectomy. Exp 
Brain Res 1990; 81: 479-90.
24- Dieterich M, Brandt T. Wallenberg’s syndrome: lateropulsion, 
cyclorotation and subjective visual vertical in thirty-six patients. 
Ann Neurol 1992; 31: 399-408.
25. Cogan DG. Downbeat nystagmus. Arch Ophthalmol 1968; 80: 
757-68.
26. Biichele W, Brandt Th, Degner D. Ataxia and oscillopsia in down­
beat nystagmus/vertigo syndrome. Adv Otorhinolaryngology 1983; 
30: 291-7.
27. Brandt T, Dieterich M. Vestibular falls. J Vestib Res 1993; 3: 3-14.
28. Prince F, Corriveau H, Hebert R et al. Gait in the elderly. Gait 
Posture 1997; 5: 128-35.
29. Newman G, Dovenmuehle RH, Busse EW. Alterations in neuro­
logical status with age. J Am Geriatr Soc 1960; 8: 915-17.
30. Tinetti ME, Speechley M, Ginter SF. Risk factors for falls among 
elderly persons living in the community. N Engl J Med 1988; 
319: 1701-7.
31. Marsden CD, Thompson PD. Frontal gait disorders. In: Bronstein 
AM, Brandt Th, Woollacott M, eds. Clinical Disorders of Balance, 
Posture and Gait. London: Arnold, 1996: 188-93.
32. Lajoie Y, Teasdale N, Bard C et al. Upright standing and gait: are 
there changes in attentional requirements related to normal 
aging? Exp Aging Res 1996; 22: 185-98.
33. Elble RJ, Hughes L, Higgins C. The syndrome of senile gait. J Neu­
rol 1992; 239: 71-5.
34. Nigg BM, Fisher V, Ronsky JL. Gait characteristics as a function 
of age and gender. Gait Posture 1994; 2: 213-20.
35. Nutt JG, Marsden CD, Thompson PD. Human walking and 
higher-level gait disorders, particularly in the elderly. Neurology 
1993; 43: 268-79.
36. Atchison PR, Thompson PD, Frackowiak RSJ et al. The syndrome 
of gait ignition failure: a report of six cases. Movement Disord 1993; 
8: 285-92.
37. Dietz V, Berger W, Horstmann GA. Posture in Parkinson’s disease: 
impairment of reflexes and programming. Ann Neurol 1988; 24: 
660-9.
38. Sudarsky L. Geriatrics: gait disorders in the elderly. N  Engl J Med 
1990; 322: 1441-6.
  

50 Falls
Joanna Downton
Introduction
Humans are prone to falling because of their upright stance, 
which results in a relatively high centre of gravity and small 
base of support. In addition, any movement tends to take that 
centre of gravity outside the support base. The human nervous 
system has therefore developed an enormously complex system 
to maintain balance in static and dynamic situations. Despite 
this, falls are a universal human experience, though there are 
particular groups of people who are especially prone to falling. 
Falls are much commoner at the extremes of life. In children, 
the maturing nervous system cannot always cope with the 
demands put upon it by the energetic activities of play, and falls 
occur frequently, though usually without serious consequences. 
In the elderly, the depredations of age and disease mean that 
the neuromuscular balance maintenance system sometimes fails 
and falls occur. Falls are also much commoner in younger peo- 
pie with diseases which impair the efficiency of the various sys- 
tems which preserve balance.
Because falls and their complications are so much com­
moner in the elderly, and because the majority of research on 
falls has been done in this group, this chapter considers falls in 
the elderly rather than falls in all age groups, unless stated 
specifically.
Epidemiology of falls
Much work has been done on the epidemiology of falls over the 
last 30 years. Despite this, there remains some uncertainty 
about the prevalence of falling, partly because of the intrinsic 
difficulties of studying a phenomenon which is frequently 
unwitnessed, and which tends to occur most commonly in 
people who may have difficulty describing their experience. As 
a result, there are widely varying estimates in the research liter­
ature of the frequency of falls. It is possible that there are 
genuine large differences in frequency of falling between and 
within populations, but studies have been performed inconsis­
tently.1 Study populations have been selected in ways that make
comparisons difficult or impossible; definitions of falls have 
varied; and not all studies have taken account of the possibility 
that fallers may forget or not report their falls. Most studies 
have concentrated on the elderly.
Several large, well-designed population studies of elderly 
people have now been carried out, and these report fairly consis­
tent estimates of the prevalence of falls in community-dwelling 
older people (Table 50.1). These methodologically sound epi­
demiological studies of falls indicate an incidence of falling of 
28-35% in those aged 65+,2-5 35% in the over-70s,5'6 and 32-42% 
in the over 75s.7,8 Those who have already had a fall have a higher 
rate of falling (60-70%) in the subsequent year.9 Some studies 
have looked specifically at ‘healthy elderly’ (though there are 
difficulties defining who these are), who appear to fall less 
frequently— only about 15% of a group of‘fit elderly’ fell over the 
course of a year.10 Elderly people in institutional care, who are by 
definition a frailer group than community-living elderly, fall 
more frequently, though it is difficult to be certain about the 
prevalence of falls in this group. It is estimated that at least 50% 
of elderly people in institutional care are subject to falls.11
Complications of falling (Table 50-2)
Death
Most deaths due to falls occur in those aged over 65,12 and 
deaths from injury in the over-65s are mainly a result of com­
plications of falls13 (Figure 50.1). Approximately 2 per 1000 of
Table 50.1 Rates of falling in the elderly (% falling each year).
Community-living elderly
65+
28-35%
70+
35%
75+
32-42%
Previous fallers
60-70%
'Healthy elderly'
15%
Institutionalized elderly
50%+

832 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Table 50.2 
Complications of falling.
Death 
Injury 
Fracture 
Trivial' injury 
Need for medical attention 
Anxiety/depression/fear of falling 
Increase in need for social care
2 per 1000 65+ per year
<10% falls 
30-50% falls 
50% fallers 
30-40% fallers 
Unknown
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Males
65-84
□ Other
□ Homicide
□ Suicide
0  Motor vehicle
□ Falls
Males 
Females 
Females 
85+ 
65-84 
85+
Figure 50.1 Deaths from injury in those aged over 65.1'
2500 r
0-4 
5-14 
15-64 
65-74 
75+ 
Age group
Figure 50.2 Fatal falls in England and Wales 1985 by age group.100
trivial, though even ‘trivial’ injuries in the elderly can have sig­
nificant functional effects. An injury of some sort occurs in a 
third to three-quarters of falls.19 However, more than half of 
fallers do not present to medical attention.8 Most serious 
injuries and the majority of fractures in the elderly are caused by 
falling,20 and there is an exponential increase in fractures with 
increasing age (Figure 50.3). Nonetheless, fractures occur in 
less than 10% of falls.8 Although being fit and active reduces
the population over 65 per year die directly as a result of a fall 
(though these estimates are affected by the inaccuracy of death 
certification), with men having a higher risk than women. The 
risk of dying as a result of a fall increases with age14 (Figure 
50.2), and almost half of deaths follow a hip fracture. Falls are 
also a marker of increased risk of dying from causes other than 
the direct result of the fall.15 One study found that fallers had 
more than double the death rate over 2 years of a matched 
group of non-fallers.16
Although a faller may be uninjured, he or she may be 
unable to get up without assistance, and may suffer a ‘long lie’. 
The proportion of elderly fallers unable to get up alone has been 
reported to be as high as 50%.17 Those who are unable to get up 
tend to be older and frailer than those who can get up unaided, 
and are at risk of a number of serious problems such as dehy­
dration, pneumonia, pressure sores and rhabdomyolysis.18 They 
have a higher risk of death, of decline in independence and of 
requirement for institutional care.17
Injury
Injuries caused by falling make enormous demands on health and 
social care systems. Most injuries following falls are relatively
25
20
15
10
□ Hip
□ Forearm 
©  Humerous 
■ Pelvis
XL
i JikJk
<50
50-59
60-69 
70-79
80+
Figure 50.3 Rates (per 1000 women per year) of fall-associated fractures by 
age group.
  

Falls 
833
the risk of falling, ‘healthy elderly* are more likely to suffer a 
fracture if they do fall.21
The commonest fall-related fracture is that of the neck of 
the femur. Overall, the incidence of fractured femoral neck is 
reported to be approximately 5 per 1000 population over 65 per 
year.22 There are interesting variations in fracture incidence in 
different parts of the world which are not fully explained23 
(Figure 50.4), though it is thought that they may reflect differ­
ent patterns of activity at different stages of life. The frequency 
of osteoporosis also affects the likelihood of a fall-related frac­
ture, though the presence of osteoporosis is a necessary but not 
a sufficient cause of age-related fracture, and much of the 
increase in fractures with age reflects the prevalence of falling 
rather than the prevalence of osteoporosis. The rate of injury 
following falls is substantially higher in institutionalized elderly 
than in those living independently.24
Fall-related fractures result in substantial costs to health 
services, though quantification of this is not easy. It is even 
more difficult to calculate the overall costs of such fractures, 
given that consequent disability and dependence is frequent, 
with a substantial demand on social care systems, both formal 
and informal (Figures 50.5 and Figure 50.6). It is easiest to 
calculate health service costs for fractured neck of femur, and 
North American work suggests that the worldwide cost to 
health systems of treating hip fracture will exceed 130 billion 
dollars by 2050.25
Social and psychological effects of falls
Falls and fear of falling have a huge effect on the quality of life 
of elderly people. Fear of falling is reported to be at least as 
common as falling itself.26 In some cases, such fear can have cat­
astrophic effects on mobility and independence.27 There is a
Figure 50.4 Age- and sex-adjusted annual incidence rates of hip fracture.23
Figure 50.5 Mortality 1 year after fractured neck of femur by age group.K
Figure 50.6 Place of residence before and one year after fractured neck of 
femur in 1000 UK patients.101
strong association between falls and fear of falling, but a third 
of those who had not had a fall in the previous year reported 
that they limited their activity because of fear of falling.28 
Depressive symptoms are common in patients following hip
fracture, 
and there is some support for the contention that 
falls themselves produce symptoms of anxiety and depression.28 
Falls and fear of falling may mean that the elderly person makes 
significant demands on relatives and carers and on formal care
  

834 
Vestibular disorders and their management
systems, since falls have been shown to lead to old people 
restricting their activity.30
Fractured neck of femur tends to cause a decline in func­
tional abilities compared with the pre-fracture state,31 and other 
fractures can also have a significant effect on independence.32 
Those who are already frail prior to their injury tend to do 
worse, though thorough assessment and rehabilitation follow­
ing injury can improve outcome.33 Fallers, particularly recurrent 
fallers, are more likely to end up in institutional care than 
non-fallers.34
Causes of falls
It is very difficult to determine the cause of an individual fall, 
let alone the ‘causes of falls’. There will be intrinsic, environ­
mental and temporal factors underlying a fall (‘why did this 
individual fall in this place at this time?’), but even the faller 
herself, or someone witnessing the fall, may not be able to be 
certain why it occurred. It is considerably more difficult to 
ascribe causation at a distance. Despite this, an enormous 
amount of effort has gone into investigation of ‘the causes of 
falls’, partly because of the enormous socio-economic impact of 
falls and their consequences. Much of the work has identified 
‘factors associated with falls’ rather than causes of falls, though 
these factors are often then described as causes of falls.
Many factors are implicated in the causation of falls. For 
reasons related to the complexity of fall aetiology (and 
sometimes the inadequate quality of some falls research), it is 
possible to find studies which show an association between 
practically any medical, psychological, social or environmental 
factor and falls, and almost as many showing that those factors 
are not associated. It seems likely that combinations of factors 
are more important than single problems. A further confounder 
is that the presence of a factor or factors known to increase the 
risk of falling does not invariably mean that a fall will occur, so 
that the predictive value of the presence of an individual factor 
is far from 100%.
Many factors associated with falls are not independent of 
each other, e.g. age and cognitive function, confusion and 
dependency, and neurological disease and abnormal gait, and 
therefore multivariate analysis is required to determine inde­
pendent associations. Since this sort of complex statistical 
analysis has not been done very frequently, particularly in ear­
lier work on falls, the relative risk of any particular factor can­
not be estimated. In addition, studies using multivariate 
analysis have shown limited ability to predict who would be 
classified as a ‘faller’ or a ‘non-faller’, even when used retro­
spectively on the population from which the factors were 
derived.2,4
There are several factors that have consistently been shown 
to be associated with a higher risk of falls (Table 50.3), such as 
increasing age (although in some studies the very elderly have 
a lower prevalence of falling, possibly because those who reach 
extreme age may intrinsically be particularly fit and healthy,3,35
Table 50.3 
Factors associated with increased risk of falling.
Increasing age
Female gender
Having multiple illnesses
Taking multiple medications
High level of functional dependency
female gender (apart from hospitalized subjects, where men 
have a higher risk than women36), and having multiple ill­
nesses. Living alone or spending the greater part of the day 
alone,2,3’9 and living in specialized housing for the elderly,11 
have been identified as risk factors for falls, though it is more 
likely that these merely identify those who have physical or 
other problems increasing fall risk.
Any fall is the result of an interaction of a number of fac­
tors. In order for a fall to occur, there must be an ‘opportunity’ 
as well as a ‘liability’ to fall, and the relative contributions of 
‘liability’ and ‘opportunity’ vary at different ages, contributing 
to the different rates of falling with age. They also vary in an 
individual from moment to moment, depending on tiredness, 
concentration, health factors, etc. Clinical presentations 
include the single fall (either a simple trip or a non-trip fall), 
falls with significant injury, falls associated with loss of con­
sciousness, recurrent falls in those who appear to be otherwise 
well, and recurrent falls in the frail elderly. Because it can be so 
difficult to determine the cause of an individual fall, because 
there are so may different presentations, and because there are 
so many potential causes of falls, it is perhaps more useful to 
look at groups of problems that may present with falls.
Clinical problems causing falls (Table 50,4)
Acute medical illness—a ‘geriatric giant’
One of the characteristics of illness in the elderly is the ten­
dency of elderly people with acute illness to present with non­
specific symptoms and signs. This means that assessment of 
elderly people can be a considerable diagnostic challenge. 
There are five so-called ‘geriatric giants’ which are the com­
monest non-specific presentations of illness in the elderly— 
falls, confusion, immobility, incontinence and failure to cope or 
failure to thrive. Any of these presentations may indicate acute 
illness of any type. Thus, a fall may be the non-specific presen­
tation of any acute illness.
Specific diseases
Some specific health problems are particularly likely to present 
with or be associated with falls.
Neuromuscular disease
Impairment of postural control is one of the cardinal features 
of Parkinson’s disease, and so people with this disease are, in 
general, frequent fallers. Having had a stroke in the past is a risk 
factor for falling, even where there is little overt residual
  

Falls 
835
Table 50.4 Clinical problems causing falls.
Acute medical illness 
Specific diseases 
Neuromuscular disease 
Loss of consciousness 
Autonomic dysfunction 
Visual impairment 
Age-related gait and balance abnormalities 
Tailing syndromes'
Multiple sensory deficits 
Cerebrovascular disease 
'Frontal lobe gait and balance disorders' 
'Drop attacks'
Drugs
Cognitive and affective disorders 
Environmental factors
neurological deficit.37 Lower-limb weakness has been shown to 
be a risk factor for falls,38 so myopathies and motor neu­
ropathies, especially those affecting the lower limbs, may result 
in falls. Sensory neuropathies can contribute to falls because of 
corruption of postural sensory information. Cervical spondylo­
sis may predispose to falls; impairment of proprioceptive input 
from the cervical spine mechanoreceptors is a source of symp­
toms of vague dizziness and imbalance in elderly sufferers,39 and 
cervical myelopathy causing lower limb spasticity and weakness 
is likely to affect gait detrimentally, particularly producing a 
tendency to trip.
Loss of consciousness
Any disease which results in episodes of loss of consciousness 
(e.g. epilepsy, cardiac arrhythmia) is liable to be associated 
with falls, but it should be noted that elderly people may 
have episodes of loss of consciousness following which they 
will be aware that they have fallen but may have no recol­
lection that they have lost consciousness.40 Recent work sug­
gests that a significant number of fallers may have cardiac 
arrhythmias precipitated by carotid sinus hypersensitivity 
(Table 50.5).45'41
Table 50,5 Types of carotid hypersensitivity.
Cardioinhibitory 
Carotid sinus massage produces asystole 
exceeding 3 s
Vasodepressor 
Carotid sinus massage produces fall in systolic 
blood pressure exceeding 50mmHg
Mixed 
Carotid sinus massage produces both asystole
and drop in blood pressure (independent 
vasodepressor response demonstrated by 
repeating massage once cardioinhibition has 
been abolished)
Autonomic dysfunction
This is not very common in healthy community elderly, but 
when present can be a potent cause of falls because of postural 
hypotension.42 Postural hypotension without autonomic failure 
seems to be commoner, and can be precipitated by drugs, fluid 
depletion or immobilization.43
Visual impairment
This is strongly associated with an increase in risk of falling.44 
In addition to poor visual acuity, other factors such as reduced 
visual field, impaired contrast sensitivity and the presence of 
cataract may underlie this association.
Age-related gait and balance changes
Simple observation indicates that many old people do not move 
about in the same way as their younger peers, and that their 
balance appears less reliable. Objective measurement has 
shown some associations between impaired gait and balance 
and risk of falling,45 though this is not useful for prediction of 
falling.46 Changes in gait and postural stability may be due to 
age alone, or may be caused by pathology, and it is difficult to 
determine in individuals or in populations which is responsible. 
However, some very elderly subjects do seem to retain ‘normal’ 
balance and gait.47 An important age-related change which may 
predispose older people to falling is that central integrative 
mechanisms which are important for postural reflexes tend to 
become slower.48 Older brains seem to have less processing 
capacity and reduced ability to divide attention. Thus the 
appropriate allocation of central processing resources between 
concurrent tasks is disturbed.48 If concentration is distracted, 
e.g. by another cognitive task, there is slower recovery from pos­
tural perturbation,49 and those who struggle to combine walking 
with another cognitive task are more likely to fall.50 Where 
maintaining posture competes with other cognitive demands, 
impaired postural control is more likely than difficulty with the 
other cognitive tasks.51
‘Falling syndromes’
Multiple sensory deficits
Many elderly people have accumulated multiple, often fairly 
minor, deficits in sensory systems. There is evidence that some 
of the symptoms of dizziness, imbalance and falls in the frailer 
elderly are related to these deficits.52 Individual deficits are asso­
ciated with an increase in likelihood of falling, but combina­
tions of deficits seem particularly hazardous.
Cerebrovascular disease
A variety of disorders associated with a high risk of falling can 
be produced by discrete or diffuse vascular disease affecting the 
brain. Stroke itself significantly increases risk of falling.37 Multi­
infarct dementia almost always produces gait disorder as well as 
cognitive impairment, and both predispose to falls. Fallers are 
much more likely to show white matter hypodensity (which is 
usually due to vascular ischaemic damage) on CT scan than 
non-fallers.53
  

836 
Vestibular disorders and their management
‘Frontal lobe gait and balance disorders'
These are commonly a result of vascular disease and can take a 
variety of forms.54 They are often associated with falls, and pro­
duce difficulties in gait ignition, unsteadiness on turning, irreg­
ularity of gait cadence and/or shuffling gait.
Drop attacks
Although not well understood, these have been recognized for 
many years.55 Unfortunately, the term tends to be used as a 
description for any sudden falling attack, including sympto­
matic drop attacks due to such things as epileptic fits, cataplexy 
and focal structural central nervous system lesions.56 ‘Idio­
pathic’ drop attacks have been defined as ‘a falling without 
warning, not associated with loss of consciousness, not appar­
ently due to any malfunction of legs, not induced by changes of 
posture or movement of the head, and not accompanied by ver­
tigo or other cephalic sensation, not associated with myoclonic 
jerks’.57 Aetiology is uncertain, since studies of the phenome­
non have rarely been rigorous in excluding symptomatic drop 
attacks. It is postulated that they are due to transient dysfunc­
tion of the brainstem centres in the reticular formation con­
trolling tone in the antigravity muscles.58 True idiopathic drop 
attacks appear to have a good prognosis,59 although there is a 
substantial risk of injury as a result of the fall.
Drags
There are good theoretical reasons why some specific drugs 
might be associated with an increased risk of falling. Any drug 
which has a tendency to produce postural hypotension (anti­
hypertensives, 
tricyclic 
antidepressants, 
anti-parkinsonian 
medication, major tranquillizers, diuretics) could be expected to 
lead to falls in some elderly; drugs with sedative effects (benzo­
diazepines, anticonvulsants, antidepressants) may impair a 
range of neurological reflexes and thus threaten postural con­
trol. Evidence from a large number of studies (with variable 
methodological rigour) has been conflicting, however.2,4,7,60,61 
More recent consensus seems to be that it is polypharmacy that 
is the risk rather than specific drugs,62,63 though obviously in an 
individual faller a particular drug may be implicated.
Cognitive and affective problems
There is good evidence that cognitive impairment increases 
risk of falling,2,3,64 and dementia sufferers are at significantly 
higher risk of hip fracture than those with normal cognitive 
function.65 Impaired balance mechanisms may occur as part of 
the neurological deterioration associated with dementia,66 and 
being cognitively impaired may make risk-taking behaviour 
more likely, due to lack of insight into the effects of actions. 
Although anxiety and depression may result from falls, there 
is also some evidence that those with affective disorders are 
more likely to fall.2,11,67 Again, the explanation for this is 
uncertain, though those with severe depression do have 
changes in gait,68 and their concentration is likely to be 
impaired, potentially reducing awareness of risks. Rarely, 
attention-seeking behaviour may result in ‘deliberate’ falls.69
Fear of falling may lead elderly people to restrict activity, 
which can in turn increase risk of falling because of the 
deconditioning effect of immobility.43
Environmental factors
Environmental factors are obviously important in the genesis of 
falls,70 though fallers tend to blame external causes excessively, 
and there is not necessarily a difference between the exposure 
to environmental hazard of those who fall and those who do 
not.71 It seems that environmental factors are a major element 
in about a third of falls,72 though the proportion is less in the 
very elderly.73 More commonly, the environment combines 
with intrinsic factors to increase risk of falls. For example, 
elderly people may have difficulty negotiating stairs if their 
vision is impaired or if lighting levels are low.74
In hospitals and institutions very low staffing levels may be 
associated with fewer falls because activity is discouraged,75 
while higher staffing levels may reduce fall frequency, presum­
ably because there can be greater supervision of potentially 
risky activities.76 Environmental temperature may affect the 
risk of falling,77 particularly in thin or undernourished women, 
perhaps because of a relationship between nutritional state and 
thermoregulation.78
Clinical management of fallers
Table 50.6 Clinical management of fallers.
Assessment
History
Examination
Investigations
Clinical assessment of gait and balance 
Treatment of identified diseases/problems 
Rehabilitation 
Prevention of further falls
Management of fallers involves a range of tasks, including 
assessment of the faller and the circumstances of the fall, 
identifying treatable problems, rehabilitation, and prevention 
of further falls and injury. The first question to be considered is 
why did this particular person fall at this particular time in this 
particular place? There will be intrinsic and environmental 
factors which may be fixed or variable with time. There is 
always a reason (or more commonly a number of reasons) why 
someone falls, and with careful assessment it is usually possible 
to ascertain at least some of the factors that have caused the 
fall. Contrary to popular opinion it is commonly possible to 
affect some or all of these to reduce the risk of further falls.79 
However, because of the multiplicity of potential causes of falls, 
effective assessment requires a systematic approach (consider­
ing the factors described above) to make sure that all relevant 
risk factors are considered.
  

Falls 
837
Assessment of fallers 
History
Table 50.7 
What to ask an elderly faller*
What were you doing at the time of the fall? 
e g, walking, standing still, getting up from chair
Were you feeling well before you fell?
Did you experience any symptoms before or after the fall?
Did you black out or lose consciousness?
When an elderly faller is questioned about a fall, general 
questions such as ‘why did you fall?’ or ‘what caused your fall?* 
are only of relatively limited value. People who have had a 
straightforward trip or slip are often able to describe the cir­
cumstances of their fall in response to such questions, but those 
who have had a ‘non-trip’ fall often struggle to describe their 
experience, or rationalize what happened (‘I must have 
tripped’). A more useful approach is to ask what the person was 
doing at the time of the fall (e.g. walking, standing still, getting 
up from a chair), whether they were feeling quite well before 
they fell, whether they noticed any symptoms (e.g. dizziness, 
palpitation, chest pain, visual disturbance) prior to, or follow­
ing, the fall, and whether they blacked out or lost consciousness 
when they fell, bearing in mind the possibility that they may 
not remember an episode of loss of consciousness.
Symptoms such as ‘dizziness’ or ‘palpitations’ must not be 
taken at face value, as they may describe a number of different 
sensations. Although the majority of falls are unwitnessed, if 
someone else did observe the fall, information should be 
obtained from the witness, as it is often difficult for the faller to 
remember or describe the circumstances of the fall. The normal 
functional status of the faller should be determined, partly 
because the likely causes of falls in the fit, healthy elderly may 
be different from those in the frail elderly. A thorough medical 
history, including drug history, is usually appropriate, given the 
wide range of potential factors underlying a tendency to fall.
Examination
A full medical examination is usually appropriate, particularly 
if the fall seems to be due to acute illness or if there are recur­
rent falls, when the problem or problems may be in any body 
system. Special attention should be paid to the cardiovascular, 
neurological and musculoskeletal systems. Specific factors 
which may be useful in the examination of someone who has 
fallen are shown in Table 50.8.
Clinical assessment of balance and gait
Simple measures of balance, gait and mobility should be part of 
the assessment of all elderly fallers. However, many of the 
assessments of balance, gait and mobility that have been 
devised are complex and time-consuming and unsuitable for 
day-to-day use.80 Nevertheless, a number of simple balance and 
gait assessments could be carried out routinely in the assessment
Table 50.8 
Examination of a faller — specific factors.
Pulse rate and rhythm
Supine and standing blood pressure
Mental status
Visual acuity and visual fields
Muscle power, especially in lower limbs
Neck movements-do these precipitate dizziness, etc.
Knee joint stability 
Foot deformities 
Romberg test
'Get up and go’ test or 'timed up and go' test 
Functional reach 
Timed walk
of elderly fallers. The Romberg test demonstrates stability on 
standing with the feet together, with eyes open and closed. 
Severe loss of balance when the eyes are closed suggests vestib­
ular and/or proprioceptive impairment, with reliance on vision 
to maintain static posture. The addition of a gentle push on the 
sternum stresses stability further81 and can indicate the state 
of the postural and protective responses. ‘Functional reach’, 
where the subject stands still and reaches forward as far as 
possible along a fixed ruler, tests dynamic postural control.82 
Performance in this test has been shown to correlate with other 
measures of mobility and balance and with risk of falling.83 The 
timed walk, either the time taken to complete a given distance 
or the distance walked in a given time, is a simple assessment of 
gait and mobility.84 This can also be used to monitor response 
to treatment. An overall measure of static and dynamic stabil­
ity can be made using the ‘get up and go test’85 or the slightly 
more refined ‘timed up and go’ test,86 which again can monitor 
response to treatment.
Treatment and rehabilitation
Treatment of a faller must be dictated by the assessment of the 
cause of the fall, as intervention requires identification of possi­
ble causes and/or risk factors for falling. Where the cause seems 
predominantly external, assessment by an occupational thera­
pist to identify potential risks in the immediate environment of 
the faller can be helpful, though people may be reluctant to 
make adaptations to their surroundings. It is impossible to 
remove all risks, and attempts to do so may lead to unacceptable 
restrictions of the autonomy of elderly people.
Rehabilitation of fallers needs to be matched to individuals 
and their specific problems. Therefore, the assessments dis­
cussed above need to be carried out to determine the particular 
medical and functional difficulties of the individual. A particu­
lar difficulty is that fallers may have a degree of cognitive 
impairment, and thus may not fully appreciate their limitations, 
or the changes that may need to be made to improve their func­
tion or reduce their risk of falling again. Many fallers demon­
strate abnormalities of balance or gait, and input from a 
physiotherapist, with graded balance and mobility exercises, 
may be helpful.87 Teaching someone how to get up after a fall
  

838 
Vestibular disorders and their management
may avoid the potentially dangerous ‘long lie’ if further falls 
occur, and can also be of psychological benefit to the faller. Pro­
viding a body-worn alarm device may also be of psychological 
as well as practical benefit, reassuring the faller and relatives or 
carers that help can be summoned if a fall occurs. It may be 
useful to visit the home of the faller to look for alterable risk 
factors in their environment, though recent work suggests that 
attempts to decrease home hazards have not been particularly 
effective in reducing falls.88,89
Prevention of (further) falls
This is important because of the frequency of falls and their 
complications in older people. Although primary prevention 
may be the ideal, secondary prevention (i.e. prevention of 
further falls in those who have already fallen) is more realistic. 
For the elderly population as a whole, general strategies in pri­
mary prevention should, however, be encouraged. Maintaining 
physical fitness as far as possible by regular exercise sessions is 
likely to reduce the risk of falling and injury by improving mus­
cular function,90 limiting osteoporosis, and possibly maintaining 
cognitive function.91
There is now evidence-based advice available about how to 
prevent falls in the elderly population. Those at higher risk of 
falling can be identified by simple assessment of risk factors.92”95 
Multifactorial assessment and intervention seems to benefit the 
frailer elderly,16 and the fitter elderly benefit from exercise 
including a balance component.96,97 It may be possible to pre­
vent or reduce injury due to falls, for example by using simple 
hip protectors to reduce the incidence of hip fractures.
Although much can be done to reduce the risk of falling in 
populations and in individuals, it is not possible to prevent all 
falls, and attempts to do so may have a deleterious effect on the 
quality of life of frailer elderly. It is important to remain realis­
tic, and accept that some risk is unavoidable if autonomy is to 
be retained and life is to remain worth living."
References
1. 
Downton J. The problems of epidemiological studies of falls. Clin 
Rehab 1987; 1(3): 243-6.
2. 
Campbell A], Reinken ], Allan BC, Martinez GS. Falls in old age: 
a study of frequency and related clinical factors. Age Ageing 1981; 
10: 264-70.
3. 
Prudham D, Evans JG. Factors associated with falls in the elderly: 
a community study. Age Ageing 1981; 10: 141-6.
4. 
Blake AJ, Morgan K, Bendall M] et al. Falls by elderly people at 
home: prevalence and associated factors. Age Ageing 1988; 17: 
365-72.
5. 
Campbell AJ, Borrie MJ, Spears GF, Jackson SL, Brown JS, 
Fitzgerald JL. Circumstances and consequences of falls experi­
enced by a community population 70 years and over during a 
prospective study. Age Ageing 1990; 19: 136-41.
6. Campbell AJ, Borrie MJ, Spears GF. Risk factors for falls in a
community-based prospective study of people 70 years and older. 
J Gerontol 1989; 44: Ml 12-17.
7. Tinetti ME, Speechley M, Ginter SF. Risk factors for falls among 
elderly persons living in the community. N Engl J Med 1988; 319: 
1701-7.
8. Downton JH, Andrews K. Prevalence, characteristics and factors 
associated with falls among the elderly living at home. Aging 1991; 
3(3): 219-28.
9. Nevitt MC, Cummings SR, Kidd S, Black D. Risk factors for 
recurrent non-syncopal falls. A prospective study. JAMA 1989; 
261: 2663-8.
10. Gabell A, Simons MA, Nayak USL. Falls in the healthy elderly: 
predisposing causes. Ergonomics 1985; 28: 965-75.
11. Tinetti ME, Speechley M. Prevention of falls amongst the elderly. 
N EnglJ Med 1989; 320: 1055-9.
12. Waller JA. Injury in aged. Clinical and epidemiological implica­
tions. N York State J Med 1974; 74: 2200-8.
13. Sattin RW. Falls among older persons: a public health perspective. 
Annu Rev Public Health 1992; 13: 489-508.
14. Sattin RW, Lambert Huber DA, DeVito CA et al. The incidence 
of fall injury events among the elderly in a defined population. Am 
J Epidemiol 1990; 131(6): 1028-37.
15. Campbell AJ, Diep C, Reinken J, McCosh L. Factors predicting 
mortality in a total population sample of the elderly. J Epidemiol 
Comm Health 1985; 39: 337-42.
16. Rubenstein LZ, Robbins AS, Josephson KR, Schulman BL, 
Osterweil D. The value of assessing falls in an elderly population. 
A randomized clinical trial. Ann Intern Med 1990; 113(4): 
308-16.
17. Tinetti ME, Liu W-L, Claus EB. Predictors and prognosis of inabil­
ity to get up after falls among elderly persons. JAMA 1993; 
269(1): 65-70.
18. Mallinson WJW, Green MF. Covert muscle injury in aged patients 
admitted to hospital following falls. Age Ageing 1985; 14(3): 
174-8.
19. O’Loughlin JL, Robitaille Y, Boivin J-F, Suissa S. Incidence of and 
risk factors for falls and injurious falls among the community- 
dwelling elderly. A m ] Epidemiol 1993; 137(3): 342-54.
20. Melton LJ III, Riggs BL. Epidemiology of age-related fractures. In: 
Alvioli LV, ed. The Osteoporotic Syndrome. New York: Grune & 
Stratton, 1987.
21. Speechley M, Tinetti M. Falls and injuries in frail and vigor­
ous community elderly persons. J Am Geriatr Soc 1991; 39: 
46-52.
22. Evans JG, Prudham D, Wandless I. A prospective study of frac­
tured proximal femur: incidence and outcome. Public Health 1979; 
93: 235-41.
23. Lewinnek GE, Kelsey J, White AA, Kreiger NJ. The significance 
and a comparative analysis of the epidemiology of hip fractures. 
Clin Orthop 1980; 152: 35-43.
24. Luukinen H, Koski K, Honkanen R, Kivela S-L. Incidence of 
injury-causing falls among older adults by place of residence: a 
population-based study. J Am Geriatr Soc 1995; 43(8): 871-6.
25. Johnell O. The socioeconomic burden of fractures: today and in 
the 21st century. Am J Med 1997; 103(2A): 20S-25S.
  

Falls 
839
26. Grisso JA, Schwarz DF, Wolfson V, Polansky M, LaPann K. The 
impact of falls in an inner-city elderly African-American popula­
tion. J Am Geriatr Soc 1992; 40: 673-8.
27. Murphy J, Isaacs B. The post-fall syndrome. A study of 36 elderly 
patients. Gerontology 1982; 28: 265-70.
28. Downton JH, Andrews K. Postural disturbance and psychological 
symptoms amongst elderly people living at home. Int J Geriatr Psy­
chiatry 1990; 5: 93-8.
29. Billig N, Ahmed SW, Kenmore P, Amaral D, Shakhashiri MZ. 
Assessment of depression and cognitive impairment after hip 
fracture. J Am Geriatr Soc 1986; 34: 499-503.
30. Kosorok MR, Omenn GS, Diehr P et al. Restricted activity days 
among older adults. Am J Public Health 1992; 82: 1263-7.
31. Marotolli RA, Berkman LF, Cooney LM. Decline in physical func­
tion following hip fracture. J Am Geriatr Soc 1992; 40: 861-6.
32. Greendale GA, Barrett-Connor E, Ingles S, Haile R. Late physi­
cal and functional effects of osteoporotic fracture in women: the 
Rancho Bernardo study. J Am Geriatr Soc 1995; 43(9): 955-61.
33. Bemardini B, Meinecke C, Pagani M et al. Comorbidity and 
adverse clinical events in the rehabilitation of older adults after 
hip fracture. J Am Geriatr Soc 1995; 43(8): 894-8.
34. Dunn JE, Fumer SE, Miles TP. Do falls predict institutionalization 
in older persons? J Aging Health 1993; 5: 194-207.
35. Woodhouse PR, Briggs RS, Ward D. Falls and disability in old 
peoples homes. J Clin Exp Gerontol 1983; 5: 309-21.
36. Berry G, Fisher RH, Lang S. Detrimental incidents, including 
falls, in an elderly institutional population. J Am Geriatr Soc 1981; 
29: 322-4.
37. Forster A, Young J. Incidence and consequences of falls due to 
stroke: a systematic inquiry. Br Med J 1995; 311: 83-6.
38. Whipple RH, Wolfson LI, Amerman PM. The relationship of 
knee and ankle weakness to falls in nursing home residents: an 
isokinetic study. J Am Geriatr Soc 1987; 35: 13-20.
39. de Jong JMBV, Bles W. Cervical dizziness and ataxia. In: Bles W, 
Brandt T, eds. Disorders of Posture and Gait. Amsterdam: Elsevier 
Science Publishers BV, 1986: 185-206.
40. McIntosh SJ, Lawson J, Kenny RA. Clinical characteristics of 
vasodepressor, cardioinhibitory, and mixed carotid sinus syndrome 
in the elderly. Am J Med 1993; 95: 203-8.
41. Kenny RA, Traynor G. Carotid sinus syndrome— clinical charac­
teristics in elderly patients. Age Ageing 1991; 20: 449-54.
42. Mader SL, Josephson KR, Rubenstein LZ. Low prevalence of 
postural hypotension among community dwelling elderly. JAMA 
1993; 258: 1511-14.
43. Creditor MC. Hazards of hospitalization of the elderly. Ann Intern 
Med 1993; 118: 219-23.
44. I vers RQ, Cumming RG, Mitchell P, Attebo K. Visual impairment 
and falls in older adults: the Blue Mountains eye study. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 1998; 46(1): 58-64, 1998.
45. Maki BE, Holliday PJ, Topper AK. A prospective study of postural 
balance and risk of falling in an ambulatory and independent 
elderly population. J Gerontol 1994; 49(2): M72-84.
46. Baloh RW, Corona S, Jacobson KM, Enrietto JA, Bell T. A 
prospective study of posturography in normal older people. J Am 
Geriatr Soc 1998; 46(4): 438-43.
47. Bloem BR, Haan J, Lagaay AM, van Beek W, Wintzen AR, Roos 
RAC. Investigation of gait in elderly subjects over 88 years of age. 
J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 1992; 5: 78-84.
48. Teasdale N, Stelmach GE, Bard C, Fleury M. Posture and elderly 
persons: deficits in the central integrative mechanisms. In: 
Woollacott M, Horak F, eds. Posture and Gait: Control Mechanisms. 
Portland, Oregon: University of Oregon, 1992: 203-7.
49. Stelmach GE, Zelaznik HN, Lowe D. The influence of aging and 
attentional demands on recovery from postural instability. Aging 
1990; 2(2): 155-61.
50. Lundin-Olsson L, Nyberg L, Gustafson Y. Attention, frailty, and 
falls: the effect of a manual task on basic mobility. J Am Geriatr Soc 
1998; 46(6): 758-61.
51. Shumway-Cook A, Woollacott M, Kerns KA, Baldwin M. The 
effects of two types of cognitive tasks on postural stability in older 
adults with and without a history of falls. J Gerontol 1997; 52A(4): 
M232-40.
52. Manchester D, Woollacott M, Zederbauer-Hylton N, Marin O. 
Visual, vestibular and somatosensory contributions to balance 
control in the older adult. J Gerontol 1989; 44(4): Ml 18-27.
53. Masdeu JC, Wolfson L, Lantos G et al. Brain white matter 
changes in the elderly prone to falling. Arch Neurol 1989; 46: 
1292-6.
54. Nutt JG, Marsden CD, Thompson PD. Human walking and 
higher-level gait disorders, particularly in the elderly. Neurology 
1993; 43:268-79.
55. Sheldon JH. The Social Medicine of Old Age. Report of an Inquiry in 
Wolverhampton. London: Oxford University Press, 1948.
56. Lee MS, Marsden D. Drop attacks. In: Bronstein AM, Brandt T, 
Woollacott M, eds. Clinical Disorders of Balance, Posture and Gait. 
London: Arnold, 1996: 177-87.
57. Stevens DL, Matthews WB. Cryptogenic drop attacks: an afflic­
tion of women. BMJ 1973; 1: 439-42.
58. Overstall P. Drop attacks. In: Kenny RA, ed. Syncope in the Older 
Patient. London: Chapman & Hall Medical, 1996: 299-308.
59. Meissner I, Wiebers DO, Swanson JW, O’Fallon WM. The natural 
history of drop attacks. Neurology 1986; 36: 1029-34.
60. Myers AH, Baker SP, Van Natta ML, Abbey H, Robinson EG. 
Risk factors associated with falls and injuries among elderly 
institutionalized persons. Am J Epidemiol 
1991; 
133(11): 
1179-90.
61. Ray WA, Griffin MR, Malcolm E. Cyclic antidepressants and the 
risk of hip fracture. Arch Med 1991; 151: 754-6.
62. Weiner DK, Hanlon JT, Studenski SA. Effects of central nervous 
system polypharmacy on falls liability in community-dwelling 
elderly. Gerontology 1998; 44: 217-21.
63. Close J, Ellis M, Hooper R, Glucksman E, Jackson S, Swift C. Pre­
vention of falls in the elderly trial (PROFET): a randomised con­
trolled trial. Lancet 1999; 353: 93-7.
64- Morris JC, Rubin EH, Morris EJ, Mandel SA. Senile dementia of 
the Alzheimer’s type: an important risk factor for serious falls. J 
Gerontol 1987; 42: 412-17.
65. Melton LJ, Beard CM, Kokmen E, Atkinson EJ, O’Fallon WM. 
Fracture risk in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J Am Geriatr Soc 
1994; 42(6): 614-19.
  

840 
Vestibular disorders and their management
66. Visser H. Gait and balance in senile dementia of Alzheimer’s type. 
Age Ageing 1983; 12: 296-301.
67. Granek E, Baker SP, Abbey H et al. Medications and diagnoses in 
relation to falls in a long-term care facility. J Am Geriatr Soc 1987; 
35:503-11.
68. Sloman L, Berridge M, Homatidis S, Hunter D, Duck T. Gait 
patterns of depressed patients and normal subjects. Am J Psychiatry 
1982; 139: 94-7.
69. Belfield PW, Young JB, Bagnall WE, Mulley GP. Deliberate falls in 
the elderly. Age Ageing 1987; 16: 123-4.
70. Gibson MJ. The prevention of falls in later life. A report of the 
Kellogg International Workgroup on the Prevention of Falls by 
the Elderly. Dan Med Bull 1987; 34: 4-7.
71. Sattin RW, Rodriguez JG, DeVito CA, Wingo PA. Home environ­
mental hazards and the risk of fall injury events among community- 
dwelling older persons. J Am Geriatr Soc 1998; 46(6): 669-76.
72. Citron N. Femoral neck fractures: are some preventable? Ergonomics 
1985; 28: 993-7.
73. Morfitt JM. Falls in old people at home: intrinsic versus environ­
mental factors in causation. Public Health 1983; 97: 115-20.
74. Archea JC. Environmental factors associated with stair accidents 
by the elderly. Clin Geriatr Med 1985; 1: 555-68.
75. Morris EV, Isaacs B. The prevention of falls in a geriatric hospital. 
Age Ageing 1980; 9: 181-5.
76. Blake C, Morfitt JM. Falls and staffing in a residential home for 
elderly people. Public Health 1986; 100: 385-91.
77. Campbell AJ, Spears GFS, Borrie MJ, Fitzgerald JL. Falls, elderly 
women and the cold. Gerontology 1988; 34: 205-8.
78. Bastow MD, Rawlings J, Allison SP. Undemutrition, hypother­
mia, and injury in elderly women with fractured femur: an injury 
response to altered metabolism? Lancet 1983; 1: 143-6.
79. Rubenstein LZ, Robbins AS, Schulman BL, Rosado J, Osterweil 
D, Josephson KR. Falls and instability in the elderly. J Am Geriatr 
Soc 1988; 36: 266-78.
80. MacKnight C, Rockwood K. Assessing mobility in elderly people. 
A review of performance-based measures of balance, gait and 
mobility for bedside use. Rev Clin Gerontology 1995; 5(4): 464-86.
81. Weiner WJ, Nora LM, Glantz RH. Elderly in-patients: postural 
reflex impairment. Neurology 1984; 34: 945-7.
82. Weiner DK, Duncan PW, Chandler J, Studenski SA. Functional 
reach: a marker of physical frailty. J Am Geriatr Soc 1992 ; 40:203-7.
83. Studenski S, Duncan PW, Chandler J et al. Predicting falls: the 
role of mobility and nonphysical factors. J Am Geriatr Soc 1994; 
42: 297-302.
84. Thapa PB, Gideon P, Fought RL, Kormicki M, Ray WA. Compar­
ison of clinical and biomechanical measures of balance and mobil­
ity in elderly nursing home residents. J Am Geriatr Soc 1994; 
42(5): 493-500.
85. Mathias S, Nayak USL, Isaacs B. Balance in elderly patients: 
the ‘get up and go’ test. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1986; 67: 
387-9.
86. Podsiadlo D, Richardson S. The timed ‘up & go’: a test of basic 
functional mobility for frail elderly persons. J Am Geriatr Soc 
1991; 39: 142-8.
87. Hogan DB, Berman P, Fox RA, Hubley-Kozey CL, Turnbull G, 
Wall J. Idiopathic gait disorders in the elderly. Clin Rehabil 1987; 
1(1): 17-22.
88. Northridge ME, Nevitt MC, Kelsey JL, Link B. Home hazards 
and falls in the elderly: the role of health and functional status. 
Am J Public Health 1995; 85(4): 509-15.
89. Clemson L, Cumming RG, Roland M. Case-control study of haz­
ards in the home and risk of falls and hip fractures. Age Ageing 
1996; 25(2): 97-101.
90. Rickli R, Busch S. Motor performance of women as a function of 
age and physical activity level. J Gerontol 1986; 41: 645-9.
91. Molloy DW, Richardson LD, Grilly RG. The effects of a three- 
month exercise programme on neuropsychological function in 
elderly institutionalized women: a randomized controlled trial. 
Age Ageing 1988; 17: 303-10.
92. Tinetti ME, Williams TF, Mayewski R. Fall risk index for elderly 
patients based on number of chronic disabilities. Am J Med 1986; 
80: 429-34.
93. Nevitt MC, Cummings SR, Hudes ES. Risk factors for injurious 
falls: a prospective study. J Gerontol 1991; 46(5): M164-70.
94. Tinetti ME, Doucette JT and Claus EB. The contribution of pre­
disposing and situational risk factors to serious fall injuries. J Am 
Geriatr Soc 1995; 43: 1207-13.
95. Tinetti ME, Inouye SK, Gill TM, Doucette JT. Shared risk fac­
tors for falls, incontinence, and functional dependence. Unify­
ing the approach to geriatric syndromes. JAMA 1995; 273(17): 
1348-53.
96. Province MA, Hadley EC, Hombrook MC et al. The effects of 
exercise on falls in elderly patients. A preplanned meta-analysis 
of the FICSIT trials. JAMA 1995; 273(17): 1341-7.
97. Lord SR, Ward JA, Williams P, Strudwick M. The effect of a 
12-month exercise trial on balance, strength, and falls in older 
women: a randomized controlled trial. J Am Geriatr Soc 1995; 43: 
1198-206.
98. Lauritzen JB, Petersen MM, Lund B. Effect of external hip pro­
tectors on hip fractures. Lancet 1993; 341: 11-13.
99. Wynne-Harley D. Living dangerously: risk-taking, safety and 
older people. Centre for Policy on Ageing, 1991.
100. Consumer Safety Unit. Home and Leisure Accident Research. 
Department of Trade and Industry, 1988.
101. Keene GS, Parker MJ, Pryor GA. Mortality and morbidity after 
hip fractures. BMJ 1993; 307: 1248-50.
  

51 General medical causes 
of dizziness
Tim Petterson, Rose Anne Kenny
Introduction
Dizziness: What do we mean?
Patients describe their experience of ‘sensory dysfunction’ using 
a variety of synonyms, jargon or colloquialisms.1 Physicians are 
faced with a colourful array of words and phrases often tainted 
with medical meaning. Examples include ‘funny do’s’, ‘collapse’, 
‘coming over queer’, ‘about to fall’, ‘about to faint’, ‘muzziness’, 
‘unsteadiness’, ‘vertigo’ or ‘blackouts’. These descriptions have 
different meanings for doctor and patient. Dizziness is perhaps 
the commonest of these presentations and the dizzy patient 
represents a major diagnostic challenge. A logical approach will 
help to define an appropriate management strategy (Figure 
51.1). The key first step is to encourage the patient to describe 
their exact experience, by giving the patient time and present­
ing a series of detailed ‘best guess’ descriptions. Drachman and 
Hart2 reported four types of dizziness: vertigo, lightheadedness, 
dysequilibrium and others (Table 51.1). The first two descrip­
tions are useful predictors of final diagnostic category and so 
help to define initial assessment strategies. Vertigo indicates 
probable vestibular pathology (Chapters 48 and 54) whilst 
lightheadedness suggests a cardiovascular disorder.3 Dysequilib­
rium describes imbalance or unsteadiness and may indicate a 
central neurological disorder. In practice it is a less useful pre­
dictor and its clinical application is therefore limited (Chapter 
49). The fourth category of ‘others’ is a repository for poorly 
defined dizziness. Significant overlap between these four 
descriptions may occur. This reflects both the limitations of 
categorizing subjective data and the multifactorial nature of 
dizziness in many patients.
There is marked overlap of descriptions and causation.
Epidemiology of dizziness
Dizziness is a common problem, particularly in the elderly. 
Incidence and prevalence increase with age, more so in 
females.4 6 Dizziness affects at least 30% of the UK community 
aged over 65 years6-8 and almost half of those aged over 75
Table 51.1 Classification of dizziness.
Symptom
Vertigo
Lightheaded
Dysequilibrium
Others
Possible attributable cause
Vestibular cause 
Cardiovascular cause 
Central neurological cause 
Miscellaneous causes 
Multifactorial 
Poorly defined
years. Twenty per cent of community living elderly people 
report dizziness severe enough to seek medical advice.10 In the 
USA dizziness is the commonest complaint of older people pre­
senting to primary care physicians and emergency rooms.5
Vestibular11 and psychogenic12,13 causes are prominent in 
younger people. Medical conditions, particularly cardiovascular 
disorders, cerebrovascular disease, neuromuscular disorders and 
drugs are more often implicated in the elderly.
Cardiovascular causes of dizziness
Introduction
Dizziness is difficult to define. Existing studies are in small 
patient numbers, often retrospective and suffer selection bias. 
Most use patients attending ENT or neurology clinics rather 
than population studies. They tend to group patients into vague 
diagnostic categories or define a single diagnosis which may be 
contributory rather than causative. There is little emphasis on 
the assessment of specific interventions to resolve symptoms 
and reduce disability.14 Against this background, peripheral 
vestibular disorders are reported as the commonest cause of 
dizziness (Chapter 50).
Cardiovascular disorders are increasingly recognized as 
significant medical causes of dizziness, particularly in older 
people.15”17 Specialist centres using detailed cardiovascular

842 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Figure 51.1 Dizziness in older patients: a scheme for basic management.
assessment as part of their evaluation protocol report an over- 
lap between the symptoms of dizziness, syncope and falls.15,16 
Use of phasic blood pressure monitoring (digital photoplethys­
mography: Portapres), standardized carotid sinus massage 
(CSM) and head-up tilt testing has implicated three related 
hypotensive disorders: carotid sinus syndrome (CSS), postural 
hypotension and vasovagal syncope. Of 169 patients who 
attended a dedicated facility, over 80% presented with dizziness, 
usually associated with syncope and/or unexplained falls15,16,18 
(Figure 51.2). Two-thirds of these had an attributable diagnosis, 
usually CSS and/or orthostatic hypotension (Figure 51.3). 
These findings from specialist units are supported by a recent 
prospective study of the causes of severe dizziness in patients 
over 60 years of age,3 with marked overlap between carotid 
sinus hypersensitivity (CSH), orthostatic hypotension and 
vasovagal syncope (Table 51.2). Predictors of a cardiovascular 
cause were dizziness described as ‘lightheadedness’, associated 
pallor, syncope, prolonged standing, the need to sit or lie down, 
or co-morbid cardiovascular disease.
CLINICAL PREDICTORS OF 
CARDIOVASCULAR DIZZINESS
Dizziness described as tightheadedness.
Associated with syncope, pallor, need to sit/lie down. 
Symptoms with prolonged standing.
Comorbid cardiovascular disease.
Carotid sinus syndrome 
Definition
CSS is diagnosed when CSH is demonstrated in a patient 
with unexplained dizziness, presyncope or syncope. ’ 
CSH 
describes 3 s or more of asystole (cardioinhibitory response) or 
a 50mmHg fall in systolic blood pressure (vasodepressor 
response) following 5 s of unilateral CSM. Mixed responses
  

General medical causes of dizziness 
843
Figure 51.2 Overlap between dizziness, syncope and falls-presenting 
symptoms in 169 older patients who attended a dedicated facility.
45 -
40 -
35 -
30 '
25 -
20 -
15 -
10 -
0 -
Figure 51.3 Attributable diagnoses in 169 older patients presenting to a 
dedicated facility with dizziness, syncope and falls.
occur if significant hypotension persists once bradycardia is 
abolished, either by atrioventricular sequential pacing or 
intravenous atropine.21,22 A history of unexplained dizziness 
and/or syncope is essential, since a hypersensitive response can
Table 51.2 Cardiovascular diagnoses, peripheral vestibular 
disorders and central neurological disorders in 50 consecutive 
patients over 60 years presenting with dizziness to the general 
practitioner/
Diagnosis 
n
Cardiovascular diagnoses (n = 23)
Total CSH alone or in combination 
17
VDCSH 
5
CICSH 
5
Mixed carotid sinus hypersensitivity 
2
Vasovagal 
3
VV + VDCSH 
2
VV + OH + VDCSH 
2
Arrhythmia 
2
Orthostatic hypotension 
1
Mixed CSH + VV 
1 
Peripheral vestibular disorders (r?= 17)
Vestibular neuronitis 
12
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
4
Meniere's disease 
1 
Central neurological disorders (/? = 8)
Severe cervical spondylosis 
2
Drop attacks 
2
Stroke disease 
2
Migraine 
1
Bilateral carotid stenosis (>90%) 
1 
Associated diagnoses in patients in whom diagnosis remains 
unknown (n= 11)
Abnormal Romberg 
4
Abnormal gait 
2
Osteoarthritis lower limbs 
2
CSH, carotid sinus hypersensitivity; VDCSH, vasodepressor carotid sinus 
hypersensitivity; CICSH, cardioinhibitory carotid sinus hypersensitivity;
VV, vasovagal syncope; OH, orthostatic hypotension.
be present in asymptomatic individuals, particularly those with 
coexisting cerebrovascular disease.
Epidemiology
CSS is a disease of older people,23 especially males with comor- 
bid ischaemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, peripheral 
vascular disease or hypertension.24 The average age at presenta­
tion is 70 years, and it is rare below the age of 50. CSS is a 
frequent yet overlooked cause of dizziness, syncope and unex­
plained falls. It is an attributable diagnosis in 20-45% of 
patients presenting with these symptoms to secondary and 
tertiary referral centres.15
Clinical features
Over two-thirds of patients present with dizziness often associ­
ated with syncope and/or unexplained falls.16 Dizziness, pre­
syncope or syncope can be provoked by manoeuvres which 
mechanically stimulate the carotid sinus, such as head turning 
in the presence of tight neckwear or neck pathology. However,
  

844 
Vestibular disorders and their management
this ‘Vicar’s collar’ phenomenon accounts for less than half of 
presentations. Symptoms are more commonly provoked by 
stimuli associated with vasovagal syncope or ‘fainting’.16 These 
include stress, prolonged standing, meals, or raised intra- 
thoracic pressure (e.g. micturition, defaecation or coughing). 
Symptoms show marked ‘clustering’, with variation in 
frequency both within and between individuals over time.
Pathophysiology
Pathophysiology (Figure 51.4) involves abnormal gain of the 
baro-reflex, probably at the brainstem level. The afferent 
pathway runs from the carotid sinus (at the bifurcation of the 
internal and external carotid arteries) via the glossopharyngeal 
nerve to the vagal nucleus at the brainstem. The efferent con- 
nection is via the vagus nerve to the sinus node and sympa­
thetic nerves to peripheral vasculature. Vagal afferents from 
other organs are modulated by the brainstem, independent of the 
sinus. This may explain a hypersensitivity to stimuli unrelated to 
carotid sinus pressure. Asystole follows sinus arrest due to sino­
atrial block and depressed sinoatrial automaticity. Complete 
heart block may also occur and coexists with sinus arrest in up 
to 70% of cases.23 The asystolic response is abolished by atropine.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is confirmed when symptom reproduction is associ­
ated with CSH during CSM. The procedure should be stan­
dardized and performed initially in the supine position with the 
neck slightly extended (Figure 51.5). Longitudinal massage is 
applied for 5 s over the point of maximal carotid pulsation (usu­
ally medial to the stemomastoid muscle at the level of the 
upper border of the thyroid cartilage) on the right and then left 
sides, allowing a 30 s interval between stimuli.4 The heart rate
response occurs immediately (Figure 51.6) (mean: 2 s), returns 
to baseline within 30 s and can be recorded using continuous 
surface electrocardiography. The blood pressure response lags 
behind, reaching a nadir at a mean of 18 s and returning to 
baseline by 30 s.16 Continuous phasic blood pressure monitoring 
(Portapres: digital photoplethysmography) (Figure 51.7) is 
required to detect and monitor the vasodepressor response to 
CSM. Previous work using conventional mercury or digital 
sphygmanometry has underestimated the prevalence of vasode­
pressor and mixed forms of CSH, which are more common than 
the cardioinhibitory form (Figure 51.2).
In a third of patients, a response is only present during mas­
sage at 70° of head-up tilt25 (Figure 51.8). Upright posture may 
allow easier location of the carotid sinus and/or alter baro-reflex 
gain. If the supine response is not diagnostic, CSM should be
Figure 51.5 Technique of carotid sinus massage: a 5s longitudinal massage is 
applied over the point of maximal carotid pulsation (usually 2 cm below the 
angle of the jaw at the level of the upper border of the thyroid cartilage).
The procedure is repeated on the other side after a 30s interval. Continuous 
observation of pulse rate (ECG recorder) and blood pressure (digital flowmetry: 
Portapres) is required.
CSM 
Time (secs)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Figure 51.6 Carotid sinus massage: schematic representation of mixed carotid
Figure 51.4 Carotid sinus massage: schematic representation of baro-receptor 
sinus hypersensitivity. Asystole occurs immediately while the blood pressure 
reflex pathways. 
nadir occurs approximately 18s later.
  

General medical causes of dizziness 
845
Figure 51.7 Phasic blood pressure monitoring through digital photoplethysmography. Note the ditigal cuff on the first finger of the right hand; the results of pulse, 
blood pressure and other parameters are visualized on the display screen.
repeated when upright. An abnormal response to CSM may not 
always be reproduced in those with the syndrome.22 The pro­
cedure should be repeated if massage is negative but clinical 
suspicion high.
Contraindications 
to 
CSM 
include 
recent 
cerebral 
ischaemia or myocardial infarction, or previous ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias. Those with carotid bruits or established 
cerebrovascular disease may undergo CSM if clinically indi­
cated, provided that carotid doppler ultrasonography excludes 
significant stenosis. Neurological complications following 
CSM, from arterial occlusion or embolization, are rare, pro­
vided that a standardized technique is used and exclusion 
criteria are respected.26
Management
Patients in whom the cardioinhibitory response predominates 
should have a review of medication. Withdrawal of rate- 
limiting drugs (digoxin, beta-blockers, diltiazem and others) 
may render them asymptomatic and CSM negative. Those 
with syncope in whom drugs are not implicated or cannot be 
stopped for medical reasons require dual chamber pacing. 
This abolishes syncope in over 80%, though dizziness may 
remain unchanged or even exacerbated.27 Syncopal symp­
toms are probably converted to less severe dizzy symptoms 
because an intrinsic vasodepressor response persists despite 
treatment of the asystolic component. Symptomatic patients 
with a dominant vasodepressor response are more difficult to 
treat.28 They may respond to conservative measures (Table 51.3)
and/or drugs aimed at attenuating vasodepressor responses
(Table 51.4).
Table 51.3 Conservative measures in vasodepressor 
syndromes.
Review of all medications 
Night-time head-up tilt to 20°
Graded compression hosiery, lower limb or abdominal 
Education 
Avoid precipitating events/situations 
Avoid sudden changes in posture/position 
Avoid prolonged standing or sitting 
Use evasive actions 
Lying down 
Limb exercises 
Squatting 
Know times of lowest blood pressures 
Nocturnal 
Early morning 
Postprandial
Limb exercises before major changes in position/posture 
Diet
Caffeine-3-5 cups of strong tea or coffee per day
Salt-high sodium diet
Fluids-drink around 21 per day
Alcohol-avoid or reduce
Avoid heavy meals (small and frequent)
  

846 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Figure 51.8 Carotid sinus massage at 70° of head-up tilt. One-third of patients are positive only when tilted, probably due to improved anatomical access to the 
carotid sinus.
Vasovagal syndrome 
Definition
Vasovagal syndrome (VVS) describes episodic hypotension and 
bradycardia resulting in dizziness, pre-syncope or syncope,29 
usually following a classical precipitating event or situation. 
Both symptoms and haemodynamic changes should be repro­
ducible on head-up tilt testing.30 As with CSS, the condition
may be defined in terms of vasodepressor, cardioinhibitory or 
mixed responses (Table 51.5).
Prevalence
VVS classically affects younger people between the ages of 20 
and 50 years31 but is now increasingly reported in the elderly.32 
Primary VVS is the commonest cause of vasovagal syncope in
  

General medical causes of dizziness 
847
Table 51.4 Drugs most commonly prescribed for the treatment of vasodepressor syndromes.
Drug
Doses
Mechanism(s)
Adverse effects
Fludrocortisone 
0.1-1.0mg (single dose)
Beta-blockers
Midodrine
SSRIs
NSAIDs
Drug dependent-e.g. 
metoprolol 50 mg tdsf 
atenolol 25-TOO mg od
2,5-15mg tds
Drug dependent-e.g. 
paroxetine 10-20 mg od
Drug dependent-e.g. 
ibuprofen 6G0mg tds
Plasma and intracellular volume expander, 
direct vasoconstrictor, sensitizes 
a-adrenergic receptors to noradrenaline
Modulates catecholeamine surge, inhibits 
Bezoid Jarisch reflex, prevents 
vasodilatation (p-adrenergic blockade}
a-Adrenergic agonist (resistance vessels)
Downregulation of postsynaptic 
serotoninergic receptors
Prevent vasodilatation (prostaglandin 
synthetase inhibitors)
Supine hypertension, oedema, heart failure, 
hypokalaemia
Lethargy, bronchoconstriction, bradycardia, 
conduction deficits
Pilomotor reaction, GIT effects, 
cardiovascular toxicity
Peptic ulcer, GIT bleeding, renal impairment
Peptic ulcer, gastrointestinal bleeding, 
renal impairment
SSRI, selective serotonin receptor inhibitor; NSAIDs, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug; GIT, gastrointestinal tract
Table 51.5 Classification of vasovagal syncope.
Type 1 
Mixed
Type 2A
Cardioinhibitory
Type 2B
Cardioinhibitory
Heart rate falls during syncope but the 
ventricular rate is never less than 40 
beats/min, or falls to less than 40 beats/min 
for less than 10s with or without asystole of 
less than 3. Blood pressure falls prior to the 
fall in heart rate
Heart rate falls at syncope to a ventricular 
rate less than 40 beats/min for more than 
10s or asystole occurs for more than 30s. 
Blood pressure again falls prior to the heart 
rate fall
Heart rate falls at syncope to a ventricular 
rate less than 40 beats/min for more than 
10s or asystole occurs for more than 3 s. 
Blood pressure falls to hypotensive levels 
(<80mmHg systolic) only at or after the 
onset of rapid and severe heart rate fall as 
previously defined
Heart rate does not fall more than 10% 
from its peak at the time of syncope. Blood 
pressure falls to precipitate syncope
The main exceptions to this classification 
include chronotropic incompetence, an 
excessive heart rate rise (>130 beats/min) 
during tilt, and where carotid sinus 
hypersensitivity is present
Source: Sutton R, Petersen M, Brignole M et al. Proposed classification for tilt 
induced vasovagal syncope. EurJ Card Pacing Electrophysiol 1992; 3:180-3.
all age groups, but hypotensive medications, particularly 
cardiovascular and psychotropic drugs, are implicated in up to 
40% of older patients.2 4
Type 3
Pure vasodepressor 
Exceptions
Pathophysiology
On upright posture, gravity pools around 700 ml of blood in 
lower limb and splanchnic venous capacitance vessels. This 
relative central hypovolaemia causes a slight reduction in 
systolic blood pressure which initiates arterial baro-reflexes. 
The result is an increase in sympathetic efferent activity and 
a suppression of vagal outflow to the heart and peripheral 
vessels. Blood pressure is maintained by the subsequent 
increase in peripheral vascular resistance through alpha- 
mediated arteriolar vasoconstriction. Beta-mediated increases 
in heart rate and myocardial contractility also contribute. 
The release of several rapidly acting humoral factors such as 
renin, angiotensin and noradrenaline enhances these effects. 
Disruption or distortion of this arterial baro-reflex arc results 
in vasovagal syncope.33 The precise mechanism remains 
uncertain but is thought to involve the Bezold-Jarisch reflex 
(Figure 51.9). Orthostasis (or head-up tilt) reduces venous 
return and systolic blood pressure. This results in an intense 
sympathetic response, catecholamine surge (mainly adrena­
line) and a small, relatively empty, left ventricular cavity.34 
Vigorous contraction of a small left ventricle initiates the 
reflex via intracardiac vagal mechanoreceptors. Brain-stem 
synapsis with vagal efferents produces bradycardia, sympa­
thetic withdrawal and peripheral vasodilatation, leading to 
profound hypotension and syncope. Other neurohumoral 
responses may play a part.35 Serotonin and p-endorphin 
levels rise before syncope and may initiate central sympatho- 
inhibitory responses. The adrenaline surge may itself evoke 
p-adrenergic dilatation of resistance vessels. Central provo­
cation of vasovagal syncope in response to intense emotion, 
pain and other noxious stimuli may be modulated directly 
through a limbic sympathoinhibitory pathway or indirectly 
through the amygdala and its connection with brainstem 
autonomic nuclei.36
  

848 
Vestibular disorders and their management
f Irotropy
f  Contractility
Figure 51.9 Bezold-Jarisch reflex: schematic representation (see text).
Clinical presentation
Symptoms usually (but not exclusively) occur when upright.35 
Classical precipitants include emotional stress, anxiety, exer­
cise, heavy meals, trauma, prolonged standing, a hot stuffy 
environment, pain or its anticipation. Specific situations may 
precede an event. These include valsalva manoeuvres implicit 
in defaecation, straining, coughing or micturition. Prodromal 
symptoms are common. They include severe dizziness, unsteadi­
ness, vertigo, visual deficits, extreme fatigue, weakness, 
diaphoresis, nausea, headache, visual or auditory hallucinations 
and focal neurological deficits. A significant prodrome may 
warn of impending syncope and allow implementation of 
successful evasive strategies.
Syncope is associated with extreme pallor, diaphoresis and 
dilated pupils. Myoclonus, opisthotonos or tonic clonic limb 
movements (the ‘anoxic’ or ‘convulsive’ syncope) may occur. 
Events are usually brief and recovery rapid. Sequelae include 
nausea, vomiting, headache, malaise, lethargy, hypersomno­
lence, confusion and disorientation. Events may be ‘clustered’, 
with several occurring together followed by a symptom-free 
period of days, weeks or months.
Older people with VVS may present atypically.15 Non- 
prodromal symptoms and retrograde amnesia associated with 
cognitive deficits, arthritis and sensory impairment may result 
in acute presentation with significant injury following a ‘fall’ or 
‘drop attack’. If syncope occurs, tonic clonic activity, urinary 
and/or faecal incontinence and a prolonged post-syncopal state 
are common, since major organs are usually closer to a failure 
threshold.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of VVS should not be one of exclusion. The head- 
up tilt is the gold standard test for vasovagal syndrome.37 Symp­
toms evoked are compatible with those of spontaneous vasovagal 
events. Prodromal symptoms, haemodynamic responses and 
changes in plasma catecholamines are almost identical. Esti­
mates of sensitivity (80-90%) and specificity (35-85%) compare 
favourably with standard cardiological tests, although there is 
no ‘gold standard’ tool for comparison, and differences in tilt pro­
tocol and haemodynamic monitoring techniques may critically 
affect results. Reproducibility (62-85%) is better in patients who 
are severely symptomatic or tilted within 30 days of their last 
syncopal event. False-positive tests occur in less than 10% of 
normal patients and may represent enhanced susceptibility to 
vasovagal events. Exact symptom reproduction must therefore 
accompany haemodynamic changes if a diagnosis of VVS is to be 
made with confidence. The test should be mandatory in the 
investigation of patients with unexplained dizziness, collapse, 
syncope or seizures. It is also useful in the investigation of elderly 
patients with unexplained falls, recurrent vague ‘neurological’ 
symptoms (often labelled as a ‘transient ischaemic attack’), and 
possible psychogenic or hyperventilation syncope or presyncope. 
The test is generally safe, but relative contraindications include 
severe left ventricular outflow obstruction, and mitral valve or 
proximal coronary artery stenosis.38
The test generally uses the physiotherapist’s standard tilt 
table with an electronic foot plate to elevate and lower the 
bed. The optimal protocol is still a subject of debate. The 
Newcastle protocol favoured by the authors is described in
  

General medical causes of dizziness 
849
detail elsewhere.35 Briefly, blood pressure and heart rate are 
monitored continuously, initially with the patient supine for 
15min and thereafter during head-up tilt to 70° for 40min 
(Figure 51.10). Continuous phasic blood pressure measurements 
(digital flowmetry; Portapres) are used in preference to standard 
or automated sphygmomanometry to detect rapid blood pressure 
changes (Figure 51.7). The test is considered positive only if the 
patient’s original symptoms are reproduced and accompanied by 
hypotension, bradycardia or both. If initial testing is non- 
diagnostic but clinical suspicion remains, then further tilting 
with intravenous cannulation, pharmacological (sublingual 
glyceryl trinitrate or intravenous isoprenaline) provocation or 
lower-body negative pressure should be considered.
Treatment
Vasodepressor symptoms may respond to conservative therapy 
(Table 51.3). Awareness of periods of relative hypotension (at 
night, early morning, postprandially), avoiding precipitants, 
and reviewing culprit hypotensive medications may relieve 
symptoms. Compression hosiery may be useful initially but 
often proves cumbersome, impracticable or aesthetically unac­
ceptable. Prodromal symptoms should prompt evasive strate­
gies, e.g. lying down, limb exercises, squatting. The patient has 
usually learned these through experience prior to presentation.
If symptoms persist or are non-prodromal, then additional 
measures are required.39 Dual-chamber cardiac pacing is usually
reserved for those few patients with malignant VVS.39 This com­
prises non-prodromal, frequent, severe or disabling symptoms 
associated with profound bradycardia (less than 40 beats/min 
for greater than 10 s) or asystole (greater than 3 s).
Beta-blockers such as metoprolol or atenolol are useful first- 
line drugs (Table 51.4). Their therapeutic effects are at least 
partly explained by modulation of the catecholamine surge 
which occurs prior to syncope. Fludrocortisone is limited by 
poor tolerability and adverse effects, particularly in older 
patients, and although prescribed, has not been evaluated in 
appropriately sized randomized control studies. Midodrine, an 
alpha-agonist, is currently being evaluated but is contraindi­
cated in those with significant cardiovascular disease and 
women of child-bearing age.40 Serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
such as fluoxetine, paroxetine or sertraline minimize sympatho- 
inhibitory serotoninergic activity prior to syncope by down- 
regulating postsynaptic serotonin receptors. Non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs may be useful in some patients.
Orthostatic hypotension 
Definition
Orthostatic (postural) hypotension (OH) has been arbitrarily 
defined as a 20 mmHg fall in systolic blood pressure or 10 mmH^ 
fall in diastolic pressure on assuming upright posture.41,42 
However, smaller, often transient changes in blood pressure
Figure 51.10 The 70° head-up tilt test. Note the digital cuff (right hand) for phasic blood pressure monitoring and the limb leads for ECG recording.
  

850 
Vestibular disorders and their management
may be significant, particularly in older people with comorbid 
hypertension and cerebrovascular disease.43 Conversely, large 
falls in postural blood pressure may remain asymptomatic in 
young patients. In practical terms, therefore, diagnosis depends 
upon the ability to demonstrate a postural fall in blood pressure 
on active (unassisted) standing associated with symptom 
reproduction.
Prevalence and the effects of ageing
Older people are much more susceptible to OH.44 Prevalence in 
healthy, normotensive, elderly subjects is around 7% but rises in 
the general elderly population to 24%.44 46 This is because 
comorbidity exacerbates age-related physiological changes and 
blunts compensatory baro-reflex responses.43 A blunting of the 
initial heart rate response to OH is compensated for by 
increased peripheral vascular resistance. Cardiac output is 
maintained unless the disease process is advanced or compen­
satory mechanisms are complicated by medication or comor­
bidity such as neurological disorders, cardiovascular disease 
(including hypertension)and cerebrovascular disease. Hyper­
tension impairs baro-reflex sensitivity and reduces ventricular 
compliance. In patients with OH, the normal pattern of 24 h 
blood pressure behaviour can be reversed. Elderly people with 
OH are consequently susceptible to symptoms during orthosta­
tic change in the early hours of the morning, on rising from bed, 
or after meals (Figure 51.11). Hypertension also alters cerebral 
autoregulation. Symptoms such as dizziness and syncope can 
occur with even small, transient drops in blood pressure. In 
older patients with OH and supine hypertension, coexisting 
cerebrovascular disease further lowers the threshold for cerebral 
ischaemia and exaggerates symptoms.
In contrast, younger patients retain the ability to maintain 
cerebral blood flow for systemic blood pressure changes ranging 
from 90-160 mmHg.47’48 Severe orthostatic blood pressure 
changes are asymptomatic or produce only minor symptoms 
such as dizziness, transient visual disturbance or neck and back 
discomfort, often in a ‘coathanger’ distribution. A high index 
of clinical suspicion is needed to diagnose OH in younger 
patients.
Pathophysiology
OH results from a transient or persistent failure of the arterial 
baro-reflex to adapt to postural change.46 On standing, gravity 
pools around 500-700 ml of blood in the lower limbs, splanch­
nic and pulmonary circulations. Venous return falls rapidly and 
reduces cardiac output and blood pressure. Prolonged standing 
exacerbates this through interstitial fluid shift and haemo- 
concentration. The resultant relative hypotension stimulates 
baro-receptors in the carotid sinus and aortic arch, which 
activate sympathetic and inhibit parasympathetic activity. 
Catecholamine release has a net positive inotropic and 
chronotropic effect, minimizing the fall in cardiac output. 
Reduced blood volume, cardiac dysfunction, abnormal baro- 
reflex gain, excessive peripheral blood pooling and impaired 
sympathetic or parasympathetic activity may precipitate OH.
Figure 51.11 Examples of 24-h ambulatory blood pressure profiles:
(a) normotensive with nocturnal dip; (b) reversal of diurnal rhythm (nocturnal 
hypertension) with profound early-morning postural hypotension.
These stresses may result from age-related physiological 
changes, age-associated diseases or hypotensive drugs.
Causes
Autonomic failure is the commonest pathological mechanism 
for OH.49 Underlying causes are listed in Table 51.6. Three pri­
mary autonomic failure syndromes are recognized: pure auto­
nomic 
failure 
(PAF) 
(previously 
idiopathic 
orthostatic 
hypotension), multiple system atrophy (MSA) and autonomic 
failure associated with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (IPD).
Pure autonomic failure presents exclusively with dysau- 
tonomia, while the other conditions are distinguished by the 
presence of additional neurological signs.
Patients with IPD may display autonomic failure, though 
this is mild and occurs relatively late in the condition. Con­
tributory factors include drugs (for both IPD and comorbid con­
ditions), age-related dysautonomia and autonomic neuropathy 
complicating other comorbid conditions (e.g. diabetes). MSA 
is an adult-onset sporadic neurodegenerative condition of 
unknown cause which is phenotypically diverse and around 
one-tenth as common as IPD. The median age of onset is 
around 60 years. It may present with autonomic involvement 
(Shy-Drager syndrome), with primarily parkinsonian features 
(striatonigral degeneration type) or with mainly cerebellar 
and/or pyramidal problems (olivopontocerebellar type). Even­
tually, features of all three types may coexist, but in the early 
stages, if parkinsonism predominates, there may be considerable 
difficulty discriminating MSA from IPD. This is important, 
since treatment, complications and prognosis are different.
  

General medical causes of dizziness 
851
Table 51.6 Causes of autonomic failure.
Primary autonomic failure 
Chronic 
Pure autonomic failure 
MSA
with Parkinsonian features
with cerebellar and pyramidal features
with multiple features (combination of above)
Acute or subacute dysautonomias
Secondary autonomic failure or dysfunction 
Central
Brain tumours, especially of the third ventricle or posterior 
fossa
Multiple sclerosis 
Syringobulbia 
Elderly 
Spinal
Spinal transverse myelitis 
Transverse myelitis 
Syringomyelia 
Spinal tumours 
Peripheral 
Afferent 
Tabes dorsalis 
Holmes-Adie syndrome 
Guillain-Barre syndrome 
Efferent 
Diabetes mellitus 
Amyloidosis
Surgery (such as splanchnicectomy) 
Dopamine-p-hydroxylase deficiency 
Nerve growth factor deficiency 
Afferent/efferent 
Familial dysautonomia (Riley-Day syndrome)
Miscellaneous 
Autoimmune and collagen disorders 
Renal failure 
Neoplasia
Human immunodeficiency virus infection 
Drugs
Neurally mediated syncope 
Vasovagal syncope 
Carotid sinus hypersensitivity
Source: Adapted from Mathias CJ. Primary autonomic failure in association 
with other neurological features-the syndromes of Shy-Drager and 
multiple system atrophy. In: Kenny RA, ed. Syncope in the Older Patients: 
Causes and Investigations o f Syncope and Falls. London: Chapman and Hall 
Medical, 1996: 137-54.
Helpful features differentiating MSA from IPD are given in 
Table 51.7.
Drugs are a major cause of OH in the elderly. 
The list of 
drugs with hypotensive actions is long, and a simple review of 
medication may be curative.
Table 51.7 Differentiation of multiple system atrophy (MSA) 
and idiopathic Parkinson's disease: features favouring MSA.
MSA
Marked OH ± abnormal APIs 
Levodopa unresponsiveness 
Erectile impotence 
Urinary symptoms 
Mild pyramidal/cerebellar signs 
Nocturnal stridor
OH, orthostatic hypotension; AFTs, autonomic function tests.
Clinical features
In a consecutive series of 40 older patients with OH, over half 
presented with dizziness, often associated with syncope and/or 
unexplained falls17 or ‘drop attacks’. In general, symptoms are 
related to the consequences of low blood flow rates following 
orthostasis. Other presentations therefore include presyncope, 
visual disturbance, malaise, lethargy, weakness, neck and back 
pain in a ‘coathanger’ distribution, claudication and angina. 
Precipitating factors include rapid changes in position or 
posture, prolonged recumbency, vasoactive drugs and ‘vagal’ 
stimuli such as a warm environment, raised intrathoracic 
pressure (coughing, defaecation, micturition) and physical 
exertion. 
Patients 
may 
report 
associated 
dysautonomic 
symptoms or display focal neurological signs suggestive of MSA.
Guidelines from the American College of Neurology have 
recommended changes in excess of 20 mmHg in systolic blood 
pressure during 3 min of standing as diagnostic of OH.42
Diagnosis
Diagnosis often depends on symptom reproduction when blood 
pressure falls during orthostasis. Sphygmomanometer measure­
ment may be as sensitive as more sophisticated phasic blood 
pressure measurement, and active standing as diagnostic as 
head-up tilting.17 Patients should be supine for at least 10 min 
and erect recordings taken at minute intervals for 3 min during 
standing using conventional sphygmanometry. In practice, this 
method is cumbersome. The author’s preference is to use con­
tinuous phasic blood pressure measurements (digital photo- 
plethysmography: Finapres or Portapres) for 3 min. In this way, 
rapid or transient changes in blood pressure can be recorded 
more conveniently. Reproducibility of OH is poor and depends 
upon time of measurement and autonomic integrity. Repeated 
measurements may be required in the early morning, 30-60 min 
after a meal and after exercise.
Baseline tests such as cortisol level, synacthen test, and 
glucose will exclude secondary causes of OH. Twenty-four-hour 
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring is useful in defining dis­
turbances in diurnal rhythm and the effects of supine posture,
  

852 
Vestibular disorders and their management
meals and medication. Twenty-four-hour readings can guide 
therapeutic interventions. Autonomic function tests should 
also be performed.
Management
Management aims to improve both cerebral and peripheral per­
fusion.43 A simple review of medication with rationalization of 
vasoactive drugs may be sufficient. Conservative measures may 
help if the cause of OH remains elusive (Table 51.3). Elevation 
of the head of the bed to 20° during sleep lowers renal artery 
perfusion pressure, thus activating the renin-angiotensin 
system. This conserves salt and water, thus increasing intra- 
vascular volume. These changes reduce natriuresis and diuresis 
and elevate morning blood pressures. Patients should be edu­
cated about ‘vulnerable times’ when blood pressure is lowest 
and take note of possible precipitating factors. Leg exercises 
before standing can minimize the effects of prolonged recum­
bency. Graduated pressure hosiery such as stockings or abdomi­
nal binders reduce venous pooling but may be poorly tolerated 
or of only temporary benefit. Increased fluid and salt intake pro­
tect against relative volume depletion. Small, frequent meals 
will reduce the likelihood of postprandial hypotension due to 
vasodilating effects of insulin and splanchnic pooling. Caffeine 
is a potent vasoconstrictor of capacitance vessels. An intake of 
3-5 cups of strong tea or coffee per day, particularly in the early 
morning or after meals, may ameliorate symptoms, although 
haemodynamic tolerance can develop. If conservative treat­
ment fails or there is autonomic failure, then drug treatment is 
necessary. More than one drug may be required. Therapeutic 
options are detailed in Table 51.4.
Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS)
Some patients with orthostatic intolerance do not have signifi­
cant OH on active standing or head-up tilt testing. Postural 
tachycardia syndrome (POTS) describes the reproduction of 
orthostatic symptoms associated with a heart rate increase of 
>30 beats min (or a maximum heart rate of 120 beats min or 
greater) in the absence of profound hypotension or generalized 
autonomic neuropathy.51,52 The condition usually affects young 
females and may follow a viral illness or significant weight loss. 
Patients often describe significant autonomic (profound tremu­
lousness, anxiety, restlessness, palpitations) 
and somatic 
(headache, chest wall pain, flushes, chills, fatigue, lethargy) 
symptoms in addition to those of orthostatic intolerance. 
Symptoms may be clustered or cyclical and are often mistaken 
for anxiety, panic attacks, chronic fatigue syndrome, effort syn­
drome or Da Costa’s syndrome. The condition may represent an 
incomplete or mild autonomic neuropathy. Cardiovascular 
responses to head-up tilt testing are abnormal.53 Heart rate usu­
ally rises quickly, often with marked variability, to values of 
between 120 and 170/min within 2-5 min of tilting. Blood 
pressure response may be normotensive, hypertensive or mildly 
hypotensive if there is significant venous pooling or relative 
volume depletion. Autonomic function tests usually define 
partial peripheral deficits affecting mainly sympathetic innerva­
tion. Cardiac innervation remains intact in most patients 
although p-receptor supersensitivity is described. Patients with 
peripheral a-receptor hyposensitivity and cardiac P-receptor 
supersensitivity seem particularly prone to syncope. Defective 
a-mediated peripheral vasoconstriction limits the increase in 
total peripheral resistance on assuming upright posture, while 
P-receptor supersensitivity increases cardiac contractility and 
may initiate the Bezold-Jarisch reflex. Treatment remains 
largely empirical, although it may be guided by cardiovascular 
responses and the type of autonomic dysfunction.54 Patients 
with profound tachycardia (>130 beats min) are usually P- 
receptor supersensitive, and beta blockers are therefore useful. 
Starting doses should be small, since supersensitivity can exac­
erbate adverse effects. Excessive lethargy and postural hypoten­
sion may occur with conventional doses. Patients with 
peripheral adrenergic failure may respond to an alpha-blocker 
(e.g. midodrine). Patients with unstable hypertensive responses 
to head up tilt may respond to drugs such as phenobarbitone or 
clonidine at doses which diminish central sympathetic outflow. 
Those few patients with autonomic deconditioning due to rela­
tive volume depletion, prolonged immobility or bedrest often 
respond to conservative measures (Table 51.3) and fludrocorti­
sone. The natural history of the syndrome remains undefined. 
In some patients, particularly those with autonomic decondi­
tioning, the disorder may be temporary or show improvement. 
In others, autonomic dysfunction may show insidious progres­
sion over many years.
Dizziness may be a presenting feature of the chronic fatigue 
syndrome (CFS). Recent work suggests that a partial autonomic 
neuropathy causes intermittent reductions in cardiac output at 
rest and/or diminished blood pressure responses to psychosocial 
stress. The resulting low flow states may be insufficient to sup­
port metabolic functions. This may partly explain the hetero­
geneous nature of CFS and its overlap with postural orthostatic 
tachycardia.54,55
Conduction defects, arrhythmias and outflow 
obstruction
Bradyarrhythmias and conduction deficits account for most 
dizzy, presyncopal or syncopal arrhythmic events in older 
people. These events commonly manifest as sinus node disease 
or ‘sick sinus syndrome’, said to be present when sinus rate is 
inappropriately slow for the physiological conditions prevailing 
at the time.56
Most patients with the sinus node disease or second- or 
third-degree atrioventricular block are asymptomatic. Inci­
dence is therefore difficult to assess, but is estimated at around
0.2%. The condition usually follows a long erratic course, with 
an asymptomatic phase detectable on Holter monitoring for 
many years before clinical presentation.58 Symptoms are due to 
the haemodynamic consequences of sinus bradycardia, sinus 
arrest, sinoatrial block and escape tachyarrhythmias (the so- 
called ‘tachy-brady syndrome’).59 Episodic dizziness, lighthead­
edness and syncope are the commonest presentations, although
  

General medical causes of dizziness 
853
subtle features such as fatigue, mild heart failure and intellec­
tual impairment are common in elderly patients with comorbid 
ischaemic heart and cerebrovascular disease. Palpitations 
may be prominent if escape tachyarrhythmias such as atrial 
fibrillation, atrial flutter or atrial tachycardia dominate the 
clinical picture.
The pathogenesis of the condition is thought to be a com­
bination of age-related sclerosis of the sinus node and comorbid 
heart disease.60 The artery to the sinus node is too small to be 
affected by atherosclerosis. Other conditions such as myocardi­
tis, vasculitis and infiltrations such as haemachromatosis and 
cardiac amyloid may be implicated.
A high index of suspicion is often needed to make the diag­
nosis. A 12-lead ECG may provide some clues (in the form of 
sinus bradycardia, sinoatrial block or underlying ischaemic 
heart disease) but is often completely normal. Once suspected, 
the diagnosis is confirmed by ambulatory heart rate monitoring 
and/or intracardiac electrophysiological studies.
Treatment includes pacemaker implant for the bradycardic 
component and in some cases antiarrhythmic drugs to control 
intermittent tachycardia.
One of the commonest causes of syncope in the elderly is 
failure of atrioventricular (AV) conduction. This can occur as 
an isolated lesion of the conduction system or as part of a more 
global abnormality of electrical impulse formation. Electrical 
block can occur at any point in the specialized conduction 
system. AV block is classified into two categories— supra-HIS 
(AV node and proximal HIS bundle) and infra HIS (distal HIS 
bundle and bundle branches or fascicles).61 During AV conduc­
tion failure, the more proximal the level of block, the more reli­
able, rapid and therefore better tolerated the ventricular escape 
rhythm. Although both locations of block may cause symptoms 
of dizziness and syncope, supra-HIS block is generally more 
benign than infra-HIS block. In general, if block is established 
on ECG or by intracardiac electrophysiology, pacemakers are 
required, whether patients only have symptoms of dizziness or 
also of syncope.62 First-degree block is present when there is 
intact AV conduction but the PR interval is prolonged to more 
than 200 ms on ECG limb leads. Second-degree block is present 
when ventricular complexes do not always follow atrial depo­
larization and beats are ‘dropped’. Third-degree block is known 
as complete heart block and occurs when no atrial depolariza­
tion conducts to the ventricles.
Most tachyarrhythmias, except supraventricular tachy­
cardia (both AV reciprocating tachycardia and AV nodal re­
entrant tachycardia) occur more frequently in the elderly and, 
if sustained, are less well tolerated.63 If underlying tachy­
arrhythmia is suspected as a cause of symptoms, referral for 
detailed cardiological assessment is necessary.64,65
Treatment options for symptomatic tachyarrhythmias 
include antiarrhythmic drugs and radiofrequency ablation of 
accessory pathways. Most antiarrhythmic agents can be pro- 
arrhythmic and should be used with care. Patients with com­
bined tachy and brady arrhythmias or conduction defects 
require pacing before starting antiarrhythmic drug therapy.
Pacing modes should be selected with care, the most physio­
logical system for the individual patient being preferred.66
Cardiovascular conditions causing ventricular outflow 
obstruction or severely reduced cardiac output may present with 
dizziness, presyncope or syncope.67 Symptoms are usually related 
to exertion but other stresses, such as postural change, OH, 
vasodilatation or arrhythmia may precipitate events at rest. 
Aortic stenosis is the commonest structural heart condition. It 
mainly affects older people through age-related calcification of 
the valve. Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM) 
is also being increasingly recognized in older populations. The 
two conditions have important clinical similarities: a systolic 
murmur may be the only clinical feature; classical peripheral 
signs may be completely absent (due to underlying atheroscle­
rosis of the peripheral vessels) and there is a significant risk of 
sudden death if undetected or untreated. Two-dimensional 
echocardiography and doppler are needed to confirm diagnosis 
and will usually assess severity in experienced hands. Obstruc­
tion of a prosthetic valve, left-sided atrial tumours (usually a 
myxoma) and intracardiac thrombus are rare causes of dizziness 
due to mechanical obstruction. A high degree of clinical suspi­
cion is required for diagnosis, and an unexplained diastolic 
murmur should alert the physician. Two-dimensional echocar­
diography may not be sufficiently sensitive, and trans- 
oesophageal echocardiography may be required to visualize 
these conditions. Echocardiography should be performed in any 
patient presenting with dizziness and/or a murmur to exclude 
these conditions before proceeding to further provocative tests.
INVESTIGATION OF CARDIOVASCULAR 
DIZZINESS
Elect roc a rd iograph y.
Blood pressure and heart rate measurements during 
standing, head-up tilt, autonomic function tests. 
Ambulatory heart rate monitoring.
External or internal loop recorder. 
Echocardiography.
Exercise stress testing.
Intracardiac electrophysiological studies.
Non-cardiovascular causes of 
dizziness
Dizziness in acute medical illness
Dizziness may be a non-specific presentation of acute or sub­
acute medical conditions causing hypotension, cerebral hypo­
perfusion, hyperventilation or vestibular disturbance. Older 
people are especially vulnerable, since some organs may operate 
on the threshold of failure. Major infection, anaemia or acute
  

854 
Vestibular disorders and their management
blood loss, pulmonary embolism, aortic dissection, cerebrovas­
cular disease, metabolic disturbance and adverse drug reactions 
may all present with dizziness. There are usually other associ­
ated symptoms and signs suggesting diagnosis; management is 
that of the underlying condition.
Non-cardiovascular medical causes of chronic 
or recurrent dizziness
Peripheral vestibular and psychogenic causes of dizziness domi­
nate in younger people.11,13 Peripheral vestibular disorders are dis­
cussed elsewhere (Chapter 48). Anxiety, depression and panic 
disorders cause dizziness by hyperventilation, adverse effects of 
antidepressant drugs or comorbidity. Psychogenic dizziness may 
be difficult to prove and is often a diagnosis of exclusion. Repro­
duction of symptoms on head-up tilt testing with overbreathing, 
stable haemodynamics and an alkalotic, hypocapnoeic, arterial 
blood gas profile suggests psychogenic (hyperventilation) dizzi­
ness or presyncope. 
Other miscellaneous conditions causing 
dizziness in younger patients include anorexia nervosa or chronic 
fatigue syndrome. The latter is particularly heterogeneous and 
may overlap with the postural tachycardia syndrome.51,52
Figure 51.12 Causes of dizziness in 50 consecutive patients presenting to 
primary care physicians. (Reproduced with permission from Lawson et al. 
Diagnosis of geriatric patients with severe dizziness. J Am Geriatr Soc 1999; 47: 
12- 17.3)
DIZZINESS IN YOUNGER PATIENTS
Is commonly psychogenic and/or vestibular.
Diagnosis of OH requires a high index of suspicion.
A non-medical cause is suggested by:
Absence of presyncopal or syncopal symptoms.
Dizzy supine as well as standing.
No OH or POTS on repeated active stand or head-up 
tilt.
An associated psychiatric disorder.
Head-up tilt with symptom reproduction, 
hyperventilation and an alkalotic hypocarbic blood 
gas profile during symptoms.
DIZZINESS IN OLDER PEOPLE
Non-specific presentation of acute medical illness. 
Overlaps with syncope and falls.
Retrograde amnesia for events.
Lightheadedness predicts a cardiovascular cause.
True vertigo predicts a vestibular cause. 
Cardiovascular causes are the commonest attributable 
medical cause.
Common non-cardiovascular causes: drugs, peripheral 
vestibular and central neurological disorders. 
Psychogenic causes are rare.
Multifactorial and poorly defined.
Requires multidisciplinary management.
Non-cardiovascular causes of dizziness in older people are 
heterogeneous and often difficult to define. In contrast to young 
patients, psychogenic causes of dizziness are uncommon and the 
significance of peripheral vestibular disorders often overstated68 
(Chapter 48). A major problem is differentiating a causative 
condition from one which is merely contributory. Many so- 
called ‘provocative tests’ are non-specific. For example, symp­
tom reproduction on head and neck movements may be 
attributable to cervical spondylosis but may equally implicate 
carotid sinus hypersensitivity or cerebrovascular disease. Many 
authors have categorized the non-cardiovascular causes of 
dizziness3,68 (Figure 51.12) (Chapters 49 and 54).
A prospective case-controlled study by Lawson et al3 used 
detailed cardiovascular, vestibular and neuromuscular assess­
ments to define attributable and contributory causes of dizziness
in patients over 60 years presenting to their general practi­
tioner. Sixteen per cent of patients had attributable ‘central 
neurological disorders’, comprising mainly cerebrovascular dis­
ease and cervical spondylosis. A prospective study by Colledge 
et al68 recruited older patients with dizziness through local press 
advertisements and also reported cerebrovascular disease and 
cervical spondylosis as prominent attributable causes.
Diffuse cerebrovascular disease increases the risk of 
cerebral hypoperfusion in response to small transient blood 
pressure reductions difficult or impossible to measure by 
conventional means. Hypertension, a common comorbid 
condition, compounds this problem by altering cerebral 
autoregulation. Dizziness (or vertigo) occurring in isolation 
cannot be attributed to brainstem ischaemia without a descrip­
tion of additional focal neurological deficits.69 A combination
  

General medical causes of dizziness 
855
of dizziness with one or more of dysarthria, diplopia, demi- 
anaesthesia or demiparesis (the ‘five D’s’) is required. Absence 
of these features should prompt investigation for alternative 
causes of dizziness. In the subclavian steal syndrome, stenosis of 
the subclavian artery proximal to the origin of the vertebral 
artery results in transient brainstem ischaemia on physical 
activity of the affected arm.
acuity72 may contribute to the evolution of dizziness. Twenty- 
two per cent of patients in Lawson’s study had no definitive 
diagnosis after full evaluation, but a number of peripheral 
‘somatosensory deficits’ were found which may have been 
contributory.
Ultimately, many if not most elderly patients will have a 
mixed or multifactorial dizziness, and in a significant proportion 
no cause will be found, even after comprehensive assessment.
POSTERIOR CIRCULATORY DISTURBANCES 
AS A CAUSE OF DIZZINESS—THE ‘FIVE D’S’
Dizziness or vertigo.
Dysarthria.
Diplopia.
Demiparesis.
De m i anaesthes ia.
Degenerative changes in the cervical spine and paraspinal 
tissues may disrupt proprioceptive input to central centres, 
resulting in dizziness and dysequilibrium. This mechanism 
seems to be more significant than that of intermittent sympa- 
thetic interruption or osteophytic vertebral artery occlusion.70
Similarly, peripheral disturbances to the sensorium may be 
caused by a variety of sensory, neurological or locomotor deficits 
(Figure 51.13). Peripheral neuropathy, degenerative changes in 
the major weight-bearing joints or muscles71 and poor visual
Figure 51.13 The 'sensorium': schematic representation of possible 
disturbances resulting in dizziness and dysequilibrium.
Medical assessment of the dizzy 
patient
Introduction
A careful clinical history (Table 51.8) and detailed examina­
tion (Table 51.9) may direct the physician towards a particular 
diagnosis or diagnostic category. A logical investigation strategy 
may then be devised for the individual patient. In many cases, 
it is difficult to think algorithmically, but a general approach to 
the dizzy patient is summarized in Figure 51.1.
History
Predictors of a cardiovascular diagnosis3 include: dizziness 
described as ‘lightheadedness’, associated syncope, pallor or 
unexplained falls, a need to sit or lie down, and symptoms pre­
cipitated by prolonged standing or co-morbid cardiovascular 
disease. A peripheral vestibular disorder is implied by descrip­
tion of vertigo, particularly if associated with other vestibular 
symptoms such as tinnitus or deafness1,3 (Chapter 48).
An eyewitness account of a dizzy episode can be invaluable, 
particularly in older people who may have retrograde amnesia 
or poor cognitive function.
A detailed past medical history will help to define comor­
bidity and may identify those likely to have specific, multi­
factorial or poorly defined causes for their dizziness.
A comprehensive drug review is vital. All drugs (including 
those obtained ‘over the counter’) should be regarded as poten­
tial causes of dizziness until proved otherwise.
In older people, multifactorial or poorly defined dizziness is 
common and definitive medical intervention may not be possi­
ble. A detailed social and functional review then becomes cen­
tral to the development of a holistic multidisciplinary strategy 
designed primarily to maintain function and independence 
rather than ‘cure’ dizziness.14
Examination
Physical examination should focus on assessment of the cardio­
vascular, neurological and locomotor systems.3,17,68 Bradycardia 
may be drug related or suggest underlying sick sinus syndrome 
or conduction defects. Systolic murmurs may indicate outflow 
tract obstruction. Carotid bruits may imply carotid stenosis and
  

856 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Table 51.8 The dizzy patient: history (key features).
Description of dizziness 
Vertigo 
Lightheaded 
Others 
Frequency 
Severity 
Duration
Effect on quality of life
Associated features 
Cardiological 
Neurological 
Vestibular
Precipitating events 
Position 
Posture
Head and neck movements
Situations
Valsalva
Exertion
Anxiety
Eyewitness account 
Syncope (pallor, flushing)
Altered awareness
Tonic clonic or myoclonic movements
Post-event states
Frequency
Duration and severity of episodes
Past medical history 
Cardiological 
Neurological 
Vestibular 
Locomotor 
Psychiatric
Drug history
Review all drugs (including alcohol and recreational drugs) for 
potential effects on heart rate, rhythm, blood pressure, mental 
state, neuromuscular function
Social history 
Smoking 
Alcohol 
Occupation 
Driver status
Social and family networks
Functional history 
Independence in basic and extended activities of daily living
significant cerebrovascular disease. Baseline and orthostatic 
blood pressure measurements may detect large postural blood 
pressure deficits. A history of dizziness or presyncope while 
using an arm, in conjunction with a low-volume radial pulse 
and a lower blood pressure, would indicate a subclavian steal 
syndrome.
Table 51.9 The dizzy patient: examination (key features).
General 
Well or ill
External stigmata of disease 
Cognitive impairment 
Anxiety state
Cardiovascular
Bradycardia or tachycardia 
Systolic or diastolic murmur 
Carotid bruits 
Hypertension
Postural blood pressure drop
Neurological 
Cervical radiculomyelopathy 
Peripheral neuropathy 
Stroke disease 
Parkinsonism 
Cerebellar signs 
Gait and balance abnormalities
Locomotor
Myopathy
Arthropathy of cervical spine or weight-bearing joints
Vestibular
Hallpike's manoeuvre
Assessment of cognitive function is useful in older patients. 
Cognitive impairment, due to cerebrovascular disease or 
Alzheimer’s disease, may be a marker of comorbid cardio­
vascular pathology. Significant cognitive deficits may compli­
cate clinical assessment, make definitive diagnosis difficult and 
influence management once diagnosis is established. An 
Abbreviated Mental Test (AMT)73 is a quick and convenient 
screen and may be followed by a formal Mini Mental State 
Examination (MMSE)74 if indicated.
A full neurological examination should be performed 
(Chapter 49) and central or peripheral disturbances to the 
sensorium noted. Pyramidal signs, and an abnormal gait pat­
tern together with vascular risk factors, may suggest a central 
vascular origin for dizziness. This impression is supported by 
symptom reproduction during stable haemodynamics on 
head-up tilt testing. A history of arthritis, neck restriction, 
mixed motor signs in the upper limbs, pyramidal signs in the 
lower limbs and an unsteady gait may imply significant cervi­
cal radiculomyelopathy as a cause of dizziness and dysequilib­
rium. Loss of sensory modalities (particularly proprioceptive) 
in the lower limbs, a positive Romberg’s test and gait 
anomalies suggest a peripheral neuropathy. Patients with OH 
should be carefully assessed for associated extrapyramidal, 
pyramidal and cerebellar signs suggestive of MSA. Hallpike’s 
manoeuvre75 may help to define those in whom benign 
paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) forms part of their 
dizziness or balance disorder (Chapter 48).
  

General medical causes of dizziness 
857
Examination of the locomotor system may yield evidence 
of significant arthritis or muscle wasting and weakness. The 
cervical spine, weight-bearing joints and postural muscles are 
particularly important in terms of proprioceptive input.
Other physical assessments routinely performed may have 
little predictive value in terms of diagnosis but may identify 
minor contributory factors which can direct rehabilitative 
strategies in those with multifactorial or poorly defined dizzi­
ness. 
Visual acuity should be measured with a Snellen chart. 
Deficits assume greater significance when associated with 
vestibular or proprioceptive deficits and may be easily cor- 
rectible. A positive Romberg’s test in the absence of other pro­
prioceptive deficits loosely suggests a primary vestibular 
problem. A wide range of gait and balance assessments are 
described.76 They are non-specific but provide useful informa­
tion regarding stability, function, judgement and coordination. 
For example, the ‘get up and go test’ measures the ability of a 
patient to rise from a chair, walk a prescribed distance, turn 
around, stand with eyes shut, walk back to the chair and return 
to the sitting position. Again, poor performance in various 
aspects of this and similar manoeuvres may influence rehabili­
tative intervention.
Investigation
Routine tests, including full blood count, biochemical profile, 
thyroid function, chest X-ray and 12-lead ECG, are useful in 
helping to exclude acute general medical causes of dizziness. In 
older patients with chronic or recurrent dizziness, they help to 
define significant comorbidity and provide an essential baseline 
for therapeutic interventions.
Detailed vestibular assessment is usually unhelpful unless a 
description of true vertigo predominates or there are associated 
vestibular features.68 Posturography and formal gait analysis are 
not generally helpful in diagnosis but may be used as a measure 
of response to interventions in some patients (Chapter 44). 
Vestibular review should be directed by an audiology physician 
with an interest in dizziness and vestibular disorders (Chapter
54).
It is the authors’ opinion that all patients presenting with 
chronic or recurrent dizziness, which does not have vestibular 
characteristics, should be considered for cardiovascular assess­
ment. This includes provocative testing for common hypoten­
sive disorders, i.e. carotid sinus massage (supine and upright), a 
70° head-up tilt test (with provocation if necessary) and ortho­
static blood pressure measurements. Non-invasive beat-to-beat 
blood pressure monitoring (digital plethysmography: Portapres) 
will detect rapid or transient changes in blood pressure during 
symptoms. Conventional sphygmomanometry may fail to 
recognize vasodepressor responses.
Further investigation is individualized by presentation, 
clinical findings and the results of baseline cardiovascular tests. 
Most of these have been described in the relevant sections but 
are summarized here. Ambulatory heart rate (Holter) monitor­
ing is most useful in dizzy patients with associated palpitations,
syncope, abnormal 12-lead ECG or other evidence of struc­
tural heart disease. If the recording is unremarkable or asymp­
tomatic but clinical suspicion of arrhythmia remains high, 
then an external (Cardiomemo) or implantable (Reveal: 
Medtronic Inc) loop recorder may be useful in selected 
patients. Electrophysiological studies may be useful in a small 
selected group of patients in whom the suspicion of arrhythmia 
is high. A 24-h ambulatory blood pressure profile is helpful in 
further defining vasodepressor syndromes and monitoring 
response to treatment. Echocardiography should be performed 
if systolic (aortic stenosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
pulmonary stenosis) or diastolic (left atrial ball thrombus, left 
atrial myxoma) murmurs are present to exclude mechanical 
outflow tract obstruction. Other evidence of structural heart 
disease, particularly left ventricular hypertrophy or dilatation, 
may provide supportive evidence for dizziness of cardiovascular 
origin.
Neuroradiography may detail the extent of underlying 
cerebrovascular disease and exclude other significant intracere­
bral pathology. Carotid doppler ultrasonography defines the 
severity of carotid stenosis prior to carotid sinus massage in 
those with a bruit or recent cerebrovascular events. Retrograde 
flow in the vertebral artery during upper-limb exercise, if asso­
ciated with typical clinical features, confirms subclavian steal 
syndrome. MRI scanning will define the severity of cervical 
spinal pathology (Chapter 49).
General management of the dizzy 
patient
Interventions for cardiovascular and specific medical causes of 
dizziness have been discussed elsewhere. Unfortunately, at 
least half of all patients remain without a definitive diagnosis 
even after full evaluation. Many others have dizziness of multi­
factorial origin.77 Further detailed investigations are usually 
unrewarding and often counterproductive. These patients 
require a holistic multidisciplinary approach. The emphasis 
should be on defining practical strategies for relieving symp­
toms and reducing disability rather than finding a panacea for 
dizziness.14
Useful interventions include vestibular rehabilitation exer­
cises and balance re-training (Chapter 54). Provocative exer­
cise programmes encourage habituation to postures and 
positions associated with dizziness. Such approaches may 
improve symptoms, proprioceptive input, stability, gait, balance 
and confidence. Psychological assessment, with anxiety man­
agement programmes, may improve hyperventilation or psy­
chogenic symptoms. A detailed home assessment with a 
physiotherapist and occupational therapist may build confi­
dence and reduce risk of falls through the implementation of
C 
. 
78-80
various safety strategies.
‘Traditional’ methods of treating the dizzy patient are con­
troversial. In the authors’ opinion, soft collars given to prevent
  

858 
Vestibular disorders and their management
osteophytic nipping of the vertebral arteries reduce propriocep- 
tive input and may provoke symptoms of carotid sinus hyper- 
sensitivity. Vestibular sedatives should be used with extreme 
caution. They may exacerbate symptoms if dizziness is not 
vestibular in origin. Adverse effects may compound comorbid­
ity in older patients. They should be used only after careful 
thought and stopped after a short trial period if ineffective 
(Chapter 54). Other regular medications should always be 
viewed as potential causes of dizziness and reviewed at regular 
intervals.
Summary
Medical management of the dizzy patient presents a consider­
able challenge. Physicians should be aware that dizziness may be 
a non-specific presentation of acute medical illness, particularly 
in older people. Those with chronic or recurrent dizziness need 
further careful evaluation. Patients with vertigo and/or other 
significant vestibular features should be referred to an audiology 
physician following medical review. Psychogenic dizziness 
requires specialist intervention by a clinical psychologist once 
physical causes have been excluded.
Cardiovascular disease is a common but frequently over­
looked cause of dizziness in older people. It is suggested by a 
description of lightheadedness, particularly on prolonged stand­
ing, and when associated with syncope, pallor or comorbid 
cardiovascular disease. Assessment should include carotid sinus 
massage, a prolonged head-up tilt test and orthostatic blood 
pressure measurements with continuous phasic blood pressure 
monitoring.
Non-cardiovascular medical causes of dizziness are hetero­
geneous and include central neurological disease and periph­
eral somatosensory deficits. Dizziness is often multifactorial 
and remains poorly defined in a significant proportion of 
patients. Those without remediable cause(s) may benefit from 
rehabilitative strategies to reduce morbidity and maintain 
independence.
Data to support an evidence-based approach to the dizzy 
patient remain in short supply. The protean nature of dizziness 
fosters bias and clouds the assessment of specific interventions. 
Many views and reviews on the subject must therefore remain 
personalized rather than evidence-based. The problem is sum­
marized effectively by Sloane and Dallara,14 who compare the 
assessment of dizziness to the attempts of three blind men to 
describe an elephant. Each man feels a different part and so 
gives a different, accurate, yet biased description of what the 
elephant is like.
No account of dizziness can therefore be definitive but it is 
hoped that this text will provide a stimulus to further research 
and debate. The problem of dizziness impinges on many differ­
ent medical and paramedical specialities. Collaboration 
between these groups is essential if we are to develop more 
effective management strategies for the dizzy patient.
References
1. Orma EJ, Koskenoja M. Dizziness attacks and continuous dizziness 
in the aged. Geriatrics 1957; 12: 91-100.
2. Drachman DA, Hart CW. An approach to the dizzy patient. Neu­
rology 1972; 22(4): 323-34.
3. Lawson J, Fitzgerald J, Birchall J, Aldren CP, Kenny RA. Diagno­
sis of geriatric patients with severe dizziness. J Am Geriatr Soc 
1999; 47(1): 12-17.
4. Royal College of General Practitioners, Office of Population 
Censuses and Surveys. Morbidity Statistics from General Practice. 
Table 13. Third National Study, 1981-82.
5. Sloane PD. Dizziness in primary care. Results from the National 
Ambulatory Medical Care Survey. J Family Practice 1989; 29(1): 
33-8.
6. Colledge NR, Wilson JA, Macintyre CC, MacLennan WJ. The 
prevalence and characteristics of dizziness in an elderly commu­
nity. Age Ageing 1994; 23(2): 117-20.
7. Sixt E, Landahl S. Postural disturbances in a 75-year-old popula­
tion: I. Prevalence and functional consequences. Age Ageing 1987; 
16(6): 393-8.
8. Evans JG. Transient neurological dysfunction and risk of stroke in 
an elderly English population: the different significance of vertigo 
and non-rotatory dizziness. Age Ageing 1990: 19(1): 43-9.
9. Downton J, Andrews K. Postural disturbance and psychological 
symptoms amongst elderly people living at home. Int J Geriatr 
Psychiatry 1990; 5: 93-98.
10. Sloane P, Blazer D, George LK. Dizziness in a community elderly 
population. J Am Geriatr Soc 1989; 37(2): 101-8.
11. Kroenke K, Lucas CA, Rosenberg ML, et al. Causes of persistent 
dizziness. A prospective study of 100 patients in ambulatory care. 
Ann Intern Med 1992; 117(11): 898-904.
12. Smith MS. Evaluation and management of psychosomatic symp­
toms in adolescence. Clin Pediatrics 1986; 25(3): 131-5.
13. Nozawa I, Hisamatsu K, Imamura S, Fujimori I, Nakayama H, 
Murakami Y. Psychosomatic aspects of healthy young women with 
orthostatic dysregulation. Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci 1996; 21(3): 
222-5.
14- Sloane PD, Dallara J. Clinical research and geriatric dizziness: 
the blind men and the elephant. J Am Geriatr Soc 1999; 47(1): 
113-14.
15. McIntosh S, Da Costa D, Kenny RA. Outcome of an integrated 
approach to the investigation of dizziness, falls and syncope in 
elderly patients referred to a ‘syncope’. Age Ageing 1993; 22(1): 
53-8.
16. McIntosh SJ, Lawson J, Kenny RA. Clinical characteristics of 
vasodepressor, cardioinhibitory, and mixed carotid sinus syndrome 
in the elderly. A m ] Med 1993; 95(2): 203-8.
17. Ward C, Kenny RA. Reproducibility of orthostatic hypotension in 
symptomatic elderly. Am J Med 1996; 100(4): 418-22.
18. Shaw FE, Kenny RA. The overlap between syncope and falls in 
the elderly. Postgrad Med] 1997; 73(864): 635-9.
19. Thomas JE. Diseases of the carotid sinus— syncope. In: Vinken PJ, 
Bruyn GW, eds. Handbook of Clinical Neurology, Vol II. 
Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing, 1972: 532-51.
  

General medical causes of dizziness 
859
20. Lown B, Levine SA. The carotid sinus: clinical evaluation of its 
stimulation. Circulation 1961; 23: 766-89.
21. Morley CA, Perrins EJ, Grant P, Chan SL, McBrien DJ, Sutton R. 
Carotid sinus syncope treated by pacing. Analysis of persistent 
symptoms and role of atrioventricular sequential pacing. Br Heart J 
1982; 47(5): 411-18.
22. Walter PF, Crawley IS, Domey ER. Carotid sinus hypersensitivity 
and syncope. Am J Cardiol 1978; 42(3): 396-403.
23. Strasberg B, Sagie A, Erdman S, Kusniec J, Sclarovsky S, Agmon 
J. Carotid sinus hypersensitivity and the carotid sinus syndrome. 
Prog Cardiovasc Dis 1989; 31(5): 379-9.
24. Draper AJ. The cardioinhibitory carotid sinus syndrome. Ann 
Intern Med 1950; 32: 700-16.
25. Parry S, Richardson DA, O’Shea D, Kenny RA. Upright carotid 
sinus massage is essential. Heart 2000; 83(1): 22-3.
26. Davies AJ, Kenny RA. Frequency of neurologic complications 
following carotid sinus massage. Am J Cardiol 1998; 81(10): 
1256-7.
27. Morley CA, Sutton R. Carotid sinus syncope. IntJ Cardiol 1984; 
6(3): 287-93.
28. Bexton RS, Davies A, Kenny RA. The rate-drop response in 
carotid sinus syndrome: the Newcastle experience. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 1997; 20(3 Pt 2): 840.
29. Lewis T. Vasovagal syncope and the carotid sinus mechanism. Br 
Med J 1932; 1: 873-6.
30. Kenny RA, Ingram A, Bayliss J, Sutton R. Head-up tilt: a useful test 
for investigating unexplained syncope. Lancet 1986; 8494:1352-5.
31. Weissler AM, Warren JV. Vasodepressor syncope. Am Heart J 
1959; 57: 786-94.
32. Fitzpatrick A, Sutton R. Tilting towards a diagnosis in recurrent 
unexplained syncope. Lancet 1989; 1(8639): 658-60.
33. Mark AL. The Bezold-Jarisch reflex revisited: clinical implica­
tions of inhibitory reflexes originating in the heart. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 1983; 1(1): 90-102.
34. Fitzpatrick A, Williams T, Ahmed R, Lightman S, Bloom SR, 
Sutton R. Electrocardiographic and endocrine changes during 
vasovagal syncope induced by prolonged head up tilt. Eur J 
Cardiac Pacing Electrophysiol 1992; 2: 121-8.
35. Sutton R. Vasovagal syncope: clinical features, epidemiology and 
natural history. In: Blanc JJ, Benditt T, Sutton R, eds. Neurally 
Mediated 
Syncope: 
Pathophysiology, 
Investigations, 
Treatment. 
Armonk: Futura, 1996: 71-6.
36. Le Doux JE. Emotion and the amygdala. In: Aggleton JP, ed. The 
Amygdala Neurobiological Aspects of Emotion, Memory and Mental 
Dysfunction. New York: Wiley Liss, 1992; 339-51.
37. Parry SW, Kenny RA. Tilt table testing. In: Malik M, ed. Clinical 
Guide to Cardiac Autonomic Tests. London: Klewer Academic 
Publishers, 1998; 67-99.
38. Grubb B, Samoil D. Neurocardiogenic syncope. In: Kenny RA, ed. 
Syncope in the Older Patient: Causes and Investigation of Syncope and 
Falls. London: Chapman and Hall Medical, 1996; 137-54.
39. Connolly SJ, Sheldon R, Roberts RS, Gent M. The North 
American Vasovagal Pacemaker Study (VPS). A randomized trial 
of permanent cardiac pacing for the prevention of vasovagal 
syncope. J Am Coll Cardiol 1999; 33(1): 16-20.
40. Ward CR, Gray JC, Gilroy JJ, Kenny RA. Midodrine: a role in the 
management of neurocardiogenic syncope. Heart 1998; 79(1): 
45-9.
41. Mathias CJ, Bannister R. Investigation of autonomic disorders. In: 
Bannister R, Mathias CJ, eds. Autonomic Failure: A Textbook of 
Clinical Disorders of the Autonomic Nervous System. Oxford: Oxford 
Medical Publications, 1992; 225-90.
42. Anonymous. Consensus statement on the definition of orthostatic 
hypotension, pure autonomic failure, and multiple system atrophy. 
The Consensus Committee of the American Autonomic Society 
and the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology 1996; 46(5): 
1470.
43. Dey AB, Kenny RA. Orthostatic hypotension in the elderly: aeti­
ology, manifestations and management. J Irish Coll Physicians 
Surgeons. 1998; 27: 182-7.
44. Lipsitz LA, Storch HA, Minaker KL, Rowe JW. Intra-individual 
variability in postural blood pressure in the elderly. Clin Sci 1985; 
69(3): 337-41.
45. Caird FI, Andrews GR, Kennedy RD. Effect of posture on blood 
pressure in the elderly. Br Heart J 1973; 35(5): 527-30.
46. Schatz IJ, Masaki KH, Burchfiel CM, Curb JD, Chiu D. Orthosta­
tic hypotension (OH) as a predictor of two year mortality in elderly 
men; the Honolulu heart program. Clin Autonomic Res 1995; 5:321.
47. Sjostrand T. Regulation of blood pressure distribution in man. 
A eta Physiol Scand 1952; 26: 312.
48. Lassen NA, Christensen MS. Physiology of cerebral blood flow. 
B J Anaesthesia 1976; 48(8): 719-34.
49. Mathias CJ. Primary autonomic failure in association with other 
neurological features— the syndromes of Shy-Drager and multiple 
system atrophy. In: Kenny RA, ed. Syncope in the Older Patient: 
Causes and Investigations of Syncope and Falls. London: Chapman 
and Hall Medical, 1996: 137-54.
50. Wynne HA, Schofield S. Drug induced orthostatic hypotension. 
In: Kenny RA, ed. Syncope in the Older Patient: Causes and Investi­
gations of Syncope and Falls. London: Chapman and Hall Medical, 
1996: 137-54.
51. Schondorf R, Low PA. Idiopathic postural orthostatic tachycardia 
syndrome: an attenuated form of acute pandysautonomia? 
Neurology 1993; 43(1): 132-7.
52. Low PA, Opfer-Gehrking TL, Textor SC, Schondorf R, Suarez GA, 
Fealey RD, Camilleri M. Comparison of the postural tachycardia 
syndrome (POTS) with orthostatic hypotension due to autonomic 
failure. J Autonomic Nervous System 1994; 50(2): 181-8.
53. Sandroni P, Opfer-Gehrking TL, Benarroch EE, Shen WK, Low 
PA. Certain cardiovascular indices predict syncope in the postural 
tachycardia syndrome. Clin Autonomic Res 1996; 6(4): 225-31.
54. De Lorenzo F, Hargreaves J, Kakkar VV. Possible relationship 
between chronic fatigue and postural tachycardia syndromes. Clin 
Autonomic Res 1996; 6(5): 263-4.
55. LaManca JJ, Peckerman A, Walker J et al. Cardiovascular 
response during head-up tilt in chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin 
Physiol 1999; 19(2): 111-20.
56. Mazuz M, Friedman HS. Significance of prolonged electrocardio­
graphic pauses in sinoatrial disease: sick sinus syndrome. Am J 
Cardiol 1983; 52(5): 485-9.
  

860 
Vestibular disorders and their management
57. Wu DL, Yeh SJ, Lin FC, Wang CC, Chemg WJ. Sinus auto- 
maticity and sinoatrial conduction in severe symptomatic sick 
sinus syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol 1992; 19(2): 355-64.
58. Hilgard J, Ezri MD, Denes P. Significance of ventricular pauses of 
three seconds or more detected on twenty-four-hour Holter 
recordings. Am J Cardiol 1985; 55(8): 1005-8.
59. Short DS. The syndrome of alternating bradycardia and tachycar­
dia. Br Heart J 1954; 16: 208.
60. Kuga K, Yamaguchi I, Sugishita Y, I to I. Assessment by autonomic 
blockade of age-related changes of the sinus node function and 
autonomic regulation in sick sinus syndrome. Am J Cardiol 1988; 
61(4): 361-6.
61. Steinhaus D. Atrioventricular conduction disturbance. In: Kenny 
RA, ed. Syncope in the Older Patient: Causes and Investigations of 
Syncope and Falls. London: Chapman and Hall Medical, 1996: 
185-200.
62. Rosen KM, Dhingra RC, Loeb HS, Rahimtoola SH. Chronic 
heart block in adults. Clinical and electrophysiological observa­
tions. Arch Intern Med 1973; 131(5): 663-72.
63. McComb JM. Electrophysiological studies. In: Kenny RA, ed. 
Syncope in the Older Patient: Causes and Investigations of 
Syncope and Falls. London: Chapman and Hall Medical, 1996: 
73-86.
64. ACC/AHA Task Force Report. Guidelines for Implantation of 
Cardiac Pacemakers and Antiarrhythmia Devices. A Report of 
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on the Assessment of Diagnostic and Therapeutic Car­
diovascular Procedures (Committee on Pacemaker Implantation). 
J Am Coll Cardiol 1998; 31(5): 1175-209.
65. Bennett DH. Cardiac Arrhythmias. Practical Notes on Interpretation 
and Treatment 5th edn. Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann, 1997.
66. Anonymous. Recommendations for pacemaker prescription for 
symptomatic bradycardia. Report of a working party of the British 
Pacing and Electrophysiology Group. Br Heart J 1991; 66(2): 
185-91.
67. Banning PA, Hall RJC. Structural and mechanical causes of syn­
cope. In: Kenny RA, ed. Syncope in the Older Patient: Causes and 
Investigations of Syncope and Falls. London: Chapman and Hall 
Medical, 1996: 201-18.
68. Colledge NR, Barr-Hamilton RM, Lewis SJ, Sellar RJ, Wilson JA. 
Evaluation of investigations to diagnose the cause of dizziness in 
elderly people: a community based controlled study. Br Med ] 
1996; 313(7060): 788-92.
69. Sandercock P. Recent developments in the diagnosis and manage­
ment of patients with transient ischaemic attacks and minor 
ischaemic strokes. Q J Med 1991; 78(286): 101-12.
70. de Jong PT, de Jong JM, Cohen B, Jongkees LB. Ataxia and nys­
tagmus induced by injection of local anesthetics in the neck. Ann 
Neurol 1977; 1(3): 240-6.
71. Richmond FJR, Bakker DA, Stacey MJ. The sensorium: receptors 
of neck muscles and joints. In: Peterson BW, Richmond FJR, eds. 
Control of Head Movements. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1988: 49-62.
72. Paulus WM, Straube A, Brandt T. Visual stabilization of posture. 
Physiological stimulus characteristics and clinical aspects. Brain 
1984; 107(Pt 4): 1143-63.
73. Hodkinson HM. Evaluation of a mental test score for assessment 
of mental impairment in the elderly. Age Ageing 1972; 1(4): 
233-8.
74. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. ‘Mini-mental state’. A 
practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the 
clinician. J Psychiatr Res 1975; 12(3): 189-98.
75. Dix MR, Hallpike CS. The pathology, symptomatology and diag­
nosis of certain common disorders of the vestibular system. Ann 
Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1981; Suppl 90(1 pt 2): 1-19.
76. Wolfson L, Whipple R, Amerman P, Tobin JN. Gait assessment in 
the elderly: a gait abnormality rating scale and its relation to falls. 
J Gerontol 1990; 45(1): M12-19.
77. Tinetti ME, Williams CS, Gill TM. Dizziness among older adults: a 
possible geriatric syndrome. Ann Intern Med 2000; 132(5): 337-44.
78. Tinetti ME. Where is the vision for fall prevention? J Am Geriatr 
Soc 2001; 49(5): 676-7.
79. Fabacher D, Pietruszka F, Josephson K. An in-home assessment 
programme for older adults: preliminary findings. Gerontologist 
1990; 30: 46.
80. Tinetti ME, Baker DI, McAvay G et al. A multifactorial interven­
tion to reduce the risk of falling among elderly people living in the 
community. N EnglJ Med 1994; 331(13): 821-7.
  

Balance disorders in 
children
Claes Moller
At birth, the newborn infant experiences a new world, in which 
he is exposed suddenly to new kinds of movements and posi­
tions. The sensory systems are fully developed at birth; the 
acquisition of balance is a matter of adaptation and learning, 
and is achieved using three different systems:
* 
the proprioceptive system
■ 
the visual system
■ 
the vestibular system.
Afferent signals from all three systems pass into the brain­
stem, pons and cerebellum, where they are processed, and 
then modulated neural information is transmitted through 
efferent nerve fibres to maintain coordinated movements. 
Assessment of these three sensory systems and the central 
nervous system is essential when evaluating children with 
balance disorders.
History
The anamnesis is, as in adults with balance disorders, of the 
utmost importance. It is, however, difficult to get good case his­
tories from small children or the parents, as a young child, when 
subjected to attacks of dizziness, can often only respond with 
crying, pallor and sleepiness. However, the child with a chronic 
bilateral vestibular dysfunction displays other symptoms, such 
as delayed motor milestones, which should be established for 
children with ‘dizziness’, ‘clumsiness’, ‘funny turns’, ataxia or 
hearing impairment (Table 52.1).
Table 52.1 
Early motor milestones.
6 weeks 
Hold the head in the plane of the body
12 weeks 
Hold the head above the plane of the body
16 weeks 
Good head control
6 months 
Unsupported sitting
10 months 
Standing up with support
12 months 
Walking
Questions concerning bilateral vestibular hypofunction or 
areflexia are simple and straightforward, such as those given in 
Table 52.2.
If attacks of vertigo or dizziness are suspected in a child, a 
valuable suggestion is to have the parents keep a diary, in which 
they should note:
# 
symptoms 
(pallor, 
vomiting, 
unsteadiness, 
headache, 
abnormal movements, falling, loss of consciousness)
* 
frequency of attacks (increasing, decreasing?) 
m 
duration of attacks and the time of day
■ 
other ear symptoms
■ 
other general medical symptoms
■ 
trauma, drugs, chemicals.
From the general perspective, it is important to obtain a 
detailed past history regarding the mother’s pregnancy, the 
child’s delivery, any perinatal medical history, any history of 
childhood trauma and/or infections, any previous drug therapy, 
and a detailed family history of migraine, or neurological or 
otological disorders.
Balance assessment
Balance assessment is, of course, dependent upon the age of the 
child, but most balance tests can be performed from a very early 
age (Table 52.3).
Table 52.2 
Questions relevant to vestibular function.
At what age did the child sit unsupported?
What was the walking age?
Did the child experience difficulties in learning to cycle?
Does the child have problems when walking in darkness or on 
uneven surfaces?
Does the child experience motion sickness?
Does the child have problems in gymnastics and sports 
activities?
Is the child considered to be clumsy?

862 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Table 52.3 
Balance assessment.
Play
ENT examination 
Eye-movement examination 
Neurological examination 
Romberg test
Video-oculography/electro-QCulography 
Caloric testing 
Standard irrigations 
Ice water irrigations 
Rotary chair testing
Observation of a child playing can give extremely valuable 
information regarding vision, position of the head, movement 
of the arms and legs, and stability (Figure 52.1) although it is 
time-consuming for the busy clinician. Balls are excellent tools 
to use in assessment, as they allow evaluation of a number of 
different skills required for balance.
A detailed ear, nose and throat examination is essential in 
order to detect dysmorphology of the face, outer ear, ear canal, 
tympanic membrane and middle ear. A neurological examina­
tion, including cranial nerve tests, deep tendon reflexes and 
assessment of developmental reflexes, allows an overall assess­
ment of central nervous system (CNS) function and may 
identify specific opthalmological/neurological defects associ­
ated with balance dysfunction. Moreover, a detailed clinical 
examination of eye movements using an ‘interesting’— e.g.
toy— target should be conducted to assess smooth pursuit, sac- 
cades, optokinetic nystagmus and spontaneous and positional 
nystagmus. The effect of optic fixation can be crudely assessed 
clinically by using Frenzel glasses or an infrared viewer. Children 
older than 4 years of age can often perform a sensitized Romberg 
test, standing on one leg. The performance in younger children 
displays large standard deviations and depends to a large degree 
on cooperation between the examiner, the child and the parent.
Objective methods of evaluating vestibular function are 
important to document the severity of derangements, provide 
evidence of site(s) of lesion and monitor change. Electro­
nystagmography (ENG) or videonystagmography (VNG) can be 
performed in small children, but there are difficulties with cali­
bration and interference of eye-movement records by blinks. Eye 
movements are best recorded in darkness with the direct current 
(DC) electro-oculography (EOG) technique. Video-oculography 
is a relatively new method that provides the clinician with good 
information concerning abnormalities of the vestibulo-ocular 
reflex, including the presence of spontaneous and induced posi­
tional and rotatory nystagmus. This technique is gradually 
replacing the EOG technique. The easiest way to measure the eye 
movements is by using Frenzel glasses with infrared TV cameras.
Bithermal binaural caloric testing (250 ml, 30°C, 44°C) 
should be performed with eyes open in darkness. The velocity of 
the slow phase is the most physiological parameter to assess. An 
interaural difference of >20% is considered pathological, and a 
total sum of four irrigations of <40% is considered to indicate 
bilateral hypoactivity, but each laboratory should define its own
Figure 52.1 Observation of a child playing can give extremely valuable information regarding vision, position of the head, 
movement of the arms and legs, and stability.
  

Balance disorders in children 
8G3
precise normative ranges. Experience dictates that calorics can 
be performed in children as young as 4-5 years of age. ‘Ice-water’ 
calorics performed binaurally (50 ml, 8°C) can be performed in 
older children who do not show responses during standard 
caloric tests. This test cannot, however, be quantified but merely 
indicates the presence or total absence of vestibular function.
Sinusoidal rotatory chair tests are the best tests to evaluate 
possible bilateral vestibular loss in small children (Figure 52.2). 
They can be performed using the EOG technique and/or 
infrared TV monitoring. The tests should be performed in dark­
ness, and if vestibular function is present, a resulting nystagmus 
will immediately appear. In some cases, a good EOG recording 
is not possible, and then infrared TV monitoring focused on the 
eyes of both child and parent will immediately show the differ­
ence in response, if bilateral vestibular loss is present. This test 
may be difficult to quantify, and it is not possible with certainty 
to differentiate between a unilateral vestibular loss and bilateral 
normal function.
Depending on the history, examination and balance assess­
ment, other medical and neurological tests such as ECG, EEG, 
renal ultrasound or genetic typing may be required. Evaluating 
a child with a balance disorder is often a team effort, in which 
other specialists such as paediatricians, neurologists and physi­
cal therapists are required.
Balance disorders and dizziness, in general and in children in 
particular, are difficult to diagnose. One of the first approaches is 
to find out whether the pathology is due to a lesion within the 
vestibular end organ or the CNS. This differentiation has disad­
vantages, since the vestibular system is a continuum, which 
makes it difficult to assess if the lesion is within the labyrinth, 
the nerve or the vestibular nuclei (Table 52.4).
Table 52.4 
Balance disorders-differential diagnosis.
Central nervous system 
Epilepsy 
Tumour 
Migraine
Demyelinating disease 
Psychosomatic
Vestibular end organ
Middle ear disease with/without labyrinthitis 
Trauma
Sudden vestibular loss (vestibular neuronitis)
Meniere's syndrome
Benign paroxysmal vertigo in childhood (BPV)
Meningitis
Ototoxicity
Genetic-with/without auditory impairment
Central nervous system disease
Epilepsy
Children with epilepsy sometimes display symptoms of nausea, 
vomiting, loss of postural control and loss of consciousness. 
Most children with dizziness associated with epilepsy do not, 
however, suffer from grand mal seizures. The epileptic foci are 
most often located in the temporal lobes. This condition may 
resemble benign paroxysmal vertigo in childhood (see below), 
and thus an EEG should be performed in these cases.1
Figure 52.2 Sinusoidal rotatory chair tests are the best tests to evaluate possible bilateral vestibular loss in small children.
  

864 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Tumour
Any space-occupying tumour along the vestibular system can 
cause vertigo and dizziness. Brainstem gliomas and cerebello­
pontine angle tumours occur in childhood but the symptoms 
often include other neurological abnormalities. If a tumour is 
located within this region, children, as well as adults, often 
show pathological smooth pursuit and/or saccadic eye move­
ments. If suspicion is raised, magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) should be performed.
Migraine
Migraine headache is not very common in childhood. It is esti­
mated that 4% of all migraine patients are between the ages of
7 and 15 years. Around 20% of children with migraine com­
plain of dizziness.2 A general opinion is that these types of 
migraine may originate within the basilary artery system. The 
attacks usually start with dizziness or vertigo, followed by 
headache and insomnia. One associated finding in children 
with migraine is a high incidence of motion sickness.
It is sometimes difficult to differentiate migraine from 
benign paroxysmal vertigo (BPV) in childhood. The occur­
rence of headache and a strong family history of migraine might 
help to make the diagnosis. A very rare but similar condition is 
paroxysmal torticollis of infancy. The symptoms are head tilting 
to one side with pallor and sometimes vomiting. The attacks 
can last minutes to days. The onset is usually around the age of 
1 year, and the symptoms disappear within 1 or 2 years. The 
pathology is still unclear but, due to the symptoms found, one 
might expect dysfunction within the vestibular apparatus.3
Demyelinating disease
Demyelinating disease (i.e. multiple sclerosis) is rare in child­
hood. Vertigo may be a symptom if a sclerotic plaque involves 
the vestibular pathways. The other symptoms do not differ from 
those in adulthood.
Psychosomatic dizziness
The symptom of dizziness rarely occurs as an isolated entity in 
children with psychosomatic illness. This diagnosis should be 
made with caution and only when other diagnoses have been 
ruled out. This is one of the most difficult diagnoses to make, 
and requires time, paediatric psychological-psychiatric assess­
ment and therapies.
Vestibular end-organ diseases
Middle ear disease
Serous otitis media is a common cause of vestibular disturbance 
in children. The reported symptoms include ‘falling all over the 
place’ or ‘walking clumsily’, and the problem is often described
as ‘unsteadiness’ rather than true vertigo. The causes of the 
symptoms are usually attributed to pressure changes in the mid­
dle ear affecting the inner ear through the round and oval win­
dows. The symptoms often disappear following treatment with 
ventilation tubes or spontaneously.
It is therefore important to examine otoscopically every 
child with balance disorders and to perform tympanometry. 
Acute or chronic otitis media rarely produces cases of sec­
ondary labyrinthitis with vertigo in the industrialized world, 
but in debilitated and immigrant populations and the Third 
World, greater vigilance with regard to this life-threatening 
condition is required. If vestibular symptoms appear with or 
without nystagmus, rapid treatment with intravenous anti­
biotics, myringotomy and mastoidectomy may need to be 
performed.
Trauma
A head injury in a child may result in different forms of fracture 
involving the petrous temporal bone. If the fracture involves 
the labyrinth or the vestibular nerve, severe vertigo will result, 
together with vomiting and unsteadiness. However, a concus­
sion without a fracture may also result in dizziness. An acute 
unilateral vestibular destruction will result in a spontaneous 
nystagmus with the fast phase directed towards the healthy side. 
The nystagmus and the vertigo will often disappear rapidly due 
to central compensation and CNS plasticity. Failure of recovery 
requires rehabilitative treatment, including vestibular rehabili­
tation by a skilled physiotherapist.
Sudden vestibular loss (vestibular neuronitis)
In the literature, the incidence of vestibular neuronitis in chil­
dren is very low. The symptoms and course of the disease are the 
same as in adults, but usually much milder. Thus, the real inci­
dence might be higher. The origin of this disease is still obscure, 
with viral, vascular, autoimmune and genetic factors having 
been proposed. The child suffers from acute rotatory vertigo and 
nystagmus (suggestive of impairment of vestibular function) 
with the fast phase beating towards the healthy ear. Caloric 
tests show an asymmetric response. The recovery is usually 
rapid (2-3 days), with disappearance of spontaneous nystagmus 
and vertigo, and improved balance. If compensated, the child 
will not have any sequelae and, in adults, vestibular function 
may be subsequently totally normal.
Meniere’s syndrome
Classical Meniere’s syndrome in children is rare. The symp­
toms of low-frequency fluctuating hearing loss, rotatory 
vertigo attacks, tinnitus and fullness are the same as in adults. 
Auditory and vestibular findings in children with Meniere’s 
syndrome indicate the same pathology of endolymphatic 
hydrops as in adults.4 The cause of Meniere’s syndrome 
remains obscure, although some families have been found to
  

Balance disorders in children 
865
have an inherited tendency, suggesting a genetic factor. Find­
ings in inner ear disorders of genetic origin have demonstrated 
symptoms resembling Meniere’s syndrome, showing an autoso- 
mal-dominant progressive auditory and vestibular loss. The 
treatment of Meniere’s syndrome in children has so far been the 
same as for adults, including a low-salt diet and diuretics.5
Benign paroxysmal vertigo in childhood
This disorder is a distinct clinical entity first described by Basser 
in 1964.6 The disorder is characterized by the features listed in 
Table 52.5.
The diagnosis is made by case history and clinical 
examination. It is advisable to instruct the parents to make a 
diary and to teach them to look for nystagmus during the 
attacks. When examining the child, this condition is associ­
ated with no hearing loss, normal otoneurological examina­
tion and normal EEG. Video/electronystagmography with 
calorics should be performed, since some authors have 
reported decreased caloric responses. If the case history is not 
clear, the differential diagnosis of tumour and epilepsy must be 
ruled out. Among causes of dizziness in childhood, BPV seems 
to be one of the most common.7
The aetiology of BPV remains unclear. In many cases, the 
presence of spontaneous nystagmus suggests a vestibular disor­
der. The possibility of BPV being a migraine equivalent has 
been raised but not confirmed. In a follow-up study of children 
with BPV, at least 10 years after diagnosis, migraine was found 
to be slightly more common than in a normal population. Com­
pared to migraine patients, a positive family history of migraine 
was much more uncommon in patients who had suffered from 
BPV All subjects were free of vertigo and showed normal audi­
tory and vestibular test results at follow-up.8
Meningitis
Viral and bacterial meningitis are diseases of early child­
hood (6-24 months). The main bacterial agents are the 
Pneumococcus, Meningococcus and Haemophilus influenzae. Viral
Table 52.5 
Benign paroxysmal vertigo.,R
Sex: 
No gender difference
Age of onset: 
Usually <4 years
Symptoms: 
Sudden onset of vertigo, seconds-minutes,
pallor, vomiting, nystagmus can occur in any 
position
Falling, unable to move, stand or sit 
Complete recovery to normal activities 
Consciousness not impaired.
Frequency: 
Several times a week to once a year 
Prognosis: 
Disappears after months to years
meningitis, unlike bacterial meningitis, does not cause damage 
to the inner ear.
Permanent sequelae due to meningitis result from damage 
to the CNS, including the cranial nerves and the labyrinth. 
The clinical picture after CNS damage is of mental retardation, 
motor pareses, seizure syndromes and ataxia. CNS lesions have 
a prevalence of 1-10%.9 Sensorineural hearing loss is a 
manifestation of meningitis in approximately 20% of cases, but 
involvement of the vestibular end organ is much more 
common. Not surprisingly, vestibular lesions and vertigo are 
frequently observed in association with hearing loss due to 
meningitis. Different studies have shown the prevalence of 
bilateral vestibular failure to be 40-80% .10,11 Bilateral vestibular 
loss can be clinically observed in many cases, while the preva­
lence of unilateral vestibular loss may pass undetected upon 
clinical examination.
A child who has suffered from meningitis may have a long 
period of recovery during which there may be regression of 
motor milestones. A child who has started to walk may revert 
to crawling again. The symptoms attributable to vestibular 
involvement differ, depending upon whether the lesion is uni­
lateral or bilateral. A child with a unilateral vestibular lesion 
presents symptomatically like a child with vestibular neuroni­
tis, i.e. with spontaneous nystagmus, which disappears quickly, 
with a rapid recovery provided that there are no major CNS 
lesions.
A child with bilateral vestibular loss does not suffer from 
vertigo but rather displays severe unsteadiness and impaired 
motor milestones. This latter sign is often misinterpreted as the 
result of CNS involvement rather than reflecting primary 
vestibular dysfunction. Assessment of vestibular function after 
meningitis should be undertaken in all cases and, if bilateral 
lesions are found, appropriate balance retraining should be 
started as soon as possible.
A summary of the features of meningitis is given in Table 
52.6.
Table 52.6 
Meningitis.
Sex: 
No gender difference
Age of onset: 
Usually <2 years 
Symptoms: 
Vertigo
Falling
Increased clumsiness 
Unilateral lesion: 
Spontaneous nystagmus 
Vertigo
Rapid recovery 
Bilateral lesion: 
Retarded motor milestones
Difficulties in learning to walk 
Diagnosis: 
Observation of motor milestones
Caloric testing
Rotatory tests with video-oculography/ENG 
Bilateral lesion shows no rotatory nystagmus 
Unilateral lesion shows rotatory nystagmus
  

866 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Ototoxicity
Several groups of drugs are known to be ototoxic, particularly 
the aminoglycoside antibiotics, chemotherapeutics and some 
diuretics.
In children, gentamicin and cisplatinum are the most com­
monly used drugs giving rise to vestibular failure. Both drugs are 
administered intravenously.
Vestibular damage due to gentamicin arises for two main 
reasons: the correct dose is difficult to control in small children, 
and the vestibular part of the inner ear is much more suscepti­
ble to gentamicin compared to the cochlea.12 For these reasons, 
it is imperative to monitor, very regularly, both serum drug 
levels and renal function. The mechanism of gentamicin oto­
toxicity is slow destruction of vestibular supporting cells, and 
damage may therefore become apparent after treatment has 
ended. An inherited predisposition to gentamicin-induced sus­
ceptibility has been identified. The prevalence of such genes is 
not yet defined. The symptoms of ototoxicity include dizziness 
and unsteadiness. If the loss is asymmetric, spontaneous 
nystagmus may be found, but if bilateral vestibular damage 
occurs, the picture is that of vestibular failure with retarded 
motor milestones.
In small, very sick children, such symptoms are very difficult, 
if not impossible, to observe and interpret. Thus, if ototoxicity is 
suspected, spontaneous nystagmus, using video-oculography, 
should be sought. This procedure can be performed at the bed­
side, although optimal results are achieved in the laboratory with 
the child seated on the mother’s lap in a rotating chair.
Every child who has undergone treatment with ototoxic 
medication should have a hearing and vestibular assessment 
performed.
Genetic
Genetic causes of vestibular loss remain obscure. This in part 
reflects difficulties in diagnosing vestibular dysfunction, both 
with respect to each of the five receptors in each vestibular 
labyrinth and with respect to the insensitivity of currently 
available routine vestibular tests. The vestibular system works 
closely with vision and the somatosensory system, enabling the 
CNS to compensate for dysfunction. It is, however, reasonable 
to believe that there are genetic defects within the vestibular 
system causing imbalance and dizziness.
The frequency of deafness and severe hearing impairment 
due to genetic conditions is approximately 50-75% of all hear­
ing losses in children. It is common to identify ‘clumsy’ deaf 
children, but rarely, to date, has it been deemed necessary to 
consider the ‘clumsy’ element of the child’s complaints. Indeed, 
it is often forgotten, even among physicians, that the inner ear 
consists of two parts: the cochlea and the vestibular labyrinth. 
Nonetheless, there is some evidence that deaf children with 
intact vestibular function are more clumsy than normal chil­
dren. If this is true, it might be a result of the deafness in itself,
with lack of orientation being secondary to auditory responses 
when crawling, walking and turning.
Provided that vision is adequate and it is light, a deaf per­
son with bilateral vestibular loss can perform nearly normally 
with respect to balance. On the other hand, in the dark or when 
walking on an uneven or unstable surface, such as a ploughed 
field or sand, the loss of the vestibular system can make the 
same person very clumsy and insecure.
The recent discoveries of different genetic hearing defi­
ciencies have made it necessary to differentiate between similar 
auditory phenotypes, and vestibular testing has provided valu­
able, although still limited, information. This is true for both 
syndromal and non-syndromal hearing loss.
Shambaugh13 collected information in 1930 from approxi­
mately 5000 deaf students and concluded that 70% had normal 
balance function with no differences between congenital and 
childhood-onset deafness. He did not, however, perform any 
vestibular tests. In 1955, Amvig14 presented a study of nearly 
500 children who were deaf or severely hard of hearing. 
He found approximately 40% with abnormal caloric reac­
tions. No distinction was made between congenital and
Figure 52.3 Balance relies on information from vision and the somatosensory 
and the vestibular sysems. Visual problems and vestibular areflexia result in 
unsteadiness when walking on uneven surfaces or in darkness, (from Moller and 
Kimberling. Laryngoscope 1989; 99: 73-9.17)
  

Balance disorders in children 
867
childhood-onset deafness, and the calorics did not meet present 
standards.
In 1965, Sandberg and Terkildsen15 presented results from 
57 children who underwent caloric testing according to present 
standards. They found a positive relationship between the 
degree of hearing loss and the severity of loss of vestibular 
function, with vestibular dysfunction being present in 80% of 
the deaf population.
The author16 performed a further study of balance in 74 
subjects suffering from severe or profound hearing loss. More 
than 50% of all subjects reported a walking age later than 18 
months and significant problems getting around in darkness, 
especially in winter. Very few had experienced any motion sick­
ness, and none reported motion sickness during car rides. A 
large majority (75%) remembered problems in sports and gym­
nastics, and many of these spontaneously reported ‘I never 
cared because I was so clumsy’. All the subjects who had absent 
vestibular responses on the caloric and rotatory tests reported a 
walking age later than 18 months. Thus, there are reasons to 
believe that around 30-40% of all deaf persons suffer from 
bilateral vestibular areflexia.
Syndromal hearing loss
Vestibular function has been investigated in many different 
syndromes. One of the first to be characterized was Usher syn­
drome, in which vestibular function has been found to be the 
best discriminator between different forms. Table 52.7 summa­
rizes current knowledge of vestibular function in syndromal 
hearing loss. It is apparent that, in many syndromes, the 
vestibular end organ shows dysfunction expressed by the same 
genes which are causing the cochlear deficiency.
Table 52.7 
Syndromal hearing losses.
Vestibular 
Other organs 
Heredity
Usher type I
+
Eyes
AR
Usher type II
-
Eyes
AR
Usher type III
+ / -
Eyes
AR
Alstrom
+
Eyes
Diabetes
AR
Obesity
Refsum
+
Eyes
Nerves
AR
Waardenburg
?
Skin
Eyes
AD
Alports
+
Kidney
ADr
Eyes
BOR
+
Kidney
AD
Branchial fistulas
Pendred
+ / -
Thyroid gland
AR
Jervell-Lange
?
Heart
AR
+ vestibular hypofunction; -  normal; + /-, variable; ?, not known; AD, 
autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; X; X-linked.
Usher syndrome
In a study of vestibular function in Usher syndrome (hearing 
loss/deafness and retinitis pigmentosa),15 vestibular dysfunction 
was found to be extremely important in explaining some behav­
ioural patterns, and in helping to classify different types of this 
condition. In all genetically linked cases of Usher type 1 (deaf­
ness + retinitis pigmentosa), bilaterally absent vestibular func­
tion has been demonstrated. However, in Usher type II (hard of 
hearing + retinitis pigmentosa), normal vestibular function 
bilaterally has been found. Usher type III displays progressive 
hearing loss and retinitis pigmentosa, and vestibular function 
seems to follow the hearing loss with a gradual decrease of the 
vestibular function.
Alstrom syndrome
Alstrom syndrome includes early onset of retinitis pigmentosa, 
which results in blindness in the early teenage years with bilat­
eral symmetrical progressive hearing loss, hyperlipidaemia, 
elevated triglycerides and early-onset diabetes. Vestibular func­
tion shows a progressive decrease, which, together with blind­
ness, results in severe unsteadiness, especially on uneven 
surfaces.
Conclusion
From a genetic perspective, vestibular tests can discriminate 
otherwise similar cases of non-syndromal hearing loss into two 
types: with and without vestibular dysfunction. It is likely that 
a phenotype reflects an underlying defect which is gene specific. 
If so, hereditary hearing loss should always be categorized 
according to whether the vestibular labyrinth is involved or 
not. If vestibular involvement is consistent within families, 
then hearing loss with or without vestibular symptoms 
represents two major clinical categories of hearing impairment. 
In syndromal hearing loss, it allows the differentiation of sub- 
types of a syndrome, enabling more accurate prognosis and 
rehabilitation.
Thus, in order to study hearing disorders and to provide a 
better mode of classification, vestibular function should be eval­
uated in all cases of sensorineural and unexplained conductive 
childhood hearing loss and deafness. This is particularly rele­
vant for children being considered for cochlear implantation, as 
the presence of good vestibular function may result in vestibu­
lar symptoms postoperatively, while the absence of vestibular 
function emphasizes the need to determine whether the VUIth 
nerve is intact.
Moreover, clumsiness and delayed motor milestones in 
children warrant full balance investigations to establish the 
presence of isolated vestibular dysfunction, on either an 
inherited or acquired (ototoxic, traumatic or infective) basis. 
Thus, appropriate rehabilitation and prognostic advice may be 
given.
  

868 
Vestibular disorders and their management
References
1. 
Eviatar L, Eviatar A. Neurovestibular examination of infants and 
children. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1978; 23: 169-91.
2. 
Prensky A, Sommer D. Diagnosis and treatment of migraine in 
children. Neurology 1979; 29: 506-9.
3. 
Parker W. Migraine and the vestibular system in childhood and 
adolescence. Am J Otol 1989; 10: 364-71.
4. 
Hausler R et al. Meniere disease in children. Am J Otol 1987; 8: 
187-93.
5. 
Akagi H, Yuen K, Maeda Y, Fukushima K et al. Meniere’s disease 
in childhood. IntJ Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 2001; 61: 259-64.
6. 
Basser L. Benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood. Brain 1964; 87: 
141-6.
7. 
Russel G, Abu-Arafeh S. Paroxysmal vertigo in children— an epi- 
demiological study. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1999; Suppl 1: 
105-7.
8. 
Lindskog U, Odkvist L, Noaksson L, Wallquist J. Benign paroxys­
mal vertigo in childhood: a long-term follow up. Headache 1999; 
39: 33-7.
9. Salven KM, Vikerfors T, Olecen P. Increased incidence of child­
hood bacterial meningitis. A 25-year study in a defined population 
in Sweden. ScandJ Infect Dis 1987; 19: 1-11.
10. Van Rijn PM. Causes of early childhood deafness. Theses 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 1990, ISBN 90-9002125-6.
11. Kimberling W, Moller C. Clinical and molecular genetics of Usher 
syndrome. J Am Acad Audiol 1995; 6: 63-72.
12. Moller C, Odqvist L, Tell J et al. Vestibular and audiological func­
tions in gentamycin-treated Meniere’s disease. Am J Otol 1988; 9: 
383-91.
13. Shambaugh G. Statistical studies of children in public schools for 
deaf. Arch Otolaryngol 1930; 12: 190-245.
14. Amvig J. Vestibular function in deafness and severe hard of hear­
ing. Acta Otolaryngol 1955; 45: 283-8.
15. Sandberg L, Terkildsen K. Caloric tests in deaf children. Arch Oto- 
laryngol 1965; 81: 352-4.
16. Moller C. Balance function and hearing loss. In: Martini A, 
Read A, Stephen D, eds. Genetics and Hearing Impairment. London: 
Whurr, 1996: 109-17.
17. Moller C, Kimberling W, Davenport S et al. Usher syndrome: an 
otoneurologic study. Laryngoscope 1989; 99: 73-9.
  

Psychiatric 
consequences of 
vestibular dysfunction
Rolf G Jacob, Joseph M Furman, Stephen P Cass
Introduction
Patients with psychiatric symptoms constitute a challenge to 
the otoneurological clinician. At a minimum, such patients 
signal extra expenditures of time. Traditionally, therefore, the 
main reason for otoneurological clinicians to summon psychi­
atric expertise was to find alternative, ‘psychogenic’ causes for 
the dizziness. As we will see, because of its implication that 
their dizziness is imagined, the patients often resent the result­
ing psychiatric referral. Furthermore, the receiving psychiatric 
clinician, ill-informed of the ways of the vestibular system, is 
not well equipped to care for these patients.
The possibility that psychological or psychiatric symptoms 
might constitute consequences of vestibular dysfunction is of 
relatively recent origin. The title of this chapter, therefore, can 
be seen as recognition of new grounds being broken. Most of 
the few previous contributions in this area, however, have been 
more theoretical than practical in nature. The present chapter 
will therefore focus on qualitative data, i.e. clinical case 
material. We hope that clinicians -  both psychiatric and 
otoneurological-will be able to recognize, among their own 
patients, psychiatric symptoms that might be consequences of 
vestibular dysfunction. Armed with this knowledge, they might 
be able to cultivate an attitude of recognition and interest. 
They might be surprised to find that such an attitude by itself 
has a power of ‘healing.’
Sources of qualitative data
Yardley et al performed the only published analysis of qualita­
tive data concerning the psychological or psychiatric function 
of patients with vestibular disorders.1 Their report inspired the
approach taken in this chapter. Most of the clinical material for 
the present chapter came from 28 patients with vestibular 
dysfunction who were referred or sought consultation for 
psychiatric complications. These patients underwent semistruc­
tured psychiatric interview and questionnaire assessments. In 
the case illustrations, the patients are referred to by a coded 
name. For easy recognition of patients described on several 
occasions, first names were chosen to alphabetically code a 
patient’s order of first appearance in the chapter. A few patients 
provided written material on their experiences. Naturally, 
excerpts from such autobiographical statements will be in first 
person format. Another rich source of information about 
patients with persistent vestibular symptoms is a website 
designed as a resource for patients with symptoms of Mai de 
Debarquement (MDD).2 Many of the autobiographical case 
descriptions on this website reported reactions similar to those 
of other patients with unremitting vestibular symptoms. In this 
chapter we will include some quotes from the website. Such 
quotes will be designated as ‘MDD patient.’
Like the observations by Yardley et al, our observations 
were in part guided by preconceptions. These included the con­
clusions by Yardley et al,1 and our own research on the role of 
space and motion sensitivity or discomfort.3”5 An impression 
that emerged de novo, however, was that certain personality 
attributes, i.e. perfectionistic tendencies, appeared to increase 
vulnerability to psychiatric complications and chronicity. 
Brandt, in his assessments of patients with ‘phobic postural 
vertigo’ has already reported this impression.6 Another insight 
that emerged was that the spectrum of psychiatric complica­
tions in part depends on whether the patient has chronic 
unremitting or disabling symptoms versus subclinical or inter­
mittent symptoms.5 Depression and disability appear to be more 
common in the group with disabling symptoms.

870 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Overview: range of vestibular- 
psychiatric interactions
The interactions between vestibular symptoms and psychiatric 
symptoms are complex.5 This chapter will not cover all of them 
in detail. Nevertheless, in order to establish an overall context 
for subsequent discussions, we present an overview of possible 
interactions in Table 53.1.
Vestibular and psychiatric symptoms are interrelated at 
several functional levels
Listed at the top of Table 53.1 is the circumstance where a 
patient may have a vestibular disorder and a psychiatric disor­
der simply as a chance co-occurrence. Being afflicted by depres­
sion or a psychotic disorder does not immunize patients against 
vestibular disorders. For example, one of our patients recovered 
from a vestibular disorder and later developed a depressive 
episode that appeared to be related to changed work circum­
stances after his company was sold. Although not a focus of the 
present chapter, it is important to remember the possibility of 
such chance co-occurrences, because the presence of psychi­
atric symptoms may lead to the error of diagnosing the dizziness 
of such patients as ‘psychogenic.’
Dizziness does not always have a vestibular origin. Table
53.1 provides examples of such non-vestibular etiologies to
dizziness, including other medical disorders (such as orthostatic 
hypotension) and psychiatric disorders (such as panic disorder). 
The latter type of dizziness is referred to as psychiatric dizziness.
In neither of the two scenarios above do psychiatric and 
vestibular factors influence one another. However, in the next 
set of circumstances, such interactions do occur. Next in Table
53.1 appears the case where psychiatric symptoms are compo­
nents of an integrated response to certain types of vestibular 
dysfunction. We refer to this type of interaction, where psychi­
atric and vestibular symptoms are based on a common underly­
ing mechanism, as ‘linkage.’ Psychiatric complications can also 
occur as psychologically mediated reactions to the perception of 
vestibular symptoms, or to the distress induced by them. We 
refer to this interaction as ‘somatopsychic’ effects. Conversely, 
certain psychological or behavioral factors can influence 
vestibular function. We will refer to this interaction as ‘psycho­
somatic’ effects.
In our experience, those patients who develop psychiatric 
complications of vestibular dysfunction also show more intense 
vestibular symptoms and prolonged recovery. However, not all 
patients develop psychiatric complications to vestibular dys­
function. We refer to factors that might predispose a patient 
toward these complications as ‘vulnerability factors.’ These 
include anxiety proneness, tendency towards ‘somatization,’ 
and obsessive-compulsive personality traits (‘perfectionism’).
The phenomena discussed thus far have concerned 
phenomena within a particular patient. However, some psychi­
atric phenomena are understandable only if we consider the 
patient in the context of his or her psychosocial environment.
Table 53.1 
Overview of vestibular-psychiatric interactions.
Type of interaction
Chance co-occurrence
Non-vestibular dizziness
CNS linkage 
Somatopsychic effects
Psychosomatic effects
Increased vulnerability
'Systems’ issues
Explication
Patient with a psychiatric disorder and 
an unrelated vestibular disorder
Dizziness due to non-psychiatric medical 
conditions
Dizziness that is a symptom of psychiatric 
disorder: psychiatric dizziness
‘Hard wired' neural connections
Psychological reactions to vestibular 
symptoms
Vestibular function affected by 
psychological factors
Psychiatric conditions predispose to
(a) psychiatric complications;
(b) delayed recovery from vestibular
disorder
Interaction between patient's 'illness 
behavior' and significant other's or 
provider's 'treatment behavior'
Example
Patient with schizophrenia develops BPFV
Patient recovered from a vestibular disorder develops depression
Orthostatic hypotension 
Hypoglycemia
Dizziness during a panic attack due to hyperventilation
Primary anxiety, space and motion sensitivity or discomfort 
Secondary anxiety depression
Reactivating compensated vestibular lesions
Anxiety proneness.
Somatoform disorders 
Perfectionism
Social withdrawal; anger at provider
  

Psychiatric consequences of vestibular dysfunction 
871
These include the behaviors of significant others and treatment 
providers. The ‘systems issues’ involved provide a basis for 
understanding social withdrawal and anger in the patients.
We mentioned earlier that the spectrum of psychiatric 
complications depends on whether or not the patient has 
chronic unremitting or disabling symptoms, versus subclinical 
or intermittent symptoms.5 This chapter is organized based on 
this insight. Thus, we will begin with linkage and somatopsy­
chic effects that occur even in patients whose dizziness has 
diminished or remitted because of central compensation of 
their vestibular balance. We will then proceed to the additional 
complications occurring in patients with persistent vestibular 
symptoms, including ‘systems’ issues. We will then discuss the role 
of psychosomatic effects on vestibular function, vulnerability 
factors, and psychiatric dizziness. The chapter will end with a 
brief discussion of treatment.
Psychiatric phenomena in with 
subtle vestibular symptoms
In this section, we will discuss the phenomena of anxiety, panic 
and a situational specificity of symptoms that we have called 
‘space and motion discomfort.’ These consequences occur not 
only in patients with active vestibular symptoms, but also in 
those patients for whom vestibular symptoms are no longer 
prominent because of the effects of central compensation. In 
the latter type of patient, psychiatric symptoms may completely 
mask the remaining subtle vestibular symptoms.
Panic attacks and phobic avoidance occur frequently in 
patients with vestibular disorders, including 
patients 
with compensated vestibular lesions.
Anxiety and panic
In humans, the experience of anxiety has two components, 
somatic symptoms and anxious thoughts. These two com­
ponents are often referred to as ‘somatic’ and ‘cognitive’ 
anxiety symptoms. Somatic anxiety includes autonomic 
symptoms and symptoms associated with hyperventilation. The 
autonomic symptoms include heart palpitations, sweating, 
trembling, nausea or abdominal distress, and chills or hot 
flashes. Symptoms that resemble the effect of hyperventilation 
include sensations of shortness of breath or air hunger, chest 
pain or discomfort, dizziness or feeling faint, depersonalization 
(feelings of unreality or of being detached from oneself) and 
paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations).
Anxious thoughts -  also referred to as cognitive anxiety-  
find their expression as verbal (symbolic) content. This verbal 
content tells us what the individual is anxious ‘about.’ The pro­
totypical anxious thought has the form of a ‘what if’ statement
-e.g. ‘what if I have a brain tumor?’ Because anxious thoughts 
require verbal competence, they do not occur in preverbal or 
non-verbal organisms such as infants or animals. Finding out 
what the patient is anxious ‘about’ is important if we want to 
understand the patient. Furthermore, anxious cognitions can be 
modified by corrective information-‘you don’t have a brain 
tumor.’ Cognitive anxiety symptoms represent a hallmark of an 
anxiety disorder called generalized anxiety disorder. The 
proverbial ‘worry wart’-th e individual who worries about the 
minor daily issues in life -  represents the prototype for patients 
with generalized anxiety disorder.
Most anxiety states have both somatic and cognitive com­
ponents. Furthermore, the two components are interrelated; an 
anxious cognition can lead to somatic symptoms and vice versa. 
Among different forms of anxiety, psychiatrists have singled out 
one form, the panic attack, as separate from other anxiety 
responses. The main difference between panic attacks and 
other forms of anxiety is that somatic symptoms are particularly 
prominent. Because of their fundamentally somatic or wordless 
nature, patients experiencing panic attacks often are not able to 
report what they feel panicky ‘about.’ This leads to a description 
of the panic attacks as being unpredictable, uncued, or coming 
‘out of the blue.’ Cognitive anxiety symptoms do occur during 
panic attacks but can be considered as secondary reactions, 
reactions in which a significance or ‘meaning’ is assigned to 
primary somatic sensations. They include fear of losing control 
(e.g. ‘going crazy’) and fear of a catastrophic bodily event (e.g. 
‘heart attack’ or ‘death’). The cognitive symptoms can be 
understood as representing a ‘fear of fear’ component of the 
panic attack.
Many patients with panic disorder avoid certain situations 
because of the panic attacks. They avoid situations in which 
panic attacks are likely to occur, or situations from which it 
might be difficult to escape, should a panic attack have 
occurred. Such patients are said to have panic disorder with 
agoraphobia.
Anxiety disorder diagnosis
Certain psychiatric disorders will be repeatedly discussed in this 
chapter. Therefore, we will briefly discuss how psychiatrists 
diagnose them. In the USA, psychiatric diagnosis follows the 
criteria codified in the fourth edition of the Diagnostic Manual 
of the American Psychiatric Association (DSM-IV).7 Specifi­
cally, the DSM-IV lists specific criteria for the diagnosis of each 
disorder. These criteria were established to maximize reliability 
of diagnosis, but, unlike traditional medical diagnosis, do not 
necessarily imply anything about the hypothesized etiology of a 
disorder. Even so, the DSM-IV is the most authoritive source 
for descriptive psychiatry.
In the DSM-IV, pathological conditions are organized 
around three main categories, labeled Axis I, Axis II and Axis III. 
In addition, Axis IV and Axis V are included to reflect psycho­
social stressors and overall functioning, respectively. The five 
axes were created to ensure that multiple types of information 
are considered simultaneously in the planning of psychiatric
  

872 
Vestibular disorders and their management
treatment. Axis III involves ‘general medical conditions.’ Here, 
diagnostic labels such as ‘labyrinthine dysfunction’ would be 
recorded. Axis II was created for conditions that imply endur­
ing predispositions of a person, i.e. characteristics similar to 
‘temperament’ and other traits. This axis includes personality 
disorders and mental retardation. Axis I is defined as ‘clinical 
disorders’ and ‘other conditions that may be the focus of clini­
cal attention.’ Essentially, the conditions listed on Axis I repre­
sent the psychiatric analog to the general medical conditions of 
Axis III. Having to consider all of the axes in the diagnostic 
system counteracts our natural tendency of trying to arrive at a 
single ‘correct’ diagnosis.
DSM-IV recognizes the existence of 11 different anxiety 
disorders. Among these, the most important ones for this 
chapter are panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and 
‘anxiety disorder due to ...’ (a specific medical condition). 
Panic disorder comes in two variants: panic disorder without 
agoraphobia, and panic disorder with agoraphobia. Panic dis­
order without agoraphobia is diagnosed if patients report recur­
rent panic attacks (already described) that lead to either fear of 
future attacks, worry about the implications of an attack, or 
other changes in behavior.7 Panic disorder with agoraphobia 
also requires the presence of agoraphobia, which we defined in 
the preceding section.
Generalized anxiety disorder is diagnosed if the patient has 
been excessively worried-more days than not-for a period of 
at least 6 months. Furthermore, even though they try, patients 
cannot stop worrying. In addition, the worries are associated 
with at least three of six specific symptoms, including restless­
ness, muscle tenseness, trouble in concentrating, irritability, 
fatigability and trouble in sleeping. The diagnosis also requires 
that the worries interfere with the patient’s overall functioning 
or cause significant distress. Finally, generalized anxiety is not 
diagnosed, if the worries only concern future panic attacks or a 
medical symptom such as dizziness.
Anxiety disorder due to a medical condition is diagnosed if 
the clinician judges the anxiety symptoms to be caused by the 
direct physiological effects of a medical condition. Medical 
causes of anxiety unrelated to the vestibular system include 
hyperthyroidism, 
hypoglycemia, 
pheochromocytoma 
and 
cardiac arrhythmias. The implication of this diagnosis is that 
if the underlying medical disorder were cured, the anxiety 
symptoms would completely remit.
Anxiety and panic in patients with vestibular 
dysfunction
Anxiety symptoms-both somatic and cognitive -  are perhaps 
the most pervasive psychiatric complication of vestibular dys­
function. Several systematic studies conducted in otoneurolog­
ical settings have documented the high prevalence of anxiety 
symptoms in vestibular patients.8-11 For example, in our setting, 
one-third of consecutive (i.e. unselected) patients with vestibu­
lar dysfunction had anxiety symptoms qualifying as panic 
attacks on a questionnaire assessment.9 The neurophysiological 
correlates of the vestibular dysfunction-anxiety link have only
recently been explicated.12 These include convergence between 
vestibular and visceral afferent inputs in the parabrachial 
nucleus of the brainstem. The parabrachial nucleus has recipro­
cal connections with the amygdala, a major way station in the 
processing of both internal and external fear-inducing stimuli. 
These basic brainstem circuits are subject to descending corti­
cal inputs. The responsivity of the anxiety-supporting circuitry 
is further moderated via connections with the locus coeruleus 
that support responses to novelty.
Especially in patients with compensated vestibular abnor­
malities, anxiety symptoms can be the principal clinical mani­
festation; such patients tend to seek psychiatric rather than 
otoneurological help. In patients with anxiety disorders, 
vestibular abnormalities have been correlated with the presence 
of symptoms of agoraphobia, space and motion discomfort (to 
be discussed further below), and dizziness between panic 
attacks.13-15
The following case illustrates how vestibular symptoms may 
be missed in patients with panic attacks. The description below 
came from a research evaluation, conducted by a psychiatric 
clinician unfamiliar with the ways of the vestibular system. The 
patient received a diagnosis of uncomplicated panic disorder 
and mild height phobia.
Patient: Arnold S. (as described by psychiatric clinician). The 
patient is complaining of a 3-year history of panic attacks, 
dating back to the summer of 1991. His initial attacks 
occurred while at work and were associated with symptoms 
of lightheadedness, heart palpitations, dry mouth, fear of 
heart attack and fear of dying. The patient states that 
attacks are increasing in severity and causing him increas­
ing concern. The patient’s current panic symptoms are feel­
ings of breathlessness, nausea, sweating, numb hands, tight 
chest, heart palpitations, feelings of blacking out and feel­
ings that he is going to die. The attacks are rapid in onset 
and sometimes occur immediately. Their duration is under 
15 min. The patient is unable to identify triggers. He iden­
tifies severe distress during current attacks. He worried 
moderately during the month about having more attacks.
This patient participated in a research study examining the 
vestibular system in panic disorder. His vestibular laboratory 
examination revealed a right reduced response of 55%. After 
the evaluation, he remained asymptomatic for 1 year. When his 
symptoms recurred, he was examined by one of the co-authors,
S.P.C. (otolaryngologist), who reported the following:
Arnold S. (as described by S.P.C. (otolaryngologist) 1 year 
later): The patient reports the onset of vertigo beginning 
approximately 4 years ago. He has had periods of time last­
ing months when he would have dizziness sensations and 
then these sensations would disappear for months at a time 
only to return subsequently. Currently, his symptoms con­
sist of a lightheaded feeling and short bouts of vertigo asso­
ciated with nausea and lasting from seconds to minutes. 
Once he begins to feel dizzy, he feels increased anxiety,
  

Psychiatric consequences of vestibular dysfunction 
873
which is correlated with increased symptoms. Recently, his 
spells have been lasting up to hours and have occurred 2-3 
times per week. There has been no fluctuation of hearing or 
aural fullness. There is a bilateral high-pitched tinnitus 
present.
It is difficult to see that these two descriptions concern the 
same patient, albeit 1 year apart. There is nothing in the first 
description that would implicate the vestibular system. In fact, 
we have found that the symptom profile of a patient’s panic 
attacks do not predict whether or not a patient has vestibular 
dysfunction. The symptoms occurring between attacks, on the 
other hand, do predict vestibular dysfunction.16 These symp­
toms include feeling like falling, nausea, perceiving the room as 
spinning, spinning sensations inside the head, and veering.
Even when between-panic vestibular symptoms are more 
prominent, recognition of vestibular disorder may be delayed.
The patient, Beatrice S., is a 48-year-old physician. One 
Thursday in October, while attending an art exhibition, 
she felt a sense of imbalance, started swaying, and had to sit 
down. Thinking ‘Oh my God there is really something 
wrong with me’ she reported ‘freaking out,’ fearing that she 
might have a nervous breakdown. The next morning, 
another episode of excessive swaying occurred. In the after­
noon the same day, she had a panic attack. Thereafter, she 
began to have panic attacks frequently. When not panicky, 
she would worry about future panic attacks. She also began 
to dread driving. Because she knew that avoidance leads to 
agoraphobia, she resisted tendencies to avoid and pushed 
herself. She began yoga exercises and psychological treat­
ment for panic. However, 3 months later she still felt off 
balance and went to her internist, who arranged for a CT 
scan that was negative. Six months after the episode 
began she went on vacation. She did well until the last 
day, when she had a migraine followed by a ‘huge’ panic 
attack. At the airport coming home, she was so dizzy and 
off-balance that she needed a wheelchair. The subsequent 
course was 
characterized by recovery and further set­
backs. In July- 9  months after symptom onset-she was 
finally referred for vestibular testing. Caloric testing 
showed reduced left vestibular response. She was sent for
vestibular rehabilitation therapy. Examination by the 
physical therapist revealed impaired performance on 
dynamic posturography.
Sources for anxiety or panic
The considerations above of brain circuitry linking functions of 
vestibular processing and anxiety suggest that somatic anxiety 
is a ‘hard-wired’ component of responses to vestibular dys­
function. Stated differently, anxiety is a component of the 
symptomatic response to vestibular dysfunction, just as heart 
palpitations are part of an integrated response to physical 
exercise (Table 53.1). However, compared to the heart rate 
response to exercise, the anxiety response to vestibular dys­
function may be more amenable to the moderating effects from 
descending, ‘cognitive’, influences. These latter influences can 
both increase and decrease the anxiety symptoms or create 
anxiety symptoms that are only indirectly related to vestibular 
dysfunction. The various sources for anxiety in vestibular 
patients are listed in Table 53.2.
We divide the anxiety responses associated with vestibular 
dysfunction into primary (early, somatic) anxiety and secondary 
(late, cognitive) anxiety.
Primary anxiety is a correlate of disorientation and loss of 
physical support associated with vestibular dysfunction. 
Metaphorically, primary anxiety is equivalent to the startle 
response that occurs when someone ‘has the rug pulled out from 
under his or her feet.’ This type of anxiety has been described 
as ‘almost instinctive’.1 As stated already by Cawthome,17 the 
symptoms of vestibular injury are
Often so terrifying ... that observers unused to the ways of 
the labyrinth may find it difficult to believe that such a pro­
found disturbance can be caused by injury to such a modest 
organ.
Primary anxiety is not verbally mediated. By this, we mean 
that the anxiety response would also occur in non-verbal or 
preverbal organisms. Primary anxiety is different from motion 
sickness. Whereas motion sickness takes time to build, primary 
anxiety occurs immediately. Balaban and Thayer report the 
following situation that illustrates primary anxiety:
Table 53.2 
Elicitors of anxiety or panic in patients with vestibular dysfunction.
Type 
Characteristics 
Source
Primary anxiety 
Somatic symptoms, autonomic symptoms 
Direct linkage: ’hard-wired' concomitant of vestibular dysfunction
Immediate somatopsychic response to disorientation
Secondary anxieties 
Cognitions (thoughts) 'What if ..! 
Future attacks or dizziness or panic
Social consequences (embarrassment)
Medical illness (brain tumor)
Mental illness ('going crazy')
Disability
  

874 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Suppose you are stopped at a traffic light on a hillside facing 
up. In anticipation of the traffic signal changing, a large bus 
that is alongside your car moves forward slowly, giving you 
a wide-field optic flow stimulus that you interpret as a back­
ward drift of your car on the hill. You feel an urgent sense 
of panic as you vigorously depress the brake pedal. This is 
followed by a sense of relief as you realize that the perceived 
movement was merely illusory.12
This quote illustrates the immediate and reflexive nature of 
an initial anxiety response, and a secondary response (realizing 
it was the bus moving, not you) modifying it. This pattern-a 
primary anxiety ‘wave’ followed by a second moderating phase 
-can be described as a ‘double take.’ That is, the pattern is anal­
ogous to the situation where we see a face in a crowd and sud­
denly realize that it looks familiar and look again for 
verification.
Returning to the example of waiting at a traffic light next 
to a bus just quoted, the information gained from the ‘second 
take’ of the double take represented good news -  it was the bus 
that was moving, not you. However, good news is not always 
assured-as the first author once realized after having backed 
into the car behind him. In patients with vestibular dysfunc­
tion, the second take often involves the possibility of bad news. 
Secondary anxiety begins when patients begin to worry about 
the meaning or significance about their symptoms. For example, 
a patient described above (Beatrice S.) expressed a fear of 
mental disorder. A similar sentiment is expressed in the follow­
ing autobiographical statement:
Cecilia R.: During my adult life I have had two grand mal 
seizures. Even though the last one was 17 years ago, I was
now afraid that I would become so dizzy that I would faint 
and have another seizure and possibly die. The fear of 
seizures has plagued me for 25 years. Was this episode 
related to seizures? I was very scared ...
A major source of secondary anxiety is the fear that the 
dizziness or panic sensations might happen again. This fear can 
be seen in the patient Beatrice S. just described-when not pan­
icky, she would worry about future attacks. The fear of future 
panic attacks heralds the onset of panic disorder (see section on 
diagnosis above). Patients with severe dizziness also fear the 
return of dizziness per se:
Cecilia: I was afraid to fall asleep, afraid I would wake up 
and the ceiling would be spinning. The fear was almost as 
terrifying as the dizziness.
The various sources of panic and anxiety in a patient with 
dizziness and agoraphobia are apparent in Table 53.3, which 
reflects a patient’s recollection of sensations and thoughts 
during a panic attack in a shopping mall.
Donna P.: The sequence of events in Table 53.3 can be 
assumed to extend over a period of 10-30 minutes. They 
were reported by a 50-year-old female whose problem 
started with an ear infection at age 48 followed by episodes 
of dizziness and tinnitus in her left ear (‘like a hurricane’). 
She often staggers and has a tendency to fall to the left. A 
few times she went into a store and almost passed out. The 
patient reports panic-like feelings that include the follow­
ing sensations: severe dizziness or faintness, and nausea; 
moderate shortness of breath, feeling of choking, feelings of 
unreality and fear of going crazy. Even when not feeling
Table 53.3 Sequence of subjective events during a panic attack in a patient with agoraphobia and vestibular dysfunction.
Type
1. Primary
2. Secondary
Stage
A, Prodromal phase
B, Somatic symptoms
C. Social/appeal for help
D, Tear of fear'
E. Social/embarrassed
F. Social/lonely
Verbal descriptors or content
Oh, not again, here it comes!
Oh (expletive), here it comes 
I'm sick to my stomach 
My ear is hurting 
There is buzzing in my head 
My eyes don't focus 
My heart is beating fast
Oh God what I'm going to do
I’ll just have to call somebody to come and get me and take me home
What if I pass out
Oh that is so scary a feeling
Oh God, I just want to go home and lie down
!t is so terrifying
This is embarrassing
I feel like an idiot
Nobody knows how scary it is
They look at you like you are crazy
  

Psychiatric consequences of vestibular dysfunction 
875
panic-like, she reports the following symptoms as happen­
ing often or more: ringing in the ears, veering, lighthead­
edness, dry mouth, heavy feeling in her chest, nausea, 
blurred vision, and lump in her throat.
For heuristic purposes, the panic sensations can be divided 
into the phases of foreboding, somatic symptoms, social/help 
seeking, fear of fear, social/embarrassed, and social/lonely. The 
first two phases, foreboding and somatic symptoms, appear to be 
non-verbal in nature, representing primary anxiety symptoms. 
Secondary anxiety symptoms occur in the later phases. These 
include the initial appeal for help (‘what if nobody can help 
me’), followed by further distress from the anxiety symptoms or 
their possible consequences. As the primary symptoms wane, 
the patient becomes aware of the possibility of social disap­
proval (shame and embarrassment).
Space and motion discomfort, fear of heights, 
and agoraphobia
We mentioned earlier that the symptom profile of panic attacks 
is unrelated to the presence or absence of vestibular dysfunction 
but that one indicator of vestibular dysfunction comprised 
vestibular symptoms occurring between panic attacks. In fact, 
patients with uncomplicated panic disorder (panic disorder 
without agoraphobic avoidance or without height phobia or 
without dizziness between panic attacks) are not any more 
likely to have vestibular dysfunction than are normal control 
subjects. Another major theme, however, is that symptoms are 
situation-dependent; that is, certain situations result in 
increased symptoms. We refer to this situational pattern as 
space and motion discomfort (SMD). This discomfort pattern 
appears to have a physiological basis; we have found that con­
trived situations with similar characteristics result in increased 
body sway in patients with balance disorders.18 We refer to this 
physiological basis as Space and Motion Sensitivity. Thus, ‘dis­
comfort’ refers to the tendency to report symptoms, whereas 
‘sensitivity’ refers to increases in objectively measured sway. To 
facilitate the reader developing a prototypical understanding of 
the situational patterns involved in SMD, we present the 
following vignettes obtained from our patients:
In patients with anxiety disorders, agoraphobia, space 
and motion discomfort, and dizziness between panic 
attacks are predictors of abnormalities on clinical 
laboratory tests of vestibular function.
Donna: The patient whose panic experiences were 
described in Table 53.3 reported that she avoided the 
following agoraphobic situations: malls, public transporta­
tion, grocery stores, crowds, waiting in line, and going to 
the hairdresser, and taking elevators. The following symp­
toms of space and motion discomfort began or worsened
after her ear problem began: riding as a passenger in a car 
(but uphill-downhill), riding on narrow roads, riding in the 
back seat, supermarkets, tunnels, going down on escalators, 
rolling over in bed, closing eyes in shower, leaning far back 
in chair, dancing. She had pre-existing fears of heights but 
now experiences more dizziness and fear of falling in high 
places (from three rungs on a ladder and up).
Elisabeth W .: After her symptoms of imbalance started, the 
patient developed height phobia, including fear of small 
stepladders. The patient cannot go into a grocery store. In 
malls she is particularly bothered on the second floor 
because of the vibrations in the floor on that level.
Fred L.: He does not like bridges, downtown Pittsburgh or 
New York City (too much motion), the open spaces in 
Washington DC, the outlook on Mount Washington in 
Pittsburgh, glass elevators, hotels with large atriums or 
walkways high up, environmental ‘Escher-like’ patterns, 
balconies in restaurants, and theaters with certain spatial 
characteristics (large balconies and small intimate theatres 
are OK).
Beatrice: After the dizziness began, she developed new dis­
comfort or anxiety with heights such as standing on a 
ladder. In addition, she is bothered by department stores, 
auditoriums, or while walking along a large outdoor open 
water reservoir. She endorsed the supermarket syndrome 
(discomfort looking at the shelves while walking down the 
aisle). She experienced dizziness when closing her eyes in 
the shower. She reported discomfort while riding in a car, 
especially on limited access roads, in buses if crowded, in 
open fields especially if she is in the middle of a field, and 
in tunnels, especially if curved.
George T.: After the onset of vertigo, the patient began to 
avoid theaters, restaurants, elevators, and boats. In eleva­
tors, he was particularly bothered after the elevator has 
stopped because the ground still would be moving under 
him. The patient also developed mild discomfort when 
looking up at tall buildings.
Hillary G.: She has taken to avoiding going into public 
places and shopping because her symptoms are brought on 
there. If her symptoms are brought on while being exposed 
to a rich visual environment in a store, the symptoms can 
persist after she leaves. Watching ice-skating and other 
moving objects can increase her symptoms.
Ivan B.: He was particularly bothered by large drop-offs 
along the side of the road, particularly on the right side. 
He is also bothered on bridges, particularly if he is driving 
in the right lane, and especially on truss or suspension 
bridges (where the beams on the side provide optokinetic 
stimulation when driving by).
Additional troublesome situations reported by some of our 
patients include looking down spiral staircases, looking at 
Navaho rugs with zigzag patterns, and looking at shiny or
  

876 
Vestibular disorders and their management
backlit surfaces. In addition, watching TV can be problematic, 
especially when the background is moving (such as when the 
camera follows a football player running across the field). Some 
patients are also bothered when working on computers, espe­
cially when the screen is scrolling. Other patients report prob­
lems driving through an alley of trees when the sun shines from 
a direction that causes the tree trunks and branches to cast 
shadows in the form of black stripes across the street. More than 
one patient complained about the senior author’s attire when 
he was wearing a vertically striped shirt during a session. One of 
these patients had a hobby of ballroom dancing. She was not 
able to dance when her husband was wearing shirts with striped 
patterns.
The phenomena observed by Brandt and coworkers in their 
studies on a condition they call phobic postural vertigo appear 
to be consistent with socially disabling SMD. The features of 
phobic postural vertigo include anxiety and dizziness upon 
exposure to bridges, staircases, empty rooms, streets, depart­
ment stores, restaurants, concerts and crowds.6 The condition 
was typically preceded by acute vestibular disturbances, such as 
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, or traumatic conditions, 
such as whiplash injury, that could be expected to result in 
otolith dysfunction.6 Phobic postural vertigo has been consid­
ered to be a form of ‘psychogenic’ vertigo. However, although 
the case vignettes above all came from patients referred for 
psychiatric evaluation, this situational sensitivity is not limited 
to such patients. In a study in which we assessed anxiety
symptoms in consecutive patients with vestibular dysfunction 
already mentioned,9 patients with vestibular dysfunction, 
compared to those evaluated for mild hearing loss, tended to 
particularly avoid heights and boats.
To assess further the pattern of situations that are problem­
atic for patients with vestibular dysfunction we constructed a 
questionnaire, the Situational Characteristics Questionnaire.3 
This questionnaire consists of three subscales (the SMD-I, 
SMD-II and Ag-I). (‘SMD’ stands for ‘space and motion dis­
comfort’; ‘Ag’ stands for ‘Agoraphobia,’ reflecting items that 
would be avoided by patients with agoraphobia even in the 
absence of vestibular dysfunction.) In patients with anxiety dis­
orders, the SMD-I has been shown to predict the presence or 
absence of vestibular dysfunction over and above the diagnosis 
of agoraphobia.16 Table 53.4 lists the items reflecting situations 
that bothered the vestibular patients more than patients 
evaluated for hearing loss.19 Again, these patients were not 
specifically selected for psychiatric dysfunction.
Situational fears following the SMD pattern have also 
been described by others, including fear of heights,8’20 ‘street 
neurosis’,21 the ‘supermarket syndrome’,22,23 the ‘motorist 
vestibular disorientation syndrome’,24 ‘visual vertigo’25 and 
‘space phobia’.26,27 Agoraphobia as a syndrome was identified 
130 years ago.28-30 Interestingly, a major theme in the early 
literature on agoraphobia was whether or not agoraphobia was 
a form of vertigo.31 In view of this background, it is of inter­
est that in our study assessing the prevalence of vestibular
Table 53.4 Situations eliciting space and motion discomfort in consecutive otolaryngological patients with dizziness and 
vestibular dysfunction.
Situation
Aspect of situation inducing more discomfort (SMD-I or Ag-I)
Effect size'
Looking up at tall buildings
_
1.1
Closing eyes in the shower
-
1.0
Rolling over in bed
-
0.9
Leaning far back in chair
-
0.8
Riding in a car
Reading versus looking out of the window
0.7
Dancing
-
0.7
Aerobic exercise
-
0.7
Riding in a car
Back seat versus front seat
0.6
Tunnels
Looking at end versus looking at lights on side
0.6
Elevators
Moving versus stationary
0.5
Elevators
Glass versus standard
0.5
Reading newspaper close to face
-
0.4
Riding in a car
Straight roads versus winding roads
0.4
Buses
Moving versus standing still
0.4
Movies
Middle of the row versus aisle3
0.4
Supermarkets
Crowded versus empty'
0.4
Elevators
Crowded versus empty1
0.4
Riding on roller coasters
0.3
Elevators
Stopping versus moving at steady speed
0.3
d Item from Ag-I subscale, all other items in this column from the SMD-I. If no item in this column the situation is from the SMD-II 
b Effect size: Difference between groups divided by the standard deviation of the difference
  

Psychiatric consequences of vestibular dysfunction 
877
dysfunction among anxiety patients, the highest-prevalence 
laboratory vestibular abnormalities were found in patients with 
agoraphobia.16
Situations triggering space and motion discomfort 
include long visual distances and busy, ‘Escher-like/ wall­
paper patterns.
Generally, SMD situations involve one or more of the 
following: (1) intense vestibular stimulation, such as during 
abrupt head movements when exercising; (2) neck extension; 
(3) unfamiliar body accelerations; (4) discordance or incongru­
ence among the information in the vestibular, visual and 
somatosensory systems,32 (5) inadequate or confusing visual 
spatial information, such as those involving long visual dis­
tances,33,34 ‘particularly rich or repetitive visual patterns’25 that 
provide competing stimuli for visual fixation; or (6) unstable or 
soft support surfaces.
The mechanism underlying space and motion discomfort 
can be deduced from the fact that spatial orientation involves 
an integration of information from three main sensory chan­
nels, the visual, somatosensory (proprioceptive), and vestibular. 
Individuals with vestibular dysfunction may develop a sensory 
integration strategy in which visual and somatosensory infor­
mation is used to replace the defective information in the 
vestibular channel. These individuals would be expected to be 
unusually sensitive to inadequate or misleading visual informa­
tion (visual dependence) or unusually sensitive to instability of 
the support surface (surface dependence). Clinical experience 
with computerized dynamic posturography, as well as the result 
of a study examining the response to optic flow stimuli,18 
indicate that many patients with vestibular dysfunction are 
visually or proprioceptively dependent. In a study of anxiety 
patients with space and motion discomfort, we found them 
similarly responsive to optic flow stimuli.35 Furthermore, agora­
phobic patients are characterized by poor performance on 
dynamic (moving platform) posturography.36 In our laboratory, 
we have found that patients with agoraphobia, many of whom 
had vestibular dysfunction, had a proprioceptively dependent 
pattern, with poor performance limited to conditions IV-VI on 
moving platform posturography.15 Seen in this light, SMD 
cannot be viewed as an abnormal response to vestibular dys­
function any more than other situational medical symptoms. 
For example, individuals allergic to cats prudently avoid visit­
ing households with cats.
Patients with unremitting, disabling 
balance symptoms
Riding a roller coaster is an experience that many individuals 
choose to have. The situation for the patient with unremitting
symptoms, however, can be compared to a roller coaster ride 
infinite in duration. Besides anxiety and space and motion dis­
comfort, these patients develop psychiatric problems that are 
related to the unremitting, intrusive nature of the symptoms, or 
from the disability resulting from the dizziness or imbalance. 
Although its symptoms are better compared with rides on a 
boat rather than a roller coaster, the syndrome of MDD37 can be 
viewed as a prototype for patients with continuous intrusive 
symptoms. The intrusiveness of the symptoms can be appreci­
ated in the following quote:
MDD patient.2 Two hours on the boat. That’s all. I now use 
that cruise as a point of reference in the time line of my life. 
Pre-boat or post-boat. I remember dates and things I have 
done in relation to that because I have not been myself 
since that night.
Among individuals responding to a survey on the Internet 
focused on MDD, the most common psychiatric symptoms were 
fatigue, problems in concentrating, anxiety, memory problems, 
and depression.2
Intrusive or disabling vestibular symptoms often lead to 
anxiety, decreased ability to concentrate, depression, 
social withdrawal and anger.
As mentioned already, besides the distress from the symp­
toms of dizziness or imbalance themselves, restrictions in daily 
activities provide another source of psychiatric distress. Thus, 
the patients examined by Yardley et al reported being unable to 
conduct normal daily activities, including cooking, washing, 
and shopping.1 They also restricted their use of transportation 
(driving or traveling). In addition, the patients reported diffi­
culties in meeting work demands, including the handling of 
dangerous machinery; there were significant periods of absence, 
and some patients had to stop working altogether. Even leisure 
time was affected; the patients reported restrictions in active 
physical activities such as gardening, dancing, bike riding and 
other sports restriction, as well as in sedentary pursuits such as 
reading, knitting, and sewing. Both the distress from symptoms 
and the disability from behavioral restrictions are illustrated by 
our patient below:
Cecilia: I could not look up, down, or to the side or bend 
over without getting uncontrollably dizzy. I could not walk 
in a dark room with my eyes open or closed. I could not 
walk without holding on to someone or something. I could 
not work in my garden, clean, iron, and certainly could not 
cook. I have always been an avid reader and now I could 
not read. I could not look at someone or something that 
was within 2 feet of my vision. I was afraid to fall asleep, 
afraid I would wake up and the ceiling would be spinning. 
The fear was almost as terrifying as the dizziness. It was 
literally impossible to lie on my right side or turn from left
  

878 
Vestibular disorders and their management
to right while lying down. I have slept only on my left side 
since last June because I could not lie flat on my back. I 
could not be in any stores or close places. This meant I 
could not shop. I could not go inside a mall or movie or 
even a small room. If I did, the sensations would be a very 
physical one. A combination of what I would imagine a 
panic attack would be, along with head pressure, dizziness 
and motion sickness.
Impaired attention, poor concentration, 
distractibility, and fatigue
It is impossible for humans to remain standing after falling 
asleep; control of upright balance requires attention. Maintain­
ing balance under difficult conditions requires more attention 
than maintaining balance under easy conditions; the former 
diminish the attentional resources available for other tasks. In a 
study with normal subjects, reaction time was used as a measure 
for available attention (with long reaction time implying that 
less attention was available for the reaction time task).38 It was 
found that reaction times were the shortest for sitting, followed 
by standing with broad support, standing with feet together, and 
walking, in that order. In another study, evidence for decreased 
attentional capacity was found when tasks were executed while 
the subject was standing on a sway-referenced support com­
pared to a stable support surface.39
Given these findings on normal subjects, it is not surprising 
that impaired concentration is a common complaint among 
patients with balance disorders. The patients have to deploy 
attention to maintain balance similar to what is required from 
normal subjects under demanding balance conditions. Com­
plaints by patients therefore include difficulty in maintaining 
attention on tasks that require planning, difficulty in remem­
bering things, and a subjective sense of one’s mind seeming 
foggy, and ‘spacey.’
MDD patient: Probably the worse feeling to me is the fuzzy 
head, spaciness, or ‘Brain Fog’ feeling in my head. I feel as 
if I am not operating on all cylinders ... or that I have a 
short circuit in the wiring up there. Half of my brain feels 
like I am here and the other half feels like it is out in 
‘Ozone Land’ somewhere! So hard to concentrate, hard to 
remember things I just did and just walking in a haze some 
days.
In addition, persistent attentional demands can lead to 
fatigue, a common complaint among vestibular patients. 
Increased attentional demand may be just one pathway to 
symptoms of fatigue, however. Sleep deprivation is another. 
Poor sleep may be a consequence of intrusive symptoms of 
vertigo. Some patients with intense symptoms fear closing their 
eyes because the vertigo increases.
Jennifer B. is a 32-year-old woman disabled from bilateral 
vestibular hypofunction and severe oscillopsia. She was 
unable to sleep because closing her eyes increased her
symptoms. One method of coping was to keep her eyes 
open as long as possible while looking at a small red light 
on her VCR in darkness. Later she was able to visualize the 
spot with her eyes closed and this enabled her to fall asleep. 
A helpful modification of this visualization was to imagine 
a stick or pole sticking out of the water in a river. The flow 
of the water would ‘model’ the environment moving due to 
vertigo, while the tip of the pole provided a spatially invari­
ant target for visual fixation. Even so, and probably as a 
result of concomitant depression, she would wake up early. 
Her total sleep duration was 3h per night (despite treat­
ment with fluvoxamine, a sedating type of serotonergic 
reuptake inhibiting antidepressant).
Conversely, fatigue may further decrease attentional 
capacity and increase symptoms: patients with balance dis­
orders typically report that their discomfort increases as the 
day progresses (i.e. later during the day19).
Depression
Trouble in concentrating, poor sleep and fatigue can also be 
indicators of another psychiatric consequence of persistent 
symptoms, depression. Diagnostic criteria for depression 
appear in Table 53.5. In addition to the three symptoms just 
mentioned, depression is also characterized by: dysphoric 
mood; loss of interest in things previously enjoyed; poor 
appetite (or increased appetite due to ‘nervous eating’); 
agitation or the converse, decreased activity; feelings of 
worthlessness; and death wishes that can escalate to suicidal 
ideation.
Jennifer (the patient with bilateral vestibular dysfunction just 
described) j reported depressed mood, difficulty in falling 
asleep, 
restlessness, 
decreased concentration, fatigue, 
irritability, and guilt over her reduced function in her role as 
a mother. She had lost 12 pounds in 2 weeks. She did not
Table 53.5 Symptoms and signs of depression.3
Symptoms/signs
1. Depressed mood (complains or looks depressed)
2. Loss of interest
3. Weight loss or weight gain
4. Insomnia or hypersomnia
5. Psychomotor retardation or agitation
6. Loss of energy
7. Feeling worthless, guilt feelings
8. Trouble in concentrating
9. Recurrent thought of death or suicidal ideation
3 Paraphrased and simplified from DSM-IV. To count as a criterion, the 
symptoms have to be pervasive and occur most of the day and nearly 
every day.
  

Psychiatric consequences of vestibular dysfunction 
879
complain of nausea; nevertheless, she reported that nothing 
tastes good and that her mouth feels dry. Her concentration 
is decreased. The patient frequently expresses wishes not to 
live because she feels like a burden; however, she strongly 
denies current intent because of the consequences of such 
an act for her children.
In general, although depression as a psychiatric condition 
can come on without any apparent external trigger, in many 
patients depression occurs as a reaction to a psychosocial 
stressor. One source of depression in vestibular patients com" 
prises the very realistic practical restrictions on lifestyle experi­
enced by the patients, restrictions that deprive them of the 
rewards of everyday life. Depression represents a state of 
‘learned helplessness’ that has been studied in animal models.40 
Alternatively, the depressed state can be conceptualized as grief 
over the loss of previous function. Patients with depression 
often welter in ruminative thoughts. Depressive ruminations 
can be identified by their characteristic ‘if only’ verbal structure, 
e.g. ‘If only the doctor could find out why I have these symp­
toms’. Pervading the state of mind of a depressed person is a 
sense of hopelessness and demoralization.
Cecilia: Exactly 1 year, 3 weeks and 6 hours ago, on 17 June, 
1998, I was diagnosed with benign positional vertigo. In 
simpler terms ... I was dizzy ... room spinning dizzy —  Too 
dizzy to sit up, walk or move. This condition would con­
tinue in varying degrees throughout this past year and still 
exists today, in some form —  Imagine turning yourself 
around 25 times as fast as you can. Now stop. How long 
would you like to feel that dizzy sensation? Imagine now 
that it never goes away ... Six months ago, to abate the 
dizziness, I had begun to use self-inflicted pain as a deter­
rent. I would pound my head with my fists, scratch my scalp 
to the bleeding point and bang my head into walls, door 
frames and windows. One month ago, I lamented that I had 
just lost a complete year of ‘my precious time’ ... One 
whole year. It was over and gone, 365 days stripped from my 
allotted life span. What a wasted year! This loss was not 
due to a life threatening illness, or a drug or alcohol addic­
tion, nor was I in prison or in a coma ... That might have 
been easier to understand.
Once a person is in a depressed state of mind, it tends to be 
self-perpetuating. Depressed patients tend to attend selectively 
to things to be depressed about. They view the world from a 
consistently pessimistic perspective -  the proverbial glass is half 
empty rather than half full. For example, if a patient’s symptoms 
of dizziness have partially improved, the depressed person may 
selectively focus on the symptoms that remain rather than on 
the reduction in symptoms. Perhaps this is the reason why many 
clinicians suspect that the patient’s symptoms are caused 
(entirely) by depression, i.e. are ‘psychogenic.’ However, the 
bias for seeing the negative does not mean that their symptoms 
are self-produced.
Social withdrawal
Studies on patients with balance disorders sometimes reveal 
social anxiety to be among the most prevalent complica­
tions.1,11 Social fears provide reasons for avoiding public places, 
in addition to space and motion discomfort already discussed. 
Specifically, patients may become concerned about appearing 
intoxicated.
MDD patient: I drive people nuts behind me with my sway­
ing ... It helps to hold on to the cart, it keeps the motion 
down, but I am sure a few of them think I am drunk!
Jennifer (the patient with bilateral hypofunction) reported that 
a stranger had once approached her in a shopping mall, 
confronting her with ‘it is a shame that a young women like 
you should walk around in public, intoxicated’. With per­
suasion by the therapist (RGJ), the patient was induced to 
continue going to malls but walk with the assistance of a 
cane, thereby preventing similar encounters by the use of 
therapeutic ‘impression management’.
Besides social fears, social withdrawal can be the end result 
of other influences. In the case that the patient is unable to 
maintain employment, the resulting change in social network 
naturally results in restrictions in social activities. In addition, 
patients with persisting vestibular symptoms tend to avoid 
social activities such as interacting with friends because they 
are too distracted by their symptoms. Furthermore, depression is 
often associated with diminished interest in social activities.
Social withdrawal may also occur as an expression of nor­
mative influences on illness behavior stemming from the 
patient adopting the ‘sick role.’ For individuals succumbing 
to an acute illness, the sick role social ‘contract’ permits them 
to assume the role of a patient, a role that includes license to 
express distress over symptoms and to be exempted from normal 
activities.41 Concurrently, this sick role contract obligates the 
patient to comply with treatment-e.g. submitting to medical 
tests and taking medication. The sick role contract also pre­
scribes behaviors for members of the patient’s social environ­
ment. For example, family members are expected to act 
supportively in various ways, ranging from showing sympathy to 
performing the patient’s chores.
The sick role contract works well for acute illnesses; if the 
patient gets better, all participants benefit. Not getting better, 
however, can be interpreted as a violation of the sick role con­
tract. This transition from acute to chronic disease represents a 
phase of disappointment for all parties involved. The patient, 
no longer entitled to the degree of exemption from normal 
activities bestowed on the acutely ill, is put in a situation of 
feeling as if he or she is a ‘burden.’
Jennifer (the patient with bilateral hypofunction): The patient 
reports 1 year of feeling anxious, more days than not, with 
worries about her not being able to respond to family 
members’ needs (e.g. aging parents and children) and 
finances.
  

880 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Conversely, family members or friends may indicate their 
doubt as to whether or not the patient is indeed entitled to the 
sick role by showing less sympathy:
Kathryn H.: Friends have shown signs of impatience if the 
patient is weepy. Similarly, her children are not good 
listeners. Normally, she would have had her husband but he 
died 10 years ago. The patient has felt a need to talk 
through her problems with friends of family but they have 
tended to cut her off with premature advice-giving. Now 
she puts up a ‘good front.*
Patients may attempt to cope with such influences by reduc­
ing their demands on the family by withdrawing or by attempt­
ing to behave in ways that minimize their illness behaviors.
Cecilia: This pressure to ‘keep a stiff upper lip’ appears to be 
particularly pronounced in front of young children or 
grandchildren.1 During a session, Cecilia complained that 
her adult children did not enquire enough about her symp­
toms. At the same time, however, she would try extra hard 
to appear free from distress or ‘normaP when interacting 
with her grandchildren.
Anger
The sick role contract just described prescribes behaviors not 
only for patients and members of their immediate social envi­
ronments, but also for the health professionals that the patients 
consult for their problem. In the case of acute illness, the patient’s 
illness behavior is complemented by the clinician’s treatment 
behavior, such that the latter leads to a reduction in the former. 
Treatment behaviors include the clinician showing interest in 
the problem, performing appropriate assessments, in due course 
providing physical explanation for the patient’s symptoms, and 
proceeding and following through with appropriate treatment. 
If the patient’s evaluation is completed and no treatable causes 
are identified, or if treatment is unsuccessful, clinicians tend to 
show signs of decreased treatment behavior, in the form of 
diminished expression of interest, reduction of time spent with 
the patient, and perhaps suggesting a ‘psychogenic’ origin of the 
problem or at least conveying the implication that the patient’s 
vestibular problem is minor. Collectively, we will refer to such 
behaviors as ‘clinician’s dismissive behaviors’ (CDBs).
CDBs have the untoward effect of further increasing the 
patient’s sick role behaviors. These increases are often accom­
panied by expressions of anger over the clinician’s perceived 
violation of his or her end of the sick role contract. In fact, out­
rage over CDBs can be discerned in close to 50% (9/19) of the 
autobiographical reports published on the website for MDD.2 
CDBs noted by the MDD patients include:
A clinician’s dismissive behavior may cause anger in 
patients with chronic vestibular symptoms.
1. Failure to recognize that there is a problem:
MDD patient: There I saw the head of Neurology, who had 
never heard of MDD and dismissed it immediately —  I 
found the doctor there to be very indifferent and quite con­
descending. I get no advice (that I am willing to follow) 
from my doctors here and not much empathy-perhaps due 
to my age.
MDD patient: He looked at it for about 1 minute and 
handed it back to me saying, ‘you don’t have this. This 
happens after an extended boat trip. You were on that boat 
for 2 hours.’ And I said, ‘I know that, but the symptoms fit 
me. It’s not BPV.’ ... He looked at me and said ‘Do you 
want me to help you or not?’ (on the wall behind him was 
a sign that says ‘if you remember who is the doctor and who 
is the patient, your care will be a success’)
2. Minimizing the impact of the problem:
MDD patient: The doctor in charge of my testing ... said 
‘if it only happens when I fly, he suggests that I don’t fly and 
even when I do at least I know it will eventually go away.’ 
I have very few kind words to say about... (the doctor)
3. The degree of CDB is inversely proportional to the amount 
of time spent with the patient:
MDD patient: I went armed with all my recent info to the 
doctor, and I don’t know whether his ego was on the line, he 
just didn’t know anything about MDD or just wasn’t inter­
ested but I couldn’t even get him to talk to me for 5 minutes 
on the phone about this ... not unless I was willing to set up 
another appointment. I had already paid him $350.00 cash for 
the tests (no medical insurance), and he would not give me 5 
minutes more of his time! —  I was not only insulted that the 
doctor was not listening to me, but I was mad that he wasn’t 
even interested in an illness or syndrome that he might not 
have ever heard of before! I gave up on that doctor.
4. ‘Insult’ is added to ‘injury’ when suggestions are made that 
the problem might be ‘mental.’
MDD patient: In six months time I then saw an ear spe­
cialist and three neurologists, had CAT scans and an MRI 
and other neurological tests. All had negative results. 
There were always hints by the doctors that I was imagin­
ing the symptoms or that the condition was stress-related. 
Finally, I was advised to see a psychiatrist. I related my 
cruise ship story to the psychiatrist and was sent home with 
an antidepressant. For 2 years, various antidepressants and 
other medications were prescribed, none helping to relieve 
me of this rocking motion.
The opposite of ‘dismissive’ behaviors is ‘validating’ behav­
iors (Table 53.6). Thus, clinician’s validating behaviors include: 
(1) accepting the patient’s symptoms even if they do not fit a 
predetermined pattern and remaining open to the possibility of 
unknown non-psychiatric conditions or vestibular conditions
  

Psychiatric consequences of vestibular dysfunction 
881
Table 53,6 
Clinician's dismissive behaviors and validating behaviors.
Clinician's dismissive behaviors 
Clinician's validating behaviors
Not acknowledging that there is a problem 
Minimizing the impact of the problem 
Reducing amount of time spent with patient 
Suggesting that dizziness is 'psychogenic'
Recognize limitations of medical workup, including vestibular laboratory test battery 
Recognize the impact from the perspective of the context provided by the patient 
Increase the time spent; repetition, patient education.
Physical explanations of dizziness etiology as initial 'nidus' of symptom complex
not detected by conventional vestibular laboratory tests;42 (2) 
recognizing and showing empathy for the severity of the prob­
lem within the context presented by the patient; (3) spending 
more time with the patient-such time can profitably be spent 
educating and elaborating on the nature of vestibular symptoms 
and their consequences (of the kind used by vestibular rehabil­
itation therapists); and (4) recognizing that unknown etiology 
does not imply psychiatric etiology. Evidence for the value of 
clinician validating behaviors can be found in some of the 
reports from MDD patients:
MDD patient: During our first meeting she evaluated me, 
listened to my account of my symptoms, and had me do all 
sorts of balance tests —  Then she told me about this thing 
called Mai De Debarquement. She pulled a big book off the 
shelf and read a description of it and I was thinking ‘Oh my 
God. That sounds just like me.’
MDD patient: I once overheard my physical therapist talk­
ing to a colleague of hers —  She had called him specifi­
cally to ask if he could tell how I would react to flying (I was 
getting ready to take a trip and was worried about the 
effects of flying). She said to him, ‘this is that patient of 
mine with MDD I was telling you about.’ I know she thinks 
that is what I have and to hear her actually say it to some­
one else was like music to my ears. But why can’t I get a 
doctor to tell me that?
Psychosomatic effects on vestibular 
function
Up to this point, we have discussed psychiatric responses or cor­
relates to vestibular dysfunction. However, psychological fac­
tors may also affect vestibular function. Psychosomatic effects 
on vestibular function can be a result of increased physiological 
‘arousal,’ an effect of hyperventilation, or, possibly, a conse­
quence of sleep deprivation. The latter possibility is speculative 
and will not be discussed further-see the up-to-date review by 
Yardley and Redfem.43
Increased arousal and hyperventilation may unmask a 
previously compensated vestibular lesion.
It is well known that the gain of vestibular responses is depen­
dent on the degree of an individual’s arousal or alertness. Low 
alertness decreases gain; in recognition of this fact, many vestibu­
lar tests require alerting tasks such as naming cities or performing 
calculations. Conversely, high arousal increases gain. High 
arousal (e.g. elevated heart rate) is a characteristic of anxiety 
states. These considerations suggest that anxiety or ‘stress’ might 
trigger symptoms of vestibular dysfunction. However, the evi­
dence for this possibility is only suggestive. For example, 
Anderson et al reported a study in which patients with Meniere’s 
disease performed daily ratings of ‘stress’ and ‘dizziness’.44 Using 
sophisticated time series analysis techniques on each patient’s 
data, the investigators found that the patients reported more dizzi­
ness on those days that they also reported more ‘stress.’ However, 
they did not find that dizziness was preceded by increases in stress 
- a  finding that stress preceded dizziness would have made a 
stronger case for a psychosomatic causal relationship. Moreover, 
the general levels of stress reported by the patients were low.
Hyperventilation is a characteristic of panic attacks. 
Hyperventilation is also known to affect vestibular function.45 
Sakellari et al found that hyperventilation in normal subjects 
increased body sway by moderating somatosensory input.46 
Furthermore, in patients with unilateral vestibular hypofunc­
tion, hyperventilation led to the re-emergence of nystagmus 
and to increases in lateral body sway.46 The latter findings sug­
gest that hyperventilation can reverse the central compensatory 
processes that had mediated recovery.
Psychiatric complications resulting from dizziness and 
dysequilibrium may prolong recovery from a vestibular 
disorder.
Psychiatric factors such as anxiety states thus may worsen a 
vestibular disorder in various ways, through increased arousal or 
hyperventilation. We have already seen, however, that vestibu­
lar dysfunction can bring about anxiety through linkage or 
somatopsychic mechanisms. Thus, vestibular symptoms and 
psychiatric distress may mutually enhance each other in a 
vicious circle. This may be why it has been found that the pres­
ence of anxiety symptoms predicts poor recovery from vestibu­
lar disorders.47,48 In general, the phenomenon of psychiatric 
conditions worsening or interfering with the natural course of 
recovery from a medical disorder is sometimes referred to as 
‘psychiatric overlay.’
  

882 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Vulnerability factors
Only some of the patients with vestibular disorders develop psy­
chiatric complications. Little systematic knowledge is available 
as to whether or not certain patients are more vulnerable than 
others in these regards. Many of the patients referred to R.G.J. 
for psychiatric evaluation have commonalities in their pre- 
vestibular histories. These include pre-existing anxiety symp­
toms, and obsessive-compulsive personality traits. More rarely, 
patients showed evidence for somatization, meaning that they 
had histories of prior non-vestibular medical disorders associ­
ated with hypochondriacal preoccupation. It appears that these 
features provide fertile ground for, or act like a catalyst for, 
developing psychiatric complications. Alternatively stated, 
these attributes constitute predisposing or vulnerability factors 
for psychiatric complications.
Psychiatric complications may in turn be conducive to 
delayed recovery from the underlying vestibular disorder, as sug­
gested in the previous section. Therefore, psychiatric vulnera­
bility also predisposes for intensified vestibular symptoms or for 
delayed recovery from the vestibular disorder. For example, 
symptoms of SMD may escalate from ‘discomfort’ into phobic 
reactions, leading us to propose the diagnostic label of ‘space 
and motion phobia’5 for SMD that is highly intense and socially 
disabling.
What is not known is the extent to which this impression 
is a reflection of selection bias. However, our impression of the 
importance of obsessive-compulsive personality traits parallels 
that of data by Brandt already published in the reports on pho­
bic postural vertigo.6 Furthermore, the concept of vulnerability 
factors (diathesis) is well known in psychiatry. For example, 
individuals with family histories of anxiety disorders are more 
likely to react with anxiety disorders to a wide variety of 
psychosocial stressors, a phenomenon referred to as ‘anxiety 
proneness.’
Patients with pre-existing anxiety disorders or tendencies 
toward somatization or perfectionistic personality traits 
may be particularly vulnerable to developing psychiatric 
complications.
Pre-existing anxiety
As already discussed, patients with autonomic anxiety symp­
toms tend to have greater disability and poorer prognosis than 
vestibular patients without such symptoms.43,48 In many of the 
patients referred to R.G.J. for psychiatric evaluation, some of 
the anxiety symptoms preceded the onset of the vestibular dis­
order, with new anxiety symptoms being added after onset of 
the vestibular disorder.
Lena N.: She reports that she always has been afraid of the
dark. She also has severe fear of insects, enlisting the aid of
neighbors to deal with them at home. She has always 
worried about the health of relatives. Her two cousins on 
her father’s side recognize that ‘we are the same way, it is in 
our blood; we worry too much.’
Donna (patient in Table 53.3): Most of her anxiety symp­
toms started after she had the ear symptoms, but some 
began after an episode of breathing problems that led to an 
admission for double pneumonia and asthma in 1988. On 
the other hand, she never liked buses, reading while riding 
in a car, sitting in the front at the movies, flying, elevators, 
and roller coasters. She has pre-existing fears of heights but 
now experiences more dizziness and fear of falling in high 
places (from three rungs on a ladder and up). She has also 
always been afraid of thunderstorms and water.
The pre-existing anxiety suggests that the patients are 
prone to respond with anxiety to a greater number of stimuli 
than is the case for the average person (anxiety proneness). 
Therefore, it is not surprising that they respond with anxiety in 
the presence of vestibular symptoms. Anxiety proneness is 
genetically determined, as evidenced by the fact that patients 
with anxiety disorders tend to have positive family histories of 
anxiety disorders. In other cases, the vestibular symptoms 
remind the patients of past fearful events and thus elicit condi­
tioned anxiety responses.
Beatrice (the patient whose dysequilibrium had started during an 
art exhibition) recalled that she had undergone treatment for 
scoliosis at age 11. After surgical fusion of the mid-thoracic 
vertebrae, she was put in a body cast for 6 months and then 
in a smaller cast for 2 months. After this, she was unable 
to walk and had to learn to walk again. Her vestibular 
symptoms (described earlier) primed the reoccurrence of 
emotional states from this time period.
Fred (the patient whose SMD profile included bridges and 
‘EscherAike’ patterns) developed an increased understanding 
of SMD symptoms and his avoidance was much reduced 
after a few treatment sessions. However, he remained wary 
of bridges. During a detailed review of thoughts and symp­
toms concerning bridges (similar to what was done for the 
patient in Table 53.3), he described a sequence of cogni­
tions-‘I will be blown away,’ ‘I feel weightless,’ ‘It’s almost 
like a drug trip, you are not there, you blend in.’ He then 
realized that these experiences were similar to those from 
an episode in 1970 in which the patient had a drink that 
turned out to be laced with LSD -an episode in which he 
(and other partygoers) experienced extreme panic.
Anxiety and avoidance may also interfere with the func­
tional recovery from vestibular disorders. For example, patients 
engaging in avoidance behaviors may deprive themselves of 
input needed for the development of central compensation. 
They may continue to avoid even though their underlying 
vestibular disorder has healed, thus maintaining their anxiety 
disorder. The latter phenomenon is illustrated in the case of a
  

Psychiatric consequences of vestibular dysfunction 
883
patient with space and motion phobia related to probable 
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo:
Lena (the patient who had pre-existing fears of insects): About 
6 years ago, the patient woke up perceiving the whole room 
as spinning. This experience was frightening, terrifying. 
Since then she has had problems with dizziness and SMD. 
Much of her SMD was height and travel related. In addi­
tion, severe dizziness would invariably occur when she was 
lying on her left side. Consequently, she had not slept on 
her left side for 3 years. She would avoid rolling over in bed 
to the left at all cost. For example, she would not roll over 
on her left side to turn off her alarm clock located on her 
night table located on the right side of her bed. Instead she 
had to sit up in bed first.
Because these symptoms were consistent with benign 
paroxysmal positional vertigo, a session was scheduled with 
a vestibular rehabilitation therapist for particle reposition­
ing. Because of the patient’s high anticipatory anxiety, 
R.G.J. participated in the session. The patient was 
equipped with video goggles that documented the occur­
rence of nystagmus. She was highly anxious with flushed 
facies prior to the intervention and needed to hold R.G.J.’s 
hand firmly. Lying down to the right did not elicit nystag­
mus or dizziness. The patient was then persuaded to lie 
down with her head turned to the left. No nystagmus was 
elicited, and the patient did not feel dizzy, much to her 
surprise. She then lay down on her left side, again without 
nystagmus or dizziness.
Thus, by consistently avoiding lying on the affected side, 
the patient had deprived herself of the opportunity to learn 
that this maneuver now is ‘safe.’
Somatization
Somatization refers to the tendency to report and be pre­
occupied with medical symptoms from varied organ systems. 
Thus, individuals with tendencies towards somatization report 
histories of other medical complaints preceding the vestibular 
disorder.
Maurice R.: Prior to the onset of the patient’s vestibular dis­
order, the patient had an episode of leg pain possibly related 
to varicose veins. During follow-up sessions, he showed 
himself preoccupied with his leg pain, a preoccupation that 
interfered with the discussion of his vestibular symptoms. 
He reported not wanting his veins stripped ‘because I might 
need the vein in the future’ but requested a referral to a 
surgeon. He also had been concerned about his blood 
pressure but avoids having it checked, fearing the results.
Ned A.: The patient had a past episode of a painful shoul­
der with which he was preoccupied for an entire year, until 
his physician told him that he was healthier than most. He 
then realized that he had been ‘adopting a stance (with 
respect to somatic symptoms) that turned into fear.’
In a recent study, patients with vestibular disorders were 
asked to provoke symptoms by engaging in vigorous head move­
ments. Those patients who reported more somatic symptoms 
during the 2-month period prior to the study responded to the 
head movements with increased respiration rate.49 A recent 
study showed that patients with somatization syndrome had 
elevated indices of physiological arousal, including salivary 
cortisol and increased heart rates.50 Patients with somatization 
tendencies are prone to form the type of relationship with their 
medical care providers described under ‘anger’ above.41
Perfectionistic traits and obsessive-compulsive 
personality disorder
A personality disorder is defined as ‘an enduring pattern of inner 
experience and behavior that deviates markedly from the expec­
tations of the individual’s culture.’7 The pattern is so enduring 
that it can be identified during adolescence or early adulthood. 
The requirement that the deviation from cultural expectations 
should be ‘marked’ sets a high standard for diagnosis. However, 
rather than forming distinct pathological categories, personality 
disorders can also be viewed as maladaptive extremes of funda­
mental personality dimensions. Many individuals show person­
ality traits similar to these extremes but do not meet the criteria; 
even so, they still adapt poorly to illness. Thus, whereas these 
traits may not have caused problems earlier in the person’s life, 
they often interfere with adaptation to illness.
Our clinical experience, as well as that of others, is that of 
the nine personality disorders in DSM-IV, obsessive-compulsive 
personality disorder (OCPD) is of particular interest. The 
behaviors of patients with OCPD are characterized by ‘a perva­
sive pattern of preoccupation with orderliness, perfectionism 
and mental and interpersonal control’ that occurs ‘at the ex­
pense of flexibility, openness, and efficiency.’7 Specific criteria 
include: perfectionism, preoccupation with details, devotion to 
work, inability to delegate, general inflexibility or stubbornness, 
a miserly approach to spending money compared to others in 
similar circumstances, and unwillingness to discard old things 
even when they have no sentimental value. Again, even if the 
degree of OCPD traits does not meet strict personality disorder 
diagnostic criteria, they still seem to affect the person’s response 
to illness. The criteria and descriptions above, however, do not 
do justice to the fact that the patient with OCPD traits is often 
highly capable and functional, at least before the onset of their 
vestibular disorder.
OCPD appears to be so common among patients coping 
poorly with dizziness that Brandt has included such traits as a 
definitional criterion of phobic postural vertigo.6 Many of these 
patients were reported to have personality disorders, and the 
majority of those who did had OCPD.6 On the other hand, the 
fact that compulsive personality traits were included as a crite­
rion may be part of the reason why it was so commonly 
reported. However, we share Brandt’s impression; a majority of 
the vestibular patients referred to R.G.J. had obsessive- 
compulsive traits.
  

884 
Vestibular disorders and their management
It is not known why OCPD traits seem to put such patients 
at more risk for continued vestibular symptoms or greater dis- 
ability from symptoms. One possibility is that these patients 
tend to be anxiety prone (see above). Many patients with 
generalized anxiety disorder, for example, have underlying 
OCPD or traits. A commonality among OCPD patients beyond 
anxiety is that their thinking style is characterized by a high 
degree of persistence. Consequently, they have trouble chang­
ing their focus of attention-including directing their attention 
away from their symptoms. The patients try hard to not per­
ceive the symptoms, but in doing so paradoxically increase their 
awareness of the symptoms. This effect is similar to the conse­
quences of deliberate thought suppression that occur when we 
are instructed to, for example, ‘try not to think about a pink 
elephant.’
Some patients with OCPD are highly organized (‘compul­
sive’) and adhere to high standards of cleanliness and order. 
They will react with distress when their function is impaired in 
ways that makes them unable to meet these standards. Some 
also tend to react negatively when the behavior of others does 
not meet standards, including those of their clinician. Therefore 
they may be particularly sensitive to clinician’s dismissive behav­
iors, such as keeping the patient waiting or not returning phone 
calls (see section on ‘anger’ above). Finally, patients with OCPD 
traits tend to have a long time horizon in planning their future; 
therefore, they respond with distress when vestibular symptoms 
might necessitate a change in their plans or ‘life stories’.51
A potential risk with patients with OCPD traits is that they 
might overcomply with treatment. Our patient, Cecilia, 
describes the following response to vestibular therapy home­
work instructions:
Cecilia: I pushed hard and convinced my therapist to give 
me more and more exercises to do. I would spend up to 2 
hours a day, twice a day flipping my head, trying to look 
down, trying to bend over, trying to roll from side to side. I 
would march in place while moving my head in all direc­
tions. Then, I would stand on a dense foam rubber cushion, 
march in place, and shake my head until I literally could 
not shake it one more time. There were countless exercises. 
And I was to do each one with eyes closed and then open. 
Each time the dizziness would overwhelm me to the point 
of tears. I began to chant in my head ‘I can do this, I can do 
this, I can do this’, over and over and over. Rest 30 seconds 
... begin again. Chant again. This went on for 2 months. 
It was almost unbearable to exercise but more unbearable 
to just sit and have the dizziness consume me.
Psychogenic versus psychiatric 
dizziness
‘Psychogenic dizziness,’ is a term that until recently pervaded 
the literature to describe some of the phenomena discussed in 
this chapter. The reason for our avoiding this term and similar
terms, such as psychic dizziness, functional dizziness, and 
psychophysiological dizziness, is that these imply that the 
patient does not have a vestibular disorder. The psychogenic 
dizziness can be traced back to psychoanalytic thinking in 
which dizziness was seen as an expression of anxiety neurosis 
that could manifest even without concomitant cognitive anxi­
ety symptoms.52 Indeed, a clinical practice developed in which 
the presence of anxiety symptoms constituted a reason to ‘rule 
out’ vestibular disorders as a cause for dizziness complaints. As 
we have seen, however, certain psychiatric symptoms (e.g. 
space and motion discomfort) actually implicate the vestibular 
system. This is why the term ‘psychogenic’ vertigo is inappro­
priate in most cases. Furthermore, excessive reliance on this 
concept is counterproductive in the clinical setting. As we have 
seen, the practice of communicating to a patient that his or her 
dizziness is psychogenic constitutes a clinician’s dismissive 
behavior that is particularly prone to elicit angry responses from 
patients.
This chapter would be incomplete, however, without rec­
ognizing that the presence of a symptom of dizziness does not 
always imply vestibular dysfunction. For example, dizziness can 
be an expression of non-vestibular medical conditions such as 
orthostatic hypotension or diabetic neuropathy. Similarly, dizzi­
ness can be a symptom of certain psychiatric disorders. We have 
proposed the term psychiatric dizziness for such occasions.53 
The criteria for psychiatric dizziness include:
1. The dizziness occurs exclusively in combination with other
symptoms as part of a recognized psychiatric symptom
cluster.
2. This symptom cluster is not itself related to vestibular
dysfunction.52
For example, dizziness is a defining symptom of panic 
attacks, which represent the defining symptom of panic dis­
order. Dizziness during panic attacks is a consequence of hyper­
ventilation; the presence of dizziness during a panic attack was 
not correlated with the presence or absence of vestibular dys­
function.16 The dizziness that occurs during panic attacks thus 
fits the definition of ‘psychiatric dizziness.’ However, vestibular 
symptoms between panic attacks did predict vestibular dysfunc­
tion in our studies. Thus, this form of dizziness does not warrant 
the label ‘psychiatric’ -  these particular patients have both ‘psy­
chiatric’ and ‘non-psychiatric’ dizziness.
The number of psychiatric conditions that can cause com­
plaints of dizziness in the absence of vestibular and other med­
ical conditions associated with dizziness is small (Table 53.7). 
We have already mentioned panic disorder. Another cause for 
psychiatric dizziness is conversion disorder, a rare condition in 
psychiatric settings. Conversion disorder manifests with symp­
toms or deficits in motor or sensory control; such disturbances 
in gait can mimic a balance disorder. Still other cases of psychi­
atric dizziness may be related to verbal labeling phenomena. 
The experience of dizziness is private in nature and not subject 
to direct social validation. It is therefore possible that some 
individuals use the word ‘dizziness’ idiosyncratically to denote
  

Psychiatric consequences of vestibular dysfunction 
885
Table 53J  
Psychiatric dizziness: psychiatric disorders with dizziness or imbalance as a defining or associated symptom.
Phenomenon
Dizziness,
lightheadedness,
faintness
Feeling unreal'
Possible mechanism
Acute hyperventilation 
during panic attacks
Chronic hyperventilation 
'Dissociation'
Vague complaints, e.g. 
swimming sensations; 
no imbalance
Gait disturbance, 
imbalance
Language used for difficulty 
in concentrating or being 
fatigued
Pharmacological effect 
Unknown (dissociation?)
Associated phenomena
Pricking sensations, heart 
palpitations (panic attacks)
Anxiety
No panic, no imbalance
Extreme 'stress,' numbness
History of trauma, flashbacks, 
reports of feeling ‘numb1
Poor appetite, trouble in 
sleeping
Ataxia
Gait disturbance, no pronounced 
dizziness
Psychiatric disorder 
Panic disorder
Panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder 
Depersonalization disorder 
Acute stress disorder 
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Depression
Alcohol/drug intoxication 
Conversion disorder
vague sensations such as difficulty in concentrating or being 
fatigued. Still other patients complain of ‘feelings of unreality’, 
which might be another manifestation of hyperventilation in 
panic disorder. This term may also occasionally be used to 
describe symptoms of dissociation that occur in psychiatric 
disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder.
Treatment of patients with 
vestibular dysfunction and 
psychiatric complications
Little systematic knowledge is available that is relevant for the 
treatment of psychiatric complications of vestibular disorders. 
Clinically, our approach to these patients includes patient 
evaluation, patient education, vestibular rehabilitation, and 
medication. Patient evaluation involves a review of both the 
patient’s vestibular and psychiatric symptoms. Because of the 
complexity of the interrelationships, this often requires a 
prolonged session of combined questionnaire and interview 
assessments (e.g. 2h). This evaluation provides the basic mate­
rial necessary for the next phase, patient education. This
Education of the patient using appropriate physiological 
explanations, exposure to feared situations, vestibular 
rehabilitation physical therapy, and psychiatric medica­
tion are elements of a comprehensive treatment approach 
to patients who suffer from psychiatric complications of 
vestibular disorders.
involves providing an internally consistent conceptual struc­
ture from which the patient’s symptoms can be predicted. In our 
setting, such education includes handing out literature on 
vestibular symptoms and space and motion discomfort (such as 
Jacob et al3,54; the present chapter was also written for potential 
use for our patients). Patient education can extend over several 
sessions. One focus for continued sessions is to combat and 
reverse tendencies of avoidance. Furthermore, sources of 
secondary anxiety are identified and corrective information is 
given, if indicated. To combat the negative effects of symptom 
suppression (see section on OCPD), an attitude of acceptance 
may need to be cultivated in the context of an overall thera­
peutic approach.55 Another focus for the patients with intrusive 
chronic symptoms is the problem of anger (see section on 
‘anger’), which is validated and placed in perspective.56
Some patients are also referred for vestibular rehabilitation. 
The use of vestibular rehabilitation has several advantages. 
First, symptomatic improvement can be expected from the 
vestibular rehabilitation exercises. In a recent study, we found 
that vestibular rehabilitation was helpful for patients with ago­
raphobia and vestibular dysfunction. 7 Second, the assessment 
by the rehabilitation therapist provides further details about the 
patient’s functional limitations in a clinically validating con­
text, thus augmenting previous efforts of education.
The third component of treatment is medication. The 
benzodiazepine clonazepam, in typical doses of 1.0-1.5 mg per 
day (q.d.) (range 0.25 mg q.d. to 3 mg q.d.), has become the 
treatment of choice and is often associated with dramatic 
improvement. At times, ‘if needed’ dosing of clonazepam is suf­
ficient. However, patients sometimes develop excessive seda­
tion and ataxia, and this is a particularly high risk with elderly 
patients. Furthermore, although many patients are able to ulti­
mately discontinue the medication, a few develop prolonged 
rebound anxiety symptoms. An advantage of clonazepam over
  

886 
Vestibular disorders and their management
other benzodiazepines is its longer duration of action, which 
may minimize withdrawal and rebound symptoms. Clonazepam 
may have other advantages. For example, the patient below 
improved significantly after he was switched to clonazepam 
from diazepam, another long-acting benzodiazepine.
George: The patient had been on diazepam prior to his 
psychiatric evaluation. This medication was replaced with 
a combination of clonazepam, 0.5 mg twice per day (bid) 
and fluoxetine 20 mg q.d. (Eight months later, the fluoxe­
tine was stopped, with no recurrence of dizziness.) After 1 
month of treatment, he reported the following:
‘After my appointment with you today, I decided to go 
biking for the first time this year. I am an avid road bicyclist 
but have not ridden all year due to my condition —  I 
found the articles that you wrote quite fascinating, though 
a lot of it is ‘over my head’. I’m also thankful to be able to 
walk normally, ride elevators, walk across bridges and look 
over the railing, ride crowded subways facing backwards, 
eat in crowded restaurants and go to the mall, take trips 
away from home, etc. My next big step is getting back onto 
an airplane. Though this was never a fear before the onset 
of my condition, there is a slight hesitation at this moment 
—  I do not want to get too optimistic, as I understand 
that I may have a couple of ‘bad days’ but I firmly believe 
the worst is behind me and I am on the road to recovery.’
A second class of drugs that can be considered comprises 
the serotonin reuptake inhibiting (SSRI) antidepressants. 
Recent findings of vestibular symptoms in response to with- 
drawal from SSRIs (Balaban and Thayer12) should motivate 
further study of the effects of such drugs on the vestibular sys- 
tem. However, the SSRIs do not provide benefit for all patients 
and can be associated with side-effects, such as sexual dysfunc­
tion. In our clinical experience, the SSRIs such as fluoxetine 
(typically 20 mg q.d., but up to 80 mg q.d. may be required) may 
be particularly useful for underlying obsessive-compulsive per­
sonality traits, where they contribute to diminished preoccupa­
tion with and disability from dizziness. In addition, the SSRIs, 
as well as other antidepressants such as imipramine, may be use­
ful in those patients in whom the dizziness is related to 
migraines.58 Finally, antidepressants, including the SSRIs, are 
indicated for symptoms of depression, particularly if the patient 
shows symptoms of insomnia, loss of appetite, significant diffi­
culty in concentrating, and suicidal ideation.
References
1. 
Yardley L, Todd AM, Lacoudraye-Harter MM, Ingham R. 
Psychosocial consequences of recurrent vertigo. Psychol Health 
1992; 6: 85-96.
2. 
Torrie E. Mai de Debarquement: a support page for people with 
MDD. http://www.etete.com/mdd/).
3. 
Jacob RG, Lilienfeld SO, Furman JMR, Durrant JD, Turner SM. 
Panic disorder with vestibular dysfunction: further clinical
observations and description of space and motion phobic stimuli. 
J Anxiety Disord 1989; 3: 117-30.
4. Lilienfeld SO, Jacob RG, Furman JMR. Vestibular dysfunction fol­
lowed by panic disorder with agoraphobia: a case report. ] Nervous 
Mental Dis 1989; 177: 700-2.
5. Furman JM, Jacob RG. A clinical taxonomy of dizziness and 
anxiety in the otoneurological setting. ] Anxiety Disord 2001; 15: 
9-26.
6. Brandt T. Phobic postural vertigo. Neurology 1996; 46: 1515-19.
7. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders, 4th edn. Washington, DC: American Psychi­
atric Association, 1994.
8. Eagger S, Luxon LM, Davies RA, Coelho A, Ron MA. Psychiatric 
morbidity in patients with peripheral vestibular disorder: a clinical 
and neuro-otological study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1992; 
55: 383-7.
9. Clark DB, Hirsch BE, Smith MG, Furman JMR, Jacob RG. Panic 
in otolaryngology patients presenting with dizziness or hearing 
loss. Am] Psychiatry 1994; 151: 1223-5.
10. Stein MB, Gordon J, Asmundson GJG, Ireland D, Walker JR. 
Panic disorder in patients attending a clinic for vestibular disor­
ders. Am J Psychiatry 1994; 151: 1697-700.
11. Sullivan M, Clark MR, Katon WJ et al. Psychiatric and otologic 
diagnoses in patients complaining of dizziness. Arch Intern Med 
1993; 153: 1479-84.
12. Balaban CD, Thayer JF. Neurological bases for balance-anxiety 
links. J Anxiety Disord 2001; 15: 53-79.
13. Yardley L, Britton J, Lear S, Bird J, Luxon LM. Relationship 
between balance system function and agoraphobic avoidance. 
Behav Res Ther 1995; 33(4): 435-9.
14. Jacob RG, Furman JM, Durrant JD, Turner SM. Panic, agora­
phobia and vestibular dysfunction: clinical test results. Am J 
Psychiatry 1996; 153: 503-12.
15. Jacob RG, Furman JM, Durrant JD, Turner SM. Surface depen­
dence: a balance control strategy in panic disorder with agora­
phobia. Psychosom Med 1997; 59: 323-30.
16. Jacob RG, Furman JM, Perel JM. Panic, phobia and vestibular 
dysfunction. In: Yates BJ, Miller AD, eds. Vestibular Autonomic 
Regulation. New York: CRC Press, 1996: 197-227.
17. Cawthome T. Vestibular injuries. Proc R Soc Med 1945; 39: 270-3.
18. Redfem MS, Furman JM. Postural sway of patients with 
vestibular disorders during optic flow. J Vestil Res 1994; 4(3): 
221-30.
19. Jacob RG, Woody SR, Clark DB et al. Discomfort with space and 
motion: a possible marker of vestibular dysfunction assessed by the 
Situational Characteristics Questionnaire. J Psychopathol Behav 
Assessment 1993; 15: 299-324.
20. Hallam RS, Hinchcliffe R. Emotional stability; its relationship to 
confidence in maintaining balance. J Psychosom Res 1991; 
35(4/5): 421-30.
21. Levy I, O’Leary JL. Incidence of vertigo in neurologic conditions. 
Ann Otorhinolaryngol 1947; 56: 329—47.
22. McCabe BF. Diseases of the end organ and vestibular nerve. In: 
Naunton RF, Ed. The Vestibular System. New York: Academic 
Press, 1975: 299-302.
  

Psychiatric consequences of vestibular dysfunction 
887
23. Rudge R, Chambers BR. Physiological basis for enduring vestibu- 
lar symptoms. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1982; 45: 126-30.
24. Page NGR, Gresty MA. Motorist’s vestibular disorientation 
syndrome. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1985; 48: 729-35.
25. Bronstein 
AM. 
Visual 
vertigo 
syndrome: 
clinical 
and 
posturography findings. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1995; 59: 
472-6.
26. Marks I, Bebbington P. Space phobia: syndrome or agoraphobic 
variant? BMJ 1976; 2: 345-7.
27. Marks I. Space ‘phobia’: a pseudo-agoraphobic syndrome. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry 1981; 44: 387-91.
28. Benedikt. Ueber ‘Platzschwindel’. Algemeine Wiener Medizinische 
Zeitung 1870; 15: 488-9.
29. Westphal C. Die agoraphobia, eine neuropathische Erscheinung. 
Arch Psychiatrie Nervenkrankheiten 1871; 3: 138-61.
30. Cordes E. Die Platzangst (Agoraphobie). Arch Psychiatrie 
Nervenkrankheiten 1871; 3: 521-74.
31. Balaban CD, Jacob RG. Background and history of the interface 
between anxiety and vertigo. J Anxiety Disord 2001; 15: 27-51.
32. Brandt T, Daroff RB. The multisensory physiological and patho­
logical vertigo syndromes. Ann Neurol 1980; 7: 195-203.
33. Brandt T, Arnold F, Bles W, Kapteyn TS. The mechanism of 
physiological height vertigo. I. Theoretical approach and psycho­
physics. Acta Otolaryngol 1980; 89: 513-23.
34. Bles W, Kapteyn TS, Brandt T, Arnold F. The mechanism of phys­
iological height vertigo. Acta Otolaryngol 1980; 89: 534-40.
35. Jacob RG, Redfem MS, Furman JM. Optic flow-induced sway in 
anxiety disorders associated with space and motion discomfort. 
J Anxiety Disord 1995; 9: 411-25.
36. Yardley L, Britton J, Lear S, Bird J, Luxon LM. Relationship 
between balance system function and agoraphobic avoidance. 
Behav Res Ther 1995; 33(4): 435-9.
37. Murphy Terrence P. Mai de Debarquement syndrome: a forgotten 
entity? Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993; 109(1): 10-13.
38. Lajoie Y, Teasdale NBC, Fleury M. Attentional demands for static 
and dynamic equilibrium. Exp Brain Res 1993; 97: 300-10.
39. Andersson G, Yardley L, Luxon L. A dual task study of interfer­
ence between mental activity and control of balance. Am J Otol 
1998; 19: 632-7.
40. Peterson C, Maier SF, Seligman MEP. Learned Helplessness. A 
Theory for the Age of Control. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1993.
41. Jacob RG, Turner SM. Somatoform disorders, in: Turner SM, 
Hersen M, eds. Adult Psychopathology and Diagnosis. 1st edn. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1984: 304-28.
42. Gresty MA, Bronstein AM. Testing otolith function. Br J Audiol 
1992; 26: 125-36.
43. Yardley L, Redfem MS. Psychological factors influencing recovery 
from balance disorders. J Anxiety Disord 2001; 15: 107-19.
44. Anderson G, Hagnebo C, Yardley L. Stress and symptoms of 
Meniere’s disease: a time series analysis. J Psychosomat Res 1997; 
43(6): 585-603.
45. Theunissen EJ, Huygen PL, Golgering HT. Vestibular hyperactiv­
ity and hyperventilation. Clin Otolaryngol 1986; 11: 161-9.
46. Sakellari V, Bronstein AM, Coma S, Hammon CA, Jones S, 
Wolsley CJ. The effects of hyperventilation on postural control 
mechanisms. Brain 1997; 120: 1659-73.
47. Yardley L. Contribution of symptoms and beliefs to handicap in 
people with vertigo: a longitudinal study. Br J Clin Psychol 1994; 
33:101-13.
48. Clark MR, Sullivan MD, Katon WJ et al. Psychiatric and medical 
factors associated with disability in patients with dizziness. Psycho- 
somatics 1993; 34(5): 409-15.
49. Yardley L, Gresty M, Bronstein A, Beyts J. Changes in heart rate 
and respiration rate in patients with vestibular dysfunction 
following head movements which provoke dizziness. Biol Psychol 
1998; 49: 95-108.
50. Rief W, Shaw R, Fichter MM. Elevated levels of psychophysiolog- 
ical arousal and cortisol in patients with somatization syndrome. 
Psychosomat Med 1998; 60: 198-203.
51. Clark MR, Swartz KL. A conceptual structure and methodology 
for the systematic approach to the evaluation and treatment of 
patients with chronic dizziness. J Anxiety Disord 2001; 15: 95-106.
52. Jacob RG, Furman JM, Balaban CD. Psychiatric aspects of vestibu­
lar disorders. In: Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM, eds. Disorders of the 
Vestibular System. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996:509-28.
53. Furman JM, Jacob RG. Psychiatric dizziness. Neurology 1997; 48: 
1161-6.
54. Jacob RG, Furman JMR, Clark DB, Durrant JD. Vestibular symp­
toms, panic and phobia: overlap and possible relationships. Ann 
Clin Psychiatry 1992; 4: 163-74.
55. Hayes SC, Strosahl KD, Wilson KG. Acceptance and Commitment 
Therapy: An Experiential Approach to Behavior Change. New York: 
Guilford Press, 1999.
56. Jacob RG, Pelham WH. Behavior Therapy. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock 
VA, eds. Kaplan and Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 
7th edn. Vol. 2. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 
1999: 2080-123.
57. Jacob RG, Whitney SL, Detweiler-Shostak G, Furman JM. Vestibu­
lar rehabilitation for patients with agoraphobia and vestibular 
dysfunction: a pilot study. J Anxiety Disord 2001; 15: 131-46.
58. Cass SP, Furman JM, Ankestjeme JKP, Balaban CD, Yetiser S, 
Aydogan B. Migraine-related vestibulopathy. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1997; 106: 182-9.
  

Medical management 
of balance disorders 
and vestibular 
rehabilitation
Doris-Eva Bamiou, Linda M Luxon
Introduction: 
vestibular compensation
The balance system in humans has a remarkable capacity to 
adapt to new situations and to learn new behaviours, which are 
prerequisites for survival. This capability is characterized by the 
rapid symptomatic recovery following vestibular damage, 
referred to as ‘vestibular compensation’. Vestibular compensa­
tion is not a homogeneous process that affects synchronously all 
aspects of disordered vestibular function, but consists of a num­
ber of subprocesses progressing at different rates and to differing 
final extents.1
Physiology of vestibular compensation
Damage to the labyrinth results in a characteristic syndrome of 
oculomotor, postural and sensory disturbances that start to 
recover soon after the damage:
1. Static symptoms include high-frequency spontaneous nys­
tagmus towards the intact side, tonic eye deviation towards
the side of the lesion, roll head tilt,2 and postural imbalance
and ataxia,3 which are present when the only vestibular
stimulus applied is gravity.1 These symptoms are related to
the differences in the levels of tonic activity in the vestibu­
lar nuclei, as type I excitatory neurones have reduced activ­
ity ipsilaterally and increased activity contralaterally to the
lesion.4,5 Static oculomotor recovery is a robust process that
starts 3-4 h after onset of the lesion and is complete in a few
days,2 in parallel with the reappearance of active type I
neurones ipsilaterally, leading to a return of resting activity
and neural rebalancing of the vestibular nuclei. Postural 
recovery, on the other hand, appears to rely more on proprio- 
spinal mechanisms.6
2. Dynamic symptoms include abnormalities of the gain, sym­
metry and phase of the vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR), as 
well as deficits of the vestibulospinal responses in response 
to head movement.2 These are thought to be related to the 
loss of one half of the afferent input to the vestibular nuclei, 
resulting in absent excitation from the lesioned side but 
persistent disinhibition from the intact side in response to 
rotation. Horizontal VOR gain is decreased by 50% toward 
and by 25% away from the side of lesion, while vertical 
VOR gain is decreased by 66%.7 Dynamic recovery contin­
ues over months or years8 and seems to be faster for postural 
than for oculomotor symptoms.2 Dynamic oculomotor 
symptoms show incomplete recovery, with deficits becom­
ing more apparent for high velocities of movement.10
Current models explain vestibular compensation in terms of 
central nervous system (CNS) plasticity (flexibility to function 
under and deal with a variety of conditions), a theory that can 
accommodate all the proposed subprocesses and that is compat­
ible with the versatility of vestibular function.11 Following the 
event of a vestibular lesion, compensatory mechanisms consist 
of:
1. Adaptation/habituation/plasticity leading to recalibration 
of the gain of vestibular reflexes. The vestibular nuclei on 
the side of the lesion are almost devoid of type I neurones 
immediately after the lesion, and the VOR gain is lower 
than normal. The VOR gain will partially recover in the 
following days and months, but it will not reach normal

890 
Vestibular disorders and their management
VESTIBULAR COMPENSATORY MECHANISMS 
Adaptation/habituation/plasticity
“► recalibration of gain of vestibular reflexes 
Context-specific process—driven by error signal 
Error signal: retinal image slip and smooth pursuit
Substitution
of sensory inputs: visual, proprioceptive, somatosensory 
and intact labyrinthine input 
of motor responses: increased smooth pursuit gain, 
generation of saccades or blinks 
of strategies: based on prediction
pre-lesion levels, as the response to rapid acceleration 
demonstrates.3 The restoration of balance in the vestibular 
nuclei and the resulting recalibration of the gain of the 
vestibular reflexes are due to adaptation of type I neurones 
of vestibular nuclei on the intact side, which demonstrate 
an increased discharge immediately after the lesion, com­
missural efficacy in effecting inhibition, and cerebellar 
shutdown of activity on the intact side.1 Commissural and 
cerebellar activity seem to affect dynamic rather than static 
compensation,2 while the cerebellar flocculus seems to be 
required for initiating but not for maintaining the compen­
satory process.12 The error signal that induces VOR adapta­
tion is a combination of image motion or slip on the retina 
during head movements4 and the smooth pursuit which 
suppresses this retinal slip.13 Adaptation is context specific;4 
that is the greatest VOR gain change will occur at the 
adapting frequency.
2. Substitution
m 
of sensory inputs, including visual, proprioceptive, 
somatosensory and labyrinthine input from the intact 
side.14 Vision,15 cervical input16 and input from the 
intact labyrinth14 do not affect static recovery, but are 
crucial for dynamic recovery. On the contrary, proprio­
ceptive and somatosensory inputs are important for 
both static and dynamic recovery.17 There is a critical or 
sensitive period for substitution mechanisms in vestibu­
lar compensation,18 and sensory deprivation during that 
time, either by deprivation of light, resulting in reduc­
tion in visual stimuli, or by restriction in movement,19 
may have a negative effect on compensation. Patients 
may rely more on visual or on proprioceptive substitu­
tion, depending on the stage, i.e. acute versus chronic, 
and extent of the lesion, i.e. unilateral versus bilateral 
failure.13
■ 
of motor responses. The gaze change that is generated 
by a unilateral vestibular lesion may itself act to restore 
the neural imbalance between the two vestibular 
nuclei.1 In later stages, patients may learn to increase 
smooth pursuit gain13 or to generate saccades or blinks
during a head movement to the affected side, in order 
to eliminate the visual blur that occurs due to a defi­
cient VOR gain20 by suppressing vision during the sac­
cades or the blinks.
■ 
of strategies. Strategies are highly idiosyncratic and ini­
tially conscious actions that are employed to attempt to 
rectify the dynamic symptoms, after compensation for 
the static symptoms. They are based on prediction, 
much as athletes prepare for a race by mentally rehears­
ing their movements and visualizing the space.4 Central 
preprogramming of eye movements results in more sig­
nificant gain increase for predictable than for unpre­
dictable tasks,21 and the same may happen for postural 
reflexes.13 Some strategies may be inappropriate in the 
long run, e.g. restriction of head movements to the 
affected side in order not to challenge an inadequate 
VOR,1 which impedes exposure to the error signal that 
is necessary for adaptation, or use of visual cues to 
maintain postural stability in the case of bilateral 
vestibular failure, as eyes are not stable and vision 
degrades during head movements.13
Several theories have been proposed to explain the static and 
consequently the dynamic compensation by structural and 
functional neurochemical processes 
that are distributed 
throughout the CNS22 on the basis of behavioural, neurophysi- 
ological or neuropharmacological studies.23 Evidence has 
recently emerged for a potential spontaneous regenerative 
capacity in the mature mammalian vestibular system,24 but no 
satisfactory evidence of vestibular regeneration contributing 
towards compensation as yet exists. Darlington and Smith 
have postulated that intrinsic membrane properties of the 
neurones in the vestibular nuclei contribute in the (static) 
compensatory process, with the vestibular nerve being partly 
responsible for the resting activity in the vestibular nuclei. 
Furthermore, they explain the initial disappearance of resting 
activity in terms of a diaschisis phenomenon, i.e. neural shock 
after the injury due to overstimulation by leakage of neuro­
transmitters. Curthoys and Halmagyi3 propose that short-term 
mechanisms that initiate compensation may include neural 
adaptation of increased firing in the intact vestibular nuclei, 
cerebellar shutdown and changes of gaze or spinal input. Reac­
tive synaptogenesis consisting of sprouting of healthy axons,26 
denervation supersensitivity, i.e. neurones becoming more sen­
sitive to the transmitters normally released,1 increased neuro­
transmitter release27 and increased commissural excitability and 
efficacy28 are slower-acting processes that may account for later 
stages of compensation.
Vestibular compensation: clinical perspectives
The majority of patients will learn to function almost normally 
within a few weeks or months following a peripheral vestibular 
disorder, although this symptomatic recovery does not parallel 
recovery of vestibular function, as asymmetry in dynamic gain
  

Medical management of balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
891
FACTORS THAT MAY DELAY COMPENSATION
Central vestibular disorders
Psychological disorders
Cerebellar disorders
Hyperventilation
Progressive vestibular
Somatization
pathology
Autonomic symptoms
Intermittent vestibular
pathology
Visual impairment
CNS or vestibular
Impaired proprioception
suppressant drugs
Head injury
Restriction of activity
Other medical comorbidity
Late introduction of 
vestibular exercises
of vestibular reflexes persists.3 Some patients, however, may 
have incomplete resolution of symptoms, due to failure of 
recovery from the initial event, or recurrent episodes of vertigo 
with no intermittent symptoms or persistent fluctuation of 
symptoms with improvement and relapses.11 The reasons for 
incomplete symptomatic recovery may be single or multiple and 
need to be addressed prior to or concurrently with rehabilita­
tion. For example, progressive pathology, such as Meniere’s 
disease, or intermittent pathologies, such as migraine, may be 
responsible for recurrence of symptoms and non-recovery.29 
Management in these and similar cases should initially focus on 
controlling the primary disease before the initiation of vestibu- 
lar rehabilitation.
Compensation may depend on whether the lesion affects 
predominantly the vestibular nerve or the labyrinth, and 
Glasscock et al30 report a 28% incidence of persistent unsteadi­
ness after labyrinthectomy as opposed to only 14% after 
vestibular neurectomy. Animal studies suggest that preservation 
of Scarpa’s ganglion in vestibular neurectomy is necessary for 
vestibular compensation; however, Black et al31 found similar 
recovery patterns between those patients who, in the process of 
unilateral vestibular deafferentation, had Scarpa’s ganglion 
excised and those who had it preserved during the same proce­
dure. Other factors that may delay or impede compensation and 
symptom recovery include cerebellar damage, impaired propri­
oception, visual impairment and psychological disorders,
36 
37
head injury, hyperventilation, CNS or vestibular suppressant 
drugs,33’38 other medical comorbidity,29 the presence of somati­
zation (i.e. the tendency to complain about unrelated health 
problems) and autonomic symptoms.34 Decompensation may 
occur even in well-compensated patients, due to fatigue, alco­
hol or drug intake39 or benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
(BPPV).11 Exercise, on the other hand,40 vestibular rehabilita­
tion (see Table 54.7 for references and details) and its early 
introduction41 have beneficial effects on symptomatic recovery.
A well-compensated patient is able to control and coordi­
nate eye, head and body movements in order to maintain gaze 
stability and posture, and to achieve vestibular perception,
without any adverse symptoms,42 despite the persisting dynamic 
asymmetry in the gain of vestibular reflexes.3 Clinical evalua­
tion of compensation, therefore, is not an easy task, due to the 
desynchrony between vestibular symptoms, signs and test 
results.43-45 Most vestibular tests do not provide an accurate pic­
ture of either the extent of impaired function, termed ‘disabil­
ity’s/activity limitation’,47 or the impact of the vestibular 
disorder on the patient’s life, termed ‘handicap’46/‘participation 
restriction’.47 Various measures have been employed to quantify 
compensation from a clinical perspective in order to assess the 
rehabilitation outcome. These measures include scores calcu­
lated by intensity and duration parameters of vertigo induced by 
positional 
manoeuvres,48,49 
dynamic 
posturography,39 
the 
Clinical Test of Sensory Integration and Balance (CTSIB), 
which correlates well with posturography results,50 and stan­
dardized, self-report questionnaires.51”53 Clearly, more than one 
measure should be employed in order to assess the efficacy of 
treatment of the vestibular patient.
Treatment of the vestibular patient
Successful management of the vestibular disorder patient 
depends upon accurate diagnosis, an understanding of vestibu­
lar physiology, timing aspects of the intervention, and the 
physician’s awareness of the overlap between the vestibular 
system and the autonomic and limbic system and of the result­
ing psychological aspects of the vestibular disorders. Treatment 
falls into the following main categories:
1. Pharmacological treatment.
2. Vestibular rehabilitation. Theories on vestibular compensa­
tion were put into a practical context in the 1940s, when 
Sir Terence Cawthome and Dr Harold Cooksey devised the 
vestibular exercises known as the Cooksey-Cawthome 
exercises,54,55 which still form the basis of vestibular reha­
bilitation. The development of these exercises was mostly 
empirical, based on observations of what seemed to benefit 
patients with unilateral vestibular disorders and head injury 
patients. However, the Cooksey-Cawthome exercises 
became widespread only about 30 years later, when animal 
studies established the beneficial effect of mobilization and 
vision on vestibular compensation.19,56,57 The current 
rationale for vestibular rehabilitation is based on the con­
cept of the capacity of the vestibular system for adaptation 
and recalibration of vestibular reflexes by substitution of 
sensory input, motor responses and strategies in order to 
achieve symptomatic recovery following a vestibular 
lesion.13
3. Adjunctive treatment: behavioural therapy, relaxation and 
breathing exercises, treatment aimed to correct vision/ 
proprioception/mobility, environmental modifications and 
safety measures.
4. Surgery.
  

892 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Pharmacological treatment of vestibular 
disorders
Despite our current understanding of vestibular neuro- 
chemistry, very few, if any, of the recent discoveries in this field 
have led to the development of a new anti-vertigo treatment,58 
and most of the drugs that are used today as treatment for 
vestibular disorders had already become established clinical 
practice before the era of modem neurochemistry provided 
information on the vestibular system’s neurotransmitters.59 To 
date, the treatment of vestibular disorders remains mostly 
empirical. Causes that hinder major progress in vestibular phar­
macology are as follows:
m 
The potential CNS side-effects of antagonists of vestibular 
neurotransmitters such as glutamate.58 
i 
Difficulties in determining which specific property of a drug 
is responsible for the drug’s anti-vertiginous action.60 
m 
The lack of an absolute indicator for compensation and the 
resulting problems in designing experimental models to 
judge the anti-vertiginous effect of a drug on animals.60,61
■ 
Action of a drug may be species-dependent and animal 
experiment results do not necessarily indicate a similar 
action in humans.61
* 
The lack of clinical trials assessing treatment of acute 
vestibular crisis, due to either the distressing nature of 
symptoms that necessitate immediate treatment, in which 
case it is impossible to obtain consent from the patient to 
take part in a clinical trial, or to the brevity of symptoms, 
which makes treatment redundant, as it will not be possible 
to establish effective blood levels of the drug before the 
symptoms have spontaneously abated.62
The ideal anti-vertiginous drug should suppress dizziness, pre­
vent vomiting and help restore normal balance with minimal 
side-effects and no adverse effects on compensation. However, 
to date no such drug is available.62 As a general rule, the aim of 
pharmaceutical treatment of vestibular disorders is to minimize 
the patient’s symptoms by administering the smallest dose of 
the drug with the least side-effects for the shortest time possi­
ble, and, in the case of an acute vestibular crisis, never for a 
period longer than a week, as there is strong evidence that 
vestibular suppressants impede central compensation.38,63 The 
drug treatment of a vestibular disorder falls into three main 
categories:
;i 
Symptomatic treatment of acute vestibular symptomatology, 
a 
Treatment of a specific condition that causes the vestibular 
symptoms. This may be well documented, e.g. in Meniere’s 
disease, migraine, or epilepsy, or emerging but not yet 
standardized treatment, as in the case of central vestibular 
disorders.65
as 
Treatment of an underlying or coexisting medical or neuro­
logical disorder or of symptoms that developed after the 
onset and partly as a result of the vestibular disorder (e.g. 
depression) is mandatory, but beyond the scope of this 
chapter.
* 
Experimental drugs e.g. drugs that accelerate compensation.
Symptomatic treatment of acute vestibular crisis
Acute vestibular crisis may be single or recurrent, with symp­
toms such as vertigo, nausea, vomiting, sweating, pallor or diar­
rhoea, which can be extremely alarming and debilitating to the 
patient. Studies that assess the efficacy of the acute vestibular 
treatment are scarce, and treatment is mostly empirical. The 
patient has to be reassured and rehydrated, while investigations 
may be needed in order to exclude a life-threatening condition 
(e.g. cerebellar haemorrhage) and to plan long-term manage­
ment. During the acute stage, the patient may need suppression 
of the vestibular symptoms of vertigo/dizziness, nausea and 
vomiting. Vestibular suppression should only be initiated if 
vestibular symptoms last more than 30 min to 2 h,62 and last no 
longer than 1 week, as vestibular suppressants hinder compen­
sation and may have severe side-effects, while vestibular reha­
bilitation should be initiated as soon as the acute symptoms 
subside.
Drugs that control vertigo seem to target neurotransmitter 
action, including acetylcholine, histamine, and GABA action, 
at the level of primary to secondary vestibular neurones and 
vestibular nuclei,62 thus suppressing integration of sensory stim­
uli in the vestibular nuclei.61 Anti-emetics block input to the 
medullary vomiting centre from three major afferent pathway 
that relay the signals of emetic stimuli to the CNS:60,66
*  
the chemoreceptor zone in the area postrema (action
blocked by dopamine agonists) 
m 
the gastrointestinal tract (blocked by serotonin (5HT3)) 
m 
from the labyrinth, leading to stimulation of the vestibular
nuclei 
(blocked 
by 
antihistamine 
and 
glutamate
antagonists).
Motion sickness is a form of vertigo triggered by travel in 
which autonomic symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, malaise 
and increased salivation predominate. It is caused by unusual 
movements or conflict of sensory stimuli (e.g. visual and 
vestibular). The neural substrate of nausea is unknown, but may 
include neurones in the hypothalamus and inferior frontal gyrus 
of the cerebral cortex.67
Treatment should be prophylactic, although it can also be 
given after the onset of symptoms. Effective drugs for combat­
ing motion sickness include antihistamines, antimuscarinics, 
5-HT1A (serotonergic) receptor agonists and neurokinin type 
1 receptor antagonists,67 and treatment may include hyoscine, 
cinnarazine, dimenhydrinate (also appropriate for children) or 
promethazine.68
The properties of the most commonly used vestibular sup­
pressants are given in Table 54.1, while dosage, side-effects and 
contraindications are given in Table 54.2. Vestibular suppres­
sant drugs include the following.
Anticholinergics
The main drug in this category, hyoscine, was one of the first to 
be used for treatment of vertigo. Hyoscine is the most effective 
drug for the treatment of motion sickness.68 Anticholiner­
gics are thought to act on the CNS, as acetylcholine is the
  

Medical management of balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
893
Table 54.1 
Recommended drugs for acute vestibular crises: properties.
Drug
Histamine 
Ach
Hyoscine
✓
Prochlorperazine
/
Promethazine
/
/
Cyclizine
/
/
Dimenhydrinate
/
/
Metoclopramide
Cinnarazine"
Diazepam
/
/
‘ Cinnarazine is a calcium antagonist.
Antagonist of 
Dopa
/
/
5HT,
GABA
Sedative
Anti-emetic
Anti-vertigo
action
action
action
4- +
+ + +
+ + +
+ +
+ + +
? —
+ + +
-H +
+
+
*f +
-
+ + +
+ + +
+
+
? + +
-
+
+
? + +
+ +  +
—
—
Table 54.2 
Recommended drugs for acute vestibular crises: dosage, side effects and contraindications.
Contraindications/precautions
Drug
Hyoscine
Prochlorperazine
Promethazine
Cyclizme
Dimenhydrinate
Dose
M otion sickness
PO: 300 pg before journey, 
then by 300 pg/6 h
Patch: 500pg 5-6 h before 
journey, repeat 72 h after
P0 5mg TDS up to 30 mg/day
IM: 12.5 mg 0D followed by oral 
dose 6h later if necessary.
Per rectum: 25mg, followed by 
oral dose 6h after, if necessary
M otion sickness
P0: 25 mg before journey, 
then after 5-8 hours as required.
Sedation
PO: 25-50 mg at bed time 
as a single dose
PO/IV/IM: 50 mg TDS
PO: 50-100 mg TDS.
M otion sick ness
First dose 30min before journey, 
50-100 mg TDS,
Metoclopramide 
P0: 5-10 mg TDS
Cinnarazine 
P0: 30 mg TDS
M otion sickness 
First dose 2 h before journey, 
then 15 mg TDS
Diazepam 
IV: 1-2 mg, continued orally as
needed until the acute symptoms 
subside (smaller dose than for 
sedation)
Side-effects
Dry mouth, drowsiness, 
constipation, urinary retention
Sedation, dystonia (0.3%), 
postural hypotension, 
extrapyramidal symptoms, 
dry mouth, blurred vision, 
constipation, urinary retention, 
endocrine disturbances
Sedation, postural hypotension, 
extrapyramidal symptoms, dry 
mouth, blurred vision, 
constipation, urinary retention, 
endocrine disturbances
Drowsiness, dryness, blurred vision, 
urinary retention, constipation, 
auditory and visual hallucinations
Drowsiness
Extrapyramidal symptoms, 
neuroleptic syndrome, tardive 
dyskinesia
Drowsiness, gastrointestinal upset, 
unsteadiness, headache, 
extrapyramidal symptoms, 
depression
Muscle relaxation, sedation, 
hypnosis, addiction, risk of falls
Glaucoma, prostate hypertrophy 
Caution in elderly: memory disturbance, 
confusion
Pregnancy
Caution in elderly: more susceptible to 
postural hypotension, extrapyramidal 
symptoms
Caution in elderly: more susceptible to 
anticholinergic action, extrapyramidal 
symptoms
Heart failure, glaucoma, prostate 
hypertrophy
Caution in glaucoma, hyperthyroidism 
(anticholinergic action)
Renal insufficiency, phaeochromocytoma
Pregnancy
Caution in elderly: more susceptible to 
extrapyramidal symptoms
Caution in acute pulmonary insufficiency, 
respiratory depression, acute psychosis
  

894 
Vestibular disorders and their management
predominant neurotransmitter in the efferent feedback from 
the brainstem to the vestibular labyrinth, to parts of the 
vestibular cochlear nucleus69 and at the muscarinic receptors of 
autonomic effector sites innervated by parasympathetic nerves, 
both centrally and peripherally.68 The most common mode of 
administration is transdermal and it achieves continuous 
release of the drug into the bloodstream for up to 72 h.70
Antihistamines
The phenothiazines are dopamine antagonists with significant 
antimuscarinic effects that act centrally in the dopamine recep­
tors in the area postrema of the brainstem69 and are effective in 
controlling nausea and vomiting.
They include the following:
■ 
Promethazine is a long-acting anti-histamine with anti­
emetic, central sedative and anticholinergic properties.
■ 
Prochlorperazine is a dopamine and histamine antago­
nist, with weak anticholinergic action. It is a very 
potent anti-emetic and has been reported to be effec­
tive in treating vertigo or dizziness in small, uncon­
trolled studies,71 but there is no definite evidence that it 
is more effective than placebo.72 Buccal prochlorper­
azine causes less drowsiness and sedation and is slightly 
more effective than oral prochlorperazine.73 Prochlor­
perazine impairs driving, with little subjective appreci­
ation of this impairment.74 It must be used with caution 
in the elderly, as it is more likely than other pheno­
thiazines to produce extrapyramidal symptoms.75 In 
addition, it slows down compensation in guinea pigs.38
Piperazines include cyclizine, a histamine HI receptor 
antagonist characterized by a low incidence of drowsiness. 
Dimenhydrinate (dramamine) is another HI receptor blocker. 
Sedation is the most common reported side-effect, and patients 
who take this drug are advised not to drive. Cyclizine and 
dramamine have been reported to be similarly effective in pre­
venting the overall subjective symptoms of motion sickness in 
a double-blind study.76 The authors postulated that while 
dramamine’s effectiveness may be related to its sedative proper­
ties, cyclizine may work more directly on the stomach, leading 
it to be more effective in preventing or controlling gastroin­
testinal symptoms.
Metoclopramide is a benzamide closely associated with the 
parasympathetic nervous control of the upper gastrointestinal 
system. Combination with phenothiazines should be avoided, 
due to severe extrapyramidal reactions.70
Calcium channel antagonists
Cinnarizine and flunarazine inhibit the influx of calcium intra- 
cellularly. Flunarazine has long-lasting vestibulo-suppressant 
effects in both animals and humans,77 and residual concentra­
tions in the blood may be detected up to 4 months after admin­
istration.59 In the UK, it is only available on specific specialist 
request, as it is not included in the British National Formulary; 
the side-effects of this drug include prolonged extrapyramidal
effects and depression.78 Doweck et al79 reported significantly 
reduced seasickness susceptibility and severity in normal sub­
jects who received cinnarizine 50 mg, as opposed to placebo, 
before travel, with no notable side-effects. However, cinnar­
izine is less effective than hyoscine in the prevention of motion 
sickness, but it has fewer side-effects in small doses.80 Both drugs 
may have extrapyramidal side-effects,81 and these adverse reac­
tions preclude their use in older people for more than a few 
weeks at a time.59
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam has no specific action on the vestibular system and 
acts by reducing neural activity and causing inhibition through­
out the CNS, including the vestibular nerve and nuclei.69 It is 
an anxiolytic, anticonvulsant, muscle relaxant drug with little 
autonomic activity. There are anecdotal reports that diazepam 
during the acute phase of vertigo appears to assist in the early 
phase of compensation in humans,64 possibly by allowing for 
earlier ambulation and head movements. However, the role of 
diazepam as a vestibular drug is controversial,63 as its effects on 
compensation are not entirely clear,82’83 and its use should be 
restricted to the initial stage of the acute vestibular crisis.62
Other drugs
Ondasetron is a potent, highly selective 5HT3 receptor antago­
nist with highly effective anti-emetic and anti-nausea action, 
but there are no data to support specific anti-vertigo action.69 
However, it has been reported to help some patients with 
vertigo due to brainstem stroke.84 As the precise mode of action 
in the control of nausea and vomiting is not known, the drug 
should be reserved for treatment of chemo- or radiotherapy- 
induced and postoperative nausea and vomiting, and possibly 
vertigo due to brainstem pathology.
Specific treatment of vestibular disorders
Migraine-associated dizziness
Headache is a common problem that occurs in 91-96% of 
adults and 51.5% of children, while migraine occurs in 6-18% 
of adults and 5.7% of children.85,86 Vertigo, dizziness or imbal­
ance may be migraine-related phenomena that do not necessar­
ily occur at the same time as the headache.87 Cutrer and Baloh87 
postulate that the short-duration vertiginous attacks, which last 
for minutes to 2 h and are temporally associated with headache, 
are due to the same mechanism as other aura phenomena, while 
longer-lasting attacks of vertigo and motion sickness, with or 
without headache, result from the release of neuroactive pep­
tides into peripheral and central vestibular structures. Brandt,88 
however, argues that motion sickness symptoms in migraine are 
due to neuronal hyperactivity and increased bloodfiow in the 
brainstem. Vestibular test results may be normal.87,89 Benign 
recurrent vertigo of childhood may also be a migraine precursor, 
with vertigo replaced by migraine years after the onset of the 
symptoms, or a migraine equivalent, with simultaneous onset of 
vertigo and migraine attacks.90
  

Medical management of balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
895
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA OF MIGRAINOUS 
VERTIGO'” 
Definite migrainous vertigo
1. Episodic vestibular symptoms
2. Migraine according to HIS criteria
3. At least one of the following during at least two 
vertigo attacks:
(a) headache
(b) photophobia
(c) phonophobia
(d) visual/other aura
4- Other causes ruled out by appropriate investigations*
Probable migrainous vertigo
1. Episodic vestibular symptoms
2. Migraine according to HIS criteria
3. Other causes ruled out by appropriate investigations.
Correct diagnosis is essential for treatment. The Interna­
tional Headache Society (IHS) classification of migraine91 rec­
ognizes vertigo as a migrainous symptom only within the 
framework of basilar migraine; however, more recently there 
was an attempt to define migrainous vertigo according to a 
combination of the IHS criteria for migraine and the presence 
of other specific symptoms.92 Differential diagnosis from 
Meniere’s disease can be difficult to make, while the two condi­
tions may coexist, and diagnosis may only be made following 
response 
to 
treatment.93 
Pharmacological 
treatment 
of 
migraine-related dizziness has a high success rate of up to 92% 
resolution or improvement of episodic vertigo,94 while a patient 
survey study found that the efficacy of pharmaceutical treat­
ment in treating migraine-related dizziness is directly correlated 
with the ability to alleviate the headache.95 Treatment of 
migraine-related vestibular symptoms may include vestibular 
exercises and pharmacological treatment, as well as dietary 
measures (avoidance of foods that may trigger the headache), 
lifestyle adaptation (e.|. regular sleeping patterns) and stress 
reduction techniques. 9,93,94 Pharmacological treatment of 
migraine, and, similarly, treatment of migraine-associated dizzi­
ness, is primarily symptomatic-abortive or prophylactic when 
patients have frequent unsatisfactorily treated attacks.96,97 It
may take several weeks in order to choose the single or combi­
nation drug and the optimal dose that are most effective for 
control of the dizziness/vertigo and the headache.94 Acute 
abortive treatment may include analgesics such as acetylsali- 
cylic acid, paracetamol or ibuprofen, anti-emetics, ergotamine 
or serotonin ID agonists.88 Prophylactic treatment may include 
P-blockers, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, calcium 
channel blockers, serotonin reuptake inhibitors and amitrypti- 
line.97 The dosage, side-effects and contraindications of the 
main anti-migraine drugs are given in Table 54.3.
Symptomatic/abortive 
treatment 
This 
treatment 
may 
include anti-vertigo or anti-emetic drugs as well as specific 
treatment for headache.98
Anti-emetics 
Motion sickness can be a prominent feature of 
migraine-related dizziness.87,89 Baloh98 recommends treating 
patients with promethazine, because of combined anti-vertigo 
and anti-emetic properties, dimenhydrinate and meclizine for 
milder episodes of vertigo, or metoclopramide if vomiting is a 
prominent symptom. All of these drugs are indicated if symp­
toms last for more than half an hour, as this is the minimum 
time needed for the drug to enter the blood.
Over-the-counter medications 
The vast majority of migraine 
sufferers may be self-medicating, basing their treatment on 
information from advertisements and a ‘trial and error’ method, 
using drugs such as aspirin, paracetamol, ibuprofen, and other 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory analgesics as single or combi­
nation drugs that may also include caffeine.99 The efficacy of 
this treatment for headache has been established,100 although 
its mechanism of action is not fully understood.99 Sheftell99 
recommends a step-care therapy, starting with a single­
ingredient over-the-counter medication and increasing the 
dose, or replacing with a combination drug if ineffective. He 
limits use of these agents to three times a week, in order to 
avoid overuse and rebound phenomena, and avoids using these 
agents in patients with daily headaches.
Ergot drugs 
Dihydroergotamine (DHE) has a high clinical 
efficacy in migraine treatment and has fewer side-effects of arte­
rial constriction and nausea than ergotamine.101 The DHE 
abortive treatment dose is 1 mg IM or 2 mg nasal spray, while 
the ergotamine dose is 2 mg suppository or 2 mg tablets. It is 
contraindicated in patients with coronary and peripheral
TREATMENT OF MIGRAINE-ASSOCIATED DIZZINESS
General measures
Dietary measures 
Lifestyle adaptation 
Stress reduction techniques 
inhibitors
Vestibular rehabilitation
Abortive treatment
Anti-vertigo/anti-emetic drugs 
Over-the-counter analgesics 
Ergot drugs
Sumatriptan
Acetazolamide
Prophylactic treatment
P'Blockers
Calcium channel blockers 
Serotonin reuptake
Amitryptiline
  

896 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Table 54.3 
Recommended drugs for migraine: dose, side-effects and contraindications.
Drug
Dose
Side-effects
Contraindications/precautions
Dihydroergotaminea IM:1 mg
Spray: 2 mg nasal spray
Ergotamine
PR: 2 mg supp 
PO: 2 mg up to 6mg/day 
Aerosol: 1-2 up to 6 inhalations 
per day
Nausea and vomiting, vertigo, 
diarrhoea, abdominal pain, leg 
cramps, myocardial ischaemia; 
pleural or peritoneal fibrosis in 
prolonged use
Pregnancy, breastfeeding, arteriosclerosis, 
coronary artery disease, 
thrombophlebitis, Raynaud, liver or 
kidney dysfunction, hypertension, 
porphyria, hyperthyroidism
Sumatriptan
SC: 6mg-repeat after 1 h if 
effective and if needed (up to 
12 mg/day)
20 mg nasal spray-repeat after 
1 h if effective and if needed
Chest pain—throat tightness, 
arrhythmias, ischaemic ECG 
changes, myocardial infarction, 
drowsiness, hypotension, 
bradycardia, tachycardia, 
palpitations, pain, tingling, heat 
sensations
Ischaemic heart disease, coronary 
vasospasm, peripheral vascular disease, 
CVA/TIA, hepatic impairment, 
uncontrolled hypertension, epilepsy, 
brain lesions
Acetazolamide
P0: 250-1000 mg daily in divided 
doses
Paraesthesias, loss of appetite, taste 
disturbance, polyuria, flushing, 
thirst, fatigue, dizziness, depression, 
ataxia, gastrointestinal disturbances
Kidney or liver disease, depressed K or Na 
blood levels, suprarenal gland failure, 
glaucoma, hyperchloraemic acidosis
Propranolol
P0: 10mg bd up to 
160-180 mg/day
Bradycardia, heart failure, postural 
hypotension, heart block, cold 
extremities, dizziness, confusion, 
psychoses, hallucinations, 
bronchospasm, fatigue
Bronchial asthma, bronchospasm, 
bradycardia, cardiogenic shock, 
hypotension, metabolic acidosis, sick 
sinus syndrome, untreated 
phaechromocytoma
Flunarizine3
PO: 5-10 mg 0D
Pizotifen
P0: 1.5 mg 0D (start with 0.5 mg 
and increase by 0.5 mg every 
3 days)
Drowsiness, increased appetite and 
weight, dizziness, dry mouth, 
nausea
Closed angle glaucoma, urinary retention
Methysergide
PO: 1-2 mg TDS
Nausea, heart burn, abdominal 
discomfort, vomiting, dizziness, 
drowsiness, fibrosis and vascular 
reactions
Pregnancy, lactation, peripheral vascular 
disorders, progressive arteriosclerosis, 
hypertension, coronary heart disease, 
pulmonary/ kidney/ liver disease
Amitriptyline
10 mg nocte increased by 10 mg 
every 2 weeks up to 150-175 mg 
Usual dose 50 mg nocte
Cardiovascular, CNS and 
neuromuscular, anticholinergic, 
gastrointestinal and endocrine 
reactions, dizziness, weakness, 
fatigue, weight loss or gain, 
headache
Arrhythmias, mania, severe liver 
disease, lactation
3 Not in ABP1 formulary.
vascular disease and in pregnant women. Nausea is a major side- 
effect. Empirical evidence suggests that it is an appropriate drug 
for patients with migraine-associated vertigo.102
Sumatriptan 
Sumatriptan is a selective 5-HT receptor agonist 
that should be used when there is a clear diagnosis of migraine 
or cluster headache for the acute relief of migraine attack and 
not for prophylaxis. The drug also relieves symptoms such as 
nausea, vomiting, and phonophobia, and decreases the need for
anti-emetics.101 The dosage is 6 mg subcutaneously or 20 mg 
nasal spray into one nostril. The dose can be repeated once in 
the next 24 h if migraine initially responds but returns at least 
1 h after the initial dose. The dose should not be repeated if 
non-effective but can be taken again for subsequent attacks. 
Tablets can also be given (50-300 mg per 24 h). Sumatriptan 
should not be administered with any other acute migraine treat­
ment. Side-effects include chest or throat tightness or pressure
  

Medical management of balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
897
as well as dizziness. Bikhazi et al95 reported that sumatriptan was 
the single drug that was highly effective in ameliorating both 
dizziness and headache in a clinical uncontrolled trial of effi­
cacy of a wide range of anti-migrainous drugs used by patients 
with migraine-related dizziness.
Acetazolamide 
Acetazolamide stabilizes the transient dysfunc­
tion of mutant calcium channels by acidification103 and has 
been reported to be effective in controlling vertigo and motion 
sickness in patients with migraine and vertigo.87,104
Prophylactic treatment 
Prophylactic treatment is appro­
priate when there are frequent episodes of vertigo or when 
the severity is not adequately controlled by symptomatic
98
treatment.
fi-blockers 
are the drugs of first choice for migraine prophy­
laxis,105 while failure to respond to one drug of this category 
does not predict failure to respond to another.97 Propanolol is a 
p-adrenoreceptor antagonist. A starting dose of 40 mg bd or 
TDS may be increased by the same amount at weekly intervals 
according to patient response. An adequate response is usually 
seen in the range 80-160 mg/day. It must not be used in asthma, 
atrioventricular conduction defects or brittle diabetes, and it 
must be withdrawn gradually. Concomitant administration 
with chlorpromazine increases the plasma levels of both drugs. 
Side-effects include nightmares and nocturnal hallucinations, 
fatigue, cold extremities and dizziness. Harker and Rassekh106 
reported that propanolol was effective in abolishing or reducing 
the frequency of vertigo and migraine attacks and reducing the 
associated motion sickness in seven of eight treated cases with 
a diagnosis of basilar migraine, while there is anecdotal evi­
dence suggesting that this drug prevents vertigo as a symptom 
of migraine aura.93
Calcium channel blockers 
The use of these in migraine prophy­
laxis has been based on their effect on cerebral blood vessels, 
protecting from vasospasm, as well as on their protective action 
against cerebral hypoxia.97 Flunarazine is of proven efficacy in 
migraine prophylaxis,105 while it also has long-lasting vestibulo- 
suppressant effects in both animals and humans.77 The standard 
dose is 10 mg OD, or 5 mg OD if side-effects occur, for at least 2 
months.97 Its main side-effects include weight gain and fatigue, 
and it is contra-indicated in pregnancy, hypertension and 
glaucoma.
Serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
Pizotifen has antiserotonin, anti- 
tryptamine and antihistaminic effects as well as some antago­
nistic activity against quinine. It inhibits the permeability of 
the migraine-affected cranial vessels, checking the transudation 
of plasmakinin, so that the pain thresholds of the receptors are 
maintained at ‘normal* levels. Side-effects include drowsiness, 
increased appetite and weight gain. Pizotifen has been reported 
to be effective in prophylaxis against migraine that developed 
after remission of benign recurrent vertigo of childhood.90 The 
daily suggested dose is 1.5 mg, starting with 0.5 mg OD, and 
increasing the dose by 0.5 mg every 3 days until the desired 
dosage has been established, in order to avoid drowsiness.97
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR MENIERE’S 
DISEASE (AMERICAN ACADEMY OF 
OPHTHALMOLOGY AND 
OTOLARYNGOLOGY, 1995)
Certain Meniere’s disease;
Definite Meniere’s disease + histopathological 
confirmation.
Definite Meniere’s disease:
^2 episodes of vertigo of 20 minutes or longer 
Documented hearing loss on at least one occasion 
Tinnitus or aural fullness in the affected ear 
Other cases excluded.
Probable Meniere’s disease:
One definitive episode of vertigo 
Documented hearing loss on at least one occasion 
Tinnitus or aural fullness in the affected ear 
Other causes excluded.
Possible Meniere’s disease:
Episodic vertigo characteristic of Meniere’s disease 
without documented hearing loss or 
Sensorineural hearing loss, fluctuating or fixed with 
dysequilibrium hut without definitive episodes of 
vertigo 
Other cases excluded.
Methysergide (3-6 mg in three divided doses) is a highly effec­
tive prophylactic drug, but, due to serious side-effects that 
include fibrotic disorders with chronic usage, and dizziness, vom­
iting, sedation and depression with acute use, it should only be 
used when other prophylactic drugs have not been of benefit.97
Amitryptiline 
Cass et al89 suggest amitriptyline, a tricyclic anti­
depressant, as the first drug of choice for migraine-related 
vestibulopathy, with the second and third choices being P- 
blockers and calcium channel blockers respectively, and they 
observe that 30-50% of their patients respond favourably to 
this treatment. Amitryptyline (10 mg at night, increasing by 
10 mg every 2 weeks up to 50 mg, or even 150-175 mg) is the 
only antidepressant drug with established efficacy in migraine 
prophylaxis, and its anti-mi|raine effect seems to be unrelated 
to its antidepressant effect. 7 Side effects include drowsiness, 
weight 
gain 
and 
orthostatic 
hypotension, 
and 
contra­
indications include glaucoma, urinary retention, pregnancy, 
breastfeeding and concomitant use of monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors.
Meniere’s Disease
The diagnosis of Meniere’s disease should be based on strict 
criteria as defined by the American Academy of Ophthalmol­
ogy and Otolaryngology (AAOO) Committee on Hearing and 
Equilibrium guidelines.107 Causes such as migraine,98 Cogan’s 
syndrome108 or Meniere’s disease of syphilitic aetiology109 have
  

898 
Vestibular disorders and their management
to be differentially diagnosed, as they require specific treatment, 
which, in the case of Cogan’s syndrome and syphilis, needs to 
be promptly initiated for best hearing results. To date, treat­
ment of Meniere’s disease remains mostly empirical, as the exis­
tence of different theories of pathogenesis, the lack of a 
universally accepted method of evaluating treatment results 
despite the AAOO guidelines,110 and the course of the disease, 
which has frequent spontaneous remissions, have hindered the 
development of a widely accepted evidence-based treatment 
protocol Furthermore, there is no consensus with regard to 
prophylactic versus symptomatic treatment.59 There are a few 
double-blind randomized studies assessing treatment effi­
cacy,110’111 which is reported to range between 60% and 80%, 
but these studies may not be satisfactory after rigorous inspec­
tion,110’112’113 and a placebo effect of treatment cannot be 
excluded.111,112 Management of Meniere’s disease can be med­
ical or surgical. However, destructive surgical treatment must be 
the last resource after all other options of rigorous medical 
treatment have failed, as it has non-reversible effects, while it 
may not prove beneficial in all cases, and the possibility of bilat­
eral Meniere’s disease as well as the potential of the older 
patient for postoperative recovery need to be carefully consid­
ered.114 Medical treatment falls into four main categories:
1. Short term—acute vestibular symptom suppression, as 
described above.
2. Long term—measures that aim to influence endolymphatic 
hydrops, such as low- or no-salt diet, diuretics, betahistine.
3* Suppression of immunological reactions in the endolym­
phatic sac.
4* Destruction of the diseased inner ear by intratympanic 
injection of aminoglycosides.
Measures that aim to influence endolymphatic hydrops
Diet 
There are no double-blind trials that report on the efficacy 
of a low-salt diet in treating Meniere’s disease. Santos et al115 
reported vertigo control in 79% and hearing improvement in 
35% of patients with Meniere’s disease who were evaluated 
retrospectively with the 1985 AAOO criteria, on a 2-year 
follow-up after treatment with diuretics and a low-salt diet. 
However, the study did not attempt to separate benefits derived 
from diet from benefits due to diuretics, there were no controls, 
and the number of subjects was small. As a general rule, 
patients are advised to restrict salt intake to 1 mg111 or 1.5-2 mg 
per day.64 In our experience, strict adherence to a low-salt diet 
can be sufficient to control a Meniere’s crisis in many cases. 
However, the success of this regimen depends on patient com­
pliance as well as on educating the patient about unappreciated 
sources of salt (e.g. tinned food). Although a low-salt diet is a 
baseline treatment of Meniere’s disease in ours as well as in 
other clinical settings,64 a study has yet to emerge that con­
vincingly demonstrates the benefits of this regimen.
Diuretics 
Diuretics (Table 54.4) have been reported to be 
effective in the long-term control of vertigo but not of hearing 
loss. However, their beneficial effects are not unanimously
MANAGEMENT OF MENIERE’S DISEASE 
Acute phase, short term:
Anti-emetics, anti-vertigo drugs
Chronic phase, long term;
Diet
Diuretics 
Betahistine 
Vestibular exercises
If evidence for autoimmune aetiology:
Steroid treatment
If medical therapy has failed;
Intratympanic injection of aminoglycosides 
Destructive surgery
accepted, as most efficacy studies have been flawed method­
ologically, while thiazide diuretics may affect electrolyte 
levels.111,116 Significantly, there was only one double-blind 
placebo-controlled trial between 1978 and 1995, by van Deelen 
and Huizing,111,117 and there have been none since.
Bendroflurozide is a thiazide diuretic which reduces the 
absorption of electrolytes from the renal tubules, thereby 
increasing the excretion of sodium and chloride ions, and con­
sequently of water. Its main side-effect is hypokalaemia, and a 
potassium-rich diet or potassium supplements must be adminis­
tered in conjunction with the drug, which has to be adminis­
tered with caution to diabetics. There are no data on its efficacy 
in treatment of Meniere’s disease.
Dyazide (combination of 50 mg triamterene and 25 mg 
hydrochlorthiazide) is a potassium-conserving diuretic that has 
been reported to be effective in controlling vertigo, but not 
hearing problems.117
Chlorthalidone is a sulphonamide derivative that has been 
reported to be beneficial in uncontrolled studies.118 Acetazo­
lamide is best avoided, due to ambiguous results and unpleasant 
side-effects.119 Loop diuretics such as furosemide should be 
avoided due to potential ototoxicity.59
Betahistine 
Betahistine (see Table 54.4) is a histamine 
analogue with weak agonistic action at both HI and H2 and 
moderate antagonistic action at H3 histamine receptors. The 
drug may owe its anti-vertigo properties in Meniere’s disease to 
improved microvascular circulation in the stria vascularis of the 
cochlea which reduces the endolymghatic pressure or inhibits 
the activity in the vestibular nuclei. 
In a review paper, Claes 
and Van de Heyning111 identified five double-blind trials 
between 1978 and 1995, three crossover studies and two double­
blind comparisons with flunarazine or dihydrochlorthiazide. In 
a more recent meta-analysis (oral paper) prepared for a 
systematic review of betahistine for the Cochrane library,110 the 
authors identified six double-blind subject control trials, 
excluding crossover if there were no data available before to
  

Medical management of balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
899
Table 54.4 
Recommended drugs for Meniere's disease: dose, side-effects and contraindications.
Drug
Bendroflurozide
Dyazide
pregnancy
Chlorthalidone
Dose
PO: 5-10 mg OD or on alternate 
days early in the morning, 
Maintenance dose 5-10 mg once 
or twice per week
PO: 1 tablet containing 50 mg 
triamterene and 25 mg 
hydrochlorthiazide after the
morning meal, thereafter 
adjusted to patient's needs
PO: 25-50 mg OD per day at 
breakfast time
Betahistine
PO: 16 mg TDS
Maintenance dose: 24-48 mg
Side-effects
May exacerbate/activate lupus 
erythematosus 
Hypokalaemia
Dizziness, nausea, vomiting, 
weakness, headache, dry mouth, 
hypotension, electrolyte changes
with occasional metabolic 
acidosis, rarely blood dyscrasias
May induce gout, electrolyte 
changes
5/de effects with higher dosage 
may include:
electrolyte imbalance, dizziness, 
hypotension and arrhythmias, 
skin rash, gastrointestinal 
problems, worsening of glucose 
intolerance, thrombocytopenia
Gastrointestinal upset, headache, 
skin rash, pruritus
Contraindications/precautions
Renal failure, pregnancy, hypersensitivity 
to thiazides
Caution in Addison disease, 
hyperealcaemia, diabetes, hepatic 
impairment
Hyperkalaemia, renal failure, hepatic 
dysfunction, hyperealcaemia, diabetic 
ketoacidosis, Addison's disease,
Caution in diabetes
Anuria, renaf/hepatic insufficiency, 
hypersensitivity, refractory hypokalaemia 
and hyponatraemia, hypercalcaemia, 
hyperuricaemia, untreated Addison's 
disease,
lithium therapy
Caution in elderly, hyperlipidaemia, 
coronary disease
Phaeochromocytoma, hypersensitivity 
Caution in peptic ulcer, pregnancy, 
bronchial asthma
crossover, as cited on Medline and Embase. None of the trials
reported in these review/meta-analysis studies adhered to the
AAOO criteria. Claes and Van de Heyning111 reported
unequivocal results, while in a systematic review James and
Thorp112 found conflicting evidence on the effect of betahistine
on the symptoms of Meniere’s disease. However, experimental
evidence from animals suggests that betahistine facilitates com- 
_ 
120 
pensation in cats.
Other drugs include calcium agonists (flunarazine, cin- 
narazine), but there is no evidence to suggest that these are 
effective or more effective than betahistine.111,121
Suppression of immunological reactions 
Steroid treatment is 
based on the assumption of an autoimmune pathogenesis of 
Meniere’s disease, as indicated by elevated serum levels of auto­
antibodies,122 but there are no double-blind control studies 
demonstrating the clinical effects of this concept. Steroids can 
be administered topically or systemically, but topical applica- 
tion achieves a much higher drug penetration and produces 
fewer side-effects than systemic administration.123 Shea124 
reported hearing improvement in 35.4% and complete vertigo 
control in 63.4% of cases treated with 16 mg intratympanic and 
16 mg intravenous dexamethasone for 3 consecutive days, 
followed by oral dexamethasone, in an uncontrolled study that 
followed the AAOO guidelines. Silverstein et al,125 however, 
report no benefit of intratympanic administration of dexa­
methasone versus placebo in terms of hearing and tinnitus in 22 
treated patients with Meniere’s disease. A recent uncontrolled 
open trial reported good results for bilateral Meniere’s disease 
with methotrexate.
Intratympanic injection of aminoglycosides 
Streptomycin 
and gentamicin are selectively vestibulotoxic and act by 
destroying the dark cells of the secretory epithelium, thus 
decreasing endolymph production. Gentamicin is currently pre­
ferred to streptomycin.127,128 Although this treatment seems to 
have a hi|h efficacy in controlling the vertigo in up to 90% of 
cases,119,12 there is no consensus as to the best protocol regard­
ing dose, technique of administration and end point of therapy, 
while deafness may develop in up to 30% of treated cases. 
This treatment should be reserved for patients who have failed 
medical therapy,128 and seems to be of value in patients with 
incapacitating symptoms of Meniere’s disease who have not 
responded to long-term aggressive medical treatment. There are 
anecdotal reports that if one ear is successfully treated, 
Meniere’s disease only rarely develops in the contralateral 
ear.127 Although the presence of the A1555G mitochondrial 
mutation, which increases susceptibility to aminoglycoside 
ototoxicity,131 has not been reported so far in patients with 
aminoglycoside-induced hearing loss following vestibular abla­
tive therapy,132 patients who are considered for this treatment, 
and particularly those of Asian origin, should be screened for
  

900 
Vestibular disorders and their management
the mutation, and, if the results are positive, alternative 
means of treatment (e.g. vestibular neurectomy) should be 
preferred.
Chronic vertigo
Central vestibular disorders will result in chronic or progressive 
disability that cannot always be improved by medication, and 
both the patient and the doctor must have realistic expecta­
tions of the treatment. However, alternative gait and posture 
control strategies in the case of central vestibular patients, and 
vestibular exercises, in the case of bilateral vestibular failure, as 
well as implementation of safety measures and assistive devices, 
may improve the patient’s mobility and sense of confidence and 
should form an integral part of the treatment of the chronic 
vestibular patient.35,1 3,134 Any treatable underlying neurological 
disease should be treated.
There is some evidence, although inconclusive, that some 
centrally induced involuntary eye movements can be controlled 
by medication acting at neurotransmitter sites in the CNS, but 
drugs have to be titrated against side-effects.135 One has to bear 
in mind that the long-term effects of these drugs are unknown, 
and it is recommended that this treatment be initiated by a 
neurologist with experience in eye movement disorders. The 
main drugs available are summarized in Table 54.5.
Psychiatric morbidity is high in patients with vestibular 
dysfunction,136 particularly in chronic disorders, and these 
patients must be identified so that they can be given appropri­
ate treatment. Vestibular sedatives should be particularly 
avoided as they delay compensation, except in some cases of 
central neurological conditions that cause intractable vertigo
and do not respond to treatment.137 The drug treatment of the 
patient with chronic vertigo and falls should be reviewed, in 
case the falls of the patient are partly caused by medication that 
can be withdrawn, as, for example, antipsychotic treatment in 
the older patient is known to predispose to falls and can be pre­
scribed without a solid indication.138 Table 54.6 summarizes 
medication that may increase the risk of falls in the elderly. 
Surgery should only be considered in cases where all other 
treatment has failed, there is good indication for surgery, and 
evidence that this may prove beneficial.
Experimental drags
A novel category of drugs emerging from animal experi­
ments that may potentially be used in the future but has not 
been fully clinically assessed includes drugs thought to accel­
erate compensation, such as gingko biloba extract EGb 761, 
melanotropic peptides57 and opiates.139 Schlatter et al,140 
however, found no evidence that EGb 761 accelerates or 
enhances static compensation, and the authors attributed 
part of the drug’s action to the drug’s vehicle. Some home­
opathic remedies have also been reported to be effective in 
reducing the frequency, duration and intensity of vertigo 
attacks in a double-blind randomized control study that used 
betahistine as controls.141 However, the action of homeo­
pathic drugs is poorly understood and their long-term effects 
are unknown. None of these substances should be used until 
clinical trials have established their efficacy in treating 
vestibular disorders and their long-term effects, bearing in 
mind the UK government’s recent directive on the effects of 
St John’s wort.
Table 54.5 
Drug therapy of central eye movement disorders.
Condition
Drug
Action
Side-effect
Downbeat nystagmus
Baclofen
GABAergic
Muscle weakness
Clonazepam
GABAergic
Sedation
Scopolamine
Anticholinergic
Drowsiness
Upbeat nystagmus
Baclofen
GABAergic
Muscle weakness
Episodic ataxia
Acetazolamide
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
Paresthesia, fatiguability
Suithiame
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
Periodic alternating nystagmus
Baclofen
GABAergic
Muscle weakness
See-saw nystagmus
Clonazepam
GABAergic
Sedation
Gabapentin
Anticonvulsant
Somnolence, dizziness, ataxia
Congenital nystagmus
Barbiturates
Baclofen
GABAergic
Muscle weakness
Acquired pendular nystagmus
Baclofen
GABAergic
Muscle weakness
Clonazepam
GABAergic
Sedation
Barbiturate
  

Medical management of balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
901
Tabic 54.6 
Drugs that may increase risk of falls in the elderly or adversely affect compensation in the general population.138
Drug 
Psychomotor impairment 
Increased risk of falls 
Adverse vestibular effects
Benzodiazepines 
Cyclic antidepressants 
Antipsychotics 
Diuretics
Antihypertensives 
Recreationaf drugs 
Alcohol
Antihistamines
Dimenhydrinate
+ + + +
+ + +
+ + +
?
+ +
+ + + 
Drowsiness
+ + + 
+ +
+ + 
+?
+ +
+ + +
Delays compensation 
Induces central vestibular syndrome 
Delays compensation 
None reported
Induces central vestibular syndrome 
Induces central vestibular syndrome 
Delays compensation
Vestibular rehabilitation: key factors
Vestibular rehabilitation should follow a detailed evaluation of
the patient. Evaluation should establish:
1. The cause of vestibular lesion, in order to identify and ini- 
tiate the appropriate medical management, e.g. pharmaco­
logical treatment in Meniere’s disease and migraine or 
surgery in the case of a vestibular schwannoma.
2. The extent and type of the vestibular lesion. This is essential 
information in order to choose the most appropriate exer­
cise/manoeuvre regimen. For example, an Epley manoeuvre 
is appropriate treatment, with very good results for isolated 
BPPV; however, further coexisting peripheral vestibular 
pathology will require the appropriate rehabilitation for 
optimal results.142 In the case of bilateral vestibular failure, 
vestibular rehabilitation should be based on exercises that 
foster substitution of visual and somatosensory cues.143
KEY FACTORS OF VESTIBULAR
REHABILITATION
Detailed evaluation:
Cause, extent and type of lesion 
Identify concurrent factors: medical, vision, 
proprioceptive, neuro-muscular, musculosceletal, 
psychological, drugs
Identify patient’s main difficulties, preferred strategies* 
levels of activity
Establish patient’s active collaboration:
Explanation of symptoms. Motivation 
Realistic outcome targets agreed upon
Timing:
Early introduction of vestibular rehabilitation
Choice of appropriate rehabilitation regimen:
Preset versus customized exercises 
Individualized or class instruction 
VOR recalibration versus substitution 
BPPV manoeuvres
3. Concurrent factors that may affect compensation in order 
to correct remediable problems, e.g. operation of cataracts 
for improvement of vision, or to initiate adjunctive therapy, 
such as behavioural therapy for patients with psychological 
disorders, or relaxation and breathing exercises for hyper­
ventilation.
4. The patient’s particular difficulties, preferred strategies and 
levels of activity. There is considerable variability among 
subjects with regard to which mechanisms are used for 
compensation, and therefore the rehabilitation programme 
must be based on the type and degree of deficit and on the 
patient’s inherent potential for compensation.4
5. Estimate of the prognosis; for example, CVD takes longer 
than PVD for recovery.33
The patient’s active collaboration needs to be established. For 
this reason, an accurate explanation of symptoms and of the 
purposes of the rehabilitation programme should be given, and 
time and realistic outcome targets should be set and agreed 
upon. Motivation, attention, effort and interest have long been 
recognized as key factors in compensation144 and may play a 
specific role, in that the VOR can be adaptively modified by 
imagination and effort of spatial localization.4,145
Timing is a key factor in vestibular rehabilitation, as early 
onset of the exercises is associated with better outcome,41 in 
agreement with animal studies.
Vestibular exercises have to be designed keeping in mind 
that the vestibular adaptation is induced by an ‘error signal’ and 
therefore exposure to situations that produce this is necessary, 
and that adaptation is context specific, while the VOR is 
required to have an infinite number of gains for different situa­
tions (e.g. looking at objects far/near), and therefore exercises 
must be done in various contexts and speeds.13
Current physical exercise regimens and manoeuvres that are 
employed in the management of the vestibular patient include:
1. systematic preset exercise programmes
2. ‘customized’ exercise programmes
3. specific therapies for the treatment of benign peripheral 
positional vertigo of the posterior, horizontal or anterior 
semicircular canal.
  

902 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Systematic preset exercise programmes
Cooksey-Cawthome exercises
These comprise a series of graded head and body exercises that 
incorporate eye-head coordination tasks as well as balance 
tasks that have to be performed at various speeds due to the 
context specificity of vestibular adaptation, depending on the 
patient’s severity of symptoms. The regimen can be individually 
tailored by asking the patient to score each exercise according 
to the symptoms it provokes, from 0 (no symptoms) to 3 (severe 
symptoms), in order to identify the exercises that elicit dizziness 
and are therefore required for habituation.146 The patient is 
advised to progress to the next exercises on the list when he or 
she is free of symptoms or after having performed the exercises 
for 2-3 weeks.
Cawthome and Cooksey held daily exercise class sessions 
and encouraged patients to expose themselves to challenging 
noisy or crowded environments. Classes for Cooksey- 
Cawthome exercises are time- and cost-effective and make the 
best use of limited specialized personnel resources, while the 
patient’s experience is positive as a result of meeting other 
patients with similar symptoms.147 Nevertheless, an exercise class 
may not be ideal for all patients; for example, those with back 
or psychological problems will require individual instruction.148
Cohort observation studies report symptomatic improve­
ment in the majority of patients with vestibular disorders that 
are managed with Cooksey-Cawthome exercises.144,148 How­
ever, Szturm et al149 suggest that dynamic balance measures and 
VOR asymmetry may benefit more from balance and goal 
directed eye-head exercises under varied visual and somatosen­
sory input than from the Cooksey-Cawthome exercises, but 
potential confounders of their study’s results are the non- 
randomized group assignment and differences in the follow-up 
arrangements for the two groups. Table 54.7 summarizes major 
recent studies on the efficacy of vestibular exercises.
None's exercises: Vestibular habituation exercises 
Vestibular habituation training (VHT) was developed as a 
treatment for vertigo, induced by movement or change of posi­
tion, in patients with peripheral vestibular disorders.150 VHT is 
based on the concept of the ‘error-signal’ driven adaptation and 
on the assumption that repetition of the same stimulus (move­
ment) causes a decline in response (vertigo) which is stimulus 
specific.150 VHT consists of 19 positional manoeuvres151 which 
are initially performed passively; symptoms of vertigo or dizzi­
ness, as well as estimates of their intensity and duration, are 
noted. The manoeuvres that elicit vertigo are then selected as 
exercises and the patient is advised to perform these in an 
active and vivid way.150 Results in subjects with peripheral 
vestibular disorders are reported to be excellent with only 8% of 
patients showing no improvement.151 A comparison of outcome 
between subjects who received VHT and controls who received 
‘sham’ exercises or no treatment demonstrated significant 
improvement in all VHT patients and far better results than in 
controls.152 Major disadvantages of VHT are that it does not 
include eye-head coordination exercises, balance tasks or exer­
cises under challenge of visual/somatosensory input. However, 
VHT recognizes the significant overlap of vestibular pathology 
and psychological factors and advocates the use of relaxation 
exercises151 and motivation of the patient.150
Customised’ exercise programmes
University of Michigan's approach
This regimen combines habituation exercises, balance and gait 
exercises, and general conditioning exercises suited to age, 
health and interests.35,49,153 These are selected for each patient 
after a detailed neuro-otological multisystem evaluation and 
more specifically on the basis of posturography findings, gait 
evaluation and the ‘motion sensitivity quotient’, which is 
calculated by tabulating the number of vertigo-producing 
positions with intensity and duration of symptoms.35 The 
selected exercises are then practised in the home environment 
or under therapist supervision for a period of 2-6 weeks, after 
which the patient will be reassessed and the exercise pro­
gramme readjusted. Once the improvement begins to plateau, 
in 8-10 weeks on average, according to the authors, the patient 
is offered counselling and a maintenance programme that 
includes postural control and conditioning exercises. The 
authors also highlight the importance of educating the patient 
regarding his or her illness. Outcome results reported in various 
studies that include patients with different types and degrees of 
vestibular pathology indicate improvement in up to 90% of 
patients33,3 132,153 (See Table 54.7 for details of outcome studies).
The John Hopkins/University of Miami programme 
The exercises used by this programme are modifications of the 
Cooksey-Cawthome exercises. The programme places particu­
lar importance on exercising under limited or altered visual and 
somatosensory input, on making use of ‘central preprogram­
ming’, and on making the patient work at the limit of his 
ability.154 It includes eye-head, movement and positional exer­
cises, balance and gait training, and a walking programme. The 
acute vestibular patients are encouraged to start performing 
eye-head exercises sitting or standing, as early as 2-3 days after 
the onset of vestibular loss, to gradually increase the duration of 
exercise over the next few days, and to terminate the exercises 
only if vomiting. The chronic vestibular patient is encouraged 
to perform head movements and is taken through a series of bal­
ance and gait graded exercises. In bilateral vestibular failure, 
the treatment approach includes exercises that foster substitu­
tion of visual and somatosensory information and the develop­
ment of compensatory strategies.143
Special considerations: central vestibular disorders, Meniere's 
disease, bilateral vestibular failure
Vestibular rehabilitation has been traditionally reserved for 
patients with a stable peripheral vestibular lesion, but there is 
evidence to suggest that patients with central vestibular disor­
ders may also benefit from vestibular rehabilitation. Patients 
with cerebellar lesions have been reported to improve their pos­
tural stability after vestibular training.155 Shepard et al33
  

Table 
54.7 
Vestibular exercises: outcome evaluation 
studies.
Medical management o f balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
903
jo
■ —
to 
2
E E
2 o
-O  
c
to 
£5
-C  £
J£» 
lo 
o
-O3
on
S5 SL
E  CO
—  <U
£ *0
E  to
O  CT
Q . 5
E
> - O i
tO c
O  
cj P
TO
co >■
T3 
l?l
TO 
‘- 0
<L> 
°
£ >~
O  
2  
<U
J? £
a £
&! Q .
> . -c
CL D> 
f f  2
 
Qj
"D  
C
t> 
gj 
cc o
O  
CO 
<£ “ ■
:E Q
c
i» 
ro 
to
E -- 3
£  *o  
-  
> 
o
QJ
= e 
™ o 
5 c
a -2 
> t;
S  S.
lO TO
CL
§ E
' qj +9
E  c
o ^
lo fc:
-o S
£ o _
§ | - . i
qj
I
I
CL
r> o 
rs Z
i -  
3
co 
to
3  £
-o‘^3 </)
to  
<IJ
Qj 
-O  
>
T3
<U>
QJ
U
OJ
CL/
o .2
iZ 
-t- 
5  ±? 
in hr 
ti -o  to
tu
qj
OJ
to
Q .
3
O
tu
o l
TO
JZ
QJ
CT
<~>
QJ JC
<u
OJ
c
3
O
4—1
TO
QJ "to
XJ
0
cn
cn
CJ
*TO
>0
c
, 2
4—►
c
'Q
Q .
OJ
CL
SC
T3
QJ
>O
E
_>^
c
0
TO
+J
jD
TO
E
QJ
>
2
CL
QJ
ro
OJ
Q .
<u
CJ
E
CJ
c
E
to
CJ
c
ro
k_
TO
+-J
c
QJ
TO
c
CO
U
c
TO
-O
3  
-O  
’■*—>
TO
CJ
t E
QJ
Q_
QJ
Kt
3
to
<u
>
‘c
“O
C
Q
in
CO>-
1 1
5
o  wIS
E oj
in 3 
£ 
_  > 
w 5 C  
o tn £
-  > 5
3 c Q 
£ 
°
7:1 ™ 
co J5
QJ
£  ™ 5 
2- i/i c  
s® 
>  
o
oi !d
5 5 
■° £
.1 £
4—* 
4—*
i c  
•s =
■D S
^•E 
o
-
 ^ Q . Q .
Ow_
OS
JCo
X lc
T3
Q
 
i r  
>  
o
,s £ g l  = 
a  id .§ -2 e
^ E
m 
<L O  
CO
cl -a $
ai 
aj ’to 
tn *0
.y S
E £
TO 
CL
&J
a
o .§
S' £
tj O 
0J 
u
a 5
E c
CO ' —
C
■s- s
■E 1
c °
aj t l
P <L»
> <u 
o ©
I-J >-
£*o
cc
O>
"S^3
,C
■tSc:
5
— 
03 
^
Z ^ o
c  
O l ^
CO 
C  +-J
o  ■ — o
^
 -O  
C  
ra -O
.5 *ts 3
on
i^ >*
^ c
.E °
c  o  
o
^  .o'
O  n
3 tn
■° c-
<u .E 
oc
3
oo
03
<U
E
4>
E0u3
O
CL3
1$
o
l/l
s S’
5-1 
t j  
e
(L» ■*“> 
u  
_  vn
§ a 
^ ~ > 
re ^ 
_  
-3 
<u 
0 ^ 0
-  B s
r
 
ro 
g
JLJ -C  
C
<Lf
<U
^Jh
aJ 
j/>
s ° s
E =r
B  
a .
a. co :
E CTl
f t  2  . 
<u 5
E
o
-—; -+-J
OJ 
r—
*- E
>-
^  E . 
S  2 ;
I
*
o
cn
Eo
e kiz 
qjE
CO
flj co
1 3  i »
. i  S - S - f
^ 04
o  7 !
- C
O
^  °  r
f -  c  £
2 J= -o
o ^ ■-
= a 8
^Z, 
Ul 
(V
c
E
OJ>
o
E
l/l
o
Q l
UO 
. 
_
J °  :§
,Sf 
o  x j
I 1 o
J--® °
Q
<u
<u
to
QJ
o £
* - CO
-o
^
 _o>
■■s i * -
o L §
to 2  S 
? E r
w  r
 X5 
^  
4J 
C  
3  
Q_ CJ
o
CO
Ito
§1
I S
o.:> 
E ■-
t  uo
5r c<L>
V\
8 o
t/> 4-*
•M E
J3 QJ
CO Q
^  O
o
kC
TO
> .
CM
2  c  
o
E  c
o ^3 
- 2  t
/I JS
- -  
Z3
TO _o
■J~\
T3 
_
C  
>  
TO _ -
,tr oz
TO Q
CD
<&
<u5
CO
o
£TO
C  
> -
JC
X3 
Q .
- P
oc t« 
O  
o
>  
CL
c
o
E
uO
c
CO 
JUO
c•2 
§ g 
CO 
°
3
loTO
cu
O -
.>■
’ • 
o
to 
O)
^ 
. .
t£J 
+-•
V C
<bi ^  
X
^  
(Li 
^
_  
O  ^ 
CO
i  
c  W
jo j3 J< ?.
5 .S.-E 
a ■§ ??
JLr 
i^O
OJ>
"S
.M E 
to E
3  
CO
1 £n 
>  
o
O l
c
TO
K £
4, .10
C  ^
ra 
x
•S.I
TO 
+-J
2  "CJ
- -  c 
■2 o
c  
o  
o
<u
tn 
<u
X<u
TO 
3
_ o  
o  
s
 
CU
^ 
m
"S 
^
jM E
to E
3 
ro
TD 
bL
■ zr CT
, >  
O  
^
T3 T3 
C  
U  
^  
o
to -*—' 
<3J C
W 
Q
x<u c  
o  
o
u  
o
QJ '+Z
CL CO 
to 
O
c  ^  
o w
c
5  
OJ 
o  
C
"o ° 
j c  
un >
« I
u CJ
S >■
S « c
k_ ~x E
i2 O 
o>
■+C 
QJ 
j—
io _c 2
3
X )
TO
QJ
E
a  e 
S s
"8 s
^ Q.
TO 
(U 
3  tO
XJ \ j
.> <u
-i £
O  
O
ir,
QJ 
>-o
OJ 
N
"to 
cu
13 
OO
-g a
:>
- n  X
C  ^
<u
lo1
c; 
qj 
TO S'
01 c
2 I
Cl. Z
—- -o
O  
3
-— 
CJ
r-  
v-
■ — 
<U
TO 
X
i— 
rtj
QJ -O 
TO
0^ 
GJ
c ■=
JS ^
TO 
<U 
CO
JjO
-  
e 
8 
§ 
>- 
<~>
i  
«  
S is %
3 * U
- £ 3  0
> S o
CL
3
P
£
Q_
OQ
O
2
O
S+
o
>
co
01
o
Q l 
CT C 
£ g
o
5+
Q
Cl ^
B g1
+  
X3
o  “
§
<U 
tJ
> ^
XZ 
c:
o  o
o
cL
<u > i_  
•jz, u
o
QJ1
q . ^ 2.
LO 
oj
B.p
g
Q _
a./ 
v-j
> Jc 
c
o  o 
o
Q l 
1 
10 <& 
O to TO
CL* O
^  
«U 
£Cj _TO
QJ ~0J 
CL C
tn 
O
2 tj 
O -
"tj TO
aj 
oj
Q . £
10 O
t  a>
Q_ jO
_ o
<u
X3
(U
—  . o p
-D <U J3
3 0 ^ 
0 ^ 0  
Q  
CL U
E P
O  y
= -«
ra ra
QC cj
O
00
cn
LD
CO
m
<r>
TO
ra 
0.^2— 
OJ 
TO 
JC ^  
U/l 
dj
.2 TO 
, <L» V
c3
TO «  
C L ^ _  
Oj  
TO
S
to i=
*S ra
^ 4J
E 5
3  
TO
M  v
t n  
(U
  

904 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Eo
"O
<u3c
'■+-1
EO
cj
P*H
Lf>-Si
X), TO
to
CU
TO
.Ss! ~
M— 
tO
‘c  g 
g* E 
'</» c 
"I
CO £c
—
to 
tO <D
— 
F
3 F
10 o
C
to O
Sc
is
in __^
.E e 
>> <u 
.■? E
> <U
‘43 O
’Co O
<U 
C ^
vi3 
(U C
a -o  o 
^ w 
?  nj i:
co
<U
o
k. 
s ,
cn Oa
£ ^ ■ 
> ’E
c 
.2 "S
£3 S o ^
5_ 
Si c 
^ ^
5  f S ' ^  
8+1
o .E a  3 t  
£ wii
m 
> n
00
<u=3
O’
cu
>•5 -
C 03 3 >
<U £> <2
£  c  S ®
o o E >■
^  C — to
CO O <0 C
c  aj
— t; o
(o ro 
.E 
. y ^ T j
-  c § = 
O
coE
OJ
E
cu
CL
2
4- o E
CO <L> o
>*I5'-c
.tf 3 v 
>  
to 
to
tz ^ $
03 £ ^
— o O
■*_ -^- a>
iu ^  x
to  
CO 
u
§L“o "o
8
Q ^
Z t *
>  a  o  
1
Z
Z
T3
a/
rs!
<u
CL
c  O
o I 
xjC to
CO TO
CJ cu
a  „  
£ £ 
^  -o
-  
"§■£ 
£5 4jE
2 E 
^
8 to
CL o f
■IS
c
o
E
+ 1
*  c  
+- o
c  U3 
<U o
E E
■S”
cu
-2 c  <2
J  .2 £
l/l — —
OJ 13 03
>  
CO Q .
"O -q
K S
E  §
o u
c ^
TO co
cc 
U
to
CU
e 
§ §§ 
£ 
|-3
£  
E C
— 03 
^ 
0} €
§■ c Ig
Q_=1
O
o
_
O CT_  
o  - a  
co
v 
JS S
JD C -C ,0 
O ^
>
 ' —. 4—I 
O
c ■? 5 § y]
jo TO Qj
a . JZ
rt= co
c; -c r:
.2^ e >
un 
S_
OJ
to 
CTl
„ ra (U ^
E ™ E ~? 
g
o E c  ^
s. c
- =  
c  
Q- *- TO OJ
E Oj Ov 3
-B cc O* -  
o o O Sf 01 
c  
^
 >  **- cn
• n i l
o b OL 
_ 
c
^  a; •-
o i ; 2 f  §  
^ > -° 
- 
Q - r^
c to O To 
-  it £  to 
^  a> » c
o' o O O r-
4
—^ 
r j 
r j
LO Q_
ro o
t £  
*0 co
9^ Cu
c
QJ
E Cl 
t: £3 G •=
>-o
c
CL*>
_C
Q.
co
u"O
c
CO
t/^
‘H
a/ i ;  c
r-
gj tc .E
> C TO 
C-* CO ^
o - fc!
s l&
CO 
o _
tn iS .0 03 
cur
U f—
M E
Q . U
o c
CD Is, Q . CTJ
oe+o
a> co
CL I
I I
<U ^ 
CC JD
CO
CO
o
CJ
-D <U
£ S
o TO 
QC °- > 
to i s  
oj o 
^  -2 
tr %-
CO 
>  
jC ^
0  
CO
<u
U1
cn tT 
4-r o
m  Q_
oj
_ 10
T 3 
cu
c .2
CO 
o
qj aj
K ><
co 
aj 
CD
>00
CU— aj
u ^
cu 
CO 
CL 
I
L/l <U
s o
<U t j
cc
LO
CO
oc
=  -a 
■- c
CD 
co
reported that patients with central vestibular disorders which 
were predominantly due to brainstem pathology required a 
lengthier rehabilitation programme, but achieved no worse out­
come, than patients with PVD. However, a more recent report 
suggests a mild-to-moderate reduction in symptoms of patients 
with central, predominantly cerebellar, lesions in response to 
vestibular rehabilitation.156 Rehabilitation of central balance 
disorders will include retraining of sensory and movement 
strategies, i.e. training the patient to develop effective motor 
and sensory strategies in order to maintain stability during any 
functional tasks, while any coexisting peripheral vestibular 
pathology should be identified and appropriately rehabili­
tated.157 Specific neurological rehabilitation may also be needed 
in order to restore mobility, either by means of restoring physi­
ological gait functions or by fostering substitute movements and 
using technical aids.134 The rehabilitation programme needs to 
take into account the specific impairments of each patient, 
underlying pathology, age, cognitive ability, severity of func­
tional deficit and several other factors.134,157 A patient with 
central vestibular pathology, e.g. following a traumatic brain 
injury, may require modified vestibular exercises in order to 
accommodate impaired motility and cognition, and increased 
supervision and assistance.158
Although vestibular rehabilitation is usually reserved for 
patients with stable vestibular deficits,35 it will also benefit 
Meniere patients who have developed unilateral or bilateral 
vestibular hypofunction, and should be initiated when the fre­
quency of the hydropic attacks has started to decrease.159
Patients with bilateral vestibular failure can have different 
levels of functional impairment.29 Vestibular rehabilitation will 
lead to subjective symptomatic improvement as well as 
improvement of stability during locomotion.160 However, those 
with fluctuations in vestibular function will fare worse than the 
rest.29 It is essential to educate these patients regarding the 
functional limitations of their condition, and to counsel them 
regarding safety considerations (such as working at heights, 
swimming in the dark, diving in the water) and balance assis­
tive devices.133,155 Patients with bilateral vestibular failure must 
be able to use both visual and somatosensory clues, or alternate 
the use of them, in a variety of challenging or conflicting sen­
sory environments, and their rehabilitation programme must 
include exercises to foster substitution of alternative strategies 
for gaze stability as well as exercises that improve static and 
dynamic stability.158 Patients with oscillopsia will particularly 
require eye-head coordination exercises, while posturography 
findings, as well as the therapist’s evaluation, will help to decide 
whether the patient will benefit more from a customized
133
exercise programme.
Vestibular exercises— conclusion
The decision to refer the patient for preset versus customized 
exercises will depend on resource considerations, among other 
factors. Any vestibular exercises are better than no exercises, 
while a number of studies suggest that customized exercise 
regimens give significantly better results than preset exercise
  

Medical management of balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
905
regimens, particularly in addressing dynamic balance problems. 
However, not all patients who have experienced vestibular 
symptoms require vestibular rehabilitation, and not every 
patient with persistent vestibular symptoms will need cus­
tomized exercises. It is up to the clinician to decide, depending 
on clinical judgement, resources available and the presence of 
prognostic indicators for vestibular rehabilitation outcome, the 
best available regimen for the patient’s needs.
Specific therapies for the treatment of benign 
paroxysmal positional vertigo of the posterior, 
horizontal or anterior semicircular canal
Positional vertigo is characterized by vertigo attacks that are 
triggered by changes in the head’s position relative to gravity. 
The benign or peripheral type has until recently been attributed 
to ‘cupulolithiasis’,161 that is, that degenerative debris adhere to 
the cupula of the posterior semicircular canal (p-SCC), making 
it gravity sensitive. More recently, the hypothesis of ‘canalo- 
lithiasis’,162 i.e. that degenerative debris float freely in the 
endolymph of the p-SCC, has been considered to explain more 
effectively the features of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
(BPPV). BPPV most commonly arises from the p-SCC, 
although it may also arise from the horizontal (h-SCC) or, 
rarely, the anterior (a-SCC) canals.163-166 Honrubia et al166 
report the prevalences of p-BPPV, h-BPPV and a-BPPV as 
being respectively, 93%, 5% and 2%. BPPV may also arise from 
pathology of more than one canal.167,168 However, BPPV must 
be differentially diagnosed from positional vertigo arising from 
central pathology in the caudal brainstem or vestibulo- 
cerebellum169 with lesions often found dorsolateral to the fourth 
ventricle or in the dorsal vermis.170 This localization, together 
with other clinical features (associated cerebellar and oculo­
motor signs), generally allows one to easily distinguish central 
PPV from BPPV, but there are exceptions, and it appears that 
the direction of nystagmus on testing is the most reliable crite­
rion for differentiation between central and peripheral
170,171
types.
Cawthome54 
and 
other 
authors172 
have 
advocated 
vestibular habituation therapy for BPPV, involving repeatedly 
assuming the position of maximal stimulation in order to 
gradually habituate to the vertigo-inducing position, while it 
has been recognized that vestibular suppressants are ineffec­
tive treatment.173 In more recent years, mechanical therapies 
proposed for the treatment of BPPV, in the form of exercises 
or single manoeuvres, have been based either on the cupulo- 
or canalolithiasis hypotheses, and are highly effective in 
achieving symptomatic relief after a single or short-term 
application.
Regardless of the chosen set of exercises or manoeuvres, 
there are three major considerations for the effective treatment 
of BPPV, which highlight the necessity for detailed neuro- 
otological testing in all BPPV patients:
1. The following manoeuvres and exercises are only indi­
cated in the presence of BPPV, as diagnosed on the basis
of strict criteria174 (Table 54.8), and by definition are not 
appropriate for central positional vertigo, which needs to be 
differentially diagnosed, as it may have life-threatening 
implications.
2. Concurrent vestibular pathology such as peripheral vestibu­
lar hypofunction needs to be appropriately treated. Poliak 
et al14 reported that the majority of patients with BPPV 
and peripheral vestibular hypofunction remain sympto­
matic after successful treatment of BPPV by single-step 
manoeuvres and require further vestibular rehabilitation. 
Herdman175 also reported that BPPV patients have abnor­
mal postural stability when compared with age-matched 
controls. This finding may not be related to the debris in 
the posterior canal and needs to be taken into account 
when designing the appropriate treatment plan.
3. When deciding on the most appropriate treatment for the 
BPPV patient, the clinician needs to consider efficacy of 
the treatment, but also special circumstances in each indi­
vidual case. For example, the Brandt-Daroff exercises 
require patient compliance and will not be effective other­
wise. Conversely, if the patient has back or neck problems, 
exercises may be more appropriate than single-step 
manoeuvres. In addition, anxious patients or those with an 
avoidance disorder who absolutely refuse to undergo the 
provoking Hallpike test will require the appropriate 
psychiatric/behavioural treatment before progress can be 
made. Our anecdotal observations indicate that most of 
these patients will comply with and be successfully treated 
by a single-step manoeuvre after a few sessions with the 
behavioural therapist.
Specific treatment of p-BPPV
Brandt-Daroff positional exercises 
In 1980, Brandt and 
Daroff176 proposed a mechanical therapy, based on Schucknecht’s 
hypothesis of cupulolithiasis, for BPPV. This consists of a rapid 
sequence of lateral head/body tilts, starting from the sitting 
position, rapidly moving to the challenging position (nose up), 
and remaining in this position for at least 30 s or until vertigo 
subsides, then sitting up for 30 s, and finally assuming the oppo­
site head and nose down position for 30 s before sitting up 
(Figure 54.1). The authors reported that 66 of 67 patients 
experienced complete relief from BPPV within 3-14 days, 
with the exception of one patient who had a perilymphatic 
fistula.
Semont’s liberatory manoeuvre 
Semont et al177 devised a 
manoeuvre based on the theory of cupulolithiasis, which 
involves laying the patient on the involved side, with the face 
turned upwards by 45°, bringing the patient quickly to the 
sitting position and rapidly swinging the patient to the opposite 
side, face turned downwards by 45°, maintaining the patient in 
this position for 5mins, and then bringing him slowly up to 
the sitting position (Figure 54.2). The authors reported res­
olution of symptoms in 92% of patients treated with this 
manoeuvre.
  

906 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Table 54.8 Diagnostic characteristics of BPPV.
p-BPPV
History 
Vertigo on sitting up from supine,
lying down, rolling in bed, 
extending/flexing neck
Vertigo 
Present on testing
Latency 
2-20 s after head tilt
Duration 
<40s
Nystagmus 
Linear-rotatory, geotropic [towards 
affected undermost ear) or 
upward when gaze is directed 
to uppermost ear
Reversal 
On return to sitting position
Adaptation 
Yes
Fatiguability 
Yes
h-BPPV1
Vertigo on rolling from side to side 
in bed
Present on testing 
<5s
>2Q~60s
Geotropic towards undermost 
ear-beats stronger to affected ear
On rolling to other side
Yes
No
a-BPPV
Onset of symptoms may follow a 
liberatory manoeuvre
Present on testing
Similar to p-BPPV
Similar to p-BPPV
Torsional towards unaffected 
undermost ear
Similar to p-BPPV 
Yes
1 Atypical h-BPPV may beat towards the uppermost ear (Steddin et al., 1996)207 and last for minutes when the precipitating position is maintained.
Epley’s repositioning manoeuvre 
In 1992, Epley developed 
the canalith repositioning procedure (CRP), based on the 
theory of ‘canalolithiasis’, as a well-tolerated, non-invasive 
treatment for BPPV. 
The canalith repositioning procedure 
combines head movements and bone vibration in order to 
induce free canaliths to gravitate out of the p-SCC to the utri­
cle. Patients are premedicated the night before or 1 h before the 
procedure with a patch of scopolamine or diazepam. The 
affected p-SCC is identified by the Hallpike manoeuvre, and 
the latency and duration of nystagmus are noted in order to 
determine the timing of the procedure. After application of the 
bone vibrator over the ipsilateral mastoid, the patient is sat on 
the table and brought down with the head extended over the 
edge of the table, turned by 45° to the affected side. The head 
is then turned 90° to the opposite side. This is followed by 
rotating the head and body 90° facing downwards (135° from 
the supine position), and the patient is next brought to the 
sitting position with the head turned 45° to the unaffected side. 
The CRP finishes with the head turned forward 20° (Figure 
54.3). Epley suggested proceeding to the next position of the
5-position CRP until nystagmus approaches termination, or, if 
there is no nystagmus observed, basing the timing on the last 
nystagmus latency + duration, with the typical time in each 
position being 6-13 s. He also advocated repeating the manoeu­
vre until there is no nystagmus or no progress made in the last 
two cycles. He reported total resolution of symptoms in 90% of 
patients and resolution of BPPV but persistence of other symp­
toms in 10% of patients after the initial CRP treatment. He 
argued that surgery is elected if there are multiple disabling 
BPPV recurrences, irrespective of the success of the canalith
repositioning procedure. Following Epley’s manoeuvre, BPPV 
symptoms may subside within 72 h in 35% and within 1 week 
in 74% of treated patients.179 There are several modifications of 
this manoeuvre involving longer maintenance at each position 
and gradual position changing with 30 s intervals.180,181
The effect of the duration of symptoms before treatment on 
CRP success rate is controversial, as some authors report it to be 
a negative prognostic indicator,180 while others report no corre­
lation. 
’ 
Patients with BPPV due to head trauma tend to 
benefit less from the treatment than idiopathic BPPV 
patients,180 while Vestibular neuronitis’ patients have a better 
prognosis than patients with BPPV due to other aetiologies.143 
CRP plus mastoid oscillation may achieve better results in 
terms of symptomatic improvement as well as negative Hallpike 
test than CRP alone, 
although this is disputed by other 
authors.184
Complications and adverse reactions 
Several patients report 
instability following CRP, possibly due to the new position of 
the canaliths in the utricle.185 Complications of CRP include 
conversion of posterior canal BPPV to anterior or horizontal 
canal BPPV in about 6% of treated patients.165
Moreover, Epley’s manoeuvre involves significant neck 
strain, while Semont’s manoeuvre may also strain the spinal
column. Modified Brandt-Daroff exercises may constitute an
186
alternative in such cases. 
Recurrence of BPPV may occur in 
up to 50% of succesfully treated patients,164 and in 20% BPPV 
will recur in the first 2 weeks after treatment.181
Treatment of p-BPPV— conclusion 
BPPV resolves sponta­
neously within weeks or months, however, if untreated, it will
  

Medical management of balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
907
&
w
Figure 54.1 Brandt-Daroff positional exercises. For Left BPPV. 1. Sitting position 2. Head and body down to the left (nose up) 3. Sitting position 4. Head and body 
down to the right (nose down) position. Reproduced from Brandt et al. Neurology 1994; 44: 796-800.208
persist in 20-30% of patients.187 Treatment efficacy by single 
manoeuvres or exercises is high, as reported by several 
randomized case-control, non-blinded studies (see Table 54.9 
for details), while the complications are few. The patient with 
p-BPPV should be treated by either of the single-step manoeu­
vres, except in the case of contraindications such as neck or 
back problems, vertebrobasilar insufficiency or perilymph fis­
tula. In the case of neck or back problems, modified 
Brandt-Daroff exercises are indicated. Surgical treatment is 
only indicated in the few patients who do not respond to appro­
priate treatment repeated over a long term.
Specific treatment of h-BPPV
Liberatory manoeuvre 
De la Meilleure et al167 reported a 
100% success rate for this manoeuvre in six patients treated. 
From the supine position, the head is lifted by 30°, turned to 
the affected side, and maintained in that position for 5 mins. 
The head is then turned as fast as possible 180° to the other side 
and maintained there for 5 mins. The patient is then asked to 
avoid head shaking and not to lie down for the next 48 h. The 
authors report that patients may require treatment for bilateral 
h-SCC or for coexisting p-BPPV. Contraindications for this 
manoeuvre are cervical spondylosis, vertebrobasilar insuffi­
ciency or neck pain during the manoeuvre.
  

908 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Figure 54.2 Semont’s liberatory manoeuvre. For Left BPPV. 1. Sitting position 2. Head and body down to the left (face turned upwards by 45°), neck extended over 
the couch 3. Rapidly swung to the sitting then head and body down to the right position (face turned downwards by 45°) 4. Slowly up to the sitting position. 
Reproduced from Brandt et al. Neurology 1994; 44: 796-800.208
‘Forced prolonged position* on the healthy side 
Vannuchi et 
al188 advise patients with h-BPPV to lie down on the healthy 
side for 12 h in order to allow the debris in the affected h-SCC 
to gravitate to the vestibule by maintaining the affected h-SCC 
uppermost. They report total recovery within 3 days in 74.3% 
of 35 treated patients and conversion of h-BPPV to homolateral 
p-BPPV, which they successfully treated with Semont’s 
manoeuvre. By contrast, the rates of recovery within 3 days in 
the group of patients who received no treatment (15 patients) 
and in those treated by head shaking (24 patients) were 26% 
and 16% respectively. Obesity and cervical spondylosis were
factors that did not permit maintenance of the position for the 
time required.
270° ‘barbecue’ manoeuvre 
Lempert and Tiel-Wilck189 report 
successful treatment of h-BPPV in two patients by an adapta­
tion of Epley’s manoeuvre. This consists of turning the patient’s 
head and body from the supine position by three 90° step 
rotations (total 270°) towards the unaffected ear to assume the 
lying position on the affected side, and then having the patient 
sit up. Nuti et al190 reported that while both the ‘barbecue’ 
manoeuvre and the forced prolonged position are effective
  

Medical management of balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
909
Figure 54.3 Epley's repositioning manoeuvre. For Left BPPV. 1. Sitting position, head turned by 45° to the left. 2. Lying down, neck extended over the couch. 3. 
Head turned 90° to the right. 4. Head and body rotated 90° facing downwards. 5. Sitting position, head turned 45° to the unaffected side and 20° forward. 
Reproduced from Brandt et al. Neurology 1994; 44: 796-800.208
  

Table 
54.9 
BPPV 
treatm ent-outcom e evaluation 
studies.
9 1 0  
V
e s t i b u l a r  d i s o r d e r s  a n d  t h e i r  m
a n a g e m
e n t
£  S
<u to
E t  
2 |
.§
E
£ >•
03 in
O fc 
c  c  -D
■S' O =
^  ~  £
co j| 
CD Q
OJEOJ
>oa.E
Q_
132
i_ co
0  00
j£! o  
3  £
E 2
w
. tn 
ra
1  y
un un
|. *.
c
□l
OJ
E
>
c
ro
TO
<u
-.e
*=
H—
. O1j0
"S3
a>
“>
a j
u
tn
a
4 5
M=
XJ
u
E
>0J
is
. §X
ura
TO CL
£
□c
C J
-o<u
>oQ_
E
u
54
I5 1
3
qj gj 
TO co
w  “ I
~ J 2
*  E
i r-i
N
CL
cc
oo
aj3
■o
t/l o
■Q
s
j . j
l | . E
"  o  w
• s # 1 5
sz ?  «
tN ^  5
03
_  E 
^
*3 £ 
o
s
-
 
I
=s p 
§
*  E  
#  
CO 
CO
CO 
CD
Ie  a j ’
■*-> QJ
i  3 
>. *- 
<D .E v~ 
a 
o c
S  * K  8
cc 
cc
5
53 2
co
c
v_
OJ
O
Ocl
CO
'3-
C 0J
2 3  B 
ti 
t£ 
g  »  »  
a. £ c
CT
CT.fe!
‘C  3  
a. cr
13 ^ 3
-= O 
CO > 
^  <!
— (U
a
■■= c
8  °  
cl a.
r— 
W
o  X
*ZZ o
■7= 0>
r o w
 
■2 *.t! «  
a .—  -o 
3 o  in . 
- c  £  w  -
OO
S t Z
o
o
■co
un
£ca>
EOJ
>o
E
_U]
is
JO
o
<
ra a j
<U qj
°- 5
«u 
o  u
<u ■~- 
>
42
<u
l/l03
^  <LJ
O  O
4J C
UO
s/ioQ_
_C
CO
c<u
E
■ — 
s/l
I c*
^  sE w
u
uoi
COCNJ
Q - fc
E >=
0J CO
CN|
X 3
OE
Vr S/1 
^  >
O <u
E Q.
<U uj 
U1
iA O 
C p
o  ^  
‘43 in 
c/ c:
3 ■— 
^ <u
>
+1 % 
2  E
C iA
o  >. 
E ^
aj Q_ 
bO UJ
>*
Q.
Co
E
>CL_
□C
o
■g
o
t/i03 O
E =
+ s
a. S2 
□c &
<u >
un C 
3in ■a j
aj J* E 
> “  -•- 
r ; ra
£?i w
O
□_
□C
C J
J/J 
+—1 
c  
o  E 
<u 
tyn
>
003
E2
<u
>Cl.
cc
o
c(U
u0J
E
TO
lo3(/I
on
00 In
>*
>.
o
<u
QJ <u
c
Q_
CL CL
LU
LU LU
Q_
3
O
£
£a_
CG
Eou
tj > -J2 
°
f
2
' £  §
?
 ® o
CL 
P  . O  
CQ 
^
O j£)
CO 2
I §
^  o
CQ ^
£CLCQ
s/1
£>3
o sy
> O i/i 
^  c  tz 
03 O
in E '+=
CL 
O
3  c  2
O ^ *j 
!z IA
(U c
ClCO
Q_
QQ
£CL
CD
£  
£
CL
CO
0 
c:
1
£Q_
00
I 
£  2
£  E c
c  
rn °  
a g o
E i= -
i— 
cr> 
j
Al o  •£
k- 
°
M- C ^
>  
=
g: o ^
CL 
C  O
CL CQ 
CO
I
SCL
CCS
CL
,>*
05
CJ
OJ
c
gj O 
> '& 
4—> CO
S 2
9- Sn
i/s
p -§
03C
aj o 
.> += 
+-J co
a  £
e -M
I/I
e
-8
<LI 
03
—— 
^ 73
QJ 
O
> ^ ‘J3
I
u  £■ >
Q . P '
sn 2 
CL
'y 
■ £ 
' -So
a/fvl c
E  o
E o
I
 k
S TO
CO <^r
cc
-a E
a/
iS* c
*E o
o
o
TJ <
<u1/1
c m
TO
CC o
~D 2
^  C
'c  O
c  o
-O i
1
 s
CO o
cc
<vNl
Eo
-ac
CO
DC
CO
c
a> O 
> +3
'-3  0J
u  >
nj s— 
CL
un i/>
p - s
JO
O
c  
o  «
a 
■? ^  
s  
S s
O  cc
o
LTJCM
LO
CM
00
00
<£>
<J>
o
CD
00
r o
o
CD
O
CD
LD
to
>>
XJ3
05 
£  
-<U <U
o  a
'21 QQ
OJ£
.E oj 
—  c  
g  «  
S  QQ
>*o
fly®
£  TO 
TO _  
X  <U
■O
cCO
T3 S
^tN
o  ^
1?! _TO 
J5 a j
CO
E5
■5 TO
ZJ0  <u
TO
CD
.E 5
<u
un <u
O  F
C O
OJ
C  o  
<U ™ 
CJ ^
' c. 
C/1 To
X3
1
£Z
TO
rOrm
JZ
CT^
o
3 «
E
LJ_ 31 LO
  

Medical management of balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
911
treatments for h-BPPV, the forced prolonged position may be 
successful in slightly more cases than the barbecue manoeuvre, 
which, however, achieves immediate results.
360° yaw rotation 
Baloh191 successfully treated two patients 
with h-BPPV with a 360° yaw rotation performed in 90° steps 
at 30 s intervals.
Treatment of h-BPPV— conclusion 
Forced prolonged posi­
tion is the simplest and possibly the most efficacious treatment 
for h-BPPV; however, it may be worthwhile to perform a single 
manoeuvre first, as it may achieve immediate results, and to 
advise the patient to maintain the forced prolonged position 
afterwards. If symptoms of h-BPPV persist after 2 days, Brandt174 
advises patients to perform the Brandt-Daroff exercises.
Specific treatment of a-BPPV
BPPV of the anterior canal is a rare variant that may occur as a 
complication of treatment of p-BPPV by single-step man­
oeuvres.165 Owing to the rarity of the syndrome, there are only 
single-case reports in the literature reporting on treatment. 
Herdman and Tusa165 have succesfiilly treated two patients with 
a canalith repositioning manoeuvre similar to that for p-BPPV 
of the contralateral ear (i.e. if there is right a-BPPV, then a left 
CRP 
should 
be 
performed). 
Brandt174 
observes 
that 
Brandt-Daroff exercises were effective and superior to single- 
step manoeuvres for patients treated for a-BPPV. In the absence 
of a clinical trial, either of these approaches can be used, 
depending on the patient’s condition and the physician’s per­
sonal preference.
Surgical treatment of BPPV
Few patients with BPPV will require surgical treatment, as a last 
resort. Surgical procedures for treatment of p-BPPV may 
include singular neurectomy,192 p-SCC occlusion,193 and parti­
tioning of the labyrinth.194
Adjunctive treatment
Adjunctive treatment, as needed in each case, may include:
1. Behavioural therapy/psychiatric management. Psychiatric 
disorder is a primary cause in 1:4 to 1:5 of patients pre­
senting with vertigo,195 while about 50% of patients with 
peripheral vestibular disorder may experience significant 
psychiatric symptoms after the onset of the vestibular disor­
der, which may act as a trigger factor.136 These patients will 
require further psychiatric management.
2. Relaxation and breathing exercises. When dizziness is 
caused or exacerbated by stress, hyperventilation and other 
similar causes, these exercises may alleviate or remove a 
cause of the symptoms.157
3. Corrective treatment for visual, proprioceptive, neuromus­
cular and musculoskeletal disorders, as all these disorders 
may delay vestibular compensation.
4* Safety measures, including environmental modifications 
and assistive devices.
Surgery
Surgical management of vertigo is indicated if all options of 
aggressive medical treatment have been employed and failed to 
alleviate the symptoms, or if the vertigo is due to perilymph fis­
tula or complications of middle ear disease.
References
1. Curthoys IS, Halmagyi GM. Vestibular compensation: a review of 
the oculomotor, neural and clinical consequences of unilateral 
vestibular loss. J Vestib Res 1995; 5: 67-107.
2. Smith PF, Curthoys IS. Mechanisms of recovery following 
unilateral labyrinthectomy: a review. Brain Res Rev 1989; 14: 
155-80.
3. Curthoys IS, Halmagyi GM. How does the brain compensate for 
vestibular lesions? In: Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM, eds. Disorders of 
the Vestibular System. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
4. Zee DS. Vestibular adaptation. In: Herdman S], ed. Vestibular 
Rehabilitation, Philadelphia: F.A. Davis Company, 1994: 68-79.
5. Halmagyi GM, Curthoys IS. Clinical changes in vestibular func­
tion over time after lesions: the consequences of unilateral 
vestibular deafferentation. In: Herdman S], ed. Vestibular Rehabili­
tation, Philadelphia: F.A. Davis Company, 1994: 90-108.
6. Straka H, Dieringer N. Spinal plasticity after hemilabyrinthec- 
tomy and its relation to postural recovery in the frog. J Neurophys­
iol 1995; 73: 1617-31.
7. Allum JH], Yamane M, Pfaltz CR. Long-term modifications of ver­
tical and horizontal vestibulo-ocular reflex dynamics in man. Acta 
Otolaryngol 1988; 105: 328-37.
8. Yagi T, Markham CH. Neural correlates of compensation after 
hemilabyrinthectomy. Exp Neurol 1984; 84: 98-108.
9. Curthoys IS, Halmagyi GM. Vestibular compensation. Adv Otorhi­
nolaryngol 1999; 55: 195-227.
10. Fetter M, Zee DS. Recovery from unilateral labyrinthectomy in 
rhesus monkey. J Neurophysiol 1988; 59: 370-93.
11. Luxon LM. Vestibular compensation. In: Davis RA, Luxon LM, 
eds. Handbook of Vestibular Rehabilitation. London: Whurr, 1997.
12. Courjon JH, Flandrin JM, Jeannerod M, Schmid R. The role of 
the flocculus in vestibular compensation after hemilabyrinthec­
tomy. Brain Res 1982; 239: 251-7.
13. Herdman SJ. Role of vestibular adaptation in vestibular rehabili­
tation. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 119: 49-54.
14. Precht W, Dieringer N. Neuronal events paralleling functional 
recovery (compensation) following peripheral vestibular lesions. 
In: Berthoz A, Mellvill Jones G, eds. Adaptive Mechanisms in Gaze 
Control. Facts and Theories Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1985.
15. Fetter M, Zee DS, Proctor LR. Effect of lack of vision and of occip­
ital lobectomy upon recovery from unilateral labyrinthectomy in 
rhesus monkey. J Neurophysiol 1988; 59: 399-407.
16. Dichgans J, Bizzi E, Morasso P, Tagliasco V. Mechanisms under­
lying recovery of eye-head co-ordination following bilateral 
labyrinthectomy in monkeys. Exp Brain Res 1973; 548-62.
  

912 
Vestibular disorders and their management
17. Lacour M, Xerri C. Vestibular compensation: new perspectives. In: 
Flohr H, Precht W, eds. Lesion Induced Neuronal Plasticity in Senso­
rimotor Systems. Berlin: Heidelberg, New York: Springer-Verlag, 
1981: 240-53.
18. Lacour M. Reapprentissage et periode postoperatoire sensible dans 
la restauration des fonctions nerveuses. Exemple de la compensa­
tion vestibulaire et implications cliniques. Ann Otolaryngol Chir 
Cervicofac 1984; 101(3): 177-87.
19. Igarashi M, Levy JK, Ouchi T, Reschke ME Further study of exer­
cise and locomotor balance compensation after unilateral 
labyrinthectomy in squirrel monkeys. Acta Otolaryngol 1981; 92: 
101-5.
20. Berthoz A. The role of gaze in compensation of vestibular dys­
function: The gaze substitution hypothesis. Prog Brain Res 1988; 
76:411-20.
21. Barnes GR. Visual-vestibular interaction in the control of head 
and eye movement: the role of visual feedback and predictive 
mechanisms. Prog Neurobiol 1993; 41: 435-72.
22. Igarashi M. Vestibular compensation. An overview. Acta Oto­
laryngol 1984; Suppl 406: 78-82.
23. Smith PF, Darlington CL. Neurochemical mechanisms of recov­
ery from peripheral vestibular lesions. Brain Res Rev 1991; 16: 
117-33.
24. Warchol ME, Lambert PR, Goldstein BJ, Forge A, Corwin JT. 
Regenerative proliferation in inner ear sensory epithelia from 
adult guinea pigs and humans. Science 1993; 259: 1619-22.
25. Darlington CL, Smith PF. The recovery of static vestibular func­
tion following peripheral vestibular lesions in mammals: the 
intrinsic mechanism hypothesis. J Vestib Res 1996; 6(3): 185-201.
26. Dieringer N, Kunzle H, Precht W. Increased projection of dorsal 
root fibres to vestibular nuclei after hemilabyrinthectomy in the 
frog. Exp Brain Res 1984; 55: 574-8.
27. Errington ML, Lynch MA, Bliss TVP. Long term potentiation in 
the dentate nucleus: induction and increased glutamate release are 
blocked by D( —) amino phosphorovalerate. Neuroscience 1987; 
20: 279-84.
28. Dieringer N, Precht W. Modification of synaptic input following 
unilateral labyrinthectomy. Nature 1977; 269: 431-3.
29. Gillespie MB, Minor LB. Prognosis in bilateral vestibular hypo­
function. Laryngoscope 1999; 109: 35-41.
30. Glasscock ME, Hughes GB, Davis WE, Jackson GC. Labyrinthec­
tomy versus middle fossa vestibular nerve section in Meniere’s dis­
ease. A critical evaluation of relief of vertigo. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1980; 89: 318-24.
31. Black FO, Wade SW, Nashmer LM. What is the minimal function 
required for compensation? Am J Otol 1996; 17(3): 401-9.
32. Rudge R, Chambers BR. Physiological basis for enduring vestibu­
lar symptoms. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1982; 45: 126-30.
33. Shepard NT, Telian SA, Smith-Wheelock M, Raj A. Vestibular 
and balance rehabilitation therapy. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1993; 
102: 198-205.
34. Yardley L, Luxon LM, Haacke NP. Longitudinal study of symp­
toms, anxiety and subjective well-being in patients with vertigo. 
Clin Otolaryngol 1994; 19: 109-16.
35. Shepard NT, Telian SA. Vestibular rehabilitation programmes. In:
Shepard NT, Telian SA, eds. Practical Management of the Balance 
Disorder Patient. London: Singular Publishing Group, 1996.
36. Shepard NT, Telian SA, Smith-Wheelock M. Habituation and 
balance retraining therapy— a retrospective review. Neurol Clin 
1990; 8: 459-75.
37. Sakellari V, Bronstein AM, Coma S, Hammon CA, Jones S, 
Wolsley CJ. The effects of hyperventilation on postural control 
mechanisms. Brain 1997; 120: 1659-73.
38. Schaefer KP, Meyer DL. Compensation of vestibular lesions. In: 
Komhuber HH, ed. Handbook of Sensory Physiology, Vol 6/2. 
Berlin: Springer, 1974: 463-90.
39. Katsarkas A, Segal BN. Unilateral loss of peripheral vestibular 
function in patients: degree of compensation and factors causing 
decompensation. Otolaryngology HNS 1988; 98(1): 45-7.
40. Mathog RH, Peppard SB. Exercises and recovery from vestibular 
injury. Am J Otolaryngol 1982; 3: 397-407.
41. Bamiou DE, Davies RA, McKee M, Luxon LM. Symptoms, dis­
ability and handicap in unilateral peripheral vestibular disorders—  
effects of early presentation and initiation of balance exercises. 
Scand Audiol 2000; 29: 238-44.
42. Shumway-Cook A, Horak FB. Rehabilitation strategies for 
patients with vestibular deficits. Neurol Clin North Am 1990; 8: 
441-57.
43. Hallam RS, Beyts J, Jakes SC. Symptom reporting and objective 
test results. Adv Audiol 1988; 5: 129-36.
44. Stephens SDG, Hogan S, Meredith R. The desynchrony between 
complaints and signs of vestibular disorders. Acta Otolaryngol 
1991; 111: 188-92.
45. Spitzer JB. An evaluation of the relationship among electronys- 
tagmographic, audiologic, and self report descriptors of dizziness. 
Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1990; 247: 114-18.
46. World Health Organization. International Classification of Impair­
ments, Disabilities and Handicaps. Geneva: WHO, 1980.
47. World Health Organization. International Classification of Func­
tioning and Disability. Beta-2 draft. Geneva: WHO, 1999.
48. Norre ME, De Weerdt W. Treatment of vertigo based on habitua­
tion. J Laryngol Otol 1980; 94: 971-7.
49. Smith-Wheelock M, Shepard NT, Telian SA. Physical therapy 
programme for vestibular rehabilitation. Am J Otol 1991; 12: 
218-25.
50. El-Kashlan HK, Shepard NT, Asher AM, Smith-Wheelock M, 
Telian SA. Evaluation of clinical measures of equilibrium. Laryn­
goscope 1998; 108(3): 311-19.
51. Jacobson GP, Newman WC. The development of the Dizziness 
Handicap Inventory. Arch Otolaryngol HNS 1990; 116: 424-8.
52. Yardley L, Putnam J. Quantitative analysis of factors contributing 
to handicap and distress in vertiginous patients: a questionnaire 
study. Clin Otolaryngol 1992; 17: 231-6.
53. Honrubia V, Bell TS, Harris MR, Baloh RW, Fisher LM. Quanti­
tative evaluation of dizziness characteristics and impact on quality 
of life. Am J Otol 1996; 17: 595-602.
54. Cawthome TE. The physiological basis for head exercises. J Chart 
Soc Physiother 1944; 30: 106-7.
55. Cooksey FS. Rehabilitation of vestibular injuries. Proc R Soc Med 
1945; 39: 273-8.
  

Medical management of balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
913
56. Lacour M, Roll JP, Appaix M. Modifications and developments of 
spinal reflexes in the adult baboon (papio papio) following unilat- 
eral vestibular neurotomy. Brain Res 1976; 113: 255-69.
57. Courjon JH, Jeannerod M, Ossuzio I, Schmid R. The role of vision 
in compensation of vestibulo-ocular reflex after hemilabyrinthec- 
tomy in the cat. Exp Brain Res 1977; 28: 235-48.
58. Smith PF, Darlington CL. Can vestibular compensation be 
enhanced by drug treatment? J Vestib Res 1994; 4(no. 3): 169-79.
59. Rascol O, Hain T, Brefel C, Benazet M, Clanet M, Montastruc JL. 
Antivertigo medications and drug induced vertigo. A pharmaco- 
logical review. Drugs 1995; 50(50): 778-91.
60. Timmerman H. Pharmacotherapy of vertigo: any news to be 
expected? Acta Otolaryngol 1994; Suppl 513: 28-32.
61. Lucot JB. Pharmacology of motion sickness. J Vestib Res 1998; 8: 
61-6.
62. Foster C, Baloh RW. Drug therapy for vertigo. In: Baloh RW, 
Halmagyi GM, eds. Disorders of the Vestibular System. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1996.
63. Zee DS. Perspectives on the pharmacotherapy of vertigo. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1985; 111: 609-12.
64. Shepard NT, Telian SA. Medical therapy for the balance disorder 
patient. In: Shepard NT, Telian SA, eds. Practical Management of 
the Balance Disorder Patient. London: Singular Publishing Group, 
1996.
65. Luxon LM. Modes of treatment of vestibular symptomatology. In: 
Davis RA, Luxon LM, eds. Handbook of Vestibular Rehabilitation. 
London: Whurr, 1997.
66. Takeda N, Morita M, Hasegawa S, Horii A, Kubo T, Matsunaga T. 
Neuropharmacology of motion sickness and emesis. Acta 
Otolaryngol 1993; Suppl 501: 10-15.
67. Yates BJ, Miller AD, Lucot JB. Physiological basis and pharmacol- 
ogy of motion sickness: an update. Brain Res Bull 1998; 47(5): 
395-406.
68. Nathan A. Products for motion sickness and sleep disturbance. 
Pharmaceutical J 1997; 259: 929-32.
69. Smith CL, Darlington PF. Drug treatment for vertigo and dizzi­
ness. N Z Med J 1998; 111: 332-4.
70. ABPI Compendium of Data Sheets and Summaries of Product 
Characteristics 
1998-99. 
London: 
Datapharm 
Publications 
Limited.
71. Aanta E, Skinhoz A. Controlled clinical trial comparing the effect 
of betahistine hydrochloride and prochlorperazine maleate for 
patients with Meni&re disease. Ann Clin Res 1976; 8: 284-7.
72. Dollery C. Prochlorperazine. In: Dollery C, ed. Therapeutic Drugs, 
London: Churchill-Livingstone, 1999.
73. Bond CM. Comparison of buccal and oral prochlorperazine in the 
treatment of dizziness associated with nausea and/or vertigo. Curr 
Med Res Opin 1998; 14(4): 203-12.
74. Betts T, Harris D, Gadd E.The effects of two anti-vertigo drugs 
(betahistine and prochlorperazine) on driving skills. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol 1991; 32: 455-8.
75. Rodgers C. Extrapyramidal side effects of antiemetics presenting 
as psychiatric illness. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 1992; 14(3): 192-5.
76. Weinstein SE, 
Stem RM. 
Comparison of marezine and 
dramamine in preventing symptoms of motion sickness. Aviation
Space Environ Med 1997; 68(10): 890-4.
77. Olesen J. Calcium entry blockers in the treatment of vertigo. Ann 
NY Acad Sci 1988; 522: 690-7.
78. Verspeelt J, De Locht P, Amery WK. Postmarketing study of the 
use of flunarizine in vestibular vertigo and in migraine. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol 1996; 51: 15-22.
79. Do week I, Gordon CR, Spitzer O, Melamed Y, Shupak A. Effect 
of cinnarizine in the prevention of seasickness. Aviation Space 
Environ Med 1994; 65: 606-9.
80. Pingree BJ. INM investigations into drugs for seasickness prophy­
laxis. J Royal Naval Med Service 1994; 80(2): 76-80.
81. Daniel JR, Mauro VF. Extrapyramidal symptoms associated with 
calcium-channel blockers. Ann Pharmacother 1995; 29: 73-5.
82. Ishikawa K, Igarashi M. Effect of diazepam on vestibular compen­
sation in squirrel monkeys. Arch Otolaryngol 1984; 240: 49-57.
83. Martin J, Gilchrist DPD, Smith PF, Darlington CL. Early 
diazepam treatment following unilateral labyrinthectomy does not 
impair vestibular compensation of spontaneous nystagmus in 
guinea pigs. J Vestib Res 1996; 6: 135-9.
84. Rice GP, Ebers GC. Ondasetron for intractable vertigo complicat­
ing acute brainstem disorders. Lancet 1995; 345: 1182-9.
85. Silberstein SD, Lipton RB. Epidemiology of migraine. Neuro­
epidemiology 1993; 12(3): 179-94.
86. Sillanpaa M, Anttila P. Increasing prevalence of headache in 
7-year-old schoolchildren. Headache 1996; 36(8): 466-70.
87. Cutrer FM, Baloh RW. Migraine-associated dizziness. Headache 
1992; 32: 300-4.
88. Brandt T. Migraine and vertigo. In: Brandt T, ed. Vertigo— its 
Multisensory Syndromes, 2nd edn. London: Springer-Verlag, 1999.
89. Cass SP, Furman JM, Ankerstjeme JKP, Balaban C, Yetiser S, 
Aydogan B. Migraine related vestibulopathy. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol 1997; 106: 182-9.
90. Lanzi A, Ballotini U, Fazzi E, Tagliasachi M, Manfrin M, Migra E. 
Benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood: a long term follow up. 
Cephalalgia 1994; 14: 458-60.
91. Headache 
Classification 
Committee 
of 
the 
International 
Headache Society. Classification and diagnostic criteria for 
headache disorders, cranial neuralgias and facial pain. Cephalalgia 
1988; 8: 19-73.
92. Neuhauser H, Leopold M, von Brevem M, Arnold G, Lempert T. 
The interrelations of migraine, vertigo and migrainous vertigo. 
Neurology 2001; 56: 436-41.
93. Tusa RJ. Diagnosis and management of neuro-otological disorders 
due to migraine. In: Herdman SJ, ed. Vestibular Rehabilitation. 2nd 
edn. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 2000.
94. Johnson G. Medical management of migraine-related dizziness 
and vertigo. Laryngoscope 1998; 108(suppl): 1-28.
95. Bikhazi P, Jackson C, Ruckenstein MJ. Efficacy of antimigrainous 
therapy in the treatment of migraine associated dizziness. Am J
Otol 1997; 18: 350-4.
96. Harker LA. Migraine associated vertigo. In: Baloh RW, Halmagyi 
GM, eds. Disorders of the Vestibular System. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1996: 407-17.
97. Tfelt-Hansen P. Prophylactic pharmacotherapy of migraine. 
Neurol Clin 1997; 15( 1): 153-65.
  

914 
Vestibular disorders and their management
98. Baloh RW. Neuro-otology of migraine. Headache 1997; 37: 
615-21.
99. Sheftel FD. Role and impact of over the counter medications in 
the management of headache. Neurol Clin 1997: 15(1): 187-98.
100. Celentano DD, Stewart WF, Lipton RB, Reed ML. Medication 
use and disability among migraine sufferers: a national probabil­
ity sample survey. Headache 1992; 18: 223-8.
101. Mathew NT. Serotonin ID (5-HT1D) agonists and other agents 
in acute migraine. Neurol Clin 1997; 15( 1): 61-83.
102. Dieterich M, Brandt T. Episodic vertigo related to migraine (90 
cases): vestibular migraine? J Neurol 1999; 246: 883-92.
103. Jen JC, Yue Q, Karrim J, Nelson SF, Baloh RW. Spinocerebellar 
ataxia type 6 with positional vertigo and acetazolamide respon­
sive episodic ataxia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1998; 65: 
565-8.
104. Baloh RW, Yue Q, Furman JM, Nelson SF. Familial migraine with 
vertigo and essential tremor. Neurology 1996; 46: 458-60.
105. Anderson KE, Vinge E. Beta adreno-receptor blockers and cal­
cium antagonists in the prophylactic treatment of migraine. 
Drugs 1990; 39: 355-73.
106. Harker LA, Rassekh CH. Episodic vertigo in basilar artery 
migraine. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1987; 96: 239-50.
107. Committee on Hearing and Equilibrium, the American 
Academy of Opthalmology and Otolaryngology. Committee on 
Hearing and Equilibrium guidelines for diagnosis and evaluation 
of therapy in Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995; 
113: 181-5.
108. Bohndorf M, Baykal HE, Plinkert PK, Pleyer U. Cogan I syn­
drome. Audio-vestibular, ophthalmologic findings and therapy in 
6 patients. HNO 1996; 44: 302-6.
109. Pulec JL. Meniere’s disease of syphilitic etiology. Ear Nose Throat 
J 1997; 76: 508-27.
110. James AL, Burton MJ. Betahistine for Meniere’s diseases— a 
systematic review. Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium 
on Meniere's Disease. Hague: Kugler Publications, 2000.
111. Claes J, Van de Heyning PH. Medical Treatment of Meniere’s 
disease: a review of literature. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl 1997; 526: 
37-42.
112. James A, Thorp M. Meniere’s disease. Clinical Evidence 2001; 5: 
348-55.
113. Ruckenstein MJ, Rutka JA, Hawke M. The treatment of Meniere 
disease: Torok revisited. Laryngoscope 1991; 101: 211-18.
114. Silverstein H, Rosenberg S, Arruda J, Isaakson JE. Surgical abla­
tion of the vestibular system in the treatment of Meniere’s 
disease. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1997; 30(6): 1075-96.
115. Santos PM, Hall RA, Snyder JM, Hughes LF. Diuretic and diet 
effect on Meniere disease evaluated by the 1985 Committee on 
Hearing and equilibrium guidelines. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1993; 109: 680-9.
116. Arenberg IK, Bayer RF. Therapeutic options in Meniere’s disease. 
Arch Otolaryngol 1977; 103: 589-93.
117. Van Deelen GW, Huizing EH. Use of a diuretic (dyazide) in the 
treatment of Meniere’s disease. A double-blind cross-over 
placebo-controlled study. ORL J Otolaryngol Relat Spec 1986; 
48(5): 287-92.
118. Klockhoff I, Lindblom U, Stahle J. Diuretic treatment of 
Meniere’s disease. Long term results with chlorthalidone. Arch 
Otolaryngol 1974; 100(4): 262-5.
119. Brookes GB. The pharmacological treatment of Meniere’s 
disease. Clin Otolaryngol 1996; 21: 3-11.
120. Tighilet B, Leonard J, Lacour M. Betahistine dihydrochloride 
treatment facilitates vestibular compensation in the cat. J Vestib 
Res 1995; 5: 53-66.
121. Hausler R, Sabani E, Rohr M. The effect of cinnarazine on vari­
ous types of vertigos: clinical and electronystagmographic results 
of a double-blind study. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Belg 1989; 43: 
177-85.
122. Hamman KF, Arnold WW. Meniere’s disease. Adv Otorhino­
laryngol 1999; 55: 195-227.
123. Pames LS, Sun Ah, Freeman DJ. Corticosteroid pharmaco­
kinetics in the inner ear fluids: an animal study followed by 
clinical application. Laryngoscope 1999; 109(suppl 91): 1-17.
124. Shea JJ Jr. The role of dexamethasone or streptomycin perfusion 
in the treatment of Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 
1997; 30(6): 1051-9.
125. Silverstein H, Isaakson JE, Olds MJ, Rowan PT, Rosenberg S. 
Dexamethasone inner ear perfusion for the treatment of 
Meniere’s disease: a prospective, randomized, double-blind, 
crossover trial. Am J Otol 1998; 19(2): 196-201.
126. Kilpatrick JK, Sismanis A, Spencer RF, Wise CM. Low-dose oral 
methotrexate management of patients with bilateral of Meniere’s 
disease. Ear Nose Throat J 2000; 79: 82-92.
127. Bergenius J, Odkvist LM. Transtympanic aminoglycoside treat­
ment of Meniere’s disease. In: Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM, eds. 
Disorders of the Vestibular System. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1996: 407-17.
128. Hirsch BE, Kamerer DB. Role of chemical labyrinthectomy in 
the treatment of Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 
1997; 30(6): 1039-49.
129. Blakley BW. Clinical forum: a review of intratympanic therapy. 
Am J Otol 1997; 18: 520-6.
130. Blakley BW. Update on intratympanic gentamicin for Meniere’s 
disease. Laryngoscope 2000; 110: 236-40.
131. Usami S, Abe S, Kasai M, et al. Genetic and clinical features of 
sensorineural hearing loss associated with the 1555 mitochon­
drial mutation. Laryngoscope 1997; 107: 483-90.
132. Chen JM, Williamson PA, Hutchin T, Nedzelski JM, Cortopassi 
GA. Topical gentamycin induced hearing loss: a mitochondrial 
ribosomal RNA study of genetic susceptibility. Am ) Otol 1996; 
17: 850-2.
133. Telian SA, Shepard NT, Smith-Wheelock M, Hoberg M. 
Bilateral vestibular paresis: diagnosis and treatment. Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1991; 104: 67-71.
134. Mauritz KH, Hesse S. Neurological rehabilitation of gait and 
balance disorders. In: Bronstein, Brandt, Woollacott eds. Clini­
cal Disorders of Balance, Posture and Gait. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1996.
135. Buttner U, Fuhry L. Drug therapy of nystagmus and saccadic 
intrusions. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1999; 55: 195-227.
136. Eagger S, Luxon LM, Davies RA, Coelho A, Ron MA. Psychi­
  

Medical management of balance disorders and vestibular rehabilitation 
915
atric morbidity in patients with peripheral vestibular disorders: a 
clinical and neuro-otological study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
1992; 55: 383-7.
137. Lee RJ. Pharmacological and optical methods of treating vestibu- 
lar disorders and nystagmus. In: Herdman SJ, ed. Vestibular Reha­
bilitation, 2nd edn. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 2000.
138. Thapa BP, Ray W. Medications and falls and fall related injuries 
in the elderly. In: Bronstein A, Brandt T, Woollacott M, eds. 
Clinical Disorders of Balance, Posture and Gait. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1996.
139. Kitahara T, Takeda N, Kiyama H, Kubo T. Molecular mecha­
nisms of vestibular compensation in the central vestibular 
system. Acta Otolaryngol 1998; Suppl 539: 19-27.
140. Schlatter M, Kerr DR, Smith PF, Darlington CL. Evidence that 
the ginkgo biloba extract, EGb 761, neither accelerates nor 
enhances the rapid compensation of the static symptoms of uni­
lateral vestibular deafferentation in guinea pig. J Vestib Res 1999; 
9: 111-18.
141. Weiser M, Strosser W, Klein P. Homeopathic versus conven­
tional treatment of vertigo: a randomized double-blind con­
trolled clinical study. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998; 
124(8): 879-85.
142. Poliak L, Davies RA, Luxon LM. Effectiveness of the particle 
repositioning manoeuvre in benign positional vertigo with and 
without additional vestibular pathology. Am Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
2002; in press.
143. Herdman SJ. Vestibular rehabilitation. In: Baloh RW, Halmagyi 
GM, eds. Disorders of the Vestibular System. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1996: 407-17.
144. Hecker HC, Haug CO, Herndon JW. Treatment of the vestibu­
lar patient using Cawthome’s vestibular exercises. Laryngoscope 
1974; 84: 2065-72.
145. Jones GM, Berthoz A, Segal B. Adaptive modification of the VOR 
by mental effort in darkness. Exp Brain Res 1984; 56: 149-53.
146. Foord G, Marsden J. Physical exercise regimes—practical 
aspects. In: Davis RA, Luxon LM, eds. Handbook of Vestibular 
Rehabilitation. London: Whurr, 1997.
147. Freeman JA, Naime J. Using a class setting to teach Cawthome- 
Cooksey exercises as a means of vestibular rehabilitation. 
Physiotherapy 1995; 81: 74-9.
148. Cohen H. Vestibular rehabilitation reduces functional disability. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992; 107: 638-43.
149. Szturm T, Ireland DJ, Lessing-Tumer M. Comparison of different 
exercise programs in the rehabilitation of patients with chronic 
peripheral vestibular dysfunction. J Vestib Res 1994; 4 : 461-79.
150. Norre ME, Beckers A. Vestibular habituation training: exercise 
treatment for vertigo based upon the habituation effect. Oto­
laryngol Head Neck Surg 1989; 101: 14-19.
151. Norre ME. Rationale of rehabilitation treatment for vertigo. Am 
JOtol 1987; 8 :31-5.
152. Norre ME, De Weerdt W. Positional (provoked) vertigo treated 
by postural training. Aggressologie 1981; 22: 37-44.
153. Shepard NT, Telian SA. Programmatic vestibular rehabilitation. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995; 112: 173-82.
154. Herdman SJ, Borello-France DF, Whitney SL. Treatment of
vestibular hypofunction. In: Herdman SJ, ed. Vestibular Rehabili­
tation. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1994.
155. Gill-Body KM, Popat RA, Parker SW, Krebs DE. Rehabilitation 
of balance in two patients with cerebellar dysfunction. Physical 
Ther 1997; 77: 534-52.
156. Shepard NT, Asher A. Treatment of patients with non-vestibular 
dizziness and dysequilibrium. In: Herdman SJ, ed. Vestibular Reha­
bilitation, 2nd edn. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 2000.
157. Shumway-Cook A, Horak FB, Yardley L, Bronstein AM. Reha­
bilitation of balance disorders in the patient with vestibular 
pathology. In: Bronstein A, Brandt T, Woollacott M, eds. Clini­
cal Disorders of Balance, Posture and Gait. New York: Oxford Uni­
versity Press, 1996.
158. Shumway-Cook A. Vestibular rehabilitation in traumatic brain 
injury. In: Herdman SJ, ed. Vestibular Rehabilitation. Philadelphia: 
FA Davis, 1996.
159. Clendaniel RA, Tucci DL. Vestibular rehabilitation strategies in 
Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1997; 30(6): 
1145-58.
160. Krebs DE, Gill-Body KM, Riley PO, Parker SW. Double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial of rehabilitation for bilateral vestibular 
hypofunction: preliminary report. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1993; 109: 735-41.
161. Schuknecht HF. Cupulolithiasis. Arch Otolaryngol 1969; 90: 
765-8.
162. Epley JM. New dimensions of benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1980; 88: 599-605.
163. McLure JA. Horizontal canal BPPV. J Otolaryngol 1985; 14: 
30-5.
164. Baloh RW, Jakobson K, Honrubia V. Benign positional vertigo. 
Neurology 1987; 37: 371-8.
165. Herdman SJ, Tusa R. Complications of the canalith reposition­
ing procedure. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1996; 122: 
281-6.
166. Honrubia V, Baloh RW, Harris MR, Jakobson KM. Paroxysmal 
positional vertigo syndrome. Am J Otol 1999; 20: 465-70.
167. De la Meilleure G, Dehaene I, Depondt M, Damman W, Crevits 
L, Vanhooren G. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo of the 
horizontal canal. ] Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1996; 60: 68-71.
168. Suzuki M, Yukawa K, Horiguchi S, et al. Clinical features of 
paroxysmal positional vertigo presenting combined lesions. Acta 
Otolaryngol 1999; 119: 117-20.
169. Brandt T. Central positioning vertigo. In: Vertigo: Its Multisensory 
Syndromes, 2nd edn. London: Springer-Verlag, 1999.
170. Buttner U, Helmchen C, Brandt T. Diagnostic criteria for central 
versus peripheral positioning nystagmus and vertigo: a review. 
A eta Otolaryngol 1999; 119(1): 1-5.
171. Fife TD. Recognition and management of horizontal canal 
benign positional vertigo. A m ] Otol 1998; 19: 345-51.
172. Norre ME, Forrez G, Beckers A. Vestibular habituation training 
and posturography in benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. 
J Otolaryngol Relat Spec 1987; 49: 22-5.
173. McLure JA, Willett JM. Lorazepam and diazepam in the treat­
ment of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. J Otolaryngol 1980; 
9:472-7.
  

916 
Vestibular disorders and their management
174. Brandt T. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. In: Vertigo: Its 
Multisensory Syndromes, 2nd edn. London: Springer-Verlag, 1999.
175. Herdman SJ. Assessment and management of benign paroxysmal 
positional vertigo. In: Herdman SJ, ed. Vestibular Rehabilitation. 
Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1994.
176. Brandt T, Daroff RB. Physical therapy for paroxysmal positional 
vertigo. Arch Otolaryngol 1980; 106: 484-5.
177. Semont A, Freyss G, Vitte E. Curing the BPPV with a liberatory 
manoeuvre. Adv Otolaryngol 1988; 42: 290-3.
178. Epley JM. The canalith repositioning procedure: for treatment of 
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 1992; 107: 399-404.
179. Wolf M, Hertanu T, Novikov I, Kronenberg J. Epley’s manoeuvre 
for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo: a prospective study. 
Clin Otolaryngol 1999; 24: 43-6.
180. Harvey SA, Hain TC, Adamiec LC. Modified liberatory maneu­
ver: effective treatment for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. 
Laryngoscope 1994; 104: 1206-12.
181. Herdman SJ, Tusa R, Zee DS, Proctor LR, Mattox DE. Single 
treatment approaches to benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993; 119: 450-4.
182. Fung KF, Hall SF. Particle repositioning maneuver: effective 
treatment for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. J Otolaryngol 
1996; 25: 243-8.
183. Li JC. Mastoid oscillation: a critical factor for success in the 
canalith repositioning procedure. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1995; 112: 670-5.
184. Hain TC, Helminski JO, Reis IL, Uddin MK. Vibration does not 
improve results of the canalith repositioning procedure. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2000; 126: 617-22.
185. Welling DB, Barnes DE. Particle repositioning maneuver for 
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Laryngoscope 1994; 104: 
946-9.
186. Beynon GJ. A review of management of benign paroxysmal 
positional vertigo by exercise therapy and by repositioning 
manoeuvres. BrJ Audiol 1997; 31: 11-26.
187. Brandt T. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Adv Otorhino­
laryngol 1999; 55: 195-227.
188. Vannuchi P, Giannoni B, Pagnini P. Treatment of horizontal 
semicircular canal benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. ] Vestib 
Res 1997; 7: 1-6.
189. Lempert T, Tiel-Wilck K. A positional maneuver for treatment of 
horizontal canal benign positional vertigo. Laryngoscope 1996; 
476-8.
190. Nuti D, Agus G, Barbierri MT, Passali D. The management of 
the horizontal canal paroxysmal positional vertigo. Acta Oto­
laryngol 1998; 118: 455-60.
191. Baloh RW. Reply to the letter by Lempert: Horizontal benign 
positional vertigo. Neurology 1994; 44: 2214.
192. Gacec R. Singular neurectomy update. II. Review of 102 cases. 
Laryngoscope 1991; 101: 855-62.
193. Pames LS, McLure JA. Posterior semicircular canal occlusion in 
the normal hearing ear. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1991; 104: 
52-7.
194. Anthony PF. Partitioning of the labyrinth: application in 
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Am J Otol 1991; 12: 
388-93.
195. Lazko-Schroeder T. Psychological aspects of vestibular rehabili­
tation. In: Davis RA, Luxon LM, eds. Handbook of Vestibular 
Rehabilitation. London: Whurr, 1997.
196. Horak FB, Jones Rycewicz C, Black O, Shumway-Cook A. 
Effects of vestibular rehabilitation on dizziness and imbalance. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992; 106: 175-80.
197. Cohen H, Kane-Wineland M, Miller LV, Hatfield CL. Occupa­
tion and visual/vestibular interaction in vestibular rehabilitation. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994; 112: 526-32.
198. Mruzek M, Barin K, Nichols DS, Burnett CN, Welling DB. 
Effects of vestibular rehabilitation and social reinforcement on 
recovery following ablative vestibular surgery. Laryngoscope 1995; 
105: 686-92.
199. Cowand JL, Wrisley DM, Walker M, Strasnick B, Jacobson JT. 
Efficacy of vestibular rehabilitation. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1998; 118: 49-54.
200. Norr£ ME, Beckers A. Comparative study of two types of exercise 
treatment for paroxysmal positioning vertigo. Adv Otorhino­
laryngol 1988; 42: 287-9.
201. Pames LS, Price-Jones RG. Particle repositioning maneuver for 
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1993; 102: 325-31.
202. Massoud EAS, Ireland DJ. Post-treatment instructions in the 
non-surgical management of benign paroxysmal positional ver­
tigo. J Otolaryngol 1996; 25: 121-5.
203. Blakley BW. A randomized, controlled assessment of the canalith 
repositioning maneuver. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994; 110: 
391-6.
204. Serafini G, Palmieri AMR, Simoncelli C. Benign paroxysmal 
positional vertigo of posterior semicircular canal: results in 160 
cases treated with Semont’s maneuver. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1996; 105: 770-5.
205. Steenerson RL, Cronin GW. Comparison of the canalith reposi­
tioning procedure and vestibular habituation training in forty 
patients with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1996; 114: 61-4.
206. Smouha EE. Time course of recovery after Epley’s maneuvers for 
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Laryngoscope 1997; 107: 
187-91.
207. Steddin S, Ing D, Brandt T. Horizontal canal benign paroxysmal 
positioning vertigo (h-BPPV): transition of canalolithiasis. Ann 
Neurol 1996; 40: 918-22.
208. Brandt T, Steddin S, Darroff RB. Therapy for benign parox­
ysmal positoning vertigo, revisited. Neurology 
1994; 44: 
796-800.
  

55 Role of surgery in the 
management of the 
dizzy patient
Harold Ludman
This topic can be discussed fully only by consideration of 
certain separate headings:
1. Diseases of the temporal bone involving the labyrinth, so 
causing vertigo.
2. The treatment of intrinsic peripheral labyrinthine diseases:
(a) Meniere’s disease
(b) Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
3. The role of labyrinthine membrane rupture and perilymph 
fistula.
Temporal bone diseases
Of these, the most urgent and dangerous is cholesteatoma asso- 
ciated with the unsafe variety of chronic suppurative otitis 
media. Cholesteatoma is stratified squamous keratinizing 
epithelium like skin,1,2 which has become involved with, and is 
invading, the air spaces of the middle ear and, in particular, the 
attic and antral regions. It may arise in several possible ways. 
One recognized mechanism is by the retraction of a pocket of 
tympanic membrane either of the pars flaccida in the attic or of 
the posterior pars tensa below the posterior malleolar fold 
(Figure 55.1). There are certainly other possible mechanisms 
for the development of cholesteatoma.3,4 It may be congenital; 
or it might develop from metaplasia of middle ear mucosa, or 
even by papillary ingrowth through intact tympanic mem­
brane.5 However it arises, cholesteatoma forms a multiloculated 
sac of skin wrapping itself around all the complex structures in 
the attic and middle ear and extending into all the available 
anatomical air spaces of the middle ear. The importance of 
cholesteatoma is that it reacts with subjacent bone,6 and by 
eroding it can expose the contents of the labyrinth to the 
effects of pressure wave transmission, and to spreading infec­
tion. Many other structures apart from the labyrinth may be
exposed and damaged, but vertigo arises if the labyrinth 
becomes involved. The first way in which this may happen is 
when the bone over a semicircular canal (usually the lateral) 
has become thinned until the endosteum within the lumen is 
exposed to direct contact with the basal layer of the 
cholesteatoma, which is outermost. At that stage, any pressure 
changes within the middle ear or the external ear canal are 
transmitted to vestibular perilymph, causing vertigo and eye 
movement. This constitutes the basis of the so-called ‘fistula 
sign’ (Figure 55.2). Infection within the cholesteatoma may 
then spread to the interior of the labyrinth causing suppurative 
labyrinthitis with destruction of labyrinthine function. The 
effect of this will be severe vertigo with gradual recovery by 
compensation in the way that happens with any of the other 
causes of sudden vestibular failure. Apart from the unpleasant­
ness of the vertigo, the danger is that further spread may pro­
duce meningitis or other intracranial sepsis.
The recognition of cholesteatoma, then, is of prime 
importance, and careful examination of the ears is an 
essential part of the 
investigation of any patient 
complaining of vertigo.
Figure 55.1 Attic retraction pocket.
Attic retraction 
pocket
Middle 
ear cavity
Tympanic
membrane

918 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Examination for a fistula sign is also a cardinal aspect of 
patient examination. This may be conducted by pressing the 
tragus into the ear canal to raise the air pressure, but is better 
conducted by inserting a firmly fitting airtight speculum, and 
increasing ear canal air pressure with a pneumatic, or Siegle’s, 
speculum. If positive, the patient will complain of vertigo, and 
jerk away. The eyes must be watched. As pressure increases, the 
eyes will deviate away from the observer, and if the pressure is 
maintained, there will then be a rapid jerk back to the mid-line. 
The actual direction of eye deviations associated with a positive 
fistula sign depends on the site of the fistula; the commonest site 
is the lateral semicircular canal.7 Unfortunately, fistula signs 
have low predictive power. A false-negative finding arises if a 
mass of cholesteatoma prevents transmission of sound pressure 
to the labyrinthine perilymph, while false positives are found as 
the so-called Hennebert’s sign, discussed later in this chapter.
Sometimes an attic cholesteatoma may be hidden from 
view by a hard crust, acting like a cork, plugging the opening 
into the cholesteatoma through which the skin has become 
invaginated (Figure 55.3). Only when such a crust can be 
removed and the underlying area inspected is it possible to rule 
out a cholesteatoma, and that inspection should be conducted 
with a binocular microscope. Occasionally, an ear needs exam­
ination under a general anaesthetic. If there is any suspicion of 
cholesteatoma, even if other causes for vertigo seem probable 
on historical grounds, the ear must be considered unsafe, and its 
management will almost always be operative, with the prime 
purpose of making the ear safe, whereby the patient will be pro­
tected from potentially serious disease. There is a role for mod­
em radiological imaging techniques, but the findings can be 
misleading, and certainty can emerge only from operative
8,9
inspection.
The surgical treatment of cholesteatoma 
This can follow one of two principles.
SURGICAL TREATMENT OF CHOLESTEATOMA
Creation of a wide cavity leading into the external 
ear canaL
‘Combined approach tympanoplasty' with the preser­
vation of the posterior meatal bony canal wall and 
reconstruction of any tympanic membrane defect.
The classical, conventional and most traditional method is 
creation of a wide cavity opening into the external ear canal. 
The region occupied by the cholesteatoma is fashioned into as 
smooth a hemispherical space as possible, within the anatomi­
cal constraints. This cavity will become lined with skin that 
will be histologically identical to that constituting the preced­
ing cholesteatoma. Because of the wide access to the external 
ear canal, the surface layer of the skin will migrate outwards in 
the same way as the normal tympanic membrane, and wax 
within it, together with the surface keratin, will gradually be 
extruded into the ear canal, and laterally to the exterior. This 
kind of operation— designated an open cavity operation— 
includes a number of varieties, such as atticotomy, attico- 
antrostomy, modified radical mastoidectomy and radical 
mastoidectomy.
These open cavity procedures differ from each other, and 
are named according to the extent of anatomical rearrangement 
necessary to encompass the cholesteatoma and produce a 
smooth cavity (Figure 55.4). This in turn is determined by the 
extent of the cholesteatoma, and the damage that it has already 
done. In an atticotomy (Figure 55.5) the outer attic wall, or scu­
tum, is removed to expose the attic. If the cholesteatoma 
envelopes the head of the malleus and the body of the incus 
found therein, it may be necessary to remove the incus and 
amputate the head of the malleus in order to make a smooth 
cavity. Hearing efficiency will then rely on displacement of the 
tympanic membrane medially to adhere to the head of the 
stapes— an arrangement allowing transmission of sound waves 
directly from the tympanic membrane to the stapes, called 
myringostapediopexy. Atticoantrostomy entails more extensive 
removal of bone backwards, to open both the attic and the mas­
toid antrum behind it. In the modified radical mastoidectomy
  

Role of surgery in the management of the dizzy patient 
919
Figure 55.5 Atticotomy, right ear. The tympanic membrane behind the malleus 
has been lifted forwards. The outer attic wall has been drilled away to expose 
the body of incus and head of malleus.
the operation extends still further behind and below the mas- 
toid antrum to open any air cells and to follow the 
cholesteatoma to its limits. In this operation, the remaining 
incus, which has often lost its long process to erosion, is 
removed. The head of the malleus must be amputated, and the 
tympanic membrane displaced medially to lie on the head of 
the stapes. In this way, the mesotympanum remains as an air- 
containing cavity, excluded from the attic and the mastoid cav- 
ity behind it. A radical mastoidectomy (Figure 55.6) entails 
removal of much or all of the tympanic membrane as well, to 
leave the middle ear cavity exposed in continuity with the 
newly fashioned mastoid cavity. The incus and the malleus are 
removed, leaving the stapes (or only its footplate if the crura 
have been destroyed) as the sole remnant of the ossicular chain.
Each of these operations may be performed through an 
incision behind the ear—postaural— or an incision between the
Figure 55.6 (a) Radical mastoidectomy, right ear. Cavity seen behind the facial 
ridge, over the vertical part of the facial nerve, (b) Modified radical 
mastoidectomy. The tympanic memebrane and the ossicles have been preserved.
tragus and the crus of the helix— endaural (Figure 55.7). The 
development of the cavity, by drilling away bone, may (classi­
cally) start from behind, by drilling into the mastoid antrum 
first, and working forwards. Many otologists, including the 
author, prefer a ‘front-to-back’ approach, starting by removal of 
the outer attic wall to expose the attic and its contents, and 
extending the operation backwards towards the antrum by con­
centric removals of bone upwards and backwards to reach the 
limits of the cholesteatoma (Figure 55.8). This technique has 
the advantages of limiting the size of the cavity to the extent of 
the disease, and providing assessment of the ossicular chain and 
the position of the facial nerve early in the procedure. As with 
all middle ear surgery, there is a risk of damage to other struc­
tures, and of these the facial nerve is the most important. It is 
important to leave the cavity as smooth as possible. The so- 
called ‘bridge’, which is the remaining bone of the posterior 
meatal wall bridging laterally over the aditus ad antrum, is 
lowered and removed, to leave a smooth vertical bony ridge just 
covering and protecting the vertical part of the facial nerve. 
This facial ridge must be carefully reduced, where it abuts 
against the bony bulge of the lateral semicircular canal. Too 
high a facial ridge as a result of excessive caution in protecting 
the facial nerve may leave a pocket of cavity medially not 
adequately exposed to the meatus, and infected material may 
accumulate there.
(b) 
High facial ridge-
to be lowered as 
operation proceeds
  

920 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Figure 55.8 Development of mastoid cavity from the attic backwards.
All open cavity operations discharge for some weeks after 
operation, and many do so continuously, or intermittently if the 
skin lining becomes infected.10,11 Indeed, discharge of serum, 
which easily becomes infected by opportunist commensal 
organisms, is expected until and unless the whole of the cavity 
becomes lined with skin. A mastoid cavity is a warm damp 
chamber uncongenial for the growth and survival of healthy 
skin, and it is much less likely to develop this healthy skin 
lining if the volume of the cavity is proportionately large when 
compared with the diameter of the remaining external meatus. 
As has already been noted, a healthy mastoid cavity develops a 
skin lining that is histologically identical to cholesteatoma, but 
it has no erosive potential, because its surface layer of desqua- 
mating keratin can migrate into and through the external ear 
canal. This desirable behaviour, and easy access to examine and 
treat by removal of accumulating keratin, is assisted by a wide 
meatus. Open cavity operations are usually completed by surgi- 
cally widening the external meatus—meatoplasty (Figure 55.9). 
Postoperatively, patients need regular outpatient attention, 
throughout life, for removal of wax and any dead skin that has 
not cleared itself. Usually, this will become an annual, or less 
frequent, event. Patients must protect the ear from water, and 
for this reason should not swim. Open cavity operations require 
considerable care, skill and experience to produce well-behaved 
cavities without damaging adjacent structures.
The second approach is called an ‘intact canal wall tym­
panoplasty’ or ‘combined approach tympanoplasty’, and some­
times ‘canal wall up surgery’.12,13 The aim is to remove the 
cholesteatoma from within the middle ear cleft, while preserv-
Figure 55.9 Meatoplasty, right ear.
ing the posterior meatal bony canal wall (Figure 55.10) and 
reconstructing any defect in the tympanic membrane. It may 
also be possible to repair the damaged ossicular chain.
Afterwards, there is no residual cavity. The patient is left 
with a normal external ear canal separated from the middle ear 
cleft by a reconstructed tympanic membrane. Theoretically, 
this is a much more satisfactory state than after an open cavity 
operation, but there are problems.
Intact wall tympanoplasty is carried out through a postau- 
ral incision. Extensive removal of bone over the mastoid 
antrum and the cells behind is needed to provide wide access 
to the region lateral to the vertical part of the facial nerve. 
This is a significant disadvantage. If the disease proves to be 
limited in extent, the bone removal will be much more 
extensive than would have been needed with an open cavity 
operation. If, subsequently, because of residual or recurrent 
disease, it becomes necessary to convert this procedure into a
Figure 55.10 Intact canal wall mastoidectomy. The cavity is separated from the 
meatus by the outer attic wall and the posterior bony meatal wall.
Semicircle of 
conchal cartilage 
excised
Meatal skin pulled 
posteriorly and 
sutured back
  

Role of surgery in the management of the dizzy patient 
921
radical mastoidectomy, as sometimes happens, then the 
resulting cavity will be very much larger than ideal, and more 
capacious than if a mastoidectomy of the open cavity kind 
had been formed intentionally to start with. During the 
intact canal wall procedure, the bridge and posterior bony 
meatal wall is drilled from its inner surface to paper thick­
ness, but must carefully be left intact. An opening is then 
made from the mastoid air cell area, which has been uncov­
ered, into the middle ear through a so-called posterior tym­
panotomy. This is a narrow vertical groove between the air 
cells behind and the middle ear space in front. Bone is 
removed from the aditus, just below the region of attachment 
of the short process of the incus, working downwards, with a 
fine drill burr, superficial to the vertical part of the facial 
nerve. Considerable care and skill is needed to avoid damage 
to the facial nerve, which can be injured thermally by the 
burr working just fractions of a millimetre away. Laterally, the 
posterior tympanotomy is limited by the annulus of the tym­
panic membrane, and this must not be damaged. Through 
this narrow vertical groove, it is possible to see behind for­
wards, into the middle ear, medially to the tympanic mem­
brane. When all disease has been removed, and the tympanic 
membrane defect has been repaired with a temporalis fascia 
graft, the middle ear and its lateral bony external ear canal 
should be anatomically virtually normal. It is also possible to 
reconstruct any parts of the ossicular chain that may have 
been damaged by disease or by the operative procedure to get 
access to it. There are differences of opinion about the advis­
ability of conducting reconstruction at the time of the initial 
operation rather than as a staged procedure later on. Apart 
from the risk of damage to the facial nerve, which is much 
greater in intact canal wall procedures, there is also a chance 
that the cochlea may suffer from vibrations transmitted from 
the operating drill burr, if it accidentally touches the incus or 
any other part of an intact ossicular chain. Intact canal wall 
mastoid surgery carries a higher risk of sensorineural hearing 
damage than does open cavity operation.
A further risk is that small, even microscopic, particles of 
cholesteatoma, or skin, may be left behind and later develop 
into destructive cholesteatoma, hidden from view by the poste­
rior meatal wall and the intact tympanic membrane.14 For this 
reason, it is generally accepted that any patient who has had an 
intact canal wall operation must agree to have the ear opened 
again some months later, for inspection and the removal of any 
recurrent or persistent disease. More than one subsequent oper­
ation may in fact be needed. These risks, and the disadvantage 
of further operations, restrict the number of patients suitable for 
this procedure, since they have to be willing and reliable 
enough to accept the postoperative plans.
However, intact canal wall surgery does offer the opportu­
nity to leave an anatomically normal middle ear with good 
hearing. Of even greater importance to many patients is that 
the ear can be exposed to water while swimming without risk of 
infection. Open cavity operations should always be protected 
from water, because the precarious skin lining them is easily
infected when it becomes soggy and exposed to external 
organisms.
Views on the virtues of each of these different types of oper­
ation have swung like a pendulum over the past 30 years, and 
at the present time the mood is more in favour of open cavity 
operations than it was in the 1970s.15
Fistula management
The possibility of discovering a fistula into the labyrinth is 
particularly high when operating on cholesteatoma in a 
vertiginous patient. In any mastoid surgery, dissection of 
cholesteatoma away from otic capsule regions prone to erosion, 
such as the lateral semicircular canal dome, must be conducted 
under high magnification, and with care. A fistula will be sus­
pected when the dome is flattened by erosion, and, as the skin 
of the cholesteatoma— or matrix— is carefully lifted with a fine 
instrument, the bluish discoloration of the perilymph space 
within will become visible.
The management of a fistula depends on circumstances. The 
matrix overlaying the fistula can often be dissected away from 
the underlying endosteum, but there is a high risk of destroying 
inner ear function should the endosteum be accidentally trans­
gressed. For this reason, there are many occasions when the sur­
geon will decide to leave the matrix intact over the fistula. If this 
decision is made during an intact canal wall operation, then it 
will need careful management when the ear is explored again. By 
that stage, the remaining matrix will usually have formed into a 
so-called ‘epithelial pearl’—or skin cyst—which can usually be 
winkled off the fistula without difficulty.
It is often safer to leave the matrix intact, rather than risk­
ing damage to the inner ear, but if it is left in place during an open 
cavity operation, the patient may afterwards suffer the symptoms 
of ‘perilabyrinthitis’ with episodes of vertigo when pressure 
changes are transmitted to the fistula from outside. This condi­
tion was first named by the late Sir Terence Cawthorne, and 
unfortunately the term is often used incorrectly.16 Vertigo may be 
triggered by loud noise (Tullio phenomenon), or even by wind 
blowing into the fistula from the outside air. The patient may also 
experience vertigo from time to time, if and when the mastoid 
cavity lining becomes infected.
If it is thought safe to remove the matrix from the fistula 
without risk to the endosteum, the fistula can be covered, and 
protected from subsequent pressure changes, by a graft of meso­
dermal material such as temporalis fascia.
VERTIGO AFTER MASTOIDECTOMY
Persistent disease.
Labyrinthine fistula.
Poor compensation.
Residual vestibular epithelium. 
Secondary hydrops.
  

922 
Vestibular disorders and their management
Vertigo after mastoidectomy
A patient who has undergone open cavity mastoidectomy may 
experience subsequent vertigo. Of course, this can happen for 
quite unrelated reasons, but there are a number of different 
possible mechanisms which may cause vertigo and which can 
cause diagnostic difficulty.
1. Persisting disease with continuing erosion of the labyrinth. 
This should be discovered by examination and must be 
treated by operation
2. Labyrinthine fistula. This should be diagnosed by the fistula 
test, and by probing the region of a possible fistula (see 
above).
3. Poor compensation. It is possible that the preoperative con­
dition, or the operation itself, may have destroyed vestibu­
lar function, and the patient’s recovery from this will have 
been prolonged and gradual over the course of weeks or 
months. Recovery by central compensation may later 
become compromised by other illnesses, old age, or psycho­
logical disorders. Under these circumstances, the patient 
may become dizzy simply because the central mechanism of 
compensation has broken down. A detailed history of the 
pattern of any vertigo around the time of the operation may 
be the only clue to this state of affairs. For instance, the 
patient may recall a long period of vertigo and imbalance, 
for days on end, during the initial postoperative recovery 
period. Cold air caloric testing (since water irrigation would 
be inadvisable) may demonstrate loss of canal sensitivity.
4. Residual vestibular epithelium. It is theoretically possible for 
a patient to have lost most vestibular function, but to have 
retained some vestibular epithelium, which may at random 
cause episodes of vertigo. Treatment for this relatively rare 
condition often entailed a labyrinthectomy operation to 
remove any remaining such epithelium. This kind of 
labyrinthectomy used to be called a bony labyrinthectomy, 
in contrast with the membranous labyrinthectomy used in 
the treatment of Meniere’s disease to be described later. 
When it is performed from an open mastoidectomy opera­
tion, the medial wall of the vestibule will be left exposed to 
the cavity. Subsequent vertigo may arise, not because the 
operation has been inadequate, but because of the develop­
ment of traumatic neuromas on residual vestibular nerve 
fibres exposed to the environment.17 These can sometimes 
be demonstrated by probing the appropriate part of the cav­
ity and causing vertigo by so doing. Satisfactory relief can be 
offered by dividing the vestibular nerve. There are particular 
problems in performing this operation through a potentially 
infected cavity, and these have been well reviewed.18
5. Secondary hydrops. The condition of secondary or delayed 
hydrops has been recognized for many years.19 If, for any 
reason, an inner ear is damaged, with loss of cochlear func­
tion and total deafness, but with the survival of some 
vestibular function, then the patient may develop endolym­
phatic hydrops in that ear with typical Meniere-like attacks 
of vertigo. The onset, after the initial damage to the inner
ear, is on average about 20 years.20,21 Damage causing sec­
ondary hydrops may arise from congenital inner ear abnor­
malities, viral infections (such as mumps), or indeed 
trauma— including surgical trauma. The diagnosis after 
mastoid surgery depends upon a reliable history indicating 
hearing before the operation and total loss immediately 
afterwards. The persistence of some vestibular function may 
be demonstrated by cold air caloric testing. Effective treat­
ment entails radical destruction of the vestibular function 
of that ear. Total deafness associated with surviving vestibu­
lar function will suggest the diagnosis.
It should be clear that the distinction between these different 
causes rests with a very careful history as well as a detailed exam­
ination of the existing state of cochlear and vestibular function.
Surgical treatment of Meniere’s 
disease
The general view is that about 20% of patients suffering 
from Meniere’s disease cannot be relieved by medication or 
spontaneous remission, and, for these, operative options are 
considered.22
Radical operations
Relief from vertigo can almost always be achieved by ablating 
the erratically active labyrinth, (labyrinthectomy), but to do 
so entails total loss of hearing in the affected ear. For patients 
who have severe deafness and distortion, this sacrifice may be 
acceptable, but in some cases the hearing is too valuable to 
sacrifice, and this is particularly so when there is any doubt 
about the integrity of the other ear. It might be thought that 
involvement of the second ear would be easy to establish, but 
reports in the literature of its frequency are extremely variable 
because of different criteria used to accept involvement. Some 
are based on pure tone audiometric tests, others on transtym- 
panic electrocochleography of the normal ear, and yet others 
on changes in the electrocochleographic findings with glycerol 
dehydration, or acetazolomide loading. There are many sur­
geons who take the view that the risk of later involvement of 
the second ear is too great ever to justify labyrinthectomy, but 
this seems to be overstating the case. Some patients, particu­
larly those over the age of 60, do not compensate fully for the 
loss of a labyrinth. Others who have lost a labyrinth earlier in 
life, for any reason, may experience imbalance from progres­
sive loss of compensation as they grow older. For all these rea­
sons, there are limitations to the role of radical surgery 
treatment by labyrinthectomy, well reviewed by Pereira and 
Kerr.23
Total destruction of the membranous labyrinth may be 
achieved by almost any operation that transgresses the mem­
branous labyrinth. Access may be transtympanic through the 
external auditory meatus, turning forwards a tympanomeatal
  

Role oF surgery in the management of the dizzy patient 
923
flap. The incus is removed, and then the stapes is lifted out of 
its oval window niche, after dividing the fibres of the stapedio- 
vestibular ligament around the footplate. Fine instruments with 
hooked ends can then be inserted into the vestibule and used to 
destroy the utricle and saccule, and to reach into the ampullae 
of each of the semicircular canals to extirpate the contents 
(Figure 55.11).
Transmastoid access through a postaural incision allows 
exposure of the lateral semicircular canal. This can be opened 
so that the membranous contents may be removed (Figure
55.12). Some surgeons favour an even more radical approach, 
with destruction of each semicircular canal in turn, possibly 
followed by extension to the internal auditory meatus in order 
to divide the vestibular nerve as well.
Figure 55.11 Transtympanic labyrinthectomy. A double angled hook has been 
introduced into the vestibule through the oval window, after displacement of 
the stapes.
Figure 55.12 Transtympanic labyrinthectomy. The membranous semicircular 
canal is being removed.
It is also feasible to destroy the labyrinth chemically. In the 
past, streptomycin injections were used, and today there is a 
vogue for the use of intratympanic gentamicin.24’25
Conservative surgical treatment
The development of so-called conservative operative proce­
dures aimed at relieving vertigo, while attempting to preserve 
auditory function, is most important. There are two main 
groups of operation.
1. those addressing a presumed cause of hydrops
2. those eliminating or reducing excitation of the brainstem 
by the labyrinth, through disconnection of the neural con­
nections between the two, with preservation of the cochlea.
Some procedures that were popular are now obsolete and are of 
historical interest only. Among these are procedures of dubious 
rationality. It is axiomatic, in surgical practice, that profusion of 
surgical solutions is evidence of the efficacy of none. Among 
the first group of conservative operations, based on a presumed 
aetiology, one must consider endolymphatic sac decompression 
as the most important, while noting that in the past there was 
enthusiasm for cochleostomy or cochleosacculotomy,26 for 
cochlear dialysis, for sacculotomy, for the insertion of ventila­
tion tubes into the tympanic membrane, and for cervical sym­
pathectomy. In the second group of conservative procedures 
vestibular nerve division is the most important. Intratympanic 
injection of ototoxic drugs deserves mention, and in the past 
ultrasonic destruction of the vestibular part of the labyrinth was 
important.
Saccus decompression operation
Operations on the saccus endolymphaticus were first described 
in the 1920s, but their use relapsed until a renaissance of saccus 
surgery about 25 years ago. Since then, they have become the 
most commonly applied techniques of conservative treatment 
for Meniere’s disease. A good review of the history of this pro­
cedure can be found in the contribution of Lacher.27
It is hoped that by dealing fundamentally with the main 
functional defect of the disorder, the natural history of the dis­
ease may be altered, with the preservation of hearing otherwise 
doomed to inexorable deterioration. It has to be said that it has 
proved difficult to perform adequate consistently controlled 
trials of the efficacy of saccus surgery, and the mechanism by 
which it might work is not understood.
It must even be accepted that there are reasons for doubt­
ing whether saccus surgery has any actual effect on the course 
of Meniere’s disease, and its benefits to a patient may be those 
of a placebo.28’ 30 Certainly, it is simplistic to believe that 
endolymph pressure in the pars inferior of the membranous 
labyrinth is relieved by constant leakage from the opened sac­
cus. The saccus is a flat fan-shaped structure with an alveolar 
kind of interior, and any incision made in it is likely to become 
shut off by scarring very soon after operation. It has been sug­
gested that increased vascularity following operative trauma
Membranous
canal
  

924 
Vestibular disorders and their management
might have some effect on endolymph absorption, but there is 
as yet no strongly supported explanation. The technique 
involves exposing the endolymphatic sac, through a cortical 
mastoidectomy operation, where it is to be found in front of the 
sigmoid sinus just below the posterior semicircular canal (Figure
55.13). The sac can usually be found without difficulty by fol­
lowing the posterior fossa dura deep to Trautmann’s triangle for­
wards and medially, using a small diamond paste bur to avoid 
damage to the dura. Sometimes, a bulging sigmoid sinus pre­
vents easy access to the posterior fossa dura and requires com­
pression after the development of a trap door of thin bone on 
its surface whereby it may safely be pressed medially with a 
blunt dissector. The saccus can be recognized by its thick tex­
ture and whitish colour, contrasting with the thin bluish dura 
above and below. It can be identified positively by following it 
medially and identifying the ductus (Figure 55.14). When 
exposed, the saccus may be left untouched, or opened with a 
sharp knife into the mastoidectomy cavity. In earlier days, it was 
usual to place a shunt tube between the lumen of the saccus and 
the subarachnoid space in the posterior cranial fossa, even
Figure 55.13 Saccus decompression, right ear. The sac has been exposed 
through a cortical mastoidectomy approach.
Figure 55.14 Saccus decompression. Demonstration of the endolymphatic duct
though it has been known from earlier structural studies that 
any lumen in the sac is multiloculated and of minute dimen­
sions. If the saccus is opened, a tube or a sheet of silastic may be 
placed from the mastoid cavity into whatever lumen it has. It 
seems that there are no definite differences arising from 
handling the saccus in different ways. Perhaps this is not sur­
prising, as the effect in helping to cure the disease is not under­
stood, and sham operations seem to be just as good at 
preventing vertigo.
Recent developments have suggested that the effect of 
surgery might be due to traumatic destruction of the saccus, and 
on that basis deliberate saccus ablation has been advocated.31,32
Ventilation tube insertion
It seems improbable that the insertion of ventilation tubes into 
the tympanic membrane could have any effect on Menifere’s dis­
ease, but because of the safety of the procedure it has often been 
used as a desperate remedy of last resort. The theoretical basis 
for its possible action has been argued along the following lines. 
If a patient has intermittent Eustachian tube obstruction, and 
an abnormally patent aqueductus cochleae, then lowered 
pressure in the middle ear might displace the round window 
membrane outwards, drawing cerebrospinal fluid from the 
subarachnoid space into the labyrinth. Precisely what should 
happen next is not clear, but this disturbance of intravestibular 
fluid mechanics might, it is argued, cause changes that disturb 
the vestibular sense organs. If so, then maintaining pressure 
equalization with a ventilation tube should protect the patient 
from this deviant process.
Vestibular nerve section
Division of the vestibular nerve to prevent abnormal sensory 
labyrinthine stimuli from reaching the vestibular neurones can 
be performed through a number of different routes—posterior 
fossa, middle fossa, retrolabyrinthine and retrosigmoid.,MI The 
advantages of different approaches are well documented, 
and 
the 
mechanisms 
of postoperative 
recovery 
have 
been 
analysed.42 Whichever is favoured, the aim is to divide all the 
vestibular fibres of the cochleovestibular nerve complex with­
out damage to the cochlear nerve or its blood supply (Figure 
55.15). It is not always easy to separate the vestibular fibres 
from those of the cochlear nerve,35 and one of the main risks of 
the operation is damage to the cochlear nerve with hearing 
loss, in about 4-5% of patients.43 Many of the techniques entail 
the more serious risks of a neurosurgical operation.44,45 There 
are many possible reasons for failure, including inadequate 
anatomical section.46
Benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo
It is rare for patients with this disorder to require surgical treat­
ment, but there are two options available for those who are
Ariitu%
Lateral semicircular canal
Saccus
endolymphaticus
Posterior
semicircular canal
legmen
Ductus
endolymphaticus
Posterior fossa 
dura
Sigmoid sinus 
plate
Posterior fossa 
dura plate
Ductus endolymphaticus
Saccus
  

Role of surgery in the management of the dizzy patient 
925
severely incapacitated, and who have not been helped by 
Epley’s particle repositioning manoeuvre.
Posterior ampuliary (singular) nerve section
The posterior ampuliary nerve carries the sensory fibres of the 
posterior canal crista to the inferior vestibular nerve. After 
leaving the internal acoustical meatus, it travels backwards to 
the posterior semicircular canal ampulla in a channel that takes 
it just below the lower border of attachment of the round win­
dow membrane. It can be reached through a permeatal tympa­
notomy approach. The bony overhang of the round window 
niche is drilled away with fine diamond paste burs until the 
round window membrane is exposed. Drilling further bone 
below and medially to its inferior edge will expose the singular 
nerve so that it can be avulsed (Figure 55.16). Accessibility of 
the nerve depends on its relationship to the round window. If it 
is too far superomedial, it may not become visible without dam­
age to the cochlea, and although this procedure offers relief for 
the symptoms of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, it carries 
a high risk of severe sensorineural hearing loss.t7,48
Figure 55.15 Vestibular nerve section. Neural contents of the internal acoustic 
meatus after removal of its posterior bony wall.
Figure 55.16 Posterior ampuliary nerve section, left ear. View through aural 
speculum after displacing the tympanic membrane forwards.
Posterior canal obliteration
Compression of the membranous posterior semicircular canal 
can prevent movement of loose material within it.49 2 The 
posterior canal is exposed through a cortical mastoidectomy 
approach (Figure 55.17). Diamond paste burs are used to ‘blue 
line’ the canal, which is gently opened. It is important to avoid 
damage to the membranous labyrinth within. Bone wax or bone 
pat£ is then used to fill the perilymph space in order to squash 
the membranous tube within and prevent movement of its 
contained endolymph. Recently, lasers have been used to 
shrink the membranous posterior canal” and also to destroy the 
utricular macula.54
Labyrinthine membrane rupture 
Iperilymph fistula)
This condition is controversial, and has exercised otologists for 
the past 20 years or so. Under certain conditions, the inner ear 
membranes may be ruptured, and then the oval window or 
round window may leak perilymph in to the middle ear. The 
external pressure trauma needed to produce this damage may be 
severe, as in concussive head injuries and diving barotrauma, or 
perhaps trivial, as with pressure changes caused by sneezing, 
straining at stool or light blows to the head briefly raising 
intracranial cerebrospinal fluid pressure. That perilymph leak­
ages can be caused by the more severe insults is accepted, but 
there is a great deal of argument about the less violent causes 
and whether so-called ‘spontaneous perilymph fistulae’ actually 
occur.55,56 The name perilymph fistula is unfortunately mislead­
ing, since the damage arising in the inner ear is attributable to 
tearing of intralabyrinthine membranes, disruption of sensory 
structures and chemical damage from mixing inner ear fluids. 
The perilymph leak itself is simply the final evidence, found at 
operation, of this damage. It cannot rationally be argued that 
the closure of a fistula which is just the injury at the most 
peripheral extent of the insult will repair irreversibly disrupted 
inner ear structures.
The clinical effects of labyrinthine membrane ruptures 
have never been consistently agreed. This is hardly surprising 
when the very existence of spontaneous perilymph leaks is 
uncertain. Suspicion should be directed, it is argued, at all
Superior vestibular nerve 
Interior vestibular nerve
Cochlear
nerve
Posterior
a m n u lla ry
nerve
Porus of 1AM
Cut bone
Ampulla of posterior 
semicircular canal
  

926 
Vestibular disorders and their rranaqement
patients who develop sudden sensorineural hearing loss after 
trauma of the kinds mentioned, and when there are attacks 
of Meniere-like vertigo with atypical features such as persist' 
ing imbalance between attacks of proper vertigo. Patients 
with untypical features and otherwise characteristic benign 
paroxysmal positional vertigo should also be suspects. There 
are no useful diagnostic predictable clues beyond the clini­
cian’s suspicion.57 A great deal has been written about the 
status of a possible fistula sign, but in fact no series of pre­
sumed perilymph fistulae has shown the presence of a fistula 
sign to be more than a useful pointer, and its absence is of no 
value at all.
Diagnostic proof can be sought only by observation during 
a tympanotomy operation. Even this is subjective and not as 
positive a finding as non-surgeons often imagine. False-positive 
leaks have been described by the observation of fluid accumu­
lating in the round window niche, which actually has come from 
tissue exudate or preoperative infiltration of the ear canal, while 
false-negative reports may arise from lowering of perilymph 
pressure. There have been descriptions of shredding of the 
round window membrane later shown to be mucosal strands 
across the round window niche, which normally hides the 
actual membrane from view. Enthusiasts suggest watching 
the windows for several minutes with the head lowered on the 
operating table to raise the cerebrospinal fluid pressure, before 
the absence of a leak is declared. Absence of leak discovery is 
sometimes ascribed to spontaneous healing, which is a circular 
argument in the enthusiasts’ armamentarium that is very diffi­
cult to gainsay. To see the round window membrane clearly, it 
is usually necessary to drill away bone overhanging it, but this 
acutely risks causing a leak.
If a leak is found or suspected, it can easily be patched oper­
atively with a piece of connective tissue or fat from the earlobe. 
There certainly are reliable anecdotal accounts of immediate 
relief from ataxia and imbalance after this procedure. There are 
few reliable accounts of any improvement in the patient’s hear­
ing. The rational otologist should keep an open mind about the 
existence of this syndrome. Any patient developing vertigo or 
sensorineural hearing loss after diving or definite head injury 
should be a legitimate suspect for the diagnosis, and ought to be 
nursed sitting up, since, if healing can occur, it should do so 
more readily with low cerebrospinal fluid pressure. After a week 
or so with no improvement, it is reasonable to explore the 
middle ear surgically, while maintaining scepticism about the 
findings.
References
1. 
Youngs R, Rowles P. The spatial organisation of keratinocytes in 
acquired middle ear cholesteatoma resembles that of external 
auditory canal skin and pars flaccida. A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 
1990; 110: 115-19.
2. 
Lee R, Mackenzie I, Hall B, Gantz B. The nature of the epithelium 
in acquired cholesteatoma. Clin Otolaryngol 1991; 16: 168-73.
3. Ruah C, Schachem P, Paparella M, Zelterman D. Mechanisms of 
retraction pocket formation in the pediatric tympanic membrane. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992; 118: 1298-305.
4. Sad6 J, Babiacki A, Pinkus G. The metaplastic and congenital 
origin of cholesteatoma. A eta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1983; 96: 
119-29.
5. Abramson M, Gantz B, Asarch R, Litton W. Cholesteatoma Patho­
genesis: Evidence for the Migration Theory. Cholesteatoma. First 
International Conference. 
Birmingham: Aesculapius, 
1977: 
176-86.
6. Kurihara A, Toshima M, Yuasa R, Takasaka T. Bone destruction 
mechanisms in chronic otitis media with cholesteatoma: specific 
production by cholesteatoma in culture of bone-resorbing activity 
attributable to interleukin-I alpha. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1991; 
100: 989-98.
7. McCabe BE Labyrinthine fistula in chronic mastoiditis. Ann Otol 
Rhinol Laryngol Suppl 1984; 112: 138—41.
8. Mahmood F, Mafee M. MRI and CT in the evaluation of acquired 
and congenital cholesteatomas of the temporal bone. J Otolaryngol 
1993; 22: 239-48.
9. Leighton S, Robson A, Anslow P, Milford C. The role of CT imag­
ing in the management of chronic suppurative otitis media. Clin 
Otolaryngol 1993; 18: 23-9.
10. Youngs R. The histopathology of mastoidectomy cavities with par­
ticular reference to persistent otorrhoea. Clin Otolaryngol 1992; 
17: 505-10.
11. Youngs R. Epithelial migration in open mastoidectomy cavities. 
] Laryngol Otol 1995; 109: 286-90.
12. Jansen C. The combined approach for tympanoplasty. J Laryngol 
Otol 1968; 82: 779-93.
13. Glasscock M, Miller G. Intact canal wall tympanoplasty in the 
management of cholesteatoma. Laryngoscope 1976; 86: 1639-57.
14. Smyth G. Postoperative cholesteatoma in combined approach 
tympanoplasty. ] Laryngol Otol 1976; 90: 597-621.
15. Toner J, Smyth G. Surgical treatment of cholesteatoma: a com­
parison of three techniques. A m ] Otol 1990; 11: 247-9.
16. Cawthome TE. Perilabyrinthitis. Laryngoscope 1957; 67: 1233-6.
17. Ludman H. Neuronal activity in otology. J Laryngol Otol 1986; 
100: 989-1007.
18. Parikh AA, Brookes GB. Vestibular nerve section following pre­
vious mastoidectomy. J Laryngol Otol 1996; 110(9): 836-40.
19. Nadol J, Weiss A, Parker S. Vertigo of delayed onset after sudden 
deafness. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1975; 84: 841-6.
20. Langman AW, Lindeman RC. Sensorineural hearing loss with 
delayed onset of vertigo. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995; 
112(4): 540-3.
21. Ludman H. Surgical treatment of vertigo. In: Dix MR, Hood JD, 
eds. Vertigo. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 1984: 113-31.
22. Ludman H. Meniere’s disease. BMJ 1990; 301: 1232-3.
23. Pereira KD, Kerr AG. Disability after labyrinthectomy. ] Laryngol 
Otol 1996; 110: 216-18.
24. Nedzelski JM, Chiong CM, Fradet G, Schessel DA, Bryce GE, 
Pfleiderer AG. Intratympanic gentamicin instillation as treatment 
of unilateral Meniere’s disease: update of an ongoing study. Am ] 
Otol 1993; 14: 278-82.
  

Role of surgery in the management of the dizzy patient 
927
25. Grant IL, Welling DB. The treatment of hearing loss in Meniere’s 
disease. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1997; 30(6): 1123-44.
26. Giddings NA, Shelton C, O’Leary M], Brackmann DE. 
Cochleosacculotomy revisited. Long-term results poorer than 
expected. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1991; 117(10): 1150-2.
27. Lacher G. Current and historical perspectives on endolymphatic 
sac surgery. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl 1997; 526: 50-3,
28. Bretlau P, Thomsen], Tos M, Johnsen NJ. Placebo effect in surgery 
for Meniere’s disease: a three-year follow-up study of patients in a 
double blind placebo controlled study on endolymphatic sac shunt 
surgery. A m ] Otol 1984; 5(6): 558-61.
29. Kerr AG, Toner JG, McKee GJ, Smyth GD. Role and results of 
cortical mastoidectomy and endolymphatic sac surgery in 
Meniere’s disease. J LaryngolOtol 1989; 103(12): 1161-6.
30. Thomsen J, Kerr A, Bretlau P, Olsson J, Tos M. Endolymphatic sac 
surgery: why we do not do it. The non-specific effect of sac surgery. 
Clin Otolaryngol 1996; 21(3): 208-11.
31. Gibson WP. The effect of surgical removal of the extraosseous por­
tion of the endolymphatic sac in patients suffering from Meniere’s 
disease. J Laryngol Otol 1996; 110(11): 1008—11.
32. Welling DB, Pasha R, Roth LJ, Barin K. The effect of endolym­
phatic sac excision in Meniere disease. Am J Otol 1996; 17(2): 
278-82.
33. Glasscock ME, Thedinger BA, Cueva RA, Jackson CG. An analy­
sis of the retrolabyrinthine vs. the retrosigmoid vestibular nerve 
section. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1991; 104(1): 88—95.
34. Dufour JJ, Girard L, Mohr G. Selective vestibular neurectomy 
through the posterior fossa in Meniere’s disease. J Otolaryngol 
1988; 17(6): 311-14.
35. Green JD Jr, Shelton C, Brackmann DE. Middle fossa vestibular 
neurectomy in retrolabyrinthine neurectomy failures. Arch Oto­
laryngol Head Neck Surg 1992; 118(10): 1058-60.
36. House JW, Hitselberger WE, McElveen J, Brackmann DE. Retro­
labyrinthine section of the vestibular nerve. Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1984; 92(2): 212-15.
37. Kemink JL, Telian SA, el-Kashlan H, Langman AW. Retro­
labyrinthine vestibular nerve section: efficacy in disorders other 
than Meniere’s disease. Laryngoscope 1991; 101(5): 523-8.
38. McDaniel AB, Silverstein H, Norrell H. Retrolabyrinthine 
vestibular neurectomy with and without monitoring of eighth 
nerve potentials. A m ) Otol 1985; Suppl: 23-6.
39. Monsell EM, Wiet RJ, Young NM, Kazan RP. Surgical treatment 
of vertigo with retrolabyrinthine vestibular neurectomy. Laryngo­
scope 1988; 98(8 Pt 1): 835-9.
40. Ortiz Armenta A. Retrolabyrinthine vestibular neurectomy. 10
years’ experience. Rev Laryngol Otol Rhinol 1992; 113(5): 413-17.
41. Pulec JL. Surgical treatment of vertigo. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl 
1995; 519: 21-5.
42. Bohmer A, Fisch U. Clinical pathophysiology of vestibular 
neurectomy. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995; 112(1): 183-8.
43. Rosenberg SI, Silverstein H, Hoffer ME, Thaler E. Hearing results 
after posterior fossa vestibular neurectomy. Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 1996; 114 (l):3 2 -7 .
44. Gacek RR, Gacek MR. Comparison of labyrinthectomy and 
vestibular neurectomy in the control of vertigo. Laryngoscope 
1996; 106(2 Pt 1): 225-30.
45. Silverstein H, Wanamaker H, Flanzer J, Rosenberg S. Vestibular 
neurectomy in the United States— 1990. A m ] Otol 1992; 13(1): 
23-30.
46. Thedinger BS, Thedinger BA. Analysis of patients with persistent 
dizziness after vestibular nerve section. Ear Nose Throat J 1998; 
77(4): 290-2, 295-8.
47. Gacek RR. Singular neurectomy update. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 
1982; 91(5 Pt 1): 469-73.
48. Gacek MR, Gacek RR, Martell R. Effect of singular neurectomy 
on the caloric response. A m ] Otolaryngol 1995; 16(6): 362-6.
49. Dingle AF, Hawthorne MR, Kumar BU. Fenestration and occlu­
sion of the posterior semicircular canal for benign positional ver­
tigo. Clin Otolaryngol 1992; 17(4): 300-2.
50. Hawthorne M, el-Naggar M. Fenestration and occlusion of poste­
rior semicircular canal for patients with intractable benign parox­
ysmal positional vertigo. J Laryngol Otol 1994; 108( 11): 935-9.
51. Pace-Balzan A, Rutka JA. Non-ampullary plugging of the poste­
rior semicircular canal for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. 
J Laryngol Otol 1991; 105(11): 901-6.
52. Pames LS. Update on posterior canal occlusion for benign parox­
ysmal positional vertigo. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1996; 29(2): 
333-42.
53. Kartush JM, Sargent EW. Posterior semicircular canal occlusion 
for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo— C 0 2 laser-assisted 
technique: preliminary results. Laryngoscope 1995; 105(3 Pt 1): 
268-74.
54. Anthony PF. Utricular macular ablation for benign paroxysmal 
positional vertigo. Ear Nose Throat J 1996; 75(7): 416-21.
55. Shea J. The myth of spontaneous perilymph fistula. Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1992; 107: 613-16.
56. Gibson WP. Spontaneous perilymphatic fistula: electrophysiologic 
findings in animals and man. A m ] Otol 1993; 14(3): 273-7.
57. Kohut RI. Perilymph fistulas— clinical criteria. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1992; 118: 687-92.
  

Index
Page numbers in italic denote figures, tables 
and boxed material where there is no textual 
reference on the same page. Locators in bold 
denote glossary definitions.
28-kDa protein 72, 73
30-kDa protein 68, 72
52-kDa protein 73
68-kDa protein 68, 71-2
70-kDa heat shock protein see hsp 70
270° ‘barbecue’ manouevre 908, 911
360° yaw rotation 911
A
AAOO guidelines 897, 898 
Abbreviated Mental Test 856 
abducens nucleus 784 
abiotrophy 242 
ablation experiments 190-1 
abnormal auditory adaptation 229-30, 232 
accreditation 242 
acetazolamide 896, 897 
acoustic basis of speech 309-12 
acoustic couplers 207-8 
acoustic excitation of speech 
and acoustic spectra 318 
aperiodic/voiceless 311-12 
laryngeal/voiced 310-11 
acoustic immitance 
purpose 363-5
at tympanic membrane 363-4 
acoustic immitance measurement see 
tympanometry 
acoustic impedence audiometry 375 
meters 208 
acoustic neuromas see schwannomas, 
vestibular 
acoustic schwannomas 114-15 
acoustic shadow 536-7
acoustic space 588 
acoustic spectra
consonant production 314, 315 
and excitation patterns 318 
spectral envelope of two vowels 319 
speech production 315 
acoustical evaluation of impulse noise 480 
acoustical neuroma 256 
acoustical reflex 182 
acoustics 201-12 
classroom 504 
standards 245 
acquired cholesteatoma 27-8 
activities, classification of 514 
activity limitation 514, 598 
improvements 529 
recent scales 517 
see also disability 
acuity 242 
auditory 588 
see also visual acuity 
acute haemorrhagic leukoencephalomyelitis 
649
acute labyrinthitis
distinguishing from schwannomas 110 
imaging, preferred technique 107 
MR imaging 105 
acute otitis media (AOM) 355-6, 382 
medical treatment 386-7 
risk of OME 381 
acute vestibular neuritis 803-8 
clinical features 803 
definition 803 
differential diagnosis
autoimmune inner ear disease 807 
cerebellar infarction 805 
labyrinthine infarction 807 
Meniere’s disease 807 
falls in 821-3 
investigation 804-5 
natural history 805 
postural instability 826
treatment 805 
adenocarcinoma, low-grade, of probable 
endolymphatic sac 44 
adenoidectomy 388-9 
in OME 614 
adenotonsillectomy 388 
adhesive otitis see otitis media, with effusion 
afferent auditory neurotransmission 194 
age/ageing
and ABRs 281 
and anatomical changes 8 
in auditory system 13-23 
hearing thresholds 215-16 
prevalence of hearing impairment 91 
speech recognition 424, 425 
and cochlear implants 424, 428-9 
mathematical expression 216 
membrane hypothesis of 39 
mitochondria in 15, 39-40 
and orthostatic hypotension 850 
and self-recording audiometry 232-3 
in vestibular system 13-23, 37 
balance 20-1, 22, 671-90, 777 
dizziness 97
vestibular disorders 95, 643-4 
age-related gait 835
age-related hearing loss see presbyacusis 
agnosia, auditory 588 
agoraphobia 876-7 
and dizziness 874-5 
air-bone gap (ABG) 226, 242 
analysis 220, 224, 604 
air-conduction audiogram 217 
air-conduction audiometry 242, 359 
Bekesy audiometers 228 
manual 225-6 
masking 362 
standards 246 
air-conduction hearing aids 408 
air-conduction hearing loss 358, 359 
air pressure in tympanic cavity 4 
air-bone gap surgery 608

930 
Index
allergy and OME 385 
Alpert’s syndrome 368 
u-tectorin 49, 53 
Alport syndrome 52, 397 
in children 867
gene-knockout mouse model 452 
progressive SNHL 454 
Alstrom syndrome 
in children 867 
progressive SNHL 453 
alternative dispute resolution (ADR) 138 
Altman atresia classification 607 
American Cued Speech 518 
aminoglycosides
intratympanic injection 899 
ototoxic damage 33, 55, 463—4, 644 
fetal 152-3 
genetic factors 464 
mechanism 463 
amitriptyline 896, 897 
amplification
active mechanical 260 
in adults 533-53 
electrophysiological 274-5 
differential 275 
personal communicators 545 
amplification devices 20 
amplitude measures 205, 277 
amplitude of sound 157 
intensity coding 184, 189 
and cochlear implants 420 
ampulla 9, 641 
ampullary crest 9, 10 
innervation 705 
amusia 502 
amygdaloid body 188 
anacusis 588 
analgesics and NIHL 482 
anamnesis 349, 373 
anaplastic schwannomas 656 
anatomy
auditory system, peripheral 3-8 
central auditory nervous system 179-84 
cochlear nucleus 169 
developmental 147-51 
hair cells 704 
horizontal gaze 782-3 
neurotransmission 193 
radiology 101-3 
vertical gaze 782-3 
vestibular system 641 
labyrinths 641, 701 
vestibular nerve 641 
vestibule 8, 9-11 
voluntary gaze 789-90 
anechoic rooms/chambers 201, 588 
aneurysms 652
of vein of Galen 653 
anger and balance disorders 880-1 
angular acceleration 701
animal models 190-1 
ankle strategy 750 
anotia 352 
anoxia
cochlear 455 
and haemorrhage 32 
ANSI standards 138, 204, 211-12 
anterior inferior cerebellar artery (A1CA) 
121-2
in cochlear ischaemia 455 
anterior ventral cochlear nucleus 168 
cell types 179 
receptive fields 169 
anti-emetics 892, 895 
anti-inflammatory drugs
for autoimmune inner ear disease 79 
for collagen-induced ear lesions 67 
antibiotic treatment 
acute otitis media 387 
cochlear period of sensitivity 152-3 
in Meniere’s disease 809-10 
ototoxic damage 645 
see also specific drugs 
antibodies
anticochlear 62, 63 
collagen-specific 66 
non-specific 69
and steroid treatment response 69 
viral 69
see also monoclonal antibodies 
anticholinergics 892, 894 
antidepressants in tinnitus 561 
antigravity muscles 773 
antihistamines 894 
anxiety after screening 344-5 
anxiety attacks 
elicitors 873 
primary anxiety 873—4 
secondary anxiety 874 
anxiety disorders 871-5 
diagnosis 871-5 
pre-existing 882-3
and response to optic flow stimuli 877 
unsteadiness 754, 755 
with vestibular dysfuncation 872-3 
vestibular testing abnormalities 745 
anxiety-related tinnitus 556, 561 
aortic stenosis 853 
aperiodic excitation 311-12 
apoptosis 242
noise-induced 489 
Approved List of Bacterial Names 139 
apraxic gait 777 
arachnoid cysts 
imaging 118-19 
and tinnitus 627-8, 630 
aragonite crystals 701, 704 
arousal state 881 
arrhythmias 852-3 
arteriovenous malformations 652-3
dural 627, 629 
articulation
places of 312, 313, 314 
voicing/manner of 313-14 
artificial ears 207, 242 
artificial mastoid 207, 242 
aspartate 194 
asphyxia, perinatal 401-2 
assessment of hearing 349-71 
anamnesis 349 
voice intensities used 350 
assistive listening devices 410 
FM systems 504 
assistive sensory devices 331-3 
astrocytomas 
diffuse 658 
pilocytic 657-8 
ataxia 900 
atelectasis 38 
atherosclerosis 650-1 
atresia see congenital ear atresia 
atretic EAM 353 
attention deficits 188 
attic 5
cholesteatomas in 356 
attic retraction pocket 917 
atticoanstrostomy 918 
atticotomy 919 
audiograms 225, 242
air conduction audiometry 228 
bone conduction audiometry 229 
classification 233 
Bekesy 232, 233 
hereditary non-syndromal SNHL 453 
spurious 226 
Audiological, Epidemiological and Genetic 
Definitions 90 
audiological rehabilitation 513-31
activity/participation improvements 529 
ancillary help/services 526-7 
attitude/understanding of patient 521 
behavioural approach 598-9 
changes to physical/cultural environment 
528
communication status 517-19 
auditory 517
non-verbal communication 519 
previous rehabilitation 519 
sign language 518-19 
speech/language production 518 
visual 517-18 
contextual factors 
environmental 518 
personal 519-20 
counselling 528 
definition 513 
disablements 513-14 
evaluation 516-17 
information provision 527 
instrument modification 528
  

Index 
931
instrumentation
for communication 523-4 
environmental aids 522 
personal instruments 521-2 
for use in daily living 523 
management model
continuing remediation 527-9 
evaluation 516-20 
integration/decision-making 520-7 
outcome measures 529-30
of instrument effectiveness 529 
for patient quality of life 530 
for patient rehabilitation 529 
of service provision 529-30 
performance-based improvements 529 
quality of life improvements 529 
related fuctions/activities 520 
satisfaction-based improvements 529 
Shortened Hearing Aid Performance 
Inventory for the Elderly 530 
skill building 527-8 
strategy 524
goal setting 525 
hearing tactics 525-6 
philosophy/personality 525 
see also aural rehabilitation 
audiological tinnitus 556, 561 
audiometric equipment 206-10 
audiometers 206-8, 224, 242 
Bekesy 228 
standards 245, 359 
booths 359 
calibration of 204 
audiometric picture 242 
audiometric threshold tests 229, 231-2, 359 
in children 374, 375 
audiometry 224-5, 242 
for atretic EAM 353 
with earphone listening 225 
electric response audiometry 209 
environment 209 
high-frequency 485 
manual 225-8, 359-60 
in NIHL 484, 490 
play 426
reference zero level 225 
with sound field listening 225-6 
see also pure tone audiometry; self- 
recording audiometry 
audiotory cortex 185-7 
audit, medical/clinical 134, 139 
auditory acuity 242, 588 
auditory adaptation, abnormal 229-30, 232 
auditory agnosia 502 
auditory analysis
in cochlear hearing impairment 317 
experimental 316
importance in speech perception 317-18 
auditory brainstem/cortex imaging 103 
auditory brainstem implants 628
auditory brainstem responses (ABRs) 68, 
185, 278-81 
abnormalities 185 
in autoimmune mice 79 
and CANS lesion sites 500 
in children 375 
clinical assessment 566 
cochlear imlpant assessment 426-7 
in diagnosis 284-5 
generators 279 
in infant screening 339 
accuracy 341, 342, 343 
neuro-otological measures 280 
non-pathological factors 280-1 
in tinnitus 566
see also brainstem auditory-evoked 
potentials 
auditory cells 451 
auditory cognitive test 500 
auditory cortex 171, 175 
ablation 175
auditory stimulation influences 191 
cat vs primate 170, 174 
electrical stimulation 190 
lateralization 190 
nerve activity in silence 557 
responses, diversity of 174, 175 
responses in monkey 176 
selectivity 175 
stimulation for tinnitus 628 
temporal responses 189 
tonotopic organization 189 
vascular anatomy 192 
auditory cortical potentials 282-4, 285 
generators 284 
waveform 283 
auditory disability with normal hearing see 
King Kopetzky syndrome 
auditory disorders, epidemiology of 51 
auditory evoked magnetic field 566 
auditory evoked potentials 272 
classification 271 
descriptions 276-85 
factors affecting 271-2 
auditory hallucinations 588, 589 
auditory long-latency/late evoked potentials 
(ALEPs) see auditory cortical 
potentials
auditory middle-latency evoked responses 
(AMEPs) 281-2, 285 
auditory modality 157 
auditory nerve
activity in silence 557, 558 
lack of, and cochlear implants 621 
auditory pathways
descending control 176 
development 151, 152 
auditory plasticity restoration 445, 504 
auditory processing 309-21 
disorders 496
see also central auditory processing 
disorders 
speech 314-20
perceptual cues 313, 314 
stages 310 
auditory sensitivity 242, 588 
auditory signals 157-8 
auditory stimulation experiments 190 
auditory subcortex 185-7 
auditory system 
anatomy 3-8
developmental 147-51 
ascending anatomical pathways 169 
filtering 157-8 
physiology 157-77 
developmental 151-3 
plasticity 153-5 
sensitivity reduction 164, 176 
auditory thalamocortical evoked responses
281-2, 285 
auditory thresholds see hearing thresholds 
auditory training 504 
auditory tubes see Eustachian tubes 
auditory-oral communication 325 
auditory-verbal communication 325 
aural rehabilitation 
in presbyacusis 20 
see also audiological rehabilitation 
auricle 242, 352 
autoantibodies 68 
autoantigens
68-kDa protein 71-2 
for inner ear disease 73-4 
non-tissue-specific 71-3 
autoimmune diseases/disorders 61-2 
affecting hearing 62 
criteria for 62 
encephalitis 649 
inner ear 64-71, 459, 814 
animal models 78-9 
differential diagnosis 807 
labyrinthitis 105, 106-7 
sensorineural hearing loss see under 
hearing loss
systemic
complications 77
in immune tolerance induction 80 
inner ear involvement 76, 79 
automated auditory brainstem response 
screening 339, 343, 344 
autonomic dysfunction 
causes 851 
and falls 835
and orthostatic hypotension 850 
tinnitus suffering 560 
autonomy 441-2 
autophony 588
autosomal dominant inheritance 52-3 
hearing impairment 53 
in children 393-5, 394
  

932 
Index
linkage analysis 49 
otosclerosis 56 
pedigree patterns 48 
autosomal recessive inheritance 
hearing impairment 53 
in children 394, 395-7 
localization 49 
pedigree patterns 48 
autosomal trisomy 370 
avoidance 882-3 
combatting 885
B
P 242
P'tubulin 73, 78-9
bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) 50 
bacterial infections
causing otitis media 25 
inner ear 34-6, 458 
vestibular system 38, 644-5 
bacterial labyrinthitis 105, 106 
balance
and ageing 20-1, 22, 671-90 
assessment 682, 683, 775 
in children 861-3 
and lesion localization 775-7 
maintenance 672, 674-6 
normal/abnormal 773 
and OME 386 
recovery mechanisms 674-6 
age-related deterioration 677 
regulation 21 
retraining 857
see also dynamic equilibrium; stability; 
static equilibrium 
balance control 665, 669, 683 
and ageing 671-2, 676-7, 777 
adaptability 680 
ankle strategy 675 
arm movements 680 
change-in-support reactions 676 
cognitive role 675 
compensatory grasping 681 
compensatory stepping 681, 682 
conceptual model 674 
with fixed BOS 678-80 
hip strategy 676 
principles 672-6 
rehabilitation strategies 777-8 
sensory input 675 
somatosensory contributions 674 
stepping behaviour 681 
initiation 682 
unperturbed stance 678-9 
balance disorders 
and ageing 643 
and anger 880-1
in children
balance assessment 861-3 
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
865
central nervous system disease 863-4
demyelinating disease 864
differential diagnosis 863
epilepsy 863
genetic 866-7
history-taking 861
Meniere’s disease 864-5
meningitis 865
middle ear disease 864
migraine 864
ototoxic damage 866
psychosomatic dizziness 864
trauma 864
tumours 864
vestibular end-organ diseases 864-5 
vestibular neuronitis 864 
epidemiology 94-5 
neurological causes 819-29 
neurological examination 749 
patient history 774-5 
and perfectionist traits 883—4 
and pre-existing anxiety 882-3 
and social withdrawal 879-90 
and somatization 883 
unremitting/disabling 877-81 
and depression 878-9 
and impaired concentration 878 
vestibular testing abnormalities 744-5 
vulnerability factors 882—4 
balance, loss of
health previous to 774 
precipitants 672-4 
psychatric illnessses 774-5 
risk factors 671 
vestibular lesions 774 
see also instability 
Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging 17 
bandpass filters 158-9, 274, 275 
270° ’barbecue’ manouevre 908, 911 
baroceptor reflexes 694, 850 
barotrauma 466, 467 
basal cell carcinomas 352 
basal ganglia disorders 754, 776-7 
base of support (BOS) 672, 675 
base width of gait 775 
basilar artery 183-4 
basilar membrane
in otoacoustic emissions 260 
travelling waves 159-60 
tuning curve 163, 164 
Baughn database 477 
behavioural ablation experiments 190-1 
behavioural observation audiometry (BOA)
374
behavioural tests
of central auditory function 414, 497-501
for hearing loss 342, 344 
behavioural therapy 911 
behind-the-ear (BTE) devices 
cochlear implants 436, 620 
hearing aids 534 
Bekesy audiograms, classification of 232, 233 
Bekesy audiometers 242 
Bekesy audiometric patterns 230 
in recessive deafness 377-8 
Bekesy audiometry 228-30, 231, 232 
see also self-recording audiometry 
Bell’s palsy 34 
bendroflurozide 898 
beneficence 440-1
benign intracranial hypertension 291, 296 
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 94, 
739, 805, 811-13, 823 
in children 865 
clinical features 812 
diagnostic characteristics 906 
signature nystagmus 802 
surgery 911, 924-5 
testing for 726
vestibular rehabilitation 905-11 
outcome evaluation studies 910 
vestibular testing abnormalities 744 
benzodiazepines 885-6, 894 
berry aneurysms 652 
beta-blockers 847, 849, 897 
betahistine 898-9 
Bezold-Jarisch reflex 847, 848 
bilateral cochlear implants 621-2 
bilateral hearing aid fitting 538 
bilateral horizontal gaze palsy 784 
bilateral peripheral vestibulopathy 801 
bilateral vestibulopathy 813-14 
in children 865
predominant forward/backward falls 824 
with sensory neuropathy 825 
vestibular deafferation 801 
vestibular rehabilitation 904 
bilingualism and cochlear implants 621 
binaural hearing 254-5
in conductive hearing loss 255-6 
binaural interaction tests 498, 499, 500 
binaural interference 538 
binaural listening 538 
binaural redundancy 536 
binaural squelch 537 
Bing-Siebenmann malformations 30 
Binswanger’s disease 651 
blast injury 32 
blood pressure
24 hour profiles 850 
in dizziness 856, 857 
monitoring, phasic 844 
vestibular influences 692-4 
vestibulosympathetic reflexes 695 
blood supply
auditory cortex 192
  

Index 
933
in autoimmune SNHL 66 
brainstem 183-4 
cochleo vestibular system 10 
corpus callosum 188 
body sway see postural sway 
bone-anchored hearing aids (BAHA) 409, 
615-18 
abutments 617, 618 
in atresia 607 
bilateral use 616 
indications 615-16 
principles 615 
results 618 
surgery 617-18
contraindications 617 
bone conduction audiometry 242, 359 
Bekesy audiometers 229 
manual 226-8 
masking 362 
bone-conduction hearing aids 408-9 
bone conduction hearing loss 358, 359 
bone conduction threshold measurement
227
bone deposition 40 
bone diseases 38 
bony abnormalities 40-2, 466-9 
bony labyrinth 8 
bony labyrinth lesions 111-13 
BPPV see benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo
Brachmann de Lange syndrome see Cornelia 
de Lange syndrome 
bradyarrhythmias 852 
brain auditory pathways see auditory 
pathways 
brain tumours and tinnitus 628, 631 
brainstem
crossection at pons 181 
sound processing 168 
tonotopic organization 189 
vascular anatomy 183-4 
brainstem auditory-evoked potentials 
(BAEPs) 152, 271 
typical measurements 280 
see also auditory brainstem responses 
brainstem lesions 185 
brainstem neurones 799 
brainstem nuclei 184 
brainstem pathways 171, 174
vestibulosympathetic/baroceptor reflexes
694
brainstem structures 184-92 
branchial cysts 353
branchio-oto-renal syndrome 52, 353, 395 
in children 867 
Brandt-Daroff positional exercises 905, 907 
breathing exercises 911 
British Standards Institution 247 
BS 5330 218
BSI standards 138, 139, 204, 211
Buddhism/Buddhist law 132, 134-5 
Bums and Robinson database 477 
burst neurones 782, 783
c
c-Raf in autoimmune diseases 73 
CADASIL 652
calcium channel antagonists 894, 897 
calcium ions in tinnitus 557 
calibration 242
acoustic impedence/otoadmittance meters 
208
audiometers 206, 207-8, 209 
sound generators 208-9 
sound level meters 205-6 
call-specific neurones 175 
caloric fixation-suppression index 730-1 
caloric test 728-31, 802
abnormalities, significance of 741-2 
bilateral reduction 741 
biophysical basis 729 
bithermal binaural 862-3 
in children 867 
confounding factors 730 
directional proponderance 741-2, 743 
instructions to patient 729, 730 
neural activity 799 
normative limits 724-5 
in recovered vestibular neuritis 806 
sample data 731-3 
unilateral reduction 741, 742 
vs posturography 751 
Camurati-Engelmann disease 643 
canal system
collapse see external auditory meatus, 
collapse 
paresis 806
planar organization 706-8 
canalith repositioning manouevre 906 
canalolithiasis 823 
Candida albicans 646 
canon law 135 
canonical babbling 326, 327 
capillary telangiectasias 653 
cardio-audio syndrome see Jervell Lange- 
Neilsen syndrome 
cardiovascular dizziness 
clinical predictors 842 
vestibular influences 841-53 
cardiovascular responses 
head flexion 696 
linear acceleration 696 
vestibular influences 691, 692-4, 693, 
695-6
carotid sinus massage 844, 844-5, 846 
carotid sinus syndrome 
clinical features 843-4
definition 842-3 
diagnosis 844-5 
epidemiology 843 
pathophysiology 844 
carotid stenosis, surgery for 626-7 
CASALA (computer-aided speech and
language assessment procedure) 438 
catarrhal otitis media see otitis media, with 
effusion 
cautious gait 775, 827-8 
cavernous malformatins/angiomas 653 
CCFP analyser 289 
benefits 303
comparison with direct measurement 292 
cellular schwannomas 655 
cellular vulnerability to noise 487-8 
central auditory disorders 495-511 
dysfunction in children 413-14 
see also central auditory processing 
disorders
central auditory nervous system (CANS) 
anatomy 179-84 
behavioural tests 499-501 
electrophysiological tests 501-2 
history 495 
in presbyacusis 16 
redundancy in 495 
test results/lesion sites 500 
central auditory processes 495-6 
central auditory processing 496 
central auditory processing disorders 
(CAPD) 495 
aetiological bases 496-7 
assessment
effects of peripheral hearing loss 502-3 
protocols 497-503 
test battery, need for 503 
case presentation
audiological findings 507-8 
history 507 
management 508 
radiological findings 508 
classification 497 
clinical presentation 497 
comorbid conditions 497 
definitions 496 
management 508
auditory plasticity restoration 504 
linguistic cognitive enhancement 
504-6
perceptual skill enhancement 504 
speech signal enhancement 504 
management, non-medical 503-6 
multidisciplinary approach 497, 508 
prevalence 496 
range of severity 502 
central auditory/vestibular pathways 
infarctions/ischaemic lesions 121-2 
structures 122 
central deafness 502
  

934 
Index
central nervous system
age-related changes and balance 677 
plasticity 889 
central nervous system pathology 267 
suspected 350 
central vestibular disorders 
causes 819 
classification 819-21 
plane-specific 819, 821 
topographic diagnosis 820 
vestibular rehabilitation 902, 904 
central vestibular syndromes 822 
centre of foot pressure (COP) 678 
and body sway 750 
centre of mass (COM) 672 
in reactive control 675 
centre specializing in auditory measurement
(CSAM) 217 
cerebellar arteries 183-4 
cerebellar disorders
effect on eye movements 788-9 
gait/balance features 776 
management 778 
cerebellar infarction 808 
differential diagnosis 805 
cerebellar vermis in cardiovascular 
regulation 697 
cerebellopontine angle (CPA) 
lesions 118-21 
MR imaging 102 
radiology 118-21 
tumours 44, 180, 627, 630
vestibular testing abnormalities 
745
cerebellum
vestibular pathways to 642 
in vestibulosympathetic reflexes 697, 
753-4
cerebral amyloid angiopathy 653 
cerebral cortex
areas of acoustic responsivity 186-7 
asymmetry 186, 187 
cell types 185 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
in gusher ear 31, 109 
signal intensity 115 
and skull fractures 31 
cerebrovascular disease 835 
cerebrum 185-92 
cerumen 351
chalice (type I) cells 9, 10 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 72 
CHARGE syndrome 94, 108, 371 
in children 398-9 
MR imaging of temporal bone 454 
progressive SNHL 453 
chemotherapeutic agents 464 
Chiari malformations 626 
classification 643 
children 95-8
hearing-impaired see hearing-impaired 
children
hearing status and cochlear implants 426-8 
Chinese state law 136 
chlorthalidone 898 
cholesteatomas 27-8, 44 
acquired 27-8 
congenital 27, 28, 113 
CT scan/audiograms 459 
development mechanism 917 
infection in 917 
obscured by wax plugs 918 
in otitis media 356, 612, 613 
pathogenesis 28 
surgery
open cavity procedures 918 
principles 919 
risks 921
cholesterol granulomas 26, 44-5, 113 
of petrous apex 121 
chondrodermatitis chronicus helicus 352 
chondromas 113 
chordomas 657 
Christianity 132 
chromosome abnormalities
with ear malformations 370-1 
with hearing impairment 399 
chronic labyrinthitis 105
imaging, preferred technique 107 
chronic otitis media 25, 26, 356, 377, 383 
chronic vestibular insufficiency 801 
Cl see cochlear implants 
ciliogenesis 151 
cinnarazine 893
circulating immune complexes (CICs) 74 
CIS (Continuous Interleaved Sampler) Cl 
system 431-2, 436 
cisplatin 866
ototoxic damage 464 
civil code (Romano-German law) 135 
Clarion Cl system 432, 435-6 
cleiocranial dysostosis 369 
Client Orientated Scale of Improvement 
(COSI) 529-30, 604 
comparative study 605-6 
modified for research 606 
Clinical Evaluation of Language 
Fundamentals 429 
clinical examination 349-50 
hearing-impaired children 373 
clinical governance 139 
clinical guidelines 139 
clinical otosclerosis 41 
clinical problems causing falls 834-6 
clinical speech tests 350 
clonal anergy 80 
clonazepam 885-6 
Coccidioides immitis 646-7 
COCH 53 
cochlea
abnormality in amplification 253-4 
active mechanical amplification 260 
ageing 8 
anatomy 3, 6-8
developmental 147-51 
basal turn gene expression 55 
blood supply 10 
bloodflow in NIHL 489 
coiling in fetus 147-8 
damage 31
microscopic 32 
development 147-53, 152
and auditory cortex development
153-4 
critical periods 152-3 
early cochlear ‘feeding’ 154 
electrical schematic 160 
embryology 147 
function, onset of 152 
hydromechanics 295-6 
immune-mediated disorders 459 
inflammatory reactions 457-8 
malformations 30, 108 
maturation, end of 151 
metabolic disruptions 462, 487-9 
micromechanics 259-60 
MR image 103 
in otosclerosis 608 
in Paget’s disease 40 
physiological development, end of 152 
positive feedback 163—4 
sensory cell organization 148 
sound-induced overstimulation 488, 489 
vascular thickening 39 
cochlear action potentials 160, 161 
cochlear anoxia 455 
cochlear aqueduct 10-11, 295 
importance of patency 298 
cochlear autoimmune diseases 61 
cochlear conductive presbyacusis 16, 38 
cochlear duct presbyacusis 38 
cochlear excitation 166 
cochlear feedback loop 3 
cochlear function and BAHA 618 
cochlear hearing loss 252
and interaural discrimination 254 
and loudness 249-50 
pathophysiology 164 
sound processing in 251 
cochlear implant companies 619 
cochlear implants 417-49, 618-22 
in adults 534, 622 
behind-the-ear processor 436, 620 
bilateral 621-2 
candidacy 621-2 
candidates 107, 118, 124 
in children 409-10 
communication strategy before 430 
complications 620-1 
concept 618-19
  

Index 
935
disablement rating over time 517 
electrode place discrimination 424 
electrodes 620
curved arrays 442, 445 
masking current spread 443 
placement, damage from 434-5 
ethical considerations 440-2 
family support/education 428 
fitting procedure 620 
follow-up 622
frequency/voicing coding 422 
imaging 128-9
implanted microphones 444, 445 
installation 118 
invisibility 444 
loop system 410
maximum number of stimuli 434-5 
maximum stimulus level 437 
maximum stimulus rates 432-4 
minimum age 621 
multichannel 619 
need for 417
non-simultaneous pulsatile stimulation
432-4
objections/solutions 418-26 
place of surgery 620 
predictive factors 
for adults 428-9 
for children 428-30 
preoperative selection 426-30 
medical factors 426 
radio aid systems 409-10 
rehabilitation 
mapping 437-8
speech perceptual space changes 
439-40
speech production over time 438 
speech recognition changes 439—40 
speech recognition over time 438 
reliability 436 
research directions 442-6 
schematic functioning 619 
speech/language development 331-2, 
333
speech-processing strategy 422, 429 
stimulation rate 423 
surgery 436-7 
results 622 
system comparison 432-4 
technological features 430-6 
telemetry 436 
cochlear microphonics 271, 278, 279 
cochlear implant assessment 427 
sound delivery system 279 
cochlear nerve
cellular infiltration 72 
frequency-response area 161 
FTC 162
microvascular compressions 627, 629 
and olivocochlear bundle 193
peripheral tuning 160-1 
cochlear nerve compound action potential 
271
cochlear nerve fibres
dynamic ranges 165, 167 
phase-locking 167 
projections 170
protection by nerve growth factors 444-5, 
446
rate-level functions 166, 172, 173 
tuning
effect of hypoxia 162, 163 
and OF1C loss 165 
tuning curve 180
in discrimination 167 
cochlear nucleus 168-70, 181 
afferent input 180 
anatomy 169, 179-81 
cell types 168, 169, 179-80
response characteristics 169, 171 
response patterns 179 
tuning curves 180 
‘wiring diagram’ 171 
cochlear performance tests 604 
cochlear potentials 277-9 
external recording 278-9 
transtympanic recording 277-8 
cochlear pressure 292-3, 297 
cochlear tumours 110, 112 
cochlear vs retrocochlear lesions 266 
cochleotopic maps 175 
Cogan’s syndrome 62, 459, 461 
cognitive abilities 323-4 
cognitive behaviour modification 573, 576 
cognitive behavioural therapy 594 
cognitive development 430 
cognitive function in dizziness 856 
cognitive potentials 271 
cognitive style development 506 
cognitive-linguistic gaps 324, 500 
Cokayne syndrome 396 
collagen-induced inner ear disease 65-8 
non-human primate model 67 
collagens 68
Combi-40 Cl system 432, 435 
combined approach tympanoplasty 920-1 
combustion tone 588 
Committe on Hearing, Bioacoustics and 
Biomechanics 477 
communication
hearing-impaired children 410-11 
meaning 324-6 
milestones 325, 326, 327 
modes/forms 325
parental choice 325-6 
oral, enhancement of 333 
repair strategies 330-1 
skills, factors affecting 330 
see also language; speech 
communication activity classification 514
communication skills 
training 333
curricula/resources 336 
communicative intention 327-8 
complement in autoimmune ear disease 74 
compressed speech test 498, 501 
compressional bone conduction 227 
computed tomography (CT) 101, 106, 107, 
108
bony labyrinth lesions 107, 111, 112 
cochlear implant surgery 128-9 
endolymphatic sac tumours 111 
high resolution, of inner ear 767 
labyrinthine trauma 107 
labyrinthine tumours 107, 110 
labyrinthitis 107
malformations 107, 107-8, 109, 116 
otosclerosis 112 
temporal bone trauma 113 
tinnitus 125 
computerized dynamic posturography 750, 
751,877 
test conditions encountered 751 
vs clinical counterparts 752 
concentration impairment and balance 
disorders 878 
conditioned orientation reflex audiometry
(COR) 374 
conduction defects 852-3 
conductive cochlear hearing loss 8 
presbyacusis 16 
conductive hearing impairment 
definition 90 
health care provision 91 
conductive hearing loss (CHL) 112, 255-6 
air- vs bone-conducted 255 
outcome guidelines 604 
surgery 606-8 
conductive threshold shift 242 
confidentiality 134 
congenital cholesteatoma 28 
congenital cholesteatomas 27, 113 
congenital disorders/defects 401 
congenital ear atresia 
classification 607 
indication for BAH A 615-16 
surgery 608 
congenital hearing impairment 97 
congenital hearing loss 340-1, 366 
congenital hypothyroidism 401 
congenital malformations see malformations 
congenital nystagmus 795 
congenital ocular motor apraxia (COMA) 
791
congenital syphilis 36 
connected discourse tracking 518 
connexin 26 53, 57 
connexin 31 53, 54 
consent 133
consonant production 312-14
  

936 
Index
age of acquisition 329 
spectograms 314 
in speech intelligibility 330 
constant velocity rotation 761 
context-derived comprehension instruction 
506
contralateral routing of sound 413 
contraversive rotational vertigo with 
ipsiversive falls 821-3 
conversational voice 350 
Cooksey-Cawthorne exercises 891, 902 
Cooperative Research Centre for Cochlear 
Implant Speech and Hearing 
Research 431 
Copenhagen study 17 
Cornelia de Lange syndrome 398 
corneo-retinal potential 717-18, 719 
corpus callosum 188 
corpus callosum size differences 188 
cortical deafness 502 
cortical electrical conduction audiogram 
(CECA) 217 
thresholds 220 
cortical neurone intensity coding 189 
cortical optokinetic reflex 668 
cortical pathway 668 
cortical potentials 271 
cortical vestibular syndromes 821 
corticosteroids
for autoimmune inner ear disease 79 
for OME 387 
counselling
audiological rehabilitation 528 
and cochlear implants 622 
for hearing aid use 20 
tinnitus 572-3, 575-6 
cranial metaphyseal dysplasia 467 
cranial nerve examinations 350 
craniocervical junction 125 
craniofacial abnormalities 385 
dysostoses 30, 368 
malformations 377 
microsomia 367 
crista ampullaris see ampullary crest 
critical band 588 
critical delays 171, 174 
‘critical period’ for acoustical distinctions 
175
cross-hearing 226, 227 
cross-talk 267 
in tinnitus 559 
Crouzon’s syndrome 30 
Cryptococcus neoformans 647 
cryptophthalmos 368 
cued speech 325 
cupula 9
curricula for communication training 336 
customs/customary law 131-2 
cutaneous sensitivity and balance 682 
cyclizine 893, 894
cyclophosphamide 79 
cylindrical (type II) cells 9, 10 
cysticercosis 647 
cytokine antagonists 79 
cytokines 25
cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection 34, 377 
fetal 400 
cytotoxic drugs 79
ototoxic damage 33-4, 644
D
d’ 242
Dandy syndrome see chronic vestibular 
insufficiency 
Danish Mouth-hand System 518 
De la Meilleure liberatory manouevre 907 
deafness 242 
decibel scale 242 
decibels 202, 242
of everyday sounds 360 
Declaration of Helsinki 134 
deep tendon reflex see myotatic reflex 
definitions 139 
see also glossaries 
dehiscence of superior semicircular canal 767 
Deiter’s nucleus 709 
dementia 836
demyelinating disease in children 864 
depression
and balance disorders 878-9 
in elderly fallers 833-4 
signs/symptoms 878 
depression-related tinnitus 556, 561, 562 
dermatitis, acute 352 
dermoid cyst imaging 118 
detection in noise see hearing in noise 
development milestones
communication 325, 326, 327 
motor development 861 
developmental anatomy 147-51 
developmental anomalies 366-71 
developmental physiology 151-3 
developmental plasticity 153-5 
DFNA5 53
diabetes mellitus 462-3 
Diagnosis of Auditory Processing Disorders 
in School-Aged Children 496 
Diagnostic Manual of American Psychiatry 
Association (DSM-IV) see DSM-1V 
diaphanous 1 53 
diazepam 893
dichotic digits test 498, 499, 501 
dichotic speech tests 498, 499, 500 
effects of peripheral hearing loss 502 
DIDMOAD syndrome 455 
diet
intracranial hypertension 301
Meniere’s disease 408, 462, 809,
898 
NIHL 487 
differential non-linear technique 261-2 
diffuse field 588 
dihydroergotamine 895, 896 
dimenhydrinate 893, 894 
diotic listening 537 
diplacusimetry 582 
diplacusis 581-2, 588 
binaural 588 
echoica 588
monaural, tonal/atonal 588 
‘direct drive’ transducers 622 
directional hearing aids 319 
directional microphones 543-4 
directionalization, sound 582-3, 588 
disability
definition 90, 93, 597 
see also activity limitation 
disablements 513-14
contextual factors 515, 519-20 
modifiers 513, 515 
structural/functional 514 
disabling hearing impairment 242-3 
discourse cohesion devices 506 
discrete frequency SRA 230 
discrimination training 333 
disequilibrium and ageing 20 
dispute resolution 138 
distortion product OAEs (DPOAEs) 260, 
265, 484-5 
clinical applications 266 
recording 262, 265 
distraction test 374 
diuretics
in Meniere’s disease 898 
ototoxic damage 33, 464-5 
divided attention tests 498, 499 
Dix-Hallpike manouevre 739-40,
856
dizziness 94, 95
in acute medical illness 853—4 
and agoraphobia 874-5 
ambulatory heart rate 857 
cardiovascular causes 841-53 
carotid sinus syndrome 842-5 
cerebrovascular causes 854-5 
chronic medical causes 854-5 
classification 841 
definition 841 
diagnoses 843 
drug review 855 
electrophysiology 857 
epidemiology 841 
general medical causes 841-60 
management 857-8 
medical assessment 855-7 
blood pressure 856, 857 
examination 855-7
  

Index 
937
history 855, 856 
locomotor examination 857 
neurological examination 856 
visual acuity 857 
neuroradiography 857 
non-cardiovascular causes 853-5 
and obsessive-compulsive personality 
disorder 883—4 
in older patients 777, 841, 854 
management 842 
orthostatic hypotension 849-52 
overlap with syncope/falls 843 
provocation tests 854 
psychiatric 870
psychogenic vs psychiatric 884-5 
psychosomatic 864 
spinal causes 855 
surgery 917-27 
synonyms 841 
vasovagal syndrome 846-9 
vestibular lesions 774 
vestibular review 857 
in younger patients 841, 854 
Dizziness Handicap Inventory 717 
DNA in gene identification 50 
cDNA library screening 50, 470 
doctor-patient relationship 133 
doorbells 523 
Doppler shift 588 
dorsal acoustical stria 180 
dorsal cochlear nucleus 168, 179 
‘lateral’ inhibition 169-70, 172 
receptive fields 169 
dorsal midbrain syndrome 786-7 
dorsolateral profrontal cortex 789, 790 
downbeat nystagmus 794, 822 
with backward falls 826-7 
drug therapy 900 
Down’s syndrome 399 
dramamine 894 
drop attacks 809, 823-4, 836 
drug-induced ear malformations 371 
drugs
affecting neurotransmission 193 
and balance 21
for vestibular dysfunction 892-4 
DSM-IV 871-2 
ductus reuniens 9 
dural fistulae 125 
duration pattern test 191 
dyazide 898
dynamic equilibrium 672 
recovery 673 
dynamic posturography 750 
dynamic ranges 249-50 
and hearing aids 517, 541 
dynamic visual acuity test 776 
dysacusis 588 
dyslexia 187
dysstereoacusis 582-3, 589
E
ear abnormalities with endocrine disorders 
371
ear anatomy 3—4 
ear canal
external 3, 4 
tumours 42-4 
ear diseases 62 
ear dominance 175, 176 
ear examination, clinical 350-7
external auditory meatus collapse 351 
ear, external
acquired malformations 352 
congenital malformations 352 
ear malformations, drug-induced 371 
ear nose and throat (ENT) study 94 
earphones 207, 214, 225 
pressure of 224 
earpits deafness syndrome 369 
eccentric rotation 761, 762 
echocardiography 853 
echoic room/chamber 589 
Edinburgh study 17 
education support 411
with cochlear implants 619 
in rehabilitation 526 
vestibular/psychiatric complaints 885-6 
Edward’s syndrome 399—400 
efference copies 667 
efferent autitory neurotransmission 194 
efferent nervous system 558-9 
auditory 192-3 
electric response audiometry 209 
electro-oculography/electronystagmography 
717-19, 735 
in children 862 
effect of eye blinks 719 
electrode placement 717-18 
quantitative analysis 719 
vs video-oculography 72 J, 735 
electroacoustics standards 245 
electrochemical environment 160 
electrochemical gradients 7 
electrocochleogram 284-5 
electrocochleography 278 
in children 375 
in Meniere’s disease 809, 810 
electrodes 273-4
cochlear implants 437, 620 
electronystagmography 717 
surface 273, 279 
tympanic membrane 278 
electroencephalogram (EEG) 271 
electromotility 8
electronystagmography see electro- 
oculography 
electrophysiology 271-87 
CANS tests 501-2
correlation with audiological tests 272 
pathology determination 272 
research 272 
use in children 373-4 
see also evoked potentials 
electrotactile aids 410 
embryology 366 
emerging technologies 759-70 
emotional distress 593-4 
employment/labour services 526 
encephalitis 124, 377 
autoimmune 649 
with predominant vertigo 822 
vestibular involvement 648 
endocochlear bone formation 621 
endolymph 6, 9, 10-11, 63 
communication routes 295 
in hydrops 37 
K concentration 54 
in Meniere’s disease 459, 460 
in movement 701 
endolymphatic duct 11, 37 
endolymphatic sac 11, 65 
cytokine release 458 
as defensive organ 63-4 
endolymphatic sac tumours 111 
endolymphatic surgery 809 
endolymphatic system malformations 31 
energy spectra of sounds 166 
at different intensities 167 
Engelmann disease see Camurati-Engelmann 
disease 
English common law 135 
ependymomas 659 
ephaptic transmission see cross-talk 
epidemic vertigo 822 
epidermoid cysts 118, 119 
epidermoid formation 28 
epilepsy 822, 825, 874 
in children 863 
epithelial proliferation 26 
epitympanum see attic 
Epley particle repositioning manouevre 812, 
813, 906, 909 
Epstein syndrome 454 
equilibrium see balance 
Equitest 750
equivalent rectangular bandwidth (ERB) 161 
ergot drugs 895-6
ERKs (extracellular regulated kinases) 73 
ESPrit 436
ethacrynic acid 33, 644 
ethics 133—4, 440-2 
EUROMET 243 
European Court of Justice 137 
Eustachian tubes 4
dysfunction/occlusion 384 
infants’ vs adults’ 384 
event-related potentials see evoked 
potentials
  

938 
Index
evidence 137
evidence-based medicine 139 
evoked otoacoustic emissions (EOAEs)
589
evoked potentials 271
auditory brainstem responses 279-81 
auditory cortical/long-latency/late evoked
282-4
auditory thalamocortical/middle-latency 
281-2 
cochlear 277-9 
normalcy of 284 
recording
amplification 274-5 
analog-to-digital signal conversion 
275, 276 
electrodes 273—4, 278 
factors affecting 272 
noise 273
output ambiguity 274 
sampling rates 276 
signal filtering 274-5 
techniques/procedures 272-6 
waveform analysis 276 
recording system 277 
Ewald’s law 669 
second 707 
excitation 
cochlear 166 
patterns 318 
voiced/laryngeal 310-11 
voiceless/aperiodic 311-12 
exon trapping 50 
exostoses 354 
expert witnesses 137 
expressive language scores 332 
extensor tone 773-4 
external auditory canal 159 
external auditory meatus 3, 159 
collapse 222, 224
in hearing assessment 351 
malformations 353-4 
extralinguistic behaviours 328 
eye movement disorders 
diagnosis 790-5 
drug therapy 900 
eye movements 
in children 862
compensatory 668, 704, 705, 706 
feedback 712
and vestibulo-ocular reflex 711 
control of 784
effect of cerebellar lesions 788-9 
effect of thalamic lesions 788 
functional classes 781-2 
goals of 781
head-only rotational testing 765 
normal/abnormal 781-96 
skew deviation 785 
in unconscious patients 793
F
facial nerve, fascicle of 784 
‘falling syndromes’ 835-6 
falls/falling 672, 831-40 
causes 834-6
clinical management of patient 836-8 
balance/gait assessment 837 
examination 837 
history-taking 837 
treatment/rehabilitation 837-8 
cognitive/affective problems 836 
complications 
death 831-2 
injury 832-3
social/psychological effects 833-4 
drugs causing 836 
drugs increasing risk 901 
elderly people 831-2 
environmental factors 836 
epidemiology 831—4 
fear of 683, 833^1 
‘healthy elderly’ 833 
and institutional care 831, 834 
and lateral stability 675-6 
overlap with dizziness/syncope 843 
precipitants 673
effects of ageing 677-8 
prevalence 831 
prevention 684
prevention of recurrence 837-8 
risk factors 834 
risk of 671 
falls, symptomatic 
central 825-7 
vestibular 821-7 
peripheral 821—4 
familial episodic ataxia 822 
familial mixed deafness with branchial arch 
defects 369 
familial presbyacusis 14-15 
families
effects of screening programmes 344-5 
investigation 412
support with cochlear implants 428 
fear of falling 833-4 
fear of heights 875-6 
fetal alcohol syndrome 376 
fetal hearing 153
fetal infections causing hearing impairment
376, 377, 400
FFA 243
fibrillary astrocytoma 123 
fibrocystic sclerosis 26 
fibromuscular dysplasia 654 
of internal carotid artery 127 
fibrosis 32
fibrous dysplasia 112 
filtering
of electrophysiological signals 274, 275 
of sound 157-9, 316 
impaired 317-18 
finger spelling 518 
fistula auris 352 
fistula scan 918 
fistula sign 354, 917, 918 
fistulae
after mastoidectomy 922 
dural 125 
management 921 
perilymphatic 113-14, 298 
fixation
and nystagmus 795 
saccades during 790 
fixation test 723, 782 
in children 862 
spontaneous nystagmus in 736 
fludrocortisone 847, 849 
flunarizine 896, 897 
‘foam and dome’ test 752 
forced choice adaptive procedures 375 
forced prolonged position 908 
forensic audiometry 231 
formants 310-11, 312 
forward falls 823
four frequency average (FFA) 218, 222 
fractures 31-2, 37 
after falls 832-3
temporal bone 113-14, 466, 468 
Framingham study 17 
free field 589 
free-field microphones 205 
French state law 136 
Frenzel’s glasses 823, 862 
frequency 157, 243 
coding 185, 251-2
research directions 442-4 
critical band 226
discrimination 166-7, 185, 251, 588 
lesion effects 190-1 
and selectivity 168 
‘importance functions’ 317 
interaural differences 536 
mapped on basilar membrane 160 
of noise in sociocusis 15 
place/labelled lines coding 165
and cochlear implants 419-20, 422 
in discrimination 166-7 
and presbyacusis 13-14, 15 
resolution 251 
selectivity 162, 590 
and SNHL 538
temporal/time coding 165-6, 184-5, 
252-3,316 
auditory cortex 189-90 
and cochlear implants 418-19 
in cochlear implants 443 
in cortex 189-90 
voice ranges 311, 317-18
  

Index 
939
frequency analysis 203, 317-18 
frequency pattern test 191, 498, 501 
frequency-related paracuses 581-2 
frequency spectrum 4 
frequency threshold curve 161 
cochlear nerve 162 
frequency weighting 203 
sound level meters 205 
front cortex lesions 111 
frontal eye field 789-90 
frontal lobe gait 835, 836 
Fukuda test 803
functional ear surgery see hearing
impairment, surgical management 
functional hearing loss see non-organic 
hearing loss 
functional MR 124, 125 
functional MRI see under magnetic 
resonance imaging 
fungal infections see mycotic infections 
furunculosis 353 
fusiform aneurysms 652
G
GABA 194
GABA-mediated inhibitory system 170, 173 
gait
age-related 835 
balance in 673, 675-6 
clinical assessment 748, 775 
clinical patterns 827 
frontal lobe 836 
impaired control 677 
and lesion localization 775-7 
modification to avoid risk 677-8 
perturbations during 676, 677-8 
unsteadiness 747 
gait disorders 
diagnosis 748-9
topographical 747, 748 
neurological examination 749 
in older people 776 
rehabilitation strategies 777-8 
gait syndromes 827 
galvanic vestibular stimulation 765-6 
gangliogliomas 659-60 
ganglion of Scarpa see vestibular ganglion 
gap detection method 252, 253 
gargoylism see mucopolysaccaridoses 
gaze see horizontal gaze; vertical gaze 
gaze-evoked nystagmus 709, 794-5 
gaze-evoked nystagmus test
abnormalities, significance of 737, 738 
instructions to patient 729 
gaze-evoked tinnitus 560 
gaze stabilization 665, 668-9 
vestibulo-ocular reflex 701
gender
and ABRs 281 
and dizziness 97 
and presbyacusis 13-14, 18, 19 
gene mapping 47, 48 
gene therapy
inner ear disorders 470 
T-cell mediated 80 
General Medical Council (GMC) 133 
generalized anxiety disorder 872 
genetic balance disorders 866-7 
genetic diseases 
defining 47-8 
gene identification 49-51 
investigation 47-51 
sporadic conditions 397-9 
genetic factors
auditory/vestibular disorders 47-59 
hearing-impaired children 377-8 
hearing impairment 470 
noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) 483-4 
osteogenesis imperfecta 40 
otitis media with effusion 385 
otosclerosis 40, 466 
ototoxic damage 55 
in presbyacusis 14-15 
genetic markers 56 
gentamicin 866, 899
intratympanic injection 923 
German law 
judgements 138 
Romano-German law 135 
state law 136 
Gerontological and Geriatric Population 
Study of Goteborg 17, 20 
Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease 644 
giant cilia 15, 16, 39 
glandular metaplasia 26, 29 
Glasgow Benefit Plot 604 
Glasgow Hearing Aid Benefit Profile 529,
548
glial cell abnormalities 659 
inclusions 643—4 
gliomatosis cerebri 658 
globular cortex neurones 179 
globuli ossei 40 
globus jugulotympanicum 126 
glomus tumours 357, 627 
glossaries 242-4, 588-91 
glue ear see otitis media with effusion 
glutamate 194 
glycine 194
Goldenhar’s syndrome see craniofacial 
abnormalities, microsomia 
Goteborg study 17, 20 
graduated masking 226 
graviceptors 666 
grommet insertion 388-9 
guidelines 139 
for LRECs 134
Guidelines on the Practice of Ethics Committees 
for Medical Research 134 
gunshot injury 32 
gusher ear 31, 108-9, 397 
imaging 129
H
habilitation see rehabilitation 
habituation/retraining in tinnitus 576 
haemangioblastomas 657 
haemangiopericytomas 657 
haematoma 352 
haemorrhage
auditory cortex 123 
in cholesterol granuloma 45 
into cochlea 32-3 
leukemia-induced 45 
in otitis media 26 
haemosiderosis 654 
hair cells 
ageing 8, 37 
anatomy 704 
and cochlear anoxia 455 
differentiation 148, 149 
electrochemical environment 160 
in hydrops 37 
IHCs vs OHCs 7-8 
innervation 8, 151, 702-3 
maturation 151 
physiology 702-3 
in presbyacusis 15, 16, 39 
in presbybalance 21 
sound-induced overstimulation 489 
in sound transduction 160 
supernumerary 148-9, 150 
vestibular 9
vulnerability to noise 487-8 
see also inner hair cells; outer hair cells 
Hallpike’s manouevre 739-40, 856 
hallucinations, auditory 588, 589 
handicap
definition 90, 93, 597 
minimization 408-11
assistive listening devices 410 
education support 411 
environmental changes 410 
see also hearing aids 
as outcome measure 605 
see also participation restriction 
handicap level of hearing inability 218 
haptic cues 675 
head injuries 94
head movement/orientation 666, 667, 668 
canal excitation 706-8 
compensatory eye movements 704-5 
neural activity 799 
ocular compensation 704
  

940 
Index
head-only rotational testing 764-5 
head-thrust test 776, 782 
head-up tilt 848
Health and Safety Commission 589 
health care provision 
implications for 96-8 
indicators for PCHI 96 
need/demand/supply 90-1 
in rehabilitation 526 
Health Utilities Index 530 
health visitor distraction test (HVDT) 96 
Hear-Say hybrid speech processor 436 
hearing aid fitting 97, 534—42 
bilateral 538
earmould selection 540-1 
evaluation/outcome measures 547-8 
and feedback 544 
fine-tuning 547
environment examples 547 
frequency shaping 538-9 
future developments 548 
implementation 545-6 
output limiting
compression-limiting 540 
peak clipping 539-40 
prescription regimens 538-9 
real-ear measurements 546 
and rehabilitation service 533 
and training 20, 527 
unilateral vs bilateral 536-8 
verification, acoustical 546 
hearing aids 207, 533-53 
air-conduction 408 
attitude of wearer over time 534-5 
automatic volume control (AVC) 542 
benefits 94, 98 
binaural 408 
body-worn 534 
bone-anchored (BAHA) 409 
bone-conduction 408-9 
bone conduction fittings 545 
BTE (behind-the-ear) 534 
BTE vs ITE 535
CIC (completely-in-the-canal) 534 
compression 541—2 
contralateral routing of sound 413 
digital signalling 536, 544 
directional 319, 543-4 
disadvantages 622-5 
distortion 539, 540 
earmoulds 535, 540-1 
and feedback 544 
electrotactile/vibrotactile 410 
evaluation/outcome measures 547 
feature 534-42 
feedback management 544-5 
frequency gain characteristics 538-9 
functional elements 535 
future developments 319 
implantable 545
invisibility 444, 522, 534 
ITC (in-the-canal) 534 
ITE (in-the-ear) 534, 544 
modular 541 
linear processing 538-9, 546 
mechanism of action 536 
miniaturization 534-5 
multi-memory devices 542-3 
multichannel processing 541 
National Acoustics Laboratory regimen 
538-9 
new designs 522 
noise reduction systems 544-5 
patient selection 534 
potential use 94 
prevalence of use 93-4 
psychological aspects 596-7 
remote control devices 542 
as signals of hearing status 535 
speech processing 318-20 
styles 534-6
threshold for provision 91 
in tinnitus 572, 573 
for unilateral hearing loss 413 
vs cochlear implants 331-2 
wide dynamic range compression 
(WDRC) 542, 546 
see also cochlear implants 
hearing conservation plan (HCP) 478, 479, 
490
hearing devices 605 
hearing disability estimation 605 
hearing disorders 
epidemiology 89-99 
prevalence in adults 91-4 
hearing, dynamic range 249-50 
hearing function classification 5 14 
hearing handicap 18-20 
Hearing Handicap Inventory for the Elderly 
18, 19
hearing-impaired children 95-8 
aetiological evaluation 376 
assessment 373-80
causative factors 376-8 
clinical examination 373 
communication skills 330-1 
expressive/receptive language 331 
genetic factors 377-8 
infant screening programmes 339-48 
literacy in 331 
management 407-16 
amplification 408-9 
associated pathology 412 
cause identification 411 
handicap minimization 408-11 
hearing preservation 412 
impairment reduction 407-8 
practical help/information 412-13 
testing family members 412 
vestibular pathology 411-12
morpheme errors 329 
non-organic hearing loss 414-15 
ophthaltnological investigation 377 
oral communication enhancement 333 
parental involvement in training 333 
phonology errors 329 
physical examination 373 
pragmatics, use of 327-8 
with profound hearing loss 329 
resources for professionals 333 
routine diagnostic evaluation 376 
sound-based training 333 
sound directionalization 583 
speech intelligibility 330-1 
speech/language development 323-36 
assistive sensory devices, effects of 
331-3
speech sound discrimination 330 
syntax/semantics/suprasegmentals, use of 
328
unilateral hearing loss 413-15 
hearing impairment
after language development 309 
autosomal dominant inheritance 52-3 
caused by fetal infection 376-7 
in children
autosomal dominant inheritance 
393-5, 394 
autosomal recessive inheritance 394 
classroom acoustics 504 
communication mode 325—6 
early identification 323-4, 345-6 
early intervention 346 
late identification 345 
prevalence 95-6 
cochlear 251, 252
peripheral auditory processing 317 
conductive, definition of 90 
congenital 97
congenital disorders/defects causing 401 
definitions 349, 373 
disabling 242-3 
gene identification 54 
gene localization 51, 55 
genetic factors 470 
genetic/inherited 377-8, 393 
patterns of evolution 454 
progressive 454-5 
infections causing 400 
and intracranial pressure 299 
before language development 309 
molecular diagnostics 56 
non-auditory consequences 514 
non-syndromal 393 
non-syndromic 
gene loci 52-3 
genes responsible 52-3 
phenotypic characteristics 53—4 
with OME 385-6 
postlingual onset 51
  

Index 
941
prevalence 89, 92 
by age 91-3 
by severity 91 
scales 374
sensorineural, definition of 90 
speech perception 315 
surgical management 603-37 
outcome analysis 603-4 
outcome measures 605 
vs auditory prostheses 604-5 
see also surgery 
syndromal 51-2, 393-7, 453-5 
in children 867 
see also hearing loss 
hearing in noise 193, 255 
speech-like background 318 
hearing level 243, 373-5 
hearing level prediction models 487 
hearing level scale 202 
hearing loss 243, 589 
associated symptoms 349 
behavioural evaluations in infants 342, 
344
classification 375, 597 
cochlear 249-50, 251
and interaural discrimination 254 
pathophysiology 164 
compounding problems 21 
congenital 340-1, 366 
functional see hearing loss, non-organic 
genetic 452 
causes 452 
genetic factors 483-4 
high-risk indicators 341-2 
accuracy 343-4 
with intracranial hypertension 300 
late detection 344-5 
mixed 360, 470 
non-organic 229, 244 
in children 414-15 
tests for 359 
non-syndromic 483—4 
and otosclerotic foci 42 
peripheral
and central auditory processing tests 
502-3
electrocochleograms in 284 
peripheral auditory processing 317 
pre/postlinguistic 428-9 
preoperative selection 429 
profound 502
children with 329, 342 
psychogenic see hearing loss, non-organic 
psychological aspects 596-9 
behavioural approach 598-9 
cognitive behaviour approach 599 
emotional consequences 596-7 
theory of planned behaviour 597-8 
treatment perspectives 598-9 
screening programmes 339—48
accuracy in neonates 341-4 
effects on families 344-5 
sensorineural see sensorineural hearing 
loss
sensorineural vs conductive 357, 358-9 
and skull fractures 31 
social factors 597 
sudden 455 
bilateral 62 
treatment perspectives 598-9 
unilateral, in children 413-15 
with vestibular schwannoma 43 
X-linked 231
see also hearing impairment; specific causes 
of loss
hearing protection 412 
programmes 478 
hearing protective devices (HPDs) 477, 
480-2 
attenuation 481 
usage rate 481 
hearing status 243, 589 
and cochlear implants 426 
‘Hearing Tactics’ 524-5, 525 
hearing threshold levels (HTLs) 220, 243, 
589
hearing threshold shift 243 
hearing thresholds 213-47, 514 
and ageing 215-16 
analysis
example 217-23 
information required 217 
interexaminer variability 219 
authentication by Bekesy audiometry 229 
in children 373-5 
components 221 
formulae 223-4 
measurement 214-16 
factors influencing 215 
Rudmose audiometry in 231-2 
sources of error 215 
standardization 216 
melanoderms vs leucoderms 216 
in Meniere’s disease 75 
normal level 225 
pure tone audiometry 359 
shifts 223 
diagnosis 223
see also non-organic threshold shifts 
studies 214-15 
helix abnormalities 352 
Helsinki Declaration 440, 442 
Hennebert’s sign 354, 918 
Hereditary Hearing Loss Homepage 47 
herpes simplex virus 
antibodies 69 
fetal 400
vestibular involvement 647 
herpes zoster auris 34, 648 
Heschl’s gyrus 185-6
asymmetry 186 
high-frequency hearing loss 8 
high-pass filters 158, 274, 275 
high resolution CT 101 
higher auditory centres 171-6 
highest level gait disorders 827-8 
Hindu law/Hinduism 132, 134 
hip strategy 750
histamine HI receptor blockers 894 
histological otosclerosis 41 
histology changes in presbyacusis 38-9 
HL see hearing loss
van de Hoeve’s syndrome see Paget’s disease 
homeostasis 488 
horizontal gaze
abnormalities 783-6
due to thalamic lesions 788 
anatomy/physiology 782-3 
in bilateral vestibulopathy 801 
brainstem pathways 784 
horizontal head-impulse test 807 
horizontal semicircular canal cupulolithiasis 
739
HSC see Health and Safety Commission 
hsp 70 68, 71-2, 73 
as autoantigen 71-2 
HSS 589
5-HT see serotonin 
HTLs see hearing threshold levels 
Human Genome Project 49, 50 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 377 
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 76-80 
in Meniere’s disease 460 
phenotypes 77 
Hunter’s disease 30, 396, 455 
Huntington’s disease 754 
Hurler syndrome 30, 396 
Hurst’s disease 649 
Hutchinson’s triad 36 
hyatid disease 647 
hydromechanics of cochlea 295-6 
hydrops 36-7, 38, 459 
experimental 66 
high-resolution MRI for 767 
secondary 922
with vestibular schwannoma 44 
5-hydroxytryptamine see serotonin 
hyoscine 892, 893 
hyperacusis 267, 580-1, 589 
definitions 580 
management 581 
suprathreshold 589 
threshold 589 
hyperbilirubinaemia 402 
hyperlipidaemias 462 
hyperosteoses 354 
inherited 643 
hypersensitivity to sound 580-1 
see also hyperacusis 
hypertensive angiopathy 651-2
  

942 
Index
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy 
853
hyperventilation 881 
hypoacusis 589 
hypothyroidism, acquired 462 
hypoxia 401
ICF (International Classification of
Functioning, Disability and Health) 
139,513,514,515 
icthyosis 455, 457
IEC standards 138-9, 204, 206, 210-11, 243
IHR 243
imaging
inner ear 378
high-resolution 767 
techniques 191-2 
immune complexes 74 
immune response assays 75-6 
immune tolerance induction 79-80 
immunocompetent cells 63, 64, 458 
immunofluorescence studies 
autoantibodies 71-2 
of endolymphatic sacs 65 
immunological aetiology, criteria for 62 
immunological status and OME 385 
immunology 61-87 
history 62-3 
inner ear 63—4 
immunotherapy 79-80 
impairment 90, 597 
implantable devices for SNHL 622-5 
patient selection criteria 624 
results 625
types available 623-4 
vs conventional hearing aids 622—3 
impulse noise 479-81 
and hearing 480-1 
incidence 90 
incus 5, 614 
Index Virum 139 
Indian state law 136 
indirect immunofluorescence test 65 
inertia mass transducers 444, 445 
inertial bone conduction 227 
infarctions of central auditory/vestibular 
pathways 121-2 
infections
causing hearing impairment 
fetal 400 
postnatal 400-1 
inner ear 34-6, 458 
and Meniere’s disease 460 
upper respiratory tract 384, 385 
vestibular system 37-8, 644-8 
see also under infectious agent
infectious aneurysms 652 
inferior colliculus 168, 174 
anatomy 182-3 
cell types 183 
inflammatory disorders
and inner ear disorders 457-8 
vestibular 648-50 
inflammatory reactions 
in cholesteatoma 27 
in middle ear 26 
inheritance patterns 
mitochondrial 47
non-syndromic hearing impairment 52 
pedigrees 48 
recessive 48 
inner ear
damage 773-4
fluid pressure 5, 289-307
clinical applications 299-304 
history 290 
measurement 290-5 
theorems 304-5 
functional diagram 159 
high-resolution imaging 767 
imaging 378 
immune system 63—4 
lymphocyte trafficking 74-5 
malformations 30-1 
aetiology 31 
classification 30-1 
mechanics 159-60 
ototoxic damage 33-4 
pathology 79 
in presbyacusis 16 
pressure-related damage 297-8 
sound transduction 160 
as target organ 74 
inner ear antigens 70 
in animal models 78 
inner ear disease 
autoantibodies 68 
autoimmune 64-71 
experimental transfer 66 
inner ear disease susceptibility 76-7 
inner ear disorders 
adult-onset forms 452 
in adults 451-75 
prevalence 451 
autoimmune 459 
bone disorders 466-9 
in children 393 
classification 451 
genetic cochleopathies 452-3 
immune-mediated 458, 459 
inflammatory disorders 457-8 
metabolic factors 462-3 
ototoxic damage 463-5 
traumatic 465-6, 467, 468 
vascular factors 455, 458 
inner ear infections 34-6, 458
inner ear reflexes, tonic 774 
inner hair cells (IHCs) 6, 7-8 
tuning curve 163 
innervation see nerve supply 
instability 
causes 671
see also balance, loss of; falls/falling 
institutional review bodies (IRBs) 134 
instructions 139 
insula 186-7
intact canal wall tympanoplasty 920-1 
intensity coding 184, 189 
and cochlear implants 420 
intensity discrimination 250 
and interaural time 254-5 
intensity of sound 157 
intensity-related paracuses 579-81 
interaural differences
auditory brainstem responses 284-5 
intensity difference (IID) 536-7 
intensity of sound 171 
time delay 171 
time difference (ITD) 536-7 
interaural time 254-5 
intercellular adhesion molecule 64 
interhemispheric connections 188-9 
interleukin-2
immunoconjugated with toxins 79 
in perilymph 64 
intermediate acoustical stria 180 
intermittance testing 353 
internal auditory canal (IAC)
CT imaging 101, 114 
imaging, preferred technique 117 
lesions 114-18 
malformations 116 
MR imaging 102, 114 
radiology 114-18 
stenotic 128 
tumours 42-4, 115-16 
internal audtory artery 122 
internal carotid artery 127 
International Electrotechnical Commission 
246
International Organization for
Standardization 243, 246 
Acoustics Committee 225 
occupational noise standard 478 
intemuclear ophthalmoplegia 784-5 
aetiology 785 
interstitial nucleus of Cajal (INC) 786 
lesions of 788 
intonation in CAPD 505 
intra-aural pressure waves 289 
classification 297 
measurement 294-5 
intracochlear multichannel Cl 619 
intracranial hypertension
audiovestibular symptoms 289, 296 
clinical perspective 298-9
  

Index 
943
diagnosis 289 
hearing loss with 300 
and Meniere’s-like disorders 300 
subclinical 302 
symptoms 301 
TMD measurement 293 
treatment 301-2 
undiagnosed 301 
TMD in 293, 301 
intracranial hypotension 293 
intracranial pressure measurement 292-3 
applications 302 
normal pressure 293-4 
intracranial pressure waves 294 
intracranial vascular malformations 653 
intracranial-cochlear pressure transfer 291 
asymmetry 298 
intracranial-labyrinthine impedence 
mismatch 296-9 
intracranial-labyrinthine pressure transfer 
296, 298
intratympanic injection of ototoxic drugs 
923
intraventricular shunt assessment 303
inverse square law 589
ion channel dysfunction in tinnitus 557
ischaemia 401
ischaemic lesions of central
auditory/vestibular pathways 121-2 
Islam 132-3 
ISO 243
ISO 1999 databases 17 
ISO standards 138-9, 204, 210 
ISO 1999-1990 478-9 
Israeli state law 136
J
Japanese state law 136-7 
jerk nystagmus 720, 736-7 
Jervell Lange-Neilsen syndrome 52, 396 
aetiology 642 
in children 867 
Jewish law/religion 135 
jnd 589
John Hopkins programme 902 
Johnson database 477
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing (JCIH) 
341-2, 344 
Judaism 132 
judgements/judges 138 
jugular bulbs 126
K
K+ channels 54 
K in hair cells 160
kanamycin 165 
KCNQ4 53
Keams-Sayre syndrome 397 
Kemp ‘echoes’ see evoked otoacoustic 
emissions (EOAEs)
KHRI-3 protein 71-2 
King Kopetzky syndrome 524 
kinocilium 9, 702, 703 
Klippel-Feil syndrome 30, 369 
associated disorders 397 
Kniest syndrome 370 
Kryter database 477
L
L-factor complex 243 
labelled lines coding see under frequency 
labyrinthectomy 922-3 
labyrinthine concussion 113, 114, 465-6 
labyrinthine damage 889 
labyrinthine deficits 668 
labyrinthine enhancement 105, 106, 107, 
110
labyrinthine hydrops 36 
labyrinthine infarction 807 
labyrinthine lesions, test for 705, 707-8 
labyrinthine membrane rupture 925-6 
surgery 926 
labyrinthitis 35
imaging 103, 105-7 
meningogenic/osteogenous 457 
ossificans
and cochlear implants 621 
MR imaging 107 
labyrinths
anatomy 641, 701 
bilateral destruction 801 
bony structure 702 
in cardiovascular control 696 
chemical destruction 923 
function 665-7
imaging, preferred technique 107 
normal 813
postoperative obliteration 107, 109-10 
in posture control 669 
pressure-related damage 297-8 
unilateral destruction 797-8 
unilateral stimulation 801-3 
see also bony labyrinth; membranous 
labyrinth
LAcq 243 
lamina propria 4 
laminin antibodies 70-1 
language
acquisition 324
in hearing-impaired children 332 
components 326-30 
content 324-5
development
and cochlear implants 622 
critical period 323, 385, 424 
early identification of HL 345-6 
normal/hearing'impaired children 
323-36 
and OME 385-6
severity of hearing impairment 324 
expression/reception 325
in hearing'impaired children 331 
form 324
hearing-impaired children 410-11 
patterns
in children 326-7 
in infancy 326 
post infancy 326-7 
use 325
see also communication; speech 
laryngeal excitation 310-11 
late congenital syphilis 36 
late response test 500, 502 
latent nystagmus 795 
lateral canal BPPV 812-13 
‘lateral’ inhibition in dorsal cochlear nuclei 
169-70, 172 
lateral lemniscus 182 
lateral medullary infarction 785
vestibular testing abnormalities 745 
lateral stability 675 
ageing and 678, 681 
loss of 684 
lateral superior olivary nucleus 170, 181 
lateral sway 678
lateropulsion 785, 787, 822, 825-6 
law 134-8 
evidence 137 
expert witnesses 137 
geographical entities 135-7 
judgements/judges 138 
legal systems 131-2, 134-5 
regional 137 
state 135-7 
LCVD (lateral semicircular canal-vestibule 
dysplasia) 108 
LDL 589
learned helplessness 879 
left vestibulopathy 798 
legal systems 131-2, 134-5 
Lemieux-Neemeh syndrome 454 
lenticular process 5, 187 
Lermoyez’s syndrome 36 
leukemia 45
limbic system in tinnitus suffering 560 
Linden-Jerger classification 364-5 
line of Chamberlain 125 
linear acceleration
cardiovascular responses 696 
testing 759, 760 
vestibular responses 701 
linear sleds 759, 760
  

944 
Index
linear translation 759-60
linguistic behaviours 328
linguistic cognitive enhancement 504-6
linkage analysis 49
lip reading see speechreading
lipofuchsin 15
lipomas 42
listener envelopment 589 
listening activity classification 514 
literacy in hearing-impaired children 331 
localization, sound see sound localization 
lod scores 49
loss of consciousness and falls 835 
loudness 229, 249-50, 589 
dynamic range of speech 317 
of hearing aids 517 
and paracuses 579-80 
loudness adaptation 589 
loudness decrement 589 
loudness derecruitment 589 
loudness level 589 
loudness memory method 250 
loudness modulation method 250 
loudness over-recruitment 589 
loudness recruitment 254, 589 
loudness reversal 589 
low-pass filters 158, 274, 275 
lymphocyte transition test (LTT) 76 
lymphocytes
in animal models 79 
in autoimmune SNHL 75 
trafficking in inner ear 74-5
M
MAA 589
macrosquare wave jerks 790, 792 
maculae 9-10 
ageing 37 
function 701 
innervation 705 
magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) 
neurovascular conflicts 120 
tinnitus 125, 126 
magnetic resonance imaging (MR1) 101-3 
magnetic resonance (MR) imaging 
bony labyrinth lesions 111-12 
central auditory/vestibular pathways 121, 
122
cochlear implant surgery 129 
endolymphatic sac tumours 111 
enhancement 105 
functional (fMRI) 124, 125, 192 
in tinnitus 566 
high resolution, of inner ear 767 
labyrinthine trauma 107 
labyrinthine tumours 107, 110-11 
malformations 116
multiple sclerosis 123 
neurovascular conflicts 120 
otosclerosis 112 
sequence parameters 105-7 
T1-weighted
with fat saturation 103 
gadolinium enhanced 103, 105, 107, 
114, 115, 118 
unenhanced 102-3, 105, 107, 110, 116 
T2-weighted
gradient/fast spin echo 101-2, 103, 
105-8, 110, 115, 116, 119,
120
temporal bone trauma 113-14 
tinnitus 125
vascular ‘time-of-flight’ sequence 103 
major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
61, 76 
restriction 67 
mal de debarquement 667, 869 
and anger 880, 881 
and impaired concentration 878 
and social withdrawal 879 
malformations
imaging 107-8, 116, 118 
preferred technique 107 
imaging, preferred technique 117 
malleus 5
malleus ankylosis 614 
malleus-to-footplate prostheses 614 
mandibulofacial dysostosis see
Treacher-Collins syndrome 
manual audiometer 243 
manual audiometry 359-60 
air conduction 225-6 
bone conduction 226—8 
manuals 139 
manubrium 5
MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein kinases) 
73
marble bone disease see osteopetroses 
Marquet atresia classification 607 
Marshall syndrome see Stickler syndrome 
masking level differences 182, 255, 498, 499 
mastoid bone, bed preparation for Cl 437 
mastoid process 243 
mastoid prominence 243 
mastoidectomy
radical 613, 918-19 
vertigo after 921, 922 
mastoidectomy cavities 616 
maximum comfortable level 437-8 
maximum-length sequence technique 262 
MCLL 589 
mean 243 
measles 401 
meatoplasty 920 
mechanical coupler 207 
medial efferent olivocochlear (MOC) system
260
characteristics 266-7 
suppression test 267 
medial geniculate nucleus/body 168, 183 
medial longitudinal fasciculus 783, 784 
lesions of 784 
medial superior olivary nucleus 170-1, 181 
E-E vsE-I cells 171 
medial superior temporal visual area 790 
median 243 
medical ehtics 133 
medication
and instability 671
vestibular/psychiatric complaints 885 
mediolateral COP displacement 678 
MEK (MAPK kinase) 73 
mel 589
melanocytic lesions 657 
MELAS syndrome 397 
melotia 352
membrane hypothesis of ageing 39 
membranous labyrinth 6, 8 
in hydrops 37 
‘memory’ lymphocytes 79 
Meniere’s disease 36—7, 459-62 
animal models 78 
anti-tubulin antibodies 73-4 
audiograms 808 
autoantibody assay 69 
autoantigens in 72-3 
as an autoimmune disease 65 
in children 864-5 
circulating immune complexes 74 
clinical features 808-9 
diagnosis 460-1, 809, 897-8 
diagnostic scale 459 
differential diagnosis 811
acute vestibular neuritis 807 
diplacusis in 581 
electrocochleograms in 284 
experimental drugs 900 
genotyping 78 
hearing loss, course of 75 
high-resolution MRI for 767 
imaging 125
impairment reduction 407-8 
mechanism/aetiology 810 
medical treatment 461-2 
natural history 809 
surgery 462
conservative 923—4 
radical 922-3 
and tinnitus 628 
and TMD measurement 302 
transient evoked OAEs 265 
treatment 809-10 
hydrops 898 
immunosuppression 899 
vestibular rehabilitation 904 
vestibular testing abnormalities 744 
Meniere’s drop attacks 823—4
  

Index 
945
Meniere’s-like disorders 300 
meningiomas 42, 655-7 
papillary variant 656 
and tinnitus 631 
meningiomas en plaque 656 
meningitic labyrinthitis 35 
meningitis 377
in children 400-1, 865 
in gusher ear 31
imaging of postoperative changes 116,
117
and immunocompromise 647 
invasion of labyrinth 645 
meningitis-induced hearing impairment 621 
meningogenic labyrinthitis 457 
messenger RNA 50
MET see Otologics Middle Ear Transducer 
metabolic disruptions 462-3 
metacognition 505-6 
metastatic tumours 118 
metazoan infections 647 
methysergide 896, 897 
metoclopramide 893, 894 
Michel type malformation 30 
Michel’s syndrome 108 
micro-aneurysm of Charcot and Bouchard 
651
microbiology of otitis media 25 
microphones 205
cochlear implants 619, 620 
microphthalmia-associated transcription 
factor mutations 642 
microsatellites 48 
microtia 352
middle cerebral artery 192 
middle ear 4-5, 159
and auditory cortex development 154 
compliance 363 
congenital abnormalities 355 
HEAR classification 606, 607 
indication for BAHA 615, 616 
surgery 606-8 
effusion 365 
examination 354 
functional diagram 159 
high-impedence abnormalities 365 
low-impedence abnormalities 366 
malformations 29-30 
polyp formation 356 
pressure 362, 363 
as transformer 5 
middle ear disease 814 
atelectasis 612, 613 
in children 864 
middle latency response test 500, 502 
middle temporal visual area 790 
midodrine 847, 849 
migraine
in children 864 
vestibular 744, 811
migraine-associated vertigo 94, 643 
diagnostic criteria 895 
differential diagnosis 895 
drugs for 896 
treatment 894-5 
prophylactic 897 
symptomatic 895-7 
migrainous vertigo 811 
migration inhibition test (MIT) 75-6 
military service, noise exposure in 480, 482 
Mini Mental State Examination 856 
MiniMed Cl system 431 
mismatch negativity 283 
mitochondria in ageing 15, 39-40 
mitochondrial inheritance
conditions in children 394, 397 
pedigree patterns 48 
mitochondrial mutations 54-6 
mitochondrial syndromes 55 
mixed presbyacusis 38 
mobile phones, problems with 523-4 
MOC suppression test 267 
mode 243
modiolus deficiency 31 
Mohr syndrome 370 
molecular diagnostics 56 
Mondini malformations 30, 31, 108, 401 
monoaural low-redundancy speech tests 498, 
500, 501 
monoclonal antibodies
for autoimmune inner ear disease 79 
CB11 66
monocular double elevator palsy 787 
monosyllable tests 604 
for cochlear implants 622 
morphemes 329
morphogenetic/non-morphogenetic 
malformations 30 
morphology of language 327, 329 
enhancement in CAPD 505 
Morquio syndrome 455 
most comfortable loudness level 589 
motion sickness 667 
prophylaxis 892 
motor development 861 
and cochlear implants 430 
motor response substitution 890 
movement perception 666-7, 668 
MR imaging of labyrinthine tumours 110-11 
MRC 243
MRC National Study of Hearing 17, 20 
Muckle-Wells syndrome 454 
mucopolysaccaridoses 30, 396-7, 455 
multicentre research ethics committees
(MRECs) 134 
Multipeak strategy 422 
multiple pigmented naevi and SNHL 
syndrome 455, 457 
audiograms 456 
pedigree patterns 456
multiple sclerosis 648-9 
imaging 123 
plaque 649 
multiple system atrophy 851 
multipolar cortex neurones 179 
mumps 401
musculoskeletal system 
age-related changes 676-7 
and compensatory stepping 682 
disorders 776 
and instability 671 
mycotic infections 36, 646-7 
myelin protein PO 72, 73 
myokymia 822 
myosin VIIA 53, 54 
myosin XV 53 
myotatic reflex 773 
myringostapediopexy 918
N
NAMAS 243
nasopharyngeal infections and OME 385 
National Acoustics Laboratory 538-9 
National Deaf Children’s Society (NDCS) 
quality standard guidelines 96 
National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health database 478 
National Measurement System 244 
National Physics Laboratory 244 
National Study of Hearing in Great Britain 
92, 244
necrosis
noise-induced 489 
in otitis media 26 
negative difference 283 
neonates
inner ear haemorrhage 32-3 
sensorineural hearing loss 33 
neoplasms
inner ear 42-5 
middle ear 29 
nasopharynx 29 
vestibular system 38 
nerve activity in silence 557, 558 
abnormal 559 
in tinnitus 573 
nerve damage and cochlear implants 418 
nerve growth factors 444-5, 446 
nerve supply
balance regulation 21
cochlear implants 423
cochlear nuclei 168, 180
damage in petrositis 35
hair cells 8, 702-3
imaging 102, 117, 128
inferior colliculus 182-3
medial geniculate nucleus/body 183
  

946 
Index
ossicular chain 5 
superior olivary nucleus 181 
vestibular sensory cells 9-10 
see also neural connections 
nervous system and instability 671 
neural connections
cochlear implants 418-20, 423-6 
corpus callosum 188 
efferent auditory system 192-3 
interhemispheric 188-9 
thalamocortical 187-8 
neural integrator 783 
neural presbyacusis 16, 38 
Neural Response Telemetry 620 
neural systems
age-related changes 677 
and compensatory stepping 682 
neuritis 115
imaging, preferred technique 117 
see also acute vestibular neuritis 
neurochemistry 193—4 
neurofibromatosis 2 42, 44, 371 
neurological disorders, posturography in 752 
neurological examinations 350 
neuromuscular disease and falls 834-5 
neuronal centres in normal posture 773 
neurotransmission
afferent/efferent auditory systems 194 
anatomy 193 
neurotransmitters 194, 589 
neurotrophins 444-5, 446 
neurovascular conflicts 119-20 
neutrophils 25 
NF1/NF2 655 
NMDA 194 
NMSPU 244 
noise 590
electromagnetic 273 
hearing in 193, 318
speech-like background 255 
subjective judgement 579-80 
noise-cancelling hearing aids 319 
noise damage assessment 477 
noise immission level 244 
noise-induced compound threshold shift 244 
noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) 4,
477-94
and analgesics 482 
databases 477-8 
aims of 490-1 
construction 485-7 
factors to be controlled 479-81 
degeneration patterns 17 
diagnosis 489-90
employer’s responsibilities 478, 482 
genetic factors 483-4 
hearing measurements 483-4 
in leisure time 482 
occupational 481-2, 490 
in military service 480, 482
and organic solvents 482-3 
and ototoxic damage 482, 490 
pathways 488
presbyacusis/frequency in 15 
risk assessment 477, 478-9 
risk factors, individual 483-4 
and smoking 482
treatment/prevention 487, 488, 489 
vs presbyacusis 14 
histopathology 16-17 
noise-measuring devices 206 
see also sound level meters 
noise pollution level 590 
noise trauma
in fetus/infant 153 
in tinnitus 561 
‘NoiseScan’ 485-7
hearing level prediction 487 
non-epileptic cortical vertigo 822 
non-maleficence 441 
non-organic hearing loss 244 
Bekesy audiometric pattern 229 
in children 414-15 
non-organic threshold shifts (NOTs)
219-20, 244 
classification 221 
detection rate 223 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) 847, 849 
ototoxic damage 465 
Noonan syndrome 398 
normal threshold of hearing 244, 590 
normative systems 131 
Norrie syndrome 52, 397 
progressive SNHL 453 
Norrie’s exercises 902
nose-up tilt and blood pressure 692, 695, 697
nosoacusis 590
nosocusis 15
notch magnitude 220
notched noise method 251
Notes on Occupational Deafness 232
NOTS-E 244
NOTS-S 244
noy 590
NSH 244
nuclei of optic tract 668 
Nucleus-24 system 432, 435 
incision for implantation 437 
Nucleus Cl system 431 
nystagmus 354, 668, 705, 793 
in acute vestibular neuritis 803 
definition 720 
drug therapy 900 
neural activity 799 
slow-phase waveforms 792 
spontaneous 723 
test for 722-3 
in vestibular pathology 711 
vs saccadic oscillations 791
0
OAE 590
obscure auditory dysfunction see King 
Kopetzky syndrome 
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
883-4
obstructions
foreign body 353 
wax impaction 351 
occlusion effect 540-1 
occlusion index 227-8 
occlusion phenomenon 227 
occupational medicine, Bekesy audiometry 
in 230
octave band noise spectrum 217 
octopus cortex neurones 179 
ocular albinism 453 
ocular bobbing 793 
ocular counter-rolling 711 
ocular flutter 792 
ocular misalignments 787 
ocular motor apraxia 791 
ocular motor testing 722-3, 725 
abnormalities, significance of 736 
instructions to patient 729 
normative limits 724 
ocular pursuit test see smooth pursuit test 
ocular tilt reaction 788, 822, 825 
in acute vestibular neuritis 803 
clinical features 797 
to unilateral vestibulopathy 797 
ocular torsion 804 
ocular-otolith reflexes 710 
oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia see 
craniofacial abnormalities, 
microsomia 
oculomotor nuclei 668 
off-axis rotation 761 
off-vertical axis rotation 761-3 
olivocochlear bundle 164, 176, 192-3 
olivocochlear system 260 
olivocochlear bundle 194 
OME see otitis media with effusion 
ondasetron 894
one-and-a-half syndrome 785, 787 
ON1HL 590 
ONITS 244 
opsoclonus 792, 793 
opto-kinetic nystagmus 705, 706, 710 
optokinetic after nystagmus phenomenon 
668
optokinetic nystagmus 782 
optokinetic nystagmus test 729 
abnormalities, significance of 738 
optokinetic test 723, 725 
normative limits 724 
oral tolerization 80 
organ of Corti 
anatomy 6, 7
  

Index 
947
antibody production 62, 74 
atrophy of basal lower turn 8 
differentiation 147-8 
in hydrops 37 
in leukemia 45 
maturation, end of 150 
in osteopetrosis 41 
replacement by cochlear implant 
619
sound-induced overstimulation 489 
organic solvents and NIHL 482-3 
orofacial digital syndrome type II 370 
orthostatic hypotension 
causes 850 
clinical features 851 
definition 849-50 
diagnosis 851-2 
drugs causing 851 
effects of ageing 850 
management 852 
pathophysiology 850 
prevalence 850 
orthostatic tolerance 696 
orthostatic tremor 754, 755 
ossicles 5
abnormalities in otitis media 356 
in cholesteatoma 27 
malformations 29
HEAR classification 607 
in osteopetrosis 41 
in Paget’s disease 40 
ossicular chain 5
coupling of implant 623 
direct stimulation 545 
injuries 465 
micromechanics 623 
ossicular chain prostheses 614 
ossicular disruption 366 
ossicular fixation 365 
ossicular reconstruction 613-14 
osteitis deformans see Paget’s disease 
osteogenesis imperfecta 40, 370, 468-9 
in children 395 
CT scan/audiograms 470 
osteogenous labyrinthitis 457 
osteomata 353—4 
osteopetroses 40-1, 370
radiographic appearance 112 
otic capsule
in osteopetrosis 40 
in otosclerosis 41 
otic placode 147 
otitic labyrinthitis 35 
otitis externa 353 
otitis media 382 
acute 355-6, 382
medical treatment 386-7 
risk of OME 381 
chronic 25, 26, 356, 377, 383 
definition 611
examination 611-12 
pathophysiology 612 
surgical management 612-14 
complications 29, 36 
diagnosis 382-3
with effusion see otitis media with 
effusion 
invasion of labyrinth 644-5 
in neonates 26 
pathology 25-7
serous/secretory see otitis media with 
effusion 
tympanic membrane in 4 
otitis media with effusion (OME) 25, 29, 
357, 382-3 
assessment of hearing 375 
in children 357, 381-92 
definition 612 
definition/risk factors 614 
diagnosis 614
effect on communication/behaviour 
385-6 
genetic factors 385 
medical treatment 387 
pathophysiology/aetiology 383-6 
prevalence 381 
rehabilitation 388 
risk factors 381, 384 
sequelae 385
social/environmental factors 385 
surgical management 614 
surgical treatment 387-9 
efficacy 388 
indications 388 
tympanic membrane 355 
otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) 259-70,
590 
in children 375 
classification 260-1 
clinical applications 265-7 
in diplacusis 582 
generation 259-60 
history 259
infant screening programmes 339, 342-3, 
344
and intracranial pressure waves 299 
in NIHL 484-5 
in normal subjects 263-5 
properties 263 
recording 261-2 
otoadmittance meters 208 
otocervical syndromes 369 
otoconia 9, 701, 703, 704, 811 
in BPPV 811, 812 
displaced 812 
loss on ageing 37 
otocraniofacial syndromes 367-9 
otocyst 147
otofacial-cervical syndrome 369 
otoferlin 53
otoimmunological animal models 
78-9 
otolith organ 641 
otolith organ assessment 759-65 
eccentric rotation 761 
linear translation 759-60 
off-axis rotation 761 
off-vertical axis rotation 761-3 
subjective visual vertical/horizontal
764-5
vestibular evoked myogenic potentials
763-4
otolith stimulation 802-3 
otolith Tullio phenomenon 824 
otolithic crises 809, 823-4 
otolithic membrane 9, 812 
Otologics Middle Ear Transducer 623, 624, 
625
otomastoiditis 612
otosclerosis 38, 40, 41-2, 357, 466-7, 
608-14 
audiometric findings 608-9 
definition 608 
genetic factors 466 
imaging 112, 469 
indication for BAHA 616 
inheritance patterns 56 
pure tone audiometry 360 
surgical technique 609-11 
and tinnitus 628 
otosclerotic foci 41, 42 
otoscopy 4
otoskeletal syndromes 369-70 
ototoxic damage 33-4, 37, 703 
in children 402, 866 
drugs causing 463 
genetic factors 55 
inner ear 463-5 
prevention 777 
two-stage 464 
vestibular 644 
and vestibular testing 721 
vestibular testing abnormalities
745
see also specific agents 
otovent 387 
outer ear 159
outer hair cells (OHCs) 6, 7, 8 
and cochlear amplification 253 
damage 558 
drug-induced loss 165 
evaluation of integrity 266 
lesion detection 265 
and otoacoustic emissions 259, 260 
positive feedback to cochlea 163—4 
in tinnitus 559 
outflow obstruction 852-3 
oval window 6
over-the-counter medications 895 
oxyacoa/oxyacoia/oxyaecoia 590
  

948 
Index
P
P300 evoked potentials 271 
pacemaker implant 853 
pachygyria 124 
Paget Gorman System 518 
Paget’s disease 38, 40, 468, 470 
of bone 643
radiographic appearance 112 
panic attacks 
elicitors 873
subjective sequence of events 874 
panic disorders 871-5 
classification 872
with vestibular dysfuncation 872-3 
papilloedema 300, 301 
para- 590
paracuses 579-91, 590 
frequency-related 581-2 
intensity-related 579-81 
pitch-intensity aberrations 582 
sound localization 582-3 
paracusis acris 590 
paracusis duplicata 590 
paracusis isoacutica 590 
paracusis loci 590 
paracusis obtusa 590 
paracusis perversa 590 
paracusis sclerotica 590 
paracusis Willisii 581, 590 
paralinguistic behaviours 328 
paralytic pontine exotropia 786 
paramedian pontine reticular formation 782 
paraneoplastic syndromes 650 
Parinaud’s syndrome see dorsal midbrain 
syndrome 
Parkinson’s disease 
falls in 754
gait/balance features 776-7 
and orthostatic hypotension 850 
treatment 778 
paroxysmal positional nystagmus 739 
paroxysmal vertigo 822
see also benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo 
pars flacida 4 
pars tensa 4
participation restriction 514-15, 598 
improvements 529 
recent scales 517 
see also handicap 
particle repositioning manouevre 812, 813 
Passchier-Vermeer database 477 
Patau syndrome 399 
pathology 
definition 90 
of ear 25-46 
otitis media 25-7 
Paget’s disease 40 
vestibular schwannomas 43
vestibular system 37 
pattern-extracting hearing aids 319 
pause cells 783
Peabody Picture Vocal Test 429 
peak measure 205, 206 
peak-to-peak measure 205, 206 
Pendred syndrome 52, 54, 94, 371 
aetiology 642-3 
in children 396, 867 
impairment reduction 407 
pendrin 53, 54 
pendular nystagmus 736, 795 
perceptual skill enhancement 504 
perceptual training, post-implantation 
439-40 
perfectionist traits 883—4 
perilymph 6, 9, 10-11 
in gusher ear 31 
in hydrops 37 
immunological role 64 
in scala vestibuli/tympani 160 
and skull fractures 31 
perilymph leaks 925-6 
perilymphatic fistulae 113-14, 298, 814, 
925-6 
in children 401 
and Meniere’s disease 811 
surgery 926 
perilymphatic pressure 290, 291, 295 
TMD measurement 293-4 
perinatal complications and hearing loss
377, 
401-2 
periodic alternating nystagmus 794 
peripheral auditory processing 317 
peripheral neuropathy 753 
peripheral tuning
basilar membrane/hair cell level 161-3 
cochlear nerve level 160-1 
peripheral vestibular diseases 803-14 
peripheral vestibular nystagmus 793-4 
perivenous encephalomyelitis 649 
permanent childhood hearing impairment 
(PCHI) 95-6 
permanent congenital hearing loss (PCHL) 
340-1 
persistent tinnitus 562 
personal communicators 545 
personal loudness unit 590 
personal sound exposure meter see sound 
level meters 
perturbations
change-in-support reactions 680-2 
due to BOS errors 673 
fixed-support reactions 675, 676, 679 
age-related changes 680 
informational 673-4 
mechanical 672-3 
physiological 673, 674 
petrositis 34-5 
importance 35
petrous bone 
anatomy 3 
fracture 31 
lesions 121 
in otitis media 29 
Pfeiffer syndrome 368 
phase locking 184-5, 252 
in cochlear implants 443 
phenothiazines 894 
phobic postural vertigo 876 
phon- 590
phoneme decoding 309 
phoneme perception 313 
phoneme recognition 518 
phonetically balanced monosyllables 604 
phonological awareness training 504-5 
phonology 327, 329-30 
phonophobia 590 
photoplethysmography 844 
physical therapy in balance rehabilitation 
778
physiology 157-77 
developmental 151-3 
Pierre-Robin syndrome 368 
pinna 3, 159 
piperazines 894 
pistonphone 205-6 
pitch 590
place/time coding 166 
pitch pattern test 191 
pitch perception 184 
pitch planes 820-1 
pitch-intensity aberrations 582 
pizotifen 896, 897 
place coding see under frequency 
planned behaviour, theory of 597—8 
planum temporale 186, 187 
plasmapheresis 79 
plasticity, developmental 153 
plateau-seeking 226 
platelet-derived growth factor 64 
platform-tilt perturbations 680 
platinum compounds 463, 464 
play audiometry 426 
PLU 590
pneumatic speculum 354 
pneumolabyrinth 113 
polymicrogyria 124 
polyotia 352 
population studies 90 
positional downbeat nystagmus 822 
positional nystagmus 738-40 
clinical significance 739 
direction-fixed vs direction-changing 738 
positional vertigo 38, 643 
positioning/positional tests 725-6 
abnormalities, significance of 738—40 
in BPPV 812
instructions to patient 729 
positive feedback to cochlea 163—4
  

Index 
949
evidence for 164 
in otoacoustic emissions 260 
positron emission tomography (PET) 192 
tinnitus studies 560, 566 
post-mortem frequency tuning 6 
post-traumatic stress disorder 590 
postaural system 21 
posterior ampullary nerve section 925 
posterior canal obliteration 925 
posterior eye field 789, 790 
posterior fossa aneurysm 120 
posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) 
121-2
posterior ventral cochlear nucleus 168 
cell types 179 
postural body schema 669 
postural changes 695 
postural control system 21, 669 
adaptability 751 
adaptive mechanisms 773 
anticipatory movements 678 
in postural sway testing 766 
postural reactions, control of 674 
postural reflexes 748 
postural sway
in cerebellar patients 753—4 
effects of moving visual scenes 766-7 
measurement 750 
in peripheral neuropathy 753 
testing apparatus 766 
postural tachycardia syndrome 852 
postural tone 669, 773-4 
posture
clinical examination 747-8 
inner ear damage 773—4 
tremulous stance 748 
visual dependence 755, 775-6 
posturography 747, 750-2 
basal ganglia disorders 754 
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 823 
in cerebellar patients 753-4 
clinical applications 755-6 
in neurological disorders 752 
Parkinson’s disease 754 
peripheral vestibular disorders 751-2 
range of measurements 750 
in rehabilitation 755 
value of 751-2 
vs caloric testing 751 
potassium channels see K+ channels
POU3F4 53 
POU4F3 53 
pragmatics 326, 327-8
in communication status evaluation 518 
parents’ guide 328 
pre-auricular appendages 352 
pre-auricular pits 395 
pre-auricular sinuses 353 
predictive control of stability 674 
prematurity 152-3
presbyacusis 8, 13, 244 
aetiology 14-15
audiometric characteristics 13-14 
epidemiological studies 17-18, 19 
familial 14-15 
and gender 13-14, 18 
histopathology 15-17 
mitochondrial genetic model 15, 39-40 
molecular biology 39—40 
and noise 15, 17-18 
pathogenesis 39 
pathology 38-40 
pure/primary 14 
vascular factors 455 
presbybalance 20
morphology/aetiology 21 
pressoceptors 675 
pressure 750
pressure microphones 205 
pressure waves, pathological 289 
prevalence 90
prevalence of congenital hearing loss 340-1 
bilateral vs unilateral 340 
processing negativity 283 
prochlorperazine 893, 894 
profound 329
progressive disorders and failure of 
compensation 891 
projicience 590 
promethazine 893, 894 
propanolol 896, 897 
proprioception 680 
proprioceptive reflexes 773 
proprioceptors 666 
prosody in CAPD 505 
protozoan infections 646 
pseudorandom test 728 
psychatric dizziness 870 
psychiatric consequences of vestibular 
dysfunction 869-87 
psychiatric dizziness 884-5 
psychoacoustical auditory tests 249-58 
psychogenic dizziness 884 
psychogenic hearing loss see non-organic 
hearing loss 
psychogenic vertigo 876 
psychological aspects 
hearing loss 349, 596-9 
screening programmes 344-5 
tinnitus 593-6
vertigo/vestibular disorders 814 
psychological unsteadiness 754-5 
psychometric hearing tests 373-5 
psychophysical function 590 
psychophysical tuning curve 251, 590 
psychophysics 590 
PTC 590
public address systems 524 
Public Interest Disclosure Act 133 
pure tone amplitude measures 205
pure tone audiograms
and cochlear implants 428 
presbyacusis 13, 14 
pure tone audiometers 206, 228 
pure tone audiometry 214, 359-66 
in children 374 
with OME 384 
diagnostic test procedures 359-62 
hearing thresholds 359 
and impacted wax 351 
limitations 18 
manual 359-60 
masking 361-2 
in otitis media 356 
chronic 611 
with effusion 384 
in otosclerosis 357, 360 
self-recording see self-recording 
audiometry 
shadowing 362 
voice test thresholds 350 
pyramidal cortex auditory neurones 179 
effect of cochlear stimulation 154
Q
quality of life testing 717 
questionnaires on activity limitation 517 
quinine
ototoxic damage 465, 644 
sensorineural hearing loss 33
R
radiacal mastoidectomy 918-19 
radiology
central auditory/vestibular pathways
121-4
cerebellopontine angle, lesions of 118-21 
internal auditory canals, lesions of 
114-18
labyrinths, lesions of 103-14 
normal anatomy 101-3 
Raf-1 protein 72-3
Ramsay Hunt syndrome see herpes zoster 
auris
range of normal hearing 590 
range of severity 590 
rate profile saturation 168 
reactive control of stability 674 
studies 675 
reactive oxygen metabolites 488-9 
scavengers 489 
real-ear aided response (REAR) 546 
real-ear inserted response (REIR) 546 
real-ear unaided response (REUR) 546
  

950 
Index
rebound nystagmus 795 
receptive fields in cochlear nuclei 169-70, 
172, 173
receptor potentials of inner hair cells 160 
recombination 49 
reference zero 244 
standard 244, 245 
referral, age of 97 
referral to otologists 490 
reflexes see specific reflexes 
refocussing therapy in tinnitus 573, 576-7 
Refsum syndrome 396 
in children 867 
progressive SNHL 453 
regional law 137 
rehabilitation
after cochlear implants 437—40 
audiological see audiological 
rehabilitation 
aural, in presbyacusis 20 
balance control 778 
in children 408-11 
with cochlear implants 619 
in OME 388
see also audiological rehabilitation; aural 
rehabilitation 
Reid’s line 707 
Reissner’s membrane 7 
in hydrops 36, 37 
in otoacoustic emissions 260 
and skull fractures 31 
relapsing polychondritis 459, 461 
relaxation exercises 911 
relaxation in tinnitus 576 
religion 132-3 
research
on human subjects 133-4 
misconduct 134 
resources for communication training 336 
response patterns, neural 179 
reverberation room/chamber 589 
rhabdomyosarcomas 115 
Rhode Island Hearing Assessment Program 
(RIHAP) 342-3 
rhomboencephalitis 124 
Rinne’s tuning fork test 358 
risk management 134 
roll planes 820-1 
Romano-German law 135 
Romberg fall 823 
Romberg test 748, 775, 856 
root entry zone (REZ) 119-20 
root mean square measure 205, 206 
rostral interstitial nucleus of medial
longitudinal fasciculus (riMLF) 782 
lesions of 787 
rotary chair tests 726-8, 740 
asymmetry 740 
for children 863 
directional preponderance 741
effect of alertness 727 
instructions to patient 729 
normative limits 724 
vestibulo-ocular reflex testing 728 
rotational testing
constant velocity 761 
eccentric 762 
head-only 764-5 
off-vertical axis 761-3 
sinusoidal eccentric 761 
see also rotary chair tests 
round window 6 
rubella infection 34 
fetal 376-7, 400 
Rudmose audiometer 244, 360 
Rudmose audiometry 230, 231 
see also self-recording audiometry 
Russian state law 136
s
saccades 781
disorders of 790-1 
pathways involved 782 
saccades test 723
abnormalities, significance of 737 
instructions to patient 729 
normative limits 724 
saccadic oscillations 791-3 
vs nystagmus 791 
saccadic pulse and step 782-3, 790 
saccadic pulse dysmetria 790, 792 
saccadic pulses 793
saccadic system in voluntary gaze 789-90 
saccular aneurysms 652 
saccules 9, 10, 641, 701-2 
in hydrops 36, 37 
orientation 704 
saccus decompression operation 923-4 
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome 368 
safety studies on cochlear implants 433—4,
441
salicylates
and NIHL 482
ototoxic damage 33, 465, 644 
sarcoidosis 645
SAS (Simultaneous Anologue Stimulation) 
strategy 431, 432 
Satisfaction with Amplification in Daily Life 
Scale 529 
scala media 6 
scala tympani 6 
scala vestibuli 6 
scalp potentials 271, 272, 273 
Scheibe type malformations 30 
schema induction 506 
schwannomas 654-5 
acoustic 114-15
growth potential assessment 115 
imaging, preferred technique 117 
intracochlear 110, 112 
intralabyrinthine 110
imaging, preferred technique 107 
vestibular 38, 42, 43-4, 814 
bilateral 42, 44 
imaging 111
intensity discrimination 250 
pathology 43
psychoacoustical findings 256 
and tinnitus 627 
of vestibulocochlear nerve 118 
of VIII nerve 656 
of Vth/lower cranial nerves 118 
scleral search coil results 807 
scleral search coil technique 720 
sclerosing bone dysplasias 467 
search for vestibular nystagmus test 722-3 
selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors 847, 
849, 885-6 
selective vertical gaze palsy due to riMLF 
lesion 787 
self-motion perception 666 
self-recording audiometry (SRA) 213, 
228-33
computerized statistical analysis 233 
diagnostic test procedures 360-2 
learning effects in 232 
semantics 326-7, 327, 328 
semeion 590-1 
semicircular canals 9, 641 
dehiscence 767 
malformations 108
recovery in acute vestibular neuritis 805 
relationships to each other 813 
signature nystagmus 802 
unilateral stimulation 801-3 
Semont’s liberatory manouevre 905, 908 
senile gait see cautious gait 
sensation level in intensity discrimination 
250
sensorimotor integration 
in Hermissenda 773 
organization in humans 773 
sensorineural hearing impairment 90 
sensorineural hearing loss 
autoantigens in 72 
autoimmune 63, 64 
blood supply in 66 
lymphocytes in 75 
spiral ganglion in 67 
binaural squelch in 537 
diotic summation in 537 
high-frequency 455 
impairment reduction 407-8 
implantable devices 622-5 
indication for BAHA 615 
in low-birthweight infants 32 
in meningitis 35
  

Index 
951
MR imaging sequences 105 
in Paget’s disease 40 
pathogenetic mechanisms 452 
prevalence 340 
progressive 452, 453 
in syphilis 35 
in tinnitus 558 
sensorineural structures, ageing of 8 
sensorineural threshold shift 244 
sensory deficits, multiple 835 
sensory disorders
gait/balance features 775-6 
in older people 776 
sensory input substitution 890 
sensory integration/balance, clinical test of 
752
sensory presbyacusis 16, 38 
sensory systems
age-related changes 676 
and compensatory stepping 682 
and instability 671 
sentence tests 604 
serotonin 591
and central hyperacusis 581 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors 897 
service provision see health care provision 
setting-sun sign 787 
sex trisomy 371
Shah-Waardenburg syndrome 395 
Shintoism 132-3
Short Increment Sensitivity Index 250 
Shy-Drager syndrome 850 
SI 244
‘sick sinus syndrome’ 852 
siderosis 118-19, 120, 124 
Siegle’s spectrum 354 
sign languages/signing 325, 411 
autonomous 518 
types 518-19 
signal duration 252 
signal-to-noise ratio 273, 274-5 
binaural auditory system 537 
and directional microphones 544 
‘Signs Supporting English’ 518 
sinusoidal eccentric rotation 761 
sinusoidal harmonic acceleration test 728 
site-of-lesion diagnosis 375 
Situational Characteristics Questionnaire 
876
skew deviation 822 
slow saccades, causes of 790 
smoking and NIHL 482 
smooth pursuit 781-2 
disorders 791 
movements 668 
system 790 
smooth pursuit test 723
abnormalities, significance of 737-8 
effect of encouragement 725 
instructions to patient 729
normative limits 724 
SNHL see sensorineural hearing loss 
SOAE 591 
social factors 
hearing loss 597 
OME 385 
social services in rehabilitation 526 
social withdrawal 525
and balance disorders 879-90 
socialist law 135 
socioacusis 15, 244 
somatic tinnitus 556, 561 
somatization 883 
sonalgia 591 
sone 591 
sound 157, 201-4
frequency weighting/analysis 203 
levels
and decibels 202 
within a room 201-2 
measurement 201-4 
equipment 204-6 
nature of 201 
sensation level 202 
temporal integration 203 
sound analysis 157-8 
sound directionalization 582-3, 588 
sound energy, A-weighted 489 
sound field 591 
sound field audiometry 225-6 
sound filters 158-9
sound-induced vestibular symptoms 802, 824 
sound intolerance 58I 
see also hyperacusis 
sound level meters 204-5 
calibration 205-6 
standards 206 
sound localization 182, 190, 254, 589 
paracuses 582-3 
sound power 158 
sound pressure 158
rate place representation 167 
sound pressure level (SPL) 
decibel formulae 202 
in intensity discrimination 250 
in NIHL 479-80 
reference level 202 
scale 157, 158 
sound processing 3, 157-8 
speech 309-21 
sound therapy in tinnitus 573, 576-7 
sound transduction 160 
sound transmission 3 
sound-wave injury 32 
soundfield testing calibration 208-9 
soundscape 591
Soundtec Direct Hearing System 623—4 
source broadening 591 
source-filter model of speech 309-12 
fricative production 311
vowel production 311 
space and motion discomfort 875-7 
elicitors 876 
mechanism 877 
spatial hemineglect 822 
spatial impression 591 
spatial orientation 665, 666-7 
spatiotemporal encoding 315, 316, 317 
SPEAK strategy 423, 431, 432, 436 
in rehabilitation 438 
spectograms 158
consonant production 314, 315 
speech production 315 
spectral envelopes 319 
speech 
clear 504
hearing-impaired children 410-11 
see abo communication; language 
speech audiometry 
calibration 207-8 
equipment 207 
in otosclerosis 609 
speech development
normal/hearing-impaired children 
323-36 
and OME 385-6
severity of hearing impairment 324 
speech-enhancing hearing aids 319 
speech intelligibility 330-1 
speech patterns 
in children 326-7 
in infancy 326 
post infancy 326-7 
speech perception 313-14, 314 
and cochlear implants 420-3 
information selection 421 
information transmission 421-3 
in old age 14 
speech processing 
auditory 314-20 
frequency analysis 317 
sound discrimination 330 
stages 310
strategies under investigation 435-6 
speech processing prostheses 318-20 
speech-processing strategy cochlear implants 
431-2 
speech production
acoustic excitation of 310 
auditory processing 309-21 
consonant production 312-14 
dynamic ranges 317 
expected, with implant 428 
post-implantation 438 
source-filter model 309-12 
spectral shape 312 
vowel production 311, 312 
speech recognition 
and age 424, 425 
with BAHA 618
  

952 
Index
with cochlear implants/hearing aids 
429-30 
by hearing aids 545 
and bearing threshold testing 375 
impact of hearing impairment 309 
post-implantation 438
with language training 440 
with perceptual training 439—40 
speech signal enhancement 504 
speech tests, clinical 350 
for cochlear implants 622 
speech-to-noise ratio 319 
speechreading 
tests 518
and visual acuity 518 
spherical cortex neurones 179 
spiral ganglion 8
in autoimmune SNHL 67 
in leukemia 45 
spontaneous nystagmus 809 
spontaneous nystagmus test 723
abnormalities, significance of 736—7 
instructions to patient 729 
normative limits 724 
spontaneous OAEs (SOAEs) 260, 484 
clinical applications 265-6 
clinical relevance 263—4 
in normal subjects 263 
recording 261, 264 
spontaneous sway 679 
Sprengel’s syndrome 369 
squamous cell carcinomas 352 
square wave jerks 790, 792 
stability
during gait 673 
maintenance 683 
see also balance 
stabilizing reactions 678-82 
standards 138-9
American National Standards 138, 204, 
211-12 
audiometers 245, 359 
audiometric booths 359 
British Standards Institution 138, 139, 
204, 211
in hearing threshold studies 214-15 
international bodies 246 
International Electrotechnical
Commission 138-9, 204, 206, 
210-11
International Organization for
Standardization 138-9, 204, 210 
occupational noise 478 
relating to hearing threshold 
measurement 245-6 
sound level measurement 204-6 
sound level meters 206 
stapedial acoustical reflex 267 
in TMD 290 
stapedial artery imaging 128-9
stapedius muscle 5 
stapes 5
action of footplate 7, 159 
in TMD 290 
in otosclerosis 42 
surgery
in otosclerosis 609-11 
risks 611 
stapes footplate fixation 608 
state laws 135-7 
static equilibrium 672 
static posturography 750 
statistical analysis of sound measurements 
203
statolith system 666, 667
steady state evoked potentials (SSEPs) 427
stellate cortex neurones 179
Stenger test 359
stenosed EAM 353
step initiation 682, 748-9
stereoacusis 580, 582, 591
stereocilia 6-7, 9, 702
changes in presbyacusis 38 
development 148, 149 
in movement 703 
tip link function 7 
steroids 899
corticosteroids 79, 387 
treatment response 69 
Stickler syndrome 52, 395 
progressive SNHL 453 
stimulation deafness 32 
stimulation in developmental plasticity 153 
stimulus frequency OAEs (SFOAEs) 260,
261
Storz Cl system 431 
strategy substitution 890 
strial presbyacusis 16, 38 
striola 9
strychnine blockade of lateral inhibition 
169, 170, 172 
subarachnoid cysts 119 
subclavian steal syndrome 855 
subcortical white matter lesions 777 
Subjective Tinnitus Severity Scale 564, 565 
subjective visual horizontal test 764-5, 804 
subjective visual vertical test 764-5 
sumatripran 896
superior olivary nucleus 168, 170-1 
anatomy 181-2 
functional anatomy 174 
supplementary eye field 789, 790 
suppurative labyrinthitis 35 
supramarginal gyrus 186 
suprasegmentals 327, 328 
surgery
for atretic EAM 353 
cochlear implants 436-7 
hearing preservation, imaging in 115 
for intracranial hypertension 301-2
Meniere’s disease 462, 809 
middle ear abnormalities 356 
otitis media with effusion 387-9 
safety in cochlear implantation 425 
see also hearing impairment, surgical 
management 
sway path recordings 753 
sweep frequency SRA 230 
swine ear antigen 68 
Sylvian fissure 186
electrical stimulation 190 
Symbion/Inner Aid system 431 
sympathetic nerves
affected by vestibular system 692 
responses to vestibular stimulation 694-5 
sympathetic otitis 63 
symptom 591
symptom suppression, combatting 885 
synaptic activity 193—4 
synaptic agonists/antagonists 193 
synaptogenesis 151
synchronization of auditory nerve activity
557
syncope
overlap with dizziness/falls 843 
in vasovagal syndrome 848 
synotia 352 
syntax 327, 328 
syphilis 35-6, 38 
acquired 646 
congenital 400, 645 
syringing
contraindications 351 
method 351-2
T
T-cell receptors 61, 74, 75 
T cells 61
antigen-specific 76 
gene therapy mediated by 80 
in Meniere’s disease 73 
specificity 74-5 
T-helper cells 
in inner ear 63 
Th1 lymphocytes 61 
Th2 lymphocytes 61 
tachyarrhythmias 853 
tactile warning devices 523 
tandem walking 775 
taxonometry 233 
tectorial membrane 148 
and stereocilia 7 
telephone bells/systems 523 
television viewing 524 
temperature and ABRs 281 
temporal bone 3
in chronic otitis media 612
  

Index 
953
diseases involving 466 
in Paget’s disease 40 
temporal bone diseases 810 
surgery 917-22 
temporal bone fracture 31, 32, 113-14, 466, 
468
temporal coding see under frequency 
temporal modulation transfer function 
(TMTF) method 252, 253 
temporal patterning tests 498, 500, 501 
temporal resolution 252 
temporal summation 252-3 
temporomandibular dysfunction 561 
Terminologica Anatomica 139 
terminology 139 
text telphones 523-4 
thalamic atasia 822, 825 
thalamic lesions 788 
thalamocortical connections 187-8 
thalamocortical potentials 271 
threshold shift, noise-induced permanent
244
thresholds
auditory see hearing thresholds 
in cochlear implants 437 
of hearing disability 218 
of uncomfortable loudness 229, 249, 580 
in hearing aids 540 
thyroid deficiency
cochlear hearing loss 462 
cochlear period of sensitivity 152 
TICA see Totally Implantable
Communication Assistance device 
tilt of perceived vertical 822 
time coding see under frequency 
time weighting 205 
Tinetti gait/balance scale 775 
tinnitus 20
aetiology 555-6
arterial pulse-synchronous 626-7 
assessment 574
psychological wellbeing 575 
Bekesy audiometry in 230 
causes 127, 572 
characteristics 557 
in children 555 
clinical assessment 563-6
auditory brainstem responses (ABRs) 
566
correlations between parameters 565 
instruments 564 
clinical gradings 563, 564 
counselling 572-3, 575-6 
definition 555 
and dizziness 97 
effect of anaesthetic 559 
effects of 89 
epidemiology 555 
general hypotheses 557 
hearing aids in 572, 573
imaging 125 
as impairment 514
and intracranial hypertension 299-300, 
301
management
level 1 patients 571-2 
level 2 patients 572—4 
level 3 patients 574-7 
in management model for rehabilitation 
520
masking effect 559 
measurement 563 
therapeutic use 576 
measurement 574-5 
mechanisms 573 
and MOC 267 
MR imaging sequences 105 
nerve activity in silence 557, 573 
non-pulsatile 
causes 626 
surgery for 627-9 
in ototoxic damage 463 
patient information/reassurance 571, 572 
persistent 562 
PET scan studies 560 
prevalence 91, 93, 572 
psychoacoustic measurements 563, 564 
psychological aspects/factors 555, 593-6 
cognitive behaviour modification in
573
cognitive behavioural therapy 594-5 
cognitive measures 595-6 
emotional distress 593-4 
neurophysiological model 560-1, 595 
psychological model 594 
pulsatile 125, 126, 128 
surgery for 626-7, 628 
questionnaires 563, 564, 566 
severity levels 571 
similarities to chronic pain 559 
and SOAEs 265 
somatic modulation 559, 561 
surgically-treatable 626 
treatments 572, 575-7
cognitive behaviour modification 573 
medication 573 
otoneurosurgical 626-31 
self-treatment 573-4 
tumour-induced 44 
tinnitus awareness 556 
Tinnitus Handicap and Support Scale 564, 
565
Tinnitus Handicap Inventory 564, 565, 574 
Tinnitus Handicap Questionnaire 565 
Tinnitus Handicaps Questionnaire 564, 574 
tinnitus models/theories 556
experimental animal models 557 
monoaminergic-vulnerability model 
561-2
neural sprouting hypothesis 560
neuropathophysiological 557-60 
Ca2+ influx model 557-8 
ephaptic transmission model 560 
‘gate control’ theory 559-60 
outer hair cell damage model 558-9 
Tinnitus Problems Questionnaire 574 
Tinnitus Reaction Questionnaire 564, 565,
574
tinnitus retraining therapy 560, 595 
Tinnitus Severity Questionnaire 564, 565 
tinnitus suffering 556, 571 
aetiology/treatment 561 
neurophysiological model 560-1, 595 
tinnitus therapy 562 
titanium implants 615, 617 
TMD cerebral and cochlear fluid pressure 
analyser see CCFP analyser 
tonic contraversive ocular tiltvoluntary 
control of 788-9 
tonic inner ear reflexes 774 
tonotopic cochlear stimulation 620 
tonotopic organization
central auditory system 185, 189 
and cochlear implants 419 
cochlear nerve 180 
fMRI study 192 
inferior colliculus 182 
medial geniculate nucleus/body 183 
and speech perception 315, 424-5 
superior olivary nucleus 181 
torsion swing test 728 
torsional nystagmus 794-5, 822 
torticollis 754 
total communication 325 
Totally Implantable Communication
Assistance device 623, 624, 625 
toxoplasmosis infection 400 
traceability 244 
tracking direction 230 
tracking width 232 
training
before cochlear implants 621 
hearing protective devices 481 
in rehabilitation 526 
training programmes 
for hearing aid use 20 
in presbybalance 21 
transcallosal transfer time 188 
transforming growth factor beta 64 
transient evoked OAEs (TEOAEs) 260, 484 
clinical applications 265, 266 
in hearing loss 264-5 
in MOC suppression test 267 
in normal subjects/ clinical relevance
264
recording 261-2, 265 
transient room-tilt illusions 822 
transient vertebrobasilar ischaemia 814 
transtympanic electrocochleography 277-8 
electrodes 278
  

954 
Index
transverse gyrus see Heschl’s gyrus 
trapezoid body 181 
trauma 31-2, 37, 377 
in children 864
imaging, preferred technique 107 
inner ear 465-6 
middle ear 357 
noise 153 
travelling waves 159-60
in otoacoustic emissions 260 
Treacher-Collins syndrome 29-30, 52,
367-8
trinucleotide repeats in neurodegeneration
644
trisomies 
13-15 399
13-15 (trisomy D) 370 
18 (trisomy E) 370, 399-400 
21 370-1 
sex trisomy 371 
tuberculous meningitis 645 
tuberculoventral tract 180 
tubo-tympanic disease 356 
tubotympanitis see otitis media, with effusion 
TUL 591
Tullio phenomenon 802, 824 
Tumarkin’s otolithic crises 809, 823-4 
tumour-like lesions 44-5 
tumours
and abnormal auditory adaptation 230 
angle of petrous temporal bone 44 
brainstem 123
cerebellopontine angle 44, 180 
in children 864 
cochlear 112
glial/neuronal-glial 659-60 
imaging, preferred technique 117 
internal auditory canal 42-4, 115-16 
in labyrinth 107 
of meninges 655-7 
middle ear 29 
nasopharyngeal 29 
neuroepithelial 657-60 
peripheral nerve 654-5 
and vestibular disorders 654-60 
tuning curves
basilar membrane 163, 164 
cochlear nerve fibres 167, 180 
cochlear nucleus 180 
IHCs 163
lateral lemniscus 182 
psychophysical 251, 590 
superior olivary nucleus 181 
tuning fork tests 357-9 
Turkish state law 136 
Turner’s syndrome 371, 399 
tympanic cavity 4 
tympanic membrane
acquired abnormalities 355—7 
anatomy 4
blast injury 32 
in cholesteatoma 27, 28 
colour 354-5
congenital abnormalities 355 
examination 350 
normal 4
perforations 354, 356, 365 
and otitis media surgery 613 
traumatic 466 
position 355 
reconstruction 613 
retracted 365 
thin/atrophied 366 
ventilation tubes 388 
tympanic membrane displacement (TMD) 
measurement 289, 290-3 
altitude/aerospace applications 303-4 
cerebral and cochlear fluid pressure 
analyser 289 
clinical assessment 293—4 
in hydrocephalus 303, 304 
and intracranial pressure 292-3 
and Meniere’s disease 302 
proof of technique 291-2 
quantification 292 
in space 304 
using CFFP analyser 292 
tympanic membrane electrodes 278 
tympanograms 363, 364-5 
in OME 383 
tympanometric shapes 364-5 
tympanometry 
advantages 362
diagnostic test procedures 362-5 
hysteresis 363 
instrumental lag 363 
in otitis media 356 
in otosclerosis 357 
principles 362-3 
tympanoplasty, intact wall 920-1 
tympanosclerosis 26, 27, 612 
ossicular reconstruction 614 
in otitis media 355, 356 
tympanostomy tubes 614 
type 1 cells see chalice cells 
type II cells see cylindrical cells
u
UK National Study of Disability 92 
UK state law 136
UK Target (Trial of alternative regimes of 
glue ear treatment) 388 
ULL 591
unilateral deafness as indication for BAHA 
616
unilateral horizontal gaze palsy 783-4 
unilateral peripheral vestibulopathy 797-8
acute see acute vestibular neuritis 
clinical features 797 
unilateral vestibular deafferation 798 
neural activity 799 
neural events 798-800 
and torsional eye position 804 
United Kingdom Accreditation Service 
244
United States of America Standards 
Institute 244 
universal neonatal hearing screening 
(UNHS) 339-41, 346 
criticism of 345 
University of Miami programme 902 
University of Michigan exercises 902 
unsteadiness in children 866 
Unterberger test 803 
upbeat nystagmus 794, 822 
drug therapy 900 
upper respiratory tract infections 384, 385 
USA state law 136 
Usher syndromes 51, 52, 94, 377 
in children 395, 867 
use of COSI 606 
utricle 9, 641 
in hydrops 36 
utricles 701-2 
orientation 704
V
vaccination for acute otitis media 387 
Valby study 17 
Valsalva manoeuvres 354 
in vasovagal syndrome 848 
van de Hoeve’s syndrome see Paget’s disease 
vascular anatomy see blood supply 
vascular compression 814 
vascular disorders of inner ear 455, 458 
vascular insult 192 
vascular lesions, vestibular 650-4 
vasculitis 62, 649-50 
vasoconstrictor efferents 695 
vasospasms 455
vasovagal syncope, classification of 847 
vasovagal syndrome
clinical presentation 848 
definition 846 
diagnosis 848-9 
drugs for 847 
pathophysiology 847 
prevalence 846-7 
treatment 849 
velocity step test 728 
velocity storage 709-10 
dysfunction 668 
velocity-to-position integration 709 
venous angiomas 653
  

Index 
955
venous drainage of transverse/sigmoid sinus 
12 6
venous hum 626 
ventilation tubes 924 
ventral acoustical stria 180 
verbal auditory agnosia 502 
vergence eye movements 791 
vertex potentials 271, 283 
vertibrobasilar dolichoectasia 120 
vertical gaze
abnormalities 783, 786-8 
aetiology 786
due to thalamic lesions 788 
anatomy/physiology 782-3 
brainstem pathways 784 
vertical nystagmus 736-7 
vertigo 94, 755 
drugs for 892—4 
migraine-associated 94, 643 
MR imaging sequences 105 
positional 38, 643 
psychological aspects 814 
treatment 900 
tumour-induced 44 
and unilateral vestibulopathy 798 
unlikely diagnoses 814 
visual 755
see also benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo 
vestibular aqueduct 11 
in hydrops 37 
large 108
vestibular compensation 798, 889-91
adaptation/habituation/plasticity 889-90 
clinical perspectives 890-1 
delay factors 891 
sedatives 900 
dynamic symptoms 889 
evaluation 891 
and lesion site 891 
mechanisms 889-90 
neural events 798-800 
physiology 889-90 
static symproms 889 
substitution 890 
vestibular disorders 642-60 
degenerative 643-4 
infectious diseases 644-8 
inflammatory diseases 648-50 
linear translation 759 
peripheral
in adults 797-818 
posturography in 751-2 
in presbybalance 21 
psychological aspects 814 
traumatic 465-6 
tumours 654-60 
vascular lesions 650—4 
vascular malformations 652-3 
vestibular duct/sac, large 108
vestibular dysfunction 
and agoraphobia 877 
autonomic responses 691 
effects of 89 
epidemiology 94-5 
in hearing-impaired children 411-12 
inheritance patterns 56 
and obsessive-compulsive personality 
disorder 883-4 
and OME 386
and perfectionist traits 883-4 
and pre-existing anxiety 882-3 
psychiatric complications 869-87 
treatment 885-6 
psychiatric consequences 
data sources 869 
vulnerability factors 870 
and somatization 883 
treatment 891-911
acute crises 892, 893, 894 
adjunctive 891, 911 
pharmacological 892—4 
surgery 911, 917-27 
UK survey 94-5 
see also vestibular system,
function/dysfunction 
vestibular epilepsy 822, 825 
vestibular evoked myogenic potentials 763-4 
vestibular exercises 412 
vestibular function
assessment in children 375, 862 
psychosomatic effects 881 
see also vestibular system,
funtion/dysfunction 
vestibular ganglion 641 
vestibular lesions 642 
bilateral 752 
dizziness 774 
imbalance 774 
vestibular migraine 811 
vestibular nerve 
anatomy 641
section 267, 924 
termination pattern 708 
vestibular neurectomy 462 
vestibular neuronitis 94 
in children 864 
vestibular nuclei 641
afferent projections to 642 
vestibular nucleus activity 
contralesional lateral 800 
contralesional medial 800 
ipsilateral medial 798-9, 800 
ipsilesional lateral 800 
normal lateral 800 
normal medial 798 
vestibular pathology
lesion differentiation/localization 717 
nystagmus in 711 
vestibular pathways 641-2
radiology 121—4 
secondary fibres 642 
vestibular reflex gain 782 
vestibular reflexes 773 
vestibular rehabilitation 
a-BPPV 911
bilateral vestibulopathy 904 
BPPV905
central vestibular disorders 902, 904 
exercises 902-5
customised programmes 902 
systematic preset 902 
h-BPPV 907-9, 911 
key factors 901 
Meniere’s disease 904 
outcome evaluation studies 903—4 
p-BPPV 905-7
and psychiatric complications 885 
vestibular rehabilitation exercises 857, 891 
vestibular schwannomas see schwannomas, 
vestibular 
vestibular sedatives 858, 900 
vestibular stimulation
cardiovascular responses 695 
sympathetic nerve responses 694-5 
vestibular syndromes in roll plane 826 
vestibular system 900 
and ageing 777 
anatomy 641 
autonomic responses 691 
during movement 691 
central 708-9
effect on blood pressure 692—4 
and eye movements 782 
function/dysfunction 665-70 
balance control 665, 669 
gaze stabilization 665, 668-9 
spatial orientation 665, 666-7 
see also vestibular dysfunction; 
vestibular function 
malformations 37, 108, 642-3 
neuronal network 819-21 
and orthostatic tolerance 697 
pathology 37, 642-64
see also vestibular disorders 
sensitivity 668 
vestibular system dysfunction pattern 721 
vestibular testing 
abnormalities 
patterns 743-4 
significance 736—44 
specific balance disorders 744-5 
clinical application 735-46 
effects of medication 721-2 
indications 736 
instructions to patient 729 
instrumentation 717-34 
normative data 724, 731-3 
nystagmus definition 720 
principles 717
  

956 
Index
recording techniques 717-20 
choice of 735 
standard protocol 722 
test battery 722, 736
eyes open in dark vs eyes closed 
722-31
ocular motor screening battery 722-3, 
725
positioning/positional tests 725-6, 729, 
738-40 
vestibular tests 726-31 
uses 736
vestibular-psychiatric interactions 870-1 
vestibule 3
anatomy 8,9-11 
blood supply 10 
vestibulo-collic reflex 665
compensatory head movement 704 
function 701 
vestibulo-ocular arc 709 
vestibulo-ocular reflex
in central vestibular disorders 819 
planes of action 819 
in vestibular compensation 889 
vestibulo-ocular reflex, angular 712 
vestibulo-ocular reflex, angular (aVOR) 
704-5, 709, 710, 711 
adaptation 712 
vestibulo-ocular reflex, linear (IVOR) 709, 
710, 711 
adaptation 712 
vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) 665, 668 
adaptation 712 
assessment 740 
function 701 
gain 710-11, 712 
phase 711
physiology of 701-15 
sensitivity 740 
testing 765, 782 
and vision 711-12 
vestibulo-spinal reflex 665 
canal-ocular reflex 704-5 
function 701 
vestibulocochlear nerve 
aplasia 128 
hypoplasia 117 
schwannomas of 118 
in tinnitus 629, 630 
vestibulopathy
bilateral peripheral 801 
left 798
unilateral peripheral 797-8 
vestibulosympathetic/baroceptor reflexes 694 
vestibulosympathetic reflexes 692-4 
blood pressure 695 
brainstem/spinal cord pathways 694
cerebellar modulations 697 
Vibrant Soundbridge 623, 624, 625 
vibrotactile aids 410
video-oculography/videonystagmography 717 
2D 719-20 
3D 720
in children 862
vs electro-oculography 721, 735 
video-phone systems 523 
videonystagmography see video-oculography 
viral antibodies 69 
viral infections
internal ear 458, 460 
inner ear 34 
labyrinthitis 105, 106 
and Meniere’s disease 460 
vestibular 647-8 
vestibular system 37 
vision and vestibulo-ocular reflex 711-12 
visual acuity 
and ageing 777 
in dizziness assessment 776 
dynamic visual acuity test 776 
and lip reading 518 
and passive movement 782 
visual cortex 668 
visual impairment and falls 835 
visual influences on posture 766 
visual reflexes in normal posture 773 
visual reinforcement audiometry (VRA) 374 
cochlear implant assessment 426 
visual vertigo 755 
visual warning devices 523 
visually guided gaze stabilization 669 
visual-vestibular interaction test 728, 740 
vocabulary previewing/pretutoring 505 
vocal fold function 310-11 
vocal frequency ranges 311 
vocal tract
as acoustic filter 310-11 
configuration 312 
vocalization 5 
voiced excitation 310-11 
voiceless excitation 311-12 
volitional movement, perturbations during 
678
volume conductor theory 272-3 
voluntary gaze
anatomy/physiology 789-90 
disorders 789-90 
volvular epilepsy 822 
von Recklinghausen s disease 371 
vountary organizations 526-7 
vowel perception 421 
vowel production 312 
in children 329
source-filter model of speech 311
Waardenburg syndromes 49, 51-2, 368, 
369 
aetiology 642 
in children 393-5, 867 
classification 394-5 
Wallenberg’s syndrome 651, 785 
lateropulsion in 825-6 
see also lateral medullary infarction 
warning devices, tactile/visual 523 
wave propagation 201 
waveform analysis 276 
waveforms 158 
wax impaction 351 
Weber-Fechner Law 225 
Weber’s tuning fork test 359 
websites 
ethics 134
Hereditary Hearing Loss Homepage 47 
international standards bodies 246 
national standards bodies 139, 246-7 
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 
47
Wegener syndrome 459, 461 
Western blot immunoassay 68, 69 
autoantibodies 71-2 
whiplash injuries 466 
whispered voice 350 
whole body high-frequency test 728 
Wildervanck syndrome 397-8 
word deafness 502
World Health Organization hearing loss 
classification 597, 598
X-linked hearing loss/impairment 
Bekesy audiometry in 231 
with perilymphatic gusher 397 
progressive 455 
X-linked inheritance 394, 396, 397 
X-linked recessive inheritance 
hearing impairment 53-4 
pedigree patterns 48 
xylitol sugar chewing gum 387, 871 
temporal bone trauma 113-14
Y
yaw planes 820-1
360° yaw rotation 911
yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs) 50
  

