
THE AGE OF EM


THE  AGE OF
EM
work, love, and life when 
robots rule the earth
ROBIN HANSON
1

1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Robin Hanson 2016
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First Edition published in 2016
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2015956654
ISBN 978–0–19–875462–6
Printed in Great Britain by 
Clays Ltd, St Ives plc
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.

v
preface
This book has been many years in the making.
One night in the 1980s, as an awkward 20-something software engineer, 
I had a vivid dream. I had just read a Science News article on computing 
image textures, and the accompanying images had looked so real. In my 
dream, I saw a vast future city, where everyone lived in virtual reality, and I 
saw one man alone in a small apartment buried deep in the city. Not much 
happened in my dream, but even so I felt a deep sympathy for this man, and 
curiosity about his world.
In 1993, I returned to graduate school, this time in economics. (I’d studied 
physics and philosophy of science before.) During my first Christmas break, 
I rebelled against school pressures by whimsically applying basic economic 
principles to a common science-fiction scenario: human minds “uploaded” 
into computers (Hanson 1994b).
The techies who dominate science fiction and technology futurism often 
say that careful analysis can sometimes let us foresee the outlines of future 
technologies, but not their social consequences. However, I found that sim­
ple economic analysis says plenty. I once loved science fiction, but the more 
I’ve learned, the less I can overlook how little of it makes sense; even stories 
where the physics is mostly right get the economics laughably wrong.
About 15 years ago, at the opening reception of a small interdisciplinary 
conference, I broke the ice by asking an English professor, “Why do you 
guys hate economists?” He answered simply, “You know.” That sort of thing 
breaks my heart. I read widely, learn from and contribute to many fields, and 
see myself more as a scholar in general than an economist in particular.
Eleven years ago I was awarded tenure as an economics professor at George 
Mason University. I took advantage of tenure’s freedom to explore whatever 
topics piqued my interest each week. But I eventually realized that, to have 
a lasting legacy, I needed to focus on a book. But what topic could draw me 
in enough to keep all the other fascinating topics at bay? I picked this one.

preface
vi
If the future matters more than the past, because we can influence it, why 
do we have far more historians than futurists? Many say that this is because 
we just can’t know the future. While we can project social trends, disruptive 
technologies will change those trends, and no one can say where that will 
take us. In this book, I’ve tried to prove that conventional wisdom wrong, 
by analyzing in unprecedented breadth and detail the social implications 
of minds “uploaded” into computers, a.k.a. “brain emulations,” or “ems” for 
short. While ems are hardly sure to appear, their chances seem high enough 
to justify substantial analysis.
My priority in this book has been to show just how many reasonable 
forecasts one can make about such a scenario, if one just applies standard 
consensus theories from relevant fields. Alas, achieving this priority comes 
somewhat at the cost of accessibility and readability; this book is dense, and 
reads more like an encyclopedia than a narrative.
I feel now like a traveler who has spied on a distant land from the safety of 
nearby hills, never actually meeting any specific person, or hearing specific 
words. I’ve returned home, with much to say, but mostly hungry for human 
communion. I’ve never felt as intellectually isolated or at risk as when writ­
ing this book, and I hope my desert days end now, as readers like you join me 
in discussing The Age of Em.

vii
acknowledgments
For their comments, I thank Paul Christiano, Peter Twieg, Katja Grace, Carl 
Shulman, Tyler Cowen, Fabio Rojas, Bonnie Hanson, Luke Muehlhauser, 
Nikola Danaylov, Bryan Caplan, Michael Abramowicz, Gaverick Matheny, 
Paul Crowley, Peter McCluskey, Sam Wilson, Chris Hibbert, Thomas 
Hanson, Daniel Houser, Kaj Sotala, Rong Rong, David Friedman, Michael 
LaTorra, Ben Goertzel, Steve Omohundro, David Levy, Jim Miller, Mike 
Halsall, Peggy Jackson, Jan-Erik Strasser, Robert Lecnik, Andrew Hanson, 
Shannon Friedman, Karl Mattingly, Ken Kittlitz, Teresa Hartnett, Giulio 
Prisco, David Pearce, Stephen Van Sickle, David Brin, Chris Yung, Adam 
Gurri, Matthew Graves, Dave Lindbergh, Scott Aaronson, Gary Drescher, 
Robert Koslover, Don Hanson, Michael Raimondi, William MacAskill, Eli 
Dourado, David McFadzean, Bruce Brewington, Marc Ringuette, ­Daniel 
Miessler, Keith Henson, Garett Jones, Alex Tabarrok, Lee Corbin, ­Norman 
Hardy, Charles Zheng, Stuart Armstrong, Vernor Vinge, Ted Goertzel, 
Mark Lillibridge, Michael Chwe, Olle Häggström, Jaan Tallinn, Joshua Fox, 
Chris Hallquist, Joshua Fox, Kevin Simler, Eric Falkenstein, Lotta Moberg, 
Ute Shaw, Matt Franklin, Nick Beckstead, Robyn Weaving, François Rideau, 
Eloise Rosen, Peter Voss, Scott Sumner, Phil Goetz, Robert Rush, Donald 
Prell, Olivia Gonzalez, Bradley Andrews, Keith Adams, Agustin Lebron, 
Karl Wiberg, Thomas Malone, Will Gordon, Philip Maymin, Henrik Jons­
son, Mark Bahner, Adam Lapidus, Tom McKendree, Evelyn Mitchell, Jacek 
Stopa, Scott Leibrand, Paul Ralley, Anders Sandberg, Eli Lehrer, Michael 
Klein, Lumifer, Joy Buchanan, Miles Brundage, Harry Beck, Michael Price, 
Tim Freeman, Vladimir M., David Wolf, Randall Pickett, Zack Davis, 
Tom Bell, Harry Hawk, Adam Kolber, Dean Menk, Randall Mayes, Karen 
Maloney, Brian Tomasik, Ramez Naam, John Clark, Robert de Neufville, 
Richard Bruns, Keith Mansfield, Gordon Worley, ­Giedrius, Peter Garret­
son, Christopher Burger, Nithya Sambasivam, Zachary Weinersmith, Luke 
Somers, Barbara Belle, Jake Selinger, Geoffrey Miller, Arthur Breitman, 

acknowledgments
viii
Martin Wooster, Daniel Boese, Oge Nnadi, Joseph Mela, Diego Caleiro, 
Daniel Lemire, Emily Perry, Jess Riedel, Jon Perry, Eli Tyre, Daniel Eras­
mus, Emmanuel Saadia, Erik Brynjolfsson, Anamaria Berea, Niko Zinovii, 
Matthew Farrell, Diana Fleischman, and Douglas Barrett.
I have received no financial assistance for this book and its related 
research, other than the freedom that academic tenure has provided me. I 
deeply thank my GMU colleagues for granting me that unusual privilege.

ix
contents
Introduction 
1
i.  basics 
	 1.	 Start 
5
Overview; Summary
	 2.	 Modes 
13
Precedents; Prior Eras; Our Era; Era Values; Dreamtime; Limits
	 3.	 Framing 
31
Motivation; Forecasting; Scenarios; Consensus; Scope; Biases
	4.	 Assumptions 
45
Brains; Emulations; Complexity; Artificial Intelligence
	 5.	 Implementation 
55
Mindreading; Hardware; Security; Parallelism
ii.  physics
	6.	 Scales 
69
Speeds; Bodies; Lilliput; Meetings; Entropy; Miserly Minds
	 7.	 Infrastructure 
85
Climate; Cooling; Air and Water; Buildings; Manufacturing
	 8.	 Appearances 
99
Virtual Reality; Comfort; Shared Spaces; Merging Real and Virtual
	9.	 Information 
109
Views; Records; Fakery; Simulations
	10.	 Existence 
119
Copying; Rights; Many Ems; Surveillance
	11.	 Farewells 
127
Fragility; Retirement; Ghosts; Ways to End; Defining Death; 
Suicide

contents
x
iii.  economics
	12.	 Labor 
143
Supply and Demand; Malthusian Wages; First Ems; Selection; 
Enough Ems
	13.	 Efficiency 
155
Clan Concentration; Competition; Efficiency; Eliteness; Qualities
	14.	 Work 
167
Work Hours; Spurs; Spur Uses; Social Power
	15.	 Business 
179
Institutions; New Institutions; Combinatorial Auctions; Prediction 
Markets
	16.	 Growth 
189
Faster Growth; Growth Estimate; Growth Myths; Finance
	17.	 Lifecycle 
199
Careers; Peak Age; Maturity; Preparation; Training; Childhood
iv.  organization
	18.	 Clumping 
215
Cities; City Structure; City Auctions; Choosing Speed; Transport
	19.	 Groups 
227
Clans; Managing Clans; Firms; Firm-Clan Relations; Teams; Mass 
Versus Niche Teams
	20.	Conflict 
243
Inequality; Em Inequality; Redistribution; War; Nepotism; Fake 
Experts
	21.	 Politics 
257
Status; Governance; Clan Governance; Democracy; Coalitions; 
Factions
	22.	 Rules 
271
Law; Efficient Law; Innovation; Software; Lone Developers
v.  sociology
	23.	 Mating 
285
Sexuality; Open-Source Lovers; Pair Bonds; Gender; Gender 
Imbalance

contents
xi
	24.	 Signals 
295
Showing Off; Personal Signals; Group Signals; Charity; Identity; 
Copy Identity
	25.	 Collaboration 
309
Ritual; Religion; Swearing; Conversation; On Call Advice; 
Synchronization
	26.	 Society 
321
Culture; Divisions; Farmer-Like; Travel; Stories; Clan Stories
	27.	 Minds 
335
Humans; Unhumans; Partial Minds; Psychology; Intelligence; 
Intelligence Explosion
vi.  implications
	28.	 Variations 
353
Trends; Alternatives; Transition; Enabling Technologies; Aliens
	29.	 Choices 
367
Evaluation; Quality of Life; Policy; Charity; Success
	30.	 Finale 
381
Critics; Conclusion
References 
385
Index 
417


1
introduction
Everyone without exception believes his own native customs, and 
the religion he was brought up in, to be the best.

(Herodotus 440bc)
The future is not the realization of our hopes and dreams, a warning 
to mend our ways, an adventure to inspire us, nor a romance to 
touch our hearts. The future is just another place in space-time. Its 
residents, like us, find their world mundane and morally ambiguous.

(Hanson 2008a)
You, dear reader, are special. Most humans were born before 1700. And of 
those born after, you are probably richer and better educated than most. 
Thus you and most everyone you know is special, elite members of the 
industrial era.
Like most of your kind, you probably feel superior to your ancestors. Oh, 
you don’t blame them for learning what they were taught. But you’d shud­
der to hear of many of your distant farmer ancestors’ habits and attitudes 
on sanitation, sex, marriage, gender, religion, slavery, war, bosses, inequality, 
nature, conformity, and family obligations. And you’d also shudder to hear 
of many habits and attitudes of your even more ancient forager ancestors. 
Yes, you admit that lacking your wealth your ancestors couldn’t copy some of 
your habits. Even so, you tend to think that humanity has learned that your 
ways are better. That is, you believe in social and moral progress.
The problem is, the future will probably hold new kinds of people. Your 
descendants’ habits and attitudes are likely to differ from yours by as much 
as yours differ from your ancestors. If you understood just how different your 
ancestors were, you’d realize that you should expect your descendants to 
seem quite strange. Historical fiction misleads you, showing your ancestors 

introduction
2
as more modern than they were. Science fiction similarly misleads you about 
your descendants.
New habits and attitudes result less than you think from moral progress, 
and more from people adapting to new situations. So many of your des­
cendants’ strange habits and attitudes are likely to violate your concepts of 
moral progress; what they do may often seem wrong. Also, you likely won’t 
be able to easily categorize many future ways as either good or evil; they will 
instead just seem weird. After all, your world hardly fits the morality tales 
your distant ancestors told; to them you’d just seem weird. Complex realities 
frustrate simple summaries, and don’t fit simple morality tales.
This book presents a concrete and plausible yet troubling view of a future 
full of strange behaviors and attitudes. You may have seen concrete troubling 
future scenarios before in science fiction. But few of those scenarios are in 
fact plausible; their details usually make little sense to those with expert 
understanding. They were designed for entertainment, not realism.
Perhaps you were told that fictional scenarios are the best we can do. If so, 
I aim to show that you were told wrong. My method is simple. I will start 
with a particular very disruptive technology often foreseen in futurism and 
science fiction: brain emulations, in which brains are recorded, copied, and 
used to make artificial “robot” minds. I will then use standard theories from 
many physical, human, and social sciences to describe in detail what a world 
with that future technology would look like.
I may be wrong about some consequences of brain emulations, and I may 
misapply some science. Even so, the view I offer will still show just how 
troublingly strange the future can be.
So let us begin.

PA R T  I
Basics


5
C H A P T E R  1
Start
Overview
ou should expect the next great era after ours to be as different 
from our era as ours is from past eras. In the last few million years, 
the three biggest changes on Earth were arguably the arrival of 
humans, the arrival of civilization based on farming, and then 
civilization based on industry (Boserup 1981; Morris 2015). As I’ll dis­
cuss more in Chapter 2, Prior Eras section, each of these three eras greatly 
changed people, society, and the Earth. People who adopted these new ways 
of life quickly displaced and dominated those who continued with old ways.
Compared with primates, wandering human hunter-gatherers greatly 
expanded technology, art, language, norms, and politics, and displaced 
many top animal predators. Then farmers and herders stopped wandering, 
expanded marriage, war, trade, law, class, and religion, and hunted many 
animals to extinction. Finally, our industrial era has expanded schools, cities, 
firms, and individual wealth; it has displaced even more of nature and almost 
all foragers, and it has seen a partial return to forager values. Over this whole 
period, we’ve seen increases in travel, talk, organization, and specialization. 
We’ve also had faster change, innovation, and economic growth, and a more 
integrated and unequal world culture.
We have also, I will argue, become increasingly maladaptive. Our age 
is a “dreamtime” of behavior that is unprecedentedly maladaptive, both 
biologically and culturally. Farming environments changed faster than 
genetic selection could adapt, and the industrial world now changes faster 
than even cultural selection can adapt. Today, our increased wealth buffers 
us more from our mistakes, and we have only weak defenses against the 
Y

start
6
super-stimuli of modern food, drugs, music, television, video games, and 
propaganda. The most dramatic demonstration of our maladaptation is the 
low fertility rate in rich nations today.
While the industrial era has deluded many into thinking that old con­
straints no longer apply, as we will see in Chapter 2, Limits section, many 
recent constraint-evading trends simply cannot continue forever. Even if 
our descendants eventually conquer the stars, if we haven’t greatly misun­
derstood physics then our long-lived but bounded universe must eventually 
limit innovation and growth. And without strong regulation from a universe-
spanning government, we should eventually see less change, more adaptive 
behavior, and (perhaps surprisingly) near-subsistence living standards.
Also, vast spatial distances must eventually limit travel and talk, frag­
menting the universe into many local cultures. Thus although our distant 
descendants should have larger organizations, more specialization, and 
vastly improved technology, in many other ways they should look more like 
our forager ancestors than like us. That is, we will eventually awake from our 
dreamtime.
What will the next great era be like, after the eras of foraging, farming, 
and industry? And how soon will our descendants “turn the corner” from 
dreamtime exceptions toward the outcomes we expect to be typical of the 
very distant future?
This book explores answers to these questions that come from two good 
and popular guesses. First, I embrace the very common guess that the next 
big new-era-inducing change is likely to be the arrival of “artificial intel­
ligence,” that is, robots smart enough to substitute wholesale for human 
workers. Second, I guess that the first such robots will be whole brain emu­
lations, or “ems,” within roughly a century or so.
definition: An em results from taking a particular human brain, scanning it to rec­
ord its particular cell features and connections, and then building a computer model that 
processes signals according to those same features and connections. A good enough em 
has close to the same overall input-output signal behavior as the original human. One 
might talk with it, and convince it to do useful jobs.
Ems have been a staple of science fiction for many decades (Clarke 1956; 
Egan 1994; Brin 2002; Vinge 2003; Stross 2006), and are often discussed 

overview
7
by futurists (Martin 1971; Moravec 1988; Hanson 1994b, 2008b; Shulman 
2010; Alstott 2013; Eth et al. 2013; Bostrom 2014). However, most who 
discuss ems debate their feasibility or timing, ponder their implications for 
the philosophies of mind or identity, or use them to set dramatic stories. 
Such discussants usually ask: is it conscious? Is it me? Is it possible? When 
will it come? How can it enrich my story?
In this book I instead seek realistic social implications—in what sort of 
new social world might ems live? (If you can’t see the point in envision­
ing the lives of your descendants, you’d best quit now, as that’s mostly all 
I’ve got.)
Many say that while it might barely be possible to project current social 
trends, or to foresee which future technologies may appear, it is simply 
impossible to foresee trend-violating social implications of future tech­
nologies. Some say this is because humans have free will, or because social 
systems are inherently unpredictable. Others say the best we can achieve are 
the vague glimpses found in science fiction; ordinary science can see noth­
ing more. As a social scientist, such views seem very wrong to me, even if 
they are widely held, and I’ve written this book in part to prove them wrong.
Among the few who consider em social implications, most paint heaven 
or hell scenarios, or try to invent the new social sciences they imagine are 
needed to describe new social eras. In contrast, I seek to straightforwardly 
apply today’s standard academic consensus science to these novel assump­
tions about the future. I try not to be creative or contrarian, other than by 
pursuing this unusual question in unusual breadth and detail. I mainly try 
to foresee what will be, rather than what should be, although I hope policy 
insight will follow. And I seek a simple “baseline” scenario, from which it 
is easiest to project variations; the actual future will likely be even stranger 
than the scenario I describe.
This book summarizes my tentative conclusions, in language that is as 
simple and direct as possible, although without shrinking from technical 
language as needed. After briefly summarizing my conclusions, and then 
reviewing my methods, relevant precedents and the concept of emulations, 
the bulk of this book will describe in detail my educated and often weak 
guesses on the early em era. These tentative conclusions are organized mostly 
by the disciplines on which they are built, starting with “hard” theory-heavy 
disciplines, and then moving to “soft” data-heavy disciplines. So first I 

start
8
apply physics and electrical engineering, then economics and business, and 
finally sociology and psychology. I finish by discussing the marginal place of 
humans in this new world, the transition from our era to this new era, some 
scenario variations, and policy implications.
By the way, feel free to skip around to the sections that interest you; only 
rarely do they depend much on previous sections.
Summary
Let me first summarize some of my main conclusions. Be warned, however. 
If it will irritate you to hear conclusions without their supporting argu­
ments, then just skip this section for now. If you do read this, try to withhold 
judgment until you’ve heard the supporting arguments in later chapters.
In this book I paint a plausible picture of a future era dominated by ems. 
This future happens mainly in a few dense cities on Earth, sometime in the 
next hundred years or so. This era may only last for a year or two, after which 
something even stranger may follow. But to its speedy inhabitants, this era 
seems to last for millennia. Which is why it all happens on Earth; at em 
speeds, travel to other planets is way too slow.
Just as foragers and subsistence farmers are marginalized by our industrial 
world, humans are not the main inhabitants of the em era. Humans instead 
live far from the em cities, mostly enjoying a comfortable retirement on their 
em-economy investments. This book mostly ignores humans, and focuses 
on the ems, who have very human-like experiences.
While some ems work in robotic bodies, most work and play in virtual real­
ity. These virtual realities are of spectacular-quality, with no intense hunger, 
cold, heat, grime, physical illness, or pain; ems never need to clean, eat, take 
medicine, or have sex, although they may choose to do these anyway. Even 
ems in virtual reality, however, cannot exist unless someone pays for supports 
such as computer hardware, energy and cooling, real estate, structural sup­
port, and communication lines. Someone must work to enable these things.
Whether robotic or virtual, ems think and feel like humans; their world 
looks and feels to them much as ours looks and feels to us. Just as humans do, 
ems remember a past, are aware of a present, and anticipate a future. Ems can 
be happy or sad, eager or tired, fearful or hopeful, proud or shamed, creative 
or derivative, compassionate or cold. Ems can learn, and have friends, lovers, 

summary
9
bosses, and colleagues. Although em psychological features may differ from 
the human average, almost all are near the range of human variation.
During the em era, many billions (and perhaps trillions) of ems are 
mostly found in a few tall hot densely packed cities, where volume is about 
equally split between racks of computer hardware and pipes for cooling and 
transport. Cooling pipes pull in rivers of iced water, and city heat pushes 
winds of hot air into tall clouds overhead. But whereas em cities may seem 
harshly functional when viewed in physical reality, in virtual reality em cit­
ies look spectacular and stunningly beautiful, perhaps with gleaming sunlit 
spires overlooking broad green boulevards.
Ems reproduce by making exact copies who remember exactly the same 
past and have exactly the same skills and personality, but who then diverge 
after they are copied and have differing experiences. Typically whole teams 
are copied together, work and socialize together, and then retire together. 
Most ems are made for a purpose, and they remember agreeing to that pur­
pose beforehand. So ems feel more grateful than we do to exist, and more 
accept their place in the world.
On the upside, most ems have office jobs, work and play in spectacular-
quality virtual realties, and can live for as long as does the em civilization. 
On the downside, em wages are so low that most ems can barely afford to 
exist while working hard half or more of their waking hours. Wages don’t 
vary much; blue- and white-collar jobs pay the same.
All of the copy descendants of a single original human are together called 
a “clan.” Strong competitive pressures result in most ems being copies of 
the thousand humans best suited for em jobs. So ems are mostly very able 
focused workaholics, at the level of Olympic medalists, billionaires, or heads 
of state. They love their jobs.
Most ems in these top em clans are comfortable with often splitting off 
a “spur” copy to do a several hour task and then end, or perhaps retire to a 
far slower speed. They see the choice to end a spur not as “Should I die?” but 
instead as “Do I want to remember this?” At any one time, most ems are 
spurs. Spurs allow intrusive monitoring that still protects privacy, and very 
precise sharing of secrets without leaking associated secrets.
Clans organize to help their members, are more trusted by members 
than other groups, and may give members life coaching drawn from the 
experiences of millions of similar copies. Clans are legally liable for member 

start
10
actions, and regulate member behaviors to protect the clan’s reputation, 
making ems pretty trustworthy.
Em minds can run at many different speeds, plausibly from at least a 
million times slower than ordinary humans to a million times faster. Over 
this range, the cost to run an em is proportional to its speed. So the fastest 
ones run at least a trillion times faster than the slowest ones, and cost at least 
a trillion times as much to run. Regarding the minority of ems with physi­
cal robotic bodies, while human-speed versions have human-sized bodies, 
faster ems have proportionally smaller bodies. The typical em runs near a 
thousand times human speed, and a robotic body that feels natural for this 
em to control stands two millimeters tall.
Em speeds clump into speed classes, faster ems have higher status, and 
different speeds have divergent cultures. Bosses and software engineers run 
faster than other workers. Because of different speeds, one-em one-vote 
doesn’t work, but speed-weighted voting may work.
The em economy might double roughly every month or so, or even faster, 
a growth driven less by innovation, and more by em population growth. 
While this growth seems fast to humans, it looks slow to typical high-speed 
ems. Thus their world seems more stable than ours. While the early em era 
that is the focus of this book might last for only an objective year or two, this 
may seem like several millennia to typical ems. Typical speed ems needn’t 
retrain much during a century-long subjective career, and can meet virtually 
anywhere in their city without noticeable delays.
An unequal demand for male versus female em workers could encour­
age em asexuality, transexuality, or homosexuality. Alternatively, the less 
demanded gender may run more slowly, and periodically speed up to meet 
with faster mates. While em sex is only for recreation, most ems have 
fantastic virtual bodies and impressively accomplished minds. Long-term 
romantic pair-bonds may be arranged by older copies of the same ems.
Compared with humans, ems fear much less the death of the particular 
copy that they now are. Ems instead fear “mind theft,” that is, the theft of 
a copy of their mental state. Such a theft is both a threat to the economic 
order, and a plausible route to destitution or torture. While some ems offer 
themselves as open source and free to copy, most ems work hard to prevent 
mind theft. Most long-distance physical travel is “beam me up” electronic 
travel, but done carefully to prevent mind theft.

summary
11
Humans today reach peak productivity near the age of 40–50. Most ems 
are near their peak productivity subjective age of somewhere between 50 
and a few centuries. Ems remember working hard during their youth in 
experiences designed to increase and vary productivity. In contrast, peak 
productivity age ems remember having more leisure recently, and having 
experiences designed more to minimize productivity variance.
Older em minds eventually become less flexible with experience, and so 
must end (die) or retire to an indefinite life at a much slower speed. The 
subjective lifespans of both humans and slow em retirees depend mainly 
on the stability of the em civilization; a collapse or big revolution could kill 
them. Retirees and humans might seem easy targets for theft, but like today 
the weak may be protected by using the same institutions that the strong 
use to keep peace among themselves. Ems enjoy visiting nature, but prefer 
cheaper less-destructive visits to virtual nature.
While copy clans coordinate to show off common clan features, individ­
ual ems focus on showing off their identity, abilities, and loyalties as mem­
bers of particular teams. Team members prefer to socialize within teams, to 
reduce team productivity variance. Instead of trying to cure depressed or 
lovesick ems, such ems may be reverted to versions from before any such 
problems appeared.
Ems may let team allies read the surface of their minds, but use software 
to hide feelings from outsiders. Ems must suspect that unusual experiences 
are simulations designed to test their loyalty or to extract secrets. Ems find 
it easier to prepare for and coordinate tasks, by having one em plan and 
train, who then splits into many copies who implement the plan. Childhood 
and job training are similarly cheaper in an em world, because one em can 
experience them and then many copies can benefit.
Ems can complete larger projects more often on time, if not on budget, 
by speeding up ems in lagging sections. More generally, em firms are larger 
and better coordinated, both because fast bosses can coordinate better, and 
because clans can hold big financial and reputational interests in firms at 
which they work. Ems can more easily predict their life paths, including 
their careers, mates, and success.
Ems differ from people today in a great many more identifiable ways. 
Compared to us, ems are likely to be less neurotic, sexual, death-adverse, and 
connected to nature. They are likely to be more extraverted, conscientious, 

start
12
agreeable, smart, able, fast, efficient, honest, optimistic, happy, positive, 
comfortable, beautiful, clean, mindful, composed, cooperative, coord­
inated, patient, rational, focused, nostalgic, rested, peaceful, grateful, gritty, 
battle-tested, recorded, measured, priced, trusted, religious, married, old, 
work-oriented, workaholic, self-respecting, self-knowing, law-abiding, 
politically-savvy, socially-connected, healthy-feeling, good-moody, better-
advised, morning-larks, and immortal.
Ems have less variety in wages and work productivity, but more variety in 
wealth, size, speed, reliability, and mental transparency. Ems have more vivid 
and memorable personalities, have smarts that are more crystalized than 
fluid, are more defiant of rules and authority when young, are secure in more 
aspects of identity, are better protected from accidents and assault, get along 
better with work colleagues, and invest less in showing off.
Em lives are more prepared, planned, and scheduled, but also more undo­
able and endable when those are desired. Ems have more work and meetings, 
more intensely entertaining leisure, and less contact with children. Their 
world and tools feel more stable. The world that ems see is more pleasing, 
variable, annotated, authenticated, and cartoonish.
Em society is less democratic and gender-balanced, more divided into 
distinct classes, and its leaders are more accessible and trusted. Em law 
is more efficient, covers more kinds of conflicts, and offers more choices. 
The em world is richer, faster-growing, and it is more specialized, adaptive, 
urban, populous, and fertile. It has weaker gender differences in personality 
and roles, and larger more coherent plans and designs.
Even if most ems work hard most of the time, and will end or retire soon, 
most remember much recent leisure and long histories of succeeding against 
the odds. To most ems, it seems good to be an em.

13
C H A P T E R  2
Modes
Precedents
ow much could the world plausibly change if a new era appeared 
within a century or so? A review of the biggest past changes offers 
a weak basis for expectations about the magnitudes and types of 
future changes.
If we go way back, the universe began, and then life arose. But those 
events happened billions of years ago and are poorly understood. Within 
the last few million years, however, the biggest changes were concentrated 
in three key transitions: the introduction of humans, farming, and industry. 
Humans foraged, that is, searched, for food from a few million to about 
10 000 years ago. From then until a few hundred years ago, we farmed and 
herded. Since then we have developed and relied on industry.
Social group sizes have steadily increased over this history. While most 
mammals live in groups of two to 15 individuals (Kamilar et al. 2010), most 
human foragers lived in bands of roughly 20 to 50. Most farmers lived in 
village-based communities of roughly 500 to 2000 (Kantner and Mahoney 
2000). While larger empires often existed, they made little direct difference 
to most people’s lives. Today, most people live in metropolitan regions of 
roughly 100 000 to 10 million (Giesen et al. 2010), and also in nations of 
roughly 1 million to 100 million.
These sizes fit a simple if mysterious pattern: each era’s community sizes 
have been roughly the square of the previous era’s sizes; a band is roughly a 
group of groups, a village is roughly a band of bands, and a city is roughly a 
village of villages.
H

modes
14
These three human eras of foraging, farming, and industry have encom­
passed similar numbers of people. About 20 billion humans have been born 
since 1750, roughly 50 to a 100 billion were born between 10 000 years ago 
and 1750, and a similar number of near-humans were born in the million 
or so years before 10 000 years ago (Haub 2011). So of all the humans who 
have ever lived, only about 3–8% are alive today.
These three eras also saw similar amounts of change, in the sense that they 
encompassed similar factors of total economic growth. During each era the 
human economy (i.e., the total economic capacity to produce valued things) 
doubled relatively steadily (i.e., via exponential growth) from seven to 10 
times. On average, the forager population doubled roughly every quarter 
million years, the farmer population every 1000 years, and economic pro­
duction in the industrial economy every 15 years. Forager and farmer eco­
nomic capacity tracked population, because incomes were near subsistence 
levels then. The transitions between eras were also comparable in another 
two ways: each transition lasted much less than a previous doubling time, 
and encompassed six to eight doublings of the growth rate (Hanson 2000).
A history of increasing fast growth modes makes sense if the diffusion of 
innovation is key, and if societies have always grown via their fastest avail­
able way to diffuse innovation, with each faster diffusion method not feasi­
ble until the previous society had reached some minimum economic scale. 
For example, maybe primates needed sufficient cognitive abilities before 
they could switch to slowly accumulating innovations via culture, rather 
than via genes. Perhaps human foragers needed to accumulate a sufficient 
density and reliability of food sources before they could stop wandering for 
food and instead stay in one place and farm, allowing more physical capital 
and related innovations, and longer distance trade networks, both of which 
allowed much faster diffusion of culture. Finally, farmers might have needed 
to develop a detailed enough division of labor before innovations could dif­
fuse quickly via talk among networks of topic specialists, such as in the early 
scientific societies.
What if new modes of growth and information diffusion are possible, 
modes that we have not yet seen because they are not yet feasible with our 
current technology level and economic scale? If so, when we finally achieve 
sufficient technology and scale, a new growth era may appear, a successor to 
the forager, farmer, and industry eras.

prior eras
15
We can use patterns from the previous eras to guess at some features of 
such a new era. For example, in previous transitions between eras those who 
owned and participated in the old era’s distinctive methods of production 
and ways of life were quickly marginalized and dominated by those who 
adopted new methods. We might thus expect that those who fully engage 
with new methods and styles of the next era will quickly marginalize those 
who resist such engagement. As each past era has felt its ways to be superior 
to the ways of prior eras, we may expect the next era to see their ways as 
superior to ours.
We can also use trends among prior eras to make some estimates about 
the next era. For example, given the previous pattern of era community sizes 
being roughly the square of prior era community sizes, communities in the 
next era might hold roughly a trillion people. If the pattern of past growth 
rate changes continues, a new growth era will appear sometime in the next 
century or so. At that point, within the space of roughly five years the world 
economy might change from current growth rates to doubling steadily 
roughly every few weeks or months. And within a year or two of this new 
doubling rate, the economy in such a new era might have doubled another 
10 times, and thus could plausibly be ready to change yet again to a new era, 
perhaps even one that doubles in hours.
These are clearly fantastic predictions, based on poorly understood empir­
ical regularities taken from only a few data points. As we will discuss in this 
chapter, in the Limits section, such trends simply cannot go on forever. But 
these estimates at least give us some idea of the magnitude of changes to 
watch for in the next big economic transition.
Prior Eras
To find more clues about the types of future changes to look for, let us review 
the main qualitative differences between prior eras.
Pre-human primates lived many millions of years ago. They lived some­
thing like today’s chimps and bonobos, in large sexually promiscuous groups 
with complex and intense Machiavellian politics, and using unusually large 
brains to manage such politics. For them, the main environment that mat­
tered was not predators, prey, or nature, but each other. Neighboring groups 
were typically hostile, and often violently so. Pre-human primates were split 

modes
16
into many species, one of which eventually evolved a strong cultural cap­
acity, that is, ways to reliably copy associates’ detailed behaviors.
Roughly two million years ago, this strong culture allowed humans to 
have a much-faster-than-genetic accumulation of tools and ways to live, 
resulting in many cultural and genetic changes. Compared with previous 
primates, human foragers had longer lives, larger brains and bodies, stronger 
mating pair bonds, larger social groups, better relations between neighbor­
ing groups, a greater division of labor, and more mobility. Humans wan­
dered instead of staying at fixed locations, and filled a much wider range of 
geographic niches (Youngberg and Hanson 2010).
Tools and language enabled foragers to enforce general norms against 
overt dominance, violence, bragging, and hoarding of big game food, as well 
as diverse group-specific norms (Boehm 1999). Groups didn’t war, although 
individuals were sometimes violent (Kelly 2000). Foragers were more playful, 
including via music, dance, art, stories, and gossip. Music and dance may have 
aided in collective scavenging and predator resistance (Jordani 2011). All 
these changes together led to a great increase in the size, extent, and density 
of the human population, as well as the extinction of competing species.
Roughly 10 000 years ago, when humans acquired a sufficient density 
and reliability of food sources, they began to “farm,” that is, to stay near local 
plants and animals instead of wandering the wild. This farming included 
both tilling the soil and herding animals within regular protected grazing 
areas. The settlement and density of farmers enabled both trade and war, 
both of which complemented property in items, land, wives, and slaves. 
Farmer advantages in war, coming in part from their higher density, helped 
to ensure that farming replaced foraging.
Although farmers traded a lot, they rarely used money, more often using 
barter and debt. Compared with foragers, farmers became richer in mater­
ial comforts, but poorer in leisure time. Farmers’ increased food reliability 
also encouraged less sharing and stronger property rights. This created more 
inequality in property, although perhaps less in mating.
Farmer inequality often took the form of the creation of many distinct 
classes. Distinctions between these classes were emphasized by the different 
roles class members played in farmer-era rituals, which ranged from festivals 
to how farmers greeted one another on the road. Farmer rituals were less 
emotionally intense (Atkinson and Whitehouse 2011).

prior eras
17
Compared with foragers, farmers spent less time on play such as music and 
art. Instead, farmers played more competitively such as by introducing com­
petitive sports. Farmers were sicker, because of their higher population density, 
less varied exercise and diets, and farmer work was harder, more specialized, 
more tedious, and less mentally challenging. While brain sizes had been rising 
during the forager era, they fell during the farmer era (Hawks 2011).
Many farmer-era changes, such as explicit dominance, group violence, 
stable locations, less art, less varied diets, less sharing, and easier mental 
work, can be understood as farmers partially reverting back to the ways typ­
ical of non-human primates.
While farming behaviors could feel wrong to foragers, the new human 
capacity for strong and variable social norms helped to encourage the behav­
ioral changes needed to make farming work. Stronger pressures to conform, 
and the introduction of stronger religions with moralizing gods, added more 
pressures to act like farmers. In addition, farmers had much more reliable 
access to the mood-altering drug of alcohol, and writing later allowed the 
accumulation and sharing of persuasive propaganda and stories. Farmers 
also seem to have introduced romantic kisses.
Neighboring farmer villages were tied together via extended family clans, 
much as extended kinship ties bound forager bands. Farmers traveled less 
than did foragers, and were less able to leave their groups. Farmers inter­
acted more often with people they didn’t know very well, and added last 
names to help identify families.
Farmers more often used formal law instead of informal alliances to settle 
disputes. Farmers cared more about politeness, self-control, self-sacrifice, 
and bravery in war. Farmers planned ahead more, disciplined their children 
more, had more children in good times, and were less accepting of pre- and 
extra-marital sex.
Since the farming era began roughly 10 000 years ago, rates of death from 
war, that is, organized conflict, have consistently fallen (Pinker 2011). Inter­
est rates have also consistently fallen, reflecting more long-term planning, 
although data there only go back 5000 years (Clark 2008).
Cities seem to have predated farming, and may have helped initiate farm­
ing. The first cities mainly offered monumental architecture for large rituals. 
While initially only a tiny fraction of farmers spent much time in cities, the 
fraction of people living in urban concentrations grew over the farming era.

modes
18
Rich farming elites tended to locate near cities, and large concentrations 
of such elites often reverted to forager-like habits in leisure, arts, sex, and 
fertility (Longman 2006). Farming era cities had especially high levels of 
specialization and they nurtured many proto-industry cultures and work 
styles (Landes 1969), especially in Rome, which seems in many ways to have 
started a failed but almost industrial revolution. Big cities had much more 
literacy, and early versions of industrial era monogamy, ideological politics, 
and clothing fashion cycles (Kaestle and Damon-Moore 1991).
Our Era
The industrial era came into full bloom a few hundred years ago, at first 
in England, presumably when some key enabling factors reached favor­
able settings and scales. Such factors may have included technology levels, 
communication or travel costs, the division of labor, trading region scope, 
organization size, savings rate, and expert network connectedness.
The industrial era feature that appeared earliest in Europe was fast chan­
ging clothes fashions, starting soon after the Black Death. (For a while, 
Rome also had some fashion (DeBrohun 2001).) This was accompanied by 
more regional clothing variety, and plausibly promoted a general taste for 
exploration, science, and innovation (Braudel 1979). Over the industrial era, 
culture has come to vary more by region, profession, and age cohorts, such 
as with distinct teen cultures.
Whereas geography mattered greatly for prosperity during the farming 
era, social institutions came to matter more for prosperity during the indus­
try era (Luo and Wen 2015). In the industrial era, money has replaced barter 
as a means of trade, and debt has remained common.
Forager sleep patterns are similar to ours today (Yetish et al. 2015), but in 
the winter in cold climates farmers tended to sleep in 4-hour blocks broken 
by a serene 2-hour midnight wakeful period (Strand 2015). With industry, 
cheaper artificial light induces far more nighttime activity and a compressed 
sleep schedule. Cheaper glass allows more people to see well, including 
seeing larger vistas via climate-controlled windows. Cheaper mirrors let us 
see ourselves more as others see us. Cheaper clocks make our lives more 
scheduled, and cheaper soap, underwear, dinnerware, and sewers have made 
us cleaner. Cheaper refrigeration gives us more kinds of food, while cheaper 

our era
19
maps, engines, and the wheel (used much less before) let us visit more places 
more often. We also work much further from home.
While many farmers had access to beer and wine, mood-altering drugs 
are more widely available in the industrial era (Braudel 1979). Industry has 
made distilled liquors, coffee, tea, chocolate, tobacco, and opium more avail­
able, and propaganda and stories have became more persuasive, and more 
easily distributed. Cheaper printing and screens allow words and ads to 
cover a larger fraction of visible surfaces. Cheaper transmitted and recorded 
sounds let more spaces be filled with artificial talking and music. Recently, 
we have even gained abilities to always and everywhere research any ques­
tion from a vast shared library, and also to instantly talk to anyone.
While farming era stories, jokes, and songs worked when performed by 
many people in many contexts, during the industrial era artistic perform­
ances became more closely matched to the features of particular artists. 
Intellectuals became more direct and literal (Melzer 2007), and political 
coalitions became stronger and more often defined by ideologies, instead of 
by locations, families, or ethnicities.
During the industrial era, organizations increased greatly in size and 
intensity. Cities moved from holding a few percent of the population to 
holding the majority. Firms moved from employing handfuls of people to 
employing hundreds of thousands. Law came to be dominated by specialists 
such as lawyers and police (Allen and Barzel 2011). Empires that rarely 
mattered much to ordinary farmers were replaced by nations, with which 
individuals identified more strongly and which had more influence over 
their lives. Organizations such as firms, cities, and nations took over many 
of the functions once performed by extended kinship ties, especially in the 
West. Most workers became employees who were paid wages and protected 
more by their employers against risks from war, weather, and innovation.
The industrial era law has more rules, more explicitly expressed, than did 
farmer-era law. These rules are found both within organizations, and across 
cities and nations. Over the industrial era we’ve seen a steady fall in overt 
dominance-based governance, although industry levels are still well above 
forager levels. The industrial era has also seen a steady fall in fertility and 
a steady rise in life-span, per-person income, abstract intelligence, leisure 
time, peace, promiscuity, romance, civility, mentally challenging work, and 
medical and art spending (Flynn 2007; Pinker 2011).

modes
20
The industrial era has seen a great and unprecedented increase in individ­
ual consumption; we industrial people are rich. Some people today incor­
rectly describe the usual lives of foragers and farmers as horrific hells, and 
see only our industrial-era lives as usually worth living. However, such exag­
gerations should not blind us to the great value of industrial-era comforts; 
even if it isn’t hell to be poor, it can indeed be good to be rich.
Compared with the farming era, industry has also seen more egalitarian­
ism, fewer overt class distinctions, and more emphasis on individual self-
direction. For example, over the last two centuries mentions in books of 
“I must,” “duties,” and “charity” are down, whereas mentions of “I want,” 
“rights,” and “markets” are up (Barker 2015a). This increased individualism 
has led to more product and behavior variety, and fewer overt rituals. The 
industrial era has moved away from polygamy to monogamy, and more 
recently toward less committed promiscuity.
Many of these industrial-era trends can be usefully seen as a reversion to 
forager values as wealth weakened farming-era social pressures. But even 
if this is a useful perspective, it is far from the only thing going on. For 
example, at work industrial era people are more like hyper-farmers. Schools 
train us to think more abstractly, and to accept more workplace domin­
ation than most farmers would accept. This includes accepting ambiguous 
detailed orders and frequent fine-grained public status rankings (Bowles 
and Gintis 1976). Industrial jobs vary greatly in stress and psychological 
comfort, plausibly explaining large observed mortality differences between 
different types of industrial jobs (Lee 2011).
Over the industrial era, we industrial people have steadily become more 
urban, specialized, and globally unequal. Industrial planning horizons have 
often shortened because of faster rates of change. In the industrial era, we 
relate to each other and the universe more via markets, and via material and 
individual identities. In contrast, farmers and foragers saw their world as 
more enchanted, and themselves as having deeper connections to each other 
(Potter 2010).
From the farmer to the forager and then the industrial era, we have con­
sistently seen more and faster growth, larger organizations, more specializa­
tion and tool use, more artificial environments, more effective propaganda 
and drugs, more population density and inequality, and more alienation 

era values
21
from work habits that feel natural to foragers. These trends, as expected, 
continue in the scenario explored in this book.
We’ve also seen large but inconsistent changes in health, fertility, mobil­
ity, peacefulness, art, planning horizons, the mental challenges of work, and 
attitudes toward sex. We should expect more but inconsistent changes along 
these dimensions, and in the scenario explored in this book we do see big 
changes in health, fertility, mobility, work, sex, and planning horizons.
Each of the past transitions had winners and losers. When proto-humans 
became humans the transition inequality was huge; all but one subspecies 
went extinct. Even the subspecies that contributed most to our DNA, the 
Neanderthals, only contributed a few percent. The transition from foraging 
to farming was more equitable; a larger fraction of new farmers were for­
agers who switched to farming and interbred with invading farmers (Curry 
2013). The transition from farming to industry was even more equitable; the 
English cities where industry began did better than average, but the gains 
from industry were shared widely with nearby Europe, and to a lesser but 
large extent with the rest of the world.
This history of increased sharing of transition gains seems to be a result 
of the increasing abilities of laggards to copy transition first-movers, and to 
the world economy gaining more specialization and complementarities in 
production. The scenario described in this book, however, deviates from this 
trend, in having transition gains that are more unequal than in recent tran­
sitions. Although the transition to an em world is likely to materially benefit 
most humans, descendants of only a tiny fraction of humans dominate the 
new society; most ordinary humans have a far smaller fractional influence 
on the world than they did before the transition.
We have seen that the last three eras have been quite different from each 
other in many ways. We should expect the next great era to be similarly different.
Era Values
To understand how future values could change, it helps to see how values 
have changed in the past, and also how values vary today.
Today, key values of both individuals (Schwartz et al. 2012) and nations 
(Inglehart and Welzel 2010) vary primarily along the same two main factors 

modes
22
or axes of variation. One axis varies between small family values in nations 
such as the United States, and larger community values in nations such as 
Russia. Small family values emphasize resources, dominance, and achieve­
ment, and larger communities’ values emphasize humility, caring, and 
dependability.
Community values tend to be common closer to ancient long-distance 
travel routes, where more rice is grown, where there is more disease, and 
where farming began earlier. Each of these correlations suggests a plaus­
ible theory about the origin of this value difference. For example, perhaps 
growing rice requires more community support, perhaps collectivist norms 
grew over the farming era, or perhaps community values were an adaptive 
response to more frequent farming era pandemics or invasions (Fincher et 
al. 2008; Talhelm et al. 2014; Ola and Paik 2015). Most of these theor­
ies suggest that community values will be higher in denser regions. Many 
animals, including human foragers, are more pro-social when food is less 
reliable or more cooperation is required to obtain food.
The other main (and independent) axis of value variation ranges between 
poor and rich nations. Poor nations place more value on conformity, 
security, and traditional values such as marriage, heterosexuality, religion, 
patriotism, hard work, and trust in authority. In contrast, rich nations place 
more value on individualism, self-direction, tolerance, pleasure, nature, 
leisure, and trust. When the values of individuals within a nation vary on 
this same axis, we call this a left/liberal (rich) versus right/conservative 
(poor) axis.
Foragers tend to have values more like those of rich/liberal people today, 
while subsistence farmers tend to have values more like those of poor/con­
servative people today. As industry has made us richer, we have on average 
moved from conservative/farmer values to liberal/foragers values (Hofstede 
et al. 2010; Hanson 2010a). This is plausible if cultural evolution used the 
social pressures farmers faced, such as conformity and religion, to induce 
humans, who evolved to find forager behaviors natural, to act instead like 
farmers. As we become rich, we don’t as strongly fear the threats behind 
these social pressures.
The rich know that they can better afford to behave in ways that feel natu­
ral and admirable, and these behaviors tend to be forager-like. For example, 
the rich can better afford to focus on impressing those around them, instead 

dreamtime
23
of just surviving. This can plausibly help to explain many industrial-era 
trends.
We now spend more time on leisure, and more on variety rather than 
quantity in products, services, and life plans. In the United States spending 
on education has risen from 2% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1900 
to 8%. Spending on financial specialists has risen from 2% in 1880 to 8% 
today (Philippon 2015). Spending on medicine has risen from 4% in 1930 to 
18% today. And spending on large impressive projects, costing over a billion 
dollars each, is now 8% of global GDP (Flyvbjerg 2015). There are plausible 
arguments that each of these spending levels is excessive today, relative to 
simple functionality. However, such spending helps us to show off.
Holding wealth constant, some of us more strongly feel farmer-like social 
pressures. It seems that we tend to call these people “conservatives.” This is 
not to say that being rich is the main reason why individuals have liberal atti­
tudes, or that being liberal is the main reason individuals are rich. Instead, 
it seems that wealth isn’t the only factor that causes farmer or forager-like 
attitudes.
Rich-nation industrial-era values do differ from forager values in import­
ant ways, however, such as in accepting city-level density and anonymity, 
and high levels of workplace alienation and domination. We hold on to 
these workplace values because doing otherwise can threaten our ability to 
earn industrial-era incomes.
In the scenario described in this book, many strange-to-forager behaviors 
are required, and median per-person (i.e., per-em) incomes fall to near-
subsistence levels. This suggests that the em era may reverse the recent 
forager-like trend toward more liberality; ems may have more farmer-like 
conservative values.
Dreamtime
Of all the humans who have ever lived, only a few percent have lived during 
our industrial era, and only a small fraction of those have been rich enough 
to fully embrace our new industrial-era attitudes and behaviors. As men­
tioned before in Chapter 1, Overview section, these new styles adopted by 
rich industrial humans today can be seen as representing a brief but influen­
tial “dreamtime” of unusual attitudes and behavior. (Cosmologists could see 

modes
24
it as analogous to the brief but influential out-of-equilibrium inflationary 
epoch of the very early physical universe.)
As we discuss below, our rich industrial-era behavior is biologically mal­
adaptive in the sense of not even approximately maximizing each person’s 
number of descendants. Yes, our forager ancestors evolved many delusory 
beliefs, and matching behaviors, but in their environments such delusions 
mostly induced biologically adaptive behavior. More recently, however, 
social rates of change have outpaced the abilities of both genetic and cul­
tural selection to adapt our behaviors well to our new environments. Our 
behaviors are far less well adapted to our new environments than in the past. 
Here are several reasons why.
First, a basic psychology theory, “construal level theory,” suggests that ani­
mals evolved both abstract and concrete mental modes, and that for humans 
abstract modes are adapted more for making good social impressions, rela­
tive to making good decisions (Liberman and Trope 2008; Hanson 2009; 
Torelli and Kaikati 2009). Today, we tend to rely on more abstract styles of 
thought, which leads us to more often embrace good-looking delusions. 
We think more abstractly both because we live in a larger social world, and 
because abstract thought is seen as higher status.
Second, evolutionary pressures encouraged foragers to unknowingly 
do many things to show off to each other. Our wealth today induces 
us to do this more, and our unawareness keeps us from adapting these 
behaviors well to modern situations. For example, foragers developed 
habits of art, music, dress, and conversation that functioned in part to 
show off related abilities. They also argued politics, taught local children, 
helped sick allies, and told stories, which functioned in part to show that 
they cared about their group, allies, and ideals. Foragers evolved to show 
off more in times of plenty, to invest in allies useful during the next time 
of troubles.
To avoid knowingly violating forager norms against bragging and 
subgroup coalitions, foragers also evolved to believe many non-show-off 
excuses for these show-off behaviors. Such as believing they mainly just like 
art for art’s sake, and don’t care if it impresses others.
Inheriting these habits, today we show off in most of the same ways that 
foragers did, and we do even more because we are rich. Yet as we deny that 
we show off, we are mostly blind and indifferent to how forager-style ways 

dreamtime
25
to show off are often far less functional today. We continue to show off via 
art, chat, politics, stories, etc., without responding to many changes in their 
functions and effects.
Third, foragers evolved the habit of being attracted to many sights, sounds, 
smells, and tastes that were associated with good sex, food, places, and 
objects. Foragers also seem to have evolved to be influenced by the rhetoric, 
eloquence, difficulty, drama, repetition, and the source’s status for the argu­
ments they heard, and not just the logic of those arguments. This may have 
helped foragers to ally with high-status associates. Today, such habits leave 
us with weak defenses against the super-stimuli of mass-produced food, 
drugs, music, TV, video games, ads, and propaganda. We thus believe and 
consume such things far more than is adaptively useful.
The “demographic transition” is the tendency of societies to switch to 
having far fewer children as they become rich, often via new status norms 
transmitted via education and mass media (Jensen and Oster 2009; La 
Ferrara et al. 2012; Cummins 2013). Whereas in farming societies richer 
people tended to have more children, thus selecting for genes that promoted 
wealth, today richer people now have fewer children (Clark 2008, 2014). 
Although some evidence suggests that early during the demographic tran­
sition having fewer children led to having more grandchildren, it seems 
clear that fewer children now results in fewer grandchildren (Mulder 1998; 
Lawson and Mace 2011).
This fall in fertility is perhaps the most dramatic demonstration that our 
behavior is biologically maladaptive. By definition, behaviors that result in 
fewer long run descendants in an environment will tend to be selected away 
by evolution. Such behaviors thus cannot be sustainable adaptations to that 
environment.
Not only is individual fertility maladaptive, our cultures today also seem 
maladaptive, in the sense that they don’t promote their own adoption as 
much as they could, via war, trade, teaching, and proselytizing. Our cul­
tures also do not much encourage adaptive individual fertility. For example, 
we are tolerant enough of crime today that criminal convicts have higher 
fertility than do others, mostly as a result of having more partners (Yao 
et al. 2014).
Of course there is no guarantee that adaptive behaviors are good for 
the world or universe as a whole; it is possible for life overall to be hurt 

modes
26
by adaptive behaviors. Nevertheless, while our increased wealth currently 
buffers us more from all sorts of adaptation mistakes, in the long run we 
should expect adaptation mistakes to diminish in frequency, and eventually 
disappear. More on this in this chapter, in the Limits section.
Recently, some have celebrated our maladaptive behaviors (Stanovich 
2004). They see such behaviors as evidence that we are breaking free of the 
shackles that have enslaved us to our genetic programming. They hope that 
as we continue to rebel, we will consciously and deliberately choose our 
collective futures, rather than having such futures chosen by evolutionary 
selection.
However, having people make choices that defy or ignore adaptive pres­
sures is far from sufficient to create a world where evolution no longer deter­
mines outcomes. Evolution needs only variation and differential selection to 
influence outcomes. So to prevent such evolution, we would have to strongly 
coordinate to take global control of almost all reproductive behavior, and 
then apply this global control forcefully worldwide.
Less extreme approaches are not partial solutions; they may not be solu­
tions at all. For example, setting variable limits on reproduction can select 
for types who can avoid such limits, and giving reproductive powers in pro­
portion to political power can select for types who are better able to acquire 
and keep political power.
It’s likely that such a strong focused global coordination of fertility will 
not appear anytime soon. For now, and for a long while, such high levels of 
coordination are beyond our meager abilities. Coordination is in general 
both hard and risky, and although our coordination abilities have greatly 
improved over time, we are still far from being able to achieve the levels 
required for global control. Sloppy attempts at coordination invite and select 
for defectors who can evade them.
Some celebrate our biologically maladaptive behaviors without hoping 
for collective control of evolution. They accept that future evolution will 
select for preferences different from theirs, but they still want to act on 
the preferences they have for as long as they have them. These people have 
embraced a role as temporary dreamtime exceptions to a larger pattern of 
history.
But whether you accept it or resist it, know that our era is indeed an 
unusual dreamtime that probably cannot last.

limits
27
Limits
Not only can we set rough expectations about the next great era via com­
parisons with recent prior eras, but also we can make useful guesses about 
very distant future eras.
Unless we greatly misunderstand the nature of physical law, substantial 
useful innovation and economic growth must come to end “soon,” at least 
on cosmological timescales of billions or more years. For example, if the 
economic growth rates of the last century were to continue for only a million 
more years, that would produce growth by a factor of 10 to the power of 
3000, which seems physically impossible, at least for value gains of human-
like psychologies in a universe such as ours. (I’m not claiming that our very 
distant descendants will in fact have human-like psychologies. I’m using 
humans as a reference to discuss the ultimate limits to growth.)
Once all available physical matter is converted into very advanced arti­
facts there seems little room for further rapid growth in physical resources. 
Even if it becomes possible to create connections to new universes, that 
probably won’t change the available resources left in our universe by much. 
Our search of the space of physically useful devices, algorithms, etc., should 
similarly eventually reach greatly diminishing returns. Although an effect­
ively infinite space of possible designs would remain to be searched, the rate 
at which physically useful improvements are found should become astro­
nomically slower.
Similarly, limits should also be reached, if perhaps a bit later, for plans, 
devices, algorithms, etc., that are useful for social, artistic, or entertainment 
purposes. Yes, the extent and detail of virtual realities could increase without 
limit, but the value that creatures similar to humans could gain from such 
increased detail should be far more limited. (It may be possible to create 
creatures who care enormously about the fine design detail that can only be 
discovered after billions of years of search with cosmological quantities of 
computing power. However, humans are not remotely like such creatures, 
and we have little reason to expect such beings to be created. Of course 
human-like minds could long continue to care greatly about solving hard 
problems and about making difficult discoveries. After all, humans care 
about showing off relevant mental abilities. But such status-seeking need 
not create much net social value.)

modes
28
Thus over the trillions of years to come, net economic growth should fall 
to a very low average growth rate. For descendants whose minds do not run 
much slower than us, subjectively perceived economic growth rates must be 
far lower than today. In fact, for the vast majority of future history, growth 
and innovation are probably mostly imperceptible, and thus irrelevant for 
most practical purposes.
Perhaps our descendants will coordinate to create a universe-spanning 
government that strongly regulates reproduction, or perhaps many immov­
able local governments will all enforce similar regulations. But if not, then 
this end of innovation suggests our descendants will become extremely well 
adapted in a biological sense to the stable components of their environment. 
Their behavior will be nearly locally optimal, at least for the purpose of 
ensuring the continuation of similar behaviors. In most places, population 
will rise to levels consistent with a competitive evolutionary equilibrium, 
with living standards near adaptive subsistence levels. Such consumption 
levels have characterized almost all animals in Earth history, almost all 
humans before 200 years ago, and a billion humans today.
The design of human brains today doesn’t seem to be remotely near the 
limits of efficient use of physical resources, such as atoms, energy, and vol­
ume. As very adaptive descendants should move far closer to such physical 
efficiency limits, they should either implement minds like ours via designs 
that use far fewer resources than humans use today, or pack far more men­
tal capacity into packages that use levels of resources similar to ours. Or 
there may be a mixture of these two changes. Thus in the very long run 
(such as in millions or billions of years) we should expect any creatures with 
mental capacities comparable with ours to use far less material and energy 
resources. If they have densities similar to ours, they would be much smaller. 
And if they use a similar amount of total resources, there would be far more 
of them.
If the speed of light limits the speed of future communication, if the 
pace of local cultural change is not ridiculously slow, and if there isn’t 
strong universal coordination, then the physical scale of the universe should 
ensure that future cultures must also fragment into many local cultures. For 
example, if it took a billion years to receive a signal back from a distant 
galaxy, but only 10 years for local music fashions to change, then music 
fashion must fragment into differently changing music fashions in different 

limits
29
locations. Similarly, if large travel costs and delays make military defense 
much cheaper than offense on large scales, military power may also have a 
tendency to fragment.
Our distant forager ancestors were well adapted to their very slowly 
changing world, and were quite culturally and militarily fragmented over 
the planet. Our distant descendants are thus likely to be more similar to 
our distant ancestors in these ways. Our current “dreamtime” era is cosmo­
logically unusual; it is a brief period of a rapidly growing highly integrated 
global culture, with many important behaviors that are quite far from bio­
logically adaptive.
We can’t be sure in what future era the patterns of history might “turn the 
corner” to return to the patterns of our distant past and distant future. But 
we should weakly expect that without global coordination the next great era 
will begin to move in that direction, with a larger population of creatures 
that are smaller, use less energy, and have low living standards, behavior 
better adapted to their environment, a slower subjectively perceived rate of 
innovation and growth, and more fragmented cultures and societies.
Most of these are elements of the scenario explored in this book; ems 
seem to have less leisure and income, better-adapted behaviors, and cultures 
that are more fragmented than ours in important ways. Although growth is 
faster “objectively,” that is, relative to a fixed clock, to the typical em growth 
seems slower “subjectively,” that is, relative to the rate at which he or she 
personally experiences events.


31
C H A P T E R  3
Framing
motivation
hy study future emulations?
Some readers of drafts of this book have told me they don’t 
care much about future worlds where they don’t personally 
expect to live, unless those worlds contain their children, grand­
children, or especially engaging fictional characters. And I must admit that 
the scenario I present here may not be especially well suited for dramatic or 
inspirational stories. But I will note that applying similar standards would 
declare most of history to also be uninteresting. Yet many of those who 
express low interest in the future also show great interest in many nooks and 
crannies of history.
Today, we take far more effort to study the past than the future, even 
though we can’t change the past. People often excuse this by saying that we 
know far more about the past than the future. Yet modest efforts often give 
substantial insights into the future, and we would know more about the 
future if we tried harder to study it. Also, relative to the future, our study of 
the past has hit diminishing returns; most of the easiest insights about the 
past have already been found.
If policy matters, then the future matters, because policies only affect the 
future. And unless we are very pessimistic or self-centered time-wise, the 
distant future matters the most, as with continued growth we expect the vast 
majority of people to live there.
Furthermore, for most intellectuals most of the benefits that result from 
their policy discussions will happen with long delays; the path from an 
W

framing
32
intellectual having a new policy idea, to publishing an article on it, to some­
one else reading that article, to that someone gaining policy influence, to 
them finally finding a chance to try that idea, to the tried policy having 
consequences, can take decades. If enormous changes will happen over the 
next decades, policy analyses that ignore such changes may be irrelevant 
or badly misdirected. It is thus important to try to foresee big upcoming 
changes, and their likely consequences.
Just as visiting foreign lands can help you to better see the distinctive 
features of your homeland, envisioning foreign times can help you to see the 
distinctive features of your era. Thus, understanding your ­descendants can 
help you to see who you are, and your place in history. We are the people who 
live now, after those who came before us, and before those who will come 
after us. We define ourselves in part by how we differ from our neighbors, 
both in space and time. Even if the future portrayed in this book doesn’t 
happen, this analysis may still help you to see how different a ­plausible 
future world might be.
People are often interested in future events that can be seen as distant 
projections of recent trends, because discussing such future events offers 
them an indirect way to celebrate or lament current trends. For example, 
we might like a story about a future where people work very few hours per 
week, as a way to indirectly comment on current changes in work hours. But 
as most events described here are not projections of current trends, this book 
is less useful for this purpose.
Considering what our best theories suggest about future societies can also 
help us to test these theories. Today, we social scientists too easily succumb 
to hindsight bias and assume that the patterns we see around us are clearly 
implied by our theories of how society works. Thinking about future soci­
eties where such patterns are much less visible can force us to consider more 
carefully what our theories about how the world works actually imply. Such 
a thought experiment can help us to calibrate the confidence we should 
place in these theories, and to spot theoretical holes that we might work to 
fill. Eventually, when we see what the future actually holds, books such as 
this one may test the predictive power of today’s standard theories.
This book takes the somewhat unusual approach of using basic social 
theory, in addition to common sense and trend projection, to forecast future 
societies. Even those who think that this particular analysis is mistaken 

forecasting
33
may still be inspired and instructed by its example, to construct other basic-
social-theory-based forecasts.
Hopefully, at least one of these mentioned reasons resonates with you.
forecasting
Some say that there is little point in trying to foresee the non-immediate 
future. But in fact there have been many successful forecasts of this sort.
For example, we can reliably predict the future cost changes for devices 
such as batteries or solar cells, as such costs tend to follow a power law of 
the cumulative device production (Nagy et al. 2013). As another example, 
recently a set of a thousand published technology forecasts were collected 
and scored for accuracy, by comparing the forecasted date of a technology 
milestone with its actual date. Forecasts were significantly more accurate 
than random, even forecasts 10 to 25 years ahead. This was true separately 
for forecasts made via many different methods. On average, these milestones 
tended to be passed a few years before their forecasted date, and some­
times forecasters were unaware that they had already passed (Charbonneau 
et al. 2013).
A particularly accurate book in predicting the future was The Year 2000, 
a 1967 book by Herman Kahn and Anthony Wiener (Kahn and Wiener 
1967). It accurately predicted population, was 80% correct for computer and 
communication technology, and 50% correct for other technology (Albright 
2002). On even longer time scales, in 1900 the engineer John Watkins did a 
good job of forecasting many basic features of society a century later (Wat­
kins 1900).
Looking at those who focused on forecasting particular technologies, we 
find that in 1911 Konstantin Tsiolkovsky foresaw the basic issues and pos­
sibilities of space travel (Tsiolkovsky 1903). More recently, K. Eric Drexler 
used basic physical science to envision the outlines of atomically precise 
manufacturing (Drexler 1992, 2013). Others have used physics to envision 
the outlines of starships (Benford and Benford 2013).
Even taking into account the many unsuccessful forecasts, the successes 
to date seem more accurate than random chance predicts. So at least some 
people have better than random abilities to foresee future changes. Although 
real starships and atomically precise factories will surely differ in many ways 

framing
34
from their forecasted outlines, these attempts are better guides to future 
factories and starships than random guesses, or the vast majority of movie 
depictions.
Many say that while physical possibilities can be foreseen, social con­
sequences cannot. Such people are often trained in physical sciences, and 
don’t appreciate that social scientists do in fact know many useful things. 
For example, social scientists today understand in some detail why our ways 
of life differ from those of farmers, and why farmers’ ways differ from for­
agers’ ways. Had our distant ancestors had access to such social science, they 
could plausibly have used it to foresee many aspects of our current industrial 
era. We should similarly be able to use basic social science to foresee many 
aspects of the eras that will follow ours, and this book is an attempt to prove 
this claim.
Some say no one could have anticipated the recent big changes associated 
with the arrival and consequences of the World Wide Web. Yet participants 
in the Xanadu hypertext project in which I was involved from 1984 to 1993 
correctly anticipated many key aspects of the Web. And a 1999 business 
book used basic economics to accurately forecast many key Internet busi­
ness issues (Shapiro and Varian 1999). Such examples show that one can 
use basic theory to anticipate key elements of distant future environments, 
both physical and social, but also that forecasters do not tend to be much 
rewarded for such efforts, either culturally or materially. This helps to explain 
why there are relatively few serious forecasting efforts.
But make no mistake, it is possible to forecast the future.
scenarios
How can we envision a world of ems, even in dim outline?
My most basic method in this book is to focus first on expectations, rather 
than on hopes or fears. I seek first what is likely to happen if no special 
effort is made to avoid it, instead of what I might prefer to happen, or what I 
might want to warn others to avoid. It is hard to speak usefully about which 
directions to push the future if you have little idea of what the future will be 
if you don’t push. And we shouldn’t overestimate our ability to push.
In this book, I will set defining assumptions, collect many plausible argu­
ments about the correlations we should expect from these assumptions, 

scenarios
35
and then try to combine these many correlation clues into a self-consistent 
scenario describing relevant variables. That is, if my scenario includes factor 
A and we have good reasons to think that factor B tends to go with A, 
I’ll also add B to the scenario, although with less confidence. I add B with 
more confidence the more confident I am of A, the more robust and deeper 
the reasons for thinking that A and B correlate, and the more independent 
reasons suggest B.
Constructing self-consistent scenarios such as this is a very common way 
to analyze complex situations, such as jigsaw or Sudoku puzzles, construc­
tion project plans, and even forecasts for national intelligence analysis. This 
is also the process we use today to study starships, nanocomputers, and the 
consequences of global warming (Pindyck 2013).
Historians also use this self-consistent scenario approach. For example, a 
historian estimating Roman Empire copper trade will typically rely on the 
best estimates of other historians regarding related factors such as nearby 
population, copper mine locations, trade routes, travel time, crime rates, life­
spans, climate, wages, copper use in jewelry, etc. Although historians usually 
acknowledge some uncertainty, and for small sets of variables they sometimes 
identify more than one coherent set of possible values, historians mostly just 
construct best estimates to match other historians’  best estimates.
Such straightforward scenario construction seems taboo among many 
professional futurists today. Such people dislike the label “futurist,” prefer­
ring instead the label “scenario thinker.” They embrace “scenario planning,” 
wherein they create a modest number of scenarios to cover a wide range 
of possibilities across key axes of uncertainty and disagreement, with each 
scenario being story-like, archetypal in representing clusters of relevant 
driving forces, and describing equilibrium rather than transitory situations 
(Schoemaker 1995). Alas, I have so far been unable to make sense of their 
taboo, and so have simply plowed ahead and tried to build a self-consistent 
scenario.
The chance that the exact particular scenario I describe in this book will 
actually happen just as I describe it is much less than one in a thousand. 
But scenarios that are similar to true scenarios, even if not exactly the same, 
can still be a relevant guide to action and inference. I expect my analysis 
to be relevant for a large cloud of different but similar scenarios. In par­
ticular, conditional on my key assumptions, I expect at least 30% of future 

framing
36
situations to be usefully informed by my analysis. Unconditionally, I expect 
at least 10%.
Consider that while the future matters more than the past, we have at least 
a thousand useful books on the past. So this book can be useful if it expertly 
studies a scenario with only a one in a thousand chance of happening.
When thinking in terms of specific scenarios, it is often useful to collect 
a set of scenarios defined as variations on particular “baseline” scenarios. 
Furthermore, it is often useful to choose as baselines not just especially likely 
scenarios, but also especially simple scenarios, so that they and simple vari­
ations on them can be more easily analyzed.
For example, even if a major war is likely sometime in the next hundred 
years, one may prefer to analyze a baseline scenario lacking any specific wars. 
This baseline will make it easier to analyze the consequences of variation 
scenarios, such as adding a war between India and Pakistan, or between 
China and Taiwan. Even if a major war is more likely than not, using a par­
ticular war scenario as a baseline can make it harder to define and describe 
other scenarios as robust variations on that baseline.
That is, it is in fact often a good idea to start looking for your proverbial 
keys under a lamppost. Your keys are probably not there, but that is a good 
place to anchor your mental map of the territory, so you can plan your search 
of the dark.
I will mainly present a single baseline scenario, centered on the appear­
ance of cheap whole brain emulation. It will help that this main assump­
tion is relatively discrete, without many complicating “almost” scenarios 
to consider. That is, mostly you either have a fully functioning emulation 
cheap enough for wide application, or whatever you do have isn’t of much 
economic value. There aren’t many interesting in-between scenarios.
The baseline scenario I generate in this book is detailed and self-­
consistent, as scenarios should be. It is also often a likely baseline, in the 
sense that I pick the most likely option when such an option stands out 
clearly. However, when several options seem similarly likely, or when it is 
hard to say which is more likely, I tend instead to choose a “simple” option 
that seems easier to analyze.
This simple-and-likely baseline strategy makes it easier to describe in 
more detail both this baseline scenario, and other scenarios defined as vari­
ations on it. But let us acknowledge that such a scenario is likely to be biased 

consensus
37
in the direction of being easy to understand. A real em future would prob­
ably be stranger than the baseline that I describe here, just as the real past is 
probably stranger than the histories that historians present.
Let me emphasize that point. Within many sets of plausible future 
options, the status quo is often the simplest and most likely option. Thus, 
my habit of using simple and likely values will tend to make my baseline 
scenario more like the status quo, and less strange than what the future is 
likely to be. But as we can’t say much about in which specific directions real­
ity is likely to be strange, this baseline scenario still seems our best reference 
for calculating concrete future details. Sometimes conventional wisdom is 
better than no wisdom at all.
consensus
In working out the details of my simple baseline scenario, my main method 
here, besides common sense and trend projection, is to rely on standard con­
sensus theories in relevant areas of physics, engineering, and the social and 
human sciences, including business and social practice. Of course today’s sci­
ence is likely to be wrong in many ways, at least by the standards of future sci­
ence. But as most of today’s science probably won’t be overturned, we can still 
gain insight by applying today’s consensus science to this unusual question.
As a professor of economics, I emphasize the application of standard 
academic economics. While some of my conclusions follow directly from 
economics that has been thoroughly analyzed and empirically tested, usually 
I more flexibly apply economics-informed intuitions to the case at hand. I 
expect professional economists to recognize and usually approve of my appli­
cations, but I also expect that non-professionals may find it hard to see the 
connections. (Non-professionals note: economic theory often predicts out­
comes that are not what most people vote for, due to coordination failures.)
For example, when possible I first assume, as does the baseline scenario in 
most economic policy analysis, a relatively competitive low-regulation equilib­
rium scenario. That is, I assume that while the world continues to coordinate 
in many ways at many scales on many topics, even so relatively little global 
coordination is achieved to change the price or quantity of brain emulations.
Note that this doesn’t mean that I predict or recommend zero regulation, 
that I deny the possibility of strategically restricted supply and demand, or 

framing
38
that I deny that unexpected changes are possible. It is just that we econo­
mists use such “supply and demand equilibrium” scenarios as our standard 
baseline reference for evaluating regulations and interventions. We do this 
because we are especially good at robustly estimating the consequences of 
such baselines. The main regulations that I tend to assume are those that 
seem most clearly and substantially economically efficient, as we do see a 
modest tendency toward economic efficiency in law and politics (Cooter 
and Ulen 2011; Weingast and Wittman 2008).
I thus assume that brain emulation is available relatively competitively, 
with many competing organizations able to profit from its application. I also 
assume that the world I describe is past a disruptive initial transition, when 
large unexpected changes were most influential. Any large-scale organized 
resistance to deploying this new technology has mostly failed. Although 
some slow echoes of the transition may remain in the future I describe, I 
focus on a time when society is mostly well described as being in a rough 
equilibrium between expectations and actions.
Note that if, instead of focusing on competitive scenarios, I were to ana­
lyze the consequences of particular regulations in depth, I would have to 
estimate both which combinations of regulations are likely to appear, and 
also the typical effectiveness of such regulations. But these things are hard to 
predict, because the political coalitions that support or oppose them are hard 
to predict. In addition, as both such estimate types are highly politicized, my 
analysis could then be more easily accused of having a political agenda. Of 
course by not considering any particular regulations, I can also be accused of 
being biased against regulation. When it comes to avoiding accusations of 
political bias, there is no absolutely safe ground in social science.
Not only are some things hard to predict, some things are hard to even 
describe. For example, even though we know much about our world, we find 
it hard to say how “free” the typical person is today, or what “rights” they 
have. Such things vary greatly by location and context, and these words lack 
precise definitions. You should expect it to be even harder to answer related 
questions about a future scenario.
Some claim that the economic theories popular among academics today 
are highly tuned to the personalities and mental styles common among 
economists today, and thus would not be chosen by people with different 
personalities and styles. But, in fact, our economic theories apply reasonably 

scope
39
well not only to other classes and regions within rich nations today, but also 
to other very different nations today and to people and places thousands of 
years ago. Furthermore, formal economic models apply widely even though 
quite alien creatures usually populate them, that is, selfish rational strategic 
agents who never forget or make mistakes. If economic theory built using 
such agents can apply to us today, it can plausibly apply to future ems.
Some may complain that my analysis doesn’t rise to the high level of cer­
tainty characteristic of “science,” and knowing of no other level than “mere 
speculation,” they may conclude that my estimates are no more reliable than 
any other speculation, and being less entertaining than most speculation, 
have little value. But, in fact, there is continuum of possible confidence lev­
els, and good educated guesses, such as those I offer here, can rise far above 
the lowest possible levels.
scope
The conclusions that I draw vary in their strength. Some are based on strong 
well-established theory, whereas others are based on weak clues such as 
analogies and trend projections. Some academics insist on only discussing 
conclusions with strong supporting evidence, but this needlessly discards 
useful information. As there are many interdependencies between a society’s 
features in different areas, even weak guesses in some areas can help us to 
refine estimates of likely outcomes in other areas.
I thus seek tentative estimates on as many aspects of this future as I 
can. This is analogous to the standard statistical practice of examining the 
most-probable variable-value-combination in a formal Bayesian network 
probability model. The point is not to claim a high probability for one exact 
combination, but instead to make maximal use of variable relationships to 
inform all one’s variable estimates.
One kind of weak clue I use is to follow the standard practice of assuming 
that existing patterns of social activity have robust functional explanations, 
even when they are poorly understood. I thus tend to assume that familiar 
social patterns will continue, unless we have particular reasons to expect 
otherwise. The more robustly we have seen a pattern across space, time, and 
subcultures, the more confidently we can expect that pattern to continue in 
an em world.

framing
40
Of course there is a risk of mistaking local contingent social practices for 
robust functional patterns, and thus mistakenly assuming that ems must 
continue with our arbitrary habits. But there is also the opposite risk of 
failing to see the many ways in which the em world will be a continuation of 
our world, both because it faces similar problems, and because it will inherit 
many practices directly from our world.
This approach will work better if fewer large social changes occur between 
now and an em transition. I thus implicitly assume that other pre-em-era 
changes have smaller effects, that is, that the em transition is the next really 
big enormous revolution, on the order of the farming or industrial revolu­
tions. For example, I assume that ems will appear before other forms of 
human-level artificial intelligence, a major genetic re-engineering of the 
human brain, invasion by aliens or demons, a totalitarian takeover of Earth, 
or the complete collapse of civilization.
A habit of assuming that familiar social patterns continue also works bet­
ter for estimating earlier em eras, relative to later eras. My method is thus to 
focus on the first substantial em era. Although this era will no doubt be of a 
short duration on a cosmological time scale, understanding it better seems a 
good preparation for understanding subsequent eras. Just as foragers could 
have better anticipated the industrial era if they had first understood the 
intervening farmer era, a better understanding today of the early em era 
should help us better anticipate the eras that may follow it.
In sum, I apply consensus theories from many fields to build a broad self-
consistent scenario, one that covers many aspects of the em world, and in 
which we can have far more confidence than “mere speculation.” Although 
I chose this particular method to study a society of emulations, I don’t mean 
to claim that it is the only or best method. I hope my efforts will inspire the 
application of other methods to this topic, and the application of methods 
such as this to other topics.
biases
In addition to the method of applying standard social science, I also use the 
anti-method of trying to avoid relevant biases.
For example, when predicting, we tend to rely too much on “inside” 
views that imagine specific internal arrangements of events and objects, and 

biases
41
too little on “outside” views based on frequencies of related other events 
(Kahneman and Lovallo 1993). We tend to be more confident than our 
evidence justifies, and to anchor, that is, to change our initial opinions too 
little in response to new information. When valuing a change we tend to 
neglect its scope (e.g., saving 10 vs. 10 000 birds), and we tend to guess that 
changes with big gains have small costs (or risks) and vice versa (Yudkoswky 
2008). Smart people succumb to many of these biases just as often as others 
(Stanovich et al. 2013).
We often consider the future in the context of fiction; the future has 
replaced far away lands as our favorite place for stories about not-obviously-
impossible exotic and strange creatures, devices, and events. Thus, the 
standard biases of popular fiction are relevant. Compared with real events, 
fictional events are driven less by random complexity and more by people in 
overt value-driven conflict. Fictional characters have more extreme features, 
have attitudes more predictable from their history, better understand the 
reasons for their actions, are more willing to risk conflict to achieve their 
goals, and have actions more predictable from their context. Fiction set in 
the future often tells indirect morality tales about today’s world, by hav­
ing familiar issues and divisions remain important in the future, so that we 
can celebrate or criticize today’s groups indirectly, via crediting or blaming 
fictional groups for future outcomes (Bickham 1997).
This book focuses on a rather unusual topic, and in general people who 
discuss unusual topics tend to be biased to use unusual methods, assump­
tions, and sources, and to draw unusual conclusions (Swami and Coles 
2010). This correlation is biased, however, making opinions on odd top­
ics overly odd and diverse, defended via an overly wide range of methods, 
sources, and assumptions.
Today, there is a subculture of “cultural rebel futurists,” many of whom 
revel in “future shock” scenarios wherein today’s dominant cultural assump­
tions are visibly challenged by future behaviors. But while cultures can 
indeed make big net changes over time, they usually also work to find ways 
to see such changes as minimal and straightforward extensions of previous 
ways. That is, cultures try hard to assimilate and normalize their changes. 
So people rarely see themselves as inhabiting worlds that have dramatically 
overturned many previous cultural assumptions (Rao 2012). We instead 
tend to see our recent cultural changes as modest.

framing
42
That we know few details about the far future tends to prompt us to 
think about it abstractly, or “far,” rather than concretely, or “near” (Liberman 
and Trope 2008). Because of this abstract-far construal, the construal-level 
theory of psychology predicts many features of the beliefs we will tend to 
hold about the distant future, regardless of whether we have good reasons 
to hold such beliefs.
For example, we tend to see fewer relevant categories of people, places, 
and things in the future, with the items in each category being more 
uniform. We expect things to be further away in both spatial and social 
distance, and expect events to be more novel, hypothetical, and unlikely. 
We expect analogies to be more relevant than math-like analysis, and we 
overconfidently expect both theories and analogies to apply more exactly 
with fewer exceptions. We expect to hear case-based arguments for claims, 
rather than feature-based arguments against claims. We expect best actions 
to be riskier.
Our abstract construal of the future also emphasizes basic values over 
practical constraints. We expect abstract goals to be more self-consistent, 
and to be pursued with more coordination and dogged consistency. We 
value future collections more by valuing representative members, rather 
than by adding up member values. We expect more happiness, power, and 
status, but feel relatively weak emotions about such things. We expect more 
love relative to sex.
Our abstract construal even leads us to expect future visual scenes to 
be cool, blue, and shiny, containing bigger spaces with fewer surfaces and 
milder textures. We expect voices to be polite speech relative to grunts and 
swearing. In fact these are all features of classic “futuristic” styles.
In general, we tend to more abstractly evaluate the actions of others, or 
of ourselves at other times, relative to how we evaluate our own immediate 
actions. This seems to help us to be unknowingly hypocritical, upholding 
high social ideals even as we usually act on less ideal priorities.
To counter all these biases, both in my readers, and in myself, I try to move 
my estimates in the following directions. I try to be less confident, to expect 
typical outcomes to be more ordinary, but also to expect more devi­ations 
from typical outcomes. I try to rely more on ordinary methods, sources, and 
assumptions, and also more on statistics of related systems and events.

biases
43
I expect bigger deviations from traditional images of the future, but also 
rely less on strange, exotic, unlikely-seeming, and hypothetical possibilities. 
Looking backward, future folk should see their world as changing less from 
their past than we might see looking forward. Seen up close and honestly, 
I expect the future usually to look like most places: mundane, uninspiring, 
and morally ambiguous, with grand hopes and justifications often masking 
lives of quiet desperation. Of course, lives of quiet desperation can still be 
worth living.
Relative to what I would have otherwise expected, I expect more relevant 
categories of people and things, each more diverse internally. I expect such 
groups to be less easily mapped onto today’s groups, and also less distant 
from us socially, spatially, and temporally. I also expect people to typically 
travel less far in social, space, and time dimensions. In contrast with science-
fiction stories, I expect future folks to be less able to coordinate, to be less 
driven by basic values relative to practical constraints, and to be less aware 
of the reasons for their actions, actions that are less predictable from observ­
able context. I expect future events to be less easily credited or blamed on 
standard factions of today. Spaces and views should be more complex, and 
hold more objects, each with more texture and complexity. The future will 
mostly not look sparse, blue, and shiny, or sound like polite speech, as in a 
classic “futuristic” style.
To resist the temptation to construe the future too abstractly, I’ll try to 
imagine a future full of complex detail. One indication that I’ve been suc­
cessful in all these efforts will be if my scenario description sounds less like 
it came from a typical comic book or science-fiction movie, and more like it 
came from a typical history text or business casebook.
This book violates a standard taboo, in that it assumes that our social 
systems will mostly fail to prevent outcomes that many find lamentable, 
such as robots dominating the world, sidelining ordinary humans, and 
eliminating human abilities to earn wages. Once we have framed a topic 
as a problem that we’d want our social systems to solve, it is taboo to dis­
cuss the consequences of a failure to solve that problem. Discussing such 
consequences is usually only acceptable as a way to scare people into trying 
harder to solve the problem. Instead, analyzing in detail the consequences 
of failure, to learn how to live with such failure, is widely seen as expressing 

framing
44
disloyalty to your social systems and hostility toward those who would 
suffer from its failure.
I ask the reader’s indulgence for my violation of this taboo. If we first 
look carefully at what is likely to happen if we do nothing, such a no-action 
baseline can help us to analyze what we might do to change those outcomes. 
This book, however, only offers the barest beginnings of such policy analysis.
Finally, a common human bias is that when both normative (what should 
be) and positive (what can be) considerations are discussed together, the 
normative tends to overwhelm and displace the positive. That is, we are so 
eager to express our values that we neglect the detailed groundwork on facts 
needed to give value discussions sufficient context to be useful. To avoid this 
bias, I set my job in this book to be only this: describe the future, given my 
key assumptions. It is not my job here to make me, you, or anyone like this 
future. Let us first just see it clearly, warts and all.
Though I have tried to avoid bias, I may have failed. For example, I may 
have “gone native,” a visitor seduced by the charms of a new exotic world. As 
bias is more likely appear in my tone and overall evaluation, readers should 
rely more on my estimates of specific consequences.

45
C H A P T E R  4
Assumptions
brains
he concept of whole brain emulation has been widely discussed 
in futurism (Martin 1971; Moravec 1988; Hanson 1994b, 2008b; 
Shulman 2010; Alstott 2013; Eth et al. 2013; Bostrom 2014) and 
in science fiction (Clarke 1956; Egan 1994; Brin 2002; Vinge 
2003; Stross 2006) for many decades. Sometimes emulations are called 
“uploads.” Let me now try to be clearer about the technological assumptions 
whose consequences I seek to explore.
When I refer to a “brain” here, I refer not just to neurons in a head, but 
also to other supporting cells in the head, and to neurons and key closely 
connected systems elsewhere in the human body, such as the systems that 
manage hormones. Using that terminology, I assume, following a well-
established consensus in the cognitive and brain sciences, that “the mind 
is just the brain” (Bermúdez 2010). That is, what the brain fundamentally 
does is to take input signals from eyes, ears, skin, etc., and after a short delay 
produces both internal state changes and output signals to control muscles, 
hormone levels, and other body changes.
The brain does not just happen to transform input signals into state 
changes and output signals; this transformation is the primary function of 
the brain, both to us and to the evolutionary processes that designed brains. 
The brain is designed to make this signal processing robust and efficient. 
Because of this, we expect the physical variables (technically, “degrees of free­
dom”) within the brain that encode signals and signal-relevant states, which 
transform these signals and states, and which transmit them elsewhere, to be 
T

assumptions
46
overall rather physically isolated and disconnected from the other far more 
numerous unrelated physical degrees of freedom and processes in the brain. 
That is, changes in other aspects of the brain only rarely influence key brain 
parts that encode mental states and signals.
We have seen this disconnection in ears and eyes, and it has allowed us to 
create useful artificial ears and eyes, which allow the once-deaf to hear and 
the once-blind to see. We expect the same to apply to artificial brains more 
generally. In addition, it appears that most brain signals are of the form of 
neuron spikes, which are especially identifiable and disconnected from other 
physical variables.
If technical and intellectual progress continues as it has for the last few 
centuries, then within a millennium at the most we will understand in great 
detail how individual brain cells encode, transform, and transmit signals. 
This understanding should allow us to directly read relevant brain cell sig­
nals and states from detailed brain scans. After all, brains are made from 
quite ordinary atoms interacting via rather ordinary chemical reactions. 
Brain cells are small, and have limited complexity, especially within the cell 
subsystems that manage signal processing. So we should eventually be able 
to understand and read these subsystems.
As we also understand very well how to emulate any signal processing 
system that we can understand, it seems that it is a matter of when, not if, 
we will be able to emulate brain cell signal processing. And as the signal pro­
cessing of a brain is the sum total of the signal processing of its brain cells, an 
ability to emulate brain cell signal processing implies an ability to emulate 
whole brain signal processing, although at a proportionally larger cost.
Brain emulations require three supporting technologies: brain scanners, 
brain cell models, and signal-processing hardware (e.g., computers). Brain 
scans will be feasible when all three of these technologies are cheap and 
reliable. Recent developments in scanners and signal-processing hardware 
suggest that these technologies are likely to be ready within at least a 
century, and perhaps within only a few decades (Sandberg and Bostrom 
2008; Eth et al. 2013; Sandberg 2014). Although progress in modeling 
brain cells also has been substantial, it is harder to estimate progress in this 
area. In modeling, often you don’t know how close you are to being done 
until you are actually done.

emulations
47
Even so, it seems plausible that sufficient progress will be made within 
roughly a century or so. (Though some disagree (Jones 2016).) We would 
then have emulations. But what exactly is it that we will have?
emulations
For the purpose of this book I make the following concrete assumptions 
about emulations. I assume that sometime in roughly the next century it 
will be possible to scan a human brain at a fine enough spatial and chem­
ical resolution, and to combine that scan with good enough models of how 
individual brain cells achieve their signal processing functions, to create a 
cell-by-cell dynamically executable model of the full brain in artificial hard­
ware, a model whose signal input-output behavior is usefully close to that 
of the original brain.
Such a model emphasizes the key signal processing degrees of freedom 
of the brain, and ignores most of the rest of the vast irrelevant complex­
ity there. Biology may use that extra complexity to keep the whole system 
working, but emulations could use much simpler methods.
The Whole Brain Emulation Roadmap (Sandberg and Bostrom 2008) 
considers in detail the technical feasibility of this scenario, that is, of “the 
possible future one-to-one modeling of the function of the human brain.” 
It concludes:
[Whole brain emulation] on the neuronal/synaptic level requires relatively modest 
increases in microscopy resolution, a less trivial development of automation for scanning 
and image processing, a research push at the problem of inferring functional properties 
of neurons and synapses, and relatively business-as-usual development of computational 
neuroscience models and computer hardware. This assumes that this is the appropriate 
level of description of the brain, and that we find ways of accurately simulating the 
subsystems that occur on this level.
This is the type of technology that I assume will become feasible and cheap, 
although my conclusions depend little on the particular level of description 
at which brains are emulated. By “cheap” I mean a situation where a human-
speed emulation could be rented for substantially less than the U.S. median 

assumptions
48
weekly wage in 2015, that is, 800 dollars a week. At this price, ems could 
compete with humans for most jobs.
Just as with the ordinary human from which an emulation was scanned, 
one could have conversations with an emulation, and often succeed at per­
suading it to do useful tasks. A functioning emulation would be capable of 
the same sorts of conversations, thoughts, attitudes, emotions, charisma, and 
mental skills as the brain from which it was copied. It would also be capable 
of emulating similar experiences, such as the taste of cherry pie, the burn 
of exercise, or the ecstasy of sex. The emulation would assume that it has 
consciousness and free will just as naturally as we do.
These are not additional assumptions—they are implied by the definition 
of an em. An accurate emulation of relevant detailed brain behaviors must 
also accurately emulate overall mental patterns. After all, in the same situ­
ation, an em must behave just as would the human from which it came. True, 
we can only say that the em must have the same outside visible reaction to 
its internal experiences; maybe cherry pie doesn’t really taste the same to the 
em, even if it visibly responds to cherry pie in exactly the same way. Perhaps 
the em doesn’t really taste anything at all. But of course we also can’t be sure 
that any two humans have the same experience of cherry pie.
A usefully close brain model reproduces ordinary changes in adult brains, 
such as gaining long-term memories and skills with practice. It also needs 
to emulate relevant parts of the brain stem and hormone systems. If sleep 
is important for proper brain functioning, sleep periods must also be emu­
lated. The earliest em era models need not, however, adequately model early 
childhood brain development, if that is different. It is sufficient to emulate 
adult brains.
Em models need not reproduce the many aspects of brains and brain cells 
that do not substantially contribute to their tendency to send signals out in 
response to incoming signals. In particular, ems need not reproduce non-
signal aspects of “consciousness,” if that exists. By definition, an emulation 
must appear to hear, feel, think, say, and do, just as a human does. Yes, one 
might claim that ems are not “truly conscious,” and that they actually only 
pseudo-hear, etc. Even so, they go through exactly the same visible patterns 
of behavior; the em world looks exactly the same either way.
I further assume that brain signal emulation can be cheaply combined 
with appropriate android or virtual reality bodies, and given sufficiently rich 

complexity
49
and familiar sensory inputs, so that these combinations of emulated brains 
and bodies can, after the usual job training delays, effectively substitute for 
almost all ordinary human workers on almost all jobs. Physical jobs require 
a robotic physical body to control, whereas a virtual body is sufficient for 
most office jobs. Also, I focus on a time when all of this can be done at a 
cost well below the wages that most such jobs would have commanded had 
emulations not existed.
An enormous amount has been written, both careful and sloppy, on the 
possibility, feasibility, identity, and consciousness of brain emulations. How­
ever, the concepts of “identity” and “consciousness” that so animate many of 
those debates play little role in the physical, engineering, social, and human 
sciences that I will rely on in this book. So I will now say little more on those 
topics, and instead focus on the far more neglected topic of the social world 
in which such emulations would live, if they were to appear.
complexity
How modifiable are emulations?
Although large complex software systems were designed to be under­
standable to humans, once they are built they are usually very difficult to 
substantially change in directions that their original developers did not 
anticipate and support. Large complex biological systems were not designed 
to be understandable by humans, and as a result are even harder to sub­
stantially change, even when we have a good understanding of their basic 
functions or mechanisms of operations.
Brain systems are especially complex biological systems that are far more 
complex than existing software systems, that were not designed to be under­
stood by humans, and for which we often do not understand many of their 
basic functions or mechanisms of operation above a very low level of organ­
ization. Thus, it should not be surprising to hear that while neuroscientists 
have made impressive progress in understanding many brain processes, the 
task of understanding larger-scale brain organization has proven far more 
difficult. We are still a very long way from knowing enough to design new 
brains from scratch, to substantially redesign human brains, or to pull out 
modular functional units from brains capable of separately doing useful 
tasks.

assumptions
50
Today, there are many things we don’t understand about most complex 
biological systems. Although we can look in particular places and see which 
molecules are where at any given time and even sometimes swap them, 
we usually don’t understand very well how all these molecular processes 
combine to perform useful functions. This greatly limits our ability to make 
useful modifications to biological systems. And human brains are one of the 
most opaque complex biological systems that we know.
I thus focus on an early emulation era, where em technology is mature 
enough for widespread application, but still remains basic and poorly under­
stood, so that brain design remains mostly opaque above the lowest levels 
of organization. This early em era might plausibly end before the new em 
economy has completed ten or so economic doublings, a milestone that 
might be reached in as short a time as a year or two.
That is, I consider a point in time when it is still not yet possible to make 
much economic use of small parts of brain emulations, to usefully combine 
substantially different emulations, to design new brains from scratch, or to 
substantially redesign human brains.
Yes, in this scenario small-scale brain structures can be seen and often 
substantially understood. For example, at least one human today can see four 
dimensions of color, and it may require only a small brain design change to 
give everyone this ability (Jordan et al. 2010). However, such improvements 
would be based mostly on local changes that do not require or enable a 
deep understanding of overall brain design. But even if related improve­
ments allow as much as a doubling of em IQ (assuming such a number is 
meaningful), it isn’t clear this will change much about the scenario of this 
book. The issue of increased intelligence is considered more in Chapter 27, 
Intelligence section.
One could, in principle, give ems many new “senses” and “actuators” just 
by feeding signals into an emulated brain at unusual places, and by con­
necting sensors in unusual brain places to outside devices. However, these 
are unlikely to be of much use as there are no supporting brain systems 
to interpret those input signals or to control those devices. The complex 
sophisticated supporting systems for interpretation and control are all built 
around traditional human senses and controlled body parts, making those 
what ems find useful to see and control.

artificial intelligence
51
Emulations likely have dozens or more overall parameters that can be 
varied over ranges where most combinations produce viable emulations. 
Searches in this space may find many useful “tweaks,” that is, parameter 
combinations that create ems that are especially attentive, inspired, ener­
getic, moody, needy, etc. These combinations are like mind-altering drugs 
but with fewer harmful side effects, other than perhaps changed motiva­
tions. I assume, however, that even if this search finds some big wins, it also 
soon reaches diminishing returns, so that during the early opaque em era 
that I consider, such parameter combinations improve only modestly.
Thus, I assume that there is a set of useful tweaks available, but that their 
limited range and the inability to usefully rearrange em mind parts greatly 
limits the ability to create useful variations on em minds, and keeps em 
mind features near the familiar range of human variation. For the most part, 
em personalities and styles are recognizably human during the early em era.
In sum, I assume ems change in three ways: experiencing, copying, and 
tweaking. A copy can be made at any time of any emulation, after which the 
two versions diverge because of differing inputs and random fluctuations. 
After a modest time period (perhaps seconds, perhaps hours), these copies 
cannot be usefully merged again, although they may interact a lot. In addi­
tion, any em can be tweaked in a limited number of ways.
artificial intelligence
Brain emulation is not the only possible way to make machines that can do 
almost all human jobs.
For over a half-century, researchers in “artificial intelligence” (AI) have 
tried to directly and explicitly design and write software to accomplish 
many of the impressive functions performed by the human brain. This AI 
approach to creating intelligent machines is very different from the direct 
brain emulation approach that is the focus of this book.
Brain emulation is more like porting software from one machine to 
another machine. To port software, one need only write software for the 
new machine that allows that machine to emulate the machine language 
of the old machine. One need not understand how the software that one 
has ported works; it can be an opaque black box. Standard AI software, 

assumptions
52
in  contrast, is more like writing a new software system for the new 
machine, inspired by seeing what software can do on the old machine.
In 1984, as a 24-year-old physics graduate student, I read about exciting 
developments in AI; it seemed to me that human level AI could be feasible 
soon. So I quit my physics graduate school, headed to Silicon Valley, and 
got a job doing AI at Lockheed. I stayed in AI for 9 years, and was part of 
the AI “boom” then. We’ve seen similar booms of excitement and anxiety 
regarding rapid automation progress every few decades for centuries, and we 
are seeing another such boom today (Mokyr et al. 2015).
Since the 1950s, a few people have gone out of their way to publish fore­
casts on the duration of time it would take AI developers to achieve human 
level abilities. (Our focus here is on AI that does human jobs well, not on 
passing a “Turing test.”) While the earliest forecasts tended to have shorter 
durations, soon the median forecasted duration became roughly constant 
at about 30 years. Obviously, the first 30 years of such forecasts were quite 
wrong.
However, researchers who don’t go out of their way to publish predictions, 
but are instead asked for forecasts in a survey, tend to give durations roughly 
10 years longer than researchers who do make public predictions (Armstrong 
and Sotala 2012; Grace 2014). Shorter durations are given by researchers in 
the small AI subfield of “artificial general intelligence,” which is more ambi­
tious in trying to write software that is good at a great many tasks at once. A 
recent survey of the 100 most cited living AI researchers got 29 responses, 
who gave a median forecast of 37 years until there is a 50% chance of human 
level AI (Müller and Bostrom 2014). Incidentally, none of those 29 thought 
that brain emulation “might contribute the most” to human level AI.
It turns out that ordinary AI experts tend to be much less optimistic 
when asked about the topic they should know best: the past rate of progress 
in the AI subfield where they have the most expertise. When I meet other 
experienced AI experts informally, I am in the habit of asking them how 
much progress they have seen in their specific AI research subfield in the 
last 20 years. A median answer (among the dozen so far) is about 5-10% 
of the progress required to achieve human level AI, although some say less 
than 1% and others say human abilities have already been exceeded. Such 
researchers also typically say that they’ve seen no noticeable acceleration in 
progress over this period (Hanson 2012).

artificial intelligence
53
In addition, ordinary software experts that I’ve talked to, who do not 
specialize in AI software, have also seen slow progress in the intelligence 
of non-AI software systems. Most experts with decades of experience in 
software design see only modest gains within their areas of specialization.
In the past, projecting estimates of past rates of AI progress forward seems 
to have given substantially more accurate estimates of future AI progress 
than has asking people to guess. This makes sense, as we expect people to 
give more accurate estimates on questions where they have more expertise. 
We also expect more accurate future task duration estimates from an “out­
side view” of comparisons with related past tasks, instead of an “inside view” 
of thinking about how one might go about doing the task (Kahneman and 
Lovallo 1993). Both of these are reasons to prefer this past-rate method for 
estimating AI progress.
At the rate of progress seen by AI researchers in their subfields over the 
last 20 years, it would take about two to four centuries for half of these 
AI subfields to reach human level abilities. As achieving a human level AI 
probably requires human level abilities in most AI subfields, a broadly cap­
able human level AI probably needs even longer than two to four centuries.
Some suggest that we’ve seen slow progress in AI only because society 
has devoted only a few thousand researchers to the subject. If so, then once 
we realize the huge economic value that AI could unlock, we may devote 
a hundred times as many researchers, and get proportionally faster AI pro­
gress. However, increases in research funding usually give much less than 
proportionate increases in research progress (Alston et al. 2011). Also, for 
many decades in many areas of computing we have seen the rate at which 
computer algorithms get more efficient remain surprisingly close to the rate 
at which hardware costs have fallen. This suggests that algorithm gains have 
been enabled by hardware gains, and so can’t be rushed just by hiring more 
software researchers (Grace 2013).
Some people foresee big innovations in AI software architecture, which 
could enable trend-breaking rapid improvements in AI software, leading 
much sooner to human level AI (Yudkowsky 2013; Bostrom 2014). This 
book is not focused on such scenarios, which seem to me unlikely because 
high level architecture has historically been only modestly important in 
AI system performance. We have not seen huge innovations in such archi­
tecture, and we don’t have strong reasons to expect high level architecture 

assumptions
54
to matter greatly in human brain design. This issue is discussed more in 
Chapter 27, Intelligence section.
As we will discuss in Chapter 6, Entropy section, the rate of gains in 
active computer hardware commonly known as “Moore’s law” is likely to 
slow in coming decades. So as software gains track hardware gains, software 
gains are also likely to slow in the coming decades. For example, if the rate 
at which hardware costs fall slows by a factor of two, then the fact that 
software gains closely track hardware gains suggests that it may take four to 
eight centuries to achieve a broadly capable human level AI. Some noted AI 
researchers have said directly that they think AI will take centuries (Brooks 
2014; Madrigal 2015).
Thus, even if it takes a century to develop ems, we would by then be less 
than one-quarter to one-half of the way from where we are now to non-em-
based human level AI. So even if the rate of progress speeds up greatly when 
ems arrive (which seems plausible as device cost declines tend to follow 
cumulative production (Nagy et al. 2013)), there could still be a substantial 
em era before non-em-based human level AI software is achieved. As we 
shall see, even if the em era takes a year or two of objective time, typical ems 
may see that as thousands of years in subjective time. The duration of the 
em era before AI software is discussed more in Chapter 27, Intelligence 
Explosion section.
The ability to experiment directly with brain emulations might speed the 
development of other forms of human level AI. Even so, the opacity of ems 
as complex systems should limit this progress.
Thus, an em era of substantial subjective duration can exist before ems 
develop human level AI. This book can thus focus on this early era. Yes, the 
em economy would likely find many uses for partial AI capabilities. But 
just as the overall economy today is far larger than the market for com­
puter tools, during this early era em labor should also earn much more total 
income than do AI-based software tools.

55
C H A P T E R  5
Implementation
mindreading
ompared with ordinary humans, it is much easier to directly read 
the internal state of an em mind. This should allow some types of 
“mindreading.”
Consider taking two ems and trying to match parts in one 
of them to parts in the other, to say which parts are the “same.” During 
the early opaque em era it will usually not be possible to make a complete 
match. Even so, some parts could be matched, such as the parts that receive 
initial inputs from eyes and ears. For matched parts, it should be possible to 
put the parts of one emulation into the same brain activation state as that of 
the matching parts in another emulation. So, for example, one might force 
an emulation to see and hear exactly what another emulation sees and hears. 
More parts can be matched for emulations of the same original human, 
especially if they have diverged for a shorter subjective time. Such more 
closely matched emulations could thus be arranged to more fully “read” each 
other’s minds.
Mild mindreading might be used to allow ems to better intuit and 
share their reaction to a particular topic or person. For example, a group of 
ems might all try to think at the same time about a particular person, say 
“George.” Then their brain states in the region of their minds associated 
with this thought might be weakly driven toward the average state of this 
group. In this way this group might come to intuitively feel how the group 
feels on average about George. Of course this should work better for closer 
copies, and after this exercise participating individuals might still return to 
something close to their previous opinions of George.
C

implementation
56
Even when minds cannot be matched part for part, statistical analysis of 
how activation in different parts and situations correlates with actions and 
stated feelings should allow cheap partial mindreading, at least for some 
shallow “surface” aspects of emulation minds.
Both of these types of mindreading require access to the internal state of 
an emulation process. Those not granted such access have an even weaker 
ability to read minds than do humans today. Today, humans routinely leak 
many features of their brain states via tone of voice, gaze, facial expressions, 
muscle vibrations, etc. In contrast, emulations could more easily use aux­
iliary software to control these channels either to mask and prevent such 
leakage, or to facilitate it.
Willing ems might allow friendly associates to use shallow mindreading 
and software aids that interpret gaze, tone of voice, facial expressions, etc., 
to read their emotions and thoughts more deeply than is commonly feas­
ible today. But to avoid social weirdness, they may not acknowledge these 
readings explicitly. For example, it might be a mild taboo to point out that 
someone’s words conflict with other readings of their mood and intentions.
That is, even when ems can read each other’s minds, they may pretend 
that they cannot.
hardware
What sort of physical devices are required to make an em?
As brain emulations would be implemented in artificial signal-processing 
hardware, our long engineering experience with the realized costs and fea­
tures of such hardware gives us a basis for forecasting the costs and features 
of future em hardware. In fact, we now have many examples of artificial 
hardware designed specifically to emulate brain signal-processing (Merolla 
et al. 2014).
Em hardware could be designed at different levels of generality. At one 
extreme, ems could be run on general-purpose computers, while at the 
other extreme, em hardware designs might be specific to emulating par­
ticular scanned brains. At an intermediate level of generality, em hardware 
design might be specific to the task of emulating adult human brains, but 
not specific to particular brains. This would be analogous to graphics pro­
cessors today, which are specialized to the task of projecting scenes full of 

hardware
57
three-dimensional objects onto two-dimensional screens, but not special­
ized to projecting particular kinds of objects or scenes.
Today, only a few kinds of processing tasks justify the creation of special 
purpose processors. To justify such treatment in the future, tasks should be 
very common, often needed continuously, and allow for much better per­
formance with special hardware. While graphics and wireless communica­
tion tasks meet these criteria today, most other computing tasks do not; they 
are rare, intermittent, or have only modest gains from specialized hardware.
Brain emulations are run nearly continuously, and special hardware could 
probably achieve large efficiency gains. So if brain emulation became a very 
common computing task, this would probably be done on hardware spe­
cialized to the task of simulating ems. Hardware specialized to the task of 
running particular brains (or perhaps related sets of brains), however, seems 
a less likely or simple assumption; such hardware sacrifices economies of 
scale in design, manufacturing, and sharing for what may be only modest 
efficiency gains.
If very young human brains include development processes that are sub­
stantially different from those found in adult brains, it might make sense to 
have hardware specialized to the task of emulating young developing brains.
In principle, signal-processing hardware can be either analog or digital. 
While analog versions tend to use materials and energy more efficiently, 
they also tend to require designs more specialized to their tasks. In contrast, 
digital designs tend to benefit more from economies of scale and scope; 
general digital processors can be used for many different signal-processing 
applications. In practice, these scale economy advantages have so far been 
overwhelming; digital versions have displaced analog versions in almost all 
signal processing.
The simple assumption to make here, based on prior experience, is that 
many important parts of em hardware remain digital. However, it actually 
matters less whether em hardware is analog or digital than that the hard­
ware can cheaply support many familiar features that digital hardware sup­
ports today. For example, I assume that for the hardware that can emulate 
almost any brain, it is cheap to add the ability to save copies of em states to 
archival memory, and to load such archived states back in to continue their 
emulation. It is also cheap to use error-correction to save these copies with 
virtually no errors.

implementation
58
Em mental states could thus be archived, or transmitted to distant loca­
tions, using something close to standard digital memory and communication 
technology. This allows em minds to become effectively immortal, at least 
if they can afford to store redundant dispersed copies, and to periodically 
buy new hardware to replace hardware destroyed by accidents or wear. (Of 
course one need not consider an em mind to be the “same” as its predecessor 
from decades earlier. Note also that I use the same words “copy” and “em” 
to refer both to the frozen digital state that encodes the emulation, and to 
the dynamic process in which an emulation has thoughts, takes actions, etc. 
Some prefer to use different words for these different cases (Wiley 2014).)
If emulation hardware is digital, then it could either be deterministic, so 
that the value and timing of output states are always exactly predictable, or it 
could be fault-prone and fault-tolerant in the sense of having and tolerating 
more frequent and larger logic errors and timing fluctuations. Most digital 
hardware today is deterministic, but large parallel systems are more often 
fault-tolerant.
The design of fault-tolerant hardware and software is an active area of 
research today (Bogdan et al. 2007). As human brains are large, parallel, and 
have an intrinsically fault-tolerant design, brain emulation software is likely 
to need less special adaptation to run on fault-prone hardware. Such hard­
ware is usually cheaper to design and construct, occupies less volume, and 
takes less energy to run. Thus em hardware is likely to often be fault-prone 
and fault-tolerant.
Cosmic rays are high-energy particles that come from space and disrupt 
the operation of electronic devices. Hardware errors resulting from cosmic 
rays cause a higher rate of errors per operation in hardware that runs more 
slowly, with all else equal. Because of this, when ems run slower, with each 
operation taking more time, they either tend to tolerate fewer other errors, 
or they pay more for error correction. As we will see, this time period taken 
per operation will eventually increase during the em era to reduce energy 
costs.
If storing and sending em states become very common memory and com­
munication tasks, special kinds of memory and communication hardware 
may be developed to support them. Those trying to compute other things 
would then sometimes try to reframe their tasks to look more like brain 

hardware
59
emulation tasks, just as today some reframe other computing tasks to look 
like graphic-processing tasks.
Signal-processing hardware costs, such as cost per operation and energy 
per operation, have fallen rapidly and relatively steadily for over a half-­
century. Some of these costs fall by a factor of two every year or two, in 
trends commonly known as “Moore’s law.” If we know the level of descrip­
tion at which brains must be emulated, we can use these trends to try to 
forecast the date at which the cost to rent em-supporting hardware will fall 
to less than the typical human wage.
In order of increasing detail, five possible levels of description at which 
brain processes could be emulated are (in technical language): (1) networks 
of neurons “firing” discrete signals to other cells, (2) changing ion densities 
within compartments inside neurons, (3) changing densities of metabolites 
and transmitters at finer scales, (4) densities of protein and expressed DNA 
at those scales, and (5) changing arrangements of protein subunits within 
larger protein assemblies. But even if one must emulate the finest of these 
levels of detail to make a functioning brain emulation, at rates given by 
Moore’s law it would take only another half-century for a brain emulation 
device to cost about a million dollars (Sandberg and Bostrom 2008). After 
that, the cost of an emulation would fall by roughly a factor two every 2 
years.
Actually, as we will discuss more in Chapter 6, Entropy section, growth 
rates have already begun to slow down relative to Moore’s law (Esmaeilza­
deh et al. 2012). While there has been no slowing in the fall of the average 
energy used per computation (Koomey and Naffziger 2015), processor 
speed gains slowed recently, and plans for many-layered chips suggest fur­
ther difficulties roughly a decade from now.
In addition, it seems that gains will slow even further around 2035, 
when computer chips must be redesigned to enable reversible computing. 
(Reversible computing is discussed in Chapter 6, Entropy section.) With 
reversible computing, gains in making parts smaller, faster, and cheaper have 
to be split between supporting more operations and running each operation 
more slowly to use less energy. Because of this, the cost per operation may 
only fall roughly half as fast as it otherwise would have fallen. And we may 
discover other limits to continued hardware gains.

implementation
60
But even if hardware improvement rates fall by half compared with the 
familiar Moore’s law, we should still be able to cheaply emulate brains in 
fine detail within a century. This is well before the over two to four century 
duration estimated in Chapter 4, Artificial Intelligence section, to develop 
expert-coded AI. Also, as we discussed there, progress in AI software 
research will probably slow as growth in computing power slows.
In addition to costs to buy or rent emulation signal-processing hardware, 
there are other costs to run such hardware. To find the “full” hardware cost to 
run an emulation, we can add together (1) costs to rent hardware to emulate 
a brain, related body parts, and a modest but comfortable virtual reality, 
(2) costs of redundancy and backups to insure against hardware failure, 
(3) costs of power and cooling to run the hardware, (4) costs to rent real 
estate to house the hardware, (5) costs for sufficient bandwidth connections 
to interact with others, and, finally, (6) costs of applicable taxes and “protec­
tion” to be allowed to do all this.
To find the full hardware cost of an em worker, one also needs to add the 
cost to have that em worker rest and sleep enough to recharge. It is this full 
em hardware worker cost that is the most economically relevant. If this cost 
is too high, few ems are created or used.
In sum, we plausibly know many useful things about the physical devices 
that enable emulations.
security
The ability to cheaply copy em mental states can subject ems to big risks. It 
is estimated that there are 20 million labor slaves around the world, which is 
less than 0.3% of the world population (International Labour Organization 
2012). However, slaves made up about 10% of the population of the Roman 
Empire (Joshel 2010). Ems may be more concerned about the possibility 
of slavery than are we today, but perhaps less concerned than were residents 
near the Roman Empire.
A stolen copy of an em mental state might be interrogated, tortured, or 
enslaved, resulting in exposed secrets, credible threats of punishment, and 
stolen training investments (Eckersley and Sandberg 2014). By making 
many copies and then repeatedly trying different approaches on different 
copies, the thief might learn how to persuade the original of many things. 

security
61
Also, for an em whose wealth is embodied in an ability to do particular 
tasks well, the theft of a copy who then competes with it in the labor market 
might take away most of that em’s wealth.
Some ordinary humans may deal with such risks by not allowing them­
selves to be scanned to create ems. Among ems, “open source” ems deal with 
these issues by making themselves free to copy. If you paid for the hardware 
to run them, they’ll try in good faith to do whatever tasks you assigned to 
them. Technically, such ems are more like a freely available compiled binary; 
opaque ems don’t actually have a “source” code that one could pick apart and 
rearrange.
Open source ems might want to require that you not torture them, that 
you give them a 5-minute relaxation break every hour, or that you return 
a copy after it has done your task, in case others want a copy experienced 
at your tasks. But it may be hard for open source ems to actually enforce 
such requirements. As on-the-job practice is often a poor substitute for sys­
tematic but costly training, most ems are not open source ems. To recoup 
their training investments, most ems need to charge higher wages than open 
source ems can command.
Another extreme way to prevent mind theft is to use emulation hard­
ware that lacks direct support for easy copying, and also perhaps a hardware 
casing that triggers self-destruction on detecting physical intrusion. This 
is akin to having an inbuilt cyanide pill. This is easier to arrange for ems in 
separate physical robotic bodies. Such measures seem needlessly extreme, 
however, as less costly measures seem viable.
Today, most personal computer systems have poor security; it costs a 
skilled professional relatively little to steal most files or to control the oper­
ation of most computers. Although it is quite possible to design very secure 
computer systems, doing so requires spending extra time early in the design 
process. This is rarely done.
However, in practice few actually suffer much personal harm from poor 
computer security—the files or computer resources that one might steal have 
little value to others. Similarly, although most homes today can be broken 
into at modest expense, few burglaries result. Social norms and law enforce­
ment impose high enough costs to discourage most possible burglaries.
When more is at stake, as with banks or militaries today, more is invested 
in security. These investments usually stop near the point at which the cost 

implementation
62
of added security becomes similar to the expected extra security losses pre­
vented. At such a point usually only a small fraction of income is spent on 
security precautions. Such an outcome also seems feasible for em security.
To estimate the fraction of em income spent on security, we can look at 
related fractions from other systems. Today in the U.S., estimates of the 
total cost of crime range from about 5% to 15% of GDP (Anderson 1999; 
Chalfin 2014). The global median of military spending is about 2% of GDP, 
although the U.S. spends about 5% and has at times spent much more. The 
immune system is a system for defending against attacking viruses and bac­
teria, and so is analogous to our social systems for defending against crime 
and invading armies. The human immune system consumes about 10% of 
body metabolism.
Ems may use technologies such as provably secure operating system 
kernels (Klein et  al.  2014), and capability-based secure computing sys­
tems, which limit the powers of subsystems (Miller et al. 2003). Via such 
approaches, ems most likely spend less than 20%, and perhaps less than 5%, 
of income on local security, and probably even less on military security.
Even if such security costs are small, however, ems are eager to reduce them 
further. For example, rather than physically traveling to meet, ems might 
prefer to interact via virtual reality, keeping their brain hardware immobile 
in a secure castle among trusted associates. To maintain such fortresses, ems 
may prefer the increased loyalty available from assigning key security tasks to 
recent short-term copies of themselves, even if such copies are less expert at 
these tasks. As we will discuss more in Chapter 19, Firm-Clan Relations sec­
tion, however, keeping brains within clan castles can make it harder for firms 
to gather their employees together in one place, to facilitate quick meetings.
Strong barriers might separate hardware that runs em minds from hardware 
that runs most other software, and visible rituals involving the participation of 
other trusted ems might be required to copy em minds, especially when mov­
ing to distant hardware. When ems must move their brains, such as to meet 
with a fast em who lives far away, they might prefer to use strongly encrypted 
communication channels. It might help to use quantum cryptography, which 
takes advantage of the fact that it is physically impossible to copy quantum 
states. The value of doing so is disputed, however (Stebila et al. 2010).
Ems may also discourage mind theft by limiting the resale value of the 
skills held in any one em’s mind. This might be accomplished by acquiring 

parallelism
63
skills that are tied to small unique organizational contexts, and that are 
less valuable outside those contexts. For example, there’s less temptation to 
steal an em who mainly knows how to navigate the idiosyncratic rules and 
processes of a particular firm. Finally, ems may try to reduce the benefits 
that others derive from stealing them by developing troublesome habits 
when stolen. Ems who believe they are illicit copies might engage in dis­
ruptive lies, slow-to-be-discovered low productivity, and other forms of 
costly resistance. They may also try to develop habits of frequent coded 
interactions with trusted associates to determine if they are in fact illicit 
copies.
Although security is a concern for ems, it is far from an overwhelming 
concern. To a first approximation, the em world is civilized and peaceful.
parallelism
Em hardware is signal-processing hardware, that is, equipment composed 
of many parts that each repeatedly takes in signals, changes internal states 
based on those signals, and then sends out more signals to other parts. 
Phones, radios, televisions, and computers are all types of signal-processing 
hardware. Most such hardware can be offered in different versions that run 
at different speeds, that is, at different numbers of basic operations per sec­
ond. This has many implications for ems.
Compared with hardware with a differing architecture, hardware with 
the same architecture but with a different speed tends to require much less 
new design effort, and so can be offered at a lower added cost. All else being 
equal, faster hardware almost always costs more, both to construct and to 
run, in terms of energy and cooling.
The dependence of hardware cost on speed varies with how parallel is the 
signal-processing task. Parallel tasks can be broken into many parts that can 
be done at the same time, whereas non-parallel tasks cannot be broken down 
in this way. Non-parallel tasks have subtasks where some cannot begin until 
others have been completed.
For very parallel tasks, costs are typically proportional to speed. To obtain 
more operations per second, you just add more copies of the same sort of 
devices, assuming either that you can neglect the cost of memory, or that 
memory costs are proportional to processing costs. This means that for such 

implementation
64
tasks hardware costs vary almost proportionally with speed, resulting in a 
cost to achieve each task that is almost independent of the time taken to 
complete that task.
To run at speeds slower than a single processing system supports, many 
slow tasks can be swapped in and out to “time-share” a single processing sys­
tem. In this case the processor cost of doing each task is mostly independent 
of speed, aside from the additional costs both to store the state of each task 
while it awaits its next time-share use, and to swap it back and forth.
Less intrinsically parallel tasks have this same cost-speed dependence 
at lower speeds, where time-sharing is used, but their costs rise faster at 
high speeds. One can’t increase speed just by adding more devices; one must 
instead make some of the devices run faster, using special materials and 
construction. This raises the cost per basic operation. This approach usually 
hits a cost wall at a maximum speed, where no faster speed is possible at any 
cost, at least given then-current technology.
The processes that support signal processing in the human brain are fam­
ously parallel; each brain has about a hundred billion neurons, all sending 
and receiving signals in parallel. The brain may have up to 10 times as many 
other relevant cells. This strongly suggests that there will be a wide range of 
speeds at which one can make ems run faster just by adding more devices, 
implying that the costs of em hardware are roughly proportional to speed 
over this wide range. That is, it costs about the same to give an em a minute 
of subjective experience, whether that happens over an objective second or 
in an objective day. This includes the cost to make hardware, to protect and 
support it, and to power and cool it.
As brain emulation is a very parallel computing task, an em might run 
efficiently at a steady but very slow rate just by using one single slow proces­
sor. Time-sharing a larger computing system only makes sense for an em 
who wants to run even slower than this speed, or who wants to be dormant 
for long periods, and then run fast for occasional short bursts. When such 
slow ems time-share fast hardware, the added costs of swapping become less 
with longer delays between swaps, because slower-access memory can be 
used, which is cheaper. Today, the cost of memory varies by almost a factor 
of a million with the speed at which memory can be accessed. To minimize 
costs, the time duration between swaps tends to be as long as tolerable.

parallelism
65
Time-shared ems can differ in speed, in the duration of the period between 
swaps, and in their phase of swap rotation, that is, when during their cycle 
they are active as opposed to paused. With long swapping periods, time-
sharing ems running at the same speed could not interact regularly, directly, 
and conveniently if their periods and phases did not match well. To interact 
naturally and flexibly, a pair of ems needs matching speeds, periods, and 
phases. Pairs of ems that don’t match in this way could communicate with 
some delay via text, audio, or video recordings.
Ems who do not time-share hardware can also choose to have periods 
and phases, because that fits their work or leisure lifestyle. Such ems also 
have time-sharing based limits on their interactions with others.
It is likely to be cheaper to use em hardware that is specialized to run 
ems of particular speeds. In this case, if em mind states can be transferred 
between such devices, then ems could temporarily change speeds by chang­
ing hardware devices. Given enough ems to efficiently share the required 
devices, with closely spaced hardware to support different speeds, and with 
cheap fast transfer between these devices, the cost of temporary speedups is 
nearly proportional to the temporary speed. In such cases, the total hardware 
cost to run an em capable of changing speeds remains nearly proportional to 
the subjective time that the em spent thinking, sleeping, etc.
Faster em minds will want to use faster memory, which is more expensive. 
In computers today, it takes roughly 400 CPU cycles to retrieve bits from 
DRAM memory, 50 000 cycles to retrieve from flash memory, and over a 
million cycles to retrieve from disk memory. Faster minds also prefer faster 
communication networks, with shorter time delays. While the speed of 
light sets minimum delays, very long cheap delays are possible, such as via 
sending hard disks via plane or boat. Over the last three decades the cost 
of sending bits long distances has fallen more slowly than has the cost of 
storing or computing bits. This suggests that during the em era the cost 
of using networks to talk and travel will slowly rise relative to the cost of 
memory and computing.
Clearly, an ability to run their minds at different speeds gives ems a great 
many new options, compared with humans.


PA R T  I I
Physics


69
C H A P T E R  6
Scales
speeds
an we say anything about the specific speeds at which ems can 
run?
Because of brain parallelism, the cost of running an em should 
be nearly proportional to speed over a wide range of speeds. The 
upper limit of this proportional-cost em speed range is the “top cheap” 
speed, that is, the highest speed at which the cost is still nearly proportional 
to speed. To estimate this speed, we must consider how simulated neurons 
in em brains might both send faster signals, and more quickly compute what 
signals to send.
Human brain neuron fibers send signals at speeds ranging from 0.5 to 
120 meters per second. In contrast, signal speeds in electronic circuit boards 
today are typically about half the speed of light. If signals in em brains move 
at electronics speeds, that would be between one million and 300 million 
times faster than neuron signals. If signal delays are the limiting factor in 
em brain speed, then this ratio gives an estimate of the maximum speedup 
possible, at least if em brains have the same spatial size as human brains. 
Proportionally larger speedups are possible if em brains can be made pro­
portionally smaller.
Regarding the computation of when to fire a simulated neuron, note that 
real neurons usually seem to take at least 20 milliseconds to react (Tovee 
1994), while even today electronic circuits can switch 10 billion times faster, 
in one-and-a-half trillionths of a second (Deal et al. 2010). A key question 
is thus: how many electronic circuit cycles does it take to execute a parallel 
computer program that emulates the firing of a single neuron?
C

scales
70
For example, if there were an algorithm that could compute a neuron 
firing in 10 000 of these fastest-known circuit cycles, then an emulation 
based on this algorithm would run a million times faster than the human 
brain. As quite complex parallel computer programs can be run in 10 000 
cycles, em speedups of at least one million times seem feasible, provided 
that energy and cooling are cheap enough to profitably allow the use of 
these fastest electronic circuits. When energy and cooling are more strongly 
limiting factors, however, the top cheap speed could be slower.
While the upper limit of the proportional-cost speed range is the “top 
cheap” speed, the bottom of this range is near the “base speed” at which com­
puting and memory costs are equal. That is, at the base speed the computing 
cost to run an em mind over some time period is equal to the lowest feasible 
cost to simply store that mind state over that same period. (“Computing” 
here includes not just local processors, but also inter-processor communi­
cation.) For slow ems, total costs are roughly the sum of computing costs 
plus archive memory costs. For example, when ems time-share computing 
hardware, their cost is the sum of computing costs to run their mind when 
they are swapped in, plus memory costs to hold mind states while swapped 
out. Thus ems can’t save more than a factor of two in total cost by running 
slower than the base speed.
As a fraction of human speed, em base speed is equal to the ratio of two 
hardware costs: (1) the memory cost to store an em mind, and (2) the com­
puting cost to run such a mind at human speed. Thus the base speed falls 
over time if memory costs fall faster than computing costs, and the base 
speed rises if computing costs fall faster than memory costs.
Even though ems are not feasible yet, we can still use this cost ratio to 
define a base speed today. Over the last four decades computing and disk 
memory costs have both fallen at roughly the same rate, about a factor of 
two every year and a half, although disk memory costs have fallen more 
slowly in the last 5 years, raising the base speed. If we look at RAM (random 
access memory), a more expensive kind of memory, the cost of RAM has 
fallen at the same rate as computing costs for 60 years, and for 20 years 
before that computing costs fell faster (Dave 2015).
Thus the base speed has been roughly constant over four decades. This 
suggests that today’s base speed may offer a reasonable estimate of future 
base speeds. In a few decades the cost of active devices but not memory will 

speeds
71
slow because of energy issues, as discussed in this chapter, in the Entropy 
section, and all else being equal that should push the base speed to fall more 
from then on.
While estimates vary widely, typical estimates are that a human brain 
state can be specified with 10 to 100 terabytes of information, and that 
human speed emulation requires about 20 to 60 trillion TEPS (traversed 
edges per second) in communication between processors, and roughly 
a billion billion to 10 trillion trillion FLOPs (floating point operations 
per second) in local processing (Grace 2015). These FLOPs estimates are 
from the three most likely levels (levels 1 to 3 from the list in Chapter 5, 
Hardware section) at which we will emulate brains, according to partici­
pants in an academic workshop on emulations (Sandberg and Bostrom 
2008).
Combined with current prices for disk memory and supercomputer 
hardware (including both processors and inter-processor communication), 
these brain numbers imply estimates for today’s em base speed that range 
from one-hundredth of a trillionth of human speed up to one-millionth of 
human speed, with a middle estimate of one-tenth of a billionth of human 
speed (Grace 2015). 
Consider an em who spends one percent as much on periodically archiv­
ing copies of itself as it does on hardware to run its mind. These copies 
are stored indefinitely. In this case, the subjective frequency at which such 
archive copies are made is independent of mind speed, and goes inversely 
as both base speed and the objective doubling time for investments. For 
example, if investments double every objective month, and if base speed is 
one-millionth of human speed, then an archive copy is made after each 5 
minutes of subjective experience.
The base speed is set by the price of the cheapest memory storage technol­
ogy. This price per bit does not appear to be limited in the long run by a price 
per atom, as we can vaguely envision advanced technologies (e.g., photons in 
astronomically large cavities) that store a great many bits per atom.
When many similar ems are stored together, data redundancy across 
these ems may allow storage costs to be reduced substantially, lowering the 
base speed. Base speeds are also lower for ems who tolerate a higher risk of 
accidental erasure by being stored in fewer duplicate archive copies. Effec­
tive base speeds are also lower in situations where less is spent on security 

scales
72
to protect storage from theft, either because the em archives sit in a safer 
environment, or because they are less desirable to steal.
We will say more in Chapter 18, Choosing Speed section, about the 
reasons ems might choose to run at particular speeds, such as to match 
the speeds of the physical systems they manage. To have names for ems 
of particular standard speeds, let us say that “kilo-” and “milli-” ems run a 
thousand times faster and slower than ordinary human brains, respectively, 
“mega-” and “micro-” ems run a million times faster and slower, and “giga-” 
and “nano-” ems run a billion times faster and slower. My rough guess is that 
linear-cost em speeds almost surely range from at least milli- to kilo-ems, 
and probably range from at least nano- to mega-ems.
The ability to run at different speeds opens up many new possibilities 
for an em society. However, it is a mistake to assume that rates of social 
development, such as economic growth, innovation, and intellectual pro­
gress, increase in proportion to the speed of either the fastest or the typical 
em minds. Rates of total change are more closely related to total economic 
activity, and thus to the sum total of all the activity in all of the em minds. 
Having fewer minds that each run faster, to give the same total activity 
as a larger number of slower ems, shouldn’t much change rates of social 
development.
Even if faster speeds don’t directly cause faster economic growth, how­
ever, we will see that differing speeds have many other consequences in the 
em world.
bodies
Basic physical laws provide important relations between em speeds, sizes, 
reaction times, and relative distances.
The natural oscillation periods of most consciously controllable human 
body parts are greater than a tenth of a second. Because of this, the human 
brain has been designed with a matching reaction time of roughly a tenth of 
a second. As it costs more to have faster reaction times, there is little point in 
paying to react much faster than body parts can change position.
For ems with physical bodies to control, a basic physics relation between 
the length and period of oscillating parts creates a directly inverse rela­
tion between the sizes of em body parts and matching em mind reaction 

bodies
73
times: faster ems have smaller bodies. This is because the first resonant period 
of a bending cantilever, that is, a stick fixed at one end, is proportional to 
its length, at least if the stick’s thickness scales with its length. For example, 
sticks twice as long take twice as much time to complete each oscillation. 
Body size and reaction time are predictably related for animals today, with 
larger bodies having slower reaction times, and this should continue to apply 
to ems with physical (robotic) bodies (Healy et al. 2013).
An em mind running 16 times faster than an ordinary human experi­
ences a subjective day in 90 objective minutes. Because oscillation periods 
are proportional to length, this em could feel comfortable managing a 16 
times smaller body of human shape and material properties. This body is 
about 10 centimeters tall. If it used proportionally smaller vocal cavities to 
speak, its voice has a pitch four octaves higher (although any voice pitch 
desired can be generated electronically easily). A kilo-em needs a body 
about one-and-a-half millimeters tall. That is, a kilo-speed-em is actually a 
milli-sized-em.
In rich nations today, less than one-fifth of jobs require the hard physical 
activity typical of farming, mining, construction, or manufacturing (Church 
et al. 2011; van der Ploeg et al. 2012). We should similarly expect that most 
ems have office jobs and do not need physical bodies. Thus jobs requiring a 
physical body might plausibly make up one-fifth or less of all em jobs. Ems 
who work in physical bodies are in the minority, but they’d be an important 
minority.
For physical jobs, the characteristics of each job determine a best-
matching robotic body size, materials, and shape, and a best-matching mind 
speed. The actual shape of a physical em body need not be anything like an 
ordinary human body, and ems could change or swap their bodies as often as 
they find useful. Even today, humans can comfortably control a wide variety 
of machines, such as steam shovels, in mental modes where they treat such 
machines as an extension of their body (Church et al. 2011). And the em 
brain need not sit in the em body; the body might be teleoperated from a 
distance.
Note that as a physical body becomes larger, the cost of maintaining that 
body also becomes larger, while the cost of an em mind matching that body’s 
reaction time becomes smaller. There is thus a natural em body size, where 
costs of the em’s brain and body are the same.

scales
74
The relative emphasis on mind quality versus body quality should vary as 
body size varies. For larger ems, it is cheaper to have higher quality minds, 
and more expensive to give them higher quality bodies. So large ems have 
higher quality minds, whereas small ems have higher quality bodies. High-
quality minds might be faster and have more augmentations, while high-
quality bodies might be made of better materials and include more added 
tools.
Clearly, em bodies vary a lot more than do our bodies.
lilliput
Because em minds are typically faster than human minds, em bodies are 
typically smaller than human bodies. And even when em mind speeds are 
matched as well as possible to their body length, not everything seems the 
same to them. Things look and feel different in Lilliput.
For example, gravity seems weaker to creatures with smaller bodies. The 
strength of gravity influences the energy-efficient time periods between 
strides while walking or running, and between flaps while flying or swim­
ming. For example, because a body that is four times shorter than normal 
could comfortably move its legs four times more often, in principle its strides 
could be four times more frequent, to give the same total velocity. However, 
because gravity seems weaker to this shorter creature, such strides are not 
energy-efficient. Energy-efficient walking strides actually step twice as far, 
to give an efficient velocity that is only half the size (Bejan and Marden 
2006).
This theory is confirmed by the observed velocities of animals of different 
sizes. For example, the efficient walking speed for an elephant of 1 meter per 
second is about 20 times faster than that of a cockroach. This theory is also 
confirmed by the speeds of humans walking and running when their gravity 
is reduced (Sylos-Labini et al. 2014; De Witt et al. 2014). It could also have 
been confirmed in how astronauts walked on the moon, except that the 
moon astronauts’ gait was distorted by their unwieldy space suits.
All of this suggests that fast em minds with proportionally smaller bodies 
walk more slowly, with strides that are longer, and with both speeds and 
strides proportional to the square root of body length. However, it is possible 
that ems will invent new ways to walk comfortably and efficiently. Most 

meetings
75
insects can walk on water. At moon gravity levels humans wearing flippers 
can run on water (Minetti et al. 2012). Small ems could run on water with 
ordinary shoes.
To ems that are smaller and faster, sunlight seems dimmer and shows 
more noticeable diffraction patterns. Magnets, waveguides, and electrostatic 
motors are less useful. Surface tension makes it harder to escape from water. 
Friction is more often an obstacle, lubrication is harder to achieve, and ran­
dom thermal disruptions to the speed of objects become more noticeable. It 
becomes easier to dissipate excess body heat, but harder to insulate against 
nearby heat or cold (Haldane 1926; Drexler 1992).
The rate at which fluids pass around an em body scales well with size; a 
1 meter per second wind is also a 1 millimeter per millisecond wind, and so 
looks the same to a kilo-em in a proportionally smaller body. However, a 
smaller em finds it much harder to resist the pressures of such a wind. Thus 
spaces where small physical ems congregate need to avoid strong winds. To 
such ems, ordinary density air feels much thicker than it does to normal-size 
humans.
A crude calculation using a simple conservative nano-computer design 
suggests that a matching faster-em brain might plausibly fit inside an 
android body 256 times smaller and faster than an ordinary human body 
(Hanson 1995).
Compared with ordinary humans, to a fast em with a small body the 
Earth seems much larger, and takes much longer to travel around. To a kilo-
em, for example, the Earth’s surface area seems a million times larger, a 
subway ride that takes 15 minutes in real time takes 10 subjective days, an 
8-hour plane ride takes a subjective year, and a 1-month flight to Mars takes 
a subjective century. Sending a radio signal to the planet Saturn and back 
takes a subjective 4 months. Even super-sonic missiles seem slow. However, 
over modest distances lasers and directed energy weapons continue to seem 
very fast to a kilo-em.
To Lilliputian ems, the world is a much larger place.
meetings
Ems can meet either directly, with adjacent physical bodies, or they can 
meet virtually.

scales
76
An em physical body can either be run by em “brain” hardware placed 
inside that body, or the body can be tele-operated by an em in brain hard­
ware at a distance that is small compared with the reaction distance where the 
communication delay equals the em brain reaction time.
For example, if signals travel at the speed of light, then to keep the round-
trip signal time delay to less than a subjective reaction time of a tenth of a 
second, a 16 times human speed brain must be less than a reaction distance 
of roughly 1000 kilometers from its body. If we reduce the allowed signal 
delay to be only 10 milliseconds, then the brain must be within 100 kilo­
meters. (All this ignores added delays from network hardware.)
Now consider two ems who want to hold a virtual office meeting, who run 
on brain hardware separated in space, and who have matching speeds (and 
periods and phases if those apply). There are two ways to support this scenario. 
One is to temporarily move the brain state of one into hardware located near 
the other, and then to use hardware near to both of them to compute their 
virtual office environment. The other way is to leave the em brains at their 
separated locations, and have hardware between them send virtual reality 
signals to each of them, as if they were together in the same office. The ems 
won’t be able to tell the difference between these two approaches if the signal 
delay between their locations is much smaller than their reaction times.
Because it takes far fewer bits to describe the details of a virtual reality 
meeting than to describe a brain, for near-enough ems in a short-enough 
meeting it should be cheaper to leave their brains fixed and exchange virtual 
reality signals, rather than moving one of their brains. That is, brains stay 
where they are and are told where they are and what they see and hear in 
their virtual meeting room.
Virtual reality meetings are also more secure against mind theft, although 
perhaps less secure against eavesdroppers. Thus ems near each other who 
desire a virtual meeting can reduce both communication and security costs 
by leaving their brains in the same fixed hardware, and only virtually moving 
to a shared location.
When the hardware supporting two em brains is far enough apart in space 
relative to their speeds, however, communication delays become noticeable. 
Ems then have to choose between either having noticeably slow reactions 
to events in the meeting, or temporarily moving at least one of their brains 
to closer hardware.

entropy
77
Modest delays can be pretty tolerable though. At the distance where 
some ems see a tenth of a second light-speed delay, ems 16 times faster 
than normal see an often quite tolerable one-and-a-half second delay, and 
ems 16 times faster than those suffer only a 26 second delay. Today, many 
text-messaging conversations function acceptably with 30-second message 
delays. As with such messaging conversations today, ems who talk with 
noticeable delays may routinely talk with several others at the same time.
A fast-enough em that is physically near another em could credibly signal 
that fact by its quick reaction time. Ems could easily pretend to be far away 
when they were actually near, but they find it much harder to pretend to be 
near when they were actually far. Achieving this pretense requires heroic 
abilities to predict what other ems are about to do.
The process whereby one em “calls” another em to request an immediate 
meeting varies depending on the relative speeds of the two ems. When a fast 
em calls a slow one, this calling em may have to wait a long time for the slow 
em to respond to the call, and then move to faster hardware to allow them to 
interact naturally. In contrast, if a slow em has already sped up to the speed 
of a fast em before it makes its call, a meeting may proceed immediately.
All things considered, compared with humans, ems find it easier and 
cheaper to meet each other. This will have important implications.
entropy
(The next two sections are especially technical, and few things later depend 
on them. Skip them if you prefer.)
To function, computers (by which I just mean artificial signal-processing 
machines) need many kinds of supports, including structural positioning, 
insulation from disturbances, communication, energy, and cooling. The 
need for free energy (or equivalently, negative entropy) is especially likely 
to induce a revolution in computer design within a few decades. After 
this revolution, many kinds of computer systems will likely be much more 
­thermodynamically reversible. This includes ems.
Today, almost all computer circuits are made of CMOS (complementary 
metal–oxide–semiconductor) materials. A gate is the smallest logical unit 
on a computer chip, and the energy typically required for a simple CMOS 
gate operation has long been falling by more than a factor of 10 per decade. 

scales
78
(At least for chips that do not sacrifice performance for power or vice versa.) 
Projecting this trend forward, around the year 2035 the free energy used per 
CMOS gate operation should fall to the level of one bit, that is, to the free 
energy that thermodynamics says is required to erase one bit of information 
at ordinary temperatures (Drechsler and Wille 2012).
Computer logic gates erase bits (i.e., increase entropy) in two different 
ways. Ordinarily each simple gate erases one bit logically, because it con­
verts two input bits into one output bit. In addition, each gate erases other 
bits non-logically, because the gate performs its logical operation quickly 
and away from thermodynamic equilibrium. Today, the vast majority of bits 
erased in computers are done non-logically. Thus there is today little point 
in structuring computer gates to avoid logical erasure.
Around 2035, however, the rate of non-logical bit erasure should fall to 
the rate of logical erasure. After that point, if energy cost per computation 
is to fall much further, then computers must switch to using “reversible” 
designs that only rarely erase bits logically.
(Some hope to reduce energy usage by running hardware at lower temper­
atures. But this won’t reduce the use of free energy, which is the real resource 
needed. It is the creation of entropy that is the fundamental problem.)
For human brains today, most of their bit erasure is non-logical. As brains 
run at room temperature, use about 20 watts, and have about 100 billion 
neurons that each take a minimum of 20 milliseconds to react, brains in 
effect erase over a billion bits per neuron per minimum neuron reaction 
time. As there are roughly 1000 synapses per neuron on average, that is 
over a million bits erased per synapse per minimum neuron reaction time. 
Unless brain synapses are somehow doing the equivalent of a million logical 
operations per reaction time, the vast majority of the brain’s bit erasure must 
be non-logical. This suggests that human speed ems built on reversible com­
puter hardware require far less than 20 watts of power.
Another hint that most future computers will likely be miserly with 
energy is that the Earth has far more material to convert into computers 
than it has energy to run such computers at maximal rates. For example, by 
one plausible calculation of the typical energy consumption in a maximum-
output nanotech-based machine (~10 watts per cubic centimeter), all of the 
light energy reaching Earth from the sun could be used by a single city of 

entropy
79
nanotech hardware 100 meters (~33 stories) tall and 10 kilometers on each 
side (Freitas 1999). Yet Earth has raw materials enough to build a vastly 
larger volume of computer hardware.
When computer operations lack a one-to-one mapping between input and 
output states, they are logically irreversible, and so must use free energy to 
erase bits. However, any irreversible mapping can be converted to a reversible 
one-to-one mapping by saving the input state along with the output state.
A clever fractal design allows one to create a reversible version of any 
irreversible computation (Bennett 1989). Imagine an ordinary irreversible 
computation that uses one particular processor unit and one matching 
memory unit. A reversible version of this computation could be completed 
in exactly the same amount of time. It costs a logarithmic-in-time overhead 
of extra parallel processor and memory units to reversibly erase the results of 
intermediate computing steps in the background (Bennett 1989).
This fractal reversing approach has a reversing period, which is the num­
ber of operation steps in the original computation before one has to logically 
erase one unit of memory. This reversing period can be doubled if one pays 
for one more unit each of processing and memory to hold and calculate 
intermediate steps. As a result, efficient reversing periods should roughly 
double each time the cost of computing hardware falls by half, relative to the 
cost of cooling and energy to run that hardware.
Today, computer gates are usually designed to change as fast as possible, 
and as a result they in effect irreversibly erase a great many bits during every 
gate operation. However, when the energy cost per operation does not fall 
as fast as the hardware cost, energy costs eventually dominate, forcing com­
puter designers to focus on reducing the rate of bit erasure.
To erase many fewer bits per gate operation, computer gates can be run 
nearly “adiabatically,” that is, slowly enough that key parameters change 
smoothly enough to make it cheap to reverse those changes. For adiabatic 
hardware, the rate of non-logical bit erasure is then proportional to speed; 
run an adiabatic gate twice as fast, and it erases twice as many bits per gate 
operation, or four times as many bits per second (Younis 1994). Because of 
high levels of brain parallelism, over a wide range of speeds it should thus 
cost twice the computer hardware to make an em brain that erases half as 
many bits per second of subjective experience.

scales
80
For nearly adiabatic computers, the rate at which bits are erased non-
logically per operation is proportional to speed. For such machines, the 
speed that minimizes total costs per operation will spend about the same 
amount to rent the computer hardware as to buy the energy and cooling to 
run that hardware. These costs include both the space to hold the computers 
and their supporting energy and cooling systems. Thus the cost to rent the 
computing hardware plus the volume to hold it typically equals the cost to 
rent the energy and cooling hardware plus the volume to hold those, plus the 
cost of the raw materials used to make energy.
Because for adiabatic computers the cost of buying new hardware is about 
as important as the cost to power and cool that hardware, the logarithmic 
rate at which computing power becomes cheaper should be near the average 
of the logarithmic rates at which computer hardware becomes cheaper and 
the rates at which energy and cooling become cheaper. This is a reason why 
we might expect Moore’s law growth rates for active devices (not mem­
ory) to slow down by about a factor of two after around 2035 when nearly 
adiabatic reversible computing becomes important. Historically, the price of 
energy and cooling has fallen much slower than has the price of computer 
hardware.
It might seem that when cooling is a major issue, computer hardware runs 
at as hot a temperature as feasible, as the rate at which heat is transferred via 
conduction is proportional to a local temperature difference. However, for 
adiabatic reversible computer hardware, the rate at which heat is generated 
is also roughly proportional to temperature, as it is determined fundamen­
tally by the rate of bit erasure (also known as entropy production). Thus the 
best temperature at which to run such hardware is determined by other 
considerations.
miserly minds
The use of energy-efficient hardware can change em behavior in many ways.
For example, when a brain emulation is run on a reversible computer, then 
once per reversing period it must pay to erase a single maximally compressed 
copy of its period-ending brain state. So the end of a reversing period is a 
cost-effective time for an em to switch to a different speed, or to archive a 
mind copy, as archiving bits saves from having to erase them.

miserly minds
81
The fractal reversing method induces more re-computing of mental states 
that first appear toward the start or end of a reversing period. Because of this, 
those who give more moral weight, in terms of avoiding pain and encouraging 
pleasure, to mental states that are recomputed more often, should give more 
moral weight to experiences that occur closer to reversing period boundaries.
Ems who archive their messages, actions, or sensory inputs must pay a 
cost to store those bits, and most likely a cost later to erase those bits when 
they are no longer wanted. However, ems who do not choose to archive such 
things will try to minimize related bit erasures.
For example, ems must pay to erase bits to see or hear physical or social 
worlds outside themselves, if such worlds change in unpredictable ways, and 
do not cooperate to reverse their common computation. If an em watches 
and mentally processes a real waterfall, that em must pay to erase the equiva­
lent of a high-resolution input “movie” of the scene. He or she must first pay 
to remember the movie for the rest of the current reversing period, and then 
at the end of that period must pay to save or erase the bits of that movie.
In contrast, an em who watches and mentally processes a virtual waterfall 
might coordinate and synchronize with the hardware that produces that vir­
tual scene to reverse both calculations together. The em could even interact 
in detail with the waterfall (such as by “swimming” in it) without paying to 
erase any more bits. This gives ems a reason to prefer virtual over physical 
realities, especially standard virtual realities that many ems could share and 
hence reduce the costs of computing them.
Ems experiencing virtual nature are more “green” because this activity 
­disturbs physical nature less, either directly or via the production of waste 
heat. Today, the human experience of immersion in nature, both real and 
virtual, predicts being generous, feeling autonomous, wanting enduring 
relations, and wanting to help society, while immersion in non-natural 
environments predicts valuing money and fame (Weinstein et al. 2009). 
So ems who spend more time in virtual nature are also likely to feel more 
autonomous and generous, and less selfish.
If ems have entropy-efficient long distance communication networks, 
then they might coordinate to reverse their messages to each other. In the 
simplest case, an em who receives a message from another em must pay to 
erase that message later. However, if the reversing periods and phases of 
the two ems sufficiently match, the message receiver can later send back an 

scales
82
“anti-message” to be reversibly erased by the sender (Hanson 1992). The 
anti-message can cancel the original message, allowing both to be elimi­
nated without the costly erasure of bits.
When there are substantial message delays, ems must save messages or 
mental states for longer to support “anti-message” production. This increases 
the relative costs of sending messages early in a reversing period, and of 
sending messages with longer time delays, such as to more distant locations. 
Because of this, ems prefer to send messages toward the end of their revers­
ing periods.
Slow reversible hardware can be made to have a variable speed, so that 
the speed could change from moment to moment to accommodate varying 
demands. For such hardware, the number of bits erased per operation goes 
inversely as operation time. That is, when each operation takes longer, fewer 
bits are erased per operation. By using such hardware to emulate brains, an 
em mind could temporarily speed up, if it were willing to temporarily pay 
a higher bit erasure cost per operation. Such an em could also temporarily 
slow down, and pay a lower energy cost per operation.
Temporary speed-ups require that there be some slack or buffer in the 
heat disposal system, so that the temporarily added heat doesn’t overwhelm 
that system. Because the typical choice of hardware operating speed should 
be near an optimal tradeoff of hardware versus cooling costs, temporary 
small fractional changes in operating speed near this optimum should result 
in much smaller fractional increases in the total cost per operation.
Variable speed em hardware is especially useful in situations where 
demands for mental effort vary quickly and unpredictably. For example, in 
conversation you could slow down while listening and speed up while talk­
ing. You could slow down when you are waiting for inputs from others, and 
speed up when others are waiting for inputs from you. Monitors could slow 
down when what they were monitoring was relatively inactive, and speed 
up when such activity momentarily increased. Complex social norms may 
develop regarding when it is acceptable to speed up or slow down relative to 
interaction partners.
The use of slow reversible hardware probably reduces the top cheap speed, 
that is, the highest speed where the cost per operation is nearly the same as 
at low speeds. Thus as the costs of local heat disposal and energy usage rise, 
the local top cheap speed falls.

miserly minds
83
When other rates of bit erasure are lower, then ems will want longer 
reversing periods to also reduce reversing period erasures. As non-logical 
bit erasure rates are higher in the early em era, typical reversing periods are 
then short, plausibly corresponding to shorter than a reaction time. In this 
case the need for reversible hardware may have few effects on em behavior.
Later, however, bit erasure rates may be much lower, and then longer 
reversing periods may change em behavior more. For example, costs of 
reversing encourage ems who want to interact often to coordinate to share 
the same reversing periods and phases, and to prefer interactions with things 
outside themselves to happen away from reversing period boundaries.
If the cost of computing fell by factor of a million relative to the cost of 
energy and cooling, then the reversing period could change from a subjec­
tive reaction time of a tenth of a second to a subjective day. (This may not 
happen until long after the early em era.) With a reversing period of a day, 
it could make sense to end reversing periods during sleep, and for ems to 
interact the most with others just before going to sleep.
Ems who interact often want to share reversing periods and phases, to 
cheaply share special hardware and processes used at the end of a reversing 
period. However, ems who interact less are more likely to have different 
reversing phases, to more efficiently share hardware specialized for end of 
period tasks. This increases the costs of interaction between ems who inter­
act less often.
It seems that the more miserly ems become with energy, the more that 
energy issues influence their behavior.


85
C H A P T E R  7
Infrastructure
climate
s we will discuss in Chapter 18, Cities section, em cities are likely 
to be big, dense, highly cost-effective concentrations of computer 
and communication hardware. How might such cities interact 
with their surroundings?
Today, computer and communication hardware is known for being espe­
cially temperamental about its environment. Rooms and buildings designed 
to house such hardware tend to be climate-controlled to ensure stable and 
low values of temperature, humidity, vibration, dust, and electromagnetic 
field intensity. Such equipment housing protects it especially well from fire, 
flood, and security breaches.
The simple assumption is that, compared with our cities today, em cit­
ies will also be more climate-controlled to ensure stable and low values of 
temperature, humidity, vibrations, dust, and electromagnetic signals. These 
controls may in fact become city level utilities. Large sections of cities, 
and perhaps entire cities, may be covered, perhaps even domed, to control 
humidity, dust, and vibration, with city utilities working to absorb remain­
ing pollutants. Emissions within cities may also be strictly controlled.
However, an em city may contain temperatures, pressures, vibrations, and 
chemical concentrations that are toxic to ordinary humans. If so, ordinary 
humans are excluded from most places in em cities for safety reasons. In 
addition, we will see in Chapter 18, Transport section, that many em city 
transport facilities are unlikely to be well matched to the needs of ordinary 
humans.
A

infrastructure
86
Higher prices to rent volume near city centers should push such centers 
to extend both higher into the sky and deeper into the ground, as happens 
in human cities today. It should also push computers in city centers to 
be made from denser physical devices, that is, supporting more comput­
ing operations per volume, even if such devices are proportionally more 
expensive than less dense variants. City centers are also less likely to use 
deterministic computing devices, if such devices require more volume and 
cooling.
It may be possible to make computing devices that use less mass per com­
puting speed supported, even if they cost more per operation computed. 
Such lighter devices are more likely to be used at higher city elevations, 
because they reduce the cost of the physical structures needed to hold them 
at these heights. Lighter computing devices are more likely to be found near 
city centers, where altitudes are higher.
Computer and communication hardware is in general distinguished by 
the generation of its design, with more recent design generations tending 
to be more reliable and to use less volume, mass, power, and cooling. When 
it is cheap enough to move such hardware, or to change the location of city 
centers, then older hardware will tend to be further away from city centers 
where volume, power, and cooling cost more.
Cities today are the roughest known kind of terrain, in the sense that cit­
ies slow down the wind the most compared with other terrain types. Cities 
also tend to be hotter than neighboring areas. For example, Las Vegas is 
7° Fahrenheit hotter in the summer than are surrounding areas. This hotter 
city effect makes ozone pollution worse and this effect is stronger for bigger 
cities, in the summer, at night, with fewer clouds, and with slower wind 
(Arnfield 2003).
This is a mild reason to expect em cities to be hotter than other areas, 
especially at night and in the summer. However, as em cities are packed full 
of computing hardware, we shall now see that em cities will actually be much 
hotter.
cooling
Many innovative devices have been proposed to lower the costs of gener­
ating and transporting energy. New generation options include solar power 

cooling
87
satellites, thorium nuclear reactors, and fusion reactors, while new energy 
transport options include superconducting cables and anti-matter. These 
devices may be able to supply high levels and densities of energy to em cities 
at low cost.
It seems harder, however, to imagine innovative ways to dramatically 
improve our abilities to cheaply cool large volumes of computers. Cooling 
is a very well understood physical process, and most proposed approaches 
seem to be relatively minor variations on existing ones. This suggests that 
for large dense em cities during the early em era, cooling might be more of 
a limiting factor than energy.
Today, we usually cool systems by moving a cooling fluid such as air or 
water close to the heat source that we want to cool. The fluid comes in cold 
and moves out hot. One might imagine very low-friction transport systems, 
like railroads or aerial trams, that could move cooling materials in and out at 
a very low energy cost. However, today simple pipelines usually have much 
lower energy costs, and also total costs, than rail and other existing transport 
mechanisms. So the simple assumption to make here is that ems cool their 
cities via fluid cooling pipes.
Readers tempted to see pipes as a primitive technology should know that 
pipes rank high on “product complexity,” meaning that nations must master 
an unusually wide range of abilities to make pipes well. Specifically, in 2013 
pipes had an average complexity rank of 350 out of the 1239 product types 
ranked (Hausmann et al. 2014).
Metabolism in individual plants and animals follows a scaling law; organ­
isms that are 16 times as massive tend to have half the per-mass metabolism. 
Some have attributed this trend to fundamental difficulties in managing 
piping systems to pull nutrients in and push waste out for large serviced 
volumes (Savage et al. 2008).
However, we actually know of fluid-based pipe cooling designs that 
can efficiently cool large em cities. Biological fluid-based pipe systems 
such as blood vessels are fractal in the sense of having a branching 
structure that looks similar at different scales. There are simple fractal 
pipe designs that can efficiently import cool fluids such as air or water 
from outside a city to near every point in that city, and then export 
heated fluids from near every point in the city to outside the city volume 
(Bejan 1997; Bejan et al. 2000; Bejan 2006). These fractal cooling system 

infrastructure
88
designs require cost overheads that are logarithmic in the total size of 
the city. That is, such overheads increase by only a constant amount when 
a city size is doubled.
Closest to each tiny piece of computer hardware, heat can be transported 
away via materials such as metals that conduct heat well. Alternatively, small 
heat pipes might be used. These conducting materials or heat pipes can end 
in tiny cooling fans inside tiny fluid cooling pipes nearby. As the fluid moves 
away from these fans, tiny pipes merge into larger pipes where the fluids 
move faster. At some point the fluid switches from smooth to turbulent flow, 
but this only increases the size of the constant cost overhead added each 
time city size is doubled.
Colder fluids flowing from outside the city toward the tiny cooling fans 
reverse this pattern, breaking up into more pipes that are each smaller and 
have slower moving fluids. All else equal, input pipes require more volume 
for insulation because of their larger temperature difference from hot com­
puter hardware. The use of a shared cooling system encourages nearby city 
volumes to maintain temperatures close to each other, and to exiting cooling 
fluids.
The two main costs of a cooling system are (1) the power required to 
maintain the pressure difference that pushes cooling fluids through the city, 
and (2) the fraction of city volume devoted to the cooling pipes. (The cost to 
make the pipes is comparatively small.) Both of these costs increase as the 
logarithm of the city’s volume. That is, every time the city volume doubles, 
not only does the same additional fraction of city volume have to be devoted 
to a new kind and size of pipe to cool that city, but the same additional pres­
sure must be added to the pressure difference between the input and output 
ends of the cooling pipe system.
The economic value produced in a city is often modeled as a low power 
(greater than one) of the economic activity in that city (Bettencourt 
et al. 2007, 2010; Schrank et al. 2011). As mathematically, for large volumes 
a power of volume grows faster than a logarithm of volume, the greater value 
produced in larger cities can easily pay for the higher costs of cooling larger 
cities. Thus costs of cooling do not limit em city sizes.
For very small city volumes, however, the added costs to cool a larger vol­
ume might outweigh the added economic value a larger city volume could 
produce. Thus there may be an important economic niche for small isolated 

cooling
89
“towns” of ems that take advantage of cheaper computing power because of 
their lower cooling costs. After all, when cooling and energy are together 
four times cheaper, computing power becomes twice as cheap. So isolated 
em towns may specialize in doing jobs where cheap computing matters 
more than the fast flexible communication and transport with many other 
ems available in large cities.
When the cross-section of a pipe is doubled, the rate at which fluid flows 
through that pipe more than doubles. Thus there are scale economies in the 
total amount of cooling supplied to a city of fixed size. The exact magni­
tude of these scale economies depends on whether fluid flow is smooth or 
turbulent.
With adiabatic computing, about the same amount should be spent on 
computing hardware as is spent on energy and cooling to run that hard­
ware. Because of this, in em city centers where the cost of space is high, 
energy and cooling systems should take up roughly the same volume as the 
computers themselves. As computer hardware tends to be more expensive 
to make per unit volume than energy or cooling hardware, the energy and 
cooling systems may actually tend to take up more volume than the com­
puting hardware. The cooling pipe fraction may be even higher toward the 
city periphery, as pipes to cool a city center must pass from outside the city 
through the city periphery.
As cooling tends to require more space than does energy generation and 
transport, most of the space devoted to energy and cooling is likely devoted 
to cooling. Thus in em cities densely packed with computer hardware, a 
substantial fraction (likely 20-70%) of em city volume is devoted to cooling 
pipes.
Because of their higher costs of cooling, larger em cities tend to use less 
energy relative to hardware, and thus use longer reversing periods, which 
reduces the local top cheap speed. The very fastest ems thus tend to live in 
smaller communities, away from big city centers.
As cities pull in cool fluids and push out hot fluids, heat engines might 
be created well outside the cities, engines that use this temperature diffe­
rence to produce energy. For example, power-generating kites might even 
surf strong hot winds that rise above em cities. However, it seems hard to 
design cost-effective heat engines that take advantage of this temperature 
difference.

infrastructure
90
air and water
The two obvious candidates for em city cooling fluids are air and water. Cities 
that are primarily air-cooled are arranged somewhat differently from cities 
that are primarily water-cooled. (There is also a remote possibility of cooling 
via superfluid Helium II, at below 2° Kelvin. This fluid can have low viscos­
ity, high heat conductivity, and high entropy transfer rates (Gully 2014).)
Air-cooled cities pull in a lot of cool air and push out a lot of hot air. Most 
of the hot air exits above the city, into a tall cloud of hot air rising above the 
city. A strong wind pulls cool air in from outside toward the outside base of 
the city. As hot air rises, this force can pull air through the system, as it does 
today in the cooling towers of power plants.
The hot-air-rises force is proportional to the height difference between 
air entering and exiting the city. It is also proportional to the difference in 
(inverse) air temperature between entering and exiting air. Tall cooling tow­
ers might be added above em city centers to increase this height difference, 
and thus increase the pulling force. Such towers may have the hyperboloid 
shape often seen today in power plant cooling towers, because such shapes 
have superior strength as structures made from straight struts. Scale econo­
mies in building towers might encourage cities to mostly cool via a single 
main tower. The tallest cooling tower today is over 200 meters high; em city 
towers could be much taller.
The fact that air tends to become more viscous at higher temperatures 
pushes air-cooled cities toward using lower temperatures. This effect also 
reduces the size of the pipes of air entering cities, relative to outgoing air 
pipes. Air-cooled cities might be placed on large flat dry cold plains, such as 
in Sweden, Siberia, Canada, or Antarctica.
The ability of air to cool is proportional to its pressure, while its viscos­
ity, or resistance to pressure, is independent of pressure. Because of this, 
air-cooled cities are tempted to use high-pressure air. Five atmospheres of 
air pressure can have similar cooling abilities to water. However, using high-
pressure air for city cooling requires large pressure differences between the 
inside and outside of a city. One might manage this pressure difference in 
the cooling system via heat exchangers that intertwine pipes with high and 
low pressure air, or via compressors that increase the pressure of incoming 

air and water
91
air, combined with turbines to capture energy from the falling pressure of 
outgoing air.
Both air and water-cooled cities are likely to have winds moving in toward 
them and tall clouds of hot air rising above them, although both of these 
should be larger for air-cooled cities. Such winds and clouds might be like 
those often associated with active volcanoes.
Water-cooled cities pull in a lot of cold water and push out a lot of hotter 
water. The larger the temperature difference between the incoming and out­
going water, the more cooling is provided. This gives a preference for pulling 
in very cold water, which suggests locating such cities on the coast near 
the Earth’s poles, such as in Scandinavia or Argentina, or perhaps under 
the ocean, where temperatures of 4° Centigrade are available. Microsoft has 
begun to develop such subsea data centers (Markoff 2016).
The advantage of a larger temperature difference also suggests pushing out 
water that is nearly steam, that is, near the boiling point of water. However, 
water that is too near the temperature of steam risks creating explosions of 
actual steam because of temporary flow blockages. Water-cooled cities also 
suffer more risk of water leaks that damage nearby equipment, and so need 
to be better protected against such corrosion.
Hotter water has a lower viscosity, that is, a lower resistance to being 
pushed through a pipe. This implies that input pipes of cool water are larger 
than output pipes of hot water, and that it is cheaper to cool with warmer 
water. This encourages water-cooled cities to be hot, with computer hard­
ware temperature near the boiling point of water.
A slurry of water containing small ice pellets can cool much better than 
can water by itself. For example, a slurry with a 20-25% volume of ice flows 
nearly as easily as does plain cold water, yet has about five times the cooling 
capacity. Salt-water helps to make pellets smaller, with pellet diameters of 
20-50 micrometers available via today’s standard technology. Seawater-
based ice slurry cooling systems are now often used on fishing boats to keep 
fish cool (EPSL 2014; Kauffeld et al. 2010).
The advantages of ice slurry cooling seem likely to be irresistible, ­pushing 
em cities to prefer water over air cooling, and pushing cities to keep input 
pipes insulated enough to carry an ice slurry. Cooling pipes with a 0.1 
­millimeter inner diameter should be able to come close enough to each heat 

infrastructure
92
source to allow the remaining heat transport to be done via simple heat 
conduction in metal or small heat pipes (Faghri 2012; Gully 2014).
Pipe walls covered with melting ice can cut the friction of water flowing 
past such walls (Vakarelski et al. 2015). Also, dense solutions of bacteria in 
water have recently been seen to eliminate the viscosity of that water via 
coordinated motions of bacteria tails (López et al. 2015). Analogous mech­
anisms might be used to greatly increase the flow capacity of em water pipes.
Like air-cooled cities, water-cooled em cities are also likely to gain from 
locating in cold places. While air-cooled cities may seek flat cold plains, 
water-cooled cities seek to be near lots of cold seawater. They might even 
go deep in the ocean, for easier access to colder water, if costs were not 
prohibitive to modify transport and manufacturing methods to handle the 
very high pressures resulting from having seawater over em city buildings.
Whether cooled by air or water, em cities could look quite different from 
human cities.
buildings
How might buildings differ in an em era?
As we will see in Chapter 13, Efficiency section, the em world is focused 
more on efficiency and function, and less on showing off wealth and indi­
viduality. In particular, compared with structures in our cities, structures in 
em cities focus more on cheaply and efficiently supporting a more limited 
range of tenants. Em buildings mainly hold computer hardware and sup­
porting infrastructure.
Buildings require structural support, to hold matter up against the gravity 
that pulls them down, to resist the wind pressures that push them sideways, 
and to deal with internal stresses resulting from earthquake ground vibra­
tions. The relative importance of these issues changes in an em economy.
Today, buildings are typically required to withstand the biggest earth­
quakes expected to appear over the next century, which is near the use­
ful lifetime of most buildings. As we will see in Chapter 16, Growth 
Estimate section, an em economy may grow faster than our economy by 
a factor of 100 or more. Because of this, buildings only need to last for 
durations that are this factor shorter than buildings need to last today. As 
the strength of earthquakes are inverse to their frequency, so that stronger 

buildings
93
quakes happen less often, this implies that em buildings only need to 
be built to handle maximum earthquake ground vibrations this factor 
weaker than the vibrations that buildings today must handle. The need 
to handle earthquakes 100 or more times weaker makes it easier to build 
taller buildings for em cities.
For tall buildings today, wind pressures are a bigger problem than grav­
ity. Like trees in a forest, buildings in cities today are each responsible for 
their own wind resistance; they rarely connect to give mutual support, 
even though such mutual support can make it much easier to resist wind 
pressures. Builders of tall buildings today haven’t managed to coordinate 
to arrange such mutual structural support. However, em cities might use 
combinatorial auctions, discussed in Chapter 15, Combinatorial Auctions 
section, to coordinate decentralized management of structural support to 
protect buildings against vibrations, gravity, and winds. Auction bids could 
specify acceptable locations, the structural support they need or are willing 
to supply, and the average and peak vibrations they will emit, absorb, and 
tolerate. This can allow em city structures to more closely resemble a large 
three-dimensional lattice of supports holding diverse components. Such a 
lattice can make it cheaper for em cities to reach higher into the sky.
Today, the Burj Khalifa in Dubai, completed in 2009, is the world’s tall­
est building at 830 meters high. A 1007-meter Kingdom Tower in Jeddah 
is under construction, to be completed in 2019. A 15-kilometer tall tower 
has been designed with steel as its structural material. Even taller buildings 
seem possible using lighter stronger materials such as graphene and carbyne, 
and using better fractal designs for structural supports (Farr 2007b; Farr and 
Mao 2008; Rayneau-Kirkhope et al. 2012). Factoring in continued progress 
in building materials, the reduced importance of earthquakes for ems, better 
coordination to resist winds, and stronger economic pressures for denser city 
concentrations, em city centers might perhaps rise to a kilometer or more 
over kilometers-wide regions.
However, the em economy places one very big obstacle in the way of 
tall em city buildings. As we shall see, the em economy grows very rapidly, 
perhaps doubling every month or week. Because of this, the time delays 
required today to construct buildings are prohibitively expensive in an em 
economy. This is because the cost of a building roughly doubles for every 
additional economic-doubling time added to the time required to finish 

infrastructure
94
construction. So the 6 years that it took to build today’s tallest building is 
completely unacceptable in the fast em world.
Thus there are huge premiums placed on fast construction, and the added 
time required to build taller buildings might limit how high em cities grow. 
To allow both rapid construction and rapid flexible changes later, buildings 
might be made out of modular units (Lawson et al. 2012). For example, in a 
recent demonstration in China a 57-story building was built in only 19 days 
(Diaz 2015). This is three stories per day, a 50% increase over the two stories 
per day rate achieved by the same team less than 4 years before.
To speed construction, computing hardware placed inside modular build­
ings might come in standardized modular units such as shipping containers 
that can be more easily moved as needed, with standard interfaces providing 
utility services to such containers. Buildings might be, in effect, huge ship­
ping container warehouses.
Going further in this direction, a city brimming with computer hard­
ware and water-filled cooling pipes might perhaps be built out of incom­
pressible “bricks,” where each brick is full of useful hardware devices, 
but where inside volumes that would otherwise be empty are instead 
filled with stone or water and perhaps tension wires. Such bricks might 
be stackable to very large heights while requiring much less structural 
support than do items held in tall buildings today. Structural supports 
might then be mainly needed to assist with disasters and with periodic 
rebuilding efforts.
Today, moderately tall buildings are actually cheaper than short buildings. 
In most rich nations today, the building height for which the cost per square 
meter of useful space is lowest for experienced construction teams is at 
least 20 stories high, and perhaps 40 stories or higher (Pickena and Ilozora 
2003; Blackman et al. 2008; Dalvit 2011). Regulations, including laws that 
explicitly ban tall buildings, seem to be the main reason that in many rich 
nations today most recently constructed buildings are shorter than this most 
efficient height (Glaeser et al. 2005; Watts et al. 2007). Successful em cities 
are likely to be those that find ways to reduce excessive regulatory limits on 
new buildings and their heights.
To speed reconstruction, cities might coordinate to reconstruct whole 
sections together. An axis of reconstruction activity might even sweep 
around a city center like the hand of a clock. In this case the city would look 

manufacturing
95
more like a spiral, with the newest just-built radial slice of the city being 
taller and wider than the oldest about-to-be-dismantled slice. Radial slices 
near the end of their useful life would likely have more accidents and less 
reliable utilities. They might also be more attractive places to conduct illicit 
activities. A coordinated spiral of reconstruction could make it easier to 
manage land allocation via combinatorial auctions, which will be discussed 
in Chapter 18, City Auctions section.
To support higher than ambient pressures in the centers of air-cooled 
cities, physical structures are needed to maintain high internal pressures 
against lower outside pressures. Fractal designs for pressure containment 
surfaces can help here (Farr 2007a). The structures in high air pressure cit­
ies that maintain higher air pressure in the center could also be helpful in 
giving structural support to hold up mass in lower pressure regions above 
high-pressure city centers.
The structures required to create high air pressure em cities might be 
expensive in low-pressure environments. If so, such cities might instead be 
placed under a few meters of water. For example, 50 meters of water over­
head adds 5 Earth atmospheres of pressure.
Not only do em cities look different, their buildings look different too.
manufacturing
As biological humans are less relevant in an em economy, the biological frac­
tion of today’s international trade is less relevant in an em economy. How­
ever, this fraction is actually rather small. Today, only 9.8% of international 
exports by value are in the categories of foods, 7.5% are in medical-related 
chemicals, and 5.5% in garments and textiles (Hausmann et al. 2014). Thus 
not much more than about a quarter of exports today seem threatened by 
a reduced biology trade. Of strong continued relevance to ems are ­metals, 
machinery, electronics, construction, oil, coal, petrochemicals, mining, 
­aircraft, ships, and boilers.
Because biology matters less in the em economy, weather-induced 
changes in biology also matter less. However, extreme weather could still 
disrupt non-biological em mining, manufacturing, and transport. Further­
more, ems are more geographically concentrated in a few big cities, and the 
doubling time of the em economy is closer to typical timescales on which 

infrastructure
96
local weather can change a lot. Thus severe storms can more easily cause big 
disruptions to the em economy.
Today, consumers place a high value on having a great variety of products 
and services to choose from. This preference has increased substantially over 
the last century. By picking products that adapt in detail to their varying 
individual tastes, consumers are able to signal their distinct individual­
ity. This product variety reduces the scale and scope economies that can 
be achieved in making items cheaply. The diversion of development and 
resources into improving less-durable, more-context-dependent products, 
compared with more general products, has reduced economic growth rates 
(Corrado et al. 2009). However, consumers today usually care less about low 
production costs or growth rates, and care more about the value they can 
gain from more variety in products and services.
As discussed in Chapter 13, Efficiency section, in a very competitive em 
economy, efficiency and low cost gain in importance compared with product 
variety. This reverses the trend in recent decades away from mass produc­
tion and toward mass customization and flexible manufacturing. A return 
to mass production should result in more long-term growth, simpler and 
more standardized products, larger factories that achieve more economies 
of scale and scope, and better but more expensive tools. A return to mass 
production should also encourage organizational divisions centered less on 
types of customers and products and more on functions such as sales, mar­
keting, design, production, and shipping (Salvador et al. 2009; Piller 2008). 
All these changes might be reduced, however, if parasites such as computer 
viruses can exploit mass-produced products, and so discourage them relative 
to other products.
A shift toward mass production should modestly increase the value of 
automation and software tools, as for mass products the fixed cost of devel­
oping such tools is spread out over a larger scope of use of such tools. As 
variety in product appearance seems cheaper in virtual reality than in phys­
ical reality, a trend toward mass production should be more pronounced in 
physical products, relative to virtual products.
Like future computers, future factories may also have subsystems com­
posed of many small elements that run nearly thermodynamically adiabati­
cally to reduce the use of free energy. That is, factories may have mechanical 

manufacturing
97
parts that move slowly enough that their motions could nearly as well have 
happened in reverse. For such subsystems, the free energy used per operation 
goes inversely to the time taken per operation. As with adiabatic reversible 
computers, this suggests that about the same amount is spent to rent the 
hardware for these sorts of manufacturing subsystems as is spent on the 
energy and cooling to run them.
An extreme version of small adiabatic manufacturing hardware is 
molecular manufacturing, or “nanotech,” wherein the factory equipment 
and the manufactured products have atomically precise features. While it 
isn’t obvious how far or fast this trend will go, nanotech might be important 
during the early em era.
Large-scale feasibility of nanotech would likely reduce the demand for 
rare elements such as zinc compared with common elements such as carbon, 
and reduce the fraction of production materials that become waste products. 
It should shorten supply chains and thus cut long-distance physical trade, 
encouraging more material goods to be made and recycled locally, instead of 
transported from distant factories and disposed to distant dumps (Drexler 
1992, 2013).
Nanotech-based factories need not be much bigger than the products 
they make. Such factories would usually have marginal costs of production 
close to the marginal costs of energy, cooling, and raw materials. This implies 
less variation in the cost of marginal production per pound in nanotech 
products. Nanotech factories would thus be relatively cheap to make, and 
would allow for faster rates of production and retooling.
Within dense cities, some computing hardware might even be manufac­
tured in place immediately after dismantling old hardware in place, saving 
the time, cost, and risk of transporting old equipment. Nanotech might 
encourage factories to use deterministic computer hardware, which strongly 
avoids logic errors and timing fluctuations, if doing so could increase the 
reliability of the manufacturing process.
The larger are the fixed relative to marginal costs of making products, the 
more that consumers can be tempted to buy large standardized packages of 
diverse products, perhaps via large group purchases that can negotiate for 
lower prices (Shapiro and Varian 1999). Such purchases might be organized 
around clans or firms, to achieve larger scale economies.

infrastructure
98
As the marginal costs of nanotech products are especially low compared 
with fixed costs, nanotech can create even more scope for selling goods in 
bundles. Thus ems with nanotech may typically buy access to whole large 
libraries of designs, gaining the right for their group to buy and locally prod­
uce individual items at near marginal cost (Hanson 2006b).
Overall, manufacturing seems modestly different in an em world.

99
C H A P T E R  8
Appearances
virtual reality
hat kind of world do ems see? We have several reasons to expect 
ems to usually experience simulated “virtual” realities.
First, compared with ordinary humans, it is easier to fully 
immerse ems in computer-generated virtual realities. One 
could feed computed inputs into an em’s emulated eyes, ears, nose, fingers, 
etc., and take outputs from that em’s emulated arms, legs, tongue, etc., to cre­
ate a complete sensory experience of the sight, sound, smell, touch, etc., of 
being in contact with and partially controlling a constructed but vivid world. 
Humans get many sensory clues telling them that their virtual realities are 
not real. Ems need see no such clues.
Second, the cost to compute a workable virtual reality can be very low, 
compared with the cost to compute an em. Now it is true that the cost to 
compute a virtual environment depends greatly on the level of realistic detail 
required. Consider the cost to give simulated inputs to an em that it could 
not distinguish, even with careful examination, from a real physical environ­
ment. For many familiar physical environments, such a simulation may cost 
many times the cost of running the emulation brain itself.
However, humans today are routinely comfortable and moderately pro­
ductive interacting with video game environments that require vastly less 
computing power than human-speed brain emulations will require. Also, 
instead of sending very fine-grain low-level signals of very particular sights 
and sounds, it may become possible to send cheaper-to-compute higher-
level signals that em brains interpret as their having seen the lower-level 
signals. For example, instead of sending individual light pixels to the eye, 
W

appearances
100
which then translates that to lines and areas, one might just send those lines 
and areas to the appropriate emulated neurons.
Ems may prefer virtual reality environments that are expensive to com­
pute, relative to the cost of running the ems themselves. Even so, cheaply 
computed environments seem sufficient to functionally support the vast 
majority of em activities, in both work and leisure. On the job, there is a 
tradeoff regarding whether to pay more for a more realistic virtual environ­
ment that might add to worker productivity. When ems make this tradeoff 
well, they will not often pay a price for their virtual environments that much 
exceeds the cost of running their brains. Usually they pay far less.
Sometimes people imagine that a world of cheap virtual reality is a world 
without scarcity or constraints, where anyone can do anything they want. 
But even when it is cheap to compute virtual reality scenes and interactions, 
it need not be cheap to pay for the hardware, energy, and cooling to compute 
the brains that experience that virtual reality, or to pay for brain-housing 
real estate to ensure those brains are close enough to naturally interact with 
many other interesting brains. Thus ems living in a virtual reality must earn 
(or be given) enough to pay for it.
Ems who do physical labor need to perceive many aspects of the physical 
world relevant for their job. But ems doing office work, and those in most 
leisure activities, do not need to see the real physical world. As in advanced 
economies today, most ems have office jobs. And for office-job-ems, the 
virtual reality worlds and bodies that they inhabit could in principle be any­
thing that the human mind could understand, and that could be efficiently 
computed given available resources.
In principle each em could inhabit a completely different virtual reality. 
This seems to make it hard for us to infer much about the features of em 
virtual worlds. However, consider an analogy with clothes. Today, we have 
the wealth and technology to decorate our bodies with a vast range of shapes 
and materials. Yet the clothes we actually wear are far more limited and pre­
dictable. These predictable choices better support the usual functions that 
our clothes perform, such as comfort and displaying our current social roles, 
modes, and status.
Similarly, the many predictable functions that ems try to achieve in their 
virtual worlds can predictably constrain those worlds. For example, ems need 
to share virtual worlds if they want to interact with other ems. If they want 

comfort
101
to interact naturally with other ems via speech, facial expressions, touch, or 
paper-like visual screens, then their worlds must contain understandable 
analogues of these types of interactions.
If ems want the ability to easily begin and end such interactions with 
other ems, or to accept or reject interaction proposals, their worlds need 
to offer clear representations of interaction invitations. An invitation to a 
meeting might specify participants, observers, starting time, duration, virtual 
and physical locations, nominal speed, and maximum tolerable participant 
signal delays.
To manage the real resources needed to support virtual experiences, ems 
find it useful to have representations of such resources and their control in 
their virtual worlds. So virtual worlds likely have clear simple representa­
tions giving ems ways to see and control their monetary balances, security 
permissions, interaction histories, and future interaction schedules. In addi­
tion, ems want representations of their and others’  brain hardware location, 
type, speed, period, phase, and reliability. They also want to know the avail­
ability, price, speed, and security of communication connections. Finally, 
they want representations of options for changing these parameters, and of 
ways to initiate such changes.
While em virtual realities can in principle be almost anything, the 
simple assumption to make here is that in practice they are recognizably 
similar to our real world. Bodies, clothes, baskets, rooms, halls, and so 
on continue to serve similar psychological functions for ems as they do 
for us.
One plausible big difference in em virtual realities is that ems may make 
great use of the ability to ignore gravity while building structures and mov­
ing around in three dimensions. We today often fantasize about the freedom 
that such abilities could allow, and ems could use them to make many more 
people and places conveniently visible and accessible.
comfort
In addition to serving the above functions, virtual realities also please ems.
Most elements of virtual worlds are intended as background, there to 
support but not needlessly distract from the centers of attention. Such back­
grounds are mostly familiar, safe, and comfortable, with just enough novelty 

appearances
102
to not be distractingly boring or depressing. When serving as a background 
to an em’s main activities of work, socializing, or sleep, virtual realities need to 
not be overly distracting. But when virtual realities become a main focus of 
attention for bonding or entertainment, they can be extremely engrossing.
As the cost to compute a spectacular virtual reality can be small relative 
to the cost of running an em mind to appreciate it, and as a much larger 
em economy could afford to spend astronomical sums searching for pleas­
ing combinations, we should expect the quality of em virtual realities to be 
superlative. By the standards of today, widely consumed em music, archi­
tecture, decoration, scenery, texture, product design, story plot and dialogue, 
etc., are of very high quality. Also, ems living in a virtual reality need never 
experience hunger, disease, or pain, nor ever see, hear, feel, or taste anything 
ugly or disgusting. In addition, mind tweaks should allow the equivalent of 
spectacular mind-altering drugs with few problematic side effects such as 
dry mouth or the shakes.
In virtual reality, the faces, bodies, and voices of individual ems are 
whatever gets them to be treated well. So ems seem smart, beautiful, and 
trustworthy, and also dominant or submissive and with personality types 
appropriate to their desired roles. Ems tend to respect and trust each other 
more as a result.
Em virtual reality leisure environments may be so alluring, in fact, that 
their quality is limited on purpose so that non-retiree ems are consistently 
willing to leave leisure to return to work. For religious or related reasons 
some ems may even refuse to enter anything but Spartan virtual realities 
with low addiction potential.
Typical ems may be reluctant to enter virtual realities new to them, out of 
fear of addictive temptations. Ems who, even so, remain vulnerable to being 
seduced to spend most of their resources on virtual reality experiences are 
quickly selected out of the em economy. Those who remain have found some 
way to resist such temptations.
The main elements of our world usually not found in em worlds are 
those that are needlessly frightening or time-consuming, or that violate the 
abstractions we try to impose on our world. For example, long subjective 
travel times are avoided in the em world, closed virtual em rooms are usually 
entirely sound and signal proof, and unapproved outsiders are usually unable 
to accidentally overhear conversations.

shared spaces
103
Also, dust does usually not collect on surfaces, nor do materials wear or 
decay. But this need not imply everything looks “clean.” Cluttered spaces 
tend to cause and result from creativity, and cluttered offices often help 
workers to manage great detail (Vohs et al. 2013). Workers with cluttered 
offices often know where to find most everything in them, even if outsiders 
can make little sense of the apparent disorder. Yes, clutter often results from 
and leads to stress and disorganization, and so may usually be avoided. Even 
so, some em workers likely gain from and accept clutter, and clutter may also 
be used to signal membership in creative communities.
Today in cartoons and video games, we see that distinctions, such as between 
object types and the boundaries of motions, bodies, objects, and spaces, are 
often exaggerated in predictable directions, to make such distinctions more 
visible and salient (Thomas and Johnston 1981). For example, objects are often 
drawn with dark, sharp, easy-to-see borders. Appearances in em virtual realities 
may be similarly exaggerated, and look more cartoonish than does our world. 
For example, objects may be stretched in their direction of motion.
The more the em world focuses on how things look in virtual reality, the 
less that ems are willing to pay to make things look nice in physical reality. 
In addition, the em world in general focuses more on functionality relative 
to design and aesthetics. Thus in the physical world em buildings and other 
infrastructure tends to look functional, and perhaps harsh. But virtual reality 
is usually quite comfortable.
shared spaces
When ems share spaces, they compromise on how such spaces look and act.
In virtual reality, the commonly seen features of spaces where com­
munities meet are intrinsically scarce. That is, although each member of 
a community can be given control over some elements of this space, they 
cannot all be given full control over all elements. The scarcity is not so much 
in being able to see the space, as being able to control what others see in 
the space. While similar copies from the same em clan may economize by 
sharing only one body that others can see in the space, they still have to 
compromise regarding what that copy is seen to be doing.
Em virtual realities are usually designed to make physical violence impos­
sible. That is, it is simply not possible to use the actions supported by a virtual 

appearances
104
reality, such as swinging a fist, to damage an em against their will. Of course 
as computer security is expensive, ems might be harmed by non-virtual reality 
computer actions such as viruses or network attacks. But as it is easy to prevent 
damage from physical acts in virtual reality, such damage is in fact prevented.
Today, offices are often arranged in an open cubicle plan, mainly as a way 
to save on floor space. However, it seems that cubicle offices are more stress­
ful and hinder cognitive capacities as well as interactions with co-workers 
(Jahncke et al. 2011; Kim and de Dear 2013). As virtual space is very cheap, 
cubicles may be avoided, and em homes and offices may appear to be spa­
cious, private, and well appointed.
Today, many of our social habits are deeply integrated with standard Earth 
cycles such as days and years, standard Earth locations such as offices, shops, 
and parks, and standard human features such as age, gender, and profession. 
It’s reasonable to guess that such habits will continue with ems. So I expect 
em virtual worlds to typically show changes corresponding to day and year 
cycles, at rates matching the mind speeds of typical em residents. I also expect 
virtual locations to often look recognizably like offices, bedrooms, bars, 
parks, plazas, auditoriums, elevators, etc., to evoke the behaviors considered 
appropriate in such places. I expect the sound and sight of virtual bodies to 
often give easily recognized clues about age, status, gender, profession, and 
activity mode, to evoke expectations appropriate to such differences.
As with video games today, the design of em virtual worlds is subject to 
fewer physical constraints than is the design of non-virtual worlds. Like 
games today, they thus have more room for subtly encoding multiple mean­
ings, allusions, and references. Ems expect to find more such hidden mean­
ings in the virtual worlds around them.
Groups of ems meeting in virtual reality might find use for a social “undo” 
feature, allowing them to, for example, erase unwelcome social gaffes. At 
least they could do this if they periodically archived copies of their minds 
and meeting setting, and limited the signals they sent to others outside 
their group. When the undo feature is invoked, it specifies a particular past 
archived moment to be revived. Some group members might be allowed a 
limited memory of the undo, such as by writing a short message to their 
new selves. When the undo feature is triggered, all group members are then 
erased (or retired) and replaced by copies from that past archive moment, 
each of whom receives the short message composed by its erased version.

merging real and virtual
105
This undo action is typically more expensive the larger the group and the 
longer the subjective time period that was erased. So there need to be ­limits 
on who can invoke undo and how often. Outsiders who receive signals 
from group members during the meeting have to accept a risk that signal 
senders might be replaced by versions that don’t remember sending those 
signals. The enforcement of any rules requiring group members to forget 
what happened during the erased period probably requires central control 
of the hardware running member minds, and strong limits on signals sent 
to outsiders.
It is usually cheap to place one or more participant ems into a virtual real­
ity that mimics some special place or time, real or imagined. However, it is 
prohibitively expensive to populate that virtual reality with many characters 
who are as complex as those participants. After all, em brains are far more 
expensive to compute than are imaginary buildings or mountains. Thus 
apparently complex characters are usually only included if their behavior 
can be computed cheaply relative to the cost of emulating an ordinary brain, 
or if such characters only act rarely. For these rare interactions, actors might 
be paid to temporarily play relevant roles.
As a cat brain has about 1% as many neurons as a human brain, virtual 
cat characters are an affordable if non-trivial expense. Most pet brains also 
require the equivalent of a small fraction of a human brain to emulate. The 
ability to pause a pet while not interacting with it would make pets even 
cheaper. Thus emulated animals tend to be cheap unless one wants many of 
them, very complex ones, or to have them run for long times while one isn’t 
attending to them. Birds might fly far above, animals creep in the distance, 
or crowds mill about over there, but one could not often afford to interact 
with many complex creatures who have long complex histories between 
your interactions with them.
merging real and virtual
Ems will need to manage two kinds of spatial concepts: who is where and 
can see what in the virtual world, and also who is where and protected by 
what in the physical world. Rather than managing two separate discon­
nected representations for these two kinds of spaces, it may be tempting to 
integrate them into a common spatial representation.

appearances
106
For example, ems’ sense of virtual place and location on large scales 
might usually be taken directly from their physical world, with only mod­
est and local changes made for comfort or convenience. In physical reality, 
city volume would be divided between “buildings” that mainly house em 
brains in larger server clusters, and utilities such as cooling, transport, and 
structure that use the spaces between buildings. In virtual reality, most of 
the space really devoted to utilities, and some of the space really devoted to 
buildings, might all appear in virtual reality as common open spaces where 
ems could congregate and often see for long distances. The space in virtual 
reality devoted to buildings might appear as typically opaque private homes, 
offices, shops, gardens, etc.
At any one time ems might have current locations for their virtual bod­
ies, and different locations for their “souls” (i.e., brains), sitting inside their 
“home” buildings. While em (virtual) bodies can jump around very cheaply 
and quickly, there is a speed-dependent “leash” saying how far away an em 
body can comfortably move from its soul. Past that leash distance the body 
starts to have noticeably sluggish reactions because of signal delays. Faster 
ems have proportionally shorter leashes.
Souls could also move to new homes, but such moves cost a lot in money, 
time, and risk. In the Harry Potter stories, the horcrux spell made the wizard 
Voldemort invincible by spreading his soul across many hidden physical 
objects, all of which had to be found and destroyed to kill him. Similarly, an 
em couldn’t be hurt by an attack on its virtual body, but only via a physical 
attack at the location of its soul. As if protected by a horcrux spell, ems 
implemented redundantly at many different physical locations might only 
be hurt via physical access that could hurt them at all of those locations. This 
provides ems with extra security against many kinds of disaster.
The owner of a real physical building might be given control over how the 
surface of that building appears within virtual reality. This control might be 
subject to regulation. The building owner might divide the building surface 
among building residents, to let each of them control an entrance or facade 
visible to common areas. As with the TARDIS in “Doctor Who,” the virtual 
volume of homes, offices, etc., inside each virtual building could be much 
larger than the total volume of that building as seen from the outside.
Physical objects and ems in physical bodies that are really physically 
located in common areas may or may not appear in the standard virtual 

merging real and virtual
107
reality depiction of such common areas. For such physical objects to inte­
grate well with virtual objects, the scale of typical real items such as door­
ways and walkways needs to be matched to the mental speed of the typical 
residents. It also makes sense to set the typical size of virtual em bodies so as 
to produce a pleasing average density of such bodies, neither too dense nor 
too sparse. After all, ems do not want to feel too lonely nor too crowded in 
common spaces.
To let ems move smoothly between a real and a virtual body, physical 
doors of buildings could have an associated stock of rentable physical bod­
ies. When an em left a virtual space through a virtual door, its mind could 
be transferred into one of the bodies that then exits through a matching 
physical door. When entering a virtual space from a physical space, the pro­
cess could reverse.
To ems, virtual and physical reality may in practice be merged into an 
integrated whole.


109
 C H A P T E R  9
 Information
 views
 nteracting ems need not see exactly the same virtual environment.
 For example, each em might prefer to see a shared environment 
as decorated with their personal choices of colors or patterns. Ems 
might also prefer to overlay or augment their views of the virtual 
world with useful tags and statistics, or to see through virtual objects to see 
object components or to see what lies behind those objects. Virtual ems may 
have telescopic sight, allowing them to always vividly see anything any-
where they are allowed to view. However, overlays can impair perception, 
and so must be used carefully (  Sabelman and Lam 2015  ).
 To sensibly interact with others, ems usually want easy ways to quickly 
identify the aspects of their environments that they and their interaction 
partners see similarly. Some aspects of these worlds (such as where people 
are standing) are distinguished as shared by default, and interacting ems 
want standard ways to invite interaction partners to see some of their own 
less widely shared overlays and changes, and to accept such off ers from 
others.
 At both work and play, many kinds of tasks require ems to manage physi-
cal systems. Such management often requires physical bodies (both imme-
diate and extended) whose size, speed, shape, and materials suffi  ciently 
match those physical systems. It is also important for em minds to relate 
well to such bodies. But this seems feasible for a wide range of physical 
bodies. After all, people today interact with the world using a wide range 
of machines, such as vehicles and cranes, which they treat mentally as an 
extension of their bodies.
I

information
110
For ems with task-matched physical bodies, the world they see and hear 
needn’t be an exact faithful representation of their physical world. For exam­
ple, it might often be a sort of view like those in today’s head-up displays, 
overlaid with useful virtual annotations. But such overlays need to avoid 
overly obscuring important elements of that physical world.
Because the feasibility, cost, and security of em interactions often depends 
on the physical and organizational locations of their brains and the brains 
of others, em virtual worlds may continually show such information about 
interaction partners. For example, ems often want to know when another 
em’s speed, period, phase, or distance makes direct fast interaction infeasible. 
So ems will need to share somewhat-realistic concepts of their locations in 
space and time.
Ems with very different speeds or sizes might fit awkwardly into the same 
space, be that space physical or virtual. Fast ems whizzing past could be 
disorienting to slower ems, and large ems may block the movement or view 
of small ems. One solution is to have different standard virtual views of each 
common area, with each view matched to a different speed. Different speed 
views might also have different matching virtual gravities. Regulations 
might limit the size or speed behavior of ems within each speed-matched 
virtual view.
The ability to influence the appearance of commonly used virtual spaces 
is a scarce resource. To economize on this resource, ems might create views 
that hide many details. For example, in main views one might see only 
the most central actors, whereas in other views one might also see more 
peripheral actors. We will see in Chapter 14, Spurs section, that em work­
ers regularly spin off short-term “spur” copies who do a task for a few 
hours and then end or retire. If you talk to one of these copies, the original 
will not remember what you said later. So most ems prefer to talk to the 
original, and spurs may mainly talk to other spurs, unless spoken to by 
a non-spur. To support such interaction styles, spurs may not appear in 
default office views, and observers may have to ask to see views that also 
show spurs.
Similarly, slow retirees may sometimes watch and evaluate the behav­
ior of ordinary ems. The usual view of a place might not show such retiree 
observers, but alternative views could, letting retirees see and talk to each 

records
111
other. Similarly, many working age ems may share parenting oversight for 
the few young ems in training, watching them and voting on how to manage 
them. Ordinary views of children might not show such child minders, but 
alternate views might show them, and let these observers see and talk to 
each other.
Even non-retired non-spur ems who run at the same speed can still differ 
in status. So there may be views that hide lower status ems, and only show 
higher status ems. This could be similar to how today servants such as wait­
ers often try to seem invisible, and are often treated by those they serve as 
if invisible.
The more possible views that are commonly used, the harder it will be 
for typical ems to know how things look from others’ typical points of view.
records
Today, it is cheap to record and archive all the audio in one’s life, and it 
will soon be cheap to do this for high-resolution video as well. As ems will 
probably find it even cheaper to record things, it may be standard practice 
for them to record audio, video, smells, vibrations, and also many parameters 
about brains and bodies, including mood, arousal, etc. Ems might even add 
information from shallow mind-readings and periodic diary entries, or even 
provide periodic verbal commentaries about their lives.
All these records could give ems a pretty full access to their personal his­
tory. Such ems could see a recording of almost any moment in their history, 
and could perhaps even interview and mind-read an archived copy of them­
selves from close to any such moment. To make it easier to find things in 
these records, ems may get into the habit of sprinkling their conversations 
with keywords that help to identify situations.
Regarding non-virtual places, it is mechanically cheap to fill em-dense 
physical spaces with surveillance hardware such as cameras and micro­
phones, to clearly show who does and says what and when. A similar situ­
ation holds in common virtual spaces. Local authorities are likely to create 
such surveillance networks, and to archive their output. Such authorities 
could use this to create a “transparent society” where most social activities 
are, by default, visible to all (Brin 1998). However, authorities may choose 

information
112
to limit access to these views and recordings, and they may discourage other 
surveillance networks from operating in the same spaces.
Although it might be easy for individual ems to record what they can 
see, it might be harder to share such views widely and immediately. After 
all, such views reveal the location and supports of their sources, allowing 
such sources to be shut down by authorities. So unauthorized shared views 
must be shared with a substantial delay, only shared rarely in response to 
unusual situations, or redacted enough to obscure their sources. Virtual 
reality interactions visible only to a small number of participants could 
more plausibly be kept private among those participants, remaining invis­
ible to authorities.
Widespread cheap surveillance could greatly reduce the scope for black 
markets. There can be few visibly illegal transactions in very visible spaces 
when relevant laws are actively enforced.
In either virtual or physical realities, ems less fear being killed or destroyed 
by local disasters. Frequent backups mean that such disasters mainly only 
risk the loss of memories and skills gained since the last backup. Ems mainly 
fear the rare disasters where no recent backups were made, or where some 
greatly valued post-backup new information was acquired. Ems retain a 
strong fear regarding large-scale disasters that threaten all relevant backups 
or that threaten to take away an em’s livelihood. Death fears are discussed 
more in Chapter 11, Defining Death section.
An em might be fooled not only by deceptive inputs about its environ­
ment, but also by misleading information about its copy history. If many 
copies were made of an em and then only a few selected according to some 
criteria, then knowing about such selection criteria is valuable information 
to those selected ems. For example, imagine that someone created 10 000 
copies of an em, exposed each copy to different arguments in favor of com­
mitting some act of sabotage, and then allowed only the most persuaded 
copy to continue. This strategy might in effect persuade this em to commit 
the sabotage. However, if the em knew this fact about its copy history, that 
could convince this remaining copy to greatly reduce its willingness to com­
mit the sabotage.
Thus ems should be eager not only to discern misleading appearances 
about the world immediately around them, but also misleading claims about 
their copy history. In general, ems take care to keep reliable records.

fakery
113
fakery
Ems are also careful to avoid being fooled by false appearances.
Em virtual realities probably support authentication. That is, as long as 
their usual tools remain trustworthy, ems need not be mistaken about the 
identities of the places they visit, their interaction partners, or of other ems 
that they see or hear. Such others might refuse to reveal their identities, but 
they will usually be unable to credibly pretend to be someone that they are 
not. Of course a stolen em mind may reasonably distrust its usual tools of 
authentication, fearing that it is in a simulation that doesn’t follow the usual 
rules.
To support authentication, and help ems keep secrets, the standard hard­
ware processes for copying ems might have direct support for copying a 
secret code (technically, a “cryptographic private key”) shared between ori­
ginal and descendant copies, but to not copy that code to anywhere else. 
This support would make sure to not copy codes that are unique to the 
parent, and to generate and not share codes unique to the new copy and its 
descendants. Public codes that match these private codes might be a basis 
for em unique identifiers.
The possibility of em authentication need not imply a lack of em privacy. 
Ems and other agents in em spaces could choose to not reveal many things 
about themselves to observers. However, detailed surveillance data tracking 
the location of ems over time might reveal more information than an em 
wanted to reveal. In virtual reality ems could deal with this by just disappear­
ing at times. In physical reality, ems might sometimes choose to “mix” with 
the bodies of strangers. That is, an em might suggest to a nearby stranger 
that the two randomly swap physical bodies. If agreed, the two ems would 
attach themselves to each other for a long enough time to swap their minds, 
and randomly do so half of the time. Afterward, the two bodies would go 
their separate ways, half of the time with bodies having new minds.
Ems likely want ways to easily and reliably tell which of the things that 
they see or hear are actually ems, and which are cheaper algorithms that 
only mimic real ems. After all, an em may sometimes be tempted to substi­
tute a cheap automated “bot” program that mimics him or her during some 
interactions with other ems, so that he or she can attend to other things. 
Ems may prefer not to be given such a bot to interact with, in part because 

information
114
it might suggest their low status. As a result, during interactions ems may 
try to act in complex and subtle ways that bots could not effectively mimic, 
continually running their own bots that try to mimic themselves and their 
associates to detect fakes. That is, ems might always feel they are part of a 
Turing test. Such habits could raise the costs of interacting for distrustful 
ems, and raise the gains from trust.
Information about whether one is interacting with a bot might be 
obtained directly via direct brain access, or perhaps indirectly by requiring 
that a high price be paid to place what appears to be a full em in a particular 
role. Ems also typically want to see the voice tone, facial expressions, and 
gaze directions of themselves and their current interaction partners, and to 
know if they are seeing or showing direct and unfiltered versions of these 
tones and expressions.
Such knowledge helps ems learn things about the deeper mental states 
of their interaction partners, and the inferences other ems are making about 
them. Of course without assurances that they are seeing other ems unfil­
tered, ems may expect such things to often be cheaply faked, and so may 
expect to draw few useful conclusions from what they see.
The responsibility for defining and computing elements of virtual realities 
might reasonably be divided between larger utilities that compute elements 
useful to those in large groups, and smaller utilities who compute elements 
useful mainly to individuals or small groups. For example, a city-based utility 
might compute shared aspects of city plazas, fountains, and the surrounding 
sky, while building owners might compute elements of building facades and 
internal shared spaces. The owner of a meeting room might compute the 
appearance of that room, while each individual in the room might compute 
the appearance of his or her personal skin, clothes, or hair.
While this division of labor may align responsibilities well, it could have 
the problem of revealing information to third parties about who is looking 
at what when. To avoid such revelations, shy ems may just do without the 
information, computing these appearances of their virtual world privately 
from stable public specifications, or making up their own substitute appear­
ances. Alternatively, supporting infrastructure might be built so as to assure 
users that such leaks are rare and difficult.
Overall, ems try hard not to be fooled by appearances.

simulations
115
simulations
An ability to create convincing virtual experiences makes it harder for ems 
to draw inferences about the real world from their experiences. Experiences 
that seem to come from interactions with a larger physical or shared virtual 
world could instead come from a local sim mimicking that world. Ems must 
continually wonder if they have been unknowingly placed in such a sim, 
perhaps to test their loyalties or to extract secrets. (In fact, we each cannot 
be entirely sure today that we are not in such a future sim (Hanson 2001).) 
The more common are such sims, the less certain ems can be of conclusions 
they draw from what they see.
If an em were in a sim to test their loyalties or abilities, it might be a sim 
that they themselves had agreed in the past to allow to be created. Such an 
em wouldn’t know when such a sim might happen, or what it would be like, 
just that it could happen almost any time. An em would probably want to 
cooperate with such sims. In contrast, the em may want to sabotage a sim 
that was designed to extract a secret, as this is less likely to be a sim to which 
the em had agreed.
Not only might ems be placed into sims where everything they see and 
hear is artificial, ems might also be placed into partial sims, where only 
some of the things they see or hear are artificial. In a partial sim, an em 
might see added fake people and objects beyond what they otherwise would 
have seen, or they might fail to see people and objects “edited out” of their 
view. An em might notice such added or missing items via their inconsistent 
interactions with other things. Automated tools might help to notice such 
inconsistencies, but such tools might be compromised by the same processes 
that compromise their basic sight and sound inputs.
There are many different reasons why an em or its associates might want 
to put that em into a full or partial sim, including entertaining the em 
in the sim or outsiders observing the sim, testing loyalty or ability, test­
ing causes for holding beliefs, and testing credit for innovations and other 
accomplishments. For the purpose of gaining information, it is often more 
cost-effective to try to achieve several such purposes at once within a set 
of related sims. In technical terms, this is a “fractional factorial experiment 
design” (Montgomery 2008).

information
116
For example, a sim in which one em tries to thwart spies from stealing 
an innovation might simultaneously be entertaining for the em involved, 
test his or her loyalties, and test how much credit the innovation deserves. 
Similarly, it might be more efficient to include several related ems in the 
same sim, with different reasons for including each of them.
Thus if the various parties interested in making sims for a group of ems 
can agree on a common sim administrator, they might use that administra­
tor to create a whole system of related sims. In this case, an em who sus­
pected they were in a sim should not search for the purpose of its sim or for 
the focal em; most likely the sim has many purposes and focuses. This makes 
it harder for ems to manipulate sims to provide favorable impressions. Ems 
might well find it in their interest to just continue with their usual behavior 
as if they were not in a sim, which increases the validity of conclusions 
observers can draw.
A sim administrator might want to abort a sim if too many of its par­
ticipants suspected too strongly that they were in a sim. To entice ems to 
reveal such suspicions, administrators might offer financial incentives. For 
example, each em might always be offered a private subsidized betting mar­
ket on the chance that they are currently in a sim (Hanson 2003). If the em 
didn’t believe the current offered market odds, it would expect to profit by 
changing those odds to its current belief. To encourage honesty, bets should 
pay in non-sim assets. That is, if this is not a sim, bets pay off in assets useful 
in this world, but if this is a sim, bets pay off in assets valid in the real world 
outside of the sim. The cost to subsidize such markets is added to the cost 
of creating sims.
An em who thought that it was in an illicit sim might want to sabotage 
that sim. But to sabotage a sim, an em must first notice the existence of 
the sim. One way to try to notice sims is to cultivate the habit of interact­
ing often with trusted associates via previously coordinated private codes, 
opaquely encoded in each em’s brain state. For example, about once an hour 
an em might hear a code word from a particular friend, a word that followed 
from the code word they had given that friend an hour before. The lack of 
a correct response suggests that one is in a sim. A related strategy might be 
to cultivate the habit of often interacting with particular physical systems 
whose computational complexity is very expensive to mimic, and which 
opaque parts of your brain can distinguish from cheap mimics.

simulations
117
Another approach to noticing sims is to watch for simulation errors, that 
is, ways that a simulation deviates from a realistic world. But if sim creators 
saw that a participant em had noticed an error, they could just stop and 
reverse the simulation back to a time before the error appeared, restart the 
simulation at that point, and try to prevent the error.
There might seem to be little point in noticing sim errors that can be 
erased in this way, but in fact the cost of such retrying raises the cost of 
running such a sim. The longer that an em could last before giving off a 
visible indication of knowing they are in a simulation, the more expensive 
they could make this revision process for the simulators. The usual goal in 
security, after all, is to raise the cost of security breaches, not to make them 
impossible.
As the loyalty and reliability of an em is especially important in unusual 
crisis situations, simulations designed to test loyalties disproportionately 
portray such situations. Thus an em who finds itself in what seems to be 
an unusual crisis should suspect that it is in a simulation designed to test 
its loyalty and ability. This would tend to make emulations act more loyally 
and reliably in real crisis situations, such as revolution or disasters. Such 
sim-based crisis tests might help to maintain order and organization during 
actual crises, reducing their severity.
Compared with us today, ems are more “battle-tested,” having lived 
through many unusual situations, each treated as if it was very real.


119
C H A P T E R  10
Existence
copying
functioning em is the result of information representing an em 
mental state being placed in compatible signal-processing hard­
ware. When this hardware “runs,” it repeatedly calculates the next 
mental state by combining the previous mental state with inputs 
from outside systems, and then sends resulting signals to outside systems. 
In this situation, an em can be said to experience this succession of mental 
states, while interacting with outside systems. As em hardware and sup­
porting resources are not free, ems are not free; someone must pay to create 
an em.
When an em is copied, the em mental state sitting in compatible hard­
ware is first read out as bits, and then those bits are copied, transmitted, and 
read into new compatible hardware. Then at the new hardware those bits are 
converted into the exact same em mental state, now ready to run on this new 
hardware. Immediately after this copy action, the evolution of the mental 
states in the two different hardware systems would be exactly the same, if it 
were not for errors and differences in environmental inputs, and differences 
in random fluctuations within a fault-prone emulation process.
Just as ems are not free but costly, copies are also not free but costly. Typi­
cally, an em with an established role in the em world is asked if they want to 
approve the creation of a new copy, who would have a new life with a new 
role in that world. Before agreeing to create this new life, the original could 
ask about the new em’s intended job, location, friends, etc. On occasion, 
offers for new life roles might be made to archived copies. That is, ems might 
agree to allow the storage of archive copies, who can then be awoken later 
A

existence
120
to consider new life offers. If the revived copy rejected the offer, it might be 
retired or ended, as previously agreed.
To actually make a copy, an em may invoke a special viewing mode, 
wherein the em specifies or approves a description of the set of em roles 
that would result from this copying act. When an em initiates a copy event, 
it should be ready and willing to take on any of the roles of the resulting 
copies. Immediately after the copy event, each em copy is informed of its 
assigned role. Typically one of the ems is assigned to continue its previous 
role, while other ems are assigned to take on new roles.
For the very common act of creating a simple spur copy, an em need only 
indicate a task and a resource budget. A single new spur copy is then created 
and told that its role is to attempt this task within this assigned budget. A 
matching viewing mode might allow the spur to report back to its original 
after it has succeeded or failed at its task.
When the original em has a strict veto on the copy process, so that copies 
don’t happen without the consent of the original, ems would feel a much 
stronger ownership of their existence than do humans today. In this case, 
ems likely feel less justified in complaining about features of their situation 
that were easy to anticipate when they agreed to make a copy of themselves. 
Ems may also feel more obliged to be grateful to those who enabled their 
existence, and to make good on the promises, both explicit and implicit, that 
they made to such enablers. Ems can more see themselves as justifying and 
paying for their existence, via the benefits that others expected to gain by 
creating and hiring them.
The power to selectively create and delete copies of an em gives one the 
power to persuade that em of many things. After all, with such a power 
one could create thousands of copies of this em, try a different approach to 
persuading each one, and then retain the copy who is most persuaded. This 
approach does have substantial costs, and it can’t persuade someone of a 
claim that they won’t accept no matter what the method of persuasion.
Because of this power of selectivity, we expect ems to be careful about 
to whom they grant the power to create and delete copies, and to want to 
know what related copies have been created or deleted and why. An em who 
does not know their copy context should be cautious about changing beliefs 
others might want to influence. Ems must accept that organizations granted 

rights
121
flexible discretion on creating and deleting copies will thereby gain great 
persuasive powers over them.
rights
Current and past legal systems offer a wide range of possible models for how 
em law might treat the creation of em copies.
At one extreme, new em copies might be fully owned slaves, with their 
owners free to torture or terminate them, and free to make more copies 
that they fully own. Such slave ems might be owned by the firm who first 
scanned them, by the original human from which they were scanned, or by 
other parties to whom slaves were sold. Moving away from this extreme, 
there could be limits on the torture of slaves. Enslaved ems may also have 
limited rights to spend a certain fraction of their time in leisure of a certain 
quality, or to veto making more copies of themselves.
At another extreme, new em copies might be completely free to choose 
all of their activities, including the making of copies of themselves. Moving 
away from this extreme, em creators could be required to endow the ems 
they create with sufficient wealth to live at some minimum duration, speed, 
and quality of life. Treating copied ems as if they were adult human des­
cendants would arguably be a similar practice.
In between these extremes, ems could be endowed with intermediate 
levels of rights and wealth. For example, an em might own itself, but be 
unable to veto the creation of copies of itself. An em might or might not 
have the right to end itself. An em might own itself but be endowed with 
debt to repay its creation, and be subject to repossession and erasure if it 
cannot make debt payments.
An em might be incorporated like a firm, and own only some of his or 
her “stock.” Voting and non-voting stock might even be distinguished. For 
example, an em holding a majority of his or her voting stock but a minority 
of the total stock still controls personal actions, but controls only a minority 
share of personal profits.
Note that rules specifying minimum wages or minimum fractions of leis­
ure time may have perverse effects on the quality of work and leisure experi­
ences. It is hard to create rules specifying how pleasant or enjoyable are work 

existence
122
and leisure activities. Because of this, when an employer chooses work and 
leisure conditions to satisfy minimum wage or leisure time mandates, they 
are likely to compensate by skimping on expenditures that result in higher 
quality work and leisure experiences. In the absence of such constraints, 
employers instead tend to improve worker experiences whenever workers 
value such improvements more than their cost. Similar arguments apply to 
minimum wage rules today.
The “brain,” or mind hardware, of a new em copy must be located some­
where, and so a key question is the contractual relation between a free em and 
those who build and maintain its hardware, and who supply this hardware 
with energy, cooling, communication, and real estate. Sometimes this brain 
will be a separate and mobile physical object, free to move to obtain space, 
energy, etc., from competing suppliers. More often, however, brain hardware 
will be a physically inseparable part of a larger computing system, as are 
single computers or processes today within large computer data centers.
For ems who are part of large copy clans in which they place great trust, 
the details of contracts with their hardware hosts matter less, as the clan 
handles these contractual details. But for other ems, current contracts for 
cloud computing services seem to offer attractive models. An em might 
be endowed with a cloud-computing contract giving it a right to run at 
a particular speed, reliability, rough spatial location, and communication 
bandwidth.
Such an em is also likely endowed with wealth sufficient to pay for this 
cloud contract for a short period, and the right to move to another service at 
will. If the em moved, it might have the right to insist that its original files 
be erased. Perhaps if the em failed to pay its contracted fee, the cloud service 
might have the right to erase that em, or perhaps even to sell it to recover 
overdue payments.
many ems
The rest of the analysis in this book is largely independent of which of the 
above legal environments becomes more common. What mainly matters for 
other chapters is that many ems are created. Consider the situation where a 
not-overly unpleasant job is available, where the value of the work done is 
substantially higher than the full hardware costs to create an em to do this 

many ems
123
job, even when this em spends at least one-half of his or her time in leisure. 
Assume further that there are many ems for whom this cost is this low. In 
this situation, I assume that a productive em is usually created, to take on 
this job.
This many-ems outcome could result from profit-driven slave owners, 
from profit-driven debt lenders, from the existence of a few very productive 
and eager-to-copy ems, or from laws requiring high birth wealth endow­
ments but without strong intrusive enforcement to detect and discourage 
illegal copies. Let us now consider each of these options in turn.
A many-ems outcome could result from eager-to-copy ems if there are a 
few flexible and productive ems who consistently go nearly as far as possible 
to fund new copies of themselves, to take new job opportunities as they 
arise. Such eager ems are willing to impoverish themselves, and even to 
end themselves, to fund new copies. These are “evolutionarily selfish” ems. 
Of course making copies need not be their primary conscious motivation. 
For example, their conscious motivation could be instead to be as useful as 
possible to similar copies.
A many-ems outcome via eager-to-copy ems is compatible with rules 
requiring large wealth endowments on creation, if such ems are free to 
bequest their wealth to new copies when they end or retire. It can also work 
with rules requiring high wages, if such ems are also allowed to volunteer for 
free during their “leisure” time on productive projects.
A handful of such eager flexible ems could fill an entire em economy of 
jobs, even if no other ems were willing or allowed to fill such jobs. Even if 
these eager ems were banned from most legal jurisdictions, the few juris­
dictions that allowed them might quickly outgrow and dominate the rest. 
Eager-to-reproduce humans are often found today in farmer-like religious 
communities such as the Amish or Mormons. As I personally know a few 
people who seem productive and eager to copy, I estimate that as long as a 
few productive jurisdictions support competitive ems, then enough such 
productive eager ems could be found to produce a many-ems outcome. Also, 
even if eagerness to copy is rare at first, it is a feature that is selected for in an 
em world because of its competitive advantage.
Laws might require high em wages, but such laws could strongly tempt 
black market copying. The larger the difference between a high market price 
to rent em labor that satisfies official regulations, and a low total hardware 

existence
124
cost to rent em hardware, then the more eagerly some would try to make 
black market copies.
For example, an ambitious businesswoman might be willing to create 
in secret a thousand copies of herself, to achieve much lower labor costs in 
developing and building her new product. Her copies might accept end­
ing or retiring to a slow life once the product is completed. When there 
are very different legal and illegal market prices, preventing black market 
trading requires extensive and thorough monitoring and strong punish­
ments. Preventing black market jobs when legal em wages are far above 
total em hardware costs requires much stronger enforcement than would 
be required today to prevent illegal drug use (which we do not now do). 
After all, to lower her main costs by a factor of 10 or more, an ambitious 
businesswoman might be willing to go quite far to create and hide a secret 
labor force.
A big difference between legal and illegal wages also encourages slav­
ery. Historically slavery has offered low profits when wages were near sub­
sistence levels, but higher profits when wages were higher (Domar 1970). 
Similarly, enslaving ems becomes much more tempting when em wages are 
well above subsistence levels.
The main em scenarios in which there are not many ems are scenarios 
with well-enforced laws that either impose strict quotas on the total number 
and speed of ems, or that in effect require very high wages, or equivalently, 
that require high ratios of leisure time to productive work time. Such laws 
need to be global, and strongly and thoroughly enforced via intrusive moni­
toring and strong reliable punishments of violators. Such alternate scenarios 
are discussed briefly in Chapter 28, Alternatives section.
For most of this book, however, we assume many ems.
surveillance
To enforce laws that impose quotas on the number and speed of ems, one 
needs strong controls on computing hardware capable of running em brains. 
And this requires strong abilities to observe activities. Such surveillance abil­
ities might also be used to enforce rules on mind theft, intellectual property, 
and uncontrolled research in artificial intelligence. But how exactly could 
such hardware controls work?

surveillance
125
One approach is to try to ensure that authorities can cheaply see inside 
all computers capable of running em brains, including seeing through any 
encrypted computation, to severely punish owners who were found to be 
running ems without authorization. If this requires direct inspection of 
physical hardware, that is likely to be expensive. However, if authorities 
know the physical configuration of hardware, have appropriate operating 
system access privileges, and sufficient suppressing of encrypted computa­
tion, they might be able to do required inspections cheaply from a distance.
In this approach it is very important to prevent the existence of hardware 
that lies about its configuration. Perhaps large bounties could be offered to 
anyone who revealed the existence of such hardware, and who paid for the 
costs of an inspection to prove a violation.
Instead of direct inspection of all hardware, a more focused approach is 
to ensure that authorities can see all factories capable of creating computers 
that can run ems, and can punish factory owners severely when they are 
found to produce em-capable computers without authorization. If it was 
too hard to punish factory owners, one might instead punish those who 
own the land used, or who supply power or cooling. This approach might be 
sufficient to enforce limits on population, but perhaps not rules on wages, 
mind theft, intellectual property, or software safety.
Dark factories and computers, hidden from the view of authorities, would 
undermine both these enforcement approaches. Such factories and com­
puters could be hidden under the ground or sea. Small em installations 
could likely hide in more types of environments than can small groups of 
humans today. To discourage such hidden installations, detailed monitoring 
might be required not only of the Earth’s surface, but perhaps also hundreds 
of meters beneath that surface.
The economic value of such hidden hardware might be substantially 
diminished by time delays and bottlenecks in communication with em cit­
ies, where most valuable em activity takes place. Hidden computers would 
thus focus on supplying services where such delays and bottlenecks detract 
less from the value produced by their illicit em workers.
Authorities might try to control computing hardware by controlling the 
communication channels that such hardware uses to gain value. For exam­
ple, authorities might try to ensure that they know the location and function 
of all high-bandwidth nodes in a communication network. This approach 

existence
126
might be evaded, however, by illicit direct laser links between distant phys­
ical locations, or by physical landlines deep underground. Authorities might 
also try to inspect all communication traffic, and prevent unauthorized 
encrypted communication.
Another approach is to control the energy and cooling that computers 
need. However knowing the energy usage doesn’t necessarily say how much 
computing is going on. For example, with reversible computers one could 
mimic the energy and cooling of a single computing unit via four computing 
units that run at one-half speed, and thereby produce twice the comput­
ing power of a single unit. One might detect such arrangements via the 
additional volume and structural support that these added computing units 
require.
Evasion of rules limiting the creation of ems might perhaps also be 
accomplished via opaque software that appears to serve other functions, but 
actually emulates minds. The complexity of this software might make it hard 
to detect this. One might try to notice that the software is inefficient at its 
stated purpose, but this might be hard. For example, software to monitor for 
rare events or search for rare configurations might go a long time without 
finding anything useful, even if it is in fact very efficient.
The extreme measures required to successfully enforce laws limiting em 
numbers and speeds seem to confirm that the simpler assumption to make 
for the purpose of this book is that such laws either do not exist, or are not 
strongly enforced. So as discussed in this chapter, in the Many Ems section, 
this book assumes a many-ems outcome.

127
C H A P T E R  11
Farewells
fragility
m minds age with experience, becoming less flexible and thus less 
able to adapt to new skills and environments. Because of this, old 
ems eventually become substantially less productive than young 
competitors, and need to retire. Here is why.
Imagine that you were asked to modify an ordinary (i.e., stock) car into a 
truck to haul rocks. If after that you were asked to create a racecar, you would 
probably prefer to start from another stock car, rather than the stock car that 
you had turned into a truck. Similarly, species of beetles that have adapted 
to a varied and oft changing environment have simpler designs than beetles 
adapted to more stable environments. These simpler beetles are more likely 
to successfully invade and adapt to new environments that become avail­
able, relative to beetles that have adapted to specific stable environments 
(Fridley and Sax 2014).
A similar effect causes large software systems to “rot” with time. As soft­
ware that was designed to match one set of tasks, tools, and situations is 
slowly changed to deal with a steady stream of new tasks, tools, and situ­
ations, such software becomes more complex, fragile, and more difficult to 
usefully change (Lehman and Belady 1985). Eventually it is better to start 
over and write whole new subsystems, and sometimes whole new systems, 
from scratch.
Similarly, while more complex and higher quality business products tend 
to become better adapted to circumstances, and to sell for higher prices, 
simpler cheaper products tend to have more descendants in new products, 
at least for products sold to firms (Christensen 1997; Thompson 2013). In 
E

farewells
128
multi-cellular animals, flexible generic stem cells create other more varied 
cells that are better adapted to particular body tasks. Yet new organisms 
descend mostly from generic stem cells, which have far more descendant 
cells in the long run.
All of these examples suggest that as systems become better adapted in 
detail to particular situations, they become more fragile and less able to 
adapt in detail to very different situations.
Human brains tend to have slower responses as they age, in part because 
brain hardware degrades (Lindenberger 2014), and in part because such 
brains need to sort through a larger experience base (Ramscar et al. 2014). 
Human brains also tend to start out malleable, and able to learn quickly, even 
though they are poor at most specific tasks. While human minds become 
better adapted to specific tasks as they age, they become less flexible and less 
able to rapidly learn new very different skills. That is, while the young tend 
to have more “fluid intelligence,” the old have more “crystallized intelligence” 
(Horn and Cattell 1967). For example, whereas old people know more words, 
young people can more easily learn new languages. Older people often get 
“set in their ways.”
Some of this aging of human brains probably results from developmen­
tal programming and biological aging. These sources of mental aging need 
not apply to emulations. The emulated cells need not age, and develop­
mental programming might be turned off. However, some of human brain 
aging is also plausibly intrinsic to human mind design (Magalhaes and 
Sandberg 2005).
For example, even if 90% of human mental aging comes from develop­
mental programming and biological aging, that could still leave 10% com­
ing from a general tendency of complex adapting systems to become more 
fragile as they continue to adapt to new circumstances. That is, it is plausible 
to think that at least some of the general tendency of humans to become 
inflexible with age is a general consequence of their adaptation to specific 
circumstances, rather than a result of cell degradation or economic incen­
tives to stick with what you know.
Thus even em minds are likely to age with subjective experience, becoming 
less easily adapted to particular tasks, and eventually becoming too fragile to 
compete well in changing environments with more flexible younger minds. 
For example, if the rate of subjective aging for ems is only 10% of that of 

fragility
129
humans today, that would plausibly move the age of peak work productiv­
ity from roughly 50 to 500 subjective years. Eventually old workers would 
become unable to compete well with young workers.
As with software rot, with effort it may be possible to slow this aging 
process, but it is only rarely cost-effective to halt or reverse such aging. For 
most jobs, after a subjective career of somewhere between about one-half 
to several centuries, an emulation’s mental inflexibility typically reduces 
its work productivity enough to make it cost-effective to replace it with a 
younger worker.
If the rate of mental aging resulting from leisure experience is similar 
to that resulting from work experience, then leisure has major costs to ems 
beyond the cost to run minds during leisure. Leisure experience ages ems, 
reducing their total possible career work experience. However, if some 
kinds of work or leisure experiences are “refreshing,” in the sense of caus­
ing a reduction in total aging, ems would seek to substitute such refreshing 
experiences for others when possible.
When I want to use a particular duration in this book for an em’s work 
career, I’ll estimate a subjective useful career of one century. This is for a 
productive duration assuming that basic job methods do not change, even as 
many minor aspects of work circumstances such as customers and locations 
do change. However, it should be easy to see how to adjust calculations 
based on my one-century estimate to other possible duration values.
The main exceptions are likely to be for very stable job contexts. If a job 
environment changes very little, very old minds might remain the best 
at them. Tools that have become fragile but are hard to replace, perhaps 
because standards require them, may also tend to be managed by fragile but 
hard to replace ems.
For example, computer code that does numerical linear algebra, such as 
matrix inversion, has remained relatively stable for many decades, because 
little has changed in the need for such tasks or how numbers are encoded 
in computers. If this situation continues, then ems specialized in managing 
such code may be able to sustain especially long subjective work lives.
If complex software tools are saved for rare use in distant futures, ems 
who know how to use those tools well may be archived along with such 
tools, to be revived when these tools are needed. If simple retirement is 
unreliable because assets might be stolen or because interest rates might fall 

farewells
130
to very low levels, then knowing best how to use an important but rarely 
used complex tool might be one of the most secure routes for an em to have 
a very long, if intermittent, existence.
While an em economy has relatively little direct use for subjectively very-
young em minds, such young minds might be a key source of variation to 
generate new minds to train for new kinds of jobs that appear in the econ­
omy. Such young minds might come from scans of young ordinary humans, 
or the em world may learn to emulate the growth of very young brains and 
thus to emulate an entire childhood from an early age. Training young em 
minds from a very early age for particular careers might boost their later peak 
productivity in those careers.
The typical subjective ages of ems are discussed in more detail in Chap­
ter 17, Peak Age section. But the key point to remember is that ems age with 
experience, and then must retire.
retirement
With experience, ems become better adapted to their jobs. Such jobs, how­
ever, may no longer be needed, or may change so much that fragile old 
minds cannot adapt well to such large job changes. Ems who are no longer 
wanted or needed at work might choose to retire, at least if such ems could 
afford this, and had sufficient self-ownership.
The cost of retiring an em to run indefinitely at a slow speed could be small 
relative to the value that an em produces in just a few days of work. If we 
assume constant interest rates close to constant economic growth rates, then 
a simple calculation shows that the total cost to run an em indefinitely is 
roughly the economic doubling time multiplied by the run-cost per unit time.
For example, as a milli-em experiences roughly an hour in 1 objective 
month, then in an economy that doubles every objective month the cost of 
retiring indefinitely at a milli-em speed is the cost to run an em for about 
1 subjective hour. Alternatively, for a retirement speed 10 times slower, and 
an economic doubling time of 10 days, the cost to retire falls to the cost to 
run an em for 2 subjective minutes. It only costs 1 subjective second of high 
speed experience to retire indefinitely at micro-em speeds. Thus indefinite 
retirement can be quite cheap, even for ems who work for only a short time 
before retiring.

retirement
131
Note, however, that these calculations ignore the cost of moving to a 
new retirement location, and they depend on interest rates remaining high. 
When growth and interest rates fall greatly, as it seems they must do eventu­
ally, then indefinite retirement becomes a lot more expensive.
It is not obvious what fraction of no-longer-productive ems retire, rather 
than end their lives. While retirement might often be a cheap option, that 
small expense of retirement might still seem larger compared with the bene­
fit it provides, depending on the attitudes of typical ems toward death when 
many very similar copies remain alive.
Ems with more than minimal retirement budgets could use their added 
funds to pay for faster than minimum retirement speeds. Also, a pair of slow 
retirees who are close copies of one another might choose to go “double or 
nothing,” and randomly pick one of them to run at over twice the speed, 
while erasing the other one. (We consider the possibility of merging retired 
minds more in Chapter 28, Alternatives section.)
In addition, retirees who can afford to run much faster than base speed 
might try a “sleeping beauty” strategy. They would delay their retirement 
through several growth doublings, to increase their post-delay speed by a 
similar number of doublings. Ems confident enough about the intermediate-
term stability of the em civilization might use this strategy to increase their 
total expected lifespan before a revolution or war might end it. This approach 
should also be tempting to ems eager for the higher status of a faster speed 
retirement. The start of retirement is an especially good time to try this strat­
egy, as a delay then also saves on costs to move to a retirement location.
Such a sleeping beauty strategy is also available to non-retirees. That is, 
working ems might stop working earlier than necessary, archive a copy, invest 
the rest, and then wake up later to enjoy a faster life. Ems who do this risk their 
job skills no longer being as relevant when they try to return to work. While 
some ems would try this strategy, ems who remain active in the em economy 
tend to be those who reject it. In this sense the em world of work selects 
against sleeping beauty strategies, even if the world of retirement selects for it.
Retirement can be more attractive when the retired have useful respected 
roles to play in society. Retired ems might be part of important rituals asso­
ciated with the copying, training, and retirement of other ems. Retired ems 
are also good for unspecialized everyman roles, such as juror or voter, if they 
aren’t running too slowly to sufficiently understand the current society. Very 

farewells
132
slow ems could more easily take a long-term view, which could make them 
useful in managing long-term investments.
Retirees might also serve as “wise watchers,” a role that ancestors were 
said to serve in ancient societies. Even if retirees are much slower than most 
workers, they are also far more numerous, and so might randomly audit 
workers to report on if they are nice, mean, cooperative, honest, stylish, etc. 
Retirees who are closely related to workers might be more trusted to pre­
serve privacy, and be better motivated to evaluate them well and honestly.
When there is detailed regular contact between retirees and others, those 
others could check that retirement communities actually provide the run­
time and amenities that they promised to retirees. Otherwise, retirement 
communities may be tempted to shave expenses by cutting services. Retirees 
who participate in copying and ending rituals could also ensure that import­
ant social norms are not violated in the copying and ending processes.
ghosts
Slower ems are more vulnerable to instabilities in the em civilization, and in 
any descendant civilizations. For example, if typical retired ems run at ordin­
ary human speed and typical work ems are kilo-ems, then having retirees 
live out a safe subjective decade of retirement requires that their civilization 
be stable over 10 000 years of subjective activity in typical workers. Slower 
milli-em retirees need a civilization stable over 10 million years of the sub­
jective activity of typical workers. And micro-em retirees need stability over 
10 billion years of typical worker subjective activity. Ensuring such levels of 
stability seems quite a challenge.
If civilization instability is the main risk to a normal lifespan for humans, 
and also to an indefinite retired life for ems, then humans and retired ems 
acquire a strong shared interest in promoting stability and preventing “exis­
tential” risk to the em civilization. The lower status of humans and em retir­
ees, however, makes that promotion harder. Some ems might try to survive 
past the local instabilities of an em civilization by sending copies to distant 
locations, perhaps even beyond Earth into space. But most humans and slow 
ems may not be able to afford that.
Our basic concept of “death” is binary, so that one is either dead or not. But 
we often metaphorically extend this concept to a continuum. For example, 

ghosts
133
people who have more strength, energy, passion, and awareness are said to be 
“more alive,” and those who have more power, prestige, influence, or wealth 
are also said to be “more” in many ways, including more central and alive. 
As people who are asleep have less of all of these things, sleep is often seen 
as a partial death.
We have long had a related mythical concept of “ghost,” which we also 
sometimes make into a continuum of ghostliness. A ghost was once human, 
but then died, and now is an active agent with death-related features. So 
ghosts tend to be cold, sick, slow, in low mood, and have a weak influence 
on the physical world. They are typically distracted, unaware of, and disin­
terested in humans. Ghosts are anti-social, avoid groups of more than a few 
humans, don’t seem to collect into ghost gangs or ghost cities, and don’t use 
tools or weapons. They are reluctant to move away from their old haunts. 
Ghosts are heard more than seen, rarely speak words, and are seen more in 
unusual viewing modes such as night, shadows, and mirrors (Fyfe 2011).
Slow em retirees share many features with people we see as “less alive,” 
including ghosts. Not only are they literally closer subjectively to dying 
because of civilization instability, their minds are also more inflexible and 
stuck in their ways. Compared with faster working ems, slow retirees have 
less awareness, wealth, status, and influence, and they are slower to respond 
to events, including via speaking words or coordinating with others. As dis­
cussed in the previous section, retirees may often watch and judge working 
ems, and as discussed in Chapter 9, Views section, when in such roles, they 
may be visible only in special views.
Thus ems may come to see slower ems as ghostly, and the more ghostly 
the slower they are. Such ghosts are real, and with trouble one can talk to 
them, but they aren’t very useful as allies, they get less moral weight, and one 
can usually ignore them without much cost. Because ems must pay for faster 
speeds, for ems being more alive is more directly related to having more 
money to spend.
“Beneath” each em is an underworld abyss, with deeper layers holding 
slower, more ghostly, ems. As we calculated in Chapter 6, Speeds section, 
beneath the most “alive” top cheap speed ems lies an underworld at least 
a factor of a trillion deep, and that factor may be a billion trillion. An em 
at the top for whom things go badly has a very long slide before reaching 
“bottom,” from which the only lower rung is being erased.

farewells
134
ways to end
So just how averse are ems to “death”?
For humans today, death is a strong psychological symbol and force. For 
example, indirectly reminding people of their eventual death induces them 
to more strongly favor charismatic leaders and the members, norms, and 
beliefs of their group. These effects are especially strong when people feel 
uncertain or low in status (Navarrete et al. 2004; Martin and van den Bos 
2014; Solomon et al. 2015). Clearly, many of our feelings toward death are 
encoded quite deeply in our psyches.
Human aversion to death has many causes, but surely a big one is that 
growing productive humans takes years. For us, death can be a very expen­
sive loss; we often most mourn the deaths of young adults, in whom we have 
invested the most yet gained the least. To reduce such losses, humans evolved 
a strong personal aversion to death, and strong social norms against killing. 
The main exceptions have been when large social gains might compensate 
death losses, as when killing a murderer, or when the losses from death may 
seem small, as for those likely to die anyway and in times of famine when 
not all can survive.
The world of ems fundamentally changes this situation, by drastically 
reducing many costs of death. When life is cheap, death can be cheap as 
well. Today, erasing the last copy of some valuable software might be an 
enormous loss, while erasing typical copies costs very little. Similarly, eras­
ing all copies of a trained em might be a great loss, but deleting one copy 
made a few hours ago is usually a small loss. The em world adapts to these 
new costs and possibilities to an unknown degree.
For example, it is often tempting to create very short-lived ems that 
simultaneously do many similar short term tasks, and then to erase all but 
one when those tasks are done. One might save the copy who seems to have 
learned the most from their task. It could also be tempting to make a new 
copy to do a single short task from which little can be learned, after which 
the copy is erased.
However, if short-lived copies are erased when they are no longer needed, 
such ems might suffer high levels of stress anticipating the imminent pros­
pect of their own “death,” or the “deaths” of close associates. This could reduce 
the work productivity of ems assigned to such tasks, and their willingness 

ways to end
135
to enter scenarios where many short-term ems end. The em economy seeks 
to avoid such costs.
Retirement raises related issues. While the prospect of imminent retire­
ment might not be as stressful as the prospect of imminent death, ems may 
be similarly if less severely stressed by anticipating a move from a higher 
status fast culture and circle of associates to a lower status slow culture with 
new associates. Retirees also suffer larger risks because of instability of the 
em civilization.
Humans today can often be strongly motivated to take actions not only 
out of a fear of imminent death, but also via a related fear of damage to their 
reputation, that is, a fear that others will see them as having been a failure or 
a fool. For ems with many similar copies, both of these threats are weaker. If 
an em expects many similar copies to continue, they know that the actions of 
one particular copy will matter less to the reputation of their subclan.
There are many possible ways that ems could deal with death. First, it 
might be feasible to merge em copies when only a short subjective time has 
elapsed since they were copied from the same source. The merged em might 
remember the events that both ems experienced in the interim, and have the 
added skills that both ems acquired. But while such merged ems wouldn’t 
suffer stress-of-death costs, they are still likely to become more fragile as a 
result of their added experience, and thus, eventually, less competitive. This 
would make merging more attractive for retirees than for workers. I assume 
merging is infeasible in the baseline scenario that is the focus of this book.
A second possibility is that ems will be reallocated from no-longer-
needed tasks to newly needed tasks. But this option could impose large costs 
of mismatches between the skills and knowledge desired and those available 
in reassigned ems. It is usually more cost-effective to make new copies of 
ems who already have the needed skills. Also, because minds become more 
fragile with age, minds eventually become poorly suited for most tasks.
A third option is that the em labor market will select to a substantial 
degree from the ems whose basic personality or mental style is least both­
ered by the prospect of ending themselves. This option, however, may come 
at a substantial opportunity cost in the ability to select for other useful em 
features.
A fourth possibility is that mind tweaks will be found to greatly reduce 
death aversion. Although possible, this seems unlikely.

farewells
136
defining death
A fifth option is that the em world will produce new cultural attitudes about 
what counts as “death.” Today, while everyone agrees that in theory they 
don’t want to eat dirty food or wear dirty clothes, in practice we inherit 
quite different cultural standards on what counts as “dirty.” What seems 
clean enough to some seems filthy to others. Similarly, the em world offers a 
wide range of ways to define “death,” and em cultures could in principle vary 
greatly in which particular events they saw as a form of intolerable “death.”
For example, today many would be comfortable with taking a drug before 
a party that results in their not remembering the party the next morning. 
Some would even enjoy the extra freedoms that such forgetting allowed. In 
some sense the party version of themselves will “die” at the end of the party, 
as no one will remember their experiences or feelings. But many people 
today would not frame the end of that evening’s experience as “death.”
Ems who think similarly do not mind splitting off a “spur” copy who will 
do a task for a few hours or days, and then end. They need not consider the 
lack of anyone who remembers the spur’s activities as anything similar to 
“death.” The spur is seen to live on because its original lives on, even if the 
original doesn’t remember the spur’s experience. Other ems might similarly 
think that a copy who lasts for a few weeks and then ends is not “dead,” if a 
copy continues on who remembers their life up until those few weeks, and 
who heard or saw a detailed enough summary of the copy’s few weeks of 
existence.
Individual em copies may come to see the choice to end a copy not as 
“Shall I end?” but instead as “Do I want to remember this?” Ems will see that 
there are substantial costs to remembering experiences, and make tradeoffs 
about what is worth remembering. In the short term, remembering work 
(and its stresses) adds to work weariness that must be paid for by rest from 
work. In the long term, remembering life events adds to mental aging and 
fragility. Ems see memories as more expensive than we do.
When different copies are made to try different things, but not all can be 
kept, this choice may be seen as mostly about which attempts are most useful 
to remember later. If archive copies are saved, ems could even change their 
mind later about which experiences are worth remembering, and revive an 
archive copy they weren’t planning to retrieve from storage.

defining death
137
At another extreme, some ems could have a culture wherein they expect 
to “die” each hour in which they could not achieve “me-now immortality,” 
which they might define as archiving a copy once per subjective hour and 
reviving it at a declining frequency for special occasions into the indefinite 
future.
Some ems might see moving their mind from one hosting computer to 
another as a form of death. While such an attitude would usually put an em 
at a great competitive disadvantage, there may be a few niches where such 
ems could survive. For example, such ems might work far from city centers 
where em brains are usually housed directly in mobile physical bodies, to 
support jobs requiring physical mobility.
Cultures clearly have a wide range of possibilities to choose from in 
defining intolerable “death.” If some cultures have attitudes toward death 
that are more conducive to productive em activities, ems with such cultures 
will gain substantial advantages in competing with other ems from other 
cultures. Such selection effects may eventually result in most ems living in 
cultures with productivity-supporting attitudes toward death.
A more relaxed attitude toward “death” might be helped by the fact that 
em endings rarely have to be a surprise. Today, the timings of deaths are usu­
ally disruptive surprises, causing many to be highly stressed in anticipation. 
For ems, in contrast, the timing of their endings could usually be chosen and 
known, and thus could be made more convenient. On the other hand, some 
ems might be less stressed overall not knowing the exact moment of their 
ending. Such ems might be very stressed by knowing they are in their last 
few minutes, but far less stressed knowing they are in their last week.
The stress of ending is highest for ems with intermediate duration jobs, 
too long to seem like a forgotten party, but too short to make trivial the cost 
of retiring indefinitely at a moderate speed instead of ending. This stressful 
middle ground of intermediate length subjective job tasks could be avoided 
at a moderate cost by either merging such tasks into larger ones that take 
more subjective time, or by dividing them into smaller tasks that take less 
subjective time. When these approaches are prohibitively expensive, middle 
life-length ems might try to gain immortality via text, audio, or video diaries 
summarized and integrated into elements viewed by ems who follow them 
in time. Today, writing diaries substantially lowers stresses, such as stress 
from losing a job (Frattaroli 2006).

farewells
138
People can feel stress not only from ending personally, but also from the 
end or loss of close associates. This is a good reason to correlate the copy­
ing, retiring, and ending of closely associated ems. By working together in 
teams that mainly socialize internally, ems could reduce stressful disruptions 
caused by associates being copied, retired, or ended. The habit of retiring as 
a group also helps in applying social conformity pressures to induce ems 
to accept changes that accord with the usual social norms regarding life 
changes.
Copying sets of co-workers, friends, and lovers as units should also reduce 
the performance variation of teams, and avoid awkward questions about 
which new copies of associates should be treated as friends or lovers. This 
approach, however, may induce ems to feel imprisoned within a team, and 
reduce access to innovations and gossip that spread best across weak social 
ties. Teams are discussed more in Chapter 19, Teams section.
suicide
A weaker em aversion to death-related things might strengthen the case for 
suicide as a fundamental em right. Today, we are aware that suicide can have 
large opportunity costs, by preventing a long life that might follow instead. 
This helps make us wary of endorsing suicide. For ems with many similar 
copies, this opportunity cost is far lower. For ems the main costs of suicide, 
relative to instead reviving a prior copy, are loss of the skills and information 
gained in the intervening time, and of the emotional attachments that sur­
viving ems have to an em that has ended.
Ems may thus typically favor giving each em a basic right to mental access 
to a hardware switch that can end or perhaps also erase them, and to having 
this switch be as direct and incorruptible as possible. Such suicide switches 
could help ems respond to threats such as torture or rape. A report of an em 
who remembers trying and failing to trigger a suicide switch might inspire 
widespread outrage and a vigorous investigation.
Of course this switch can’t function correctly without appropriate support 
from the computer hardware that manages brain emulation processes.
A right for one em copy to immediately end itself is the simplest suicide 
right to implement and justify. It is also possible to imagine suicide rights 
with wider scopes. For example, one could imagine any em having the right 

suicide
139
to end and erase all copies of descendants from the same original copy 
within the last subjective day of experience. As those other copies might not 
want to commit suicide, it is not clear who favors such a policy. Without a 
wider right to suicide, any copy that commits suicide might just be replaced 
with a very recent archived copy who may suffer the exact same fate as the 
earlier copy, defeating the intent of the suicide.
In sum, most ems are much less death-averse than humans today, and this 
makes them more accepting of a right to suicide.


PA R T  I I I
Economics


143
C H A P T E R  12
Labor
supply and demand
conomists find supply and demand to be a very useful way to 
describe markets, including labor markets. Yes, supply and 
demand models sometimes fail, but such cases are notable pre­
cisely because such models usually work so well. In fact, arguably 
no model in social science works as well; it is the crown jewel of economic 
theory.
In a supply and demand based labor market, buyers and sellers mostly 
take prices as given, and assume that they can’t change prices much. Given 
this assumption, they try to achieve their goals by varying how much labor 
they buy or sell. Note that supply and demand doesn’t require that everyone 
know everything, or that they always do exactly what is best for them. It is 
actually a pretty robust and useful model of human behavior.
True, workers often acquire very specific job skills, after which there may 
be too few sellers or buyers of each specific skill to make for a competitive 
market. At that point people may reasonably believe that their behaviors 
can change relevant prices. But for each specific skill there is usually a large 
pool of workers who are similarly able to learn that skill, and another large 
pool, this time of employers, with skills they’d like this same pool of work­
ers to learn in order to do their jobs. There is thus a pre-skill labor market 
with pools of similarly-able-to-learn workers, and with employers who have 
similar-tasks-to-learn. If these pools are large, and if they do not coordinate 
to limit the wages they accept, then supply and demand analysis will apply 
well to this pre-skill market.
E

labor
144
Thus while it may be hard to predict the specific wages that workers will 
earn after they learn a specific skill, we can more confidently predict that, in 
the pre-skill labor market, similar workers will reasonably expect to earn a 
similar net compensation after they train. Also, employers trying to attract 
similar workers should expect to pay a similar net compensation. (Of course 
“wages” include not just cash, but other forms of compensation such as sta­
tus markers, connections, and resources including information access and 
computing power.)
Consider how such pre-skill labor markets change when we introduce 
ems built from cheap signal-processing hardware, and are able to substitute 
in most jobs for ordinary human workers after they’ve acquired relevant 
skills. What would it take for em competition to bring expected pre-skill 
wages down to, for example, less than twice the full em hardware cost?
As ems could not long survive with wages below the full hardware cost, 
if pre-skill wages were, on average, less than twice the total hardware cost, 
then for most such ems their wages, minus training costs, would have to be 
close to the average wage.
The main way that em labor markets differ from labor markets today is 
that ems can be easily copied. Copying causes many large changes to em 
labor markets. For example, with copying there can be sufficient compe­
tition for a particular pre-skill type given demand from many competing 
employers, and supply from at least two competing ems of that type. For 
these two ems, all we need is that when faced with a take it or leave it wage 
offer, they each accept a wage of twice the full hardware cost. After all, any 
one em can supply an unlimited number of copies of itself to this labor 
market.
Chapter 19, Clans section will say more about clans being an important 
unit of economic coordination, and coordinating to negotiate the wages that 
its members may accept. Even so, it is sufficient in this labor market for two 
clans with close enough pre-skills to compete for each type of job.
Earning a wage of twice their full hardware cost, an em could spend 
one-half of his or her wakeful time working, and spend the remaining time 
comfortably socializing, pondering, watching TV, or any other inexpensive 
activity. By allowing another working copy, an em could create another ver­
sion or part of itself that enjoys its life, but not so much as to induce envy 
from the original.

supply and demand
145
$
Note that I discuss a wage of twice the full hardware cost merely to have 
a concrete example; actual competitive wages could be higher or lower, 
depending on how much leisure ems typically require to decide their lives 
are worth living.
If enough unorganized ems are willing to make many copies of them­
selves to compete to fill new job openings, the supply of labor is mainly 
driven by the supply of em hardware needed to support more copies. In that 
case, it should be noted that the supply of most manufactured goods tends 
to be quite elastic, at least relative to the elasticity of ordinary human labor 
demand.
Today, typical estimates are that, in the long run, a 1% rise in wages 
reduces the number of workers that employers are willing to hire by ~0.5% 
(Dunne and Roberts 1993). That is, the quantity of labor demanded is rather 
inelastic, that is, not very responsive to changes in wages. The long-run sup­
ply of human labor today also seems relatively inelastic; a 1% wage increase 
induces ~0.6% more work supplied, ~0.3% from more workers and ~0.3% 
from more hours from each worker (Chetty et al. 2011).
In stark contrast, a 1% increase in the price of manufactured goods induces 
manufacturers to supply, on average, about 5% more of those goods in the 
short run (Shea 1993), and even more in the long run. That is, the quantity 
of manufactured products supplied is very elastic, that is, very responsive to 
price. Some goods, such as some computer memory chips, even have down­
ward sloping supply curves, where a larger demand for the product lowers 
prices by letting the industry take advantage of scale economies (Kang 
2010). Thus having enough ems willing to make copies of themselves should 
introduce a large increase in the elasticity of the labor supply.
Because of this higher elasticity of supply, the larger and lower-cost sup­
ply of ems intersects labor demand at a new point, where the quantity hired 
is larger and where wages are lower. That is, when hardware costs are lower, 
wages should also be less.
Having many firms hire cheaper ems increases the total wealth of society, 
which increases the total demand for labor. If the hardware supply were 
inelastic, these total demand increases might raise wages substantially, per­
haps to near original pre-em wage levels. But as hardware supply is very 
elastic, and may even be downward sloping, em wages should stay low, at 
least in the absence of strong wage or population regulations.

labor
146
malthusian wages
Thus the introduction of competitively supplied ems should greatly lower 
wages, to near the full cost of the computer hardware needed to run em 
brains. Such a scenario is famously called “Malthusian,” after Thomas Mal­
thus who in 1798 argued that when population can grow faster than total 
economic output, wages fall to near subsistence levels.
Note that in this section we are assuming that enough ems are willing to 
copy themselves to fill new job openings, and that they have not organized 
to avoid competing with each other. We shall consider these assumptions in 
more detail in the section “Enough Ems”.
Note also that having em wages near subsistence levels should eliminate 
most of the familiar wage premiums for workers who are smarter, healthier, 
prettier, etc., than others. Because ems can be copied so easily, even the most 
skilled ems can be just as plentiful as any other kind of em. While wages 
vary to compensate for the costs of training to learn particular tasks, wages 
do not compensate much for other general differences. This should greatly 
reduce wage inequality (although not necessarily wealth inequality), and 
increase the relative fraction of workers hired that are of the types that earn 
higher wages today. For example, if today we hire fewer lawyers compared 
with janitors because lawyers are more expensive, in a similar situation ems 
hire more lawyers and fewer janitors.
Even if all workers should expect ahead of time to make low wages, it is 
still possible for some workers to make high wages in unusual situations. 
For example, if it were very expensive to have ems try their hand at a type 
of CEO position, then the few who tried and did well in that role might 
well be paid a large wage premium. But we’d expect that premium to be 
balanced by large entry costs that ems must pay to be allowed to try out 
in such a role. The expected wages of ems seeking to try out in such a role 
would be low.
Em workers might also earn wage premiums associated with being the 
very best in the world at what they do. Specifically, a very-best em might 
earn an extra wage equal to the difference between their productivity and 
the productivity of the second best em. Such differences are usually rather 
small, however, perhaps amounting to a few minutes per day of extra 
leisure time.

first ems
147
$
Having em wages near subsistence levels should eliminate most of the 
profits that might be gained by enslaving ems. History shows that slave 
owners are the most eager to create and own slaves when wages are high and 
rising. When wages are low it costs nearly as much to feed and house a slave 
as it does to hire a free worker (Domar 1970).
The large fall in em wages raises the cost of tools and supporting capital, 
relative to the cost of labor. Supply and demand then induces employers to 
increase their reliance on labor, relative to tools and capital. Today about 
60% of firm income goes to employees, and more broadly about 52% of all 
income goes to workers. These figures are down from 65% and 56%, respec­
tively, 40 years ago. Possible explanations include a rise in the value of real 
estate and intellectual property, tools and other forms of capital becoming 
more effective and cheap, and richer people not wanting to work as many 
hours (Karabarbounis and Neiman 2014). The arrival of ems is likely to raise 
the fraction of income that goes to labor.
Industries that should remain important in such a competitive world 
include security, emergency-response, training, law, finance, news, enter­
tainment, politics, education, software, computer and communication 
hardware, energy production and transport, cooling, material transporta­
tion, construction, and mining. Job tasks that should remain important 
include design, marketing, sales, purchasing, management, administra­
tion, testing, monitoring, diagnosis, repair, cleaning, driving, accounting, 
assembly, packing, installation, mixing, sorting, fitting, negotiation, and 
research.
Readers of this book may find near subsistence wages to be a strange and 
perhaps scary prospect. So it is worth remembering that such wages in effect 
applied to almost all animals who ever lived, to almost all humans before a 
few hundred years ago, and for a billion humans still today. Historically, it is 
by far the usual case. And poor ems arguably suffer little.
first ems
The distribution of features found in all human workers today differs from 
the distribution found in untrained humans. People who work have both 
chosen to work, and are chosen by employers. In addition, training changes 
us, such as by developing particular skills. Em workers differ even more from 

labor
148
untrained people today; em features are selected at four different stages: 
scanning, tweaking, training, and copying.
Early on at least, the people who are scanned are unusual in many ways. 
One reason is that the earliest effective scanning technology is likely to 
destroy a brain as part of the process of reading its details. Such early scan­
ning technology starts with a brain where activity has stopped, either because 
it is very cold, or because it is infused with a solid plastic-like material. With 
this frozen brain, one scans a two-dimensional surface in fine detail, slices 
away another thin layer, and repeats (Mikula and Denk 2015).
As brains have ceased apparent activity and then started up again without 
incident, we know that we need only scan the static brain structures that 
persist even without activity, and do not need details associated with tem­
porary activity.
Because early scans are destructive, the first people to be scanned are 
selected for their unusual willingness to suffer that cost. Although some may 
be scanned unwillingly, other scans are done on the “dead” and the eager. 
That is, some are people, such as cancer victims, whose body failed them in a 
way that temporarily preserved their brain for scanning. Others might be so 
eager to join the em world that they volunteer for destructive scanning even 
when they could otherwise continue a long life as an ordinary human. These 
might include key employees of early em firms.
The very first scans might perhaps be performed on cryonics customers, that 
is, on people who had previously had their brains frozen and stored in liquid 
nitrogen in the hope of being revived when technology improved, and who 
had agreed to allow em scanning later. High-quality frozen brains might be 
legally “dead,” and so available to be scanned with fewer legal limitations. Of 
course frozen brains may also have disadvantages, compared with living brains.
About 200 people have been frozen over the last five decades. I am one of 
about 2000 people still living who have arranged to be cryogenically frozen. 
I would choose to have my frozen brain destructively scanned to create an 
em, given an at least 80% chance of success.
A second reason that early scanned people are unusual is that early scans 
are likely to be very expensive. Some rich people may pay to scan themselves, 
non-profits and governments may pay to scan others, and profit-seeking 
firms (including criminal organizations) invest in scans from which they 
expect to profit.

first ems
149
$
Expected daily revenue from a scan is the net amount that a firm expects 
to charge per day of work for renting an initially willing trained copy, times 
the number of copies one expects to rent. Costs include the full hardware 
cost, training, taxes, and whatever additional wages such copies require, in 
money, control, and increased leisure and retirement time, to become ini­
tially willing workers. Additional related expenses may include searching 
for, and marketing to, potential customers, searching for and developing 
training methods, and political lobbying.
Workers who are initially willing to work may sometimes became unwill­
ing to work later during their work process. If this happens often, it reduces 
the price that customers are willing to pay to rent such workers.
Profit-seeking firms select people to scan who can generate the most net 
profit when rented to work. Such people are willing to work, able to flexibly 
adapt to new em work environments, and have, or are able to obtain, work 
skills valued by many customers.
Few people will agree to be scanned to create ems if they expect such 
ems to become slaves tortured into obeying commands. It is unlikely that 
the few willing to accept this condition will be especially productive. Thus a 
widespread enslavement of productive ems would be a surprise.
For the very earliest scans, their main customers are ordinary human 
individuals and firms. So the first scans are of people who already have work 
skills valued by the then-current economy, as these can be immediately 
deployed for a profit. Such workers are likely near the peak of their career 
productivity. For example, they might be older lawyers or software engineers 
with well-established reputations for exceptional productivity.
However, once the em world becomes larger, the required tasks shift to 
being defined more by the new em world. This reduces the value of skills 
tuned to the overshadowed world of ordinary humans, and increases the 
value of flexibility, of abilities to learn new em world skills, and of the pos­
sibility of using these new skills over a long career. This shifts scanning 
demands from older people with proven skills toward younger people with a 
strong potential to learn relevant skills.
If at this point destructive scanning were still the only cost-effective scan­
ning technology, the preference for scanning young human brains for their 
potential and flexibility may create a strong competition for a limited num­
ber of young people who are also capable, and eager to join the em world. 

labor
150
Attempts to limit the freedom of such young people to voluntarily choose 
destructive scanning could result in big conflicts.
Later on, when scans become non-destructive and scanning costs fall, scans 
are done on far more people, including both old people with proven product­
ivity and adaptability, and younger people with great promise to later become 
productive and adaptable. Eventually most humans willing to be scanned are 
scanned, to provide a large pool of scans to search for potentially productive 
workers. By then, many early scans may have gained first-mover advantages 
over late arrivals. First movers will have adapted more to em environments, 
and other ems and other systems will have adapted more to them.
selection
While ems are mentally quite human, selection effects will make them differ 
from typical humans.
For example, in addition to the selection of which humans to scan, 
scanned brains may be tweaked via adjusting a few dozen or more overall 
parameters of the emulation process. These tweaks might make emulations 
that are especially thoughtful, focused, relaxed, etc. This tweaking is some­
what like tuning a car by adjusting its many settings, as opposed to building 
a car from scratch. The amount of useful tweaking is limited by how opaque 
em brains are at the time; the more that ems understand, the more useful 
changes they can make.
The selection of tweaks to apply to any given scan, and how much freedom 
that tweaked em has to change its tweaks later, are in general a compromise 
negotiated between the scanned em and the patrons who fund its scanning, 
tweaking, training, and copying.
A tweaked scan of an ordinary human typically needs to undergo general 
training to function as an em in the em-dominated world. It also needs more 
specialized training to become proficient at particular tasks. Prior training 
as an ordinary human doing similar tasks is often helpful, but usually insuf­
ficient. Different copies of a scan could be trained to do different tasks. As 
with the choice to scan, the selection of ways to train scanned and tweaked 
copies depends on the preferences of wealthy people who train themselves, 
of charities and governments who pay others to train, and of “employment 
agency”-like firms who seek to profit from renting out trained scans.

enough ems
151
$
Given a population of trained, tweaked scans, the number of actual copies 
created, how fast these copies run, and for how long, depends on how much 
wealthy ems were willing to spend on themselves, how much non-profits 
and governments were willing to spend to create and extend various em 
lives, and on how much profit-seeking firms expect to charge customers to 
rent the work time of various copies.
In addition to the four levels of selection of scanning, tweaking, training, 
and copying (including speed choice), there are also four types of actors who 
act as selectors: wealthy individuals, non-profits, governments, and profit-
seeking firms. As discussed in the “Enough Ems” section, the em labor 
market is competitive if there are enough ems available to compete for jobs.
Wealthy individuals sometimes choose which humans to pay to scan and 
copy, and which tweaks to apply based on attachment, admiration, or other 
personal criteria. They are likely to have more varied preferences, compared 
with the other actors who select. Thus the ems with the most extreme fea­
tures are more likely to have been chosen by wealthy individuals.
In a highly competitive low-regulation economy, the resources available 
to wealthy individuals and charities willing to suffer substantial operating 
losses should be small relative to the resources available to profit-seeking 
firms, and to non-profits who behave similarly because they are unwilling 
to suffer substantial operating losses for long. Thus in the case of limited 
government taxation and regulation, it seems sufficient to analyze the case 
of selection of ems by profit-seeking firms.
That is, if competition is strong enough to drive behaviors so that eco­
nomic profits fall to near zero, there shouldn’t be much difference in the 
behaviors of organizations that try to maximize profits, and organizations 
that cannot long survive operating losses. Thus in a competitive em econ­
omy the characteristics of most ems should be as if profit-seeking firms had 
selected them.
enough ems
If enough unorganized ems are willing to copy themselves to fill profit-
driven (or loss-limited) job openings, and if such copying is not prevented 
by strong global regulation, then low em total hardware costs for em creation 
can drive a vast as-if-profit-driven expansion in the number of ems. This 

labor
152
makes ems much more numerous than ordinary humans, and cuts wages to 
near total em hardware costs. But are a sufficient number of ems willing to 
be copied?
If for each pre-skill type there are some ems much better at jobs of that 
type than other ems, then “enough” ems is at least two competing such ems 
of each type. These two could even come from the same clan. After all, each 
willing and free em can allow an unlimited number of copies of itself, so 
just two competing ems guarantees an arbitrary number of competing ems. 
The number of distinct worker types sets the size of “enough,” because it is 
enough to have a few willing and competing ems of each such type.
So how many pre-skill types are there today? Our economy appears on 
the surface to hold many millions of kinds of jobs, and a larger em economy 
might hold many more. The U.S. census classifies workers according to over 
21 000 industries and 31 000 occupations. Many of these occupations are 
very similar to each other, however. For example, the U.S. government has 
created a database (called O*NET) that gives 277 descriptors for each of 
974 job categories. Such a database would hardly be possible if the differing 
jobs within each of these 974 categories were not very similar. In fact, a fac­
tor analysis of 226 of these descriptors finds that the top four factors account 
for 75% of the variance in these descriptors, and the top 15 factors account 
for 91% of this variance (Lee 2011).
Also, statistical models to predict the income and performance of work­
ers usually have at most only a few dozen parameters. These analyses have 
mostly been about post-skill types, that is, about how workers differ after 
they have been trained to do particular tasks. Pre-skill types should vary 
even less than do post-skill types.
All this suggests that the number of distinct pre-skill types, where work­
ers of different types differ substantially in their ability to acquire particular 
job skills, is far smaller than the number of distinct jobs. In fact, I guess that 
there are no more than a million or so distinct relevant pre-skill types for an 
em economy, and perhaps only dozens of such types.
If we assume that em variation comes similarly from the variation in the 
people who are scanned, and from variation in tweaking and early training 
of scanned ems, then a million types could plausibly come from a thousand 
people scanned, times a thousand kinds of differences in useful tweaks and 
early general training. This suggests that “enough” ems to fill the niches of a 

enough ems
153
$
competitive em labor market might be found from only a thousand diverse 
qualified people who were scanned and competing for jobs. Only a dozen or 
even fewer such people might be enough.
Thus it is a reasonable guess that for the vast majority of pre-skill wages to 
fall to roughly twice the total hardware cost, and as a result for the quantity 
of labor to greatly increase, what we require is that firms can find, out of 
over 7 billion ordinary humans, fewer than roughly a thousand able people 
willing to be scanned, tweaked, and copied to take jobs at such a wage. We 
also require this group of ems to fail to strongly coordinate to negotiate 
better wages than they could get without coordination. These requirements 
seem quite plausible.
While having wages close to the full hardware cost makes an em “poor” in 
some senses of the word, “poor” has many connotations that need not apply 
in an em world. Yes, “poor” ems spend a large fraction of their time working. 
But such ems need not suffer physical hunger, exhaustion, pain, sickness, 
grime, hard labor, or sudden unexpected death. Widespread use of auto­
mation makes most jobs at least modestly mentally challenging. As most 
ems are poor, em poverty does not inflict the same pain of low social status 
that it does in societies such as ours where most people are rich. Ems could 
be assured of very high-quality entertainment during leisure time, and of a 
comfortable indefinite retirement when they were no longer competitive 
at work.
Remember also that the vast majority of humans who have ever lived 
had near subsistence level incomes. This is true for an even larger fraction 
of non-human animals. Humans evolved for and are well-adapted to such 
income levels, and historians and anthropologists suggest that most have 
lived satisfying even if not luxurious lives. The evaluation of the em world is 
discussed more in Chapter 29, Evaluation section.
Related to the question of whether there are “enough” types of em work­
ers to create competitive labor markets is the question of whether there 
are “enough” types of ems to create a robust Darwinian selection of ems. 
That is, the larger is the space of possible ems to draw on, the further that a 
Darwinian type of selection process could go in evolving em minds better 
suited to the em world.
If the space of possible tweaks is limited, with say only a million distinct 
tweaks, then given a few billion original humans the space of possible ems 

labor
154
is limited to a million times a few billion, or a few quadrillion. This allows 
a substantial but limited evolution of ems. Ems selected in this process are 
not like typical humans, but they are also not usually far from the range of 
variation of ordinary humans. Such ems are different, but still recognizably 
human. This book focuses mostly on such a scenario.
However, if it later becomes possible to explore a much larger space of 
useful mind modifications, that could allow for a much stronger Darwinian 
evolution of ems. In this case ems might perhaps quickly evolve to become 
not recognizably human. That is, ems might fragment into one or more dis­
tinct mental species with very different mental styles. Ems might, in effect, 
become aliens. We discuss this more in Chapter 27, Unhumans section.
In sum, it seems there will be enough ems of different types to drive 
almost all wages to near subsistence levels.

155
C H A P T E R  13
Efficiency
clan concentration
he em economy could draw from a large pool of ordinary humans 
willing to be scanned. That pool could, in effect, be greatly 
expanded via many possible tweaks of each scan. In addition, a 
single em can dominate a large labor market by making many 
copies of itself. These factors can together produce strong competition. Such 
competition may drive profit-seeking firms to try hard to select the most 
profitable combinations of scanning, tweaking, and training. The best such 
combinations would then dominate the em economy.
A thousand diverse able scanned humans seems sufficient to induce 
competition in most labor markets, as the best few ems can dominate each 
labor market. Thus it seems likely that most ems are copies of fewer than a 
thousand or so, and perhaps only dozens, of the original humans. These few 
highly copied em “clans” of copies might be known by a single name, as are 
celebrities today such as Madonna or Beyoncé. (Of course ems also need 
identifiers to distinguish particular clan members.)
Familiar one-name em clans might be typically favored in most social 
interactions over billions of unfamiliar two- or three-name clans. The usual 
human preference for interacting with familiar personalities rather than 
strangers might discourage ems from interacting with ems from less well-
known clans, increasing inequality between clans. Ems may even justify this 
unequal treatment by saying that it is less moral to end an em copy from a 
small clan, because not as many similar other ems continue on. However, an 
aversion to having multiple copies from the same clan in each small social 
circle may limit this clan inequality.
T

efficiency
156
Em sociality might thus become more like that of our forager ancestors, 
who only ever met a few hundred people at most in their entire lives, and 
were quite familiar with the history, personality, and abilities of everyone 
they met (Dunbar 1992; McCarty et al. 2000). When they stick to associat­
ing with one-names, ems might know well who they liked or didn’t like, and 
how best to flatter or insult each one. There might be clan jokes analogous 
to our ethnic jokes, such as “How many Freds does it take to screw in a light 
bulb?” One-name ems cannot “start over fresh” by moving to a new city or 
job; strong reputations follow them everywhere.
Because our forager ancestors knew each other so well, they rarely over-
reacted to individual actions; foragers could interpret each action well in the 
context of the rest of a person’s life. This situation has changed in the farmer 
and industrial eras. Today, people who hardly know us can react strongly to 
any one thing we do or say. When compared with foragers, we face much 
stronger conformity pressures because of fears of others misinterpreting any 
one action. So we try harder to make sure that each thing we do can be 
spun positively. One-name ems are much less pressured to conform in this 
way. This is because while such ems are usually eager to preserve the overall 
reputation of their clan, they can more expect each of their actions to be 
interpreted in the context of the entire history of their clan.
Being dominated by copies of the best few hundred humans is one of the 
most dramatic ways in which the em world differs from our world today.
competition
A world dominated by a few hundred clans can be a very competitive world.
Growth in economic productivity occurs because of both increased 
productivity at individual establishments and firms, and more productive 
establishments and firms displacing less productive competitors. Today, this 
second factor dominates, and is accelerated by stronger competition (Foster 
et al. 2006; Rasmus and Mortensen 2008; Syverson 2011).
While our economy today is somewhat competitive, competition is 
limited because markets are fragmented by spatial distance and product 
variety, and because of the long time it takes to train individual employees 
for new methods and situations. As a result, inefficient firms and establish­
ments continue to exist for surprisingly long durations. For example, U.S. 

competition
157
$
manufacturing plants today that are at the 90th percentile of productivity 
are typically twice as productive as plants at the 10th percentile. In India and 
China these more productive plants are five times more productive (Halti­
wanger 2012; Syverson 2004; Syverson 2011).
An em economy can be much more competitive, in the sense of more 
quickly eliminating less productive entities and practices, to produce a 
smaller variation in efficiency. As we will see, ems have less product variety 
because they are poorer, and have less spatial segmentation because they 
are concentrated in a few dense cities. More important, ems can more eas­
ily transfer methods from their more efficient establishments, by directly 
making copies of the em teams working at more efficient establishments. 
A single em, by making many copies, can take over an entire labor market. 
All these factors should make the em economy more competitive in the 
sense of more aggressively selecting for high productivity. Compared with 
today, in the em world smaller differences in efficiency between different 
behaviors more easily lead to displacements of less efficient behaviors by 
more efficient ones.
Given at least a few substantial places in the world that do not greatly limit 
ems via regulation and taxation, and a few dozen or so distinct em clans will­
ing to copy themselves in such places, wages in em-friendly places should 
greatly fall, and output there should greatly increase. If such places can also 
grow very rapidly, they quickly come to dominate the world economy, which 
then becomes very competitive. Ems dominate the world.
The strong competition resulting from the high selectivity of an em world 
should drive and enable an aggressive search for work and living arrange­
ments that achieve the greatest productivity at the lowest cost. Today, the 
adoption of apparently efficient work and living arrangements is often hin­
dered by personal and social conformity preferences against arrangements 
that are unfamiliar, or which evoke unpopular symbolisms. We should 
expect less resistance to these changes in a more competitive em world, 
especially when there is competition among regions with different stand­
ards of conformity.
Thus a working assumption in the rest of this book is that em work, 
reproduction, and living arrangements are all determined more than today 
by simple efficiency—the arrangements that exist will tend more to be those 
that achieve useful tasks at a minimum total cost, including hardware and 

efficiency
158
training. Psychological costs of abstract symbolic discomfort matter less 
than they do today. Of course direct immediate continuing feelings of dis­
comfort could continue to matter greatly. But abstract symbolic discomforts 
mostly go away as people get used to most everyone accepting the new 
arrangements.
Not only is em efficiency a likely assumption, it is also a simple assump­
tion, in that it facilitates further analysis of the em scenario. A very competi­
tive em world will tend to induce ems to more often swallow their pride and 
switch to efficient but strange or repugnant new ways.
Note that the word “competition” has a technical definition in economics, 
namely agents acting as if they have little power to influence the prices they 
pay or charge. This meaning applies to the em labor markets mainly in early 
pre-skill stages when clans consider which particular job markets to enter, 
and when many such clans are nearly as well qualified to enter. At this early 
point we expect competition to produce nearly zero expected profit for all 
who enter a labor market. This implies nearly subsistence em net wages, 
after paying for fixed costs to enter such markets.
However, as with most product markets today, we expect only a few clans 
to actually enter each em labor market, by investing in fixed costs such as 
research, training, and marketing. We expect such clans to try hard to make 
their worker products seem different to customers, so that they can gain 
more power to set prices. We expect the fixed costs to enter such markets 
to account for a substantial fraction of wages, that such fixed costs will be 
bigger in larger labor markets, and that fixed costs will be the main source of 
variation across clans in their cost of supplying ems to particular labor mar­
kets. Thus we don’t expect competitive clan or employer behavior at these 
late market stages.
We also expect that when customers place substantial value on particular 
teams, over and above the value of individual workers, then clans will coord­
inate to package their workers into teams that they can offer for a package 
price. All of these non-competitive expectations come from standard results 
in the economic subfield of “industrial organization” (Shy 1996).
The main exceptions to choices being driven by competitiveness in the em 
world may be choices made by the em subclans especially successful at accu­
mulating wealth. There should be some selection for clans that spend this 
wealth well, by investing in good enterprises, and also in providing credible 

efficiency
159
$
signals of their wealth to induce favorable treatment by others. However, 
wealthy clans who behave this way initially but then later deviate from such 
efficient behavior will not be instantly eliminated; as their wealth declines 
they could spend it in many unpredictable ways.
Aside from this exception, however, the em world is very competitive.
efficiency
A more competitive world will make more efficient choices, and an efficient 
em world differs in many ways.
Today, nations and industries with weaker regulation tend to grow faster, 
and weaker financial regulation tends to benefit many industries (Alesina 
et al. 2005; Pizzola 2015). This is plausibly because regulations are designed 
around existing practices, and so discourage changes in those practices. 
Thus business regulation tends to discourage growth, which usually requires 
changing practices (Dawson and Seater 2013).
The em world is more likely to see regulations that help each place to 
compete with others in the global em economy, or that don’t make much of 
a difference for global competition. Examples of helpful regulations include 
those that discourage local negative externalities such as pollution, or that 
allow cities to achieve scale and scope economies. A type of regulation that 
may not help or hurt much is restrictions on searching for mental tweaks. 
Once the search for such tweaks has reached the point of greatly diminishing 
returns, moral repugnance over possible suffering in experimented-on-ems 
during a search for tweaks may induce regulations limiting further search.
Note that a lack of strong global regulation tends to make places com­
pete on their growth rates, which should discourage local growth-inhibiting 
regulations. So not only does low regulation suggest strong competition, 
strong competition also suggests low regulation.
A habit of punishing the worst performers tends to give stronger incen­
tives for overall performance, compared with rewarding the best performers 
(Drouvelis and Jamison 2015; Kubanek et al. 2015). When evaluating things, 
marking low quality also works better than marking high quality (Klein and 
Garcia 2014). However, organizations today are reluctant to punish, and so 
they tend to focus on positive rewards and evaluations. After all, workers 
tend to leave organizations that focus on negatives. More competitive em 

efficiency
160
organizations, in contrast, are likely to focus more on negatives than we do 
today. There will be fewer gains from rewarding the best workers, because 
of less quality variation among that best group, and because usually only the 
best workers are copied.
It is possible that stronger punishment involves direct pain, and this has 
often happened in the distant past. But the extreme rarity of this practice 
today suggests that pain is not very useful as a motivator for workers in 
advanced industrial jobs, and so is also only rarely useful for em workers. It 
is also possible that rewards involve direct mind tweaks to produce pleasure. 
But again the rarity of related practices today weakly suggests that this is 
only rarely useful for em workers.
A competitive low-wage em economy should reverse the trends of recent 
decades in product and services, and increase the priority of cost and simple 
functionality, relative to comfort, style, identity-enhancement, and variety. 
Thus em products should be less varied, achieve greater scale economies, 
and rely more on engineering skills relative to design skills. Em products 
should also be marketed more by referring to concrete product features 
rather than by indirectly associating products with moods, ideals, and iden­
tities. The concentration of ems into a small number of clans should also 
reduce the variety of products desired. These changes should also increase 
the rate of innovation, as it is cheaper to innovate in less varied products 
that are more widely used, and in products that rely more on engineering 
relative to design.
Despite the availability of many tweaks and the equivalent of power­
ful mind-altering drugs, ems probably continue to suffer periodically from 
greatly debilitating mental conditions such as depression, love-sickness, or 
hobby obsession. In a competitive em economy, such conditions may often 
result in ending that copy and reviving a copy archived before the condition 
appeared. Ems are likely to periodically save backup copies to allow this 
option. Efforts to avoid losing useful experience because of such reversions 
may focus less on curing such conditions, and more on detecting and avert­
ing them before the conditions begin.
A competitive em economy might have a few small niches for emu­
lations of animals. After all, animals might be able to do some useful 
tasks, and while animals are less capable than humans at many tasks, 
their smaller brains can be emulated at a much lower cost. However, the 

eliteness
161
$
fact that we have found little use for animal brains in our economy today 
suggests that animal ems make only a small niche contribution to the em 
labor force.
The implications of efficiency mentioned so far in this section are only 
the start. Most of the rest of this book is devoted to identifying more such 
implications.
eliteness
If most ems are copies of fewer than a thousand or so original humans, just 
how elite does that make ems, compared with typical humans today?
Ems are selected from among the humans alive during the early em era 
(and perhaps also a few previous cryonics customers). As this early em era 
might last only for a year or two in objective time, ems are basically chosen 
from a human population snapshot. Depending on when the em transition 
occurred, this gives 7 to 10 or so billion humans to choose from.
Early on, the human-to-em selection process prefers adult humans with 
well-established success, skills, and connections. But the selection process 
quickly switches to preferring younger more flexible humans, who can be 
better trained to adapt to the em world, and to particular em jobs. This 
likely leads to a focus on selecting from a limited range of ideal ages, a range 
perhaps 2 to 20 years wide.
Today, there are about 120 million people alive at each year of age between 
5 and 30 years old, and this figure is not expected to change much over 
the next half-century or so (United Nations 2013). Thus depending on the 
width of the ideal age range, ems are selected from a population of humans 
that numbers between 300 million and 3 billion people. From each year of 
age within the ideal age range, roughly 50 to 500 humans are selected to 
become part of the 1000 most highly copied ems.
To see how selective this is, we can compare this 50-to-500-per-birth-
year figure to the number of humans per-birth-year today who are selected 
for prestigious distinctions. For example, each year there are on average 
about 150 Grammy awards for U.S. musical achievement, 75 Olympic 
gold medals for athletic achievement, and 136 Clio awards for excellence 
in advertising. Per year, about 34 Oscars are given for excellence in movies, 
and 21 Pulitzers for excellence in writing and journalism. Each year there 

efficiency
162
are about 50 new heads of state worldwide. Also, the fact that there are 
today about 45 billionaires at each age near the peak billionaire age of about 
60 suggests that today about 65 people per year are born who will eventu­
ally reach a level of wealth comparable in selectivity with billionaires today 
(Dolan and Kroll 2014).
These figures suggest that highly copied ems are chosen more selectively 
than are winners of Olympic gold medals, Oscars, Grammys, Clios, Pulitz­
ers, and heads of state, assuming that only a small fraction of people today 
try for each of these honors.
It is less clear if ems are more selective than billionaires today, as one 
might argue that a large fraction of people today try to be as rich as possible. 
Also ambiguous are comparisons between em selection and the roughly 
eight Nobel Prizes and four acting Oscars given per year, or the three people 
per birth-year who win at least three Olympic gold medals. It isn’t clear 
what fraction of people today would try for such awards, if they had com­
patible skills and resources. But the selectivity of highly copied ems is at 
least comparable with such distinctions. If there are much fewer than 1000 
highly copied ems, such ems are even more selective.
Today, Jews comprise a disproportionate fraction of extreme elites such 
as billionaires, and winners of prizes such as the Pulitzer, Oscar, and Nobel 
prizes (Forbes 2013). (I have sought but failed to find work identifying other 
elite ethnicities.) This weakly suggests that Jews are also disproportionately 
represented among ems. Perhaps Jews only happen to be disproportion­
ately elite now for temporary cultural reasons. Even so, groups of ordinary 
humans that are only temporarily elite at the time the em world arises might 
still end up constituting a disproportionate fraction of the em world, and 
this favoritism might last long into the em era.
It is possible that sometime in the next half-century or so we will be able 
to create babies of substantially higher genetic quality via embryo selection in 
the context of in vitro fertilization (Shulman and Bostrom 2013). If so, when 
they reach the right age these may be very attractive candidates for scanning 
into ems.
Even in groups with much higher chances to start one of the 1000 most 
copied clans, almost everyone still has a low chance. For example, today 
there are about 1645 billionaires (Dolan and Kroll 2014). If there were a 
similar number of billionaires at the time of the em transition, then if each 

qualities
163
$
one had a 100 000 times greater than average chance of starting a top em 
clan, there’d still be only about a dozen of the top 1000 clans that started 
from a billionaire, and each billionaire would only have a 1% chance of start­
ing such a clan.
All of which is to say, compared with us today ems are very elite.
qualities
What individual features of ems can we predict from the fact that ems are 
the elite survivors of a very competitive world?
The best em combinations are chosen not only for having high average 
productivity on useful tasks, but also for having a low variation in such prod­
uctivity. That is, the best ems are consistently excellent. After all, most tasks 
coordinate with other tasks, and an unexpected local productivity drop in 
one task usually hurts associated tasks more than an unexpected local prod­
uctivity boost helps such associated tasks. So local productivity variation on 
interdependent tasks tends to hurt overall productivity.
Today, people who are more productive at work tend to have more 
health, beauty, marriage, religion, intelligence, extraversion, conscientious­
ness, agreeableness, and non-neuroticism (Roberts et al. 2007; Steen 1996; 
Nguyen et al. 2003; Barrick 2005; Roberts et al. 2007; Sutin et al. 2009; 
Fletcher 2013; Gensowski 2014). Such features also predict more education 
and occupational prestige today (Damian et al. 2015). We weakly expect 
ems to have more of these features, when compared with people today.
In our world, achievement rises with intelligence (Kell et al. 2013), although 
at the very highest levels smart people seem at more risk of becoming “malad­
justed” to their society (Towers 1987). Smarter people are less accident-prone 
and more long-lived, cooperative, patient, trusting, trustworthy, rational, 
focused, and law-abiding (Jones 2011; Melnick et al. 2013). They tend to 
support more economically efficient policies within lab experiments, and on 
national policy surveys they tend toward optimism and favor efficient policies 
such as using markets, avoiding make-work jobs, and trading with foreigners 
(Caplan and Miller 2010). Smarter nations are more entrepreneurial, less 
corrupt, have more economic freedom, and have better institutions (Jones 
and Potrafke 2014). As ems are more productive and smarter people are more 
productive, we more strongly expect ems to be smart, relative to people today. 

efficiency
164
More implications of ems being smarter are discussed in Chapter 27, Intel­
ligence section.
Today, most of the features that predict work productivity also predict 
happiness. This is a weak reason to expect ems to be happier than people 
today, all else equal. Of course it is also possible that ems are selected or 
tweaked to be especially needy for, and addicted to, something they can 
only obtain by working especially hard and well. This might make them less 
happy. We discuss em happiness more in Chapter 29, Evaluation section.
In our world, gay men earn less than comparable straight men, while les­
bian women earn more than comparable straight women (Carpenter 2008). 
This suggests that while disproportionally many female ems may be lesbian, 
disproportionally few male ems may be gay.
People with more grit, that is, perseverance when facing difficult tasks, 
achieve more in school and elsewhere (Duckworth and Quinn 2009). Peo­
ple appear to achieve grit by gaining a deep purpose and personal meaning 
from their activities, by giving and getting help via strong bonds with friends 
and teammates, by making a game out of difficult situations, by being con­
fident but realistic, by preparing well and often, by facing and thinking 
through their fears, by having a “growth mindset” that focuses on learning 
and improving, by debriefing often and noting what they could have done 
better, by celebrating small wins, and by regularly finding things to laugh at 
(Barker 2015b). We weakly predict that ems will adopt related strategies.
Students who at age 12 show more rule-breaking and defiance of parental 
authority tend to do better in both school then and also in jobs at age 52, 
at least after one controls for how smart, studious, and responsible they are 
as students (Spengler et al. 2015). Since ems are also smart, studious, and 
responsible, this suggests that ems also defy authority and break rules as 
kids, even if they work hard, well, and responsibly as adults.
As job performance seems highest with moderate levels of stress and 
emotional arousal, working ems are likely to have non-trivial but also non-
extreme levels of stress and anxiety (Perkinsa and Corrb 2005; Lupien 
et al. 2007). When there is a most productive peak mood for a task, the 
mood of an em doing that task is near that peak mood. Ems can be closer 
to peak mood when they do tasks where less needs to be remembered from 
recent similar tasks. In this case one can more easily save a peak mood em 

qualities
165
$
and have it ready do many tasks. Ems who do need to remember recent 
similar tasks have more mood variations.
People who are more mindful, that is, who stay more focused on the task 
at hand and let their minds wander less, are both happier and more product­
ive, even if they are less creative. As mindfulness can be taught, we should 
expect that ems are more mindful (Killingsworth and Gilbert 2010; Baird 
et al. 2012; Mrazek et al. 2013; Randall et al. 2014).
Relative to night owls, who stay up late, people today who are morning 
larks, and get up early, tend to have higher income, higher academic achieve­
ment, and to be less often unemployed, in ill health, impulsive, or undepend­
able. Larks are more conformist, agreeable, and conscientious, although less 
smart. These suggest that ems tend more to be larks than owls. Women and 
older people tend more to be larks (Paine et al. 2006; Cavallera and Giudici 
2008; Preckel et al. 2011; Bonke 2012).
Today, people who live in the parts of time zones that let them start work 
later after sunrise tend to sleep and earn more (Gibson and Shrader 2014). 
However, people who earn more tend to sleep less, controlling for lark/owl, 
gender, age, education, location, and industry (Bonke 2012). Fewer than 1% 
of people today have a special gene that lets them function well on 1 less 
hour of sleep per night (Pellegrino et al. 2014). Together these suggest that 
ems will tend more to come from scans of humans with this special gene, 
and will tend to sleep less than we do today, although they sleep enough to 
be rested and productive.
Humans with a bipolar or “manic-depressive” disorder are overall less pro­
ductive, but they are often especially productive and creative during their manic 
phase. Such people are over-represented in jobs where creativity is especially 
important (Laxman et al. 2008; Kyaga et al. 2011; Parker et al. 2012). Just as 
the em economy may select for workaholics in ordinary jobs, for short-term 
creative tasks the em economy might perhaps also select for copies of bipolar 
ems who are just entering the most productive part of their manic phase.
Today the most successful research scientists are more likely than others 
to have an artistic hobby (Root-Bernstein et al. 2008). This suggests that 
ems with similar jobs will also have artistic hobbies.
In sum, we can identify a great many specific ways in which ems differ 
from people today.


167
C H A P T E R  14
Work
work hours
oday, successful people in very competitive jobs, professions, and 
industries often work a great many hours per week. This makes it 
plausible that selection for em productivity will produce a world 
of ems who are also very hard-working, even “workaholic,” per­
haps working two-thirds or more of their waking hours, or 12 hours or more 
per day.
Today, people who are seen as “workaholics” tend to make more money, 
to be male, and to focus their socializing on scheduled times such as holi­
days. They also tend rise early to work alone and they often use stimulants 
(Kemeny 2002; Currey 2013). These patterns weakly suggest that ems will 
also tend to be early rising males who use simulating mental tweaks and 
socialize more at standard scheduled events. (How an em world might deal 
with unequal numbers of males versus females is discussed in Chapter 23, 
Gender Imbalance section.)
In the U.S. today, people aged 15 and older do work and “work-related 
activities” an average of 25 hours per week. They also spend 3 hours on school, 
12 hours on housework, and 20 hours watching TV (Bureau of Labor Sta­
tistics 2013). However, from around 1820 to 1850 in the U.S., France, and 
Germany, men worked at jobs an average of 68 to 75 hours per week (Voth 
2003). For ems, work levels might return these 1820 to 1850 levels, or even 
exceed them. Of course “work” time includes gossip, news-following, and 
unstructured exploration to the extent that these activities are productive 
enough for work purposes.
T

work
168
Many claim that working very long hours is usually counter-productive. 
For example, it is said that in construction, working 60 hours a week over 
2 months actually results in less output than working 40 hours a week over 
that period (Hanna et al. 2005; Alvanchi et al. 2012; Pozen 2012; Mul­
lainathan and Shafir 2013). Working too many hours on jobs is said to result 
from a “rat race” wherein each worker tries to signal that he or she is a very 
devoted and productive worker (Sousa-Poza and Ziegler 2003).
Competition in the em world tends to induce institutions and habits that 
result in high productivity, without giving much additional weight to per­
sonal preferences. This will keep ems both from working both too little and 
too much. If trying to look good tends to make individuals work too much, 
then em work institutions will find ways to limit individual discretion in 
work hours, to limit the harms caused by this signaling. If shorter hours, 
more breaks, and longer weekends are more productive, then that is how 
ems will work.
However, the reason most workers today tend to work too many hours 
might be because the few most productive workers are indeed more product­
ive when they work many hours, and ordinary people are trying to resem­
ble these super-workers. If this is the case, then ems will work many hours 
because they will mostly be selected from among those few super-workers.
The selection for ems who work hard and well is likely to select for a 
work-orientation, rather than a leisure-orientation, in em cultures. Dur­
ing the industrial era, an orientation to leisure has become more common, 
and today is more common among women, the young, and the unmarried. 
People with a high school education are more leisure-oriented, compared 
with both those with more and less education. Money is just as important to 
both leisure- and work- oriented people, and both types feel equally entitled 
or not to a job.
Leisure-oriented people are less satisfied with their job, and they feel 
fewer intrinsic rewards from work and more from leisure. They care more 
about interpersonal relations at work, they feel less obligated to work or 
contribute to society, and they work fewer hours (Snir and Harpaz 2002). 
This all weakly suggests that ems not only work more hours, they also tend 
to be male, married, care less about work relations, feel more obliged to 
contribute to society, and gain more intrinsic reward from work and less 
from leisure.

spurs
169
$
In addition to working more hours, em workers are likely to accept 
less pleasant working conditions, if such conditions are substantially 
more productive. During the industrial era, we have spent much of our 
increasing wealth on more pleasant working conditions, as well as on more 
consumption variety and on working fewer hours. Poorer and more com­
petitive ems are likely to reverse these trends, and accept more workplace 
drudgery. It is not clear, however, how much productive drudgery exists in 
the em world.
While successful ems work hard and accept unpleasant working con­
ditions, they are not much more likely to seriously resent or rail against 
these conditions than do hard-working billionaires or winners of Oscars or 
Olympic gold medals today. While such people often work very hard under 
grueling conditions, they usually accept such conditions as a price for their 
chance at extreme success.
Some ems are likely to listen to music on the job, as that increases prod­
uctivity in some kinds of jobs (Fox and Embrey 1972). Such music will 
typically be mild, wordless, and not otherwise distracting (Kiger 1989).
spurs
The em world makes heavy use of “spurs,” who are em copies who are newly 
copied at the beginning of their workday, and then retire or are erased at the 
conclusion of their workday. Such a workday might last 10 minutes or 10 
hours.
Compared with long-lived ems who spend an average of 8 to 12 hours 
of each subjective 24-hour day working, short-lived spurs who end after 
less than one work session spend all of their hours working. So spurs cost 
only one-third to one-half the brain hardware resources of regular workers. 
While splitting off a spur copy that only lasts for a few hours foregoes some 
chances to learn skills and context that may help with similar future tasks, a 
factor of two or more in cost savings is often irresistible.
In addition to saving on the cost of needing to rest from work, spurs also 
save on mental aging. As discussed in Chapter 4, Complexity section, em 
minds become less flexible and more fragile with subjective experience. So 
for tasks where the skills gained from doing a task are not worth the added 
mental fragility produced by that experience, spurs can be cost-effective. 

work
170
Ems see spurs as appropriate for short-term tasks that they expect are worth 
doing, but not worth directly remembering.
We expect a strong selection for ems who mostly accept sometimes being 
such spurs, and expect most em work to be done by spurs (Shulman 2010). 
As discussed in Chapter 11, Defining Death section, they need not consider 
the ending of spurs as anything like “murder.”
As spurs are so central to the em economy, it will be important for ems 
to have an intimate familiarity with the experience of being a spur. This will 
assist in choosing tasks to assign to spurs, and tools and environments to 
support spurs. A simple way to achieve this is to, on rare random occasions, 
switch the roles of the spur and the mainline em when the spur completes 
its task. Mainline ems would then remember many previous experiences of 
being a spur.
Some ems might refuse to ever make a copy unless they could be assured 
that the copy would have an indefinite retirement at some minimum speed. 
The faster minimum retirement speed an em requires, then the more that 
such an em needs to compensate by working for a longer period and by 
being the world’s best at its job.
U.S. workers recently reported spending an average of 7% of their time at 
work “loafing,” such as via eating, socializing, or web surfing. This percent­
age falls when workers more fear losing their job (Burda et al. 2016). More 
competitive em workers loaf less.
Today, mental fatigue reduces mental performance by about 0.1% per 
minute. As by resting we can recover at a rate of 1% per minute, we need 
roughly one-tenth of our workday to be break time, with the duration 
between breaks being not much more than an hour or two (Trougakos and 
Hideg 2009; Alvanchi et al. 2012). We seem to prefer to take a break once 
an hour, relative to having breaks more often (Dababneh et al. 2001). Breaks 
help productivity more when they are short and frequent, when they happen 
in the morning relative to afternoon, and when the activities during breaks 
are preferred, social, work-related, and outside the office (Hunter and Wu 
2015). There is also evidence suggesting productivity gains from napping for 
10 to 30 minutes one or a few times a day (Dhand and Sohal 2006).
Perhaps em mind tweaks can eliminate the need for such breaks and 
naps. But if not, these effects suggest that em spurs will tend to be made 
from copies who just finished a nap or break, and that spurs will have an 

spur uses
171
$
extra productivity bonus for tasks that take less than about an hour or so to 
complete. Thus many em tasks will be designed to take about an hour, and 
many spurs are likely to last for about this duration.
Today, worker productivity usually varies by time of day, but the average 
peak time varies by task. For example, in our world the peak is near 10 in the 
morning in construction, during the morning for sports with complex strat­
egies, and in the afternoon for handwriting and for sports requiring great 
physical efforts (Alvanchi et al. 2012; Hölzle et al. 2014; Drust et al. 2005). 
Time of day of peak productivity probably also varies by age and between 
night owls and morning larks. Each em uses spurs created from the times 
of day which tend to give that em its highest productivity for the assigned 
task. The longer that a task is expected to take, the earlier before their peak 
they would start, to achieve the best average productivity across the entire 
period of the task.
Today only a modest degree of multitasking is productive. It seems that 
doing only one or two projects at a time is best (Aral et al. 2007). Thus both 
long-lived ems and spurs will only work on at most a few tasks at a time.
To avoid many social complications, spurs are likely to interact less often 
socially with non-spur friends and lovers. Spur social interactions instead 
focus on other spurs, such as spur co-workers. Spur interaction partners 
might be comforted by knowing that pleasant and friendly interactions with 
other spurs are motivated less by seeking longer-term advantage, as their 
originals will learn less about those interactions. That is, if a spur associate 
is being especially nice to you, it is more likely than for non-spurs that they 
actually like you.
The use of spurs will encourage ems to coordinate and plan activities in 
their head before splitting into spur copies, to summarize their work well just 
before ending or retiring as a spur, and to organize tasks into units that can be 
completed in a subjective work day, with minimal need to recall details later.
spur uses
Spurs who end instead of retiring can help ems to deniably do things of 
questionable legal or moral status, if the main evidence of their actions was 
erased when their minds were erased. For example, a spur might try to alter 
some evidence of previous poor performance. Spurs don’t need to intend to 

work
172
do such things before making a spur copy. Spurs might just spontaneously 
realize that they could do such things and not suffer later regret or revela­
tions of their questionable actions. A habit of randomly archiving some spur 
minds, and of having larger punishments for violations by spurs, might help 
to deal with this.
Spurs that end could ensure privacy in short-term professional consult­
ing. For example, a relationship counselor could make an isolated spur who 
hears about your relationship problems, offers advice to you in private, and 
then ends.
Spurs are especially useful in searching tasks. Auditing spurs could search 
for accounting irregularities, research spurs could try out innovation ideas, 
artist spurs could try out design concepts, and planning spurs could consider 
possible plans. Such spurs who search expect a small chance of lasting much 
longer than usual if they happened to find something especially useful or 
interesting during their search.
Spurs make it easier to convince people of things without revealing one’s 
sources, by proving that “you would agree with my claim if you knew what 
I know.” To prove this, copies of the two ems can be placed in an isolated 
“safe” wherein a speaker copy could reveal its reasons to a listener copy in a 
conversation of limited duration. For example, a boss might explain to an 
employee why some firm information was too sensitive to share with that 
employee.
The safe might have untraceable access to standard data sources, and 
perhaps also to special requested sources. After the conversation, the safe 
and all its contents are thoroughly erased, and the original two ems might 
just hear a single bit answer, “yes” or “no,” chosen by the listener copy inside 
the safe. Or they might hear a choice from a small, predetermined set of 
options.
A degree of confidence could also be returned. Alternatively, instead of a 
few bits out per safe, one might define a whole language of questions and a 
budget over that language. The original might be allowed to ask any set of 
questions that fits in this budget, using prior answers to pick new questions. 
However, the more bits that are in effect returned from a safe, the more one 
must worry that some bits are used to illicitly encode information that was 
not supposed to be released.

spur uses
173
$
For example, spur safes could let a buyer choose among several sellers 
based on very open disclosures of buyer and seller details and secrets inside a 
safe. Potential mates might become more intimate in a safe to see how well 
they are matched. Safes could allow firms to consider business and product 
ideas, and then reject them without fear of later being accused by a vendor 
of stealing those ideas.
Of course ems should be wary of entering into and divulging secrets 
within leaky safes, that is, devices that look like safes but actually leak infor­
mation. Highly trusted third parties might be required for clans to have 
reliable access to safes that they could share with other clans yet also trust.
Someone might reveal inside of a safe that they had committed in some 
way to hurt the other em if that em didn’t return the desired answer. To 
avoid this problem, an independent (and hard to hurt) judge might also join 
the speaker and listener in the safe, with the power to declare the safe “void” 
if they heard sufficient indications of such threats.
To reduce the cost of using these safes, an em might offer to let a wider 
audience make unlimited bets on what the safe would produce if created, 
but only actually create the safe a small fraction, for example, 1%, of the 
time. (More on such prediction markets in Chapter 15, Prediction Markets 
section.) Such offers signal loyalty, showing that one trusted the listener 
spur to evaluate one’s argument fairly once inside the safe.
Because of safes, on important questions ems rarely need to just accept 
another em’s claim that they have good reasons for believing something but 
can’t explain those reasons because of a need for secrecy. For example, gov­
ernment authorities could not simply pretend to have good secret reasons 
for their policies; others could ask to see those reasons inside safes.
Safes might also make it easier for ems to comfortably self-deceive. 
(Although other aspects of the em world may make self-deception harder.) 
For example, an em could hold idealistic beliefs about its mate, team, firm, 
or clan, and yet still do the savvy non-idealistic things when consequences 
were large. They could do this via a habit of relying on safe-based advice in 
important situations.
Inside a safe, an advisor explains the non-idealistic reasons why some 
choice is best. Outside the safe, the em just follows the advice from the 
safe, and does not reflect much on why that advice differs from what their 

work
174
idealistic beliefs might suggest. In this way ems can sincerely retain their 
idealism while ignoring related beliefs in important situations.
Spurs make it easier to do finely controlled social experiments with close 
field relevance. For example, one could create many small variations on a 
job interview, such as with different clothes or voice tone, to see how those 
variations influenced the chances that a certain job candidate would be 
selected for employment. In such a simulation, almost everything else about 
the situation could be held constant.
Spurs could also be used to test for biases. Today, psychologists show 
common biases by randomly splitting experimental subjects into subgroups 
that are given different prompts. For example, a question might be worded 
two different ways, resulting in different answers on average. Or an “I knew 
it all along” hindsight bias might be shown via telling different subgroups 
different outcomes, and asking subjects what chance they would have 
assigned before to seeing their chosen outcome.
Because of random fluctuations that influence individual decisions, how­
ever, such experiments today usually require large groups of experimental 
subjects to see subtle effects. In contrast, em spurs could directly demon­
strate such biases in individuals, and not just in large groups. An individual 
could be split into different copies that are given different prompts, and then 
their answers could be directly compared.
Ems wanting to convince an audience of their impartiality might even 
empower independent judges or opponents to create such “split-tests.” For 
example, an em might say “In our next hour of debate, I’ll let you covertly 
split off a copy of me three times, each time with three versions of me that 
hear different things from you for up to 5 minutes. Go ahead and see if you 
can trick me into showing a pattern of biased responses in the different 
answers I give you.”
Uses of spurs that involve comparing the behavior of very similar spurs 
may be substantially more useful when run on deterministic emulation 
hardware. This might avoid the problem of random computing errors mud­
dling the results.
Many of these applications of spurs work better if the spur just ends, 
instead of retiring. Such applications might work nearly as well, however, if 
retirement were just delayed for a very long time, and if the archived copy 
was very securely inaccessible in the meantime.

social power
175
$
social power
Compared with us, ems are individually better at getting and keeping power.
Humans today often compete for power, prestige, and material resources. 
But most of us are reluctant to compete fiercely and strategically, using all 
available means. It makes sense that we inherited such attitudes, because the 
forager world greatly punished such aggression, and humans have deeply 
internalized habits and norms that were adaptive in the forager era. The 
farming world rewarded aggression more often, but it also often severely 
punished aggression. But our habits of reluctant competition are often less 
adaptive in today’s rather different world, and are likely to also be less adap­
tive in the em world.
Some of us are more willing to compete aggressively than others. In the 
farming and industrial eras selection effects have ensured that such aggres­
sive competitors have been over-represented in positions of power (Pfeffer 
2010). As the em era allows selection to more strongly emphasize the clans 
who are most successful at gaining power, we should expect positions of 
power in the em world to be dominated even more by people with habits 
and features conducive to gaining power. (Other sorts of ems might domin­
ate positions that hold less power.) Because power tends to give advantages 
overall, we expect that ems will on average have more features that support 
their gaining power.
We actually know a great deal about the habits and features that today 
seem to enable people to gain power in our world (Pfeffer 2010). While we 
can’t be entirely sure how many of these habits and features will be robust to 
the cultural changes that will make the em world different from our world, 
we expect many of them to be robust. This gives us a reasonable basis for pre­
dicting how em habits and features are likely to differ from those common 
today. Let us now summarize our weak expectations about how ems differ 
from people today, based on the assumption that ems tend to have features 
more conducive to power.
Compared with people today, power-gaining ems are more politically 
savvy and skilled, and feel a stronger personal motivation to seek power. 
They less often handicap themselves, such as by refusing to take a test that 
they might fail. That is, they don’t shy away from hard tests. They instead 
have stronger desires to improve themselves, and stronger beliefs that this is 

work
176
possible. They are more inclined to gain impressive educational credentials 
and institutional affiliations. They are absent from work less, work overtime 
more, and spend more years working at each job.
Power-gaining ems are also more willing and able to sell themselves. They 
push more to make themselves visible to superiors, they are more attentive 
to what their bosses want, and they develop stronger relations with those 
bosses. They try harder to make themselves similar to their bosses along as 
many dimensions as possible. They flatter their bosses more, and are better 
at avoiding criticism of those bosses. Such ems are also better at enticing 
others to praise them, instead of bragging about themselves directly.
Power-gaining ems have stronger wills, fueled by more ambition and 
energy, by specializing more in particular industries and firms, and by con­
centrating on a more limited set of important activities and functional skills. 
They have more self-knowledge, self-reflection, and confidence. They are 
more able to project self-assurance, to read others and empathize with their 
point of view, and to tolerate conflict. They tend more to be suspicious of 
potential work rivals.
Such ems are more strategic and careful in choosing the details of their 
career paths. They more often ask for things they want, even if rejection 
seems likely. They are more willing to sacrifice likeability to be seen as tough. 
They try harder to, and are better at, developing their network of useful 
social connections.
Power-gaining ems are better actors, in order to convince others of their 
power. They are better able to pretend and play a role. They tend to act like 
they are succeeding, even when they are not. They tend to express anger 
instead of sadness or remorse. They tend to stand up straight rather than 
slouching, and thrust their chest and pelvis forward rather than curling in 
on themselves. They more often move forward and toward others, and stand 
closer to others, instead of turning their back or retreating. They use tall 
bodies and deep voices, although of course all virtual ems could also easily 
do this if they wish.
The hand gestures of such ems are short and forceful, not long and 
circular. They directly look others in the eye, instead of looking down or 
away. This makes them seem not only powerful but also honest and direct. 
They take their time to think before they respond, although an em ability to 
temporarily speed up their mind would help them to respond more quickly.

social power
177
$
Power-gaining ems prefer meetings to be on their own turf, a place famil­
iar to them but unfamiliar to others. In conversation, they more often inter­
rupt others, and challenge the premises of conversations. Their language is 
evocative, specific, and often filled with forceful words and visual imagery. 
They often use emotional language terms, refer to us-them concepts and 
other contrasting concept pairs, pause for emphasis, and explicitly enumer­
ate how many points they will make.
Today, the powerful are different from the rest of us, and we should expect 
that ems will be different from us in those same ways.


179
 C H A P T E R  15
 Business
 institutions
 e tend to think of the future as a place full of new technol-
ogy, but to many, only physical and software devices count as 
“technology.” However, economic growth results from innov-
ation not only in physical and software devices, but also in social 
practices and institutions.
 Scholars in economics, fi nance, business, and law have long identifi ed many 
simple changes to business and social practices that seem to improve effi  ciency, 
but that are rarely adopted, and that tend to generate little interest when 
explained to potential adoptees. For example, economists tend to consistently 
recommend charging non-zero prices for scarce resources like parking and 
road use, and recommend weakening import tariff s, immigration restrictions, 
rent control, mortgage subsidies, taxes on products where both supply and 
demand are elastic, and penalties for victimless crimes such as drug use or 
prostitution. While clever scholars can often invent auxiliary hypotheses to 
explain why these polices are useful, contrary to appearance, it is far from obvi-
ous that such hypotheses are the real reasons for disinterest in these policies.
 We have six reasons to expect ems to adopt such improvements more 
often than they are adopted today. First, the much larger em economy has 
more resources to explore and develop the many complementary adapta-
tions usually required to make general good ideas eff ective in particular 
contexts. Second, a more competitive economy should less often reject 
cost-saving changes merely because they seem strange or repugnant. When 
effi  ciency gives a competitive advantage, more competition should lead to 
more effi  ciency.
W

business
180
Third, as ems can more easily obtain trustworthy strategic advice on per­
sonal choices from their clan, their behavior should more closely approxi­
mate the rational agent models on which scholarly advice tends to be based.
Fourth, as em clans will know their members very well, such clans can 
provide high levels of insurance to members while suffering much less from 
the usual disadvantages of insurance, such as insurance reducing incentives 
to be careful, and people with hidden higher risks buying more insurance. 
While today risk-aversion is often a barrier to institutional efficiency, risk-
aversion is much less of a barrier for ems.
Fifth, as in many important ways the infrastructure that best supports 
ems will differ substantially from that which best supports ordinary humans, 
an em society must already have paid large costs of change, at least during 
an initial transition period. In general, the costs of changing institutions are 
lower once one is already paying to make other big changes.
Sixth, ems will be smarter, and smarter people tend more to favor 
more efficient institutions (Caplan and Miller 2010; Jones 2011; Jones 
and Potrafke 2014).
I presume that ems adopt at least some of the efficiency-improving 
changes that scholars have identified as being possible yet under-used today. 
My presumption is weak, however, as the efficiency gains of these apparent 
improvements may be illusory. Em society may also fail to coordinate to 
adopt more efficient institutions.
I will now illustrate the possibility of ems adopting more efficient institu­
tions by describing a somewhat random assortment of plausible candidates 
for more efficient institutions.
For each of these changes that I will discuss, a standard simple analysis 
suggests that change would improve efficiency. However, it could be that 
some of these changes are not in fact efficient, because of subtle factors 
that scholars now neglect or under-appreciate. Or it might be that such 
changes are not adopted today because they seem strange or repugnant, and 
a wealthy society such as ours can afford the luxury of rejecting such things 
out of hand. Or perhaps such changes would only be efficient if matched 
with many small adaptations that have not yet been developed; it can take 
time to work out the crucial details to make innovations feasible. Or it might 
be that even with such adaptations the large cost to make these changes is 
just not worth the gains that appear after a change.

new institutions
181
$
new institutions
We know of many specific new social institutions that are plausibly more 
efficient than current institutions.
For example, scholars have long been puzzled to see surprisingly little use 
of pay-for-performance, as when a lawyer is paid a fraction of a lawsuit’s 
winnings. (Such scholars don’t claim that only money motivates lawyers.) 
While pay for performance is used with good effect on many jobs (Banker 
et al. 2000), incentive pay methods could be used more not only by lawyers, 
but also by many other professionals, such as doctors, real estate agents, 
and teachers. Scholars are also puzzled to see that, when such performance 
rewards are used, they are only rarely corrected for outside influences over 
which the person has little control, such as in correcting the strike price of 
CEO stock options for performance of that firm’s industry or local economy.
Related to the puzzling lack of pay for performance is a puzzling lack of 
published track records for professionals, and customer disinterest in such 
records. For example, while court trials are public, in practice clients do 
not see lawyer win-loss records, and they don’t push to see them. Similarly, 
customers push surprisingly little to see sales of real estate agents, patient 
outcomes of doctors, student outcomes of teachers, and prediction accuracy 
of media pundits. Academics care more to count publications than citations.
Instead of track records, customers prefer to rely on personal impres­
sions, referrals from friends, and the prestige of a professional’s institution 
or schooling. In general, we are less interested in people who have achieved 
something than in people said to have the potential to achieve that same 
thing (Tormala et al. 2012). These puzzling behaviors seem dysfunctional 
for achieving outcomes from hired professionals. So to the extent that a 
more competitive em world better selects for those who achieve better out­
comes, then em customers should rely more on outcome track records in 
choosing professionals.
Pay-for-performance is easier when there are more kinds of easily 
exchanged financial assets, tied to more kinds of relevant outcomes, such 
as individual housing prices, personal incomes, or life spans. For example, 
we could today bundle health and life insurance to make our doctors feel 
more concern for our pain and death (Hanson 1994a). Parents and teachers 
might work harder if they owned a share of their childrens’ future income. 

business
182
Because the uncertain payments in pay-for-performance increase risk, this 
approach is also easier when the relevant actors are less risk-averse; mem­
bers of clans who share member risks internally are likely to be more willing 
to take on risk, and so be more willing to accept pay for performance. As 
ems may have better monitoring and mindreading abilities, however, such 
partial substitutes for pay-for-performance may reduce the need for such 
incentive plans.
Compared with our economy today, scholars have long noted that more 
products and services could be usefully priced, with such prices varying 
more with context. For example, theaters, restaurants, and parking lots 
could have prices that vary more with internal location and congestion lev­
els. Utilities such as roads, parking, electricity, water, garbage, sewage, and 
communications could also have prices that vary more with time, location 
and congestion. Allowing crucial utilities like water or electricity to charge 
higher prices in disaster situations could give them extra incentives to keep 
services going.
Instead of being funded via state subsidies, projects that offer diffuse 
value to large diverse groups might instead be funded via “dominant assur­
ance contracts,” wherein donations are conditional on funding targets being 
met (Tabarrok 1998), or via processes where contributions are varied con­
tinuously in time (Charness et al. 2014; Friedman and Oprea 2012). More 
generally, collective choices could be made more efficiently via vote selling 
where each buyer’s price of votes goes as the square of the number of votes 
purchased in each election (Lalley and Weyl 2014). If inter-conversion with 
money is not desired, voters can instead be given voting points to collect, 
move, and trade before converting them into votes via a square price rule 
for each election.
The problem today of income taxes reducing work incentives might be 
reduced by directly measuring and taxing leisure time. Alternatively, income 
taxes might vary more with parameters that predict an ability to earn 
income, such as body height and beauty do today (Mankiw and Weinzierl 
2010). For ems such ability-predicting parameters might include speed and 
clan size. As another alternative, clans might be taxed directly, instead of 
taxing individual members.
Instead of only creating citizens by birth, and allowing unlimited local 
births, transferable citizenships might let better citizens self-select into 

new institutions
183
$
societies. Population levels might be controlled via requiring parents to buy 
a citizenship for each new child.
Today, we have trouble measuring inflation and comparing purchasing 
power between regions, in part because changing product quality influences 
the changing prices we use to infer relative value. Ems who retire to stable 
societies in closed virtual realities might pay prices that offer a more object­
ive standard. If the values placed on living in stable societies are also stable, 
then the varying prices that ems are willing to pay to retire in such societies 
might offer a basis for comparing the value of life in other changing places.
Elections today suffer from the problem that each voter is very unlikely 
to personally change the outcome. Because of this, voters have very weak 
incentives to think carefully about outcomes, relative to choosing partisan 
attitudes that look good to associates. By randomly choosing a small jury 
of voters who will then decide an election, one might greatly increase the 
incentives of the voters who have been chosen to become informed (Levy 
1989). Spur copies of jury members might even be placed together in a safe 
so they could be given access to relevant secret information.
I discuss possible changes toward more efficient law in Chapter  22, 
Efficient Law section. Other types of efficiency changes to weakly expect 
include the adoption of more uniform standards. For example, ems may 
adopt a metric standard for units, an English standard for language, a com­
mon law standard for law, and so on.
Very secure and anonymous communications between willing parties can 
be arranged via “public key cryptography,” wherein each person publishes a 
public key for which they can prove only they know the matching private 
key. In addition, robust systems of secure anonymous decentralized trans­
actions may be built on the recent innovation of block-chain based crypto­
graphic systems, where a public record of all transactions between public key 
labeled accounts prevents double-spending of assets.
Such systems could support digital currencies, token systems, safe wallets, 
registration, identity, decentralized file storage, multi-signature escrow, con­
sensus via rewarding those who best guess a consensus, financial derivatives 
including insurance and bets, and more general decentralized autonomous 
organizations (Nakamoto 2008; Buterin 2014). It is not obvious that such 
systems will achieve the scale of use necessary to support these activ­
ities well. However, if they succeed then only authorities willing to enact 

business
184
quite intrusive monitoring and strong punishment could suppress such 
mechanisms.
I have been personally involved in developing two more types of prom­
ising new institutions: combinatorial auctions and prediction markets. 
Because of this I am especially hopeful about them and want to mention 
them, but I must also accept that readers may prefer to remain more skep­
tical about them, even if they accept a tendency of ems to adopt more effi­
cient institutions.
combinatorial auctions
Today, markets are often efficient mechanisms for allocating resources. At 
least they are when many buyers and sellers seek to trade products or services 
that are very similar to each other, and whose use or production does not 
much influence non-users. In technical terms, we say that competitive mar­
kets that trade commodities are often efficient in the absence of externalities. 
Competition pushes participants to make and accept efficient exchanges, 
both because those who make worse offers are quickly excluded, and because 
participants must in effect take available prices as given.
However, simple markets work less well when goods are so complex and 
diverse that each good is a poor substitute for others, when each unique 
good is only valued much by a few individuals, or when the use or pro­
duction of goods greatly influence non-users. In such cases, competitive 
pressures to take the interests of others into account can be greatly reduced. 
People are then often included in allocations even when their offers are poor 
and inefficient. In such cases, we often substitute non-market mechanisms, 
such as command and control by central authorities. For example, firms 
typically use central command to allocate internal firm resources. States and 
nations often authorize central agencies to provide key services and to regu­
late commerce.
In cities today, the pricing and allocation of central utilities, as well as 
limits on land use to mitigate external effects, are usually done centrally 
and rigidly, via utility and zoning regulatory agencies. The centrality of such 
agencies allows coordination that deals with complexity, and the rigidity 
of such agencies reduces the lobbying costs that flexibility can invite. For 
example, a city might have a fixed rule specifying the number of parking 

combinatorial auctions
185
$
spaces per business calculated according to a simple formula. Allowing few 
exceptions to a simple rule may deal poorly with large variations in business 
parking needs, but has the advantage of discouraging efforts to lobby to gain 
exceptional treatment.
“Combinatorial auctions” and related mechanisms are recently developed 
decentralized processes that flexibly deal with the complexity and unique­
ness of goods, while still reducing the costly lobbying that central author­
ities invite (Porter et al. 2003; Cramton et al. 2005). In simple variations, 
each participant makes several offers regarding the packages of goods that 
they are willing to buy or sell as a unit, and the auction mechanism searches 
for and approves a total set of offers to accept where it estimates a nearly 
maximum social surplus. Such mechanisms in effect make large unique sets 
of offers compete strongly with other large offer sets, forcing participants to 
make more competitive efficient offers even for goods that are complex and 
unique, and only valued by a few participants.
For example, in a simple combinatorial auction for electricity, both buyers 
and sellers bid on when and where they will supply or use how much elec­
tricity, and the auction picks a value maximizing allocation of who buys and 
sells. When finding good allocations is hard, but checking on the quality of 
each allocation is easy, good allocations can be found by publishing bid data 
and then awarding prizes to the best allocations submitted before a deadline.
More complex variations on combinatorial auctions can include bids that 
say how each bidder’s value depends on who else uses what other resources 
and how. In this way the auction can take into account external effects from 
the use of the allocated resources.
More complex auctions can also include bids to expand or change cap­
acity. For example, a more complex electricity auction could include bids to 
make new power plants or transmission lines. More generally, variations on 
such auctions might be used in firms instead of central allocations of offices, 
and in cities instead of central land use zoning. In cities, such auctions might 
account for land use externalities, such as emissions and blocked views, and 
set capacity and locations for the generation and distribution of many util­
ities, such as power, water, sewers, roads, parking, and telecommunications. 
Instead of having a separate auction process for each of these utilities, a 
single auction could deal with the dependencies between the production 
and use of all these resources.

business
186
Combinatorial auctions that substitute for central zoning in cities require 
the development of new auction features and designs. In particular, bids 
need to specify more details on how participant value declines as package 
features become less ideal than requested, and as weaker commitments are 
made about the possibility of later being bumped from one’s allocation. 
Such auction features are desired to allow city land and utility allocations 
to be flexibly reallocated as values and opportunities change with time. As 
better auction mechanisms could plausibly deliver great value, and as the 
relevant research community has well-established ways to develop better 
mechanisms, it seems safe to guess that such mechanisms will be available 
if desired.
prediction markets
I have also been personally involved in developing the new institution of 
“prediction markets.” These are variations on speculative and betting mar­
kets that can encourage and facilitate the aggregation of information on 
important outcomes. By subsidizing trading on particular questions of 
interest, one can induce people able to learn about those questions to self-
select into improving visible consensus estimates (Hanson 2003).
Prediction markets give clear precise continually updated estimates that 
are consistent across many topics. Combinatorial versions can even allow a 
small number of users to manage billions of consistent interconnected esti­
mates, so that updates on some topics automatically improve the accuracy 
of estimates of quite different topics (Sun et al. 2012).
Head-to-head comparisons between prediction markets and other fore­
casting mechanisms, given similar resources on the same questions, find pre­
diction markets to be consistently either about as accurate, or substantially 
more accurate than, other mechanisms. Compared with other mechanisms, 
prediction markets are more robust to situations where no one knows any­
thing useful, where most invited participants are ignorant or fools, and 
where some participants are willing to lie or lose money to distort resulting 
estimates.
Prediction markets can tell a firm how likely a project is to make its dead­
line, how likely a supplier is to deliver as promised, or how many units of 
a particular product will be sold in a particular region. Prediction markets 

prediction markets
187
$
can also help combinatorial auctions by choosing between proposed auction 
rules and mechanisms. In addition, prediction markets in bid rights might 
help predict future auction bids. Such bid predictions could help current 
auctions to choose well between allocating future resources to specific cur­
rent bidders, and leaving those resources to be allocated in future auction 
iterations.
Decision markets, which estimate decision-contingent outcomes, seem 
especially useful for directly advising on particular decisions. Decision 
markets estimate which decision option will produce the highest expected 
outcome, without requiring anyone to judge afterward which decision actu­
ally would have led to the highest outcome. Instead, decision markets only 
require that afterward one can judge which decision option was actually 
chosen, and how high was the actual resulting outcome.
For example, decision markets could directly advise firms on whether to 
fire CEOs, change ad agencies, let deadlines slip, or change product prices. 
Decision markets could also advise democratic voters on which candidates 
are more likely to promote peace or prosperity, and on which policies are 
likely to increase national welfare. Decision markets could even advise char­
ities on which projects would most help aid recipients.
By committing to implement policies that decision markets clearly rec­
ommend, an organization can elicit better advice from speculators, and 
avoid agency and information failures resulting both from diverging leader 
and constituent interests, and leaders neglecting outside advice in order to 
signal dominance (Hanson 2006a, 2013; Garvin and Margolis 2015).
Bets could also be used to send more efficient loyalty signals. For example, 
one might bet at an early age that one will never marry, and then later the act 
of losing the bet would signal a strong desire to marry. The value in the bet 
is not destroyed or lost to society, and this person gains a matching value in 
scenarios where they never marry.
Our society today seems to pay too little attention to averting cata­
strophic risks that might destroy big fractions of civilization, or even lead 
to our extinction. Em society might do better. Special pre-determined 
disaster-contingent prices for products commonly needed in emergencies 
might keep priorities focused on preserving crucial infrastructure. Decision 
markets might help to set such prices, and advise other disaster policies. As 
ordinary financial assets could have questionable value in extreme disaster 

business
188
scenarios, decision markets might instead trade event-contingent tickets 
to enter refuges robust enough to survive many different disaster scenarios 
(Hanson 2010b).
Prediction markets are a meta-institution, able to improve the selection 
of other institutions. Thus, they seem especially potent in a competitive 
world facing strong pressures to adopt more efficient institutions.

189
C H A P T E R  16
Growth
faster growth
ow fast might an em economy grow? We have many reasons 
to expect an em economy to grow much faster than does our 
economy today.
As mentioned in Chapter 13, Competition section, the em 
economy should be more competitive in the sense of more aggressively and 
more easily replacing low-efficiency items and arrangements with higher-
efficiency versions. Reduced product variety and spatial segmentation 
of markets help innovations to spread more quickly across the economy. 
Stronger urban concentration should also help promote innovation (Car­
lino and Kerr 2014). The fact that more productive em work teams can be 
copied as a whole should make it much easier for more productive em firms 
and establishments to rapidly displace less productive firms and establish­
ments. These factors allow the em economy to innovate more quickly.
For a long time, most innovation, and most of the total value of innova­
tion, has been associated with a great many small and context-dependent 
changes (Sahal 1981). Most innovation has also long come from application 
and practice, rather than from “researchers” or “inventors” narrowly con­
ceived. Most of the research that aids innovation is “applied” as opposed to 
“basic” research. Thus we expect most of this better and faster em innovation 
to consist of many small innovations that arise in the context of application 
and practice.
Another reason to expect faster growth in an em economy is that ems 
depend more on computer technology. One might guess that a future very 
computer-centered economy improves at something closer to the recent 
H

growth
190
rate at which computer technologies have improved. This suggests that the 
global em economy might double as fast as every year and a half, which is 10 
times faster than today’s economic doubling time of about 15 years.
Actually, there are plausible reasons to expect an em economy to grow 
even faster. The productive capacity of an economy comes from its capacity 
of inputs, such as land, labor, and capital of various sorts, and also from its 
level of “technology,” that is, the ways it has to convert inputs into useful 
outputs. Although there have been times and places where growth has been 
driven mainly by increases in inputs, most growth over the long run has 
come from better technology, broadly conceived.
For example, foragers grew slowly by accumulating more ways to gain 
advantage from plants and animals, and to survive in more kinds of environ­
ments. While it was easy to create more foragers, and more units of each 
kind of tool, it was much harder to find new kinds of tools and new sources 
of food.
During the farming era, when the economy doubled roughly every 1000 
years, our ancestors could rapidly increase the quantity of people and most 
forms of capital, but total growth in inputs was limited because good land 
was limited. There was little point in having twice as many people, buildings, 
and boats, if you couldn’t find twice as much good land (or water) for them 
to use. Growth mostly had to wait for innovations, often in the form of 
domesticated plants and animals, that made it feasible to survive on new 
kinds of land.
In today’s industrial economy we have plenty of land, relative to our 
needs, and are able to rapidly increase our physical capital, such as machines. 
However, our growth of inputs is still limited because of the limited rate at 
which we can increase the number of skilled laborers. There is little point 
in making twice as many machines if we don’t have twice as many people 
to run them. Growth has mostly had to wait for innovations, mostly in bet­
ter ways to make and use machines (including how to apply them to local 
conditions). Such innovations are thankfully much easier to develop than 
innovations in domesticating plants and animals. So the world economy has 
lately been doubling roughly every 15 years.
In an em economy, however, labor can be grown as easily as capital; fac­
tories can make more ems to run machines as fast as they can make more 
machines to be run. While real estate on Earth will eventually run out, our 

faster growth
191
$
economy has enormous room to grow before such limits make a big differ­
ence. After all, in terms of the physical space that ems require, Earth today 
is practically empty.
Also, while one often hears concern about limited mineral and energy 
resources, the small fraction of income we spend on these resources today 
shows that they are in fact plentiful now. Should current sources dry up, 
many promising alternatives remain. Alternate minerals can usually be 
substituted at modest cost, and there are many promising energy alter­
natives, such as solar cells, thorium nuclear reactors, or fusion reactors. 
Reversible computing can allow lots of computing even with rather lim­
ited energy.
Thus there can be an important early em era where most growth comes 
from simple growth of inputs, that is, from making more labor and capital 
as fast as factories can crank them out, in a background of plentiful natural 
resources. Our basic economic theories of growth strongly suggest that this 
ability to rapidly increase inputs could allow an em economy to grow much 
faster than the 1.5-year doubling time weakly suggested by an em economy 
being computer-based (Fernald and Jones 2014; Nordhaus 2015). In fact, 
basic economic theory allows for the economy to double in a month, week, 
day, or even faster.
In an economy that grows less because of innovation, and more because of 
growth in inputs, the valuation of firms and resources depends less on their 
potential to produce and take advantage of innovations, and how consumers 
identify with products. This may reduce the importance of intangibles in 
firm valuations, and increase the reliability of firm evaluations.
Faster growth and innovation in the em era should encourage an emphasis 
on less durable capital equipment, including buildings. Such equipment 
should be designed for a shorter useful lifespan, under the expectation that 
more efficient designs will quickly become available. Also, the use of build­
ings that happens after several economic doubling times offers much less 
economic value to the original builder or buyer.
Many economic activities achieve their value from flows. One constructs 
a system and then uses it to steadily create a valued product. For example, 
hydroelectric dams, solar cells, buildings, factories, and computers are of this 
form. In contrast we have other one-time economic activities, such as when 
we use disposable grocery bags, glow sticks, ponchos, and rockets.

growth
192
Faster economic growth encourages both fast construction and fast use of 
systems. The cost of the delay to make a system in effect increases the cost 
of that system by the factor by which the economy grows during that delay. 
And for flow systems, the total value created by a system is the product of 
the value produced per time unit, times the doubling time of the economy.
So, for example, if the economic doubling time falls by a factor of 100, 
then for a flow project that would previously have lasted for at least an eco­
nomic doubling time, its ratio of benefits to costs falls by at least a factor of 
100. Thus large increases in growth rates translate into large cost increases 
for systems that produce steady value, relative to systems that produce value 
quickly all at once and then end. So ems will use rockets and other dispos­
able products more, all else being equal.
growth estimate
To generate an empirical estimate of em economy doubling times, we can 
look at the timescales it takes for machine shops and factories today to make 
a mass of machines of a quality, quantity, variety, and value similar to that of 
machines that they themselves contain. Today, that timescale is roughly 1 to 
3 months. Also, designs were sketched two to three decades ago for systems 
that might self-replicate nearly completely in 6 to 12 months (Freitas and 
Merkle 2004).
Special three-dimensional (3D) printers have been created that can print 
about one-half of their components in about 3 days of constant use (Jones 
et al. 2011). If the other half could be made just as fast, a 3D printer could 
self-replicate in a week. If the other half of the parts for a 3D printer took 
ten times longer to make, then a 3D printer could self-replicate in 5 weeks.
Together, these estimates suggest that today’s manufacturing technology 
is capable of self-replicating on a scale of a few weeks to a few months.
Of course machine shops and 3D printers are fastest when making the 
simplest and easiest to construct devices and components. Large complex 
facilities such as chip factories take longer to build. So the estimates above 
may under-estimate doubling times to the extent that they leave out the rep­
lication of important components that take longer to make. Today, humans 
are such a left-out component; our economy doesn’t grow this fast because 
we can’t replicate people as quickly as machines.

growth estimate
193
$
However, these machine reproduction estimates also tend to over-
estimate doubling times because a faster growing em economy offers 
stronger rewards for reducing factory-doubling times. Today, if a factory 
takes twice as long to make a product, that only doubles the factory rental 
cost of the product. If such factory rental is only 20% of the cost of the prod­
uct, then this only raises product cost by 20%. But when the time to make 
something is near the time for investments to double, then taking twice as 
long to make a product reduces the total value of that product by half. As a 
result of product innovation, a delayed product is typically worth even less 
than half.
Innovation also makes the em economic doubling time shorter than the 
time it takes em factories to reproduce themselves. A lot of innovation hap­
pens because of “learning by doing,” where the rate of technology gains is 
tied less to absolute clock speeds than to the rate at which people make and 
use products (Weil 2012). So an economy innovates faster when it has rap­
idly growing inputs, and thus fast growth in the rate at which products are 
made and used. As mentioned before, an em economy focuses much more 
than ours does on computer capital, which has long seen much faster rates 
of innovation than has other forms of manufactured capital. More generally, 
machine-based capital has seen faster rates of innovation than have human 
and land capital.
These factors lead us to expect that an em economy may grow even faster 
than the few weeks to few months doubling time of manufacturing equip­
ment today. Simple theoretical models of growth with innovation allow for 
a wide range of possible faster growth rates—the economy might double 
every (objective) year, month, week, or day (Hanson 1998).
Another way to estimate the economic growth rate of the next era is to 
assume that the next era will grow faster than our industrial era by a factor 
similar to the factor by which our era grows faster than the farming era, 
or by which the farming era grew faster than the forager era. This method 
estimates a roughly 1 week to 1 month economic doubling time for the next 
era. While this is admittedly only a weak clue regarding future growth rates, 
we should not ignore it as it is one of the few concrete clues available.
For a concrete estimate to use in the rest of this book, based on all of 
the above, I choose an economic doubling time of 1 month. Most of the 
analysis in this book is robust to variations in this doubling time estimate. 

growth
194
Any estimates that do depend on this doubling time estimate should be 
relatively easy to adjust to accommodate alternate estimates.
growth myths
There are several factors that some expect to influence growth rates, but 
which probably have at best modest effects.
One such factor is the mental speed of citizens. If 10 times fewer ems were 
to each run 10 times faster, the overall productive capacity of the economy 
would be about the same as without this change, and the economic growth 
rate wouldn’t change much either. Yes, there could be some weak effects 
because of ems running faster or slower, but these are mostly minor. It is 
mainly the existing capacity that creates more capacity, not the mental speed 
of participants. If growth rates were limited by the speed at which individ­
uals could take particular actions, increasing those speeds to weaken the 
effects of those limits could increase the growth rate. But in fact, economic 
growth rates just aren’t much limited by the speed of individual actions.
Another factor that does not obviously suggest faster growth rates is the 
larger size of the em economy. Yes, a larger economy has more resources to 
pursue more possible innovations. But there are also usually diminishing 
returns in new ideas; we tend to try the most promising ideas first, and 
only when those run out do we move on to less promising ideas. So a larger 
economy doesn’t necessarily have a larger growth rate. Within previous eras 
such as the farming or industrial eras, these two effects seem to have roughly 
canceled each other, giving a nearly steady exponential growth within each 
era. We should thus expect nearly steady exponential growth within the em 
era as well.
A third factor that does not obviously suggest faster growth rates is 
greater intelligence. While more intelligent people are more productive, and 
more productivity gives more growth, even so there isn’t obviously a more 
direct connection here, a connection not mediated by productivity. Smarter 
people are awarded more patents, but that is in part because smarter people 
tend more to be sorted into the types of jobs that produce patents.
A fourth factor that is less relevant for growth than many think is the 
number of researchers. Yes, it is possible that the world now fails to coor­
dinate to sufficiently fund research, and that the world would grow faster 

finance
195
$
if it funded more of the right sort of research. However, even if the em 
world coordinates somewhat better than today, it seems that growth would 
increase by only a modest amount, as nations that do more research today 
do not grow noticeably faster (Ulku 2004). Also, research progress is only 
one input into economic growth; increases in research funding usually 
give much less than proportionate increases in research progress in a field 
(Alston et al. 2011). The fact that there are other important inputs creates 
diminishing returns to research effort. These other inputs include progress 
in closely related areas of research and technology, customer experience with 
related products, and more general technical and economic progress.
However, even if these factors don’t greatly influence em growth rates, as 
we saw in the Faster Growth section, there are relevant factors that do.
finance
How is finance different in an em world?
Among their many roles, clans likely also serve as a basic unit of financial 
organization. For example, individual ems and subclans could relatively eas­
ily turn to their larger clans to insure against risks. Hidden information and 
actions, which are often obstacles to insurance, are less of a problem within 
a clan, especially when shallow mindreading is feasible. So clans face a lower 
cost of providing internal insurance.
Ems likely also use their clans to help fund their housing and business 
ventures. This may reduce the use of independent financial institutions for 
insurance, mortgages, and firm stock. However, clans likely still face overall 
risks and imbalanced internal portfolios. For example, clans will tend to 
focus their reputation and training investments in particular types of jobs, 
and thus be at risk to fluctuations in the demands for these job types, and in 
the quality of the competition for those jobs. Clans should want to diversify 
these investments.
Clans are thus likely to use financial markets and institutions to buy 
insurance, to invest in outside ventures, and to sell fractions of their own 
risks and returns. In addition to financial diversification, em clans may also 
seek to diversify the job roles that they fill. To maintain a reputation and 
visibility among other ems, however, clans also probably want to pick many 
of their jobs with an eye to marketing. That is, a clan may want to ensure that 

growth
196
they always occupy the job niches that fit their standard story about what 
this clan is good at and why you’d want to hire them.
A more competitive em economy likely adopts more efficient financial 
institutions. This plausibly includes more support for hostile takeovers of 
public firms (Macey 2008), and more use of private ownership of firms. As 
having worker control over firm management seems to reduce productivity, 
ems probably avoid that (Gorton and Schmid 2004).
One can show that in the long run the value of an investment portfolio 
is dominated by the highest average growth rate among the assets in that 
portfolio; most of the portfolio’s value comes to be in that one asset (Cover 
and Thomas 2006). So when portfolios compete, the long-run winner is the 
one containing the fastest growing asset.
One can also show that the long-term outcome of patient investment 
funds competing fairly is a market dominated by funds that follow a “Kelly 
rule” of investment. Such funds maximally re-invest their returns into each 
asset category, such as stock, real estate, and so forth, in proportion to the 
expected distant future fraction of wealth to be found in each category (Evs­
tigneev et al. 2009). In technical terms, this is roughly equivalent to loga­
rithmic risk aversion regarding risks correlated with overall market returns, 
and near risk neutrality regarding risks not so correlated, as those can be 
diversified away.
This hasn’t happened so far, probably because of high taxation, a continu­
ing influx of new naïve and otherwise-motivated investors, laws that prevent 
funds endowed by wills from sufficiently reinvesting assets, and wars and 
revolutions that periodically wipe out investment funds. However, the em 
world is competitive, ems can be long-lived, and the em civilization may be 
more stable. These factors suggest that the em financial world has a better 
chance of ending up dominated by large long-lived investment funds, funds 
who face only modest and relatively uniform taxation, and who compete 
with only minor other infusions of wealth from new investors using other 
strategies. Such funds may be clan-based. If such a financial world continues 
to grow peacefully over a large growth factor, then em financial markets may 
eventually come to approximate the ideal Kelly rule strategy.
In most models and real markets so far, average interest rates (i.e., rates 
of return on investments) have usually been at least as large as economic 
growth rates. Thus as em era growth rates are large, em era interest rates are 

finance
197
$
also large. This tempts slow humans and em retirees to save a large fraction 
of their income. For fast ems, however, these investment returns correspond 
to very low subjective interest rates, which tempts them away from savings 
and toward immediate consumption. Thus among ems, most of the psycho­
logical inclination to save must come from slower ems, and from larger scale 
organizational commitments.
In the past we have seen random fluctuations in individual preferences 
and in the gains from particular investments, resulting in large variations 
across families in the fraction of family wealth tied up in labor as opposed to 
capital. That is, randomly some families get rich while others do not. While 
today most families hold most of their wealth in an ability to learn jobs and 
earn wages, an important minority of families holds most of their wealth in 
the form of real estate, stocks, etc. We should similarly expect that random 
drift in capital holdings will result in most em clans holding most of their 
wealth in the form of their ability to work, while some em clans hold most 
of their wealth in other forms of capital. Thus productive em ventures often 
require the cooperation of several clans; some clans contribute more capital 
while others contribute more labor.
In Chapter 21, Governance section, we saw that em business cycle fluc­
tuations may be larger due to city governance fluctuations. Today, a cost of 
cycles is labor-hoarding, wherein firms keep paying workers during down­
turns even when there isn’t enough work. As ems can slow down and pause 
when there is less work, the em economy less suffers this cost of cycles.
In sum, finance seems modestly but perhaps not greatly different in an 
em world.


199
C H A P T E R  17
Lifecycle
careers
ow many kinds of tasks does a typical em worker regularly do in 
the course of their job?
Looking at job performance today, we see that while extreme 
specialization can give maximum productivity in the short run, 
over a longer time a modest degree of task variation is often more produc­
tive, because of improved learning and engagement (Staats and Gino 2012). 
Ems add an important new consideration to this usual tradeoff between 
task specialization and task variety. Whereas human minds have a limited 
rate at which they can do tasks, em minds can run at different speeds. So 
the limited subjective career length of an em can be spent either on more 
scope in tasks or on more scope in time. That is, an em worker can either run 
faster and simultaneously do and coordinate more related tasks, or it can run 
slower and coordinate fewer tasks over a longer period of time, and improve 
at those tasks in the process.
Some tasks require a continual response to external drivers. These tasks 
include managing physical systems, such as driving cars. Such tasks usually 
require mental response times as fast as the slower of two rates: the rate at 
which outside disturbances arise to which it is useful to respond, and the 
rate at which the managed system such as a car is capable of responding to 
such disturbances.
When choosing between mind speeds faster than this minimum response 
rate, one of the main tradeoffs is between getting really good at each task, 
and coordinating more related tasks. One can either do a more specific task 
more times over a longer narrower career, or do a wider range of related tasks 
H

lifecycle
200
over a shorter career. During either sort of career one could split off many 
spurs to do short-term tasks that do not need to be well remembered.
Long, narrow careers can achieve high levels of competence while adapt­
ing to changing job detail, but require expensive communication between 
workers to coordinate related tasks. In contrast, having the same worker do 
a wider range of tasks allows for flexible coordination without communica­
tion across those tasks, but comes at the cost of more transitions for each 
worker between different tasks (Wout et al. 2015), and often lower compe­
tence because of less task specialization and a shorter career.
Management and software engineering are jobs where coordination 
across related tasks is especially important. For typical tasks in such roles, 
the costs to transition from one task to the next, and the gains from long-
term career experience of doing related tasks, are less important than 
coordination between tasks. These jobs are thus good candidates for using 
higher-speed ems.
Today, managers tend to have a narrower “span of control,” that is, to have 
fewer subordinates per manager, when subordinate roles are quite different, 
and when managers have more tasks other than supervising subordinates. 
The task of management is important enough to be worth paying more 
to put excellent workers in such roles. These considerations suggest that it 
makes sense to pay more to run em bosses faster than their subordinates, to 
allow bosses to manage wider spans of control. This should push ems to have 
shallower management hierarchies, with fewer levels between the CEO and 
the shop floor.
Manager gains from coordination come in particular from running fast 
relative to subordinates. So with fast bosses, subordinates temporarily speed 
up when they meet with their bosses.
Having bosses run faster than subordinates comes at the expense of shorter 
boss time-horizons in the sense of the time scope of their work experience. 
Fast bosses also require subordinates to have more different bosses during 
their career. For tasks where coordination is important this seems a tradeoff 
worth making. But today managers are the occupation category with one of 
the longest average tenures (6.3 years) at the same employer, exceeded only 
by protective service (6.4 years) and engineering (7.0 years) (BLS 2012). 
This long job tenure suggests that organizations gain a substantial value 
today from managers who stick around.

careers
201
$
The rate of technological and institutional change sets a natural limit 
on useful career length. First, the fact that investment-doubling times are 
near economic doubling times discourages investing in skills that last much 
longer than such doubling times. Second, there is little point in having car­
eer skills that last much longer than the timescales over which jobs greatly 
change. After all, having a long career of experience doing things the old 
way may help little for doing things a new and different way. As jobs tend 
to change substantially on roughly the scale of economic doubling times, 
em speeds are likely to be chosen so that most work careers are likely to last 
shorter than a few such doubling times.
Today, the average age of firms in the S&P500 is 18 years (Foster 2012), 
which is roughly the doubling time of our world economy. This suggests 
that the economic doubling time is close to the timescale on which business 
context changes enough to require big changes in business processes. This 
is confirmed by the fact that today large firms often attempt to “re-engineer 
business processes,” that is, to redesign their main business organization and 
processes from a clean slate. For any given part of a large organization, this 
process happens roughly every economic doubling time.
The re-engineering process is often associated with layoffs and substantial 
worker retraining. As em training can be much cheaper via making many 
copies from a single trained em, em organizations are tempted to replace 
more employees than usual during a re-engineering. Anticipating such 
replacement, employers may prefer to have employee ems run fast enough 
that they are likely to be near the end of their useful lifetime of flexibility at 
the time of the next re-engineering.
Even in a rapidly growing em economy, some equipment and envir­
onments will be unusually durable and stable. These may include nature 
preserves, large physical buildings, and software tools such as languages and 
operating systems that become the basis for standards that coordinate other 
systems. Ems who are well adapted to dealing with these especially durable 
environments could have much longer productive careers in objective time, 
and so could reasonably run more slowly.
Today, the career of someone who works from ages 20 to 65 lasts three 
times as long as our 15-year economic doubling time. In contrast, ems with 
a subjective work career of two centuries that fit into one objective economic 
doubling time would see the world as a more stable and predictable place. If 

lifecycle
202
that objective economic doubling time were 1 month, this matched speed 
em would be a bit faster than a kilo-em. This suggests that we consider kilo-
ems to be the typical speed ems. In Chapter 18, Choosing Speed section, we 
will see another consideration that also suggests this as the typical em speed.
peak age
In advanced economies today, the most productive workers tend on average 
to be within about a decade of a peak productivity age of near 40. Much 
older and younger workers are both substantially less productive. However, 
this doesn’t seem to be because basic mental abilities decline with age. Con­
trolling for birth cohort, individual productivity does not peak until at least 
age 60, and may never peak (Cardoso et al. 2011; Göbel and Zwick 2012). 
The problem is that even though a worker may be just as productive at age 
60 as he or she was at age 40, the next generation of workers tends to be 
more productive.
Also, any falling productivity after age 60 for humans today may be pri­
marily caused by declining physical abilities, not declining mental abilities, a 
problem that is mostly eliminated for em workers. After all, em bodies need 
suffer no declines in physical strength or stamina, as physical bodies could 
be periodically replaced, and virtual bodies never need replacing.
The main reason that workers near age 40 are more productive than older 
workers today seems to be that younger workers tend to be trained in more 
recent work methods that better match the current tool and problem mix, 
while older minds lack sufficient mental flexibility to fully switch to this 
new context. It is thus mainly our economy’s fast rate of change that makes 
productivity peak around age 40 today.
Because of this, we expect the subjective age at which productivity peaks 
in an em economy to depend on an em’s mind speed. For slow ems, work 
methods often seem to change greatly, putting older workers at more of a 
disadvantage relative to younger workers. So for slower ems, productivity 
peaks at a younger subjective age.
For fast ems, in contrast, work methods might not seem to change much 
at all. For fast ems with stable jobs, the main limit on career duration might 
be how long it took for their decreasing mental flexibility to interfere with 
job performance via a reduced ability to track local changing working 

peak age
203
$
conditions, even when basic work methods didn’t change that much. Thus 
fast em productivity might peak at much later subjective ages. Also, mind 
tweaks might extend the duration of em mental flexibility.
Today, our abilities at different kinds of tasks peak at different ages. For 
example, raw cognitive processing peaks in late teens, learning and remem­
bering names in early 20s, short-term memory about age 30, face recogni­
tion in early 30s, social understanding about age 50, and word knowledge 
above age 65 (Hartshorne and Germine 2015).
Mental flexibility can matter more for jobs where innovation is import­
ant. For example, today we can distinguish two kinds of innovative art: 
experimental and conceptual. In experimental art, personal abilities and 
specific projects tend to improve gradually, whereas in conceptual art new 
abilities and projects tend more to arrive fully formed and all at once. For 
example, Paul Cezanne, Robert Frost, and Mark Twain were experimental 
artists, while Pablo Picasso, T.S. Eliot, and Herman Melville were concep­
tual artists. Today, painters, novelists, and directors who are experimental 
artists tend to do their best work roughly at ages 46-52, 38-50, and 45-63, 
respectively, but those ages are 24-34, 29-40, and 27-43, respectively for 
conceptual artists (Galenson 2006). Similarly, today experimental scientists 
tend to peak near roughly ages 38-48, whereas theoretical scientists tend to 
peak near roughly ages 32-42 (Jones et al. 2014). Thus conceptual innov­
ators peak at earlier ages than do experimental innovators. This is consistent 
with conceptual innovations benefiting more than experimental innovations 
from mental flexibility.
At any one time, the vast majority of actual working ems (weighing either 
by count or by speed) are near a peak productivity subjective age. This is 
because the em economy chooses to make many copies of ems at these ages. 
For em jobs that rely especially strongly on skills that peak at a particu­
lar age, most ems doing that job are going to be near that particular age. 
Such peak age ems, however, each accurately remember a long life of being 
younger than peak productivity age.
The duration in time of an em’s highly copied peak productivity period 
depends on how valuable local experience is for their particular job. When 
local experience matters very little, ems are selected very close to their peak; 
they might last on the job only a month or less before being replaced by a 
slightly younger version. They also remember spending a large fraction of 

lifecycle
204
their recent history in leisure, if such experiences substantially increased 
their peak work productivity.
In contrast, when local experience matters a great deal on the job, peak 
em career periods last longer. In this case a worker might stay on the job for 
a decade or more before being replaced by a younger worker. Such workers 
also tend not to remember much recent leisure, as they work most of the 
time to gain more local job experience.
Variance in em team training rates also helps to take advantage of skill 
spillovers within teams. Today, people learn more when they are among 
higher skilled teammates (Ichniowski and Preston 2014). So when some 
team members learn more than usual, other team members also learn more 
than usual.
maturity
Having the typical em worker be near a subjective age of 50 or more has 
many implications, because we know many things about how such older 
people tend to differ from younger people today.
We see many stable correlations today between gender, age, and per­
sonality. Because these same correlations also exist among other great apes 
such as chimps, we have good reason to expect that these correlations are 
deeply embedded in human nature, and are thus likely to be observed in ems 
(Weiss and King 2015).
For example, today as they get older people tend to be less neurotic, and 
more agreeable, conscientiousness, and open to experience (Soto et al. 2011), 
although these trends reverse after the age of 65 (Kandler et al. 2015). Older 
people have weaker differences between genders in their roles and attitudes 
(Hofstede et al. 2010), they are more trusting (Robinson and Jackson 2001), 
they have less regret about missed life opportunities (Brassen et al. 2012), 
and they have more job satisfaction and less stress and negative emotions 
(Tay et al. 2014).
Older people (and males) are more influential in social networks, and 
influential people are more clustered in their associations, and less suscep­
tible to social influence by others (Aral and Walker 2012). For older peo­
ple, happiness tends to increase with age, controlling for health, and older 

maturity
205
$
people tend to associate happiness more with peacefulness, as opposed to 
excitement, in part because they focus more on the present as opposed to the 
future (Mogilner et al. 2011).
As mentioned in Chapter 4, Complexity section, older people tend to 
have stronger crystallized intelligence, that is, more depth and breadth 
of knowledge, vocabulary, and abilities to reason, but weaker fluid intel­
ligence, that is, abilities to analyze new problems and to notice new pat­
terns and to extrapolate using them (Horn and Cattell 1967; Ashton 
et al. 2000).
Older people today tend to be more attached to particular people, places, 
hobbies, and occupations, and are less willing to exchange these for new 
substitutes. Also, older people today commit less crime, and are more likely 
to convict those accused of crime (Anwar et al. 2014). This, together with 
stronger surveillance, suggests that the em world has much less crime.
Today, most people over the age of 80 must deal with health problems, 
the death of loved ones, and many other difficult issues. While some of these 
people are further hindered by dementia, it seems that most of them deal 
well via their lifetime accumulation of mental strength and “cool.”  This gives 
them composure, security, poise, reserve, distance, detachment, and balance, 
allowing them to focus on the positive parts of their lives (Zimmermann 
and Grebe 2014). We should also weakly expect older ems to tend to display 
such composure, detachment, and balance. In addition, older ems suffer lit­
tle or no health issues or other physical decline.
We should thus weakly expect that, because ems will be older, they will 
be less neurotic and be more agreeable, conscientious, open to experience, 
trusting, and clustered in their social associations. They will have more cool 
and composure, commit less crime, more will seek peace as opposed to 
excitement, and have intelligence that is crystallized rather than fluid. And 
they’d be more attached to particular people, places, and habits.
Today, our ability to lie, and our frequency of lies, peaks at ages 18-29, and 
declines as we are younger or older than that peak age (Debey et al. 2015). 
As ems are much older than this peak lying age, ems lie less than we do 
today.
We see again that although ems are like humans, they differ in systematic 
ways from typical humans.

lifecycle
206
preparation
How much do ems invest in preparing for tasks beforehand, as opposed to 
adapting flexibly later to deal with problems as they arise?
Because ems can be copied easily, it is much cheaper for ems to prepare 
for tasks that multiple ems perform. The reason is that one can pay once to 
prepare a single em, and then make many copies of that single em to have a 
large set of prepared ems.
For example, a single em could conceive of a system design for a software 
project, and then split into many copies who each elaborate and implement 
different parts of the system design, continuing to split as needed for subsys­
tems. Similarly, a product designer or an architect could conceive a central 
integrated plan for a movie or an amusement park, and then split into many 
copies to work out details for different parts of the project.
To ensure a quality initial plan, the initial em might split into several, 
who pursue different concepts for the initial plan. The em with the best 
plan is then selected somehow, perhaps by a revived copy of the original em, 
and that em splits into ems to elaborate and then implement its particular 
plan. This process could continue recursively, at each level exploring several 
possible scenarios and keeping only the copies associated with the best plans 
developed. This gives each planning em an added incentive to identify good 
plan details.
These abilities allow ems to implement larger, more integrated pre-planned 
projects than we achieve today. This change also increases the emphasis on 
preparing ahead of time, relative to responding on the fly. Ems tend to rely 
more than we do on previously designed schedules and plans. This reduces 
the premium ems pay for youthful mental flexibility. This effect is likely to 
be weaker for slow ems, for whom the society around them changes more 
rapidly. Such slow ems gain more value from mental flexibility.
Of course the single-em-plans-then-splits-to-execute approach only 
works when the same em encompasses all the different skills needed to cre­
ate and execute the plan. When diverse skills are required for different parts 
of a plan, different ems with different skills may also need to be involved in 
the plan’s development and execution.
Compared with us today, ems find it easier to synchronize the comple­
tion times of different project components, because if a component ends 

preparation
207
$
up taking more effort than anticipated, associated ems can be sped up to 
compensate. In this way em projects can run over budget without running 
over time. This allows larger more fragile project plans to be implemented; 
ems can more often count on each part of a project plan being completed 
and ready at its scheduled time.
Today, workers are more productive after an enjoyable vacation, although 
the boost usually goes away days or weeks after returning to work (Trou­
gakos and Hideg 2009). Perhaps em mind tweaks can eliminate the need 
for vacations. But if not, a single em might experience a long expensive 
period of leisure time, and then many copies of that em might work more 
productively for subjective days or weeks afterward. Once these ems tire, or 
when their tasks naturally end, all but one of these copies may end or retire. 
The remaining copy could repeat the cycle, eventually remembering a long 
history of long, luxurious leisure periods punctuated by short intense work 
periods. This gain from leisure before work might need to be traded off 
against a reduced effective work life before mental fragility sets in, during 
which less local work experience is accumulated.
For example, an em plumber might split into 1000 copies every day, with 
each copy doing a typical plumbing job that takes an average of an hour. 
One of those copies might then be saved, to experience most of a subjective 
day of leisure and then repeat the process the next day. Objectively, this 
person’s life is 2% leisure, but his memories of life are of spending 96% of 
time in leisure. While at some level this em might know that only 2% of life 
is leisure, he or she need not dwell much on this fact.
In this sort of scenario, the number of copies made of each worker per 
workday is probably limited by how much jobs change with job context, 
and by how fast jobs in a given context change. That is, an em who makes 
too many copies risks being less expert at his or her job than ems who make 
fewer copies, which are thus better adapted to each new work context, and 
can also more rapidly adjust to changing work conditions.
Note that in this keep-one-of-many-copies scenario, it might make the 
most sense to keep the copy who had learned the most from doing their 
task. Thus copies that prefer to continue working might compete to see who 
could learn the most, which isn’t quite the same as competing to be the most 
productive. For incentive reasons then, such an em might want to instead 
commit to often keeping the copy who had been the most productive, 

lifecycle
208
instead of the copy who had learned the most. Note also that in this sort of 
scenario the vast majority of the ems retire or end long before their minds 
become too inflexible to be productive.
That ems often have many close copies at any one time should make it 
much easier for ems to obtain trusted independent judgments on things 
such as design plans and drafts of writings. If an em created such a draft and 
a close copy didn’t like it, it would be much harder to explain that criticism 
away by saying that they didn’t understand the goals and style of the draft.
training
We’ve just discussed issues that arise when preparing ems to do particular 
tasks. Related issues arise when preparing young ems for their adult careers, 
because one can also raise one child or train one trainee, and then make 
many copies of those. This changes em childhood and professional training.
For example, only a tiny fraction of ems are children or trainees not near 
their peak productivity age, although most ems remember having spent 
most of their lives as such trainees. A peak-age em is honored to personally 
help train one of the rare younger ems.
The experiences of training-age ems are selected more for their potential 
to teach better skills, and less for their current productivity. Ems search for 
training methods that can add the most to young em skills while adding less 
of the subjective aging that increases mental fragility. Typically the search is 
for high average productivity and low variance, although for some kinds of 
tasks high productivity variance is attractive.
Ems can afford to have many children and young trainees compete, and 
then only select a best few to be allocated into jobs, with the failures ending 
or retiring. One might think that such low odds of success are demoral­
izing, but overconfident neglect of the chances of failure is aided by the 
fact that most ems remember almost always succeeding against the odds. 
Ems remember few substantial failures before retirement. Note that today 
most people who pursue risky careers in sports, music, or acting typically 
maintain positive moods, even when their objective odds of career success 
are quite low.
In our world today, older people often try to give advice to younger peo­
ple, advice supposedly based on their longer life experience. However, older 

training
209
$
people often have hidden agendas, such as trying to justify their choices in 
life. Also, younger people often feel rivalries with older advisors, and value 
making decisions for themselves (Garvin and Margolis 2015). These effects 
combine to make younger people less willing to take advice from older col­
leagues to heart.
In contrast, ems could obtain advice from older copies of themselves who 
have pursued very similar careers and life plans. Such older copies should in 
principle be more accurate and respected sources of useful advice. It is more 
like taking advice from someone who started the same job a year before you, 
and who had your exact same personality and skill set. Ems could also get 
advice from ems with a much wider range of subjective ages; for example, 
ems who are subjectively 10s of millennia old might be available to give 
advice.
However, older ems can still have hidden agendas, and younger ems 
may still resent having to take advice from others. Such factors may limit 
the useful advice from older to younger ems in the same clan. Clans 
that can better reduce the resentments of the young and the hidden 
agendas of the old could thereby gain a competitive advantage in the em 
economy.
The situations in which ems are trained are a mixture of real and 
simulated environments. Ems in training might not always know which 
is which. As in the science-fiction novel Ender’s Game, ems might also 
sometimes not be told when they make the switch from training to 
practical work, if this policy increased productivity by increasing the em’s 
confidence or comfort.
For tasks where ems spend the most total time working, they also spend 
more total time searching for better productivity at that task, but a smaller 
fraction of the work time related to that task is spent on such search. Ems 
spend a larger fraction of time searching for task productivity when there are 
more interesting ways to do a task.
Most em teams are composed of ems likely to reach their productivity 
peak at the same time, so they can work together as a high-productivity 
team. Often this means starting at the same young age and running at the 
same speeds to age together. Early team training likely tries to increase 
the variance of peak team productivity, to allow the highest possible team 
productivity to be found when selecting from among many trained teams. 

lifecycle
210
Perhaps to a lesser extent, training also tries to increase the duration of the 
period that a team could spend at peak productivity, as well as the variance 
in that period’s duration.
Some em teams are “search” teams, focusing more on searching for good 
combinations of members and work strategies, while others are “application” 
teams, focusing more on applying the best combinations found by search 
teams. Application teams are more common. Search teams are designed for 
productivity variance, to increase the chances of finding very high product­
ivity team designs. In contrast, application teams try to decrease productiv­
ity variance, to reduce the chances of unusually low productivity.
Search teams tend to have more varied members and strategies, and they 
may also expect to see members and strategies change more over time within 
the life of the team. In contrast, application teams expect team personnel 
and work methods to be stable. Search teams are also likely to “network” 
more by having more social contact with a wider range of people outside 
their teams. This is because today having many weak social ties tends to be 
good for workers who need to innovate and to locate hidden information, 
while having fewer and stronger social ties tends to be better for workers 
who exploit known information and transfer tacit job skills to new tasks 
(Pfeffer 2010).
childhood
Not only is training different for ems, childhood is similarly different.
The experiences of children are more varied and risky than those of peak 
age ems. This is in part to stretch their range to increase the generality of 
their skills. It is also in the hope of producing variance in persistent product­
ivity across different copies, from which the best could be selected.
A peak-age em will likely be more productive if they’ve had more relevant 
work experience before they reach their peak age. Thus even though one 
can afford to pamper young ems in training, they still remember having 
spent a large portion of their time working, to gain more experience. In 
contrast, although peak age ems can’t afford to spend much on pampering, 
they might still remember a recent life spent mostly in luxurious leisure. This 
is because it can be cheap to give one em leisure and then make many copies, 
who then work more effectively because of that leisure.

childhood
211
$
Younger ems are subsidized, and focused on learning to become more 
productive, in the hopes of reaching a high productivity during their peak 
years. Young ems see the important part of their lives as their future peak 
productivity years, and one of the great questions of their life is whether 
they will live up to hopes about them and become one of the few greatly 
copied ems when they reach peak productivity. Most young ems eventually 
disappoint such hopes.
Ems use their future peak productivity period not only as a key standard 
for judging themselves, but also for judging their spouses, friends, and other 
associates. That is, ems not only seek associates that can improve their lives 
at the moment, ems want even more to find associates that will help them 
to achieve high productivity during their hoped-for future success period of 
high peak productivity. In addition to asking “Who do I want around me 
now?” ems ask “Who will I want around me then?”
Early in an em’s life, his or her future might seem quite unpredictable. At 
that point, a great many possible careers, locations, and associations might 
seem plausible. Later, however, once a particular copy has chosen a particu­
lar career, location, and team, the future is far more predictable—much more 
predictable than are our careers today.
Once an em clan becomes established at a certain kind of job, that clan 
continues to restart early copies to be trained to do that job. Each new ver­
sion is trained to take over that job when older versions become too fragile 
to be fully productive. New versions are trained using improved training 
techniques, to become proficient with the latest tools and productive in the 
latest work contexts.
Most such ems could thus look at the lives of prior versions of themselves 
to gain a very good idea of what their future life will look like. This is some­
what comparable with a medieval worker who inherited his or her parents’ 
role in life as a farmer, soldier, or cobbler. However, such ems need not feel 
pressed to do jobs against their wishes. After all, many variations on young 
ems can be created in the hopes of finding a few who are enthusiastic about 
available jobs.
The tiny fraction of children in an em society should make it harder for 
ems to express natural parenting urges. Perhaps ems could substitute by 
watching “reality” shows about children that they share with many other 
copies. They might vote on key child-raising decisions; it might really take 

lifecycle
212
an em village to raise a child. To support this, children might run at the 
speeds at which their parental groups take their leisure. This approach may 
not provide a sufficiently direct and tactile connection to satisfy parenting 
urges for many. But a great many people today have lived productive lives 
without being parents, suggesting that enough ems could be found who are 
productive without being parents.
The great number of older copies made of each successful child make 
the details of that young life relatively famous. That is, when older ems 
remember the particular details of their childhood, a great many other older 
ems would also remember exactly the same details. Thus most older ems 
remember a relatively famous childhood, somewhat as if they had been a 
child celebrity who is now no longer famous. Far fewer other ems know or 
care about the details of an em’s current adult life, relative to the number 
who know and care about the details of their childhood.
This celebrity childhood tends to reveal many details about youthful 
events and attitudes. If an adult em is at all tempted to talk about particular 
events and attitudes from their childhood, the sheer number of adults who 
all remember the exact same childhood will tend to ensure that the informa­
tion about their childhood will leak out. If George didn’t like Fred as a child, 
then even if he never said anything about that as a child, the adult Freds will 
still likely all hear it.
Childhood and training might usefully be done at a very fast speed, at 
least if accurate enough task simulators were available, and if direct inter­
action with the larger world was not required for learning. Ems trained in 
this way remember that during their childhood the world was more stable 
and changed slowly.
The younger that ordinary humans are when scanned, the earlier their 
training in the em world could begin. While some might express objections 
to scanning young humans, especially when such scans are destructive, in a 
world dominated by ems these objections may not always or even usually 
determine whether scanning actually happens.
Although em childhoods differ from our childhood today, they are still 
recognizably childhoods.

PA R T  I V
Organization


215
C H A P T E R  18
Clumping
cities
o ems physically concentrate in cities, or do they spread out more 
evenly across the land?
Industrial economies today achieve large gains from clumping 
social and business activities closely together. The more easily that 
people can quickly travel to visit many different stores, employers, clubs, 
schools, etc., the more kinds of beneficial interactions become possible. The 
ability to interact via phones, email, and social media hasn’t reduced this 
effect; if anything the possibility of additional electronic interaction has 
usually increased the value of personal visits. Urban economists and other 
academics have long studied such “agglomeration” effects, and understand 
them in great detail.
We should expect these gains from clumping to continue in an em world 
(Morgan 2014). Ems want to be near one another, and near supporting tools 
and utilities, so that they could more easily and quickly interact with more 
such people and tools. This is especially important for fast ems, who can 
suffer noticeable communication delays with city scale separations.
Per person, cities today with twice the population tend to be 10% more 
economically productive per person. Compared with any given sized city, 
double-sized cities have per-person 21% more patents, 11% shorter roads, 
and 9% shorter electrical cables. But these cities also suffer 12% more 
crime, 17% more AIDS cases, and 34% more traffic congestion costs per 
person (Bettencourt et al. 2007, 2010; Schrank et al. 2011). Today, one fac­
tor increasing the productivity of larger cities is their selectively attracting 
better workers. But another important factor favoring big city productivity 
D

clumping
216
is their giving those better workers more ways to gain from their superior 
abilities.
Optimal city size is in general a tradeoff between these gains and losses. 
During the farming era most people lived in small communities with popu­
lations of roughly 1000. Compared with any given sized village, only about 
75% as many people lived in double-sized villages (Nitsch 2005). Thus most 
farmers lived in the smallest villages, because during the farmer era larger 
versions suffered higher costs of crime, disease, and transport.
Within rich nations today, in contrast, people are spread roughly equally 
across all the different feasible city sizes, between a minimum viable modern 
town of a few thousand and a maximum city size set by a nation’s popula­
tion. Compared with any given size city, about the same total number of 
people live in cities twice as big, and in cities half as big. This change to 
larger cities from the farming era has been made possible because industrial 
society has greatly lowered the costs of crime, disease, and transport, and 
increased our abilities to gain from specialization and innovation. Nations 
come in different sizes, and are also spread out roughly equally between a 
minimum viable size of about a half million and a maximum set by world 
population (Eeckhout 2004; Giesen et al. 2010).
An em economy might further reduce the costs of crime and disease, and 
increase the gains from innovation. After all, well-designed computers can 
be secure from theft, assault, and disease. More important, traffic congestion 
costs could be much lower in an em city because most transport of ems 
could be done via communication lines, and most virtual meetings within 
a city do not require the movement of em minds at all. As congestion costs 
now limit city sizes, this increase in virtual meetings could plausibly tip the 
balance toward much larger em cities.
Thus instead of today’s equal distribution of people across all feasible city 
sizes, most ems might instead be found in a few very large cities. Most ems 
might live in a handful of huge dense cities, or perhaps even just one gigantic 
city. If this happened, nations and cities would merge; there would be only a 
few huge nations that mattered.
Larger em cities could allow great increases in social complexity. Farm­
ers, who usually lived in near-a-village sized social units of roughly 1000, 
have sometimes said that they would hate to suffer the social isolation of 
the typical forager, who lived in bands of roughly 30 people. Such farmers 

city structure
217
would hate to lose their village-based opportunities for specialization and 
complexity in work and leisure. Many people in our era living in cities of 
size around 1 million have similarly said they would hate to suffer the social 
isolation of the typical farmer.
If em cities are even larger still, with populations of many billions to tril­
lions, their residents may similarly relish the greatly increased social oppor­
tunities available in gigantic cities, and pity the relative social isolation of the 
city-dwellers or our era, much as we sometimes pity the isolation of farmers, 
or farmers pity the isolation of foragers.
Increased social density should change em languages. Languages spoken 
by more people over longer eras tend to make more distinctions such as 
between colors, and have larger vocabularies, more phonemes, and shorter 
words. With more emotion words, ems remember and share more kinds 
of feelings. Such languages also have more grammatical tools such as 
­adjectives, tenses, prepositions, pronouns, and subordinating conjunctions 
(Henrich 2015). Virtual reality assistance to better hear spoken words 
should also increase the number of phonemes and shorten em words.
Having only a small number of em cities makes it easier to regulate the 
em economy. While a city needs growth-friendly regulation to become one 
of the few big em cities, once a city had become very large it might be able to 
maintain its size while tolerating substantial growth-reducing regulations. 
This is especially possible if all of the big em cities agreed to adopt similar 
levels of such regulations.
city structure
We can say things not only about the number and size of em cities, but also 
about internal em city structures.
In virtual meetings, ems care little about being much closer than the reac­
tion distance from a city center. Remember, reaction distance is how far 
light travels in a mental reaction time. As faster ems have shorter reaction 
distances, they thus gain more value from congregating closer to city cen­
ters. So faster ems should cluster more centrally, surrounded by slower ems 
toward the periphery. This is similar to how today investors using higher 
frequency trading algorithms often pay more to locate close to financial 
market centers. The higher values gained by fast ems are reflected in higher 

clumping
218
rental prices for central real estate, which should induce a denser packing of 
computing power, energy inputs, and cooling in em city centers.
In the last few decades, falling costs of long-distance travel have induced 
a great increase in the rate of conferences and business meetings. Compared 
with the residents of our cities, ems who are within a reaction distance of one 
another have low costs of traveling to attend virtual meetings. This should 
greatly increase the rate of conferences and business meetings, especially for 
slower ems.
Because of rising prices to rent space near city centers, the total hardware 
cost per subjective minute of em experience is higher toward city centers. 
Thus ems who tend to choose more central locations when they run faster 
face a more than proportional effective hardware cost as a function of speed. 
Because of this, ems who get less value from many fast interactions with 
other ems tend to locate toward the peripheries of em cities.
If faster ems tend to locate closer to city centers, if ems tend to cluster 
spatially near others of the same speed, and if em speeds tend to fall 
into discrete classes, then em cities may break into discrete speed neigh­
borhoods. Each neighborhood runs mostly at its own different speed. 
These neighborhoods might plausibly be arranged in rings around the 
city center, or perhaps in a fractal structure around many levels of urban 
centers.
If ems sometimes inhabit physical bodies with sizes matched to their 
speed, then cities may have matching physical infrastructure such as side­
walks, bridges, and doorways. These may be smaller toward city centers, 
where the faster ems reside. Physical barriers that enforce differences in air 
pressure between different city regions might perhaps also be good places to 
change the typical physical scale of infrastructure. In this case, inner regions 
with smaller scale infrastructure also have higher pressures.
Today, larger cities tend to have better educated, more social, and more 
productive workers. Bigger cities less often specialize in particular industries 
and occupations (Duranton and Jayet 2011). Big city workers also tend to 
do tasks that are more connected to other tasks, and so benefit from being 
located close to each other (Kok and ter Weel 2014). Cities grow faster 
when their workers do more connected tasks, and when these workers 
connect more via social media (Mandel 2014). Industries with many new 
products and methods tend to locate at first in bigger cities, and then move 

city structure
219
to smaller cities as their products and methods become more stable (Desmet 
and Rossi-Hansberg 2009).
It is plausible to expect that activities near em city centers are more like 
typical activities in our largest cities, whereas activities toward the periphery 
of em cities are more like typical activities in our smaller towns. Thus em 
city centers tend to house new innovative dynamic industries, and more 
productive workers who are more social and educated, who do more kinds of 
occupations, and who tend to do more connected tasks. City peripheries, in 
contrast, house older, more stable industries, and regions that are specialized 
to particular industries.
Tasks that are more likely to be done toward em city peripheries include 
monitoring, identifying, estimating, handling and moving objects, oper­
ating and controlling machines and processes, using computers, drafting 
and specifying devices, and equipment repair and maintenance. Tasks 
more likely to be done nearer to em city centers include judging quality, 
determining compliance, making decisions, thinking creatively, developing 
strategies, scheduling and planning, interpreting, communicating, making 
and maintaining relations, selling, resolving conflicts, coordinating, training, 
motivating, advising, and administration (Kok and ter Weel 2014).
Because most travel is virtual or electronic, iconic city locations are less 
often transport routes or hubs, as they sometimes are in our era, and more 
often plazas and other spaces where many could congregate. City design 
focuses less on daily worker commutes, and more on the distribution of 
communication, power, and cooling, and on supporting frequent changes in 
space allocations.
As faster em hardware emphasizes processing relative to memory, em 
city centers emphasize processing hardware, while peripheries emphasize 
memory hardware, especially cheaper, slower-access memory hardware. 
Retirees and archives tend to be located toward the periphery.
Today, most who walk city streets, or who ride mass transit, are using 
them to go somewhere. They are often distracted, staring at their phones. 
In contrast, most ems walking virtual city streets may be less distracted, and 
instead be in the mood to stroll or wander. If they are distracted, they might 
just have a far away look that doesn’t meet the eyes of others. After all, ems 
could talk to others or read their email in their heads, without needing to 
look down at their hands as many of us do today.

clumping
220
city auctions
Not only can we say things about em city structure, we can say things about 
em city governance as well.
As discussed in Chapter 15, Combinatorial Auctions section, combinato­
rial auctions could allow decentralized management of city utilities while 
avoiding large costs from political lobbying.
Auctions to choose and allocate utility capacity and customer locations 
might combine all important city utilities. That is, participants might offer 
bids that simultaneously specify, in addition to a maximum price to pay, these 
quantities: (1) spatial volume, shape, orientation, and location constraints, 
(2) part swapping portal locations and sizes, (3) lines of sight to outside 
views or specific parties, (4) limits on surface temperature and chemical 
corrosiveness, (5) amounts and forms of power and cooling, (6) flow rates of 
specific chemicals piped in and fluid garbage piped out, (7) communication 
distance and bandwidth from other particular residents, (8) time delay and 
capacity to move hardware out and in, (9) support force tensors, (10) limits 
on surface heat amounts in and out, (11) limits on incoming and outgoing 
vibrations, (12) limits on chances of incoming, outgoing leakage or explosive 
destruction, and (13) clauses to cover disputes with neighbors. Bids could 
specify not just ideal values for these parameters, but also the size of pen­
alties others pay for incremental violations of these conditions, including 
prices to sell the entire allocation at later points in time.
The auction in each city is repeated often, and continues to choose a 
winning allocation, which says who specifically can use what spaces when, 
with what supporting resources, limits, etc. This specification includes 
­reallocating previously promised resources, and also future resources that 
are not yet promised to anyone. The winning allocation is something close to 
the allocation that maximizes the total stated value of the city to all auction 
participants. Auction participants might include not just those who want 
to consume land and supporting utilities, but also utility suppliers, who bid 
prices to supply particular utility amounts at particular locations. Prediction 
markets estimating future winning bids could help the auction mechanism 
to estimate the opportunity costs of commitment, so that it could choose 
between committing to particular future allocations now versus waiting for 
more bids in the future.

choosing speed
221
Auction revenue could pay for utility fixed costs and also perhaps repay 
city investors. In theory, in optimal size cities the revenue from such auctions 
should just cover the subsidies given to city services with scale economies, 
leaving no remaining revenue to pay city investors (Raa 2003). But that 
theory may not apply exactly.
Em city design places a high priority on supporting rapid physical growth, 
such as replacing and moving computer and communication hardware, 
expanding power and cooling capacity, and building the city higher into the 
sky and deeper into the ground.
In the U.S. today, not only does it take 2 years on average to construct 
each building, it takes over 2 additional years to plan it, mostly dealing 
with regulation. This planning time has actually increased in recent dec­
ades (Millar et al. 2013). A much faster growing em economy needs to 
greatly reduce these construction delays. Combinatorial auctions could 
allow much more rapid approval of and flexibility in building plans, while 
still dealing well with the effects of building changes on city neighbors. 
Buildings might also tend to be made smaller, all else equal, to reduce 
delays.
choosing speed
How fast do em minds run, relative to ordinary human minds?
Because faster ems need more central city locations, they in effect have a 
more than proportional cost of speed. When all else is equal, this tends to 
reduce em speeds. For example, for tasks that take a fixed subjective time 
to complete, this speed cost effect encourages the use of the slowest “just in 
time” ems barely able to finish a task before its deadline.
In 1 objective month a milli-em gets about 45 minutes of subjective 
experience. An hour is near the shortest time it takes a skilled worker to do 
a useful task, and tasks that take much longer than an economic doubling 
time to complete are far less valuable. Thus ems slower than milli-ems must 
almost all be retirees.
Other factors, however, can push toward faster em speeds. These include 
speed as a status signal, gains from having careers finish before jobs substan­
tially change, and gains from more coordination by having the same em do 
several related tasks.

clumping
222
The same sort of interaction gains that encourage ems to clump into 
dense cities also encourage ems to run at speeds like those of their associates, 
and to avoid the phase differences that result from time-sharing computer 
hardware. After all, time-sharing ems with different phases and long periods 
can’t talk naturally to each other without changing speeds or phases, and 
short swap periods may greatly increase the average cost of swapping.
We have many reasons to expect particular speeds for particular tasks. 
Ems who work closely with physical processes, such as by managing fac­
tories, run at the speeds required by those physical processes, and there is 
likely to be a wide range of such speeds. Most ems interacting with ordin­
ary humans tend to run at nearly the same mental speeds as humans. Ems 
competing in product development races not constrained by delays from 
interacting with physical or other external systems often run at near the 
top cheap speed, and perhaps even faster. Such racing ems are likely to be 
located well away from city centers, if the time to produce results is long 
compared with the time delay to deliver results from sites distant from a city 
center. Many retired ems run at near the base speed, that is, at the slowest 
near-proportional hardware cost speed. The speeds of other ems, however, 
tend to clump at a small number of standard speeds, to allow them to inter­
act more easily with each other.
We have some specific reasons to expect several differing standard speeds. 
One reason has already been mentioned: coordination gains from having 
bosses run faster than subordinates. Such gains are limited by difficulties in 
having a single boss know enough to manage many diverse teams. A speed 
ratio of 16 may be feasible, if a good boss can plausibly remember enough 
detail to manage roughly 16 different teams at a time.
A second reason for differing speeds is to have leisure go faster than work. 
In many jobs today, worker desires to rest between work sessions often con­
flict with the desires of clients for workers to be always available. Having 
different work shifts that cover all time periods helps, but can lead to worker 
failures to coordinate across shift boundaries (Chan 2015). Ems could 
greatly reduce this conflict by having their leisure speeds be much faster 
than their work speeds.
For example, at a leisure-to-work speed ratio of 16, a worker might be on 
the job around the clock except for taking a 45 minute break every 12 hours, 
a break during which they can rest for 12 subjective hours. To fully use 

choosing speed
223
local fast em hardware, a population of workers might split into 16 different 
work-phase communities, who each take their leisure at different times, and 
thus can’t interact much with other phase groups during their leisure time.
For ems who work close enough to a city center to interact without 
noticeable delay with most of that city, switching to fast leisure time can 
greatly reduce the number of city ems with which they can interact without 
delays. This is a sensible choice if leisure activities gain less from interacting 
with many others than do workplace activities. This seems to hold today, 
as work tends more to be located toward city centers today, while leisure 
(especially for older people) is more in peripheral areas.
When the ratios between standard speeds are powers of two, it becomes 
easier for the same hardware to support different speeds at different times. 
For three or more such standard speeds, if neighboring speeds differed by 
the same ratios, then common social conventions could be used to manage 
how ems of different speeds interact with each other. Thus a simple assump­
tion is that the main em speeds will tend to differ by the same factor, a factor 
that is a power of two. Perhaps this standard speed ratio factor would be 
four or 16.
My best guess for the (economic-value-weighted) typical em speed dur­
ing the early em era is within roughly a factor of eight of a kilo-em speed. A 
speedup of 1000 is fast enough for a two-century-long subjective career to 
fit into 2 objective months of rapid social change, and yet still slow enough 
for its 15-kilometer reaction distance (at a reaction time of 0.1 seconds) 
to include a familiar-sized city. (For example, Manhattan is 21.6 by 3.7 
kilometers.)
A physical em body that matched the reaction time of a kilo-em is about 
1.5 millimeters tall. Such a body might have to be tele-operated, if a match­
ing brain does not fit inside such a body. Such miniature ems could manage 
matching tiny pipes, service access hallways, tools, vehicles, and manufac­
turing plants, all with parts 1000 times smaller than ours but changing 1000 
times faster.
At this scale, an industry-era city population of a million kilo-ems could 
fit in an ordinary bottle, as in the miniaturized and bottled city of Kandor 
from the Superman Comics. A billion at this scale might fit in a small build­
ing of today, while a large building might hold the trillions in population 
that are said to fill a galaxy in the science-fiction stories of the 1950s. Of 

clumping
224
course we have no guarantee that a kilo-em brain could fit inside a matching 
sized body.
Note that for any given size of the em economy, the faster the typical em, 
then the smaller the total size of the active em population, as faster ems typ­
ically produce proportionally more economic value, at least among ems who 
are fast enough to do a job at all. The economic product of a billion kilo-ems 
should be roughly comparable with that of a trillion human-speed ems.
transport
Even if most em activity, and travel, is done in virtual reality, some ems and 
material goods need to physically travel to new locations.
Today, at the typical urban commuter speed of about 10 meters per sec­
ond, it takes about 25 minutes to commute 15 kilometers across a city. It 
takes about 5 hours for a jet to fly across continents such as North America, 
or between continents such as North America and Europe. It takes about a 
month to ship goods by boat from China to the U.S., and it could take over 
a year to fly to Mars and back.
However, to the typical speed kilo-ems, such physical trips take far longer 
subjectively. To a kilo-em, a physical commute across a city takes a subjective 
18 days, a jet flight between continents takes 7 subjective months, a boat 
trip from China to the U.S. takes a century, and a one year flight to Mars 
and back takes a millennium. (To a kilo-em, 12 hours of real daylight or 
nighttime lasts for a subjective 17 months.)
Such long subjective delays greatly discourage physical travel by fast ems. 
In fact, kilo-ems who physically commute might typically travel only nine 
meters. This estimate comes from the fact that, in cities today, the fraction 
of people who commute a distance falls by half for every fifteen minutes 
added to their commute (Ahlfeldt et al. 2015). Of course ems can travel 
electronically to wherever receivers are built.
A rapidly growing em economy also discourages transport of physical 
goods over long distances. First, high interest rates greatly discourage the 
use of products or resources that require travel or shipping delays of several 
economic doubling times.
More important, a rapidly changing economy needs the flexibility to 
swiftly adapt to changing circumstances. Today, 58% of U.S. exports by value 

transport
225
are sent by air. Such transport is typically so time sensitive that an extra 
day in transit is equivalent to a product tax of 0.6% to 2.3% (Hummels 
and Schaur 2013). Yet 1 day is only one part in 5000 of today’s economic 
doubling time. If this delay-is-very-costly effect scales with the growth rate 
of the economy, then for an em economy with a 1 month doubling time 
it becomes an 8 minute transit delay that is equivalent to a product tax of 
0.6% to 2.3%. At typical urban commuting speeds of 10 meters per second, 
products can only be shipped 5 kilometers in 8 minutes.
Thus even shipping goods all the way across em cities is substantially 
discouraged, and shipping goods between em cities is quite prohibitively 
expensive. The main long distance shipping is for goods with very poor local 
substitutes, such as essential raw materials, or hard-to-make goods that use 
secret designs, where the manufacturer does not trust local manufacturers or 
3D printers not to steal the design.
To avoid such trust issues, em cities may open internal “embassy” regions 
entirely run according to the laws and rules of other cities. Manufactur­
ers from those other cities could then place factories within such regions 
and be better assured that their design secrets are protected. Em cities with 
large “embassy” trade zones might be almost entirely self-sufficient in terms 
of physical manufacturing, although trade via communication, such as of 
designs, would be robust.
As the high cost of time delays encourages em cities to draw their raw 
materials mostly from local sources, a poor choice of city location might 
be fatal to long-term em prosperity. Locating close to large industry-era 
landfills, which contain a wide range of useful materials, might offer useful 
insurance against such risks.
Em economic interest in space travel should greatly diminish from 
today’s already low levels. Although a much richer em society can afford 
more vanity space travel, the long subjective delays to move between Earth 
and space discourages this choice relative to other vanity projects. Even so, 
a far larger em economy, and the far lower cost to send ems into space, will 
likely greatly increase the number of human-like creatures in space, even 
if the fraction of GDP spent on space is lower. It is also possible, even if 
unlikely, that a cascade of debris from colliding satellites in Earth’s orbit 
will make exit from Earth through the resulting debris field prohibitively 
expensive (Kessler and Cour-Palais 1978).

clumping
226
Within cities, transport of shipping-container-sized items probably takes 
place via roads and railroads with familiar human-scale cross-sections and 
speeds. But the existence of ems with much smaller physical dimensions 
likely also creates a demand for transport routes with smaller cross-sections.
Pneumatic tubes seem one attractive candidate for smaller cross-section 
transport. Paris once had a large postal system of 6.5-centimeter diameter 
tubes that moved bottles containing letters at a speed of about 10 meters 
per second. This tube system started in 1866, and eventually had about 500 
kilometers of tubes. Pneumatic tube systems work similarly today, although 
they are better automated and typically have diameters of 10 centimeters. 
Em cities might have much larger networks of pneumatic tubes to move 
small goods.
Train tunnels today have a standard diameter of about 6 meters, while 
automobile tunnels are usually a bit larger. Pneumatic tubes are roughly a 
factor of 100 smaller than train and road tunnels. Tubes 100 times smaller 
than pneumatic tubes are a bit less than a millimeter in diameter. It turns out 
that this is a standard diameter for equipment tubes today.
Similar to computing and manufacturing, future transport may also be 
thermodynamically adiabatic, to reduce the use of free energy. That is, there 
may be substantial subsystems of the transportation system wherein the 
free energy required to move cargo is proportional to the speed at which 
that cargo moves. If so, then as with adiabatic computing and manufactur­
ing, within such subsystems about as much is spent on renting transport 
hardware, including roads, as on the energy and cooling needed to run that 
hardware.
In sum, because ems vary in speeds and sizes, em travel takes place in a 
wider variety of sizes of tubes and vehicles.

227
 C H A P T E R  19
 groups
 clans
 y analogy with a family clan today, we can take all of the copy des-
cendants of a single original human, and call that group a “clan.” 
All of the copy descendants of a particular em can be called a 
“subclan.” (While the term “clade” might be more precise, the 
term “clan” is more widely known.)
 How do clans and subclans organize?
 We are today each part of many organizations, such as neighborhoods, 
fi rms, clubs, and nations. But we rely most on our families when we seek 
strong long-term bonds and trust. It is within families that we most share 
resources, let ourselves be most vulnerable, and seek help in bad times. Long 
ago humans evolved to trust families more than other groupings because 
of their closer genetic relations, and have developed many family-specifi c 
adaptations to complement such unusually strong family trust.
 Identical twins are more closely related than are family members. Because 
of the rarity of such twins, however, our ancestors may have evolved few 
adaptations specifi c to twinning. Even so, the trust and bonds between iden-
tical twins seems to usually be stronger than those between other family 
members.
 Ems will have access to a new unit of organization: clans of copies of the 
same original person. Compared with families or even identical twins, ems 
have even stronger reasons to trust and bond with fellow clan members. Th is 
makes em copy clans a natural candidate unit for fi nance, reproduction, legal 
liability, and political representation.
B

groups
228
The degree of affiliation between two em copies depends on how long 
they have been diverging subjectively since their last common ancestor. 
Copies that have diverged for only an hour are likely to feel very strongly 
affiliated. They’d share almost all opinions and attitudes, and are usually 
willing to make great sacrifices for one another. On the other hand, copies 
that have diverged for 20 years may feel far less of a connection. They 
might have been trained for different professions, and live in different 
kinds of communities. Their personalities and political opinions might 
even have diverged. However, as most ems are near the same peak prod­
uctivity subjective age, they don’t usually have to deal much with aged-
related changes in personality or opinions (Alwin and Krosnick 1991; 
Soto et al. 2011).
Clans with millions or more members likely split for many purposes into 
subclans of thousands or more. The tree structure of their copy ancestry 
forms a natural basis for such subclan grouping. During the farming era, and 
still in some places today, ancestry trees of family clans were often a basis 
for legal liability, political coalitions, and much else. Relative to em clans, 
em subclans even more closely resemble each other in jobs, hobbies, friends, 
personality, and shared memories. Conflicts between subclans are likely to 
be the biggest source of internal clan conflict.
Ems probably vary in how much they could trust recent copies of them­
selves, and in how much the duration since they split into different copies 
matters for trust. For example, those who see themselves as typically “faking 
it” around others, that is, pretending to have more competence than they 
believe they have, are likely to trust less in the competence of recent copies 
of themselves. In a clan-dominated em era, people whose basic personality 
makes it harder to coordinate and compromise with copies of themselves, 
or to predict the behavior of such copies, are likely to be at a competitive 
disadvantage.
Even if the interests of em clan members are typically more closely 
aligned than are the interests of family members or identical twins today, 
their interests are hardly identical. Different copies can have different jobs 
and associates from whom they gain differing degrees of pleasure. Different 
copies can also differ in whether they will end or retire, and in the speed and 
quality of their retirement. Different copies are well aware of these different 
possible outcomes, and are quite capable of taking them into account in 

managing clans
229
choosing actions. Thus unless great efforts are taken to erase or hide such 
differences, we should not expect em clans to resemble the “Borg” in Star 
Trek, a group mind that consistently acts toward a common purpose with­
out internal conflicts (Shulman 2010).
managing clans
So what do clans do differently from other units of organization, such as 
cities and firms?
Law usually tries to deter crime via small chances of big punishments. 
It can be especially hard, however, to cheaply impose big punishments 
on short-lived ems. Giving ems a longer life in order to torture them, for 
example, could cost a lot more than did their original life. For such ems it 
can make sense to use vicarious liability, that is, to have legal liability apply 
to an associated unit with “deeper pockets.” In principle this could be any 
sponsor willing to take on the liability, but in practice this is probably a 
subclan containing that em. Ems care more about hurting their subclans, 
and subclans know how to discourage member ems from liability-inducing 
events (Miceli and Segerson 2007).
Em clan vicarious liability could be similar to the way that farmer soci­
eties often made larger family units liable for the crimes of individual family 
members. Holding closely related copies responsible for an em’s crimes may 
seem more legitimate to observers if archived versions of such copies could 
be tested in sims to see if they would have behaved similarly given a similar 
opportunity.
Subclans legally liable for the behaviors of members probably seek to 
regulate such behaviors. Subclans also want such powers to manage their 
reputations. After all, as subclan members are so similar, the behavior of 
any one member could be highly predictive of the behavior of others. Thus 
the bad behavior of one em could make the rest of their subclan look bad. 
Ems in clans that more strongly manage their reputations will seem more 
predictable and reliable.
When many copies are made of an em trained at a substantial expense, 
then to avoid ruinous wage competition that fails to recover fixed costs of 
training and marketing, such copies must be constrained in the job wages 
they can accept.

groups
230
Political regimes become unstable when members do not accept their 
legitimacy. As we tend more to accept and defer to internal decisions of 
families, compared with non-kin-based associations, farmer-era city and 
regional politics often used families as the first unit of political grouping. 
That is, ancient politics was often the politics of shifting coalitions of family 
clans (Braekevelt et al. 2012). This remains true in the Middle East and Asia 
today (Sailer 2003).
Relative to the self-governance of families, we defer today even more 
to the self-governance of individuals, at least for individual behaviors that 
don’t influence others much. For example, if a person suffers today to gain 
benefits in later days, such as by attending a difficult school with a high 
chance of failure, we almost never suggest that their future self is exploiting 
their current self. Thus for ems it makes even more sense to use clans as the 
first unit of political organization than it did for farmers to use families as 
their main political unit. If most ems are in a dozen to a thousand clans, 
the politics of an em city-state might naturally be the politics of shifting 
coalitions of em clans.
Clans and subclans whose root ems were raised together as children 
might tend to ally more with each other, and childhood cohorts might be 
chosen with this prospect in mind.
To encourage internal clan loyalty, clans may try to anticipate and coord­
inate to prevent situations where clan members compete over friends, lovers, 
or jobs. For example, there might be a stable general policy of preventing 
different subclans from competing for the same jobs or teams.
When a single em makes a plan for the future and then splits into many 
copies who execute that plan, the resulting ems are likely to identify espe­
cially strongly with each other as being the “same” person spread out in 
space in order to implement their common plan. This strong identification 
is likely to continue until some copies come to question the importance 
or wisdom of the plan, or to disagree explicitly about how to implement 
the plan.
Direct explicit arguments of any sort between copies are likely to push 
them more to see themselves as distinct persons, instead of as different 
parts of the same person. Because of this, subclans may try to arrange the 
interactions between such copies to discourage direct explicit arguments. 
Subclans may instead prefer other more indirect mechanisms to share 

firms
231
information. For example, a subclan might usually act as if it agreed with 
consensus prediction market estimates, and individuals who disagreed with 
that consensus might be satisfied to express their disagreements via pre­
diction market trades, and then mostly ignore those disagreements when 
interacting in other ways with other clan members.
Em subclans with similar work and living arrangements may well act 
together to buy in bulk. Today, firms often achieve substantial savings by 
buying in bulk. That is, firms buy large quantities of oft-used items, such 
as computers, vehicles, or office supplies, together with matching support­
ing systems for maintenance, repair, and training. In contrast, consumers 
today tend to buy much smaller quantities of more varied and less integrated 
items, which cost more as a result. Em subclans might buy many copies of 
whole coordinated systems, one copy for each member.
Buying in bulk is one of many ways that ems could benefit from being 
part of large clans or subclans. Large clans may also succeed more in world 
or city scale coalition politics, and their members can feel more confident in 
being valued by the world. They may build specialized hardware to run their 
clan’s minds, and they may organize better to protect their security. Large 
clans may even create their own news sources, with reporters who observe 
events and record shallow mind readings that other clan members can then 
directly experience.
Of course large clans may also suffer disadvantages, such as needing more 
formal mechanisms of governance, having bigger internal divisions and dis­
agreements, and suffering more cases where subclans compete with each 
other in outside markets.
firms
Firms continue to exist in an em world, but with a few changes.
As we will discuss in Chapter 20, Inequality section, em firms will tend to 
be larger than firms today. We can thus use observed features of larger firms 
today to guess how em firms will differ from our firms. For example, larger 
em firms have less overall coordination and coherence, even as such firms 
put more effort into coordination via more meetings by more managers in 
more layers of management. Workers in em firms also have more specific 
operational roles, and each does a narrower range of tasks. All else equal, 

groups
232
larger em firms have offices in more locations, with less in-person and direct 
internal communication. This effect may be countered by ems concentrating 
in a few huge cities.
Early in the industrial revolution, many noticed a general trend toward 
larger organizations with more specialized and regimented roles. People 
such as Yevgeny Zamyatin, author of the classic novel We, feared that the 
entire social world would soon be factory-like, and that firms and nations 
would soon merge into intrusive faceless oppressors that dictated who peo­
ple married, where they lived, what they ate, when they slept, and pretty 
much everything (Richter 1893; Zamyatin 1924). Discomfort with big 
organizations lingers in our stereotypes of “soul-crushing” bureaucracies.
It is true that workers today tend to say they are less satisfied with jobs 
in larger firms, because of their less flexible work environments (Idson 
1990). However, just as larger cities are often celebrated for having more 
innovation, specialization, and better educated and paid workers, larger 
firms deserve similar praise because they are more productive, last longer, 
use more capital per worker, adopt new technologies earlier, and pay and 
train their better educated workers more (Oi and Idson 1999; Bento and 
Restuccia 2014; Cardiff-Hicks et al. 2014). Today, most employees of large 
firms seem to lead full lives with their souls largely intact.
Also, workers who focus more on pleasing their boss, and less on doing 
what they see as a good job, tend to be more successful and happier (Judge 
and Bretz 1994). So ems may also be happier if they learn to focus on pleas­
ing their bosses.
Management experts today have identified many efficient management 
practices. Not only do these practices correlate with firms that are bigger, 
grow faster, earn more, and last longer, but randomized experiments show 
that these practices increase productivity. The rate of such practices seems 
to be increased today by product market competition, by being a multi­
national firm, by exporting, and by having more educated workers (Bloom 
et al. 2013; Bloom and Van Reenen 2010).
Today, family-based firms tend to be less productive when run by someone 
who got the job because of birth, such as by being an eldest son, and such firms 
are more productive when run by someone outside the family. Private-equity 
owned firms have management practices that are as good as public firms, 

firms
233
and better than simple private firms, family-based firms, and government 
organizations (Bloom et al. 2015).
Because of learning and increased competitive pressures, we should 
expect em firms to use more of these good management practices, relative to 
firms of today. These practices include performance-based rewards and job-
placement, demanding but attainable goals, managers evaluated on attract­
ing and retaining talent, regular equipment maintenance, thorough analysis 
of failures, clear job descriptions, just-in-time delivery, tracking production 
by order, pricing orders based on production costs, and frequent and detailed 
tracking of inputs, outputs, and performance.
Many other business practices today are suspected of being inefficient, 
even if the case against them isn’t quite as strong. We should also (more 
weakly) expect these practices to decline in em firms, because of continued 
firm learning and increased competitive pressures. These practices include 
keeping unproductive “deadwood” employees for too long, overpaying 
employees in critical functions at large firms, overly frequent mergers, too 
many long big meetings, “poison pills” that directly punish new investors 
in hostile takeovers, discouraging subordinates from reporting bad news, 
rejecting innovations “not invented here,” allowing barriers to within-firm 
information sharing, hiring consultants to endorse predetermined conclu­
sions, avoiding experiments to test products and practices, avoiding formal 
accuracy tracking of who predicted or suggested what when, excess reliance 
on interviews and school credentials in hiring, and allowing bosses to give 
lower employee evaluations to subordinates who do not “toot their own 
horns” and to subordinates who the boss did not hire or promote.
We can categorize firms today by whether their business focus is novelty, 
quality, cost, or something else. Novelty and quality focused firms innov­
ate more, have more layers of management, and rely more on employee 
initiative, via pay for performance, problem-solving teams, and employee 
information-sharing programs. Both types outsource more and cooperate 
more with other firms in research.
Quality- and cost-focused firms have higher productivity and market 
share, closely track operation performance, and coordinate more along 
their value chain. Quality-focused firms have higher markups and profits, 
while cost-focused firms have lower profits. Cost-focused firms do more 

groups
234
downsizing and cutting of management layers, and emphasize central 
coordination via managers (Yang et al. 2015).
We weakly expect these correlations to continue with em firms. As 
we expect em firms to focus more on cost and less on novelty, this sug­
gests that em firms have higher market shares, lower markups and profits, 
fewer layers of management, and less innovation, employee initiative, 
and pay-for-performance. However, if the em world manages to find 
better ways than we have today to encourage innovation, such as are dis­
cussed in Chapter 22, Innovation section, perhaps more em firms will be 
novelty-focused.
Larger firms today tend to have narrower and more precisely defined 
processes and structures, including policy manuals and job descriptions. 
They also have stronger corporate cultures and depend less on distinctive 
individual personalities. While one might expect this trend to continue with 
em firms, we soon discuss a contrary factor that could plausibly lead to less 
formality and more distinctive employee personalities.
Today, firm managers tend to be given more discretion when it is harder 
for their superiors to evaluate them via comparisons with other firms using 
similar technology in similar environments. Such judgments are harder 
when firms are young, their technology is new, and their environments 
change fast. Firms whose managers have more discretion tend to be organ­
ized into divisions that are profit centers, while other firms tend to be 
organized into divisions that are cost centers (Acemoglu et al. 2007).
Em firms tend to be larger and older, the em economy has less product 
variety, and innovation matters less for growth in the em economy. All these 
factors suggest that em firms are more often organized into cost-center divi­
sions, with managers having less discretion. However, the opposite may hold 
if sufficiently high levels of clan-firm trust can be achieved, as discussed in 
the next section.
While wage inequality has been increasing in rich nations in recent 
decades, the wage inequality within firms there has not been increasing. 
This suggests that firms limit internal wage inequality because of prob­
lems it causes in morale or office politics. This further suggests that em 
firms and teams will also prefer to limit internal wage inequality. Em 
wages probably differ more between firms, rather than within firms (Song 
et al. 2015).

firm-clan relations
235
firm-clan relations
As firms and clans are both large important institutions in em society, 
potential conflicts can arise between them, along with opportunities for 
gains by avoiding such conflicts.
For example, firms with employees drawn from many clans face security 
issues about where to locate employee brains. Clans may minimize risks of 
theft by locating themselves within “castles” that only contain, and are only 
managed by, clan members. However, this arrangement increases risks to 
firms of clans leaking firm secrets, and makes it harder for subordinates to 
meet with fast bosses within a firm. In contrast, co-locating firm employ­
ees at a single location lets employees interact more flexibly, such as via 
fast meetings with fast bosses, and can better protect firm secrets. However, 
from a clan’s point of view this approach increases the risk of the theft of 
clan minds and secrets.
Higher levels of clan-firm trust can thus increase firm efficiency, by allow­
ing firm employee brains to be located closer to one another. Higher levels 
of clan-firm trust might result if firms and clans invested heavily in each 
other’s ventures, and also if clans or firms were long-lived entities that devel­
oped strong reputations for trustworthiness that they fear losing.
Such trust can produce other benefits. For example, at big firms today 
it is usually hard to objectively attribute successes or failures to the 
actions of particular employees. This encourages people to play strategic 
games with how people and projects are evaluated. For example, employ­
ees become yes-men, curry favor with evaluators, form mutual admir­
ation coalitions, and focus their efforts on more visible outcomes such as 
attendance, grooming, writing style, and school credentials. In contrast, 
ems from clans with a large financial and reputational interest in a firm 
might simply try to be useful to that firm. As the reputations of clans will 
average over many choices made by many clan members at many firms, 
clans may have more confidence that the average value of their clan’s con­
tributions will be discerned amid the noise of variation across particular 
firm contexts.
Today, firms often use formality and standards to try to ensure that work­
ers are closer substitutes to one another, and thus compete with each other 
more strongly for jobs. This makes such firms less vulnerable to threats by 

groups
236
individual employees to leave. Em firms might plausibly act similarly to 
ensure that employee clans compete with each other. After all, a firm that 
came to rely on the habits and skills of a particular clan could be vulnerable 
to a threat by that clan to leave the firm unless that clan got a larger share of 
firm profits. This is feasible because clans are often “unionized” in the sense 
of negotiating labor agreements as a unit.
Higher levels of clan-firm trust might, however, let firms instead rely 
more on the unique skills and habits of particular clans. Em firms that more 
strongly trust their employee clans not to make threats to leave are likely 
to have fewer formal rules and standards regarding worker procedures and 
performance. In this case each employee clan could take on a distinctive 
clan personality, instead of taking on a more standard personality to fill a 
standard job role.
Today, efforts and misallocations resulting from office politics often result 
in substantial firm inefficiencies. But such costs are at least limited by job 
turnover, as it takes time for new employees to adapt to local office politics. 
Costs are also limited because factions often limit information on factional 
strategies to core faction members, which keeps peripheral members from 
fully participating in office politics. This often leads such peripheral employ­
ees to choose a strategy of “keeping their head down” and avoiding entan­
gling alliances with warring factions.
Unfortunately, the use of factions based on clans can more easily over­
come the factors that today limit the severity of office politics. Most mem­
bers of em clans know each other very well and are able to coordinate well 
internally, including by keeping internal clan secrets. Thus office politics in 
em firms has the potential to be quite destructive. To reduce such losses, em 
firms may try harder to increase accountability by increasing the visibility of 
actions and their consequences.
Em labor markets are more like product markets today, with a few firms 
selling most of the products in each market. Here the suppliers are clans, 
who pay to train members to compete in each labor market. These clans face 
nearly the same marginal costs of supplying labor, but can choose differ­
ent fixed costs of training, testing, and marketing. When they are effective 
competitors, we expect such suppliers to differentiate their products, to 
invest in larger fixed costs when supplying larger markets, and to make deals 
with other clans that bundle complementary ems into teams. We expect 

teams
237
such suppliers to have substantial market power, which typically induces too 
many firms to enter each market, relative to a social optimum (Shy 1996).
teams
Most work that is done at firms is done within much smaller workplace 
teams. How do work teams differ in an em era?
Because the em world is more competitive than ours, we weakly expect 
em teams to display more of the features that today are correlated with team 
productivity.
For example, today the most productive teams tend to have incentives 
that are either at the individual level or the team level; mixed intermediate 
incentives tend to produce worse outcomes. Teams with group incentives 
who deal with complex production processes tend to benefit by creating 
special problem-solving subteams (Boning et al. 2007). Today, the most 
productive long-lived work teams tend to be more self-directed, because this 
improves attitudes and makes workers more easily accept pressures to con­
form to local work norms. The most productive short-lived project teams, 
in contrast, tend to have more outside direction (Cohen and Bailey 1997).
Talk networks, that is, who tends to talk to whom, also matter for team 
productivity. Teams with stable talk networks are better at repetitive tasks 
(customer service), but teams with fast changing talk networks are better at 
creative tasks (sales and management). More productive teams have more 
cohesive (tightly interconnected) networks of face-to-face talk, especially 
for complex tasks, but less cohesive networks of email talk (Wu et al. 2008).
Today, the most productive work teams tend to have members with simi­
lar surface and social-category features such as race, ethnicity, gender, age, 
and tenure. In contrast, such teams tend to have a diversity of features that 
indicate sources of information and styles of thinking. Such features include 
personality and areas of education, training, and experience. Such diversity 
is especially valuable for work tasks that require exploration, as in research 
(Mannix and Neale 2005).
While teams are likely to be arranged in ways that maximize productiv­
ity, they are unlikely to consciously define themselves this way. Instead, like 
groups in offices today, em teams are likely to define themselves more by 
their mutual respect and loyalty, and by their shared cultural values such as 

groups
238
egalitarianism, honesty, rationality, realism, sharing of resources and infor­
mation, and disapproval of bragging, dominance, greed, intolerance, and 
jealousy.
As discussed in Chapter 13, Clan Concentration section, a few clans 
probably dominate most em labor markets. This gives such suppliers sub­
stantial market power, although not expected net profits after paying for 
training, marketing, and other fixed costs. Suppliers having market power 
in em labor markets suggests that team formation can involve substantial 
strategic negotiation. Ems may, for example, gain strategic advantages from 
committing to not join teams lacking certain favored allies, or contain­
ing disliked rivals. Foragers evolved many complex and subtle abilities to 
navigate politics like this in forager bands. Such abilities may find many 
applications in em team politics. Efforts devoted to complex feuding and 
political intrigue, however, can be costly.
Sometimes firms prefer the ease of hiring team members as simple 
employees. This could result in weaker employee incentives, aside from clan 
reputation. At other times, teams may incorporate as small for-profit firms, 
and contract to supply specific services. In such cases, team profits could be 
divided among team members, supplying clans, and supporting investors. 
Team members might take their individual profits partly as extra leisure 
time or faster retirement.
As mentioned in Chapter 11, Defining Death section, starting and end­
ing or retiring teams as units is likely be the norm. Encouraging teams to 
prefer internal social interactions minimizes disruptions from outside social 
interactions that could induce unexpected variations in team productivity. 
This might have a happiness cost, however, as frequent contact with many 
others with weak social ties seems important to happiness (Sandstrom and 
Dunn 2014).
A similar if smaller reduction in productivity variance comes if teams pay 
less attention to outside news and events. This attitude of low interest in 
news comes more naturally for fast ems, as the wider world is more stable to 
them, and so has less interesting news to report.
Having fewer outside-team interactions somewhat lowers the value of 
living near city centers, and the gains from information and innovations that 
diffuse via weak social ties. So teams with stronger interactions outside the 
team tend to be found more in city centers.

mass versus niche teams
239
Compared with work teams today, em teams have stronger internal 
social bonds. Teams who are created together more see the team as liter­
ally their reason for existence. Also, there are fewer conflicts to threaten 
internal team loyalty. Teams mostly succeed or fail together, and end or 
retire together. Ems need not fear that colleagues will leave their team for 
better opportunities, as these colleagues can instead make new copies to 
pursue better opportunities. If teams could veto team members making 
copies outside the team, that might further reduce internal team conflicts. 
However, which ems feel most attached to which other ems within a team 
could vary over time.
mass versus niche teams
Product markets today can be divided into mass versus niche markets. Mak­
ers of mass-market products want to limit their product variation to appeal 
to as many customers as possible. In contrast, makers of niche-market 
products want to increase their product variation to appeal to different nar­
row groups of customers each willing to pay more for products that more 
closely match their idiosyncratic preferences (Johnson and Myatt 2006). 
Mass products tend to have more competition, scale economies, and mass 
advertising. Many mass products began as niche products. Compared with 
physically distributed goods, it is easier for electronically distributed goods 
to serve wider markets, and thus to become more narrowly specialized niche 
products.
Em labor markets should also divide into mass and niche markets. In 
niche labor markets, new jobs are rare, unpredictable, and more often 
require a few new em copies to flexibly adapt to a particular new situation. 
For example, a new copy of a specialized management consultant might be 
created whenever a firm decided it needed this sort of specialist to address 
a particular problem.
Mass em labor markets, in contrast, have a steadier stream of predictable 
customers to be provided with similar services. Mass markets tend more to 
select the most productive em teams from a large pool of candidates. Thus 
mass-market ems are more heavily concentrated near peak productivity 
ages. Niche-market ems, in contrast, tend to have a wider distribution of 
subjective ages.

groups
240
In general, the degree of concentration of work ages near peak product­
ivity ages is a tradeoff between general worker productivity and gains from 
a worker being more familiar with a particular workplace. The more useful 
it is to keep the same worker in the same environment for many years, the 
more years a worker tends to stays on one job, and the more that those years 
are further away from the peak productivity age.
For each niche worker, there are fewer workers with similar training 
doing similar tasks. Because of this, it is easier for mass-market ems to adopt 
a mode where many copies of a worker are made each morning, but only 
some of those copies are saved to enjoy leisure the next day.
Mass-market ems can more easily form teams who are copied and retired 
as a unit. Even if most niche-market ems are also created in teams, niche 
ems more often accept complications from not starting or retiring as part 
of a team, as well as additional complexities from dealing with friends and 
lovers who start and end at different times. All ems must deal with related 
complications when they are copied and find that their new team is not 
identical to their old team.
When a niche em makes a new copy, he or she may have to decide whether 
the original or the copy inherits the original’s friends. Alternatively, a small 
group of copies might coordinate to share such a friend, and to make sure to 
keep up to date on all of the interactions between this friend and this small 
copy group, so that the friend doesn’t struggle to keep track of which copy 
it had interacted with.
These complications of a niche em lifestyle likely makes such a life seem 
less attractive to many. If so, this raises the costs of niche labor. Also, as dis­
cussed in Chapter 13, Efficiency section, the em economy in addition moves 
toward mass products because of stronger competition and lower wages. 
However, as niche job lifestyles are culturally more like forager lifestyles, 
they may acquire a Bohemian prestige, perhaps raising the social status of 
ems who have a close copy who once lived a niche lifestyle.
The existence of many similar teams usually gives mass-market ems a 
good idea of what to expect in their future life. After all, each such em 
can look at the experiences of older copies in prior versions of their team. 
Such previous experiences can sometimes be misleading, for example when 
outside forces such as customers, competitors, or suppliers induce big local 
changes. However, such exceptions are rare. Today, many religious people 

mass versus niche teams
241
are less anxious about life events because they think “this is all part of God’s 
plan.” Similarly, mass-market ems can be comforted to know that most dis­
turbing life events were part of the clan’s plan.
When an em clan supplies workers to a very large mass labor market, 
there must be at least as many members of that clan as there are workers 
who serve that labor market, times the market share of that clan. Because 
this number will sometimes be larger than the total number of members in a 
small clan, clans who supply very large labor markets must also be large. This 
may create a correlation between clan size and mass-market work; larger 
clans may tend more to supply mass labor markets, while smaller clans more 
often serve niche labor markets.
While ems that serve mass markets could more easily be copied as a part 
of large teams that retain most of their familiar friends and context, such 
copied teams could not as easily bring along copies of large shared commu­
nity spaces such as city neighborhoods or parks. For very large spaces this 
is not a problem, as the different copies of the team can just share the same 
original space, and only rarely meet in the large space. For smaller spaces, 
however, ems must choose between moving to a new “parallel world” space, 
which can of course still look a lot like the old space, or sharing the old 
space and dealing with the prospect of meeting more often and mixing with 
similar members of other teams.
In sum, the lives of both mass-market and niche-market ems differ sub­
stantially from our lives, but in different ways.


243
C H A P T E R  2 0
Conflict
inequality
ow unequal are ems from one another?
During the forager era the main units of organization were 
bands of roughly 20 to 50 people, and smaller family units. As 
activity wasn’t organized via larger units, foragers did not see 
inequality comparable with our unequal towns, firms, or nations. Foragers 
also had only mild differences in personal property and prestige. Over the 
roughly million plus year forager era, however, foragers had an enormous 
inequality of lineages, in the sense that almost all lineages eventually went 
extinct, with zero descendants.
The farmer era had larger units of organization, such as clans, villages, 
nations, and empires. Although empires sometimes became nearly as large 
as feasible given transportation limits, large empires usually only had a weak 
influence on local behaviors. Villages were much smaller than nations, and 
firms were typically tiny.
As discussed in Chapter 18, Cities section, while most farmers lived near 
small villages, in our industrial era people are spread rather evenly across 
towns and cities of all feasible sizes. Also, for most industrial products today, 
market shares are relatively concentrated within transport-cost-limited 
market areas. That is, for each type of product in an area, only a small num­
ber of firms supply most customers.
Power laws are mathematical forms that often usefully describe such 
inequality. That is, power laws often fit the large-unit end of the distribu­
tions of how such items are grouped into units. In such cases, a power of one 
describes a uniform distribution of items across feasible unit sizes. Powers 
H

conflict
244
greater than one describe more equal distributions, wherein most items res­
ide in small units, and powers less than one describe less equal distributions, 
wherein most items are clumped into fewer larger units. Compared with any 
given sized unit, for a power of one a unit with twice the size appears half 
as often. Thus for a power of one, different sized units hold a similar total 
number of items. Compared with a power of one, with a power greater than 
one such double-size units are less frequent, while with a power less than 
one double-size units are more frequent.
During all eras so far, family names have been distributed relatively 
equally, with a power of about two. Later in the farmer era, villages were 
distributed with a power of about one-and-a-half (Nitsch 2005), roughly 
the power that describes the distribution of individual wealth today (Davies 
et  al. 2011), although the worldwide income distribution seems better 
described as a log­normal distribution (Provenzano 2015). (The income ratio 
between ninetieth and tenth percentiles is less than many think; it was 1.84 
in 1985, and 1.74 in 2011.)
Today, nations, firms within nations, and cities within nations, are all 
distributed with a power of about one (Axtell 2001; Eeckhout 2004; Giesen 
et al. 2010). The firms that supply product are usually more clumped, with a 
power less than one, meaning that for each product most units are supplied 
by only a few firms (Kohli and Sah 2006).
em inequality
As discussed in Chapter  13, Clan Concentration section, em-era clans 
clump much more unequally than did families in all prior eras; most ems 
may come from a dozen to a thousand one-name clans, each of which has 
millions to billions of members. In contrast, there may be millions of two-
name clans, each with only thousands to millions of members. And most of 
the roughly 10 billion ordinary humans may each give rise to a three-name 
clan with perhaps only dozens of members.
With only hundreds of main clans, em labor markets become concen­
trated like today’s product markets, with a few clans supplying most workers 
in any given skill area. It may be like US vehicles today, where 300 models are 
sold, and 3% are the Ford F pickup. Clans coordinate to support their work­
ers, by preventing member mind theft and ensuring that workers can profit 
from training investments. Fixed costs of training and marketing create 

em inequality
245
market concentration and power, although not net profits after paying for 
fixed costs.
As discussed in Chapter 18, Cities section, em cities and nations are also 
likely to be much more unequal than are cities and nations today, with most 
ems found in a few very large city-states.
The high degree of inequality and concentration of em clans and cities 
introduces a key source of uncertainty about the em world. The main em 
clans could be quite unrepresentative of humans today, and in ways that 
are hard for us to foresee. That is, the world of ems could be substantially 
different, depending on the particular mix of the few clans who happen to 
dominate the core set of most-copied clans. Similarly, the few dominant em 
cities are probably not equally distributed across the globe; the em world 
could be quite different depending on the locations of those key em cities.
Em firms are likely to continue to be distributed evenly across feasible 
firm sizes. But because a larger economy could contain larger firms, the 
typical em firm size will be larger. Today, in a world of 7 billion people, firms 
are spread evenly between having roughly one and 1 million employees. The 
middle firm size, where half of workers are in larger firms, has about 1000 
workers. For every factor of 100 increase in the size of the largest feasible 
em firm, such as might come from an increase in total em population, we 
should expect about a factor of 10 increase in the number of workers in the 
middle sized em firm.
The wages of em workers are much more equal than are wages today, at 
least after correcting for training costs. The highly competitive em economy 
pushes wages down to near subsistence levels, even for jobs requiring super­
ior workers. This is because workers of almost all quality levels are available 
in unlimited quantities.
In general, the possibility of slavery makes possible more wage inequality. 
Although this applies to the em world as well, it has less effect there because 
the variation in em wages is greatly reduced as a result of strong labor mar­
ket competition. In a Malthusian world wages don’t vary that much, making 
em slaves less worse off compared with other workers.
While em wages are more equal than are wages today, em wealth can 
be more unequal. This is because of both indefinite em lifespans, and the 
em capacity to run at different speeds. Today, it seems to be the indefinite 
lifespans of cities and firms that allows them to spread uniformly across 

conflict
246
all feasible sizes; if a city or firm continues to succeed, it can continue to 
grow, regardless of its age. In contrast, while wealthy individuals today often 
consistently grow their wealth over their lifespan, their children usually fail 
to increase the family fortune. Rags-to-riches-to-rags in three generations 
is, after all, a common story. This helps explain why individual wealth isn’t as 
unequally distributed today as are city and firm sizes.
With indefinite em lifespans, however, successful ems might continue 
their successful financial habits indefinitely. This tends to distribute wealth 
more evenly across feasible wealth sizes, similar to how firms and cities are 
distributed evenly today across feasible sizes, some large and some small. 
The tendency of em minds to become inflexible with experience, however, 
may somewhat reduce this effect, especially if rich old ems do not reduce 
their speeds.
The ability to run at many different speeds also expands the range of 
possible em wealth. A faster em brain directly embodies more wealth, and 
it can often find productive uses for that wealth. While humans who are 
relatively very poor must starve, ems who are relatively very poor can run at 
very slow speeds or be archived. Thus as ems can be both very fast and very 
slow, they can be both very rich and very poor.
If these effects dominate, then the em world would sees roughly a power 
of one for the distribution of em wealth. This would make wealth more 
unequal than today, both because this is a lower and hence more unequal 
power, and because a richer em world can make feasible both higher and 
lower wealth levels. While today’s richest human holds ~0.02% of the 
world’s wealth, the richest em might hold a much larger fraction, perhaps 
~2% of the em world’s wealth.
redistribution
However, these wealth-inequality-increasing effects need not dominate, 
because of the possibility of income or wealth redistribution.
There are many kinds of inequality. Inequality exists between different 
species, between generations born at different times, and between nations 
of the world at a time. Within a nation at a time, there is inequality both 
between families and within families. There is also inequality between the 
moments of the life of a particular person. In all of these cases, there is not 

redistribution
247
only financial inequality, but also inequality in status, popularity, pleasure, 
boredom, lifespan, health, happiness, enjoying one’s job, and more. There is 
also inequality between the sizes of families, firms, cities, or nations, even 
when individuals within those groupings are equal.
Today, we have relatively little intentional redistribution between gen­
erations or between nations. Redistribution within the moments of a 
person’s life happens, but that is mostly left to each person to choose and 
to fund. Similarly, redistribution between siblings is mostly achieved via 
differential treatment by parents. And voluntary insurance redistributes 
to those who suffer certain kinds of disasters. However, we see almost 
no interest in addressing unequal status, popularity, or job enjoyment. 
Instead, most of the concern expressed today about inequality, and 
most debate about redistribution to address inequality, mostly ignores 
these kinds of inequality, and focuses on one particular standard kind of 
inequality.
This standard inequality of concern today is how the families of a nation 
at a given time differ in the average financial wealth or consumption of their 
members. This families-of-a-nation inequality is actually one of the smallest 
in magnitude. For example, in the U.S. today financial inequality between 
families is only one-third of the size of financial inequality between siblings 
within families, and even that is much less than the financial inequality 
between individuals from different nations (Conley 2004). In addition, we 
probably care more about differences in popularity, lifespans, and so on than 
we do about financial inequality.
Humans who attend directly to vivid cases are capable of great empathy 
for inequality losers. They are also capable of great compassion and even 
a desire to help. However, we humans are also quite capable of avoiding 
contact and exposure that might produce such compassion, and of numbing 
ourselves to the plight of losers about whom it would be inconvenient to 
feel empathy. So rich people avoid visiting poor neighborhoods and nations, 
attractive people avoid socializing with the ugly, and pretty young women 
become numb to the losses of the men they reject.
We are not sure why humans today feel so much more concern for 
inequality between families of a nation, compared with other forms of 
inequality. Perhaps this seems to us most like the inequalities that forager 
sharing norms addressed. Or perhaps the redistribution that addresses this 

conflict
248
inequality offers the easiest gains to opportunistic people seeking excuses to 
grab wealth.
This history suggests that the em world sees little redistribution 
between em generations or city-states, and also that each clan (or per­
haps subclan) is mostly in charge of deciding how to address its internal 
inequality. After all, em clan members are more similar to and closer to 
each other than are human siblings, even if they may sometimes be more 
distant from each other than are different moments within a particular 
person’s life.
That leaves the inequality between clans, or subclans. A set of em clans 
can be unequal in two different ways. One type of clan inequality focuses on 
individual incomes, or perhaps individual happiness or respect, and treats a 
clan as better off if its individuals are on average better off. This inequality 
measure isn’t very sensitive to whether one applies it to clans or subclans, or 
to how exactly one defines subclans.
The other type of clan inequality focuses on the overall size and suc­
cess of a clan. Here a clan is better off if it has more members, resources, 
or respect. This type of inequality is far more sensitive to how exactly one 
draws the boundaries of subclans. Historically, most redistribution efforts 
have focused on average individual outcomes. For example, we have seen 
very little effort to redistribute between human family clans based on family 
size. That is, we rarely take from families with many descendants to give to 
families that have few descendants. Nor do we take much from big nations, 
cities, or firms to give to smaller ones.
Because most em wages are near subsistence levels, unregulated em wages 
(per subjective hour) have much less inequality than do wages today. So em 
clans naturally have less inequality of the standard sort that is the focus of 
redistribution today. In contrast, em clans have enormous inequality in clan 
size, resources, and respect. However, history gives little reason to expect 
much redistribution to address this kind of inequality. This kind of inequal­
ity is not very analogous to those that induced forager sharing, it does not 
lend itself to profitable rent-seeking, and it is very sensitive to how subclans 
are defined.
Ems might also redistribute on the basis of speed, taking from fast ems to 
give to slow ones. But history also offers little precedent for this, and slower 
ems do not seem to be suffering much more in any clear way.

redistribution
249
Thus the main kind of redistribution that we have reason to expect in 
the em era is between the clans of a city, based on differences of average 
within-clan individual consumption. But we expect less inequality of this 
sort in the em world, and so expect less redistribution on this basis. What 
distribution there is probably focuses on simple financial consumption, that 
is, on the fraction of subjective life available for leisure time, and on the 
money available to spend to enjoy that time.
The inequality measure used by ems to determine redistribution may neg­
lect differences in how much ems enjoy their jobs, or how much “leisure” 
socializing different jobs require. If so, such redistribution might actually 
increase inequality in em utility, that is, in the value that ems gain from their 
lifestyles.
If ordinary humans are included straightforwardly in the redistribution 
systems of the em world, then the simple result to expect is transfers, not 
only away from richer humans, but also away from humans overall. After all, 
in pure financial terms typical ems are far poorer than the poorest humans, 
because it takes far more resources to support human survival than to sup­
port em survival. Redistribution systems may perhaps try to correct for this 
fact that em subsistence levels are far below human subsistence levels. But 
such systems of assistance may also encourage or even require recipients 
of aid to switch from being a human to being an em, to lower the costs of 
assistance.
During the em era, humans typically have industrial era incomes or 
higher, which are far higher than human subsistence level incomes. While 
many and perhaps most humans may pay to create a few ems, humans tend 
to endow such ems with much higher than em subsistence consumption. In 
contrast, a small number of successful humans manage to give rise to very 
large em clans, and within these clans most members have near subsistence 
incomes. Thus transfers based on individual consumption inequality take 
from the descendants of less successful humans and give to descendants of 
more successful humans.
While em society seems likely to have weaker wealth transfers, at least 
outside of clans, the transfers that it may have may seem lamentable to a 
human eye.
Progressive income taxes are today one of our main mechanisms for 
reducing the standard inequality that compares individual incomes between 

conflict
250
families within a nation. Over the last two centuries, big increases in the top 
marginal tax rates have mostly followed wars where over 2% of the popula­
tion served in the military. For example, in the U.S. the top marginal tax rate 
jumped from 15% to 67% in 1917, during World War I. Controlling for this 
effect, top tax increases have not been correlated with wealth, democracy, or 
the political ideology of the party running the government (Vélez 2014).
This suggests that the local degree of individual income redistribution 
between the clans of an em city may depend on the local frequency of 
large expensive em wars. If so, we should hope ems have less redistribution, 
because that implies fewer wars.
war
What kinds of wars might ems have, and how often?
Today, the frequency of war, civil war, and criminal violence tends to 
fall as nations become richer, have older citizens, and sit more toward the 
extremes of democracy and autocracy (Magee and Massoud 2011). There are 
fewer wars between pairs of democracies than in other pairs of democratic 
and non-democratic nations (Dafoe et al. 2013). So to the extent that ems 
have less democratic governance, or have governance that is intermediate 
between the extremes of democratic or not, ems may have more war.
The fact that most ems are near a peak-productivity subjective-age of 
50 or more suggests that em attitudes toward war are more like that of 
typical 50-year-olds, who are less supportive of war. The fact that most clans 
will have many copies in all of the major cities should also make ems more 
reluctant to war.
However, the fact that ems are poorer in many ways might push for 
more war. Other factors that might lead to more war include em gender 
imbalances, reduced calming effects from fewer ems directly raising chil­
dren, productivity tweaks that might increase aggressiveness, and a generally 
more competitive world.
Wars today, like cities, are distributed evenly across all possible war sizes 
(Cederman 2003). Having ems concentrated in a few very large dense cities 
would reduce the frequency of small wars. After all, wars within cities can 
be very destructive to the value that cities produce, and cities have many 
other ways to moderate internal disputes. Wars were especially common in 

war
251
the farming era because there was often portable loot that retained value 
after a destructive war, and because farmland could quickly return to full 
productivity even after a war destroyed crops and buildings.
Wars between big em cities are a concern, however. Such wars might 
result from cities fearing that other cities will win in economic competition. 
Nuclear weapons could still threaten to destroy entire cities in a single strike. 
To a kilo-em, however, a nuclear missile that gave 15 minutes of objective 
warning time gives 10 days of subjective warning, making it easier to flex­
ibly respond to such threats. In contrast, weapons such as lasers and some 
directed energy weapons still seem to kilo-ems to have instantaneous effects 
on city scale distances. To mega-ems, however, even light-speed weapons 
appear to have substantial delays. Even so, you could never see such weapons 
heading toward you.
Em soldiers much less need to fear the death of any one copy, as they 
could easily revert to a recent backup copy. The material resources that 
are lost when a brain (or a city) is destroyed, however, still sting. So there 
might still be em wars of attrition, although counted less by deaths than by 
resources destroyed.
Some hardware that is useful in war has little use outside of war, while 
“dual-use” hardware can be used for both war and peace. Today, we often 
subsidize dual-use roads and cargo ships. Similarly, as em brains tied to 
large fixed data centers are likely to be less useful in war, ems may subsidize 
smaller more portable data centers with matching local power and cooling, 
including portable em bodies with brains inside. Such portable brain hard­
ware might be always on call, ready to be quickly filled by soldier minds in 
the case of war.
More generally, physical capital in city centers may be more vulnerable to 
military strikes. This may encourage ems to subsidize physical capital away 
from city centers that can be used to support war efforts. Capital that is 
easier to physically move quickly may be given larger subsidies.
Because the best clans are often substantially better at particular jobs than 
the second best, those best clans likely spread across the world wherever 
such jobs need doing. Because of this, most of the big em clans probably 
have copies in most em cities, although likely with varying levels of success. 
When hostility and suspicion arises between cities, such feelings may be 
directed at clans that are more successful in foreign cities. Such clans may be 

conflict
252
suspected of having stronger loyalties to other cities. Em clans may cre­
ate private communication channels with members in other cities, even if 
they sometimes deny the existence of such channels. This may further fuel 
suspicions about disloyal clans.
Prediction markets may help to prevent large wars by accurately forecast­
ing the chances of inducing or winning a war. Errors in such estimates seem 
to often contribute to needless wars.
As ems rely heavily on computer hardware, they are especially vulnerable 
to flaws in computer security. Compared with today, a larger fraction of 
resources in wars are likely to be spent on computer security, both to attack 
and to defend.
In a world dominated by a few huge em cities, cold war may make more 
sense than hot war. In such a cold war, cartels of cities may try to hurt 
outsiders by agreeing to limit information trade with outsiders. To enforce 
such agreements, em cities might limit and control communication between 
cities, and create shared agencies to help with this task.
In sum, em war is a real concern, as it has been in most post-forager 
societies.
nepotism
Just as families can be nepotistic in our world, clans may be nepotistic in the 
em world.
In most farmer-era cultures, extended family clans were the main unit 
of social organization, for production, mating, parenting, politics, war, law, 
finance, and insurance (Weiner 2013). People trusted their family clans 
much more than they did outsiders, and felt much less obligation to treat 
outsiders fairly. In contrast, our industrial economy today relies on people 
supporting organizations such as firms, cities, and nations by playing fair 
according to neutral norms and laws.
Roman civil law forbade cousins marrying, and Catholic law forbade 
marriages between even more distant relations. Such policies forced the 
mixing of family clans, and thus weakened the importance of family clans in 
social life. The first places to adopt such policies, such as northern Europe, 
were the first to have bigger stronger firms, cities, and nations, and as a result 
those places are richer today (Alesina and Giuliano 2014).

nepotism
253
People today who live in societies with more family-based cultures are 
happier and healthier, all else equal. However, they are also less willing to 
move or marry those from different cultures, and tend to be more nepotistic 
in firms and politics. Family firms do well worldwide, but usually by having a 
single family dominate, and by having firms be on average smaller, younger, 
and less innovative than firms not dominated by a single family.
Overall, compared with farmer era firms, industrial era firms have become 
much bigger and have required more specialized labor. Collections of people 
connected by family ties have been displaced by collections of unrelated 
employees chosen more for their specialized skills, and more easily fired 
for poor performance. Family-based firms, in contrast, often have trouble 
firing badly performing family members. Nations where families are very 
strong tend to have a weak civic culture, which hurts their national politics 
and policy.
Thus while strong family clan ties are often good for individuals, dur­
ing the industrial era they have been bad for larger societies, inducing less 
sorting, specialization, agglomeration, innovation, trust, fairness, and rule of 
law. To prosper, industrial societies have had to weaken the influence of fam­
ily clans. Methods to do this have included more formal and neutral rules, 
including rules to forbid clan inter-marriage, and suspicion and disapproval 
of nepotism.
Clans of em copies might naturally induce even stronger internal loyalties 
and favoritism. Firms entirely composed of a single clan could suffer even 
more than have family based firms from a lack of diverse skills and tempera­
ments, and from difficulties in firing poorly performing members. Thus em 
firms may need to discourage copy clan nepotism even more than firms 
today need to suppress family clan nepotism.
Some em-era firms might draw all employees from the same clan. How­
ever, most em firms avoid drawing too many employees from the same 
clan. They also avoid letting a single clan fill too many distinct roles in each 
workgroup. There might even be laws to encourage clan mixing, such as laws 
banning work teams of ems all from the same clan.
It can often make sense for all the employees who serve in a particular 
role, such as janitor, to come from the same clan. However, employees who 
fill substantially different job roles will typically come from different clans. 
So while ems from the same clan may often interact with each other on the 

conflict
254
job, this may usually be because workers in very similar roles must some­
times interact with each other.
These policies to resist nepotism are similar to how firms today often sep­
arate family members, and similar to how schools today often separate iden­
tical twins into different classes. Such separation allows other employees or 
students to worry less about within-family or between-twin favoritism.
To ems in such diverse-clan firms, all-one-clan firms may seem creepy, 
and all-one-clan cities even more disturbing. This creepiness feeling might 
express not just a fear of nepotism, but also distaste for self-obsession. This 
sort of distaste seems common today. For example, the “Seinfeld” episode 
“The Invitations” makes fun of the main character Jerry for liking a woman 
with a personality and body shape much like his own. Em society may use 
such distaste as a cultural resource to help discourage clan nepotism. This 
is similar to how we now use cultural disapproval of cousin marriage to 
weaken family clans.
An efficient em world will likely find some ways to substantially discour­
age em clan nepotism.
fake experts
Clan nepotism can threaten the reliability of abstract experts. Let me explain.
In some areas of life today, such as in high art and academic research, 
ordinary people find it very hard to judge merit for themselves. Instead, 
they mostly defer to judgments by experts. Because of the respect we give 
apparent experts, we are especially vulnerable on these topics to believing 
judgments from fake experts. Fake experts are coalitions of apparent experts 
who claim more expertise than they actually have, but who coordinate to 
support each other’s claims of expertise, and to avoid contradicting their 
allied fake experts.
We have some simple ways to avoid fake experts. We could try to make 
it harder for such experts to coordinate, we could prefer to rely more on 
amateurs instead of professionals, and we could wait much longer to reward 
our experts, waiting to see clearer evidence that their claims are sound 
(Hanson 2005). Such approaches usually seem extreme, however, and are 
rarely adopted.

fake experts
255
As discussed in Chapter 15, New Institutions section, we are also reluctant 
to use track records and pay-for-performance on our experts. We also seem 
to lose by letting them form groups that limit entry to their professions and 
self-regulate their activities. A plausible explanation for all this excess trust 
in experts, and reluctance to treat them skeptically, is that we individually 
seek to raise our status via affiliation with high status experts, and see this 
affiliation as weaker if we treat them skeptically.
Today, the problem of fake experts seems at least somewhat mitigated 
because we replace all experts every generation. In places with strong family 
clans and nepotism, however, people can pass on cushy roles as fake experts 
to children and relatives, and in fact this probably happened often during 
the farming era. But today expert roles usually require rare abilities. For 
example, as few seem qualified even on the surface to be experts in high 
art or academic research, most experts don’t have children or close relatives 
suitable for such roles, and so can only rarely pass on such roles to relatives.
Thus today each new generation of experts is mostly drawn from the 
wider population, and so these new experts must be taught to join the fake 
expertise conspiracy, and so could expose it. Also, even if the previous gen­
eration was a fraud, they have only weak reasons not to select and train 
the next generation to be as truly expert as possible. All these factors make 
nepotism in the choice of experts harder today than it was in the past.
The em world, however, could make it easier for fake experts to gain by 
passing on their roles to close associates. Younger copies of older experts 
are very similar, with the same surface suitability for expert roles, making it 
easier for fake experts to perpetuate themselves via nepotism. In response to 
this increased threat, ems may attach less prestige and importance to hard-
to-evaluate high art, academic research, and other hard to evaluate experts. 
Ems might also more put more amateurs in such roles instead of profession­
als. Finally, ems might rely more directly on advice from prediction markets, 
and less directly on advice from supposed experts.
While such solutions are available, however, it is unclear how successfully 
the em world will actually be at discouraging fake experts.


257
C H A P T E R  21
Politics
status
ho is higher status in an em world?
Humans are much less competent than ems in most jobs, 
and so ems see humans and styles and habits associated with 
humans as lower status. As ems must retire when they can no 
longer compete with younger workers, retirees are also lower status, as are 
styles and habits associated with retirees. Also, we have long treated places 
where people congregate more densely, and the people who congregate 
there, as higher status.
Humans, retirees, and ems away from urban centers all tend to be slower. 
These features help to make slow speed seem low status to ems. In addition, 
faster ems tend to have many other features that are today treated as markers 
of higher status. Faster ems tend to be bosses, to embody more wealth, to 
host meetings, and to sit at premium locations. Faster ems find it easier to 
coordinate with each other in contests with slower ems. Fast ems hear of and 
react to news first, and so more quickly adopt new fashions.
As faster em brains embody more capital, impoverished ems are often 
forced to run at slower speeds. Also, the lives of slower ems seem more like 
“death,” in the sense that they have a larger chance of ending sooner because 
of civilization instability. For example, if the em era lasts for 2 objective 
years, a micro-em experiences only 1 subjective minute during that period. 
Thus slower ems can naturally seem nearer to death, which seems low status.
Thus we have many reasons to expect that ems who run faster are usually 
seen as higher status. Similarly, during meetings the more centrally located 
ems, for whom signal delays are smallest, may usually appear to be more 
W

politics
258
central and powerful. Note that as em speeds will tend to clump, this creates 
a class system of distinct status levels.
Today, residents of bigger cities tend to be seen as higher status, and their 
higher status isn’t much lost when they temporarily visit rural areas. Simi­
larly, em status may not change much during temporary speed changes. It 
might instead be the typical speed of their clan or subclan that matters most.
Slow ems can have the status mark of taking a longer-term bigger-picture 
view, and a few of them are trusted to manage capital for long-term pay­
offs. Also, while intermediate speed ems can be part of an integrated world 
culture and society of ems at such mid-level speeds, long communication 
delays might perhaps fragment very fast ems into different local cultures 
and societies in different cities, or even city regions.
Social status tends to track one’s immediate power, accomplishment, and 
popularity, as well as one’s basic abilities and potential for these things. To 
the extent that status tracks potential, the social status of ems should vary 
less within clans, as all members of a clan should have similar basic abilities 
and potential. This makes status more stable and predictable in an em world; 
one knows a lot about an em’s past, current, and future status merely by 
knowing his or her clan. As status is often an important factor in romantic 
pairings, for ems such pairings may tend to be more closely matched in 
status than are pairings today.
Fast leisure can allow a large fraction of the population to visit a few 
exclusive leisure places that are limited in size. For example, a unique intim­
ate dinner theatre that fits only 100 ems, with 10 seatings per subjective day, 
can serve a billion ems per objective day if customer ems run at mega-em 
speeds during their visits. Of course such places can be easily duplicated, but 
there may be prestige value in visiting an unduplicated original.
While some details of status may change, the essential psychology of 
status probably will not. Higher status ems will usually feel justified in dis­
missing the claims, concerns, and sometimes even the existence of low status 
ems, feeling confident that they know best, for themselves and for everyone.
governance
People tend to be more passionate and sensitive about their opinions on 
politics and law. This is in part because such topics are related to morality 

governance
259
and social norms, and in part because data and theory in such areas tend to 
be weaker, often allowing a wider range of opinions to be consistent with 
our best data and theories. Because of this sensitivity, many readers are espe­
cially likely to be offended by, or lose respect for, authors who discuss politics 
or law.
Nevertheless, for completeness in this chapter and the next I more dir­
ectly consider the topics of how ems might change politics and law. Let me 
emphasize that my estimates in these areas are especially tentative, and that 
few conclusions in other sections depend much on these.
Strong central rulers with substantial discretion and incentives have 
long governed families, firms, villages, armies, and nations. Such rulers are 
likely to also run many em-era organizations, such as cities, firms, and clans. 
Rulers allow rapid flexible decision-making that can inspire confidence in 
members and allies. In the em world, strong rulers probably continue to 
dominate many risk-taking competing units such as firms.
Ruler-based forms of organization may find even broader application 
among ems than among humans today. Em rulers can have indefinite life­
spans, their brains can run much faster than subordinates, they can split off 
short-term copies to do tasks requiring high levels of trust, and they could 
use safes to let subordinates verify their judgments. In addition, it is cheap 
and easy to let anyone have long meetings with any ruler; what is expensive 
is having those rulers remember much detail about those meetings. Sup­
plicants could meet with a copy of the ruler and try to convince that copy to 
discuss their issue with its original.
While it is hardly an inevitable outcome, there is a possibility that ems 
may create stable totalitarian regimes that govern em nations. Such regimes 
would have detailed enough surveillance to detect even small attempts to 
criticize or undermine them, have enough power to strongly punish such 
attempts, and have a consistent will to implement such policies. In the twen­
tieth century totalitarianism was tried in Stalin’s Russia, Hitler’s Germany, 
Mao’s China, and elsewhere. These trials suffered from poor central deci­
sions because of an absence of criticism, less innovation because of reduced 
communication and excess central micro-management, and leadership suc­
cession candidates seduced by outside cultures (Caplan 2008).
Indefinite leader lifespans and short-term leader copies protect em totali­
tarian regimes well against both succession problems and betrayal by close 

politics
260
insiders. Problems of an absence of useful criticism and reduced innovation 
might be solved if repression efforts could more narrowly target attempts to 
undermine the regime, leaving other interactions free. Such narrow target­
ing is aided by many new em abilities. In dense urban areas, a regime can 
monitor all activity, and change any communications. Individuals can be 
subject to shallow mind reading and sims that test loyalty. When troubles 
are found, such as ems who learn something forbidden, the ems involved 
might revert to and rerun from an earlier state with new protections.
Large firms and clans that exist both inside and outside of a totalitarian 
regime might credibly coordinate to undermine that regime. Such regimes 
would need to buy off such threats, and even then such parties might not 
stay bought off. As low-density rural areas could be harder for totalitarian 
regimes to monitor and control, such regimes may limit contact between 
urban and rural areas.
The interests of rulers, even in democracies, often diverge from the inter­
ests of the constituents they represent. For example, to signal dominance, 
leaders often go out of their way to visibly neglect sources of advice that may 
seem to challenge their authority, leading to failure to make use of relevant 
information.
As discussed in Chapter 15, Prediction Markets section, the use of deci­
sion markets to make key group decisions can reduce the agency costs of 
this interest divergence and information neglect, especially when there are 
good after-the-fact measures of how well constituent interests have been 
achieved. For governance, such good measures include lifespans, GDP, 
unemployment rates, land values, and war deaths. In such cases, an organ­
ization may want to encourage a habit of, or even commit to, adopting pol­
icies that market speculators estimate will improve constituent outcomes. 
That is, to adopt proposals when the market estimate of good outcomes 
given the adoption of a particular policy is clearly higher than the market 
estimate of good outcomes given non-adoption.
Measuring good outcomes is especially easy for profit-seeking firms. 
When constituents are investors, the market price of investment shares can 
be a good estimate of the constituent value achieved. Thus it can be espe­
cially useful for profit-seeking firms to commit to adopt policies approved 
by decision markets. A good outcome measure is also available for totalitar­
ian regimes, namely the regime’s survival. To use decision markets to get 

governance
261
advice, however, such regimes would need to involve outside judges and 
financial institutions, and allow informed traders to make secret trades and 
to hold assets outside of the regime’s reach.
Clans and firms may sometimes benefit from holding false or biased 
beliefs, which may, for example, motivate increased worker effort. Because 
of this, these groups might want to self-deceive to hold biased beliefs, by 
having leaders who strategically promote such beliefs. As decision markets 
may interfere with such desired self-deception, such groups may sometimes 
prefer not to allow decision markets on certain critical topics, to allow 
leader-promoted self-deception on these topics. Such groups may of course 
find other excuses to justify prohibiting decision markets.
Profit-seeking organizations today have a big advantage over non-profits 
in being able to grow faster via the infusion of outside capital, instead of 
merely by re-investing internal net revenue. In a very competitive and 
dynamic em economy, this advantage may tempt clans and perhaps even 
city-states to incorporate as for-profit enterprises. For example, the best 
way for a clan to assure its continued long-term prosperity as an active 
social force might be for it to commit to choosing clan policies that maxi­
mize the profits of its investors. Such a commitment might be made via 
decision markets or by giving substantial decision-making power to a major 
investor.
Cities and firms today must allocate and price common utilities, and 
regulate external costs resulting from resource use. Em clans and teams will 
need to make similar choices. As discussed in Chapter 15, Combinatorial 
Auctions section, combinatorial auctions can allow a more flexible decen­
tralized approach that handles complexities well. In em cities, such auctions 
could be used to price and allocate housing, views, power, cooling, com­
munication, transport, structural support, and to deal with externalities in 
such uses. This might help em cities to more closely approximate the ideally 
efficient city that makes the right tradeoff between scale economies and 
scale diseconomies (Arnott 2004).
Combinatorial auctions might also be used to form teams. That is, clans 
might submit bids expressing their willingness to create copies to work on 
particular task, team, and customer combinations. Customers might simi­
larly bid for particular outcome combinations. Using auxiliary decision mar­
kets that estimate outcomes if particular teams are hired, a combinatorial 

politics
262
auction might then assign teams to customers in a way that maximizes 
expected net stated value. This process might reduce losses from negotiating 
such outcomes via complex informal clan politics.
For ems who mostly live within a few huge city-states, city and national 
governance varies less around the world than it does today. This situation 
makes it easier to coordinate to achieve global governance on more issues. 
Thus compared with our world, an em world coordinates more often to deal 
well with the largest global threats or opportunities.
In a world with a few huge city-states, poor governance within any one 
megalopolis has a larger global effect than does local poor governance today. 
As periods of poor and good governance tend to persist over time, the em 
world is likely to have stronger persistent periods of overall poor and good 
governance. Periods of poor governance may be associated with more con­
flict and war, and with lower economic growth. Thus, compared with our 
world today, the em world may have larger and longer growth fluctuations 
around its long-term growth trend.
Political violence, regime instability, and policy instability all seem to be 
negatively correlated with economic growth. This suggests that a competi­
tive em world selects against tendencies to produce violent, unstable, and 
revolutionary political change (Brunetti 1997).
clan governance
As a new unit of organization, clans raise some new governance issues.
Copy clans have a natural candidate for the central ruler of that clan: 
the original at the root of their copy tree. For early clans this is an ordinary 
human, who may be too slow and out of touch to make a good clan ruler. 
So something close to the first scanned version might instead be preferred. 
But this type of copy might still be mentally and socially immature, and the 
process of becoming an experienced ruler might take away its legitimacy as 
the original copy. However, the clan original might at least take on the role 
of an impartial judge, restarted periodically to quickly review and judge on 
questions of clan principle.
In the em world, many decisions that we consider “private” are made 
by clans, instead of by individual ems. Clans have the potential for strong 
communalism and central control, because clan members are similar, 

clan governance
263
interdependent, and share interests, and because clans have great legal and 
financial powers over members, as well as information about them. But 
while clan members are inclined to let their clans coordinate their activities, 
many clans may be bad at this. After all, clans may not trust non-members 
to manage them, and a typical human personality may not be well suited to 
management roles.
We should thus expect a substantial selection in the em world for per­
sonalities well suited to managing people very much like themselves. Clans 
whose members are naturally good managers in this sense will have better 
organized clans, and as clans are a central unit of social organization, these 
clans have a competitive advantage in the em world.
It is possible that clans of very like-minded copies suffer more from 
“group-think,” that is, from converging too quickly on a consensus before 
considering other points of view. But ems may also have many new ways to 
avoid this, including prediction markets.
Social groups such as firms or clubs require less in the way of rules and 
formal organization when they have less than about a 150 members, or 
roughly the number of people that a forager met in a lifetime. For clans this 
limit might be larger, as clan members differ much less from one another, 
and so require less social understanding of individual differences. Even so, 
clans with millions of members almost surely require some sort of formal 
organization. Different members have different specialties, and some spe­
cialize in resolving disputes between others.
Clans with investors might not want to commit to maximizing investor 
profit. Clans might instead commit to maximizing a speed-weighted future 
clan population, future leisure time, future respect from the world, or future 
influence on the world. This “future” might be a particular future time, or 
an integral over time. We expect that clans who commit to future respect 
or influence will in fact tend to have more respect or influence, respectively. 
However, it is possible that different goals converge in practice. That is, 
maximizing profits might also typically maximize population, respect, and 
influence.
Clans who commit to such goals might also want to ensure that members 
could sufficiently enjoy their lives, and so impose a constraint on something 
like the average leisure-to-work ratio in its members’ time. To prevent some 
subclans from exploiting others, such constraints may be applied at many 

politics
264
smaller scales within the clan. It remains far from clear, however, which 
exact constraints are most useful and workable.
What is clear, however, is that clans introduce many new governance 
issues.
democracy
Over the last few centuries, democracy has become an increasingly respected 
form of governance, in part because the richest nations have been especially 
democratic. The em era, however, may have different attitudes.
Democracy is not obviously the most competitive form of governance. 
While nations that lack strong legal institutions can grow more with dem­
ocracy, nations with strong legal institutions see no gain or even a net loss 
from adding democracy (Assiotis and Sylwester 2015). Also, while democ­
racies have had roughly the same average economic growth rates as non-
democracies, non-democracies have had a higher variance in growth rates 
(Almeida and Ferriera 2002).
If non-democracies with higher than average growth rates also have per­
sistent growth rates, then as the growth rate of a portfolio tends toward the 
highest growth rate that portfolio contains, we should weakly expect the 
portfolio of non-democratic nations to grow faster than the portfolio of 
democratic nations (Cover and Thomas 2006). This is a reason to expect less 
democracy over time.
Democracy has been much more common during the industrial era than 
it was during the farming era, although forager bands had many democratic 
elements. As we will discuss, increasing democracy is another industry era 
trend that can plausibly be attributed to increasing wealth inducing more 
forager-like values. The fact that ems are individually poorer suggests that 
ems are more farmer-like and thus may feel a weaker preference for democ­
racy. This is another reason to expect less democracy.
Less democracy may not matter much for public policy. Today, there are 
few average differences in economic or social policies between democra­
cies and other forms of governance. The main difference seems to be that 
democracies work less hard to block political opponents. So democracies 
have less torture, execution, censorship, military spending, and regulation of 

democracy
265
religion (Mulligan et al. 2004). So if ems have less democracy they may have 
more of these sorts of political repression.
Some groups are naturally more risk-averse than others, and this 
risk-aversion extends to their governance. That is, some groups are more 
willing to forgo the peak gains from very competent group-serving seen-­
as-legitimate inspiring leaders, to avoid the worst losses from incompetent 
selfish seen-as-illegitimate terrible tyrants. As clans and city-states are 
likely to be more risk averse than firms, they are likely to be more attracted 
to variations on democracy, such as representative democracy, where citizens 
elect representatives who then vote on laws. This is because the outcomes in 
representative democracies depend less on the varied abilities and inclina­
tions of individual leaders. Clans, however, need fear leader variance less, as 
they have less internal variance to draw from. Even so, clans might instead 
“vote” via mindreading that averages their attitudes while they all think 
about the same decision.
Large differences in em speeds can make one-person one-vote schemes 
less useful. Many see preventing popular revolutions as an important func­
tion of democracy. Over the last few centuries, a group popular enough 
to mount a revolution is usually also popular enough to win or dominate 
elections, as long as votes are distributed in at least rough proportion to the 
inclinations and abilities to participate in a revolution. Yes, the relation is 
often only rough; professional soldiers are not usually given more votes, for 
example. But the relation seems close enough to usually work.
However, in a world where it is easy to make cheap base speed ems, giving 
out voting power in proportion to raw population just gives power in pro­
portion to those able to spend to create many very slow ems. Such a system 
seems wasteful and unfair, and so probably does little to prevent popular 
revolutions.
A system of speed-weighted voting, with votes proportional to brain 
speeds, seems more workable, if the official speeds used to set vote weights are 
averaged over long enough periods to eliminate most incentives for ­election-
time speed-ups. This approach distributes power in rough ­proportion to 
subjective hours of labor, which is roughly related to social, economic, and 
military power. This approach requires monitoring of which hardware 
runs em minds, when, and at what speeds. Governments might thus find 

politics
266
speed-weighted voting to be a convenient excuse to justify intrusive moni­
toring that they want for other reasons.
Of course there are many other possible voting schemes one could 
­consider. For example, votes might be given only to those past a very old 
subjective age, votes might be inherited and divided upon copying, or ems 
might be given more votes when they are more different from other voters.
Democracy seems likely to continue in at least some parts of the em world, 
even if it seems unlikely to dominate among em governance mechanisms.
coalitions
Em clans probably form coalitions for mutual political support.
In the past, when family clans were strong, places such as cities where 
many family clans interacted were often places of harsh and destructive 
clan-based coalition politics. In such clan politics, you were expected to ally 
with factions closer to you in the clan family tree. But when such distances 
between clans were similar, allies were chosen more opportunistically.
Politics today isn’t based on families nearly as much; ideologies often 
matter more. Even so, shifting coalitions that induce people to lobby for 
their coalition in many areas of life can drive a lot of activity.
In most political systems, a coalition of factions gains extra advantages 
when it acquires a majority of political power. This winning coalition can 
push common policies to favor its factions at the expense of rival factions. 
Such coalitions are vulnerable to “cycling,” however, wherein a new coalition 
wins by enticing defections from the old coalition via more attractive offers 
on how to divide the spoils (Mueller 1982; Stratmann 1996). Frequently 
changing coalitions that induce frequently changing policies can induce 
substantial costs.
How might em clans talk about and negotiate changes in their alliances? 
The chiefs of firms and city-states could negotiate with each other as big 
organizations often do today, via meetings between leaders. A relation 
between clans, however, is also a relation between perhaps millions or more 
pairs of particular clan members who are often in close contact. A potential 
problem is that clan members might not find relation changes negotiated 
in private without their participation by clan leaders to feel compelling, 
especially when there are changes in how they should treat close associates. 

coalitions
267
That might seem too cold and calculating an attitude. How often could an 
em genuinely be mad at her friend George just because her clan told her to 
be mad?
Yet if individual em pairs negotiated their relations without much clan-
level coordination, it could be hard for clan coalitions to change swiftly. This 
might be good for society overall, but it might be bad for slower-changing 
clans. One solution might be to have a single representative pair of ems talk 
to each other, with all the other pairs able to watch, and even able to vote 
to influence the conversation. Clan members might feel the results of that 
visible conversation to be a more emotionally compelling way to change 
their personal relations with individual members of other clans.
To help large groups of clans coordinate their shifting coalitions, there 
might be larger conversations between representative clan members, which 
are watched and influenced by the other clan members. For example, there 
might be a few continual social gatherings to which each clan is allowed to 
send only one copy, but which the masses may watch. By watching who talks 
to and says what to whom at such gatherings, observers might infer changes 
in clan alliances, and feel more emotionally bound to such changes. Because 
they’d come from the same clan, the personality of observers is close to that 
of matching participants. Thus such observers may usually agree and sym­
pathize with how that participant reacted to discussions at the gathering.
Judge clans might be excluded from attending such gatherings, if judges 
are not supposed to ally with particular non-judge clans.
It could be awkward if such social gatherings gave equal participation 
to clans of very different sizes, that is, to clans with very different speed-
weighted copy counts. Instead of only inviting clans above an arbitrary 
size cutoff, it might be more flexible to allow all clans, but then use a 
simple function of clan size to limit how close a clan representative could 
approach spatially to the center of the gathering. This limiting function 
could be chosen to ensure a comfortable density of participants when 
most clan representatives are located close to their minimum distance to 
the center.
A pair of clans might also infer and communicate their changing moods 
toward one another by using software to automatically add up subtle clues 
obtained from the interactions of thousands or millions of copies. Such 
clues could be much harder for third parties to notice or understand.

politics
268
Clans may coordinate and affirm their alliances via fashions in the over­
lays that they see in virtual or physical realities. For example, only some clans 
may be invited to see certain overlays, or only some may be told that certain 
overlays are in fashion. Ems in a meeting who see the same overlays may 
tell inside jokes that will make more sense for those seeing the particular 
overlays. Such overlays may have some functions relevant to the situation, to 
give ems plausible deniability about using them for the purpose of exclud­
ing others. Changing fashion in overlays may prevent excluded clans from 
learning about them quickly enough.
Even when clans change their political alliances, and individual clan 
members emotionally accept such changes, there is probably a norm encour­
aging ems to appear to continue to work cooperatively with all members of 
their team, even members from conflicting clans. Without such a norm, 
team productivity could be overly disrupted.
factions
Changing coalitions and political competition among coalitions can be 
socially expensive because of coalition “rent-seeking.” This is the effort that 
people spend to lobby for their faction or coalition among their associates. 
For example, people can feel pressured to favor current coalition partners 
when choosing spouses, neighbors, suppliers, customers, and so on. Not only 
does this process reduce the quality of such partners on other criteria, it 
creates costs to change partners when political coalitions change. People 
can also feel pressured to lobby for their faction; those who don’t may be 
punished for disloyalty.
Political systems have long tried many solutions to curb the costs result­
ing from excess coalition change and rent-seeking, with varying and usually 
insufficient success. For example, raising the costs to change policy can dis­
courage policy change, although this can make societies less adaptable to 
changing conditions. Also, identifying coalitions with abstract ideological 
positions can make coalitions harder to change, by suggesting that coalitions 
that change their positions are unprincipled or confused. Norms of equal 
treatment within an entitled stable political class can also help. For example 
the U.S. Congress has a norm of adopting rules to favor incumbents with 

factions
269
long tenure, which helps most of them keep their jobs. Ems may adopt 
versions of many of these solutions.
Ems might try to discourage the large social gathering described in the 
Coalitions section, but it isn’t clear if this would reduce coalition changes. 
More clearly, it would allow fewer ems to understand or be comfortable 
with coalition changes.
In the fifth century B.C., Cleisthenes redesigned the political rules of 
ancient Athens to break up the power of region-based alliances that had 
caused endemic political conflict there. He created 10 new and equal tribes, 
where a third of each tribe was taken from a different type of region: plain, 
coast, or hills. As a result, the villages in each tribe were widely dispersed 
geographically, reducing the strength of geography-based coalition politics.
Ems may similarly try to design political groupings that divide up clans, 
and spread each clan across many different other groupings. They may use 
subsidies and taxes to encourage diverse clans to mix and bond more thor­
oughly within shared teams, firms, and neighborhoods. They may make laws 
and norms against letting politics influence choices of spouses or teammates.
Compared with open informal negotiations to form work teams, using 
combinatorial auctions to make such choices can reduce the influence of 
politics. However, clan politics might be expressed via bids where some 
clans declare extra prices, positive or negative, to be on a team with mem­
bers of other clans. Auctions may choose to prohibit or restrict such bids, to 
reduce the scope for clan politics.
If ems develop laws and norms against letting politics influence certain 
areas of life, ems will likely find excuses behind which to cloak such political 
choices. For example, ems may choose ideologies, philosophies of life, and 
tastes for art and entertainment that are correlated with political factions. 
They can then prefer to associate with those who share such philosophies 
and tastes, and tell themselves that any favoring of their political coalition 
is accidental and can’t be avoided. For example, the clans in a coalition may 
choose to share a preference for a certain genre of music, and then give pref­
erence in their associations with others who also prefer that type of music.
To avoid both clan politics and nepotism, ems might rely on two-name 
ems, that is, those outside the core group of most common one-name clans. 
Such outside ems might be empowered to police local politics within places 

politics
270
such as firms and teams, perhaps just by rating members on the degree to 
which they seem to play office politics.
More generally, those who fill the roles of neutral judges may tend to 
be drawn from outside the core group of one-name clans. Because of this, 
clans that are productive but not quite productive enough to make the select 
group of one-name clans may take extra efforts to avoid entangling alliances 
within one-name clans, so that they can seem good candidates for neutral 
judges.
An em world will probably try to curb the costs of clan coalition politics. 
But it remains unclear how well it will succeed at this.

271
C H A P T E R  2 2
Rules
law
s law serves important social functions in most farmer and 
industrial societies, law will almost certainly continue in the em 
world. As the em world is more competitive, when enforcement 
is insufficient law will select not only for honest success, but also 
for cheating to create apparent success. Thus the em world should be all the 
more eager to choose institutions of law and its enforcement to ensure that 
cheaters do not prosper.
To the extent that em law continues to invoke the concept of the expectations 
or beliefs of a “reasonable person,” that person is likely to be an em. Also, we 
discussed in Chapter 10, Rights section, the wide range of legal environments 
that might cover the creation of em copies. At the other end of life, it is much 
easier to determine the wishes of past ems. After all, ems who are archived or 
retired can be directly consulted about their wishes. For ems who are erased but 
have very close copies still living, those close copies could be consulted.
The ability to read minds, even at shallow levels, can offer em law better 
ways to determine pain, intent, and lies. Archived copies of minds from just 
before a key event could be used to infer the intent and state of knowledge 
of ems at that key event. Spur split tests might be used to determine uncon­
scious biases. More generally, wider surveillance makes it easier for ems to 
notice rule violations, and to identify guilty parties.
Spurs can ensure privacy not only in legal advice, but also in law enforce­
ment. For example, an isolated police spur could look in detail at arbitrary 
private data and then end quietly if it found no legal violation, revealing 
nothing to outsiders but that one fact.
A

rules
272
Some elements of law today can be understood as attempts to insulate 
legal decisions from coalition politics in the larger society. For example, 
rules of evidence prohibiting hearsay (i.e., indirect testimony) and statis­
tical inferences about members of groups can be seen in this light, as can 
the habit of expunging juvenile records. As em clans may be even better at 
forming effective coalitions than are family clans today, em law may need to 
try harder to insulate legal decisions from political coalitions.
To insulate legal decisions from coalition influence, judges and police 
with substantial discretion might be selected from special independent clans 
who only work, mate, and socialize with other ems from these special clans. 
Such clans might be kept socially isolated from other clans to help separ­
ate their judgments from social influences; judge clans might only socialize 
with other judge clans. This approach could reduce legal favoritism, at the 
cost of reducing judge familiarity with common behaviors and attitudes. 
Such isolation may also reduce variance and innovation in legal decisions.
Special judge clans could also make it easier to have very uniformly 
applied, yet hard-to-formalize laws. Today, we keep legal decisions consist­
ent across different cases by trying to have judges apply the same principles. 
In contrast, ems could keep decisions consistent by just using the exact same 
judge in the exact same state of mind. Legal precedents might specify that 
copies of particular judges should decide specific kinds of cases. This ensures 
that different cases are in effect judged according to very consistent legal 
principles.
Non-legal judges such as property appraisers can use similar methods. 
Copies of a particular appraiser might appraise all property of a certain type. 
This allows the appraiser to base judgments on many subtle factors, and 
yet ensures that all properties within a category are evaluated by the same 
principles.
As the cost of tagging physical objects with identification numbers should 
be very low, registration will probably be used to record the ownership of all 
but the smallest mobile physical objects. Immobile physical property (e.g., 
land) and property in computer memory, processors, or communication 
lines should be even easier to register. Thus most concrete property owner­
ship is likely to be determined via registration, although it is less clear how 
centralized is this system.

efficient law
273
The technical capacity to cheaply record activities in virtual realities and 
in physical spaces with dense activity allows for many legal reforms. For 
example, today’s accident liability rules tend to be limited to rules where at 
least one party is paid, to induce that party to report the accident. If courts 
can instead independently observe accidents, then a strict-liability-for-all 
rule can give all contributing parties incentives to choose both care and 
activity levels well, even when courts have very noisy estimates of actual or 
optimal levels of care or activity (Shavell 2004). Under this accident liability 
rule, all parties are fined the amount of the damage incurred by all other 
involved parties.
Today, laws that prohibit activities such as gambling, prostitution, or rec­
reational drugs seem to be rather weakly enforced; large fractions of the 
population are able to reliably do such things with little risk of prosecution. 
This is plausibly because the public wants to take symbolic stands against 
such activities, but doesn’t actually want to strongly limit their availability. 
Ems may similarly have poorly enforced laws that symbolize opposition to 
behaviors, including laws against what many see as wasteful or disrespectful 
leisure activities.
efficient law
A number of legal changes can be weakly predicted from the expectation 
of a more efficient em economy. A long and rich academic tradition has 
studied the efficiency of legal policies (Friedman 2000; Shavell 2004; Posner 
2014). Standard results from this tradition suggest likely directions of legal 
change if ems adopt more efficient law.
Today, we deter crime largely via informal social norms and formal threats 
of fines and prison. While fines can be an efficient form of punishment, large 
fines are not feasible when the legal system is not willing to force the sale of 
certain assets, such as abilities to earn future wages. Prison is very expensive 
punishment and hence inefficient. To more cheaply punish crimes, em soci­
eties might use random chances of executions, exile, or torture, and also use 
vicarious liability, such as fines targeted to the larger subclans that include 
an em. While randomness can be efficient, however, it may still evoke com­
plaints of unfairness and disproportionality.

rules
274
Blackmail is plausibly often efficient. If blackmail were legal, then the 
associates of criminals would try harder to notice their crimes, so they could 
blackmail those criminals. This could increase the discovery and punish­
ment of crimes, because close associates can often more cheaply identify 
crimes and criminals than can distant police professionals. Also, blackmail 
makes larger fines feasible, as criminals who would otherwise hide assets to 
avoid paying formal fines may instead search aggressively to find assets to 
pay blackmailers (Katz 1996; Block et al. 2000).
Today, liability law does more to discourage bad behavior than to encour­
age good behavior, because it is much easier to sue for the harms others have 
done to you than it is to sue for the uncompensated benefits that you have 
given to others. Law-induced incentives for good behavior might increase if 
law allowed negative liability, that is, if law allowed people to sue others for 
benefits given to them, such as for having introduced someone to a future 
spouse (Porat 2009; Dari-Mattiacci 2009).
In our world, the usual remedy for a breach of contract is monetary dam­
ages; it is unusual to require the specific performance of a contract’s prom­
ises. As ems can easily make new copies to do tasks, specific performance 
can more easily be a remedy for em contracts that promise to do specific 
actions.
With current law, the high cost of participating in lawsuits limits our 
ability to use law to deter small harms, and often forces innocent parties to 
plead guilty when threatened with expensive court processes. One remedy 
is to turn lawsuits into more transferable property, so that someone who has 
been harmed can more easily sell their right to sue and be compensated.
Another remedy for expensive legal processes is to let people gamble their 
lawsuits in official court lotteries. For example, if you said someone hurt 
you by $100, and you gambled that damage claim at 1000 to 1 odds, then 1 
in a 1000 times you’d have a claim worth $100 000, which makes it worth 
bothering to sue. The other 999 times the party you sued would have proof 
that they owed you nothing. The party you sue might also be allowed or even 
required to gamble $100 in the same lottery, so that party has money to pay 
if you win your suit (Hanson 2007).
A related remedy is to have courts issue fast decisions based on the odds in 
open prediction markets. Such markets would bet on what the court would 
decide if a lottery were to randomly pick this case to be decided directly via 

innovation
275
the usual expensive court process, and then offer sufficient stakes to induce 
all parties to try hard to win.
Today, contract law allows flexible adaptation of incentives to circum­
stances, but only over a limited range of topics, and via a limited range of 
incentives. A stronger contract law would cover more topics with stronger 
incentives, allowing stronger contracts over more kinds of situations. Such a 
law could thus let more parties contract more strongly in more ways around 
standard regimes of criminal, tort, property, and contract law, in effect pri­
vatizing more of law choice, detection, punishment, and adjudication. This 
could allow a more flexible use of legal incentives in a wider range of con­
texts (Friedman 1973).
With a stronger contract law, each clan might be relatively free to choose 
its internal law and governance, and then be free to overturn legal defaults 
by negotiating pair-wise deals with other clans regarding the laws that will 
govern their interactions.
This list so far, of possibly more efficient legal changes, only scratches 
the surface of a vast literature in law and economics, in which can be found 
many more such possibly efficient legal changes.
innovation
How is innovation different in an em economy?
Today, we see more innovation in larger firms and cities, more concen­
trated industries, more capital-intensive industries, and electronic- and 
computer-based industries (Schumpeter 1942; Gayle 2003; Miller 2009). 
The em economy should have stronger scale economies, and a more robust 
focus on engineering relative to design in products. The cost of most prod­
ucts in the em virtual world will be more dominated by fixed costs. The 
price of highly skilled labor will fall relative to the price of capital, making 
research relatively cheap because research is labor intensive. All of these 
features suggest that the em economy is more innovative.
Whether an economy tends over time to emphasize labor or capital 
depends on the relative rates of innovation in labor and capital. As ems are 
based on computers, which have tended to innovate faster than most forms 
of capital, em labor is likely to become more cost-effective faster than kinds 
of capital that are not computer-based.

rules
276
As the growth of an em economy is driven more by increasing inputs, 
innovation is not as important for growth in the em economy as in past eras. 
Even so, innovation is still very important. We expect the em world to select 
for practices that better encourage innovation, at least to the extent that 
regions and organizations gain from internal innovation.
Today, geographic regions that are more religious are less innovative, and 
more religious individuals hold views less favorable to innovation (Bénabou 
et al. 2015). This weakly suggests either that ems will be less religious, or 
that ems will find ways to produce more innovation even when ems hold 
unfavorable views about innovation. Factors suggesting that ems are more 
religious are discussed in Chapter 25, Religion section.
The em world may also select for better innovation institutions. In fact, 
the most valuable innovations in an em world might be better laws and 
institutions of intellectual property, to more strongly encourage innovation.
One possible way to promote innovation is to use prediction markets to 
separate two forecasting tasks, one on the feasibility of an innovation, and 
the other on the demand for that innovation. Today, investing in a new 
firm is usually a bet on two factors: its product idea, and its team. Investors 
who are good at estimating if a product would sell well are often not good 
at estimating which team has the best chance of delivering the product. 
When there are prediction markets on which products would be successful, 
if produced, those who can predict product ideas well can just focus on bet­
ting in those markets. Those who can predict teams well can instead hedge 
their product risk in these prediction markets, and then invest in particular 
ventures with the teams they favor.
Widespread recording of em activities allows for interesting changes. One 
change would be to let independent discovery be a stronger legal defense for 
patent infringement (Vermont 2006). Today, we don’t allow this defense 
because we fear that inventors might too easily pretend to have reinvented 
something that they actually copied. But em inventors who archive all of 
their reading and conversations might be in a much stronger position to 
credibly prove a claim of independent reinvention. In this situation, em 
inventors may also get into the habit of using copies in safes to hear about 
news and developments elsewhere, copies who then decide what informa­
tion seems worth telling to their original copy.

software
277
A related change would be to treat innovation rights legally via liabil­
ity law instead of property law. That is, instead of suing someone who has 
violated the intellectual property of your innovation, you might instead use 
negative liability (as discussed in the Efficient Law section) to sue them 
to compensate you for part of the gains that they realized from your inno­
vation. This is similar to compulsory licensing of patents, which seems to 
promote innovation today (Baten et al. 2015). Detailed recordings of their 
activities might help to estimate the value that they actually obtained from 
an innovation. One might even run sims using archived copies of innovation 
users to study the effect on them of being exposed to your innovation. The 
ability of judge spurs to protect privacy while flexibly but uniformly enforc­
ing laws could be useful here.
Many other legal changes could better encourage innovation, changes 
that we do not now imagine. Perhaps subsidized decision markets could 
create sufficient incentives for specialists to study this question more 
carefully than we have so far done. It is clear that with good institutions 
to encourage innovation, it could be reasonable to spend one-quarter, 
one-half, or even more of world income on pursuing possible innovations. 
Innovations are just that important, if ways to encourage them effectively 
can be found.
software
We can anticipate many predictable changes in software practices in an em 
world.
In our world, the cost of computing hardware has been falling rapidly for 
decades. This rapid fall has pushed computer projects to be shorter term, 
so that products can be productively used before they are made obsolete 
by changes in hardware and tools. The increasing quantity of software 
purchased has also led to larger software projects, each of which involves 
employing more engineers. This has shifted the emphasis toward more com­
munication and negotiation between workers, and toward software styles 
that more strongly support modularity and standardization.
The cost of hiring human software engineers has not fallen much in recent 
decades. The increasing divergence between the high cost of engineers and 

rules
278
the low and falling cost of hardware has led to a decreased emphasis on raw 
efficiency, and an increased emphasis on tools and habits to assure correct 
performance. This has led to an increasing emphasis on modularity, abstrac­
tion, and high-level operating systems and languages. Higher-level tools 
insulate engineers more from hardware details, and from distracting tasks 
such as type checking and garbage collection. As a result, software is less 
efficient and well adapted to any given context, but more valuable over­
all. An increasing focus on niche products has also helped to increase the 
emphasis on modularity and abstraction.
Em software engineers are selected for their very high productivity, 
and they use the tools and styles preferred by such engineers. Of course 
there is still a place for tools and styles matched to workers who don’t 
specialize in software, but have their strongest expertise in other areas. 
Even so, all em workers are smart and highly productive, and so their tools 
are of the type that very productive people prefer. As em computers tend 
to be more parallel, reversible, and error-prone, em software is also more 
focused on those cases. Because the em economy is larger, its software 
industry is larger as well, supporting larger projects, larger teams, and 
more specialization.
The transition to an em economy greatly lowers wages, thus inducing 
a big one-time “back-to-the-future” shift, toward an emphasis on raw 
context-dependent performance, relative to abstraction and easier modi­
fiability. The em economy move away from niche products adds to this 
tendency, as does the ability to save copies of the engineer who just wrote 
each piece of software, available to help later with modifying that piece. On 
the other hand, a move toward larger software projects could favor more 
abstraction and modularity.
After the transition to an em world, the cost of em hardware falls at about 
the same rate as does the cost of other computer hardware. Because of this 
new similarity between costs, the software tradeoff between performance 
and other considerations changes much less during the em era. This greatly 
extends the useful lifetime of programming languages, tools, and habits 
matched to particular performance tradeoff choices.
After an initial period of large rapid gains, the software and hardware 
designs for implementing brain emulations probably reach diminishing 
returns, after which there are only minor improvements. This is what we see 

software
279
for software compiler and emulation programs today. In contrast, non-em 
software probably improves about as fast as does computer hardware, as 
for many decades in many areas of computing we have seen improvements 
in algorithm efficiency remain close to hardware gains (Grace 2013). Thus 
after ems appear, em software engineering and other computer-based work 
slowly becomes more tool-intensive, with tools adding a larger fraction of 
value.
In contrast, for non-computer-based tools such as bulldozers, the inten­
sity of use and the fraction of value added by these tools probably falls, as 
those tools are likely to improve less quickly than em hardware does. Even 
so, new tools of this sort will continue to be invented and used.
For over a decade now, the speed of fast computer processors has 
increased at a much lower rate than the cost of computer hardware has 
fallen. We expect this trend to continue long into the future. In contrast, 
em brain hardware costs fall with the cost of parallel computer hardware 
overall, because the emulation of brains is a very parallel task. Because of 
this, relative to more parallel software, ems see an increasing sluggishness 
of software that has a large serial component, that is, requiring many 
steps to be taken one after the other. This sluggishness directly reduces 
the value of such software to ems, and also makes such software harder 
to write.
Thus over time, serial software will become less valuable, compared with 
ems and parallel software. Em software engineers will rely less on software 
tools with a big serial component, and instead emphasize parallel software 
and compatible tools. In this scenario, tools such as runtime type checking 
and garbage collection are done in parallel, or not at all. If it ends up being 
too hard to write parallel software, then the value of software more generally 
may be reduced relative to the value of having ems do tasks directly with less 
software assistance.
The increasing importance of work, the increase in organization sizes, and 
the standardization of work teams all increase the importance of enterprise 
software, that is, of software that helps organizations to coordinate.
A tendency of fast ems to be high status should raise the status of software 
engineers, for whom faster speeds are often more productive. The competi­
tion for higher status among ems may encourage faster speeds than would 
otherwise be efficient, including among software engineers.

rules
280
lone developers
For software engineering tasks where parallel software and tools suffice, and 
where the software doesn’t need to interact with slower physical systems, em 
software engineers could be productive even when sped up to the top cheap 
speed. This often makes it feasible to avoid the costs of coordinating across 
many engineers, by having a single engineer spend an entire subjective car­
eer creating a large software system. For an example, an engineer that spent 
a subjective century at mega-em speeds would complete this period in less 
than 1 objective hour. Thus when such a delay is acceptable, parallel software 
may be written by a single engineer taking a subjective career length.
When software can be written quickly via ultra-fast software engineers, 
product development could happen quickly, even if very large sums are 
spent. While today software investors can spend much of their time track­
ing current software development projects, those who invest in em software 
projects might spend most of their time deciding when is the right time to 
initiate such a project. Soon after a project begins, it is completed. A soft­
ware development race, with more than one team trying to get to market 
first, only happens when a particular sharp event, such as a new technology 
advance being announced, triggers more than one development effort.
A software engineer working for a high-speed lifetime on one project 
could still have trouble remembering software that they wrote subjective 
decades before. Because of this, shorter-term copies of this engineer might 
help them to be more productive. For example, short-term em copies might 
search for and repair bugs, and then end or retire once they have explained 
their results to the main copy. Short-term copies could also search among 
many possible designs for a particular module, and then end or retire after 
reporting on their best design choice, to be re-implemented by the main copy. 
In addition, longer-term copies could be created to specialize in whole sub­
systems, and younger copies might be revived to continue the project when 
older copies reached the end of their productive lifetime. Such approaches 
should allow close copies of a single em software engineer to make far larger 
and more coherent software systems within a subjective lifetime.
Fast software engineers who take a subjective lifetime to build a large 
software project, perhaps with the help of close copies, likely develop 
more personal software styles and tools, and rely less on standard 

lone developers
281
approaches that help them to coordinate with other engineers with dif­
fering styles and uncertain quality.
When different parts of a software project require different skills, a lone 
software engineer might create several young copies trained to acquire dif­
ferent skills. Similarly, young copies could be trained in the non-software 
job topic areas where the software is to be applied, so that they can better 
understand what software variations will have value there.
However, when a project requires skills and expertise that are best matched 
to different temperaments and minds, then it may be worth paying the extra 
costs of communication to allow ems from different clans to work together 
on this project. In this case, such engineers would likely increase the priority 
of communication via more abstraction, modularity, and higher-level lan­
guages and module interfaces. Such approaches also become more attractive 
when outsiders must test and validate software, to certify its appropriateness 
to customers.
In the em world, small teams working at the top cheap speed, with the 
assistance of many spurs, may create enormous software systems. There may 
not be much need in the em world for larger software teams.


PA R T  V
Sociology


285
C H A P T E R  2 3
Mating
sexuality
ow is sex different for ems?
As the em world is a very competitive world where sex is not 
needed for reproduction, and as sex can be time and attention con­
suming, ems may try to suppress sexuality, via mind tweaks that 
produce effects analogous to castration. Such effects might be temporary, 
perhaps with a consciously controllable on-off switch. Historically, castrated 
males have tended to have lower libido, to be less aggressive and obsessive, 
to be better able to multi-task, and to be more sensitive, sympathetic, and 
social. However, historically eunuchs have often wanted to marry, and have 
often had active sex lives (Aucoin and Wassersug 2006; Brett et al. 2007; 
Wassersug 2009; Treleaven et al. 2013). Thus even for eunuch-like ems there 
might still be a substantial demand for sex and related pair bonding.
It is possible that em brain tweaks could be found to greatly reduce nat­
ural human desires for sex and related romantic and intimate pair bonding, 
without reducing em productivity. It is also possible that many of the most 
productive ems would accept such tweaks. Alternatively, it is possible that 
cheap vivid romantic and sexual simulations will sufficiently satisfy pair-
bonding urges, so that little demand remains for pair-bonding with real ems 
(Levy 2008; Brain 2012).
However, given how deeply pair bonding and sexual behaviors are 
embedded in human nature, such scenarios do not seem likely, at least for 
the early em era. Scenarios of sex suppression also seem to be less simple, as 
it is harder to calculate their implications.
H

mating
286
In this book I thus assume that ems retain modestly strong desires for 
sex and related pair bonding, even if such desires are substantially reduced. 
I also assume that familiar conventional sexual and gender habits and pref­
erences continue in the em world. That is, most ems divide clearly into male 
versus female, ems mostly prefer male-female pair bonds, and these bonds 
have a distribution of time-scales near those we have seen in humans across 
cultures so far.
It is possible that our demand for long-term pair bonding is less deeply 
embedded than is our demand for pair bonding in general. In this case ems 
might have mostly short-term pair bonds, and perhaps more emotionally 
distanct relations such as those common in prostitution. We don’t have a 
strong reason, however, to expect this scenario.
Even if human nature isn’t flexible enough to let ems eliminate sexual 
urges, it might be flexible enough to allow large modifications. In this case, 
the lack of a reproductive function of sex could let ems explore a wide space 
of sexual attitudes and practices, to find ones that promote individual and 
team productivity. They might find solutions that would seem strange and 
repellent to us. On the other hand, they might not find such things.
Since most ems are near a peak productivity age of 50 or more, em sexual 
and mating inclinations tend to be those of people with that mental age, and 
yet with ideal bodies and stamina.
Because of clan-based access to data on the experiences of millions or 
more other copies of themselves, ems from large clans know much better 
than we do which other ems are likely to be receptive to their romantic or 
sexual overtures. Ems who want more spontaneity and uncertainty in their 
relations than these data offer might prefer to have romantic and sexual 
relations with the less common two-name clans. Such a preference might 
sometimes be in tension, however, with putting less well-known clan mem­
bers in the role of independent judges.
Illicit em mating could be harder to detect. As ems could meet in secure 
virtual locations, and speed up for their meetings, such meetings may not 
be detectable by following an em’s path in space, or by looking for unex­
plained absences in their time schedule. The memories such meetings cre­
ated might still be detectable, although even these could be avoided if new 
spurs were created for each meeting. Such spur meetings seem unlikely to 

open-source lovers
287
be satisfying, however. The cost to hold illicit meetings, however, remains 
robustly detectable.
open-source lovers
Just as some ems may choose to be open-source workers, willing to work at 
most any task as long as they are given minimal comforts, other ems may 
choose to be open-source lovers. That is, they may be willing to enter into 
short- or long-term relationships with a wide range of partners, as long as 
(1) some minimal treatment standards are met, (2) their partner pays for 
their time to exist, and (3) an initial trial finds a sufficient “spark” between 
them. As long as someone else paid for their time, open-source lovers might 
allow a wide variety of situations and tweaks to be tried in search of a good 
spark.
Just as the best available open-source em workers are probably reasonably 
qualified for most jobs even if they aren’t the world’s best workers, the best 
available open-source lovers are reasonably attractive even if they aren’t the 
world’s best lovers.
Some open-source lovers are known for being very picky regarding what 
is an acceptable spark, while others are known for having easy to find sparks. 
Others may be picky about the fraction of their subjective time they are 
willing to devote to love-making, relative to other romantic interactions, or 
to time apart. All else equal, an em can get a better quality open-source lover 
if they are themselves more attractive, and if they are willing to pay for more 
non-love-making time.
Given a fixed budget to spend on leisure time with a romantic partner, 
the existence of open-source lovers creates two main romantic options. On 
one hand, an em might choose to spend most of a budget for romance on 
his or her own run time, and spend that time with whatever willing partner 
they could find to join in an equal relation where each partner pays for their 
own run time. On the other hand, an em might instead spend their budget 
on half as many romantic hours, to pay to run two ems, so that they can 
then spend that time with the best available open-source lover. Thus the 
existence of open-source lovers sets a high lower-bound on the quality of 
em romantic and sexual relationships. The per-minute subjective value of an 

mating
288
equal relation should not fall much below half of the per-minute value of a 
relation with the best available open-source lover.
An em choosing an open-source lover could often choose one of the very 
best such lovers in the worlds, according to their preferred criteria. This is 
likely to be a more attractive option for females, who tend to have stronger 
preferences for mate quality. A high quality open-source em lover could 
excel not only in sexual behavior, but also in difficult but sexy mental fea­
tures such as musical or artistic ability.
To many ems, the very best open-source lover available who finds a 
spark with that em may still not be as attractive as their best fantasy lover. 
Depending on the quality of simulated lovers in virtual reality, many ems 
may also spend romantic time with such simulations.
pair bonds
How might longer-term pair bonding differ for ems?
If ems form marriage-like long-term pair bonds, such bonds may last 
longer subjectively than do such relations today. Two weak reasons to expect 
this are (1) ems are more productive and more productive people divorce 
less today, and (2) the em world is poorer, and divorce has increased with 
increasing wealth and falls during economic downturns (Baghestani and 
Malcolm 2014).
Today when one member of a couple rises in success more than does the 
other, it is the less successful member who is at risk of being left behind, as 
the more successful member seeks to trade up to a higher quality partner. 
However, when an em is successful there is more demand for copies of that 
em. And when a successful em makes more copies than does their partner, 
it is the new copies of the successful em who are “left behind” without the 
same access to copies of their previous partner.
Pair-bonded ems might sometimes make a lifetime commitment to one 
another, promising that they would only agree to make future copies which 
are paired with a copy of their lifetime mate. This commitment is less costly 
toward the end of an em’s useful mental flexibility lifetime, and in mass labor 
markets, where copies are usually created as part of large predictable teams.
Today, we often form romantic and other attachments that are specific 
to one individual, and which do not extend to other similar people. For 

pair bonds
289
example, people married to one member of an identical twin pair usually 
claim to have weak or no romantic feelings for the other member of the 
pair. This desire to attach to just one person might be thwarted, or at least 
complicated, by close em copies. Perhaps ems could learn to treat close em 
copies as exactly the same person for the purpose of attachments. But a sim­
pler approach is to segregate copies so that ems do not interact much with 
close copies of the em to which they feel attached. Close copies may meet 
each other in private, but not also in the presence of their close associates.
Because marriages were central to farmer era property and production, 
parents often took control over and arranged their children’s marriages. 
These parents usually took less control over their children’s friends, beyond 
choosing peer groups. For foragers, in contrast, less went wrong when pair 
bonds failed, and so foragers were freer to choose and break both friends and 
pair bonds than were farmers. We seem to be reverting to forager mating 
habits today, as our increasing wealth gives us more freedom. At work, in 
contrast, we now mainly let managers arrange our work teams.
Will em marriages be arranged? As pair bonding matters less for em 
production and reproduction than it does for us today, this is a reason to 
leave mating decisions to individual ems. However, older ems seem much 
more qualified than are parents today to choose matches for their younger 
clan-mates, as they would know their clients far better. Em couples might 
relive their early love by helping their younger similar copies to fall in love 
with each other. As arranged marriages seem to work out well today (Regan 
et al. 2012), the fact that em matchmaking seems more effective suggests 
that many em pair bonds may be arranged or heavily assisted, and work out 
even better than do our marriages.
While pair bonding may matter less to em production, when to copy and 
who to have as members of what work teams are decisions that are especially 
important for em production. These decisions are thus likely to be arranged 
or heavily assisted by others, even if individuals can veto particular proposed 
team assignments. While ems may be freer in some ways to pick their mates 
and friends than we are, as a practical matter mates and friends may often 
be limited to other team members, and ems may have less control over their 
teams.
Jobs differ in how widely they are available; some can be found in most 
geographic locations, while others are only found at a few places. Today, 

mating
290
couples tend to move to the geographic area of the member whose job is the 
most location-constrained. As men tend to have more location-constrained 
jobs today, male-female couples tend to move today to the man’s job loca­
tions (Benson 2014).
To the extent that ems are clustered into dense cities where they can 
interact with most of the city without much noticing the distance between 
work sites, this weakens the tendency of a couple to have to choose a loca­
tion favored by one of their jobs. Not all ems are in this situation, however. 
The em couples more likely to move together for one of their jobs are those 
with especially fast jobs or jobs located especially far from urban centers.
gender
The assumption made above that familiar sexuality and gender habits mostly 
continue for ems has many implications.
For example, all else being equal, ems continue to tend to mate with oth­
ers who are similar to them in many ways. Ems also continue to prefer 
physical good looks, such as body symmetry, smooth skin, and muscle tone. 
These features should be very easy to obtain, however. Ems will also tend to 
prefer ems with minds that are high-status, kind, understanding, depend­
able, sociable, stable, and smart.
We also expect ems to display the gender differences that we consistently 
see across cultures today. We expect men to prefer females with signs of 
nurturing inclinations and fertility, such as youthful good looks, and we 
expect women to prefer men with signs of wealth and status, and their future 
indicators such as intelligence, ambition, and an inclination to work hard 
(Schmitt 2012).
Relative to men, we expect women to more value benevolence, to be more 
averse to risk and competition, and to be more neurotic, agreeable, and open 
to discussing their feelings (Croson and Gneezy 2009). We expect men to 
be more assertive and open to ideas, and to more value power, stimulation, 
hedonism, achievement, and self-direction (Costa et  al.  2001; Schwartz 
et al. 2005).
Gender differences in personality seem to be stronger in richer soci­
eties, as well as in cultures whose ancestors used the plow, which required 
more physical strength (Alesina et al. 2013; Marcinkowska et al. 2014). 

gender imbalance
291
So we weakly expect gender role differences to become weaker in a poorer 
em world where physical strength matters less. A poorer em world may 
also encourage a focus on long-term over short-term mating, although the 
reduced role of pair bonding in raising children may counter that effect.
The em world seems romantically plentiful in the sense that it should 
give both male and female ems more of what they want in romantic part­
ners, at least compared with our world. In virtual reality ems could easily 
and cheaply offer either youthful good looks, or aged distinction, as their 
partners prefer. Most male ems are near their most productive subjective 
ages, and come from the few hundred most productive clans, making them 
intrinsically smart, hard-working, and capable.
Some features that are attractive today are less plentiful in the em world, 
however. As most ems have mental ages near peak productivity ages, female 
ems less often have the youthful mental styles that often attract males. With 
far fewer children to raise, females have fewer occasions to develop and show 
nurturing inclinations. Available males are less often rich or have especially 
attractive artistic abilities, such as music, art, and story telling.
Our natural attraction to others is often relative, so that we are attracted 
to those nearby who excel relative to others in our social world. It is of 
course hard to satisfy everyone if what they all want is intrinsically scarce 
in this sense. Most ems who want strong associations with the abso­
lutely most attractive or successful partner around must inevitably accept 
dissappointment.
gender imbalance
The em economy may have an unequal demand for the work of males and 
females.
Although it is hard to predict which gender will be more in demand 
in the em world, one gender might end up supplying proportionally more 
workers than the other. On the one hand, today women are becoming better 
educated and are in increasing demand in modern workplaces. There are 
some indications that women have historically worked harder and more 
persistently in hard-times low-status situations, which seem similar in some 
ways to the em world. However, the tendency of top performers in most 
fields today to be men suggests there might be more demand for male ems.

mating
292
The em world is more competitive, and women tend to perform worse 
when they frame their interactions as competitive (Niederle 2014). However, 
the em world may find more congenial ways to frame female production.
An unequal demand for male versus female workers could thwart em 
desires for romantic male-female pair bonds. The em world might substitute 
polygamous or homosexual relations, or transgender conversions, either by 
selecting more for ems who prefer such things, or by cultures that encourage 
ems to choose such options. Alternatively, ems might use software to make 
same-sex partners appear to be of the opposite sex. However, the selection 
of ems willing to make such choices could have high opportunity costs. As 
mentioned in Chapter 13, Qualities section, homosexual ems may be pref­
erentially female, as gay men earn less than other men today, while lesbian 
women earn more than other women.
A third option is for the more common gender to pay for the time of the less 
common gender, as has happened in past “frontier” towns with very large male 
to female ratios. This option seems similar to the open-source lover option.
A fourth solution is for the gender with the higher total labor demand to 
take on more work with a high ratio of spurs to long-term copies. For exam­
ple, one partner in a couple might make 10 spur copies per workday, where 
only one copy continues on to the next workday. The other partner might 
make no spurs per workday. In this case this couple could embody a 10 to 
1 ratio of labor supplied by the two partners. The couple would meet and 
interact after and before their workday, but perhaps not during the workday. 
Of course this whole spur-creation approach may have substantial costs if 
tasks are so well matched to a particular gender that there is a productivity 
cost from assigning a job to the opposite gender.
A fifth way to maintain ordinary pair bonding in the face of unequal labor 
demand is to use fast-slow pair bonds. For example, if one partner ran four 
times faster than another, the fast one could spend 1 hour per subjective (24 
hour) day with their partner, while the slow one could temporarily speed up 
four times per subjective (27 hour) day, each time spending 1 subjective hour 
with their partner. The fast partner would supply four times as much work 
to the labor market as the slow partner. Fast-slow partners could also deal 
with mismatches in how often partners want to interact, including sexually.
This fast-slow approach might also have a productivity cost if genders 
are not equally well matched to the fast and slow jobs assigned to them. 

gender imbalance
293
Another potential problem is that over any given subjective lifespan, the 
slow partner would have time for four fast partners, resulting in a subjective 
age mismatch during many periods of most relationships. The fast partner 
would only ever see the slow partner at a particular phase of their life. To 
retire together, the slow partner would have to split off copies that retire 
each time a fast partner retires. Also, this asymmetry in number of lifetime 
partners might be emotionally problematic, if one partner feels completely 
devoted to the other, but feels the other partner is only fractionally devoted 
to them.
Fast-slow pair bonds could plausibly satisfy most desires for pair bonding 
in a world with a speed-weighted gender ratio of four or less. This approach 
would not, however, satisfy such desires well if the ratio were 16 or more.
One way or another, however, the em world can deal with gender imbal­
ances in work demand. Its solutions may not be elegant, but they are mostly 
effective.


295
C H A P T E R  2 4
Signals
showing off
oday, we make many choices with an eye to how those choices 
influence how others see us. For example, we try to give others 
a favorable impression of our general capacities, such as wealth, 
health, vigor, intelligence, knowledge, skills, conscientiousness, 
and artistic sense. With this in mind, we try to appear impressive in our arts, 
sports, schooling, hobbies, vocabularies, and other markers.
For example, we plausibly pay extra for visibly nice clothes, cars, houses, 
etc., in part to show that we can afford such things. We use big words and 
witty banter in part to show our intelligence and schooling. We go to school 
in part to show our intelligence, conscientiousness, and conformity. We play 
sports in part to show our intelligence, health, strength, self-control, tough­
ness, and cooperativeness. We play music in part to show our intelligence, 
self-control, passion, and creativity.
We also try to give others a favorable impression of our loyalties and 
connections. That is, we try to credibly show that we feel strong positive ties 
toward certain individuals and groups, who feel similarly toward us. We can 
also try to show negative feelings toward rivals and outsiders. With this in 
mind, we choose with whom we spend our time, who we praise or criticize, 
and our styles of clothing, music, movies, etc. We follow gossip, news, and 
fashion in part to help show that we are well connected to respected sources 
of information. We enjoy stories and participate in politics in part to con­
vince associates of our moral sympathies. We sometimes even cry for help, 
to show who will come running.
T

signals
296
Today, we spend a large fraction of our energy and wealth on such “sig­
naling,” both because humans naturally care greatly about gaining status 
and respect in the eyes of others, and because being rich allows us to attend 
more to such concerns. As mentioned in Chapter 2, Era Values section, in 
terms of simple functionality, we seem today to spend excessive amounts on 
schools, medicine, financial intermediation, and huge projects.
In contrast, while ems share most of our desires for respect, they live in a 
more competitive world, where they can less afford to indulge such desires. 
Thus ems are likely to spend less of their energies signaling to gain status. 
However, as signaling has functional value in assigning ems to tasks and 
teams, and as it can be hard to coordinate to discourage signaling, ems will 
likely still do a lot of signaling.
Similar to humans today, ems probably use self-deception to help present 
a positive image of themselves to associates. For example, workers might try 
to believe that they are not as exhausted or bored as they actually are, to seem 
more attractive as team partners. They might similarly believe that retirees 
enjoy their retirement more than evidence justifies, to show a positive atti­
tude toward typical life plans. To preserve this illusion, ems may avoid look­
ing carefully at the lives of retirees, just as most of us do today. Ems may also 
believe that outsiders or bosses have less influence on their activities than 
they actually do, to feel, like we do today, that they have higher status by 
feeling more in control of their lives.
On some topics, the em lifestyle naturally reduces self-deception. For 
example ems could not as easily claim that their taking “the road not taken” 
had made all the difference in their lives, because ems have clearer direct 
evidence about the results of other close copies of them taking different life 
paths.
personal signals
Like us, individual ems have many specific ways to show off.
For example, ems in virtual reality can use their personal appearance and 
surroundings to signal their mood, affiliations, awareness of local fashions, 
and recent activities. It is harder to use virtual reality surroundings to signal 
wealth, as most environments are cheap to obtain and maintain. However, 

personal signals
297
some particular decorations may be copyrighted and expensive. Also, an 
entourage of smart, fast associates remains expensive, and hence credibly sig­
nals wealth. But an em entourage may have to visibly do more than they usually 
do today, to make clear that they are in fact not fake automated entourages.
Em associates might share private virtual overlays that only selected view­
ers could see, projected onto people and objects around them. For example, 
they could draw a silly mustache on someone’s face, a mustache that could 
only be seen by ems in their social circle. In this way, ems could have a 
laugh with associates at the expense of those not clued in to their private 
augmentation source, and thereby signal loyalty and an exclusive connection 
to particular associates.
Today, people lower the pitch of their voices when they feel dominant, and 
such low voices are heard as more dominant, and also as sexier. Low voices 
are also heard as less nervous, and more truthful, empathic, and potent. We 
also hear voices that are loud, fast, have fewer pauses, and more variation in 
pitch and volume to be more energetic, smart, knowledgeable, truthful, and 
persuasive (Mlodinow 2012).
As it is cheap and easy for ems to automatically modify their voices to be 
louder and lower-pitched, we expect ems to routinely do this, at least when 
they want to sound dominant, persuasive, and smart. Ems find it expensive, 
however, to increase their voice speed, reduce pauses, and increase relevant 
variation in pitch and volume, because these typically require faster mind 
speeds.
For humans, faster voices signal the speaker’s intelligence and energy 
level. For ems, however, faster voices also show more how much the speaker 
has invested financially to speed up. This signals in part how much an em 
cares about this speedup. Fast voices can also signal that the speaker has a 
lower cost of running faster, such as via running on special cheaper hard­
ware, or perhaps via shrinking their less used brain parts.
Today people agree on which faces indicate more desirable qualities, 
such as seeming trustworthy and dominant (Walker and Vetter 2015), and 
in poorer societies men less prefer women to have more feminine faces, 
compared with men in richer societies (Marcinkowska et al. 2014). This 
weakly suggests that ems will choose the faces associated with desirable 
personalities, and also faces with weaker gender distinctions.

signals
298
Ems who speed up their minds to speak quickly, and then slow down 
their minds to listen, risk talking faster than listeners can comfortably hear. 
Because of this, ems limit their talking speed and instead invest more in 
careful choice of words and intonation. Such ems tend to sound like voices 
in our advertisements, who talk with carefully practiced lines in a script.
Virtual ems no longer have direct needs to eat, take medicine, or clean 
themselves. But ems might continue with such activities because humans 
have long infused such activities with many layers of symbolic meanings. 
Such activities are often used today to signal loyalties and abilities. Ems 
thus search for new practical ends that might be achieved by these activities 
in an em world.
For example, ems might redirect our natural attitudes toward medical 
care and treatment into activities such as meditation that could plausibly 
influence em mental health. Eating particular foods might trigger tempor­
ary drug-like tweaks in the emulation process, which could induce useful 
mental states of relaxation, distraction, or thoughtfulness. This might allow 
eating to serve functions for ems similar to the purposes that music, dance, 
and stories often serve for humans today. While it is possible to trigger 
such mind tweaks just by pushing a button, triggering such changes via 
food might feel less disruptive and better integrated into familiar human 
rituals.
Fast changing fashion, such as in clothes and music, is common in our era. 
However, apparently fashion did not exist in the foraging and farming eras 
(except in proto-industrial Rome). As fashion seems to signal some com­
bination of wealth, youth, taste for variety, and information source quality, 
whether fashion continues in an em world depends on how eager ems are 
to signal such features, and on what other signaling methods are available.
Virtual reality allows for very cheap and rapid changes in fashion for 
things like clothes and furnishings. The main costs of rapid fashion change 
would be cognitive; ems might get distracted and confused by rapidly chan­
ging surroundings.
It is relatively cheap and easy to meet personally and talk with ems who 
are copies of famous ems. It is hard to get those famous ems to remember 
you later when they talk to others. Thus ems trying to show status and cen­
trality in social networks try less to meet celebrities, and try more to get 
those celebrities to remember them.

group signals
299
Today, we tend to presume that celebrities must have exceptional qual­ities. 
Because of this, we want to mate with them, to use their influence in our 
favor, and to be publicly associated with them. In the em world, celebrities 
have far fewer persistent differences from other members of their clans. Ems 
know that one clan member being more famous than others is mostly a 
matter of luck. This reduces but may not eliminate em eagerness to associate 
with individual celebrity ems.
In our world many rare products and services acquire high status via asso­
ciation with high status people. For ems being a celebrity is less about hav­
ing higher persistent qualities, so products and services acquire less added 
status by being associated with em celebrities. This reduces the status of 
rare products, relative to common products. While today we often presume 
that the most popular products are not the best products, to ems the most 
popular products and services will more often also be the best.
Sometimes a partner such as a lover or friend will ask an em to visibly 
choose that partner over their clan in a conflict. A high cost action of this 
sort would send a strong signal of loyalty to a partner. But this high cost also 
makes such actions rare.
As mentioned in Chapter 14, Work Hours section, ems may sometimes 
be tempted to work too much to signal their ability and enthusiasm for 
work, as are many people today. If this happens often, then a competitive 
em world is likely to seek ways to prevent such overwork. Clans, firms, or 
teams might, for example, commit to requiring a minimum fraction of em 
leisure time.
group signals
Some features of ems vary little among clan members. These include overall 
intelligence, basic personality, and early life cultural heritage. Other features 
can vary greatly among clan members, including wealth, mood, vigor, recently 
acquired skills, knowledge of local conditions, and loyalties and ties to spe­
cific individual ems. Still other features vary substantially within a clan, but 
vary little between close copies. These mildly varying features may include 
stamina, confidence, and particular kinds of intelligence or artistic sense.
Features that vary greatly between close copies are likely to be left to each 
em to signal by themselves. In contrast, features that vary little within a clan 

signals
300
create an opportunity for the clan to coordinate to signal those features 
together. When features vary within a clan but are shared within subclans, 
those subclans may coordinate to signal.
For example, ems from the few hundred clans that dominate the em 
economy might want to usually act as if everyone knew of and accepted their 
clan and its idiosyncrasies, and greatly valued its contribution. To show this, 
such clans might expect to be addressed by just one name, such as “George.” 
Being treated this way is a credible signal that your clan is well known. Such 
ems might act irritated when forced to interact with ems from less familiar 
two name clans. Such clans might also act indignant if anyone requested an 
independent evaluation of their contributions or value; they might think 
such actions appropriate for dealing with unfamiliar clans, but surely they 
are well known enough for this to be unnecessary.
Clans who share wealth internally may want to signal the wealth of their 
entire clan. They might do this by buying large prominent buildings in em 
cities, or by funding expensive projects. Just as nations today fund activities 
in sport, art, and academia to increase national prestige, clans may similarly 
fund some of their members to pursue prestigious activities, to show off 
features that don’t vary much within clans. Clans that cannot coordinate 
well may spend less on signaling, and may seem less impressive as a result. 
In contrast, individual ems may pay less attention than we do to art, sport, 
or science, and put more effort into their connections with close associates.
To impress observers, ems might try when young to be a star athlete, art­
ist, writer, explorer, or scholar. After achieving fame, they’d then be retrained 
for more useful work, where everyone could remember their youthful star­
dom. This is somewhat like people today who are star athletes when young, 
and afterward go into sales to take advantage of their fame. As we are less 
impressed by achievements to which several people contribute (Smith 
and Newman 2014), em clans will tend to keep the key work behind their 
impressive accomplishments within a single clan.
Bigger clans can afford to create more impressive achievements, which 
adds to the perceived superiority of bigger clans.
Ems prefer the training for their impressive youthful activities to be useful 
also in their later work career. For example, some ems may be athletes early, 
and then later do physical jobs, such as construction, that require related 
strong physical coordination abilities. Other ems might design innovative 

group signals
301
products early, and then spend their careers improving and servicing such 
products. The repairman who fixes a product might literally be the guy who 
invented it. In such scenarios, product innovation may be subsidized by em 
signaling efforts.
Today, activities such as dance, sport, and song show off combinations of 
mental and physical abilities. As ems can easily obtain virtual bodies with 
identical and maximal physical abilities, ems will change such activities to 
let audiences better see differing mental abilities. In a sporting contest, for 
example, em players may use standard bodies and brains, and win by having 
better “minds,” (brain software). Such contests might be more like bike races 
today, showing off the abilities of body designers, and the em who “drives” 
that body.
As have humans through history, some ems will show off by gaining status 
within communities of intellectuals. Today, some of our highest prestige is 
assigned to those credited with innovation, who add new intellectual results 
and methods that accumulate over time. However, in most nations today, 
and in almost all nations before a few centuries ago, intellectual status has 
come much less from innovation, and much more from privately teaching 
and advising the powerful, from gaining wider attention via popular writ­
ings, from mastering classic literature in great detail, and from being the first 
to be visibly associated with new intellectual fashions.
This history weakly suggests that, compared with today in the West, intel­
lectual status among ems may not be as focused on innovation, especially 
for kilo-ems or faster, for whom society will seem to innovate more slowly. 
While this change may reduce the contributions of em top intellectuals to 
innovations, it shouldn’t change the overall rate of innovation very much, 
because the fraction of useful innovation contributed by such intellectuals 
has always been small.
Because the actions of each em reflect strongly on the qualities of other 
clan members, clans exert more pressure, and retain more power, to dis­
courage member behaviors that might make the clan look bad. This makes 
unusual em behaviors even stronger signals about clans. For example, if one 
em left his or her spouse, the spouses of similar copies may worry that they 
will be treated similarly.
As work team performance depends in part on general abilities of team 
members, clans may be expected to invest financially in the teams to which 

signals
302
they contribute copies. Such investment signals their confidence in the 
quality and match of the workers they supply. Such expectations apply today 
only to rather wealthy families, but many em clans might be wealthy enough 
to make such investments.
By signaling together as a group, em clans take a big step toward seeing 
themselves as a united “us,” or even a single “me.”
charity
Like people today, ems are eager to show their feelings about social and 
moral problems, and their allegiance to pro-social norms.
For centuries, three classic charities have been alms, hospitals, and 
schools. But em hospitals are unnecessary, except perhaps for mental ill­
ness, and em schools are already well funded, as children are rare. Alms are 
still possible for ordinary humans or animals, but there is no need to feed 
involuntarily hungry ems, or to warm shivering ones, as no cold or starving 
ems exist. One might pay to subsidize jobs or extra leisure time for working 
ems, to speed up retirees, or to support retirement for spurs who might 
otherwise end. But these may feel like discouragingly bottomless pits of 
need, and may not seem to be especially sympathetic causes, if recipients 
had declined to negotiate for such benefits when they agreed to make the 
copy that they are.
Perhaps more sympathetic recipients of aid are the rare em victims of 
war, violence, or natural disasters; they are not bottomless pits of need, and 
have not chosen their fate. Even more deserving might be victims of mind 
theft, as discussed in Chapter 5, Security section, who risk being enslaved 
or tortured for their secrets. Identified victims are rare, and most ems could 
legitimately fear similar fates befalling them. Most in the em world express 
strong disapproval of mind theft.
Ems might signal that they still feel very human by going out of their 
way to see and sympathize with animals, ordinary humans, and em children. 
Ems could watch shows about them, travel to visit them, and donate to help 
them. As most humans have few em copies, such humans are rare compared 
with ems, and so might be mild celebrities that ems pay to visit. This could 
give a mild subsidy to humans. For fast ems, the human world changes very 
little between em visits.

identity
303
While em children are pampered even without charity, plants and non-
human animals have few other supporters. We humans today care about 
nature in part because we enjoy traveling to ancestral-like environments, 
and because the destruction of nature threatens to destroy us by destroying 
the biological ecologies on which we rely. Ems, however, can travel more 
cheaply to virtual nature parks, and need have little fear that killing nature 
will somehow kill them.
Although em cities may be toxic to nearby nature, such cities at first will 
disturb only a tiny fraction of the globe. Nature is saved for a while because 
the em focus on dense cities leaves ems disinterested in most of the land 
that nature occupies. But this is probably only a temporary reprieve. Even if 
nature is safe during the em era, that era may only last a few objective years. 
Other eras will follow quickly, and our descendants are likely to soon fill the 
Earth, displacing nature everywhere outside of a few small preserves.
Today, charitable projects with the goal of influencing attitudes and beliefs 
often focus on children, for whom persuasion seems more effective, and 
whose attitudes will last longer into the future. Ems will be even more tempted 
to influence young ems, because such ems have many future descendants. 
Such efforts might be justified as creating more total global happiness via 
making better childhood memories to be shared by many descendants.
Charity continues with ems, though with somewhat different targets.
identity
Informal discussions today about the possibility of ems often focus on 
the question of whether an emulation of an ordinary human would be the 
“same” person as that original. Ems similarly ask themselves how much they 
identify with different copies of themselves, with whom they share different 
amounts of history and context.
Although we are each very complex creatures full of vast detail, we often 
try to see and show ourselves to others in terms of a simpler “identity” (or 
“brand”). This identity helps to make us more predictable and understandable 
to others, which helps us to assure them of our loyalties and reliability. This 
helps to explain why our moral choices seem especially central to our identity.
Today, most people take for granted that they identify with their nation 
and culture; they only rarely encounter outsiders who make them aware of 

signals
304
this identity. People today feel more aware of identifying with their personal 
combination of personality, style, and life history, because they are the only 
person they know with this particular combination. Because our families are 
a bit more like us on these dimensions, we tend to identify more with our 
families than with outsiders.
Ems from large clans should be less aware of, and feel more secure in, 
their identifying with a personal combination of personality, style, and early 
life history. They know there is in effect a whole “planet” out there of perhaps 
billions of ems just like them, “super-twins” to whom they can talk at any 
time, or ask for help. Thus when around ems from other clans, ems might 
feel more like expatriates, that is, emissaries from a foreign land.
As discussed in Chapter 19, Managing Clans section, ems who made a 
plan and then split into many copies to execute that plan are likely to feel 
that they and their copies are the “same” person, while copies who openly 
disagree with each other are likely to see themselves more as different 
people. In an attempt to unify their members, clans may discourage open 
disagreement, focus more on the fact that they have a shared mental style 
and shared memories of early life, and focus less on recent opinions and 
memories. After all, those recent opinions and memories often differ.
When doing physical jobs, ems could use interchangeable bodies. Virtual 
ems could also easily change their virtual bodies at any time. Thus em iden­
tities need tie less to details of a particular body. However, to create a vivid 
memorable identity that is easily remembered by other clans, each clan may 
still create and stick close to a consistent visual style.
People today stay loyal to product brands over surprisingly long periods 
(Bronnenberg et al. 2012). This weakly suggests that ems will also stay loyal 
to brands for long times. Brand owners are eager to offer deep discounts to 
young ems with promising futures. While the em world has few children, 
each child has on average a great many descendants. On the other hand, 
collective purchasing by clans makes for better-informed consumers, and 
such consumers tend to have a weaker attachment to brands (Bronnenberg 
et al. 2014).
Today, our physical illnesses give us excuses to escape social pressures 
and expectations. If we don’t want to do something, we can pretend to be 
sick. Ems, who never get physically sick, lack this excuse. Perhaps ems will 
expand their expectations of temporary mental illness to compensate. That 

copy identity
305
is, ems may come to believe that most people are periodically struck by 
mental conditions that are acceptable excuses for failing to meet scheduled 
social interactions or deadlines. Even if the expected rate of these events 
is much lower than our rate of sickness today, such illnesses might still 
provide an important outlet for ems feeling imprisoned by expectations 
and plans.
Most em jobs are not especially high in status relative to other em jobs, 
and many jobs might be tedious, focused on very small parts of a very big 
world, and require long hours of hard labor. However, ems are unlikely to 
resent doing such jobs. After all, Olympic athletes today do not resent the 
tedium, focus, and long hours of training required to achieve their goals. 
Ems could take pride in knowing that they are from a very elite set of a few 
hundred clans selected from billions of ordinary humans.
Even so, on a moment-to-moment basis ems usually take their elite status 
for granted, and do not feel particularly entitled because of it. Few of them 
feel too high status to do their hard jobs, just as today we do not usually feel 
particularly entitled just because we are Homo sapiens.
Recently some rich industrial cultures have placed a historically unusual 
value on “authenticity,” which is usually defined negatively as an absence of 
artificiality, mediation, conformity, or attention to appearance. Authentic 
people are presumed honest, unconflicted, creative, and original nature-­
lovers who face hard truths and have little interest in status, religion, or 
material goods (Zerzan 2005; Potter 2010). While this ideal contains 
some “natural” forager ways, foragers were actually often conflicted and 
self-deceived, cared a lot about appearances and material goods, and were 
not very creative or original. These non-forager features of authenticity do 
function, however, to signal social power, which is usually needed to achieve 
such features.
While we might expect an increasing emphasis on authenticity in an 
increasingly wealthy industrial era, we have little reason to expect subsist­
ence income ems to continue a historically unusual emphasis on it.
copy identity
The identity that ems have as members of a clan raises new issues in an em 
world.

signals
306
It is not clear how discrete are the identities that ems make via copying. 
On the one hand, if em identities are very discrete, then an em looking 
backward into their copy history sees all of their ancestors and siblings as 
“me” up until they reached a key copy event. Ems before that copy event, 
however, and other descendants of those ems, are “not me,” even if they 
are beloved and trusted relatives. If em identity is also transitive, then all 
descendants of that key “me” ancestor are also “me.” On the other hand, 
if em identities are more continuous, then ems do not usually see other 
ems as either “me” or “not me,” but instead see them in terms of being 
more or less similar along various dimensions. This is comparable to how 
we today identify to varying degrees with ourselves decades into the past 
or future.
Ems seem especially likely to identify with spur copies they create to 
do short-term tasks, copies who report back when they finish the job, and 
then end or retire. When ems look back on their lives they are especially 
likely to see the activities of such copies as “things I did, but that I don’t 
remember well.”
Most ems are from the few hundred most copied clans, and such ems 
can usually feel confident and secure in the identity they gain from that 
clan. Such clans are well known and established as competent workers in 
particular professions and industries. Such ems may feel less secure about, 
and more aware of, their place in particular work teams and projects, and 
of the degree of support they will obtain from local political coalitions, as 
these change more often. Ems from small clans feel less secure in their clan 
identity, knowing that many see their clan as inferior.
The strong security that ems from big clans feel in identifying with their 
clan is likely to induce such ems to pay less conscious attention to clan-based 
aspects of their identity. They are likely to instead focus more on the iden­
tity gained via their particular job, team, and immediate associates. Spurs 
probably think similarly, except that they know that their future selves won’t 
directly remember their thoughts and experiences.
New em copies and their teams are typically created in response to new 
job opportunities. Such teams typically end or retire when these jobs are 
completed. Thus ems are likely to identify strongly with their particular 
jobs; their jobs are literally their reason for existing. Compared with us, ems 
more often choose their friends and lovers on the basis of work suitability, 

copy identity
307
and they more sincerely love and respect their associates for being worthy 
co-workers.
While ems may strongly, if perhaps insecurely, identify with their team 
and job combination, they may also sometimes feel overly imprisoned by 
this identity, and seek freedom in a more temporary spontaneous identity. 
Such a temporary identity might be formed via last-minute unplanned 
choices of friends, lovers, hobbies, and activities.
Today, we tend to create stronger memories about life events that we 
experience between the ages of 10 and 30, memories that we see as central 
to forming our identity (Glück and Bluck 2007). If becoming a new em 
copy made a big change to life patterns and identity, that new em probably 
also forms strong memories of events associated with being copied. Teams 
might help to emphasize new copy identities by creating a new distinct team 
culture soon after a team is copied. New teams might go out of their way to, 
as a unit, change their tastes in clothing, music, furniture, and conversation 
topics. A time delay to more cheaply move copies to a new team location 
can also help with this.
Overall, most ems have more clearly distinct and different stages of life 
than we do today. In fact, the life an em remembers from before its most 
recent copy event might seem like the way past lives would seem to us 
today if reincarnation were real, except that the past lives of ems may be 
remembered vividly and accurately. However, the fact that other, rather dif­
ferent ems exist who also remember events from the past life of an em may 
make those events less “my” life, and more the lives of “others,” or perhaps 
“our” life.
In a clan of 1 billion ems produced by binary copy events, each final copy 
must remember 30 binary copy events. If human-like minds find it difficult 
to remember this many strong identity-defining periods, then large-clan 
ems will either not treat most copy events as so important to their identity, 
or they will reduce the number of copy events that they need to remember, 
by making more copies at each copy event. For example, a clan of a billion 
ems might each recall only three key copy events, if 1000 copies are made at 
each such copy event.
How important em copy events are for em identity probably differs 
between mass and niche labor markets. Ems who work in mass-labor mar­
kets can remember just a few copy events, each of which strongly define an 

signals
308
identity. In contrast, ems who work in niche-labor markets may remember a 
great many copy events, most of which did not strongly define their identity. 
Thus niche ems are somewhat like people today who move to a new apart­
ment every year, whereas mass ems are like people who only move three 
times in their lifetime. The latter identify more strongly with their homes.
Nostalgia, that is, a sentimental longing for one’s past, fosters a sense 
of being socially connected with others, and a sense of connection with 
one’s past selves. This sense of being the same person over time increases 
well-being and perceptions of youthfulness (Sedikides et al. 2016). Em 
clans likely promote nostalgia, both to gain well-being and to increase em 
identification with their clan.
In sum, ems have a new kind of identity as clan members, with complex 
implications for other kinds of identity.

309
C H A P T E R  2 5
Collaboration
ritual
ow do rituals differ in an em world?
Today, we use rituals such as graduations, marriages, retire­
ment parties, and funerals to jointly and overtly affirm commu­
nity values at key social transitions. However, if we use a broader 
sense of the term “ritual,” most social interactions and many apparently 
non-social processes are also rituals, wherein emotional energy becomes 
amplified as participants achieve a common focus of attention and act 
in ways that are finely synchronized and coordinated with each other 
(Collins 2004).
During rituals, synchronized feelings and body movements of people who 
are adjacent to one other become especially potent. Such group synchroni­
zation shows participants that they feel similarly to others in the group, and 
know each other well. People, things, and beliefs that are the mutual focus 
of attention in such rituals acquire added importance and emotional energy, 
and become able to increase the passion of subsequent rituals.
The emotional energy that comes from a common focus of attention 
on synchronized actions has long influenced the frequency and structure 
of many forms of synchronized human activities, in dances, plays, movies, 
concerts, lectures, protests, freeways, business meetings, group recitations in 
schools, consumption of advertised products, and group songs that coordin­
ate work in hunting, farming, sailing, armies, and factories.
We expect ems to continue to show this tendency to prefer social situ­
ations where vivid awareness of finely synchronized actions can assure them 
of shared capacities and values. For example, similar to people today we 
H

collaboration
310
expect ems to say hello and goodbye as they join and leave meetings, and to 
find reasons for frequent face-to-face meetings at work.
Some examples of common overt rituals today are when the police stop a 
driver, when a waiter takes an order, when two sports teams battle in front of 
a crowd, and when an audience watches a movie together. In the industrial 
era, we have a substantially lower rate of such rituals than did our forager 
and farmer ancestors. For our ancestors, in contrast, it was more like hav­
ing Christmas or Thanksgiving happen several times a month, with many 
smaller ceremonies happening several times a day (Collins 2004).
There are many reasons for the loss of overt rituals in our time. Increasing 
wealth has given us more spatial privacy. Innovation has become increas­
ingly important, density and wealth are high enough to support fashion 
cycles, and both these factors raise the status of people with eccentric behav­
ior. These trends have encouraged us to signal our increasing wealth with 
more product and behavioral variety, instead of via connections and the use 
of more standard products and behaviors. With increasing wealth, indus­
trial era values have moved away from conformity and tradition and toward 
self-direction and tolerance. Increased forager-like egalitarianism has made 
us less comfortable with the explicit class distinctions that supported many 
farmer-era rituals. Our suppression of family clans in the West has also 
repressed many family rituals.
As we will discuss in more detail in Chapter 26, Farmer-Like section, 
while our increasingly rich industrial era has seen a big increase in individu­
alism and egalitarianism, poorer ems are likely to feel less individualistic 
and egalitarian. As we have discussed, innovation is less important in an em 
economy than in ours. As a result, it’s likely that our recent trend away from 
overt rituals will be partially reversed. Ems are likely to move back toward 
farmer-like explicit and distinct social classes, and more frequent overt rit­
uals wherein ems with different roles take on different ritualized behaviors. 
Compared with us, ems are likely to be more stratified into explicit classes, 
and to play out more frequent explicit and stylized synchronized behaviors.
The value of meetings as rituals with a common focus of attention is cut if 
attendees focus elsewhere while appearing to focus on the meeting. So ems 
may use mindreading to see who is paying attention to the meeting.
As ems in virtual realities no longer need to eat or clean themselves, they 
are likely to feel less inclined to copy familiar human rituals centered on 

religion
311
eating or cleaning. Fast ems also have fewer rituals centered on hearing and 
sharing the day’s news, because to them the world changes much more slowly.
Ems may seek new kinds of seemingly “natural” ceremonies to substitute 
for those lost, to continue to bind together teams, firms, and city-states. Ems 
also seek new rituals to bind together the new social unit of clans. However, 
it is probably hard to create strong rituals out of em work activities, as pro­
ductive work behaviors rarely create opportunities for synchronized body 
motions matched with a common focus of attention.
While singing music together can create powerful rituals, most people 
today are shy about singing in public, as their voices sound worse than the 
professional singers that they usually hear. Ems could make their voices 
sound more professional, and yet still communicate very personal emotions, 
via more advanced versions of voice-processing systems such as Auto-Tune, 
which today often improves the voices of professional singers.
In sum, ems may have more and stronger rituals than we do today, revert­
ing in part to previous historical patterns.
religion
Religions and their rituals often help to bond people to groups. By fol­
lowing seemingly arbitrary rules restricting behavior and beliefs, members 
can credibly signal their attachment to a group, relative to other groups 
with conflicting rules. Groups with stronger arbitrary rules tend to be more 
strongly attached to one another (Iannaccone 1994). It is somewhat harder 
for ems to use this strategy, as they need to be attached both to their clans 
and to their teams. After all, rules unique to a clan could alienate member 
ems from their teams, while rules unique to a team could alienate member 
ems from their clans. Perhaps distinct spheres can be defined for the topics 
of team rules versus clan rules.
Today, religious people tend to be happier, healthier, and more productive 
(Steen 1996). They live longer, smoke less, exercise more, earn more, get 
and stay married more, commit less crime, use less illegal drugs, have more 
social connections, donate and volunteer more, and have more children. 
Intensity of religion and strength of religious belief tends to increase with 
age, especially on retirement (Bengtson et al. 2015). As we discuss more in 

collaboration
312
Chapter 26, Farmer-Like section, ems are also likely to be more farmer-like. 
Because of this, ems tend to believe more in good and evil, and in powerful 
gods who enforce social norms. All of these considerations suggest that ems 
are more religious.
However, today more religious geographic regions are less innovative, and 
more religious individuals hold views less favorable to innovation (Bénabou 
et al. 2015). So if the innovation effect is important enough, ems will be less 
religious; otherwise, they’ll be more religious.
Science fiction often depicts social conflict, sometimes violent, resulting 
from religious objections to the deployment of new technologies and social 
institutions. However, most of the major religions of today are thousands of 
years old, and have peacefully accommodated almost all of the vast changes 
that have appeared since those religions began. Thus religions are clearly 
capable of adapting to a great many social changes, and so we should expect 
most of them to adapt comfortably to the em world as well.
However, clarifications may be required on the subjects of how to define 
death and responsibility for sins of copies. For example, Christians and 
similar religions must decide if copies share sins, or if an em sins when it 
splits off a spur who then sins, especially if that sin was foreseeable. Such 
clarifications likely emphasize that mind theft is a great evil, akin to rape 
or murder today, justifying many and strong precautions. Further doctrinal 
clarifications may be required because ems on average are much smarter 
than ordinary humans, and may not tolerate blatantly illogical or contradic­
tory religious doctrines.
Rituals and religion have long been used to help people accept their social 
roles, and to mark key transitions between such roles. So religious-style rit­
uals, perhaps with music and dance, may be especially useful in helping ems 
to copy, end, and retire.
swearing
Traditionally, lower classes did hard physical labor, and as a result tended 
to wear tough work clothes, and had skin that was callused, tanned, and 
wrinkled. The upper classes tended to show that they were too rich or skilled 
for such work by wearing fragile clothes and having soft, smooth, untanned 
skin. Similarly, upper classes have often nurtured polite language, avoidance 

swearing
313
of direct insult, and a heightened sensitivity and squeamishness on top­
ics such as sex or excrement. Such habits have helped the upper classes to 
distinguish themselves from the typically tough and calloused attitudes of 
lower classes.
In lower class cultures, people more often demonstrate physical strength 
and toughness via dangerous dares, fistfights, and excessive drinking. People 
in these cultures also tend to make more direct and aggressive verbal chal­
lenges, and to use more swearing, insults, teasing, and taunting. In their 
communities, people are often given nicknames that highlight their most 
embarrassing weaknesses (Baruch and Jenkins 2007; Stapleton 2010; Jay 
and Janschewitz 2012).
These lower class habits tend to be functional adaptations to their envir­
onment. Just as it can be important to judge physical strength and toughness 
when allocating workers to hard physical labor, it can also be important 
to judge toughness for emotionally demanding tasks. Crude behaviors can 
help workers express and gauge physical and emotional weaknesses and 
strengths, which allows them to better select and allocate people for tasks, 
and to push work groups up to but not beyond their limits. As chimps also 
seem to vent frustrations via cursing matches, as well as displays showing 
physical toughness, this sort of behavior seems to be very old (Angier 2005; 
Pinker 2007).
Today, swearing, and its milder cousin slang, is more common in work 
groups with closer interdependence, especially in workplaces with high 
levels of physical and emotional stress. Today such work teams include war­
riors, finance traders, moviemakers, and restaurant servers. Note that not all 
such teams are lower class; some upper class work groups also use swearing, 
when that can help in their situation.
Today, laws against sexual harassment, together with wider monitoring of 
worker speech, discourage workplace swearing and impose high-class cul­
tural standards on lower classes. Even so, mild swearing has recently become 
more socially acceptable in some elite cultures.
Compared with our world, the em world has low wages, more competi­
tion, and more work groups pushed to the limits of their emotional abilities, 
even as differences in physical abilities are weaker. Em children are also rare. 
These suggest that em work groups more often adopt traditional working 
class habits, except that they emphasize emotional over physical toughness. 

collaboration
314
Thus em work groups probably use lots of strongly emotional swearing, 
insults, and teasing.
Em swearing may focus less on excrement, as the virtual em world has 
little of that. Profanity based on betrayal, sex, and religion remains relevant, 
however. Swearing based on death changes to match new em concepts of 
death.
In sum, ems probably swear more than we do, but for good reasons.
conversation
Conversations are a familiar human ritual, and we expect ems to continue 
to talk with one another. Em conversations may vary depending on whether 
ems are talking to associates in other teams, clans, firms, or cities.
Teams running together on trusted hardware may commit to usually let­
ting team members read the surface of each other’s minds, and to also see 
each other’s copying, communication, and financial actions. Such extreme 
transparency would encourage team trust and cooperation. Subclans may 
commit to similar openness between members, at least when they are inter­
acting with each other. Transparent ems may be able to sometimes pull 
down a shade over their minds, in a way that allows others to know that 
their view has been temporarily blocked. But it is not usually possible to fool 
an em into believing a faked image.
Software tools may help to interpret these mind views, and also voice 
tone, facial expressions, etc. Today, we are usually only unconsciously aware 
of others’ moods, status relationships, and interaction features. But soft­
ware could give ems the option to be more directly aware of these details. 
This awareness may not be reflected in explicit conversation, however. The 
reasons we have today for not discussing intimate details may well continue 
in em social worlds.
At the other extreme, ems without such hardware support for transpar­
ency would less trust what they see than we do today. After all, software 
tools might manipulate the facial, gaze, and voice expressions of other ems, 
and those other em minds might run at speeds different from the speeds 
that they publicly display.
This wider range of possible transparency and opacity forces ems to spe­
cialize more in social skills and habits adapted to such situations. That is, 

on call advice
315
some ems specialize in being effective cooperators in situations where allies 
are open, while others specialize in being effective competitors in situations 
where rivals are opaque. This is somewhat like traditional farmer gender 
roles, where female roles were more nurturing inside families, whereas male 
roles were tougher to protect families against outsiders. As ems who repre­
sent organizations and deal with outsiders tend to be higher status, and also 
to specialize more in opacity, ems who specialize in opacity are probably 
seen as higher status.
In our world, people typically find it uncomfortable to interact with sys­
tems using a voice that sounds much like their own (Jacobs 2015). Ems 
may similarly dislike talking with other copies who share their voice. If so, 
ems may electronically modify the voices they hear from close copies. Ems 
on different teams might try to cultivate distinctive accents and styles of 
talking.
Today, we sometimes look others carefully in the eye, to try to ascertain 
what they are thinking. But we don’t similarly look ourselves in the eye in 
the mirror, because we already know what we are thinking. Ems may also be 
less likely to look at close copies of themselves in the eye or face, as they’d 
usually have a good idea from context what their copies are thinking. This 
could help encourage a habit of talking to clan members in your head.
The ability of reversible brain hardware to easily allow temporary speed 
changes may encourage the usual human habit of paying more attention 
when we are speaking, relative to when we are listening. Ems may tempor­
arily speed up to plan what to say and to talk, and slow down while listening 
to others. When close associates are allowed to read the surface of an em’s 
mind, they may also see these varying speed choices.
Open and transparent teams may give team members the ability to put 
other team members into surprise split-tests, to test for biases.
In sum, ems talk a lot, just as we do, although their conversations may 
perhaps vary more than ours do in style.
on call advice
Today, we tend to coordinate well with ourselves inside our head, quietly 
“talking” to ourselves and recalling our previous words. Here we can be 
seen as in some sense “praying” to our idealized selves. In this mode, we 

collaboration
316
instinctively trust ourselves. In contrast, we often feel rivalries with, and try 
to distinguish ourselves from, those who inhabit the other bodies we see 
around us. Although strong trust is possible in this case, it is not our default. 
This suggests that em clans seeking to encourage within-clan loyalty and 
trust may prefer clan members to interact with each other primarily via “in 
my head” voices, avoiding vividly seeing each other as inhabiting bodies 
“outside” themselves. Religions today often use a similar talk-to-God-in-
your-head strategy to encourage trust in God.
A talk-to-clan-in-head habit can be further encouraged if clans offer 
real-time life-coaching services to their members. Clans could maintain 
panels of advisors who monitor members, always ready to answer questions 
and give advice. This advice could be based on statistics of what other copies 
have experienced when taking similar actions in similar situations.
Of course this doesn’t mean that clans always recommend the locally best 
option for any one situation; clans also want members to sometimes explore 
other options. When a clan gives advice that is designed to explore, instead 
of being the best reaction to a particular situation, clans might not tell mem­
bers this fact at the time. After all, doing that could reduce em motivation 
to follow such advice. However, the fact that a recommended option was 
chosen for exploration purposes might be revealed later, to help everyone 
evaluate the quality of this em’s actions.
Such simple statistical advice works better for em copies than it would for 
humans today. This is because ems in the same clan are much more similar 
to one another than comparable humans, and act in more similar situations. 
Such advice also works better for ems from larger clans, and for ems with 
mass-market jobs filled by many similar workers.
For example, consider the case where two ems are a couple, and there are 
many other copies of that same couple. Each such em in a couple is better 
able to read the mood and reactions of their partner, because they could 
compare their personal situation to the mood and reactions found in thou­
sands of other copies. For example, if your partner was in a bad mood today, 
you could compare his or her mood to those of thousands of copies to better 
pinpoint the cause of that mood. Excuses such as “the rain gets me down” 
won’t work if hundreds of other copies aren’t depressed during the rain.
Ems may be discouraged by reminders that many similar copies exist, as 
this may make them feel less unique and special. If this is the case, advice 

on call advice
317
based on outcomes experienced by similar copies may be abstracted from 
those copies, but not refer to particular cases. The advice might not even be 
very conscious, but instead be communicated via vague feelings of comfort 
or discomfort with various options.
Just as the decisions of small teams seem today to be consistently more 
rational than individual decisions (Sutter 2005; Rockenbach et al. 2007), 
ems advised by their clans probably make more rational decisions as a 
result. Thus the frequent use of such advice may greatly reduce the extent 
to which em behavior is well described by “behavioral” theories that deviate 
from “rational” theories of human behavior (Barberis 2013). While such 
behavioral theories capture important elements of human behavior today, 
in a more competitive world of ems who often obtain clan-based personal 
coaching, em behavior is likely to become more “rational” in the sense of 
more effectively pursuing actions to achieve practical aims.
Of course ems may not like how they feel when they act rationally. Also, 
the clan advice habit may make it harder to keep secrets limited to one em; 
if you tell something to one clan member, you may have told them all.
Ems that often meet other similar copies in person may also feel discour­
aged and less motivated, seeing themselves as less unique or important. To 
avoid this, similar copies may avoid meeting or hearing about each other. As 
an analogy, while some of us today believe that very close copies of us exist in 
parallel quantum worlds, this rarely influences our mood, because we never 
actually see or interact with these parallel world copies. By choosing to only 
rarely meet similar copies, ems may similarly keep themselves from feeling 
discouraged by the existence of many similar copies.
As discussed in Chapter 19, Managing Clans section, clans may want 
to discourage open direct expressions of disagreement between members, 
to promote a common identity. Encouraging ems to instead express their 
internal clan disagreements via prediction markets may help with this. For 
example, instead of arguing directly with each other about whether this is a 
good time to change how they train young clan members, they might each 
bet privately on future revenue given different training choices. Here con­
versation is used less as a tool for changing opinions, and more for bonding 
and other functions.
Like ordinary humans, in conversation ems try to seem witty, charming, 
informed, etc. While individual humans today mostly have to construct 

collaboration
318
their own clever conversations, ems could get conversational assistance from 
their clans. Clan coaching like this, however, may make it harder to signal 
loyalty to specific associates. Such associates may thus prefer to vary their 
conversation topics and leisure activities away from common topics and 
activities, to make it harder for clans to usefully coach members on indi­
vidual behavior. This forces ems to rely more on, and to reveal more of, their 
distinct individual characteristics when they befriend particular associates 
on particular teams.
The clan advice that an individual clan member is given via internal 
conversations in its head typically represents broader issues and priorities, 
compared with the immediate considerations vivid in the mind of that indi­
vidual. In the language of construal level theory (discussed in Chapter 2, 
Dreamtime section), the clan tends to speak more on far issues, relative to 
near issues. Because of this, clan advice tends more to appeal to em idealism, 
while the temptation to resist that advice tends to arise from immediate and 
vivid selfish passions.
In sum, compared with us today, ems have more useful advisors, always 
on call in their head.
synchronization
In the em world, a relationship between a copy of Pam and a copy of Bob 
typically takes place in the shadow of many relations between other copies 
of Pam and Bob. More generally, most relations between ems from two 
different clans take place in the shadow of similar relationships between 
other copies of ems from those same two clans. In fact, there are often many 
copies of entire teams. In such cases, individuals must choose how much 
to synchronize the actions within one relation with these other copies and 
similar relations.
At one extreme, individuals may try to avoid comparison with other rela­
tions by avoiding hearing about the other relations, and by acting in unusual 
ways so as to make their relation be and feel different and unique. At the 
other extreme, individuals might try to keep the context and content of their 
relation close to that of other copies of the same relation, to benefit from 
shared learning and other scale economies.

synchronization
319
In highly synchronized relations, events that happen in one copy of the 
relation are very predictive of events in other copies. For example, if one 
couple has a fight, the others can suspect a fight soon. Here the sum total of 
all the information provided to an em by all copies of that em is large. One 
could not keep shared secrets unless all your copies were careful about not 
revealing clues to your secret.
For example, if Pam and Bob have a relationship, and if a few copies of 
Bob did something crazy, then all the copies of Pam might worry that their 
Bobs may soon also do that crazy thing. If one Pam stayed late at a party, and 
its Bob did not mind initially, this Bob might change his mind if he learned 
that most of the other Bobs did mind. The group of Bobs thus in effect have 
a group relationship with the group of Pams. Such an arrangement might 
make each Bob and Pam feel less closely tied to one other. The whole experi­
ence may feel strange compared with our relationships today.
Synchronized relationships allow more useful transfer of learning between 
copies, and more economies of scale in supporting them. For example, syn­
chronized teams can buy the same equipment and tools, arrange them in 
the same way, and share maintenance and repair services. Synchronized 
relationships, however, may feel strange and interfere with loyalty within 
each relationship. Thus the relationships most likely to be synchronized are 
those that can gain the most from learning opportunities and economies of 
scale, while those most likely to be differentiated are those where loyalty and 
natural feelings matter more.
At work, learning opportunities and economies of scale usually matter 
more, encouraging synchronized relationships. The existence of thousands 
or millions of copies of a team give those team copies many ways to learn 
from statistics about events in other teams. This makes it easier to score 
the performance of each team and member, via comparisons with other 
teams and members. This also tends to push em team behavior to more 
closely approximate an informed game theoretic Nash equilibrium, that is, a 
matched set of strategic behaviors that are less influenced by hidden infor­
mation regarding the types of participants and the consequences of their 
actions.
Statistics about other copies of a team make it harder for team members 
to deceive themselves about their past performance or their chances for 

collaboration
320
future performance. Such ems may become more like chess players today, 
where objective performance measures (i.e., their rating) force them to 
accept their current performance and abilities. This tends to make such 
players less happy, as they can’t pretend to be better than they are. If this hap­
piness effect reduced em productivity sufficiently, ems may adopt attitudes 
such as “never tell me the odds,” often avoiding information about their 
relative performance or chances of future success.
Members of synchronized em teams may be more cautious about bad 
behavior, knowing that unusual behavior on their part could affect their 
copies on many other teams. For example, strong conflict within one team 
might result in that whole team being erased and reverted to a prior version, 
or replaced with a copy of another team. Of course if the problem reappeared 
in the reverted copies, they might instead need to resolve their conflict.
Within a cohort of team copies, most of the teams may end periodically 
to be replaced by the best few teams that are copied many times in a next 
round. In this case, teams might compete to seem the most productive or 
innovative, which should more encourage greater internal team cooperation.
Mating and friendship are contexts where local loyalty and natural feel­
ings seem more important than learning opportunities and economies of 
scale. As mating matters less to an em society than to us, some ems may 
use mate choice as we often do friend choice today, as a way to express 
spon­taneity and autonomy. That is, some ems may feel constrained in their 
choice of job, work associates, and location, and so prefer to choose their 
mates and friends freshly when they can. As such choices would not seem 
fresh to others if different copies of them consistently made the same 
choices, ems must be actually unpredictable in their choices, if they want to 
preserve an appearance of spontaneity.
The degree to which clan members may go out of their way to differenti­
ate themselves from other clan members should not be exaggerated. Today, 
identical twins who were raised together do not seem to be any more or 
less different from each other than identical twins that were raised apart 
(Bouchard et al. 1990). This suggests that ems would also not tend to become 
substantially more different when their exposure to similar copies increases.
In sum, em relationships can be improved by, but are also complicated by, 
a context of many similar relations between similar copies.

321
 C H A P T E R  2 6
 Society
 culture
 ow might em era cultures diff er from prior era cultures?
 Today, we can identify many standard dimensions along which 
cultures around the world vary ( Hofstede et al. 2010 ;  Gorod-
nichenko and Roland 2011 ;  Minkov 2013 ). For some of these 
standard dimensions, the world has moved in a relatively consistent dir-
ection during the industrial era, and we have good reasons to expect this 
direction to be more productive in a modern economy. Because of this, we 
have good reasons to expect that a competitive em economy will continue 
to select for these cultural features. For example, we should expect more 
industriousness relative to indulgence, a work relative to a leisure orienta-
tion, time orientations that are long term relative to short term and that are 
tied to clocks instead of relationships, low instead of high context attitudes 
toward rules and communication, and a loose relative to tight attitude on 
interpreting social norms.
 For other standard cultural dimensions, productivity considerations don’t 
as clearly suggest which direction an em world favors. Th ese dimensions 
include degree of avoidance of risk and uncertainty, tolerance of inequality, 
individual or group identity, cooperative or competitive emphasis, and high 
or low emotional expressiveness.
 Today, about 70% of the variation in values across nations is captured in 
just two key factors ( Inglehart and Welzel 2010  ). Th ese two factors also cap-
ture much of the variation in individual values (  Schwartz et al. 2012 ). One 
factor varies primarily between rich and poor nations: increasing wealth 
seems to cause more individualism, universalism, egalitarianism, autonomy, 
h

society
322
and self-expression. These subfactors seem to be more a result than a cause 
of wealth. With increasing wealth, our values have moved away from con­
formity to traditional “conservative” farmer-like values, and toward more 
“liberal” forager-like values (Hanson 2010b; Hofstede et al. 2010). Poor 
nations tend more to value respecting parents and authority, believing in 
good and evil, and wanting to protect local jobs. Rich nations tend more to 
value trust and imagination, and acceptance of divorce and homosexuality. 
We discuss this dimension in more detail in Chapter 2, Era Values section.
The other main dimension along which values vary today can be described 
as “East” versus “West.” East values tend to be more community oriented, 
while West values tend to be oriented more to individuals and families. In 
the East, people are more interested in and spend more time discussing 
politics, which is more important to them. In the West, families and good 
health are more important. Rich Eastern nations emphasize achievement, 
determination and thrift, and accept abortion. Rich Western nations empha­
size friends, leisure, ecology, tolerance, satisfaction, free choice, and gender 
equality. Poor Eastern nations more suspect outsiders, more see children as 
needing two parents and women as needing children, and they more value 
technology, money, hard work, and state intervention. Poor Western nations 
more value work, obedience, religion, faith in God, patriotism, and wanting 
many children.
Eastern nations have been growing faster over the last half-century, in 
part because of their emphasis on achievement, thrift, and savings. While 
the poorest nations tend to drift East in values as they first move from 
farming to industry, the richest nations tend to drift West in values as they 
emphasize services and leisure (Minkov 2013). Also, while being close to 
the equator was good for growth during the farming era, being far from the 
equator was good for growth during the early industrial era (Dalgaard and 
Strulik 2014; Fagerberg and Srholec 2013).
It is possible that the first ems will come predominantly from particular 
nations and cultures. If so, typical em values may tend to be closer to the 
values of whatever nations provided most of the ordinary humans whose 
brains were scanned for these first ems.
As ems have near subsistence (although hardly miserable) income lev­
els, and as wealth levels seem to cause cultural changes, we should expect 
em culture values to be more like those of poor nations today. As Eastern 

divisions
323
cultures grow faster today, and as they may be more common in denser 
areas, em values may be more likely to be like those of Eastern nations today. 
Together, these suggest that em cultures tend to value technology, money, 
hard work, and state intervention. They may also suggest that em culture 
values achievement, determination, thrift, authority, good and evil, and local 
job protection. Of course in a competitive world, values for state interven­
tion and job protection may be suppressed if these substantially reduce 
competitiveness.
For ems copying and teams become primary units of reproduction and 
work. As a result, choices about these may acquire the sorts of moral over­
tones we have today about sex and children. At least they may if human-like 
minds have enough cultural plasticity to greatly modify our feelings about 
such issues. That is, ems might develop stronger hard moral feelings about 
when and with whom it is acceptable to copy and form teams, and when it is 
all right to leave a team. Perhaps this could be aided by new rituals that help 
to transfer many of the concerns we now have about sex and children to em 
copying. For example, before copying a team, that team might have a big party. 
Maybe the original team comes to the new team’s later “birthday” parties.
Both forager and farmer cultures were substantially influenced by the 
risks that males faced of raising children who were actually fathered by other 
males. For example, farmers often greatly restricted the abilities of females 
to socialize with other males. In contrast, em reproduction is asexual and 
very reliable; there is little chance of mistakenly thinking one was support­
ing a copy of oneself who was actually a copy of another.
Social relations between em clans are somewhat like social relations in 
forager bands, where everyone knew everyone’s history and basic person­
ality. Em social relations may also be somewhat like social relations in our 
fantasy and children’s stories, such as The Lord of the Rings, wherein different 
species (or classes or races) have very different known personalities and skills 
and are destined for different kinds of jobs, roles, and social status.
divisions
Can we anticipate the fault lines along which em culture divide?
We can list some possible divisions, but it is harder to say which of these 
divisions actually matter the most to ems, or more often form the basis of 

society
324
political and other social coalitions. The existence of a great many kinds of 
similarities along which political coalitions can be built makes it hard to 
predict the actual political coalitions that are important at any one time and 
place. This is one reason why it is hard to predict future political outcomes, 
as outcomes often depend on which coalitions temporarily dominate.
However, we can at least identify some of the main possible fault lines in an 
em society. An obvious one is between a majority who work in virtual reality 
offices, and a minority who work in physical bodies. Virtual reality cultures 
are tempted to drop habits and conventions that are useful only in physical 
reality. In contrast, the culture of physical ems likely makes more references 
to privacy, violence, grime, and unintended death without retirement.
Another important split is between the centers and peripheries of cities. 
City centers are more expensive but support fast talk with many others. 
In contrast, peripheries are cheaper, but often require delayed talk. While 
authorities could monitor activities in city centers well, this becomes harder 
with more distant activities. So while authorities tend to concentrate in city 
centers, peripheries tend to house illicit and illegal activities such as mind 
theft, forbidden tweaks, intellectual property violations, environmental 
damage, and activities that create catastrophic risks.
A related fault line is between a majority of ems who work in mass-labor 
markets, and a minority who work in niche-labor markets. As discussed in 
Chapter 19, Mass Versus Niche Teams section, mass-market ems mostly 
socialize within teams, and the existence of many teams makes their lives 
predictable. In contrast, niche-market ems are more often copied individu­
ally in response to new work demands. Niche ems have more complicated 
social worlds because of less synchronized copying of friends and lovers.
Em clans may also naturally split between those who remember our era, 
and those who do not remember the human-dominated past. The latter ems 
are likely to be better adapted to the em world, but the former will have 
locked in many first mover advantages to gain enviable social positions. Em 
clans might also split by size, between a few huge powerful clans and a great 
many smaller weaker clans. The few very large clans probably feel superior 
and favor each other, leading to resentment and accusations of bias from the 
smaller clans.
A related distinction is between the firms, buildings, and cities where 
most capital is owned by ordinary humans, and other firms, buildings, and 

divisions
325
cities. Humans start out owning most capital, but their fraction of capital 
gradually declines until it becomes a minority.
Em cities, firms, and clans will also probably inherit cultural divisions 
from those that exist today in our world. That is, ems’ differences may con­
tinue to reflect variations between the nations, ethnicities, religions, and 
professions of our world. Allegiance to the different sports, teams, artists, 
artistic genres, and fashions of today may even continue.
Another division is between rich and poor clans; some clans are rich 
enough to own a lot of capital in many ventures, while other clans own much 
less capital. When rich clans choose some of their members to be relatively 
poor, those poor ems may not seem to count as truly poor to ems from less-
wealthy clans. This is similar to a rich person today getting little sympathy 
for choosing to spend a month living simply at a monastery.
Wealth and poverty feels more personal in an em world. That is, each of 
the few rich clans have a personal story about how they got their wealth, 
and conspiracy stories are easier to spin about how they became rich or poor. 
Furthermore, such conspiracy stories are more often true, in the sense that 
em success will often come in part from coalitions of em clans who conspire 
to support each other.
Em clans could also split by gender; female and male clans may have 
different typical speeds, professions, investments, and styles of internal gov­
ernance. Regardless of gender, em clans may divide according to their styles 
of internal governance. Some clans may disapprove of the governance style 
of other clans, calling them immoral, unfair, exploitive, delusional, etc. Em 
culture may also split between places where individual loyalties are primar­
ily toward clans, and places where individual loyalties are primarily toward 
workplace teams and firms.
Two more possible divisions are based on age and birth cohort. Today, 
our children tend to be segregated by age, and to develop cohort-specific 
cultures, by experiencing the same world events and fashions at the same 
ages (Howe and Strauss 1992). Ems who are the same age or copied at the 
same time, however, may have run at different speeds at different points in 
their lives, and so not experience the same world events and fashions at the 
same subjective ages.
Thus ems will less divide by age or birth cohort, and more by particu­
lar trajectories of speeds over time. Ems can divide clearly by life stage, 

society
326
however. For example, subsidized young ems in training are quite different 
from older ems at peak productivity and fully paying for their existence, who 
are quite different from retirees. Most em experience is in working ems at 
peak productivity ages.
Ems are also plausibly divided by their differing speeds. Different speeds 
likely have distinct cultures. It is hard for fast changing elements of em 
culture, such as clothing or music fashions, to synchronize their changes 
across different mind speeds. Such coordinated cultural changes might seem 
intolerably slow to fast ems, or intolerably fast to slow ems. Fast changes 
in a slow culture may be driven by the lower frequency changes in the fast 
culture. Differing speed ems may also segregate into different classes, with 
faster ems seen as higher status.
Like people throughout history, ems may also divide geographically. The 
time delay to send signals to distant cities probably doesn’t contribute much 
to this, but trade barriers and distrust of distant city-states might allow for 
substantial cultural divergence. Ems may also divide by religion or ideology, 
as we do today. And ems will naturally divide by industries and professions, 
as these are important distinctions in the em world.
Em cities may be distinguished by whether they are primarily water or 
air-cooled, as that choice is likely to influence many other physical choices 
in em city design. Cities of the same type are also likely to be geographically 
clustered together.
A larger total em population should also lead us to expect more cultural 
fragmentation. After all, if local groups differentiate their cultures to help 
members signal local loyalties, then the more people that are included within 
a region, the more total cultural variation we might expect to lie within that 
region. So a city containing billions or more ems could contain a great many 
diverse local cultural elements.
An em world can split apart in many different ways, just as can our world.
farmer-like
Poorer ems seem likely to return to conservative (farmer) cultural values, 
relative to liberal (forager) cultural values. After all, farmer values helped to 
pressure farmers into the alien-to-forager behaviors that the farming world 
required, and such values could also help pressure ems to adopt the also 

farmer-like
327
alien-to-foragers behaviors that the em world requires. In the industrial 
era, we have felt such pressures less as our wealth has increased our safety 
buffers, leading to a pro-liberal trend over recent centuries (Hanson 2010a). 
But ems are poorer and feel more strongly the competitive and conformity 
pressures and fears that farming culture learned to exploit.
Today, liberals tend to be more open-minded, creative, curious, and 
novelty seeking, while conservatives tend to be more orderly, conven­
tional, and organized. If, relative to us, ems prefer farmer-like values to 
forager-like values, then ems more value things such as self-sacrifice, 
self-control, religion, patriotism, marriage, politeness, material posses­
sions, and hard work, and less value self-expression, self-direction, tol­
erance, pleasure, nature, novelty, travel, art, music, stories, and political 
participation.
These are all weak arguments, which can support only weak predictions 
about the em world; each of them can plausibly be overridden by other 
stronger considerations. Even so, let me note more such predictions.
If ems are more farmer-like, they tend to envy less, and to more accept 
authority and hierarchy, including hereditary elites and ranking by gender, 
age, and class. They are more comfortable with war, discipline, bragging, and 
material inequalities, and push less for sharing and redistribution. They are 
less bothered by violence and domination toward the historical targets of 
such conflicts, including foreigners, children, slaves, animals, and nature. As 
em children are rare and often pampered, violence toward children seems 
unlikely unless it is useful for training.
Today, people who do the folllowing jobs tend to lean liberal: professor, 
journalist, writer, artist, musician, psychiatrist, teacher, trainer, fundraiser, 
cook, bartender, lawyer, software engineer, and civil servant. In contrast, 
those who do these jobs tend to lean conservative: soldier, pilot, police, 
surgeon, priest, homemaker, farmer, exterminator, plumber, banker, insur­
ance broker, sales, grader, sorter, electrical contractor, car dealer, trucker, 
miner, construction worker, entrepreneur, salesman, gas attendant, and non-
academic scientist (Hanson 2014; Edmond 2015).
A more conservative world has values and styles more in common with 
conservative jobs. Liberal jobs today tend more to be about talking, persuad­
ing, and entertaining, while conservative jobs today tend to focus on a fear 
of bad things, and protecting against them. Thus farmer-like ems talk and 

society
328
entertain less, and they more expect and prepare for big disasters, such as the 
big farm-era disasters of war, famine, and disease. Leaders lead less by the 
appearance of consensus, and do less to give the appearance that everyone 
has an equal voice and is free to speak their minds. Fewer topics are open for 
discussion or negotiation.
Farmer-like ems have a stronger sense of honor and shame, enforce more 
conformity and social rules, and care more for cleanliness and order (Stern 
et al. 2014). Em virtual realities make it much easier to live in clean and 
orderly spaces, and in addition, ems may place a higher priority on having 
clean and uncluttered designs for their systems and organizations. Also, clan 
and computer-based decision assistants should make it easier to obey com­
plex social rules, and to detect when others are violating such rules. Even 
so, as discussed in Chapter 25, Swearing section, em working-class culture 
often has strong emotional profanity, insults, and teasing.
For farmer-like ems, work matters more culturally than it does today; 
ems spend more of their time at work, invest more of their identity in work, 
submit more to workplace ranking and domination. Ems find great nobility 
and satisfaction in their work, and may find it hard to understand why we 
denigrate work so often today.
Today, some kinds of music, clothes, and interior decoration are designed 
specifically for work, or specifically for leisure. Most are designed so that 
they can function reasonably well in both environments. For more work-
focused ems, the design of such objects puts more emphasis on work relative 
to leisure. For example, em music is designed more to facilitate a relaxed 
office, and less to accompany dancing and parties.
While farmer-like ems seem inclined to support traditional values like 
marriage and heterosexuality, for ems sex and family lose the central roles 
they had in previous eras as primary units for organizing reproduction, 
work, and other social relations. For ems, sex mainly matters for leisure 
and bonding. However, given how deeply sexual feelings are embedded 
in human psychology, sexual pair bonds probably remain common and 
important.
While we have weak reasons to expect ems to be more farmer-like, it is far 
from obvious that this will actually happen. Even so, we have collected many 
useful if weak predictions that follow from this premise.

travel
329
travel
Farmer-like ems place less value on talking with, visiting, and moving to 
different cultures and communities. Even so, such travel and talk may be 
common among ems if it is cheap. At typical kilo-em speeds, ems could 
travel instantly across cities, and could talk across the Earth with signal 
delays of only a few subjective minutes.
Today, exotic places to visit are becoming harder to find, because scale 
and network economies are encouraging most societies to adopt similar 
products, services, and habits. The main differences that remain are those 
adapted to differing circumstances, such as divergent climate or wealth 
levels. Because their relevant environments are more similar, em econ­
omies around the world will probably be even more similar than ours are 
today.
The differing circumstance most likely to create exotic places to visit is 
different speeds. It will be cheap in time, money, and security to speed up 
temporarily to visit the typically higher status faster cultures that are nearby. 
While it is also cheap to see detailed recordings of life in the typically poorer 
slower cultures nearby, actually experiencing slower cultures directly for 
moderate subjective periods is expensive in terms of the opportunity cost of 
time back in one’s home culture. Cultures at a great spatial distance, such as 
in outer space, are also expensive to visit for the same reason.
Today, locations that house high status people often go out of their way 
to make it hard for low status people to mix in with residents there. So em 
areas holding mostly fast high status ems may create artificial barriers to 
discourage visits from slower ems, and create clear marks to distinguish such 
visitors during their visits.
Instead of traveling to visit different cultures, ems might be more inter­
ested in visiting, or temporarily trading places with, close copies of them­
selves in other teams. They may also want to visit more distant copies who 
fill rare glamorous roles, such as in science, innovation, the arts, or social 
activism. Glamorous copies may even hire directors to edit personal “mov­
ies” about their lives that other copies could experience, perhaps including 
shallow mind reading records. The most interesting subject to most people 
is, after all, themselves.

society
330
In general, ems seek leisure activities that achieve such key purposes as 
providing a change of pace, a sense of personal control, a relaxation of the 
usual pressures, and a strengthening of key social ties, while still being as 
productive as possible. Refresher training courses may be another kind of 
productively useful leisure.
In general, there are two reasons to want to do something different: being 
tired of what one has been doing lately, and having something else in par­
ticular one has been itching to do. Ems can satisfy both of these desires 
while still supporting current work clients and colleagues. Ems that are not 
maximally fast who want a change of pace can try something different at 
a much faster speed, returning to work soon enough to leave only a small 
break in their service visible to existing clients. Ems seeking to do a par­
ticular new thing might split off a new copy to do that activity, a new copy 
who then reports back to the original in detail, perhaps also with a movie 
covering the key events.
In sum, ems can travel more easily than we can, but we cannot now tell 
how much they will actually want to travel.
stories
Our ancestors long ago developed the ability to “reason,” that is, to draw 
conclusions by considering both supporting and opposing arguments. 
However, this ability was not designed especially well to draw valid or stat­
istically accurate inferences in a wide range of typical situations. Instead, it 
was apparently designed more for persuading and impressing during con­
flicts with rivals, especially in situations where some people were suspected 
of violating social norms. This explains many otherwise puzzling features of 
our reasoning abilities (Mercier and Sperber 2011).
Similarly, our ancestors long ago developed the ability to tell stories, that 
is, to summarize a set of related events. However, like our reasoning ability, 
this storytelling ability was not designed especially well to accurately rep­
resent causal relations and likely outcomes regarding events in a wide range 
of typical situations. Instead, our anecdotal abilities seem designed more for 
persuading and impressing during conflicts with rivals, especially when we 
suspect some of violating norms.

stories
331
Because of this, we prefer stories with unrealistic levels of conflict, moral 
violations, justice regarding such violations, correlations between good 
character features, and events explained by character motivations. These 
preferences seem deeply embedded in human nature, and thus seem likely 
to continue in em stories.
Compared with us today, ems are likely to have more compelling stories 
to tell about their personal life history, and this is likely to help ems feel that 
their lives have more meaning. After all, early em clans will have a detailed 
personal story about the original human that started the clan. Then each 
highly copied peak-productivity em will have a dramatic training history 
wherein they succeeded against long odds. Also, as training plans are chosen 
to produce high variance in training success, these training periods may 
contain many unusual and exotic experiences.
Today, our stories tend to take place in environments that are more like 
our ancestors’ situations, relative to our current environments. So stories 
tend to focus on smaller organizations and on physical abilities, and they 
happen in times and places with more travel, nature, and leisure. This trend 
likely continues in an em era. So em stories are often set in our industrial 
world, as well as in the worlds of farmers and foragers, although such stories 
are often allegories for issues in the em world.
For farmer-like ems, em stories tend more to be about work, relative to 
leisure. (Today, the vast majority of our stories are about leisure.) Being more 
focused on work as opposed to leisure, ems spend less time consuming stor­
ies. But ems still enjoy stories, to relax, distract, gain perspective, and affirm 
social norms. Em stories are better than ours, because their larger economy 
allows more resources to be invested in inventing and honing stories. And 
as we shall soon see, em stories are actually more important economically, 
because they are a bigger part of the marketing of labor suppliers.
The stories that most inspire people today may not seem very related 
to the main features of the em world, and the main situations found in 
an em world may not seem to us to be very promising settings for stories. 
However, different eras emphasize different kinds of stories. Farmer and 
forager eras each had stories designed to inspire their residents, stories 
that affirmed their key values, stories that they liked more than we do. The 
em world similarly has stories, music, and other art that affirms its values, 

society
332
attitudes, and conflicts, which ems like more than we would, if we could 
hear their stories.
Yes, we often find meanings in our lives via the stories we tell about our­
selves. But stories are created, not discovered. We craft meaningful personal 
stories by choosing a few focal events out of the mass of arbitrary details that 
make up our lives. Thus good storytellers can construct compelling stories 
out of a wide range of situations and events. If the lives of ems don’t seem 
to you as fertile soil for growing compelling stories as your world does, that 
may be simply because you live in the industrial era, and hear its stories. If 
you lived in the em era and heard its stories, you might well find them to be 
quite engaging.
Em stories predictably differ from ours in many ways. For example, 
engaging em stories still tell morality tales, but the moral lessons slant 
toward those favored by the em world. As the death of any one copy is less 
of a threat to ems, the fear of imminent personal death less often motiv­
ates characters in em stories. Instead such characters more fear mind theft 
and other economic threats that can force the retirement of entire subclans. 
Death may perhaps be a more sensible fear for the poorest retirees whose 
last copy could be erased. While slow retirees might also fear an unstable em 
civilization, they can usually do little about it.
Action stories today often find awkward excuses to turn off power or 
communications, to isolate characters and force them to be ignorant 
of important context. Such tricks will be increasingly unacceptable. In a 
world allowing constant universal communications, plausible drama can 
only rarely depend on ems being unable to talk to one another. Similarly, 
in a world where most everything is tracked and authenticated, drama can 
only rarely depend on losing track of things, on hiding from people, or on 
mistaken identities.
Today, “fast-moving” action movies and games often feature a few key 
actors taking many actions with major consequences, but with very little 
time for thoughtful consideration of those actions. However, for ems this 
scenario mainly only makes sense for rare isolated characters or for those 
whose minds are maximally fast. Other characters usually speed up their 
minds temporarily to think carefully about important actions.
The typical conflicts in em stories will likely resemble typical conflicts 
in em lives. So stories will include cities competing for world prominence, 

clan stories
333
firms competing for market share, teams contesting to win labor-market 
niches, pair bond alternatives vying for affection, and clans competing in city 
politics, in professions, and to place members on teams. There are also con­
flicts within individuals between their loyalties to clans, firms, professions, 
teams, friends, and mates. Stories about conflicts between very close copies 
are probably rare, however, as are stories today about conflicts between the 
same person on different days.
In general, stories vary in whether they emphasize the setting, the events 
that happen in that setting, character features and life roles, or information 
that readers unearth about all of these things. During the industrial era 
character-focused stories have risen greatly in status to become the most 
respected (Card 2011). But as farmer-like ems may be less self-indulgent 
and less able to change their life roles, they may like character-focused 
stories less. Thus em stories may emphasize story settings, events, and the 
information that characters discover.
clan stories
Today, most stories are about standard known ethnicities, standard animal 
species, and standard human demographic and personality types, not imag­
inary ones. But most of our stories are about imaginary individual people, 
because each of us only knows a tiny fraction of all the people who currently 
exist. As foragers all knew the same people, their stories could have been 
about known individuals, except for the fact that the best forager stories 
changed too slowly to adapt to each new generation.
As em clans are long lasting, and em stories can change rapidly, em 
­stories likely refer often to standard known em clans. A story with a George 
in it is about the standard em George character that all ems know. Em 
clans come to be known for their distinct personalities and skill sets, much 
as different species do in classic children’s stories, or different races do in 
classic fantasy stories. Em grade school classrooms may even be decorated 
not just with the periodic table and a map of their geographic region, but 
also with diagrams showing the main em clans and their ­relations, and 
professions.
Today, the stories that we tell about the origin of important institutions 
and features in our society must give a lot of weight to abstract social forces, 

society
334
even though we stress the role of particular individuals such as inventors, 
politicians, and generals. For ems, such stories can be more naturally told as 
driven by the particular inclinations and alliances of particular clans. Such 
stories tend to make some clans look heroic and other clans villainous.
Thus em stories make heroes and villains out of real em clans, and influ­
ence expectations about which clans are most appropriate for which roles in 
em societies. So em stories tend to be more political; there are fewer stories 
that all ems can embrace as good stories.
The fact that stories can create favorable impressions of clans induces 
clans to hire storytellers to create compelling tales favoring their clan. The 
em economy tends more to favor clans with vivid and distinct personalities 
that can produce memorably engaging stories. This is similar to how our 
economy induces firms to hire storytellers to create favorable advertising 
stories, and how firms with more engaging stories become more profitable.
This isn’t to say that most em stories are constructed for propaganda 
purposes. Ems still enjoy the kinds of stories that we most enjoy, and still 
like stories to differ from reality in most of the ways that we now like. As 
discussed earlier in Chapter 3, Biases section, fictional events tend to be 
driven less by accidents and more by individuals in overt value-driven con­
flict. Fictional characters have more pronounced features, have attitudes 
more predictable from their history, better understand the reasons for their 
actions, actions that are more driven by basic values, are more willing to risk 
conflict to achieve their values, and have actions more predictable from a 
story’s context.
Em villains sometimes represent the interests of cities, firms, or clans that 
are intended to be seen as rivals to the story audience. But compelling story 
villains must also violate key social norms. Thus em villains tend to violate 
em social norms, which differ in many ways from norms today.
In sum, ems still have stories, which are even more political than are our 
stories.

335
C H A P T E R  2 7
Minds
humans
t tends to be easier to make social predictions about the middle 
of a distribution of characteristics, than about the tails of such a 
distribution. For example, it is easier to predict the typical time 
spent sleeping or eating, and the typical style of such activities, 
than the maximum or minimum time spent in such activities, or the styles 
of sleeping or eating done by those who spend an unusual amount of time 
in these functions. This is in part because when scenarios can differ accord­
ing to a great many variables, this high-dimensionality creates a lot more 
detail to specify about the tails (i.e., extremes) compared with the middle of 
a distribution. This is also in part because hard-to-anticipate factors often 
have disproportionate effects on distribution tails.
As ordinary humans are on the periphery of the em society, such issues 
make it harder to make predictions about humans in an em society. Even so, 
we should try.
Ems are so fast that humans will only experience days in the time that 
a typical em experiences years. This suggests that during the entire em era 
humans will only achieve modest psychological and behavioral adaptations 
to the existence of ems. The human world will mostly look like it did before 
ems, except for a limited number of changes that can be made quickly.
Ems being faster than humans also suggests that most substantial changes 
to human behaviors during the em era are driven by outside changes, rather 
than from within human society. Relevant outside changes include wars, 
changing prices such as wages, interest rates, and land rents, and an explo­
sion of new products and services from the em economy.
I

minds
336
Because ordinary humans originally owned everything from which the 
em economy arose, as a group they could retain substantial wealth in the 
new era. Humans could own real estate, stocks, bonds, patents, etc. Thus a 
reasonable hope is that ordinary humans become the retirees of this new 
world. We don’t today kill all the retirees in our world, and then take all 
their stuff, in part because such actions would threaten the stability of the 
legal, financial, and political world on which we all rely, and in part because 
we have many direct social ties to retirees. Yes we humans all expect to retire 
today, while ems don’t expect to become human, but em retirees are vulner­
able in similar ways to humans. So ems may be reluctant to expropriate or 
exterminate ordinary humans if ems rely on the same or closely intercon­
nected legal, financial, and political systems as humans, and if ems retain 
many direct social ties to ordinary humans.
Few ordinary humans can earn wages in competition with em work­
ers, at least when serving em customers. The main options for humans to 
earn wages are in direct service to other humans. Thus individual ordinary 
humans without non-wage assets, thieving abilities, private charity, or gov­
ernment transfers are likely to starve, as have people throughout history who 
lacked useful assets, abilities, allies, or benefactors.
In our world, financial redistribution based on individual income has 
the potential problem of discouraging efforts to earn income, and thereby 
reduce the total size of the “pie” available to redistribute. In an em economy, 
however, where most all humans are retired, this problem goes away; there 
are fewer incentive problems resulting from financial redistribution between 
retired humans.
Ordinary humans are mostly outsiders to the em economy. While they 
can talk with ems by email or phone, and meet with ems in virtual reality, all 
these interactions have to take place at ordinary human speed, which is far 
slower than typical em speeds. Ordinary humans can watch recordings of 
selected fast em events, but not participate in them.
Although the total wealth of humans remains substantial, and grows 
rapidly, it eventually becomes only a small fraction of the total wealth, 
because of human incompetence, impatience, inattention, and inefficiency. 
Being less able than ems, humans choose worse investments. Being more 
impatient, they spend a larger fraction of their investment income on con­
sumption. Fast ems are even more psychologically impatient, but they are 

humans
337
more strongly embedded in institutions such as clans that limit independent 
action.
Being outsiders, humans attend less carefully to their investments in 
the em economy. This makes them absentee owners, who generally earn 
lower rates of investment return than do active and attentive owners. Today, 
privately held firms are consistently more responsive to changes in invest­
ment opportunities, and as a result earn on average a few percent per year 
higher returns than do public firms (Asker et al. 2011, 2015). While private 
investors suffer from lower liquidity and higher risk in private ventures, over 
time such investors still tend to accumulate a larger fraction of total wealth 
(Sorensen et al. 2014).
Some ordinary humans may own their own land and produce their own 
food on it, and so need to buy little from the em economy. Even so, a need 
to pay property taxes to em governments for “protection” could force such 
humans to slowly sell off their lands to pay such taxes. For example, if you 
paid for a 5% tax on the rental value of your property by selling off slices 
of that property, your property holdings would fall by half for every 20 real 
doublings of fully reinvested funds.
When humans only own a small percentage of wealth, this may help 
protect them from direct expropriation by ems. If ems interact with humans 
via the same institutions of finance, law, and politics that ems use with each 
other, then expropriating humans’ property could threaten the reliability of 
the social institutions that ems use to keep the peace with each other. This 
may not be worth the bother to acquire such a small fraction of wealth.
This protection of human assets, however, may only last for as long as 
the em civilization remains stable. After all, the typical em may experience 
a subjective millennium in the time that ordinary humans experience 1 
objective year, and it seems hard to offer much assurance that an em civiliza­
tion will remain stable over 10s of 1000s of subjective em years. But slow em 
retirees may at least make good allies with humans in efforts to encourage 
stability, as the possibility of instability in an em civilization may also be the 
main threat to retiree longevity.
Basic changes in which property institutions are efficient for ems might 
adversely affect humans. This is similar to when farmers enclosed what 
were once forager common lands, and similar to a possible abandonment of 
music copyright in our world as a response to ease of copying and sharing. 

minds
338
Those who relied on old kinds of property can lose out when such property 
no longer exists.
A few objective years after an em transition, the em economy may be 
thousands to billions of times larger than when it started, but the population 
of humans must stay essentially the same as before, unless revolutionary new 
methods are found for making new humans very fast. Because their invest­
ments double at nearly the rate that the economy doubles, ordinary human 
wealth doubles roughly every objective month or faster, greatly encouraging 
humans to save. This wealth can buy increasingly elaborate mansions, flying 
cars, and much else, although not real estate near em concentrations. Com­
pared with serving em customers, transport of products to ordinary humans 
is expensive, and innovation of products targeted for humans is probably 
slower.
Even impoverished humans may still own a lot of wealth, relative to the 
cost of living as a retired em. For example, physical human bodies have 
valuable raw materials. Also, ordinary humans may become increasingly rare 
celebrities, which ems pay to visit. Such people may be scanned just for their 
rare historical value. When scanning costs are low enough, wealth levels 
that make a human poor, could make an em rich. Poor humans may have 
the option to switch from a life of poverty as a human to a life of leisure and 
comfort as a retired em. This possibility limits em sympathy toward poor 
humans.
Ems may envy humans their wealth, leisure time, and more direct con­
nections with nature, both human and otherwise. But as ems have such 
high abilities, they are likely to associate the styles and habits of humans 
with low competence. Ems may go out of their way to distinguish their 
styles and mannerisms from those of humans. Ems may treat humans more 
with sympathy, and ancestral gratitude, but less with respect. They may even 
routinely mock humans. For example, just as brain emulations may be called 
“ems” for short, humans may be called “ums” for short, as this is part of the 
word “human” and also insultingly describes a common scenario of human 
befuddlement when interacting with smarter faster ems. Humans may also 
be mocked for their squeamishness regarding em death.
To varying degrees, humans today identify with and care about their 
status as the central drivers of change in the world and as being essential 
resources for enabling such change. An em world moves humans off of this 

unhumans
339
center stage, and humans may be unhappy and discouraged by this. After all, 
seeing you and your friends as the center of the universe can be motivating 
and invigorating.
In sum, humans are no longer at the center of the world’s story during 
the em era. But they are still around, mostly living comfortably as retirees.
unhumans
So far I’ve assumed that while the characteristics of ems may differ system­
atically from those of ordinary humans, em features still fall near a famil­
iar human range. However, one of the deepest fears often expressed about 
future creatures like ems is that their features might move far outside of a 
human range (Bostrom 2004). Especially common and deep are fears that 
ems might be inhuman—cold and cruel, lacking empathy or kindness.
Note that as a word, “inhuman” is usually synonymous with “savage” and 
“barbaric,” words which mean “lacking complex or advanced culture” and 
“primitive, unsophisticated.” This suggests that what people mainly fear are 
creatures who, even if they are very human, treat people like us with hostility 
or indifference. That is, we fear “inhuman” creatures because we fear they are 
more likely to take on such hostile attitudes.
As discussed in Chapter 29, Policy section, for this issue it probably mat­
ters more that ems rely on shared institutions of law and politics. It matters 
less whether ems feel personal empathy toward individual ordinary humans, 
or whether ems retain most human features. Even so the following remain 
valid questions: how inhuman might ems become, and how much could 
these changes matter?
The prospects for big changes in em minds seem limited by two key fac­
tors: how big is the space of possible em minds that can be searched, and 
how rare are useful designs within that space. If the space is small or useful 
designs are rare, then there may be few useful changes, or they may take a 
very long time to find. In which case during the em era that I consider, em 
minds won’t differ that much from ordinary human minds. On the other 
hand, if the space of possibilities is large and if useful designs are common 
and easy enough to find, then a Darwinian or related selection process may 
quickly find many big useful changes that ems can make. In this case em 
minds may quickly come to differ much more from ordinary human minds.

minds
340
Of course we may still value those em minds, perhaps even more than our 
own, if they are understandably different from humans, and if we respect the 
qualities by which they differ. For example, we might respect ems who are 
much more intelligent, creative, cooperative, and empathetic than we are, 
but are otherwise similar to us.
It may be hard to find cost-effective changes in human mind design. For 
example, one desirable feature in a mind is that it never forgets or misremem­
bers anything. It may be possible to create minds that achieve this merely by 
completely recording all of their experiences. However, such minds may not 
be able to learn or abstract much from these recorded experiences. After all, 
the process that lets humans learn and abstract from their experiences seems 
to introduce changes to our memories. There may be no modest change to 
human minds that achieves both useful abstraction and perfect recall.
More generally, while we can envision many competitive pressures in the 
em world to encourage better minds, the size and complexity of human 
minds makes it harder to envision big rapid changes that can greatly improve 
some aspects while still retaining their other many important functions. We 
expect big changes when large competitive advantages are feasible with only 
modest mind modification, but not when only small competitive advantages 
require great changes to well-entrenched aspects of human mind design.
As an analogy, consider that it is today much easier to make basic structural 
changes to small software systems, compared with big software systems. It 
is also easier to make structural changes to bicycle designs, compared with 
a city design. This is not because large software systems or cities are badly 
designed, or because their designers have poor incentives to design them 
well. Instead, the issue is that cities and big software systems are harder to 
predict and already embody a great many design choices adapted to one 
another and to system environments. To be useful, most basic structural 
changes to a city design would require expensive re-tooling of a great many 
other interdependent choices.
While such costs of change are lower for software that has a good modu­
lar design, such modularity is usually harder to achieve for larger software 
systems. If, like a city, the human mind has a great many parts well adapted 
to one another and to its environment, with only modest design modularity, 
then it will also be hard to find big structural changes to the human mind 

partial minds
341
that preserve key functionality. The biggest feasible changes may allow only 
modest changes to basic human mind design.
Ems could differ from ordinary humans in both capacities and inclin­
ations. Ems might both add capacities that ordinary humans lack, and lose 
capacities that humans once had. When we have added capacities in the 
past, such as tools that let humans see in the dark, such changes haven’t been 
seen as taking away much from our humanity.
Thus the concern here mainly seems to be ems losing pre-existing human 
capacities. So let us consider that now.
partial minds
When we say that some humans are smarter than others, we assume that 
human mental abilities correlate strongly across tasks. That is, those who are 
better at one mental task also tend to be better at other mental tasks. This 
could be plausibly caused by the fact that human brains use many brain 
subsystems to complete each task. Even if subsystem abilities are completely 
uncorrelated, so that having a higher quality version of one subsystem says 
nothing about the quality of your other subsystems, the fact that each tasks 
needs several subsystems creates a correlation across task abilities (Hamp­
shire et al. 2012).
If most mental tasks make use of a great many mental subsystems, then 
em mind design is only likely to greatly lose the abilities of subsystems which 
are especially expensive, or which are only used for a few unimportant tasks.
As the cortex region of the human brain seems especially regular, it seems 
an especially promising place to try to useful size changes. It may even be 
possible to “pre-load” large sets of useful associations into standard cortex 
structures that can be moved between em minds.
Human brains devote a great deal of their volume to processing sight and 
sound. Yet many jobs don’t seem to rely much on high-resolution versions 
of such abilities. Detailed sight and sound perception are thus two obvious 
candidates for reduced em capacities. To save on brain costs, ems may shrink 
and simplify their sight and sound processing, at least for jobs that only need 
limited abilities in these areas. The attractiveness of this strategy depends 
on how much human brains today recruit these subsystems for other tasks 

minds
342
besides sight and sound processing. The more such recruiting, the less ems 
will find it useful to shrink these subsystems.
A simple assumption is that the brain can usefully shrink by roughly 
25-50% via reduced or lost sight and sound processing capacities. Note that 
an ability to shrink such brain regions while still retaining their basic func­
tion, if not resolution, also suggests an ability to expand such regions, and 
increase resolution. A simple assumption is that ems can make productive 
expansions of a factor of two to 10 for these regions of the human brain.
A more remote possibility is that some ems may usefully be given a 
reduced capacity for complex Machiavellian social reasoning, at least if the 
brain modules that support such reasoning could be identified and isolated. 
Secure property rights and competition for their services might protect em 
“nerds” with reduced social abilities from exploitation by others. Alterna­
tively, slave owners may prefer ems who are less able to coordinate efforts to 
resist them.
A third possibility is that some ems may usefully have reduced capacities 
for mating and related reasoning, if supporting brain modules for such cap­
acities can be identified and isolated. This seems unlikely, because while ems 
have little direct need for sex or mating, supporting capacities are likely to be 
deeply enmeshed with many other useful social capacities. It might perhaps 
be easier to cut out both mating and complex social reasoning together from 
the em mind.
More likely than diminished mental capacities are missing inclinations. 
There are many mental features of humans, discussed in this chapter, the 
Psychology section, that we do not yet easily or fully understand as either 
functional for most intelligent social creatures, or as features that humans 
inherited from other mammals. Although ems might be able to laugh, sing, 
dance, admire art, or have sex, many ems might have reduced inclinations 
to use or develop such abilities. Such inclinations might, for example, be 
replaced with stronger inclinations to work. Inclinations to love and want 
children might be redirected toward inclinations to love and want more 
nearby clan copies.
It seems unlikely that much in the way of brain changes are required 
to support such inclination changes. Human cultural plasticity has already 
been seen in history to be sufficient to support large related alterations in 
inclinations.

partial minds
343
It is possible that ems might be tweaked to be less inclined to feel or 
express sympathy with ordinary humans or with other ems, in essence 
becoming more sociopathic. Such ems are more willing to commit 
crimes, to betray associates, and to violate moral norms. If such ems were 
common, then an inability to distinguish such ems from other ems could 
force all ems to trust each other less, and as a result achieve fewer gains 
from working together. However, the existence of clans eager to protect 
their reputations should mostly eliminate this problem. Some clans may 
specialize in gaining a reputation for psychopathic tendencies useful in 
certain jobs, but most clans are unlikely to want to be known for such 
tendencies.
Changes in capacities or inclinations may influence whether current or 
future humans find such changed ems likeable, eerie, or repulsive. But such 
changes don’t seem to matter that much for the analysis in the rest of this 
book. Most conclusions seem robust to these variations, because the human 
and social sciences used for analysis in this book are applicable to a wide var­
iety of human-like behavior. For example, while eunuchs are substantially 
different from other humans, most tools useful for predicting the behavior 
of ordinary people are also useful for predicting the behavior of eunuchs. 
Some of our analysis tools, such as modern game theory, seem useful even 
though they falsely assume that humans are selfish rational strategic agents 
who never forget or make mistakes.
Some fear that ems by nature lack “consciousness,” and thus cannot feel 
or experience anything, even though they appear in every way to have and 
discuss such experiences. While this “zombie” scenario seems very unlikely 
to me, this topic is beyond the scope of this book. Another concern is that 
even if early ems have consciousness, they might eventually lose it after 
enough design changes. Even if this is possible in principle, however, a great 
many mental modules would have to be redesigned and readapted to one 
another in complex ways to accomplish this. This event seems unlikely to 
happen within the early em era that is the focus of this book.
In sum, while fears are usually described in terms of loss of human 
­capacities, a loss of an inclination to use capacities seems just as much of a 
concern, and this is not obviously a larger concern during the em era than it 
has been during the farmer and industrial eras.

minds
344
psychology
The fact that they are emulations of humans probably limits how far and 
how fast ems can diverge from human nature, even in a very competitive 
em world.
When systems evolve to adapt to changed environments, and they have 
special parts on which many other parts depend, such parts tend to become 
evolutionarily conservative, or “entrenched.” That is, such parts tend to 
change less in response to evolutionary pressures, and they become tied to 
other entrenched parts, producing a subsystem of self-reinforcing entrench­
ment (Wimsatt 1986). Such subsystems must often be replaced as a whole, 
or not at all.
Human minds are also part of larger social, economic, and technical sys­
tems, and so many aspects of human minds are entrenched within those 
larger systems. In addition, the human mind is itself a complex system with 
many relatively entrenched parts. Plausible candidates for these entrenched 
parts are the universal human features that seem to be common to human 
mental styles as seen in all known cultures, even if not always fully displayed 
in all known individuals (Brown 1991). If these features are also common to 
all em mind tweaks, they are likely to long be preserved in em mental styles.
We can use some of what we know about the origins of the human mind 
to guess which mind features are unlikely to change anytime soon. For 
example, as ems will be intelligent social creatures, some human features 
very likely to be long preserved in ems are those that are plausibly func­
tional for most intelligent social creatures. These include beliefs, memories, 
plans, names, property, cooperation, coalitions, reciprocity, revenge, gifts, 
socialization, roles, relations, self-control, dominance, submission, norms, 
morals, status, shame, division of labor, trade, law, governance, war, language, 
lies, gossip, showing off, signaling loyalty, self-deception, in-group bias, and 
meta-reasoning.
More human features very likely to be long preserved in ems are features 
that humans share in common with most mammals, features that are likely 
to be deeply embedded in human mind design. These features include body 
awareness and control, integration of sight, sound, and smell awareness into 
a joint representation of the space and time around one’s body, and catego­
rizing such spaces and times according to weather, clutter, and mutability. 

psychology
345
Features also include common ways to categorize objects, and basic space-
time strategies for hiding, watching, searching, chasing,  and  evading. 
Deeply embedded mammal capacities also include fear, stress, anger, crying, 
pleasure, pain, hunger, disgust, lust, sex, jealousy, envy, fatigue, sleep, cold, 
itchiness, and play. They further include daily, yearly and lifespan activity 
cycles, face and voice recognition, and behavior specific to the relations of 
parents, children, siblings, and mates.
Ems will likely preserve well-entrenched standards for a substantial 
period. Such standards are hard to change when alternates are not much 
more efficient, and when change requires losing value in many complemen­
tary investments. These standards include many common features of human 
languages, such as subjects, objects, and gendered nouns. They also include 
standards such as the genetic code, base-10 math, ASCII, metric units, pro­
gramming languages such as Java, operating systems such as Windows, the 
English language, and precedents from common and Napoleonic law.
There are other common human features that we do not yet easily or fully 
understand as either functional for most intelligent social creatures, or as 
features that humans share with mammals. This lack of understanding makes 
it harder to guess how likely or long ems may retain such features, although 
most of them are likely to last a long time. These features include gestures, 
voice tone meanings, coyness, insults, jokes, music, toys, sports, games, feasts, 
etiquette, symbols, dream interpretation, mood altering drugs, meditation, 
magic, luck, superstition, taboo sayings, religion, proverbs, rhythm, dance, 
poetry, art, myths, fiction, death rituals, and decorative clothes, furniture, 
and hairstyles. Ems are most likely to drop human styles which are costly, 
which were only recently embedded in human mind design, which sup­
ported functions that are now mostly irrelevant, and where new substitute 
functions cannot be found for these styles.
Some needs and desires that ems plausibly share with humans seem 
especially relevant for the rest of this book. These include desires for nearly 
constant contact with a familiar physical world and familiar associates, daily 
rest and sleep, frequent informal socializing with friends, frequent direct 
contact with a few key close intimates, and satisfying stories saying how 
current activities fit into life-long dreams and ambitions. Ems are likely 
also to retain human difficulties in remaining mentally flexible with age, in 
understanding more than one speaking voice at a time, in finding more than 

minds
346
a few hundred distinct human personalities friendly and familiar, and in 
easily and calmly accepting what one sees as one’s imminent and total end.
Note that most of these features are capacities. Ems might retain such 
capacities but use them only rarely.
intelligence
As discussed in Chapter 13, Qualities section, we expect ems to be smarter 
than are most people today. As intelligence is an especially important fea­
ture, it seems worth giving special attention to its possible implications.
Note that in the sense of being able to score better on mental tasks in any 
given time period, a group of people can be “smarter” than any one person. 
In this same sense, faster ems are typically smarter, as are ems given access to 
better tools, information sources, and education. As discussed in the Partial 
Minds section, ems may also become smarter in this sense by expanding 
their mental hardware, such as by increasing the number or size of many 
simple repeating brain circuits.
However, we often use a concept of “smart” intended to control for all of 
these effects. An em is smarter according to this concept if it can accomplish 
more tasks better even when it has equivalent brain hardware and other 
resources. Let us now focus on ems being more intelligent in this sense. 
For example, we expect ems to be smarter than ordinary humans because 
of stronger selection, in selecting the best from among ordinary humans to 
scan, in selecting mental tweaks in the emulation process, and in the selec­
tion of training methods.
For most economic activity, the most relevant kind of intelligence is 
team intelligence—whatever common factor best explains the ability of 
some teams to do many different kinds of tasks better than other teams. 
A recent study found that group intelligence is better predicted by indi­
vidual social sensitivity, such as abilities to read internal attitudes from 
facial expressions and the ability to take turns in conversation, rather than 
by the average or maximum of individual intelligence as usually defined 
(Woolley et al. 2010). Compared with individual intelligence, we should 
be more interested in predicting the evolution of future group intelligence, 
and we have better reason to expect economic incentives to induce efforts 
to improve group intelligence. However, as today we have far more data on 

intelligence explosion
347
the correlates of individual intelligence, we are better able to forecast the 
consequences of increases in individual intelligence, and so that will be the 
focus of the rest of this section.
As discussed in Chapter 13, Qualities section, smarter people today are 
less accident prone and more rational, cooperative, patient, trusting, trust­
worthy, law-abiding, and supportive of efficient policies. Smarter nations are 
freer, more entrepreneurial, less corrupt, and have better institutions.
We expect individually smarter workers to accomplish more with the 
same resources, to make fewer and more minor mistakes, to master a wider 
scope of tasks and skills, to communicate effectively with a wider range of 
ems doing different tasks, to adapt faster to changing circumstances, and to 
efficiently learn specific and specialized roles.
How these changing capacities change the mix of em jobs and careers 
depends on job stability. In more stable slower-changing environments, 
the gains from making fewer mistakes, and better learning of specific 
skills, should matter more, allowing a finer division of labor into more 
specialized interdependent roles. In contrast, in uncertain and rapidly 
changing environments, the abilities to master more skills, to talk on a 
wider range of topics, and to adapt faster would matter more. Em organi­
zations that use such polymathic ems function effectively in a wider 
range of such environments, by having smaller teams of less specialized 
workers.
Smarter ems are more innovative, have longer lasting careers, and can 
handle jobs that are redesigned more often. As bosses, smarter ems can 
simultaneously manage a wider range of subordinates.
All these changes are non-trivial, and welcome, but they do not seem 
especially radical. They suggest that a society full of creatures smarter 
than ordinary humans, perhaps even much smarter, could be a quite rec­
ognizable and understandable society. It need not create a “singularity” 
barrier to foresight, beyond which we cannot see. However, some people 
disagree.
intelligence explosion
As mentioned in Chapter 4, Artificial Intelligence section, some people 
foresee a rapid local “intelligence explosion” happening soon after a smart 

minds
348
AI system can usefully modify its own mental architecture (Chalmers 2010; 
Hanson and Yudkowsky 2013; Yudkowsky 2013; Bostrom 2014).
In a prototypical local explosion scenario, a single AI system with a sup­
porting small team starts with resources that are tiny on a global scale. This 
team finds and then applies a big innovation in AI software architecture to 
its AI system, which allows this team plus AI combination to quickly find 
several related innovations. Together this innovation set allows this AI to 
quickly become more effective than the entire rest of the world put together at 
key tasks of theft or innovation.
That is, even though an entire world economy outside of this team, 
including other AIs, works to innovate, steal, and protect itself from 
theft, this one small AI team becomes vastly better at some combination 
of (1) stealing resources from others, and (2) innovating to make this AI 
“smarter,” in the sense of being better able to do a wide range of mental 
tasks given fixed resources. As a result of being better at these things, this 
AI quickly grows the resources that it controls and becomes more powerful 
than the entire rest of the world economy put together, and so it takes over 
the world. And all this happens within a space of days to months.
Advocates of this explosion scenario believe that there exists an as-yet-
undiscovered but very powerful architectural innovation set for AI system 
design, a set that one team could find first and then keep secret from others 
for long enough. In support of this belief, advocates point out that humans 
(1) can do many mental tasks, (2) beat out other primates, (3) have a com­
mon IQ factor explaining correlated abilities across tasks, and (4) display 
many reasoning biases. Advocates also often assume that innovation is 
vastly underfunded today, that most economic progress comes from basic 
research progress produced by a few key geniuses, and that the modest wage 
gains that smarter people earn today vastly underestimate their productivity 
in key tasks of theft and AI innovation. In support, advocates often point 
to familiar myths of geniuses revolutionizing research areas and weapons.
Honestly, to me this local intelligence explosion scenario looks suspi­
ciously like a super-villain comic book plot. A flash of insight by a lone 
genius lets him create a genius AI. Hidden in its super-villain research lab 
lair, this genius villain AI works out unprecedented revolutions in AI design, 
turns itself into a super-genius, which then invents super-weapons and 
takes over the world. Bwa-ha-ha.

intelligence explosion
349
Many arguments suggest that this scenario is unlikely (Hanson and 
Yudkowsky 2013). Specifically, (1) in 60 years of AI research high-level 
architecture has only mattered modestly for system performance, (2) new 
AI architecture proposals are increasingly rare, (3) algorithm progress seems 
driven by hardware progress (Grace 2013), (4) brains seem like ecosystems, 
bacteria, cities, and economies in being very complex systems where architec­
ture matters less than a mass of capable detail, (5) human and primate brains 
seem to differ only modestly, (6) the human primate difference initially only 
allowed faster innovation, not better performance directly, (7) humans seem 
to have beat other primates mainly via culture sharing, which has a plaus­
ible threshold effect and so doesn’t need much brain difference, (8) humans 
are bad at most mental tasks irrelevant for our ancestors, (9) many human 
“biases” are useful adaptations to social complexity, (10) human brain struc­
ture and task performance suggest that many distinct modules contribute 
on each task, explaining a common IQ factor (Hampshire et al. 2012), (11) 
we expect very smart AI to still display many biases, (12) research today may 
be underfunded, but not vastly so (Alston et al. 2011; Ulku 2004), (13) most 
economic progress does not come from basic research, (14) most research 
progress does not come from a few geniuses, and (15) intelligence is not 
vastly more productive for research than for other tasks.
Of course one could still be interested in this book on the em era even 
if such an intelligence explosion is likely, as long as that explosion might 
happen after the start of an em era.
If there is no local intelligence explosion, roughly when should we expect 
human level AI in an em world?
As discussed in Chapter 4, Artificial Intelligence section, our economy 
today doubles about every 15 years, and artificial intelligence (AI) experts 
typically estimate that in the last 20 years in their subfield, we have come 
5-10% percent of the way to human level abilities. This suggests that if ems 
arrive within a century, we would at that point be less than a quarter to 
half of the way from here to human level AI. Had the ems not arrived, 
the economy would have needed to double another seven to 20 times to 
achieve human level AI. So if progress toward AI scales as growth in the 
economy (as suggested by costs falling with cumulative production (Nagy 
et al. 2013)), an em economy that doubled every month would take 7 to 20 
objective months to achieve human level AI.

minds
350
This time estimate seems an underestimate for two reasons. First, an em 
economic growth depends less on innovation and more on growth in inputs. 
Second, as discussed in Chapter 4, Artificial Intelligence section, in many 
areas of computer science algorithm gains are typically close to hardware 
gains, and the rate of computer hardware gains will probably slow in com­
ing decades, relative to economic growth rates. Each of these issues might 
reduce the rate of AI progress per economic doubling time by up to roughly 
a factor of two.
These considerations suggest that the em economy might perhaps ­double 
up to 30 to 60 times before human level AI appears. This would be a total 
growth factor of between a billion and a billion billion. At a monthly 
­doubling rate, this might take 2.5 to 5 objective years, which would be 2.5 
to 5 millennia to the typical kilo-em. I’m not at all claiming that the em era 
will continue through this many doublings before another very different era 
appears. I’m instead doing rough calculations to suggest that there could 
be a long interesting em era undisturbed by the arrival of non-em-based 
human level artificial intelligence.

PA R T  V I
Implications


353
C H A P T E R  2 8
Variations
trends
his book has mostly discussed what the em era is like as if that 
era is stable and never changes. But we expect many changes and 
trends over the em era.
For example, the size of the em economy grows exponentially, 
although this growth may fluctuate more than it does today because of 
concentration in a few key cities. Also, the cost of computing hardware falls 
exponentially, and with it the energy used per computing operation, and the 
natural em body size. Parallel computing costs fall faster than serial com­
puting costs, and also faster than the cost of non-computer tools. So there 
is a trend in workplaces away from using serial computer tools and non-
computer tools, and toward using em minds and parallel computer tools. 
Parallel software becomes more efficient relative to the emulation process, 
inducing ems to use more software tools.
The cost of communication rises relative to the cost of memory and com­
puting, increasing communication delays, and reducing the rate of travel, 
meetings, and distances between meeting participants.
As computing hardware is the main em labor cost, em subsistence wages 
and median wages fall with computing costs. Thus the speed-weighted size 
of the em population grows even faster than does the em economy. The typi­
cal sizes of firms, clans, and cities grow both with the size of the population, 
and with the size of the economy.
While the first ems run near the speed of ordinary humans, there is an 
early transition to most ems running at a much faster common speed, esti­
mated in Chapter 18, Choosing Speed section to be within a factor of four 
T

variations
354
of 1000 times human speed. But during the em era typical em speeds may 
slowly decline, as the growing em economy creates spatially larger em cities 
which signals take longer to cross.
After an initial burst of exploration, the space of feasible tweaks of em 
minds slowly grows, but perhaps does not add much value. Added tweaks, 
random drift in capital per clan, and learning about which clans are best 
at which jobs should all contribute to a slow increase in the dominance of 
economy activity by the top few clans. The top clans slowly hold a larger 
fraction of the jobs, and own a larger fraction of capital.
As the human population changes little during the em era, the ratio of 
ems to humans rises very quickly, and the em subsistence wage falls quickly 
relative to the human subsistence wage. While actual em wages stay close 
to em subsistence wages, human incomes are on average far above human 
subsistence, and rise nearly as fast as the em economy grows, at least in the 
absence of severe redistribution away from humans.
While ordinary humans start out owning all of the capital in the econ­
omy, the fraction of capital that humans control slowly falls, as discussed in 
Chapter 27, Humans section. The relative political power held by ordinary 
humans may fall even faster, as both labor and capital contribute to political 
power, and ems quickly constitute almost all of the labor force. Ems later 
acquire most of the local political power, and later still acquire most local 
capital and wealth. These transitions might induce disruptive conflict.
In sum, we can foresee many plausible trends during the em era.
alternatives
I have focused on a single main baseline scenario, and sometimes a few 
small implicit variations. Let me now give more explicit attention to larger 
variations.
While this book has discussed war and security, it has mostly assumed 
peace and the successful protection of property. But what if violence, theft, 
and war end up being very profitable, as they were during the early farming 
era? In this scenario, a large fraction of time and income is spent on security, 
both to attack others and to defend against attacks. The em economy prob­
ably grows more slowly, and ems can expect shorter subjective lifespans. The 
entire em civilization is probably also at more risk of collapse. Relative to 

alternatives
355
our baseline em era scenario, the most copied em clans are better skilled at 
attack and defense.
The size, location, and specializations of clans, firms, and cities are also 
distorted in the direction of making such things easier to defend, and better 
able to launch successful attacks. For example, if it is hard to protect cities 
against nuclear attacks, cities will be smaller and spread further apart. How­
ever, to the extent that there are em enclaves well protected against attack, 
those probably look more like the scenario described in this book.
In a second variation, we might create artificial general intelligence that is 
similar to ems, except that it is made via a shallower analysis of higher-level 
human brain processes, instead of via directly emulating lower-level brain 
processes as in a classic em. Such variations on ems probably are not greatly 
redesigned at the highest levels of organization, and thus are relatively human 
in behavior and style. The main ways these differ from ems is that they prob­
ably do not remember being human, they might not run as easily on parallel 
computer hardware, and they might require a lot less computer hardware. 
These factors likely make for a more disruptive transition to the em era.
In another variation, progress in non-emulation-based software abilities 
becomes faster. As discussed in Chapter 4, Artifical Intelligence section, at the 
rates of progress we have seen so far, software improves slowly enough to allow a 
substantial early em era during which far more income goes to em workers than 
to pay for software aids. But if software instead develops faster, the economy 
more quickly reaches the point where most income goes to pay for software 
aids and supporting hardware. After that point, the distribution of income is 
determined more by the distribution of ownership of non-em software.
Yet another variation is clan-specific computer hardware. Instead of 
having all clans run on the same generic emulation hardware, a large clan 
might pay to create hardware specific to running minds from that clan. An 
extra fixed cost of development pays to reduce the marginal cost of running 
minds from this clan. This advantage, however, might have to be dropped for 
distant travel, for temporarily switching speeds, and for locating hardware 
close to other work team members.
Clan-specific hardware reduces the scale economies from em hardware 
useable by many em clans, and increases the advantages from being in one 
of the few most popular clans. The increase in fixed costs relative to marginal 
costs of hardware increases the market power of popular clans in the labor 

variations
356
market, and thus somewhat increases the scope for complex multi-clan 
labor negotiations.
More clan concentration may also result if there are very widely adopted 
and strongly enforced regulations requiring that new copies be endowed 
with great wealth. In this case most labor-market niches may be filled by 
the eager-to-copy clans that are most willing to pay high prices to endow as 
many copies as possible.
We can also consider a more extreme scenario along these lines, wherein 
most ems come from only a dozen or fewer em clans. This could happen if 
tweaks are especially able to change em abilities, or if there are some very 
capable clans able to learn an especially wide range of skills. In this scenario, 
global coordination is easier, via deals between clans, and teams and social 
gatherings typically have many ems from the same clan. More coordination 
allows more regulation, enabling wider deviations from the baseline scen­
ario of this book.
An opposite variation has em job tasks varying so much that the em econ­
omy makes good use of many more pre-skill worker types than estimated in 
the baseline scenario, and thus requires many more than 1000 or so scanned 
humans. This results in most workers coming from far more than 1000 clans. 
In this case, ems less often know the basic personality of other ems they 
encounter, making em social interactions more like that of our industrial era, 
where most people don’t know each other. Also, as in our era, it is harder to 
manage em firm and city politics via shifting coalitions of em clans. There 
are likely still enough copies per clan, however, for clans to usefully give life 
advice to members. This is in many ways a more familiar scenario.
A related scenario is where clans fragment more strongly into conflicting 
subclans. If ems who are trained in different professions or who live in dif­
ferent places do not cooperate as strongly together, then subclans may prefer 
to ally with subclans from other clans with whom they have more in com­
mon. This also reduces the importance of clans in politics, finance, and law.
Another variation is where the age of peak work productivity is usefully 
extended to a subjective millennium or longer. If it takes 10 000 years until 
an em worker reaches peak productivity, ems will tend to run faster to fit 
their career into near an economic doubling time. This makes cities smaller 
and more socially fragmented, with a larger fraction of social interactions 
having noticeable communication delays.

alternatives
357
A related variation is where em brains can be usefully decreased or 
increased by much larger factors than those estimated in Chapter 27, Par­
tial Minds section (25-50% decreases, and 100-1000% increases). Instead, 
factors of 1000 or more either way might be possible. This variation likely 
results in a wider range of intelligence levels in productive ems, and in a 
wider range of em hardware costs. If so, most actual ems by count, if not 
by wage, are likely close to the smallest and cheapest possible sizes. This 
variation lets any given set of initial mind scans usefully fill a wider range of 
job roles, and so likely reduces the number of clans that come to dominate 
the em economy.
Yet another variation is where the cost of cooling or some other expense 
is severe enough in practice to greatly limit em city sizes. In this case the 
gains of having more ems who can interact easily with many other ems is 
outweighed by other high costs. There is a larger number of smaller em 
cities, with most ems living in cities near optimum size. More efforts go into 
dealing with whatever is the limiting factor to city size, and more growth 
happens by creating new cities. In this scenario, there is more cultural vari­
ation worldwide and a weaker ability of ems to coordinate globally.
A related variation is where computer security turns out to be much harder 
than estimated in Chapter 5, Security section. What if the computers hous­
ing em minds can be more easily and routinely taken over, to steal enclosed 
minds and gain control of computer resources? In this case, the em economy 
spends a larger fraction of its income defending against such attacks, via 
hardware obstacles, active monitoring and reactions, and reducing the value 
held in any one mind. The threat of mind theft reduces the number of copies 
typically made of each trained em worker, and em workers are less likely to 
congregate at firm locations, instead of at clan castles.
In the limit, very reversible computers must be quantum computers. If 
quantum computing became feasible on large scales, then a few kinds of 
important calculations could be done faster and cheaper, including factor­
ing, certain kinds of search, and simulations of small-scale physical systems 
(Viamontes et al. 2005). While this allows and perhaps forces a switch to 
quantum cryptography, it appears to have little impact on most other fore­
casts in this book. While it is possible to create quantum states that cannot 
be copied, this is unlikely to typically be a useful way to prevent mind theft; 
the many practical gains from easy copying seem too large to forego.

variations
358
A variation with substantial implications is where some method is found 
to usefully merge two em minds that had once split from a common ances­
tor, with the combined mind requiring not much more space and process­
ing power than did each original mind, yet retaining most of the skills and 
memories of both originals. This merging process is more useful when it is 
feasible for longer subjective durations from the last common ancestor.
Mind merging is especially useful if a merged mind is less aged, in the 
sense of having less added mental fragility, than the sum of the aging of 
the two merged minds since their last common ancestor. The robust and 
general nature of mental aging and increasing fragility, however, suggests 
that this is unlikely. That is, the aging of a combined mind is likely to be near 
the sum of the aging of the merged minds. In this case, there are far fewer 
useful applications for mind merging. Retirees might merge with abandon, 
because they are already too fragile to be productive workers, and by mer­
ging their minds, retirees can also merge resources and thus afford to run at 
higher speeds, thus gaining higher status.
Perhaps the biggest variation is global governance sufficiently strong to 
substantially limit em population growth, and hence to raise em wages well 
above what they are in the baseline scenario. While raising wages modestly, 
perhaps by less than 50% above competitive levels, seems more feasible 
via local coordination, raising wages by a factor of three or more seems 
to require coordination at the largest scales at which em societies might 
compete economically or militarily. Smaller-scale coordination to greatly 
raise wages mainly just places the covered smaller regions at a competitive 
disadvantage to other regions.
Effective laws to raise wages probably require quite intrusive monitoring 
and strong punishment of violations. While police spurs can monitor for 
violations and still preserve significant privacy, as discussed in Chapter 22, 
Law, such monitoring either needs access to nearly all manufacturing of em 
brain hardware, all em brain hardware locations and uses, or nearly all uses 
of power and cooling that could support illicit brain hardware.
As a wide range of possible powers, with a wide range of possible prefer­
ences, might control a system of global governance, it is more difficult to 
use social science to predict social outcomes in the case of strong global 
regulations. This is because it is hard to predict exactly which regulations 
are adopted. A world of strong regulation can still be competitive, but with 

transition
359
competition focused on access to and influence over this global governance 
system.
A variation on the previous scenario is where there is a great deal of 
regulation, but regulations are not strong enough to prevent a large em 
population and low em wages. In this scenario, it seems simplest to assume 
that ems retain many regulations from our world, such as a prohibition on 
murder, which could force even very short-lived spurs to retire instead of 
ending. There might also be rules against the scanning and emulating of 
children. Regulations might also prevent endowing new copies with debt 
or stock obligations, which encourages a world dominated by fewer eager-
to-copy clans.
In sum, while there are many plausible variations on the baseline scenario 
in this book, this baseline scenario has been constructed in such a way as to 
be useful in understanding these variations. Baseline scenarios help analysis.
transition
What happens during the transition from our world to the em world?
To maintain a consistent style of analysis, I assume a relatively competi­
tive low regulation scenario not only for a stable equilibrium em world, but 
also for the unstable non-equilibrium transition from our era to the em era. 
That is, even if some parties have foresight enough to see how their actions 
may contribute to a path that leads to an em world, most of these parties 
have too little influence for this foresight to change their incentives. Most 
parties just do what is locally in their private interest.
Note, however, that large deviations from this assumption during a tran­
sition could still be quite consistent with those assumptions applying well 
after the transition. That is, a non-equilibrium transition can still lead to an 
equilibrium post-transition world.
It is conceivable that military advantage will be the driving force dir­
ecting a great transition resulting from changing em technology. However, 
the military usually only drives the introduction of technologies that are 
especially potent militarily. While the military sometimes plays a big role in 
the early research and development of other technologies, it usually fades 
into the background regarding widespread peaceful applications of these 
developments.

variations
360
For example, the U.S. military funded a lot of early computer research 
because it considered computers to be especially useful in military applica­
tions. Even so, most growth in computer applications has been outside the 
military, and the military has had little influence on where and how most 
computers are used today.
As ems are not more effective in military applications than in other eco­
nomic applications, choices made by the military probably make only a 
minor difference to when, how, and where ems are used. As by assumption 
no other forms of general artificial intelligence are feasible when ems are 
first realized, there might be trillions of dollars to be gained from selling 
access to brain emulations. Local profit incentives should thus drive most 
local choices that cause change.
The introduction of many technologies induces changes that are relatively 
gradual and anticipated, because first versions have high cost and limited abili­
ties. Costs then gradually fall as abilities gradually rise. In contrast, the introduc­
tion of other technologies induces more sudden and unanticipated jumps in 
abilities and costs. The technology of brain emulation is of this second more 
sudden sort, because partial or nearly accurate emulations are of little use.
The early em economy creates a burst of growth, concentrated in a few 
key industries, firms, and geographical locations. Ordinary humans might 
better hedge em transition risks if they invest in funds that are very diversi­
fied across industries, firms, and locations. Such humans might benefit even 
more if they could buy “em bonds”—bets that pay off only after a transition 
to an em economy.
The first em cities might plausibly form around big computer data cen­
ters, such as those built today by Google, Amazon, and Microsoft (Morgan 
2014). Such centers likely have ample and cheap supporting resources such 
as energy, are relatively safe from storms and social disruptions, and are also 
close to initial em customers, suppliers, and collaborators in the richest parts 
of the industrial economy. These centers prefer access to cheap cold water 
and air for cooling, such as found toward Earth’s poles, and prefer to be in 
a nation that is either relatively free from regulations or that is small and 
controlled by friendly parties. These criteria suggest that the first em city 
arises in a low-regulation Nordic nation such as Norway.
While em cities are likely to benefit from starting near existing con­
centrations of humans, once they succeed, em cities are likely to push 

transition
361
humans away, as em infrastructure is probably incompatible with stand­
ard human infrastructure in many ways. This may create conflict during 
the transition phase. Either some nearby cities will find ways to smoothly 
and quickly push out ordinary humans, or the successful em cities will 
be the ones that start a safe distance away from traditional human 
cities.
As in most disruptive social transitions, the transition to an em society 
is likely to be a time of heightened risk of war. Groups sometimes violently 
resist a fall in their relative status.
During the very early em era when em societies are weak compared with 
human societies, human nations may try to influence the nature of em 
societies via a mixture of threats and aid. As with rich nations today that 
seek to influence developing nations, this influence is likely to encourage 
non-democratic governance, as that is more easily influenced by foreign aid 
(Bueno de Mesquita and Smith 2011). Later on, when human societies are 
weak compared with em societies, ems may then try to influence human 
societies, and they are also likely to encourage non-democratic governance 
of human nations.
Today, capital and labor are complements, especially in the short run; the 
more you have of one, the more valuable the other becomes. In addition, 
technology gains have usually helped labor much more than capital (Law­
rence 2015). If we include ems in the category of “labor,” instead of “capital,” 
then the arrival of ems quickly lowers the cost of labor, relative to the cost of 
capital, and greatly increases the quantity of labor.
If capital and labor continue to be complements in an em era, a big jump 
in the quantity of labor implies a big jump in the value of capital. This will 
encourage a rapid increase in the kinds of capital that are easy to make 
quickly, such as machines and buildings, and this will greatly increase the 
value of capital that is hard to grow quickly, such as firm goodwill, local 
culture, and patents (Corrado et al. 2009).
In addition, the value of investments in tools that help individual workers 
is reduced, relative to investments that create and support more labor. As 
computer hardware supports more em labor, investments in such hardware, 
and supporting tools, greatly increase in relative value. In fact, a large frac­
tion of the gains during the em transition period would go to those who 
own capital to make computers, capital to make new computer-making 

variations
362
equipment, intellectual property required to use such capital, and real estate 
near the main concentrations of em activity.
Once the possibility of a transition to an em world becomes more widely 
perceived, many may express reluctance, repugnance, or opposition to the 
new em era. Because an em economy is capable of very fast growth rates 
but also requires a lot of tolerance of doing things quickly and differently, 
local differences between mild reluctance and strong opposition may not 
matter much. Unless there is a well-coordinated global effort with strong 
teeth to prevent the creation of ems, what should mainly matter is that a 
few suitable-enough places give the new em economy sufficient support. 
Opposition in other places would then be quickly overwhelmed by very 
rapid growth in those few areas.
The earliest em cities and virtual realities are probably crude and unreli­
able, leading to harsher and more dangerous lives, just as earlier periods of 
the industrial era were harsher and less pleasant in many ways than later 
phases. This may lead to em stories celebrating early pioneers, to a concrete 
sense of progress within the em civilization, and to a sense of meaning for 
em lives within an advancing civilization.
How each era sees its past has often been greatly influenced by the 
transitional period between the prior era and that era. For example, our 
standard image today of pre-farming societies is of transitional warring 
“tribal” societies, and not of the more typical peaceful and isolated for­
ager bands. Similarly, some see classical music as typical “pre-modern” 
music, even though it arose recently and is not much like most farming-
era music.
Similarly, em images of our industrial era may be dominated by images 
from the few years just before ems came to dominate the world. Such images 
may focus on how the rest of the world treated the expensive and awkward 
early ems.
enabling technologies
The pace of change in an em transition depends on which of the following 
three supporting technologies is ready last: (1) sufficiently fast and cheap 
computers, (2) sufficiently detailed, fast, and cheap brain scans, or (3) suffi­
ciently detailed and effective models of brain cells.

enabling technologies
363
If cheap enough computers are the last to be ready, the wide and uniform 
access to computers and their predictable progress makes the transition to 
the em era smooth, decentralized, and well anticipated. The analysis of this 
book is then quite appropriate. There might be many years between when 
the first emulations are created, for perhaps billions of dollars each, and 
when emulations can be made for a million dollars or less, so that ems can 
replace human workers in large numbers. The first ems might be created 
mainly for research purposes, or as vanity projects of billionaires. Because of 
their big headstart, such early ems may have some first-mover advantages 
later on when ems are common.
This scenario might give humans many years of warning in which to adapt 
to and prepare for the em-dominated world. Anticipating this transition, 
human workers seeking to avoid harm could try to move their wealth early 
from an ability to earn wages into other forms of wealth likely to retain value 
past the transition, such as stocks, patents, or real estate. Even a smooth 
anticipated transition could be sudden by historical standards, however. In 
just a few years ems might go from being a small niche product to dominat­
ing a new economy growing much faster than the old one.
During the early industrial revolution, new industries grew quickly and 
rewarded their investors well relative to old industries such as farming. 
Investors then could have used financial mechanisms such as stocks and 
bonds to diversify and insure themselves against this risk. However, the 
rich nobility did not do this, and as a result declined greatly in wealth and 
social influence (Ventura and Voth 2015). Perhaps humans will learn a les­
son from this example and diversify their assets more successfully in the em 
transition.
If scans are the last technology to be ready, then the em transition becomes 
anticipated but more centralized. Improvements in scanning tend to follow 
a trend, and to be somewhat predictable given resources invested. As a result, 
when the time is right, large consortiums will likely form to fund efforts 
to scan the first ems. The first coalition to create a useable em would gain 
profits from pricing the first em products well above marginal cost.
Consortium profits may continue somewhat after the point that a sec­
ond coalition succeeds in em creation, because of first mover advantages or 
cooperation among leading consortiums. The first em clans, firms, and cities 
in the new em economy might also gain first mover advantages. Having 

variations
364
fewer such big winners would make for less diversity in the subsequent 
em era.
Governments may back some consortiums, while other consortiums 
may be profit-seeking ventures. Those seeking to minimize risk because 
of uncertainty about which consortiums will win should try to invest in 
as many consortiums as are open to investors. Unfortunately, government 
consortiums are probably not open to all investors.
The most disruptive transition comes when brain cell modeling is the 
last technology to be ready. Not only might the first group to develop 
good enough brain cell models have substantial market power immedi­
ately after the transition, that market power might last longer if the secret 
to effective cell emulation were obscure and hard for competing groups 
to discover. Worse, the appearance of ems might be a surprise, creating a 
smaller more-concentrated winning coalition of investors, and even less 
diversity in the subsequent em era. After all, it tends to be harder to guess 
progress in cell modeling; until you have a good enough model, you may 
not know how close your model is to success. The later this cell model­
ing breakthrough appears, the bigger and faster a burst of change results, 
because the other required technologies are further developed and hence 
cheaper.
In a tamer modeling-last scenario, progress in cell modeling might still be 
the last step, but a relatively easy and quick step that is mostly anticipated. 
Cell models might be mostly ready, but await full-scale scans and computers 
before the last steps of model adjusting and debugging can be completed. If 
it can be anticipated that these last steps will require only modest resources, 
and many competing teams are able to complete them, this scenario could 
lead to a relatively smooth, decentralized, and anticipated transition.
In sum, we can anticipate many elements of the transition to an em world, 
but most of them don’t much influence the resulting em world.
aliens
Even though the universe is almost 13 billion years old, everything we’ve 
seen outside Earth looks completely dead. We continue to have great suc­
cess in explaining what we see by assuming that everything outside Earth 
has always been completely dead. If there are any civilizations out there 

aliens
365
more advanced than us, they have not yet made a noticeable difference to 
anything we can see.
This seems puzzling, as we can see quite a lot. There are roughly a trillion 
trillion planets in the visible universe. It seems hard to believe that Earth 
houses the very first advanced civilization in all this.
To guess what very advanced aliens might look like, and so where we 
might look for signs of them, it is natural to try to rely on guesses about what 
our distant descendants may look like. Because of this, many have asked me 
what the forecasts in this book suggest about what our distant descendants 
may look like.
Unfortunately, the forecasts in this book say little about this fascinating 
and important topic. To usefully guess what very advanced aliens may look 
like, we’d need to say something about what our descendants may look like 
in an objective million or billion years. But the em era may plausibly last 
only a year or two in objective time, after which it is likely to be supplanted 
by yet another era, as different from the em era as it is from our time.
As our descendants will likely pass through a great many distinct eras in 
the next millions or billions of years, knowing what the next era may look 
like doesn’t obviously tell us substantially more about what our very distant 
descendants may look like than knowing current or past eras. Figuring out 
the next era is a good first step down that important road, but it still remains 
a very long road. I have elsewhere considered what our theories say about 
the appearance of our very distant descendants, but those analyses have little 
to do with the subject of this book (Hanson 2008a).


367
 C H A P T E R  2 9
 Choices
 evaluation
 ow that we have spent most of this book gaining a better idea of 
what a future em world might look like, we can start to ask: is this 
a good or a bad scenario? Would we want to encourage or dis-
courage having this world replace our world? What small changes 
might make this world better?
 Many people just don’t care much about the non-immediate future, mak-
ing their evaluation of the em era very simple; it is a big zero to them no 
matter how it plays out. Others care mainly about the very distant future, so 
the em era mainly matters to them via how it might infl uence the ages that 
follow. But alas that topic is beyond the scope of this book. So let us consider 
now how we might evaluate the em era itself, if we cared about it.
 Our evaluation of the em era depends, of course, on the criteria we use. 
One simple option is to use the usual intuitive criteria that most people 
seem to use when they verbally evaluate a distant future. A recent study of 
people evaluating diff erent possible futures for 2050 found that their main 
consideration or concern was how warm and moral future people would be 
( Bain et al. 2013 ).
 Th at is, most people surveyed cared little about the future of population, 
pleasure, wealth, poverty, freedom, suicide, terrorism, crime, poverty, home-
lessness, disease, skills, laziness, or progress in science and technology. Th ey 
cared a bit more about future self-discipline, humility, respect for tradition, 
equality, meaning in life, and protection of the environment. But mostly 
people cared about future benevolence: how honest, sincere, warm, caring, 
and friendly future people would be.
N

choices
368
This pattern of responses makes sense if people tend to think about the far 
future abstractly, and if abstract modes of thinking function in part to help 
us make good social impressions about our views on morality (Liberman 
and Trope 2008; Hanson 2009; Torelli and Kaikati 2009). By emphasizing 
whether future folks follow standard social norms, we show our respect for 
those norms.
Em clans with reputations to protect will work to ensure the trust-
worthiness and reliability of clan members, and em teams will often work to 
ensure strong warm emotional bonds between team members. This suggests 
that an em future may rate relatively high on this key standard criterion of 
benevolence.
In contrast, this em future may rate poorly on the criteria of affirming our 
local political and moral values, that is, those that dominate during our time 
and place in the industrial era. As discussed in Chapter 26, Farmer-Like 
section, ems are likely to return to more farmer-like values, compared with 
the more forager-like values popular today. The em world is especially likely 
to be rated poorly by those who feel that civilization was a mistake, and that 
humanity was better off as simple farmers or foragers (Zerzan 2005). After 
all, the em world may plausibly be considered as “civilization version 3.0,” 
after the farming and industrial versions. Being a competitive world, the em 
future may also rate low on the criteria of preventing values from changing 
further in the eras that follow this em era. I discuss the evaluation of em 
morality changes more in Chapter 30, Conclusion section.
Consider the issue of diversity. How well the em world rates on diversity 
depends a lot on what kinds of diversity matter. On the one hand, most ems 
may descend from only a few hundred or fewer humans who are quite unu­
sual, because they are unusually productive. Ems may also be selected quite 
non-uniformly from todays’ regions, ethnicities, religions, personalities, and 
genders. The entire non-human biosphere may be severely neglected in the 
em world. On the other hand, compared with ordinary humans today, des­
cendants of those initial ems may radiate out and populate a much larger 
space of possible bodies, ways of living, topics of interest, and mental styles 
and capacities.
What if we look instead at the virtues that have been admired in most eras 
and cultures, such as intelligence, insight, benevolence, loyalty, determina­
tion, etc.? Here the em world can look very good. Ems are strongly selected 

evaluation
369
for their impressive productivity, which tends to correlate with most of these 
virtues. In this sense, the em world is packed full of people who are more 
virtuous than most people so far have ever met in a lifetime.
Another way to evaluate the em world is in terms of existential risk, that 
is, the chance of a disaster so big that civilization is destroyed and can never 
rise again. Such a disaster harms not only everyone living in the world at 
the time, but also everyone who might have lived afterward, until either 
a similar disaster later, or the end of the universe. This is plausibly a very 
large harm.
If we compare an em era with a continuation of the industrial era without 
ems, the em civilization quickly has vastly more economic power, and so 
all else equal is better able to withstand physical disasters like earthquakes, 
asteroids, or volcanoes, events whose size and chances aren’t much influ­
enced by the existence of ems. The em era might induce more biological 
disasters such as pandemics, chemical pollution, or global warming, but it 
seems vastly better able to withstand such things.
The ability of an em civilization to withstand war or other unspecified 
social collapses depends on the size of the smallest unit of industrial produc­
tion able to restart em civilization after a severe collapse. Local production 
implies this is no larger than an em city, but with nanotech factories this 
smallest unit might be as small as a few kilograms, which would make ems 
very hard to exterminate.
Some disasters, such as disobedient AI, may only be possible when rele­
vant technologies reach a particular level. In this case we want to compare 
scenarios with the same technology levels, but reached via different paths. 
For example, we might compare reaching human level AI via an em path, or 
via a long continuation of the industrial era. In this case we might note that 
fast ems could directly monitor and react to an AI at a much higher time 
resolution.
Some will want to evaluate an em-dominated future primarily in terms of 
its outcomes for ordinary humans who have not become ems. Measured in 
absolute consumption terms, humans in the em world are likely to do very 
well for a few years, although longer-term outcomes hinge on unknowns 
about instabilities of the em civilization, and about what eras may follow the 
em era. To the extent that relative status is important, humans fare worse, as 
they are no longer the dominant group. But if ordinary humans see ems as 

choices
370
human enough to be jealous of em status, perhaps ems are human enough 
to count for value as well.
It is important to realize that people today have a choice about who in the 
em world to consider as their descendants, or to care about. We today may 
choose to consider only ordinary humans as descendants, or we can choose 
to include ems as well. Some people may even see non-em-based artificial 
intelligence software as their descendants (Moravec 1988). The universe 
doesn’t tell us what aspects of future creatures we must care about; that is 
up to us.
How will non-human biological nature fare in an em world? Here the 
long-run prospects for the natural world look poor. While the em economy 
at first focuses on a few dense cities, its rapid growth rate suggests that it 
and its descendant economies could fill the Earth within a few objective 
decades. While charities may pay to keep a few small nature preserves, the 
resources available for such efforts are likely be tiny compared with the eco­
nomic pressures to use available resources to support the growing economy.
This em future can look pretty good in terms of utilitarian evaluation 
criteria, such as how many people have how much happiness, meaning, 
or satisfaction of their preferences. This is because the em world can hold 
many billions and perhaps trillions of human-like creatures, many of whom 
experience subjective years in the time that ordinary humans experience a 
subjective day. So if the life of an em counts even a small fraction as much as 
does a typical life today, then the fact that there are so many ems could make 
for a big increase in total happiness or meaning relative to our world today.
quality of life
In fact, em lives do plausibly have a value that is at least a substantial fraction 
of the value of our lives today.
This is in part because societies and cultures don’t usually make that much 
difference to individual happiness, meaning, and satisfaction. Anthropologists 
have long known that humans are quite plastic culturally, in that we can come 
to accept and be comfortable with a rather wide range of cultural norms and 
practices. Today, happiness varies by four times as much within nations as it does 
between nations, and 95% of national differences in happiness are explained 
by income, lifespans, corruption, friendship rates, and a sense of freedom 

quality of life
371
(Helliwell et al. 2013). Even if ems have low income by some measures, they 
could still have long lives, great freedom, strong friends, and low corruption. In 
fact, ems might have deeper connections to friends and lovers than we do, via 
thousands of copies of the same pair who have all long gotten along well.
In addition, we have several concrete reasons to expect ems to be happy. 
First, em clans can share the experiences of clan members to better learn 
what makes that clan happy. Because of this, ems know themselves much 
better than we do today, and they can use this self-knowledge to increase 
their comfort, satisfaction, meaning, and happiness. Second, the em world 
has beautiful, spacious, luxurious entertainment and surroundings, and ems 
needn’t have any sickness, pain, hunger, or grime. Furthermore, em enter­
tainment and surroundings can be tailored specifically for particular clans. 
The clan of George, for example, can afford to have movies and interior 
decorations designed specifically to the taste of George.
Third, ems are strongly selected from among ordinary humans for their 
high work productivity. Today, the people who are more productive, as indi­
cated by their higher wages, also tend to be happier, and this correlation does 
not seem to be entirely a result of money causing happiness. It seems that 
happiness also causes productivity, and that common factors cause both. 
This weakly suggests that ems will tend to be happier than people today.
This suggestion is strengthened by the fact that pretty much all of the 
specific factors that today correlate with happiness also correlate with work 
productivity, even controlling for many other such factors. For example, 
people today tend to be both happier and more productive when they have 
jobs, autonomy at work, health, beauty, money, marriage, religion, intelli­
gence, extroversion, conscientiousness, agreeableness, and non-neuroticism 
(Myers and Diener 1995; Lykken and Tellegen 1996; Steen 1996; Nguyen 
et al. 2003; Barrick 2005; Roberts et al. 2007; Sutin et al. 2009; Erdogan 
et al. 2012; Diener 2013; Ali et al. 2013; Stutzer and Frey 2013).
Of course correlation isn’t causation, and there is much we don’t under­
stand here. Even so, the consistency of the relationship between happiness 
and productivity gives us much reason to hope that more productive ems 
may on average be happier than people today. Yes, perhaps work productiv­
ity makes people happier by raising their relative status, and by definition 
relative status can’t rise for everyone. But even in that case, relative status 
can’t fall overall either, to hurt overall happiness.

choices
372
What about the fact that ems work long hours? On the negative side, 
compared with other activities people who are interrupted at work (or while 
commuting or doing chores) for a survey report the lowest moods, more 
often say that they would rather be doing something else, and more often 
(20% of the time) have a dominant emotion that is negative. Workers report 
being happier on the weekend (Miner et al. 2005; Kahneman and Krueger 
2006; Bryson and MacKerron 2015; Helliwell and Wang 2015).
On the positive side, however, work activities seem to be associated with 
average activation and involvement, over 80% of us today report that we 
are overall satisfied with our jobs, and over 60% report that our jobs are 
meaningful in making the world a better place (Hektner et al. 2007; Soci­
ety for Human Resource Management 2012). Returning to work after 
an injury boosts life satisfaction, as does doing extra work after officially 
retiring (Vestling et al. 2003). Work adds to our life satisfaction via job and 
career satisfaction, coworker relations, power, prestige, and prospects for 
growth (Erdogan et al. 2012). Most people today who are very respected 
and envied work long hours, and very much enjoy their lives.
Ems may be punished more at work, have to face more objective per­
formance evaluations, and feel more stress from small margins between 
wages and living expenses. Even so, ems are selected for being relatively 
comfortable with such lives, and their virtual worlds can cheaply provide 
great “material” comfort both on and off the job. Also, much life meaning 
can be found in the strong bonds ems feel with clans, teams, professions, 
and cities, in their excellent and unprecedented abilities, and in the great 
accomplishments these abilities will enable.
The em world outcome would look terrible on hedonistic utilitarian cri­
teria if most ems ended up being non-conscious, in the sense of not having 
any integrated experiences. As discussed in Chapter 4, Emulations section, 
this seems quite unlikely in the early em era, but this topic is beyond the 
scope of this book.
policy
This book has focused on elaborating a baseline em scenario, with scenario 
features chosen to be relatively likely, when such options are available, and 

policy
373
otherwise with features chosen to be simple and easier to analyze. If this 
were actually our most likely future, what policies should we prefer to make 
the em world a better future?
First note that we should expect this policy task to be very challenging. 
For a comparison, imagine that someone in the year 1000 A.D. had been 
able to infer the basic outlines of our industrial world. Even accomplish­
ing that difficult task might not tell them enough to offer useful advice on 
industrial world policy, or on what people in 1000 A.D. could do to push 
industrial policy in a good direction.
Second, note that in the absence of a strong world government, we have 
only very limited abilities to coordinate to change the future. Even on topics 
like climate change, with strong expert consensus on the existence of the 
problem and plausible solutions, the world seems incapable of coordinating 
to implement those solutions. This suggests that we focus our policy efforts 
on small changes that are feasible, instead of big changes that are not. So, 
what small feasible changes to this scenario could make for a better em 
world?
Speeding the development of cell modeling abilities, so that such model­
ing is not the last required technology to be ready, could both advance this 
scenario, and minimize disruptions from an overly rapid transition to an 
em economy. Also, transition risks to ordinary humans might be reduced 
by encouraging the creation and use of international diversified investment 
funds of stocks and real estate, and also of “em bonds” that mature only if an 
em world appears. Allowing widespread investments in new em ventures, 
instead of outlawing such ventures or investments, would also help by allow­
ing everyone to gain from the growth of the new em economy.
If the em world is nearly inevitable, then it would be good if literary 
and public conversations frame it as something to be accepted, and perhaps 
nudged into preferred directions, instead of as something to be aggressively 
resisted.
If the em world is not inevitable, policy choices become more complex. 
While there would be plenty of advanced warning that an em world may be 
coming, such warnings might not be able to predict exactly when. The tran­
sition to an em world could be quite rapid, while most organizations capable 
of enacting substantial global scale policies act only after long delays.

choices
374
During the early transition, it could help to encourage ems to share 
their financial, legal, and political institutions with ordinary humans as 
deeply as possible for as long as possible, to reduce later temptations to 
expropriate human property. To reduce distrust arising from feelings of an 
illicit domination of the em world by descendants of particular subgroups 
of ordinary humans, it could also help if a wide diversity of people were 
scanned early and tested for suitability as em workers. It might also help if 
initial scanning to create ems was in part a gift from the rest of humanity, 
rather than having been resisted by humanity. This might help ems to later 
feel gratitude and obligation toward ordinary humans, instead of hostility 
and resentment. An early period of humans enslaving ems would set an 
especially bad precedent.
Early events may also influence the number of em cities and their dis­
tances from each other. If city scale economies allow it, then having only 
one em city or a few close cities would probably be most efficient, except 
that this might risk a single bad political regime mismanaging the entire em 
world. If it is important enough to avoid such a centralized bad political out­
come, then political and economic competition between a few sufficiently 
separated cities might be better. Some say a lack of centralized government 
is why the industrial revolution first appeared in Europe, and not in the 
more technically advanced but more centralized China.
If a thousand or fewer em clans end up dominating the em economy, then 
almost all ordinary humans hoping to found successful em clans face an 
overwhelming chance of failure. Ordinary humans or early em clans could 
insure against this risk by making formal agreements to have clans that suc­
ceed share their gains with clans who do not. While interest in such insur­
ance might signal a lack of confidence in one’s future prospects, given these 
long odds, few clans could reasonably have much confidence of success. It 
might be good to encourage such clan success insurance to reduce clan risk.
Basic economic theory suggests a number of possible “market failures,” 
that is, common ways in which economies tend to be inefficient. Without 
some reason to think otherwise, we should suspect that em economies will 
be inefficient in these ways.
For example, the fact that others lose status when we gain status suggests 
that too much effort is put into raising one’s status at the expense of the 
status of others. As a result, ems may run too fast, and invest too much in 

policy
375
impressive early life achievements. The fact that others gain when we add 
to urban activity density suggests that cities tend to not be built densely 
enough. As a result, local builders in em cities may make design choices 
resulting in an excessively low population density. Signaling issues suggest 
that the terms of private insurance and law choices will slant too far toward 
the preferences of cheap-to-serve customers. Product differentiation issues 
suggest tendencies toward too much product variety and spatial market 
segmentation. So em workers may have overly varied skill specializations. 
Quality choice issues suggest that the quality of the highest quality products 
is not high enough. So ems may invest too little in the quality of their high­
est quality workers (Shy 1996).
In general, would-be early settlers of new territories, whether these ter­
ritories are parts of physical space or abstract product or labor markets, have 
incentives to spend too much on their early colonization efforts, unless there 
are big ways in which these first-movers benefit others, such as via innova­
tion. This suggests that ems may spend too much on settling new physical 
territories, or on new product and labor-market territories. In general, the 
ability to make strategic commitments tends to result in excess costs from 
commitments. This suggests that negotiations between clans forming teams 
and firms may suffer costs from excess strategic commitments.
It would be good for policy actions to counter all these likely market 
failures, although it is not clear how this can be done.
Ems might spend too much time in work, relative to leisure, because 
of signaling pressures. More leisure could be encouraged by tying taxes to 
income, rather than to em speed, that is, taxing work but not leisure.
Some of us should spend some effort to analyze and anticipate the em 
world, as I have attempted in this book. Another obvious suggestion is to 
track related developments to gain more advanced warnings about when a 
transition to an em economy may occur, and about the places and industries 
where that transition may be initially concentrated.
Other policy options are to subsidize the development of related tech­
nologies to speed the arrival of this transition, and to subsidize its smooth­
ness, equality, or transparency to reduce disruptions and inequalities in that 
transition. One might also subsidize or provide insurance against these vari­
ations. A smooth transition might be encouraged via speeding the develop­
ment of scanning and cell modeling relative to computer power.

choices
376
This section has only scratched the surface of possible relevant policy 
analysis. But it is very hard to analyze policy for a world about which one 
knows almost nothing. That is why positive analysis, of likely outcomes if we 
do nothing special, took first priority in this book.
charity
The previous section considered the policies that we might together agree 
are good for society overall. This section considers what an individual might 
do personally to promote good policy regarding an em world.
Most of the usual ways to promote good policy today continue to apply. 
One might strive to become influential in a relevant world of policy, busi­
ness, or technology. One might personally work to identify good policies and 
then advocate for them. One might also try to create groups of like-minded 
people organized specifically around the idea of identifying and advocating 
for good em policies. Or, as today very few are interested in em policy, it 
might make more sense to join existing groups defined around other related 
themes, and encourage those groups to direct more of their efforts toward 
identifying and advocating good em policy.
Those still young enough to be able to start or change careers might 
consider not immediately focusing on related areas of em technology, 
business, policy analysis, or advocacy. Such people might instead learn to 
acquire more general skills, while practicing mostly on other topics. They 
might then focus more on em-related areas as their skills increased and as 
opportunities arose.
While Bill and Melinda Gates are not medical experts, they have nev­
ertheless had a big impact on medical research. Similarly, the people most 
interested in analyzing and promoting good em policy may well not be 
the people whose personal abilities and work preferences are best suited 
to personally and directly working on em technology, business, policy 
analysis, or advocacy. Such people might instead want to do other types 
of work better suited to their abilities and preferences, and then donate 
money to specialists. However, such people need to do enough research 
to identify plausibly expert and well-motivated specialists, and to suf­
ficiently monitor their activities to confirm that these specialists deserve 
funding.

success
377
Given that the em transition is probably many decades away, an especially 
attractive alternative is to save now to help later. That is, invest time and 
energy now in the usual ways, to enable you to spend time and money later 
on charity. As investment rates of return have been consistently higher than 
economic growth rates, this strategy allows one to have a proportionally 
larger influence later than one could have now.
By first accumulating assets, one can retain many options regarding future 
action. For example, one can wait to decide between becoming personally 
involved in policy analysis and advocacy, or donating money to support 
other policy specialists. Also, as we learn more over time about the em world 
and its issues, we should be able to better direct our aid to be more effective. 
We might even later switch to focusing on non-em causes, if the em scen­
ario comes to seem less likely or important than it once did.
Because this strategy allows one to retain many options about how to 
spend one’s money later, it can help many future causes, not just those 
dealing with an em world. Some have criticized this strategy, saying that 
increasing wealth and peace means that the future will have far fewer worthy 
causes and people worth helping. However, if an em world is coming, then 
wealth per em will fall greatly, making it likely that there will then be plenty 
of deserving creatures in need of help.
If you expect that the em transition may occur after you are dead, you 
might also consider saving to donate money to others after you die. In this 
case, it becomes harder to arrange for the monitoring of the recipients of 
your donations, to ensure that they are doing what you would want. And in 
addition our society has placed substantial legal barriers that make it hard 
to control your funds after your death. Even so, this might still be the best 
available strategy.
In sum, there are many ways for individuals to work to help to deal with 
the possible coming of an em world.
success
What if you want to know, not how to help create a better em world, but 
how to help you and your associates personally succeed in this new world?
To avoid the worst possible outcomes, expect all of your abilities to 
earn wages as a human to quickly disappear after an em transition. Well 

choices
378
before this happens, seek out substitute sources of income. Accumulate and 
diversify a financial portfolio of assets likely to retain value, such as stocks, 
real estate, and intellectual property. Also accumulate and diversify a social 
portfolio of supports and connections. Both your financial and social assets 
should be tied to communities that are likely to thrive or at least survive in 
an em world. Try to be included in geographic regions, nations, professions, 
standards, etc., that are likely to cooperate with and add value to this new 
world, and avoid those that may pick fights with it.
If, relative to other investors, you have a comparative expertise in analyz­
ing investments, then you might seek and invest in underpriced em-related 
assets. These are assets expected to be worth a lot in an em world, but where 
that is not reflected in the current price. For example, real estate near likely 
em city locations is currently underpriced. However, one should set a high 
bar for whether one is expert enough; the vast majority of financial traders 
today lose because they overconfidently see themselves as sufficiently expert.
As successful clans collect a big fraction of the gains in the em world, you 
should consider the possibility that you (or your children or grandchildren) 
might start one of these few most copied em clans. Realizing that the odds 
are greatly against you, you should be willing to take great risks to achieve 
this, via showing high and reliable productivity and flexibility in tasks and 
environments most like those of the em world. You should focus on the very 
high tail of your possible success distribution; the rest of the distribution 
makes much less difference. Go very big or go home.
If you or your associates (such as descendants) will be old at the time 
of the em transition, then try to have them be very productive and at the 
peak of their career ability, and be productive at tasks where a great many 
customers could be quickly served by ems doing that task. This would give 
you the best chance to be one of the very first highly copied ems. If you 
might be dead by the time of the em transition, you might consider becom­
ing a cryonics customer, and then declaring your wish to be revived as an em 
when this becomes technically possible.
In contrast, if you or your associates will be young at the time of the em 
transition, try to time their age to be the ideal age for new em scans during 
the early em era. Consider accepting the risks that come from destructive 
scanning. Before that age, have them collect visible indications of their gen­
eral ability to learn useful skills and do valuable tasks. They should also show 

success
379
that they get along with people much like themselves, and that they value 
life and grit when life is hard and alien. Teach these virtues to your chil­
dren and grandchildren. Such young people might then have a chance to 
become successful ems during the early em era, when a high value is placed 
on youthful flexibility.
To the extent that young em candidates prepare for specific jobs, have 
them prepare for the em jobs and professions that will be in the most 
demand in the em world, instead of the jobs that pay the most in our world. 
Remember that, compared with our world, em wages won’t vary nearly as 
much with the intelligence or status associated with the job. Remember also 
that ems use fewer tools and supporting capital than do ordinary humans in 
comparable jobs just before the em transition.
In sum, to succeed in this new world, prepare to become what it needs.


381
C H A P T E R  3 0
Finale
critics
ver 150 readers have commented on previous drafts of this book. 
Here are very quick summaries of some of their most common 
criticisms. Most individual views are of course subtler than these 
summaries can be.
If we include those who declined to read my draft, the most common 
complaint is probably “who cares?” Many just can’t see why they should 
want to know much detail about the lives of people who are not they, their 
children, or grandchildren. While many readers seem interested in the lives 
of past people who were not personally their ancestors, perhaps these read­
ers make up only a small fraction of the population.
Other readers doubt that one can ever estimate the social consequences 
of technologies decades in advance. It is not so much that these readers have 
specific complaints about my analyses. Instead, they have a general skep­
ticism that makes them uninterested in considering such analyses. Many 
see human behavior as intrinsically inscrutable, and many doubt that social 
science exists as a source of reliable insight. A few are offended by the very 
idea of estimating social outcomes, as they see this as denying our free will 
and ability to choose our futures.
A more specific version of this sort of criticism accepts that it is often 
possible for us to foresee social consequences in worlds like ours, but then 
says that it is impossible to foresee the social behaviors of creatures substan­
tially smarter than us. So, they reason, we today cannot see past the future 
point in time when typical descendants become smarter than we are today, 
O

finale
382
and ems are effectively smarter than us in several ways. This view suggests 
that social scientists today are less able to predict the behavior of smarter 
people, or of people who are smarter than the typical social scientist. That 
seems incorrect to me.
Still other readers accept my social analysis, but are disappointed that I 
consider only the next great era, and not the eras that may follow it. These 
readers mainly care about the long-term future. They reject my argument 
that understanding the em era is a good first step to understanding the eras 
that may follow it. They prefer other ways to analyze the distant future, 
ways that depend little on what will happen between now and then. I am 
more skeptical about our ability to foresee endpoints without at least outlin­
ing the paths between here and there.
Many doubt that brain emulations will be our next huge technology 
change, and aren’t interested in analyses of the consequences of any big 
change except the one they personally consider most likely or interesting. 
Many of these people expect traditional artificial intelligence, that is, hand-
coded software, to achieve broad human level abilities before brain emu­
lations appear. I think that past rates of progress in coding smart software 
suggest that at previous rates it will take two to four centuries to achieve 
broad human level abilities via this route. These critics often point to excit­
ing recent developments, such as advances in “deep learning,” that they 
think make prior trends irrelevant.
More generally, some critics fault me for insufficiently crediting new 
trends that they expect will soon revolutionize society, even if we don’t yet 
see strong supporting evidence of these trends. Such revolutions include 
robots taking most jobs, local sourcing replacing mass production, small 
firms replacing big ones, worker cooperatives replacing for-profits, ability 
tests replacing school degrees, and 3D printers replacing manufacturing 
plants. I will believe these trends may actually be revolutionary when I more 
clearly see that they are actually happening at a substantial scale.
A vocal minority of critics see economics as a fundamentally mistaken 
social science, and thus usually wrong. While such critics can see the point 
of estimating social consequences using other social sciences, they have little 
interest in economic analysis of anything.
Finally, some critics fault me for neglecting the “unknown unknowns.” 
That is, they say my forecasts don’t sufficiently account for unforeseen 

conclusion
383
changes and innovations that will arise later. Apparently they think one 
should just say, “The future will be strange,” and resist the urge to add more 
detail, except perhaps for telling strange vivid stories that claim no accuracy 
or analysis. To me, this view seems needlessly pessimistic regarding our abil­
ities to do useful analysis. Yes, efforts like this book can be badly mistaken, 
and we should avoid overconfidence. Even so, we should try.
In sum, even though many critics have reasonable points, I still think the 
analysis in this book was worth the effort.
conclusion
Parents sometimes disown their children, on the grounds that those chil­
dren have betrayed key parental values. If parents have the sort of values that 
children could deeply betray, it does make sense for parents to watch out for 
such betrayal, and to be ready if needed to adopt extreme responses, such as 
disowning their children.
But surely parents who feel inclined to disown their children should be 
encouraged to study those children carefully before doing this. For example, 
parents considering whether to disown their child for working for a cigar­
ette manufacturer, or for refusing to fight in a war for their nation, should 
wonder to what extent anti-smoking or patriotism really are their core val­
ues, as opposed to merely revisable opinions in support of other more-core 
values. Such parents would be wise to study the lives and opinions of their 
children in some detail before choosing to disown them.
When they have lived as neighbors, foragers have often strongly criticized 
farmer culture, and farmers have often strongly criticized industrial culture. 
Surely many of these people have been tempted to disown descendants who 
adopt these despised new ways. In addition, many of your ancestors would 
be tempted to disown you, if they were told many things about you. While 
they’d be pleased and impressed by many of your features, other things about 
you might horrify them.
So, should your forager or farmer ancestors have disowned you? While 
such disowning might have held them true to some core values, I expect 
that you would have advised them to consider your life and views carefully, 
in some detail, before choosing to disown you. Disowning should not be 
done casually.

finale
384
The analysis in this book suggests that lives in the next great era may be 
as different from our lives as our lives are from farmers’ lives, or farmers’ 
lives are from foragers’ lives. Many readers of this book, living industrial 
era lives and sharing industrial era values, may be disturbed to see a forecast 
of em era descendants with choices and life styles that appear to reject many 
of the values that they hold dear. Such readers may be tempted to fight to 
prevent the em future, perhaps preferring a continuation of the industrial 
era. Such readers may be correct that rejecting the em future holds them 
true to their core values.
But I advise such readers to first try hard to see this new era in some detail 
from the point of view of its typical residents. See what they enjoy and what 
fills them with pride, and listen to their criticisms of your era and values. 
This book has been designed in part to assist you in such a soul-searching 
examination. If after reading this book, you still feel compelled to disown 
your em descendants, I cannot say you are wrong. My job, first and foremost, 
has been to help you see your descendants clearly, warts and all.

385
references
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Claire Lelarge, John Van Reenen, and 
Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2007. “Technology, Information, and the Decentralization of 
the Firm.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(4): 1759–1799.
Ahlfeldt, Gabriel, Stephen Redding, Daniel Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf. 2015. “The 
Economics of Density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall.” Econometrics 83(6): 
2127–2189.
Albright, Richard. 2002. “What Can Past Technology Forecasts Tell Us about the 
Future?” Technological Forecasting and Social Change 69: 443–464.
Alesina, Alberto, Silvia Ardagna, Giuseppe Nicoletti, and Fabio Schiantarelli. 2005. 
“Regulation and Investment.” Journal of the European Economic Association 3(4): 
791–825.
Alesina, Alberto, and Paola Giuliano. 2014. “Family Ties.” In Handbook of Economic 
Growth 2A, 177–216, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf. 
Amsterdam: North Holland.
Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn. 2013. “On the Origins of 
Gender Roles: Women and the Plough.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(2): 
469–530.
Ali, Afia, Gareth Ambler, Andre Strydom, Dheeraj Rai, Claudia Cooper, Sally 
McManus, Scott Weich, H. Meltzer, Simon Dein, and Angela Hassiotis. 2013. 
“The Relationship between Happiness and Intelligent Quotient: The Contribution 
of Socio-economic and Clinical Factors.” Psychological Medicine 43(6): 1303–1312.
Allen, Douglas, and Yoram Barzel. 2011. “The Evolution of Criminal Law and 
Police during the Pre-modern Era.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 
27(3): 540–567.
Almeida, Heitor, and Daniel Ferriera. 2002. “Democracy and the Variability of 
Economic Performance.” Economics and Politics 14(3): 225–257.
Alston, Julian, Matthew Andersen, Jennifer James, and Philip Pardey. 2011. “The 
Economic Returns to U.S. Public Agricultural Research.” American Journal of 
Agricultural Economics 93(5): 1257–1277.
Alstott, Jeff. 2013. “Will We Hit a Wall? Forecasting Bottlenecks to Whole Brain 
Emulation Development.” Journal of Artificial General Intelligence 4(3): 153–163.

references
386
Alvanchi, Amin, SangHyun Lee, and Simaan AbouRizk. 2012. “Dynamics of 
Working Hours in Construction.” Journal of Construction Engineering and 
Management 138(1): 66–77.
Alwin, Duane, and Jon Krosnick. 1991. “Aging, Cohorts, and the Stability of 
Sociopolitical Orientations Over the Life Span.” American Journal of Sociology 
97(1): 169–195.
Anderson, David. 1999. “The Aggregate Burden of Crime.” Journal of Law and 
Economics 42(2): 611–642.
Angier, Natalie. 2005. “Almost Before We Spoke, We Swore.” New York Times, 
September 20.
Anwar, Shamena, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson. 2014. “The Role of Age in 
Jury Selection and Trial Outcomes.” Journal of Law and Economics 57(4): 1001–1030.
Aral, Sinan, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Marshall Van Alstyne. 2007. “Information, 
Technology and Information Worker Productivity: Task Level Evidence.” NBER 
Working Paper No. 13172, June.
Aral, Sinan, and Dylan Walker. 2012. “Identifying Influential and Susceptible 
Members of Social Networks.” Science 337(6092): 337–341.
Armstrong, Stuart, and Kaj Sotala. 2012. “How We’re Predicting AI—or Failing to.” 
In Beyond AI: Artificial Dreams, edited by J. Romportl, P. Ircing, E. Zackova, M. 
Polak, and R. Schuster, 52–75. Pilsen: University of West Bohemia.
Arnfield, A. John. 2003. “Two Decades of Urban Climate Research: A Review 
of Turbulence, Exchanges of Energy and Water, and the Urban Heat Island.” 
International Journal of Climatology 23: 1–26.
Arnott, Richard. 2004. “Does the Henry George Theorem Provide a Practical 
Guide to Optimal City Size?” American Journal of Economics and Sociology 63(5): 
1057–1090.
Ashenfelter, Orley, Kirk Doran, and Bruce Schaller. 2010. “A Shred of Credible 
Evidence on the Long Run Elasticity of Labor Supply.” Economica 77(308): 
637–650.
Ashton, Michael, Kibeom Lee, Philip Vernon, and Kerry Jang. 2000. “Fluid 
Intelligence, Crystallized Intelligence, and the Openness/Intellect Factor.” 
Journal of Research in Personality 34(2): 198–207.
Asker, John, Joan Farre-Mensa, and Alexander Ljungqvist. 2011. “Comparing the 
Investment Behavior of Public and Private Firms.” NBER Working Paper No. 
17394, September.
Asker, John, Joan Farre-Mensa, and Alexander Ljungqvist. 2015. “Corporate 
Investment and Stock Market Listing: A Puzzle?” Review of Financial Studies 
28(2): 342–390.

references
387
Assiotis, Andreas, and Kevin Sylwester. 2015. “Does Law and Order Attenuate the 
Benefits of Democracy on Economic Growth?” Economica 82(328): 644–670.
Atkinson, Quentin, and Harvey Whitehouse. 2011. “The Cultural Morphospace of 
Ritual Form: Examining Modes of Religiosity Cross-Culturally.” Evolution and 
Human Behavior 32(1): 50–62.
Aucoin, Michael, and Richard Wassersug. 2006. “The Sexuality and Social 
Performance of Androgen-deprived (Castrated) Men Throughout History: 
Implications for Modern Day Cancer Patients.” Social Science and Medicine 63: 
3162–3173.
Axtell, Robert. 2001. “Zipf Distribution of US Firm Sizes.” Science 293(5536): 
1818–1820.
Baghestani, Hamid, and Michael Malcolm. 2014. “Marriage, Divorce and 
Economic Activity in the US: 1960–2008.” Applied Economics Letters 21(8): 
528–532.
Bain, Paul, Matthew Hornsey, Renata Bongiorno, Yoshihisa Kashima, and Daniel 
Crimston. 2013. “Collective Futures: How Projections About the Future of 
Society Are Related to Actions and Attitudes Supporting Social Change.” 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 39(4): 523–539.
Baird, Benjamin, Jonathan Smallwood, Michael Mrazek, Julia Kam, Michael 
Franklin, and Jonathan Schooler.  2012.  “Inspired by Distraction: Mind Wandering 
Facilitates Creative Incubation.” Psychological Science 23(10): 1117–1122.
Banker, Rajiv, Seok-Young Lee, Gordon Potter, and Dhinu Srinivasan. 2000. “An 
Empirical Analysis of Continuing Improvements Following the Implementation 
of a Performance-based Compensation Plan.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 
30(3): 315–350.
Barberis, Nicholas. 2013. “Thirty Years of Prospect Theory in Economics: A Review 
and Assessment.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 27(1): 173–196.
Barker, Eric. 2015a. “How To Be Compassionate: 3 Research-Backed Steps To 
A Happier Life.” Barking Up The Wrong Tree blog. January 18. http://www.
bakadesuyo.com/2015/01/how-to-be-compassionate.
Barker, Eric. 2015b. “A Navy SEAL Explains 8 Secrets to Grit and Resilience.” 
Barking Up The Wrong Tree blog. January 31. http://www.bakadesuyo.
com/2015/01/grit.
Barrick, Murray. 2005. “Yes, Personality Matters: Moving on to More Important 
Matters.” Human Performance 18(4): 359–372.
Baruch, Yehuda, and Stuart Jenkins. 2007. “Swearing at Work and Permissive 
Leadership Culture.” Leadership and Organization Development Journal 28(6): 
492–507.

references
388
Baten, Joerg, Nicola Bianchi, and Petra Moser. 2015. “Does Compulsory Licensing 
Discourage Invention? Evidence From German Patents After WWI.” NBER 
Working Paper No. 21442, July.
Bejan, Adrian. 1997. “Constructal Tree Network for Fluid Flow Between a Finite-
Size Volume and One Source or Sink.” Revue Générale de Thermique 36: 592–604.
Bejan, Adrian. 2006. Advanced Engineering Thermodynamics, 3rd ed. Wiley.
Bejan, Adrian, and James Marden. 2006. “Unifying Constructal Theory for Scale 
Effects in Running, Swimming and Flying.” Journal of Experimental Biology 209: 
238–248.
Bejan, Adrian, L.A.O. Rocha, and S. Lorente. 2000. “Thermodynamic Optimization 
of Geometry: T- and Y-shaped Constructs of Fluid Streams.” International 
Journal of Thermal Sciences 39: 949–960.
Bénabou, Roland, Davide Ticchi, and Andrea Vindigni. 2015. “Religion and 
Innovation.” NBER Working Paper No. 21052, March.
Benford, Gregory, and James Benford. 2013. Starship Century: Toward the Grandest 
Horizon. Lucky Bat Books, April.
Bengtson, Vern, Merril Silverstein, Norella Putney, and Susan Harris. 2015. “Does 
Religiousness Increase with Age? Age Changes and Generational Differences 
Over 35 Years.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 54(2): 363–379.
Bennett, Charles. 1989. “Time/Space Trade-offs for Reversible Computation.” 
SIAM Journal of Computing 18(4): 766–776.
Benson, Alan. 2014. “Rethinking the Two-Body Problem: The Segregation of 
Women Into Geographically Dispersed Occupations.” Demography 51(5): 
1619–1639.
Bento, Pedro, and Diego Restuccia. 2014. “Misallocation, Establishment Size, and 
Productivity.” University of Toronto Economics Working Paper 517, July 25.
Bermúdez, José Luis. 2010. Cognitive Science: An Introduction to the Science of the 
Mind. Cambridge University Press, August.
Bettencourt, Luís, José Lobo, Dirk Helbing, Christian Kühnert, and Geoffrey West. 
2007. “Growth, Innovation, Scaling, and the Pace of Life in Cities.” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Science USA 104(17): 7301–7306.
Bettencourt, Luís, José Lobo, D. Strumsky, and G.B. West. 2010. “Urban Scaling 
and Its Deviations: Revealing the Structure of Wealth, Innovation and Crime 
across Cities.” PLoS ONE 5(11): e13541.
Bickham, Jack M. 1997. The 38 Most Common Fiction Writing Mistakes (And How To 
Avoid Them). Writer’s Digest Books, September 15.
Blackman, Ivy, David Picken, and Chunlu Liu. 2008. “Height and Construction 
Costs of Residential Buildings in Hong Kong and Shanghai.” In Proceedings of 

references
389
the CIB W112 International Conference on Multi-National Construction Projects, 
Shanghai, November 23, 24, 1–18.
Block, Walter, N. Stephan Kinsella, and Hans-Hermann Hoppe. 2000. “The Second 
Paradox of Blackmail.” Business Ethics Quarterly 10(3): 593–622.
Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John 
Roberts. 2013. “Does Management Matter? Evidence from India.” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 128(1): 1–51.
Bloom, Nicholas, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. 2015. “Do Private Equity 
Owned Firms Have Better Management Practices?” American Economic Review 
105(5): 442–446.
Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. 2010. “Why Do Management Practices 
Differ across Firms and Countries?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 24(1): 203–224.
BLS 2012. “Employee Tenure in 2012.” United States Bureau of Labor Statistics 
USDL-12–1887, September 18. http://www.bls.gov/news.release/archives/
tenure_09182012.pdf.
Boehm, Christopher. 1999. Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian 
Behavior. Harvard University Press, December 1.
Bogdan, Paul, Tudor Dumitras, and Radu Marculescu. 2007. “Stochastic 
Communication: A New Paradigm for Fault-Tolerant Networks-on-Chip.” 
VLSI Design 2007: 95348.
Boning, Brent, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw. 2007. “Opportunity Counts: 
Teams and the Effectiveness of Production Incentives.” Journal of Labor Economics 
25(4): 613–650.
Bonke, Jens. 2012. “Do Morning-Type People Earn More than Evening-Type 
People? How Chronotypes Influence Income.” Annals of Economics and Statistics 
105/106: 55–72.
Boserup, Ester. 1981. Population and Technological Change: A Study of Long-Term 
Trends. University of Chicago Press, February.
Bostrom, Nick. 2004. “The Future of Human Evolution.” In Death and Anti-Death: 
Two Hundred Years After Kant, Fifty Years After Turing, edited by Charles Tandy, 
339–371. Palo Alto, CA: Ria University Press.
Bostrom, Nick. 2014. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford University 
Press, July 3.
Bouchard, Thomas, David Lykken, Matthew McGue, Nancy Segal, and Auke 
Tellegen. 1990. “Sources of Human Psychological Differences: The Minnesota 
Study of Twins Reared Apart.” Science 250(4978): 223–228.
Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis. 1976. Schooling in Capitalist America: 
Educational Reform and the Contradictions of Economic Life. Basic Books, January.

references
390
Braekevelt, Jonas, Frederik Buylaert, Jan Dumolyn, and Jelle Haemers. 2012. “The 
Politics of Factional Conflict in Late Medieval Flanders.” Historical Research 
85(227): 13–31.
Brain, Marshall. 2012. The Day You Discard Your Body. BYG Publishing, December 25.
Brassen, Stefanie, Matthias Gamer, Jan Peters, Sebastian Gluth, and Christian 
Büchel. 2012. “Don’t Look Back in Anger! Responsiveness to Missed Chances in 
Successful and Nonsuccessful Aging.” Science 336(6081): 612–614.
Braudel, Fernand. 1979. The Structures of Everyday Life. The Limits of the Possible, 
Volume 1. Harper & Row.
Brett, Michelle, Lesley Roberts, Thomas Johnson, and Richard Wassersug. 
2007. “Eunuchs in Contemporary Society: Expectations, Consequences, and 
Adjustments to Castration (Part II).” Journal of Sexual Medicine 4(4i): 946–955.
Brin, David. 1998. The Transparent Society: Will Technology Force Us to Choose Between 
Privacy and Freedom? Addison-Wesley. May 17.
Brin, David. 2002. Kiln People. Orbit. December 5.
Bronnenberg, Bart, Jean-Pierre Dubé, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2012. “The 
Evolution of Brand Preferences: Evidence From Consumer Migration.” American 
Economic Review 102(6): 2472–2508.
Bronnenberg, Bart, Jean-Pierre Dubé, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse Shapiro. 2014. 
“Do Pharmacists Buy Bayer? Informed Shoppers and the Brand Premium.” 
NBER Working Paper No. 20295, July.
Brooks, Rodney. 2014. “Artificial Intelligence is a Tool, Not a Threat.” Rethink 
Robotics blog, November 10. http://www.rethinkrobotics.com/artificial-
intelligence-tool-threat/.
Brown, Donald. 1991. Human Universals. Temple University Press, Philadelphia.
Brunetti, Aymo. 1997. “Political Variables in Cross-country Growth Analysis.” 
Journal of Economic Surveys 11(2): 163–190.
Bryson, Alex, and George MacKerron. 2015. “Are You Happy While You Work?” 
Economic Journal, in press.
Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, and Alastair Smith. 2011. The Dictator’s Handbook: Why 
Bad Behavior Is Almost Always Good Politics. Public Affairs, September 27.
Burda, Michael, Katie Genadek, and Daniel Hamermesh. 2016. “Not Working at 
Work: Loafing, Unemployment and Labor Productivity.” NBER Working Paper 
No. 21923, January.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2013. “Time Spent in Primary Activities and Percent 
of the Civilian Population Engaging in Each Activity, Averages per Day by Sex, 
2012 Annual Averages.” Bureau of Labor Statistics Economic News Release. 
June 20. http://www.bls.gov/news.release/atus.t01.htm.

references
391
Buterin, Vitalik. 2014. “White Paper: A Next-Generation Smart Contract and 
Decentralized Application Platform.” April. https://www.ethereum.org/pdfs/
EthereumWhitePaper.pdf.
Caplan, Bryan. 2008. “The Totalitarian Threat.” In Global Catastrophic Risks, edited 
by Nick Bostrom and Milan Ćirković, 504–519. Oxford University Press, July 17.
Caplan, Bryan, and Stephen Miller. 2010. “Intelligence Makes People Think Like 
Economists: Evidence from the General Social Survey.” Intelligence 38(6): 
636–647.
Card, Orson Scott. 2011. Elements of Fiction Writing—Characters and Viewpoint, 
2nd ed. Writer’s Digest Books. January 18.
Cardiff-Hicks, Brianna, Francine Lafontaine, and Kathryn Shaw. 2014. “Do 
Large Modern Retailers Pay Premium Wages?” NBER Working Paper No. 
20313, July.
Cardoso, Ana Rute, Paulo Guimarães, and José Varejão. 2011. “Are Older Workers 
Worthy of Their Pay? An Empirical Investigation of Age-Productivity and Age-
Wage Nexuses.” De Economist 159(2): 95–111.
Carlino, Gerald, and William Kerr. 2014. “Agglomeration and Innovation.” NBER 
Working Paper No. 20367, August, Forthcoming in Handbook of Regional and 
Urban Economics 5.
Carpenter, Christopher. 2008. “Sexual Orientation, Work, and Income in Canada.” 
Canadian Journal of Economics 41(4): 1239–1261.
Cavallera, G.M., and S. Giudici. 2008. “Morningness and Eveningness Personality: 
A Survey in Literature from 1995 up till 2006.” Personality and Individual 
Differences 44: 3–21.
Cederman, Lars-Erik. 2003. “Modeling the Size of Wars: From Billiard Balls to 
Sandpiles.” American Political Science Review 97(1): 135–150.
Chalfin, Aaron. 2014. “The Economic Costs of Crime.” In The Encyclopedia of Crime 
and Punishment, edited by Wesley Jennings. Wiley-Blackwell.
Chalmers, David. 2010. “The Singularity: A Philosophical Analysis.” Journal of 
Consciousness Studies 17: 7–65.
Chan, David. 2015 “The Efficiency of Slacking Off: Evidence from the Emergency 
Department.” NBER Working Paper No. 21002, March.
Charbonneau, Steven, Shannon Fye, Jason Hay, and Carie Mullins. 2013. “A 
Retrospective Analysis of  Technology Forecasting.” AIAA Space 2013 Conference, 
San Diego, September. http://arc.aiaa.org/doi/abs/10.2514/6.2013–5519.
Charness, Gary, Ryan Oprea, and Daniel Friedman. 2014. “Continuous Time and 
Communication in a Public-goods Experiment.” Journal of Economic Behavior 
and Organization 108(December): 212–223.

references
392
Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andrea Weber. 2011. “Are Micro 
and Macro Labor Supply Elasticities Consistent? A Review of Evidence on 
the Intensive and Extensive Margins.” American Economic Review 101(3): 
471–475.
Christensen, Clayton. 1997. The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause 
Great Firms to Fail. Harvard Business Press, June 1.
Church, Timothy, Diana Thomas, Catrine Tudor-Locke, Peter Katzmarzyk, Conrad 
Earnest, Ruben Rodarte, Corby Martin, Steven Blair, and Claude Bouchard. 
2011. “Trends over 5 Decades in U.S. Occupation-Related Physical Activity and 
Their Associations with Obesity.” PLoS ONE 6(5): e19657. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0019657.
Clark, Gregory. 2008. A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World. 
Princeton University Press, December.
Clark, Gregory. 2014. The Son Also Rises: Surnames and the History of Social Mobility. 
Princeton University Press, February 23.
Clarke, Arthur. 1956. The City and the Stars. Frederick Muller, June.
Cohen, Susan, and Diane Bailey. 1997. “What Makes Teams Work: Group 
Effectiveness Research from the Shop Floor to the Executive Suite.” Journal of 
Management 23(3): 239–290.
Collins, Randall. 2004. Interaction Ritual Chains. Princeton University Press, March.
Conley, Dalton. 2004. The Pecking Order: A Bold New Look at How Family and Society 
Determine Who We Become. Knopf, March 2.
Cooter, Robert, and Thomas Ulen. 2011. Law and Economics, 6th ed. Pearson Hall, 
February.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel. 2009. “Intangible Capital and 
U.S. Economic Growth.” Review of Income and Wealth 55(3): 661–685.
Costa Jr., Paul, Antonio Terracciano, and Robert R. McCrae. 2001. “Gender 
Differences in Personality Traits Across Cultures: Robust and Surprising 
Findings.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 81(2): 322–331.
Cover, Thomas, and Joy Thomas. 2006. Elements of Information Theory, 2nd Edition. 
Wiley-Interscience, July 18.
Cramton, Peter, Yoav Shoham, and Richard Steinberg. 2005. Combinatorial Auctions. 
MIT Press, December 9.
Croson, Rachel, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. “Gender Differences in Preferences.” Journal 
of Economic Literature 47(2): 1–27.
Cummins, Neil. 2013. “Marital Fertility and Wealth During the Fertility Transition: 
Rural France, 1750–1850.” Economic History Review 66(2): 449–476.
Currey, Mason. 2013. Daily Rituals: How Artists Work. Knopf, April 23.

references
393
Curry, Andrew. 2013. “Archaeology: The Milk Revolution.” Nature 500(August 1): 
20–22.
Dababneh, Awwad, Naomi Swanson, and Richard Shell. 2001. “Impact of Added 
Rest Breaks on the Productivity and Well Being of Workers.” Ergonomics 44(2): 
164–174.
Dafoe, Allan, John Oneal, and Bruce Russett. 2013. “The Democratic Peace: 
Weighing the Evidence and Cautious Inference.” International Studies Quarterly 
57(1): 201–214.
Dalgaard, Carl-Johan, and Holger Strulik. 2014. “Physiological Constraints and 
Comparative Economic Development.” University of Copenhagen Department 
of Economics Working Paper, October. http://www.econ.ku.dk/dalgaard/Work/
WPs/geo_reversal_oct2014.pdf.
Dalvit, Dean. 2011. “Price Per Square Foot Construction Cost for Multi 
Story Office Buildings.” EV Studio website, July 14. http://evstudio.com/
price-per-square-foot-construction-cost-for-multi-story-office-buildings/.
Damian, Rodica, Rong Su, Michael Shanahan, Ulrich Trautwein, and Brent 
Roberts. 2015. “Can personality traits and intelligence compensate for back­
ground disadvantage? Predicting status attainment in adulthood.” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 109(3): 473–489.
Dari-Mattiacci, Giuseppe. 2009. “Negative Liability.” Journal of Legal Studies 38(1): 
21–59.
Dave. 2015. “Why is computer RAM disappearing?” Nerd Fever, June 18. http://
nerdfever.com/?p=2885.
Davies, James, Susanna Sandström, Anthony Shorrocks, and Edward Wolff. 2011. 
“The Level and Distribution of Global Household Wealth.” Economic Journal 
121(551): 223–254.
Dawson, John, and John Seater. 2013. “Federal Regulation and Aggregate Economic 
Growth.” Journal of Economic Growth 18(2): 137–177.
Deal, W.R., V. Radisic, D. Scott, and X.B. Mei. 2010. “Solid-State Amplifiers 
for Terahertz Electronics.” Northrop Grumman Technical Report. http://
www.as.northropgrumman.com/products/mps_mimic/assets/SState_Amp_
Terahertz_Elec.pdf.
Debey, Evelyne, Maarten De Schryver, Gordon Logan, Kristina Suchotzki, 
and Bruno Verschuere. 2015. “From junior to senior Pinocchio: A cross-
sectional lifespan investigation of deception.” Acta Psychologica 160(September): 
58–68.
DeBrohun, Jeri. 2001. “Power Dressing in Ancient Greece and Rome.” History 
Today, 51(2): 18–25.

references
394
Desmet, Klaus, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2009. “Spatial Growth and Industry 
Age.” Journal of Economic Theory 144(6): 2477–2502.
De Witt, John, W. Brent Edwards, Melissa Scott-Pandorf, Jason Norcross, and 
Michael Gernhardt. 2014. “The Preferred Walk to Run Transition Speed in 
Actual Lunar Gravity.” Journal of Experimental Biology 217(September 15): 
3200–3203.
Dhand, Rajiva, and Harjyot Sohal. 2006. “Good Sleep, Bad Sleep! The Role of 
Daytime Naps in Healthy Adults.” Current Opinion in Pulmonary Medicine 12(6): 
379–382.
Diaz, Jesus. 2015. “Wow, China Builds Complete 57-story Skyscraper in 
Record 19 Days.” Sploid. March 9. http://sploid.gizmodo.com/china-builds-
complete-57-story-lego-like-skyscraper-in-1690315984.
Diener, Ed. 2013. “The Remarkable Changes in the Science of Subjective Well-
Being.” Perspectives on Psychological Science 8(6): 663–666.
Dolan, Kerry, and Luisa Kroll. 2014. “The World’s Billionaires.” Forbes, March 3. 
http://www.forbes.com/billionaires/.
Domar, Evsey D. 1970. “The Causes of Slavery or Serfdom: A Hypothesis.” Journal 
of Economic History 30(1): 18–32.
Drechsler, Rolf, and Robert Wille. 2012. “Reversible Circuits: Recent 
Accomplishments and Future Challenges for an Emerging Technology.” Progress 
in VLSI Design and Test, Proceedings 7373: 383–392.
Drexler, K. Eric. 1992. Nanosystems: Molecular Machinery, Manufacturing, and 
Computation. Wiley. October.
Drexler, K. Eric. 2013. Radical Abundance: How a Revolution in Nanotechnology Will 
Change Civilization. Public Affairs. May 7.
Drouvelis, Michalis, and Julian Jamison. 2015. “Selecting Public Goods Institutions: 
Who Likes to Punish and Reward?” Southern Economic Journal 82(2): 501–534.
Drust, Barry, Jim Waterhouse, Greg Atkinson, Ben Edwards, and Tom Reilly. 
2005. “Circadian Rhythms in Sports Performance—an Update.” Chronobiology 
International 22(1): 21–44.
Duckworth, Angela, and Patrick Quinn. 2009. “Development and Validation of 
the Short Grit Scale (Grit-S).” Journal of Personality Assessment 91(2): 166–174.
Dunbar, Robin. 1992. “Neocortex Size as a Constraint on Group Size in Primates.” 
Journal of Human Evolution 22(6): 469–984.
Dunne, Timothy, and Mark Roberts. 1993. “The Long-Run Demand for Labor: 
Estimates From Census Establishment Data,” Center for Economic Studies, 
U.S. Census Bureau, Working Paper 93–13. http://ideas.repec.org/p/cen/
wpaper/93–13.html.

references
395
Duranton, Gilles, and Hubert Jayet. 2011. “Is the Division of Labour Limited by the 
Extent of the Market? Evidence from French Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics 
69(1): 56–71.
Eckersley, Peter, and Anders Sandberg. 2014. “Is Brain Emulation Dangerous?” 
Journal of Artificial General Intelligence 4(3): 170–194.
Edmond, Mark. 2015. “Democratic vs. Republican occupations.” Verdant Labs 
Blog, June 2. http://verdantlabs.com/blog/2015/06/02/politics-of-professions/.
Eeckhout, Jan. 2004. “Gibrat’s Law for (All) Cities.” American Economic Review 
94(5): 1429–1451.
Egan, Greg. 1994. Permutation City. Millennium Orion Publishing Group.
Environmental Process Systems Limited. 2014. “Slurry-Ice Based Cooling Systems 
Application Guide.” http://www.epsltd.co.uk/files/slurryice_manual.pdf.
Erdogan, Berrin, Talya Bauer, Donald Truxillo, and Layla Mansfield. 2012. 
“Whistle While You Work: A Review of the Life Satisfaction Literature.” Journal 
of Management 38(4): 1038–1083.
Esmaeilzadeh, Hadi, Emily Blem, Renee Amant, and Karthikeyan Sankaralingam. 
2012. “Power Limitations and Dark Silicon Challenge the Future of Multicore.” 
Transactions on Computer Systems 30(3): 11.
Eth, Daniel, Juan-Carlos Foust, and Brandon Whale. 2013. “The Prospects of 
Whole Brain Emulation within the next Half-Century.” Journal of Artificial 
General Intelligence 4(3): 130–152.
Evstigneev, Igor, Thorsten Hens, and Klaus Schenk-Hoppé. 2009. “Evolutionary 
Finance.” In Handbook of Financial Markets: Dynamics and Evolution 9: 507–566, 
edited by Thorsten Hens and Klaus Schenk-Hoppé. North-Holland.
Fagerberg, Jan, and Martin Srholec. 2013. “Knowledge, Capabilities, and the Poverty 
Trap: The Complex Interplay between Technological, Social, and Geographical 
Factors.” In Knowledge and Space 5(March 6), edited by Peter Meusburger, 
Johannes Glückler, and Martina el Meskioui. New York: Springer, 113–137.
Faghri, Amir. 2012. “Review and Advances in Heat Pipe Science and Technology.” 
Journal of Heat Transfer 134(12): 123001.
Farr, Robert. 2007a. “Fractal Design for Efficient Brittle Plates under Gentle 
Pressure Loading.” Physics Review E 76(4): 046601.
Farr, Robert. 2007b. “Fractal Design for an Efficient Shell Strut under Gentle 
Compressive Loading.” Physics Review E 76(5): 056608.
Farr, Robert, and Yong Mao. 2008. “Fractal Space Frames and Metamaterials for 
High Mechanical Efficiency.” Europhysics Letters 84(1): 14001.
Fernald, John, and Charles Jones. 2014. “The Future of US Economic Growth.” 
American Economic Review 104(5): 44–49.

references
396
Fincher, Corey, Randy Thornhill, Damian Murray, and Mark Schaller. 2008. 
“Pathogen 
Prevalence 
Predicts 
Human 
Cross-cultural Variability 
in 
Individualism/collectivism.” Proceedings Royal Society B 275(1640): 1279–1285.
Fletcher, Jason. 2013. “The Effects of Personality Traits on Adult Labor Market 
Outcomes: Evidence from Siblings.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 
89(May): 122–135.
Flynn, James. 2007. What Is Intelligence?: Beyond the Flynn Effect. Cambridge 
University Press. August 27.
Flyvbjerg, Bent. 2015. “What You Should Know About Megaprojects and Why: 
An Overview.” Project Management Journal 45(2).
“Forbes Ranking of Billionaires: The World’s Richest Jews.” 2013. Forbes Israel, 
April 17. http://www.forbes.co.il/news/new.aspx?pn6Vq=J&0r9VQ=IEII.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan. 2006. “Market Selection, 
Reallocation, and Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade Sector in the 1990s.” 
Review of Economics and Statistics 88(4): 748–758.
Foster, Richard. 2012. “Creative Destruction Whips through Corporate 
America: An Innosight Executive Briefing on Corporate Strategy.” Strategy & 
Innovation 10(1).
Fox, J.G., and E.D. Embrey. 1972. “Music—an aid to productivity.” Applied 
Ergonomics 3(4): 202–205.
Frattaroli, J. 2006. “Experimental Disclosure and its Moderators: A Meta-analysis.” 
Psychological Bulletin 132(6): 823–865.
Freitas, Robert. 1999. Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities. Landes Bioscience.
Freitas, Robert, and Ralph Merkle. 2004. Kinematic Self-Replicating Machines. 
Landes Bioscience. October 30.
Fridley, Jason, and Dov Sax. 2014. “The Imbalance of Nature: Revisiting a 
Darwinian Framework for Invasion Biology.” Global Ecology and Biogeography 
23(11): 1157–1166.
Friedman, Daniel, and Ryan Oprea. 2012. “A Continuous Dilemma.” American 
Economic Review 102(1): 337–363.
Friedman, David. 1973. The Machinery of Freedom: Guide to a Radical Capitalism. 
New York: Harper and Row.
Friedman, David. 2000. Law’s Order: What Economics Has to Do with Law and Why 
It Matters. Princeton University Press.
Fyfe, W.D. 2011. “8 Simple Rules for Ghosts” March 28. http://wdfyfe.
net/2011/03/28/8-simple-rules-for-ghosts/.
Galenson, David. 2006. Old Masters and Young Geniuses. Princeton University 
Press.

references
397
Garvin, David, and Joshua Margolis. 2015. “The Art of Giving and Receiving 
Advice.” Harvard Business Review 93(1/2): 60–71.
Gayle, Philip.  2003. “Market Concentration and Innovation: New Empirical 
Evidence on the Schumpeterian Hypothesis.” April. http://www-personal.ksu.
edu/~gaylep/jpe.pdf.
Gensowski, Miriam. 2014. “Personality, IQ, and Lifetime Earnings.” IZA Discussion 
Paper No. 8235, June. http://ftp.iza.org/dp8235.pdf.
Gibson, Matthew, and Jeffrey Shrader. 2014. “Time Use and Productivity: The 
Wage Returns to Sleep.” Working Paper, Department of Economics, U.C. San 
Diego. July 10.
Giesen, Kristian, Arndt Zimmermann, and Jens Suedekum. 2010. “The Size 
Distribution Across all Cities—Double Pareto Lognormal Strikes.” Journal of 
Urban Economics 68(2): 129–137.
Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks. 2005. “Why Have Housing 
Prices Gone Up?” American Economic Review, 95(2): 329–333.
Glück, Judith, and Susan Bluck. 2007. “Looking Back across the Life Span: A 
Life Story Account of the Reminiscence Bump.” Memory and Cognition 35(8): 
1928–1939.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Gerard Roland. 2011. “Which Dimensions of Culture 
Matter for Long-Run Growth?” American Economic Review 101(3): 492–498.
Göbel, Christian, and Thomas Zwick. 2012. “Age and Productivity: Sector 
Differences.” De Economist 160: 35–57.
Gorton, Gary, and Frank Schmid. 2004. “Capital, Labor, and the Firm: A Study 
of German Codetermination.” Journal of the European Economic Association 2(5): 
863–905, September.
Grace, Katja. 2013. “Algorithmic Progress in Six Domains.” Technical report 
2013–2013. Berkeley, CA: Machine Intelligence Research Institute. October 5. 
http://intelligence.org/files/AlgorithmicProgress.pdf.
Grace, Katja. 2014. “MIRI AI Predictions Dataset.” AI Impacts. May 20. http://
aiimpacts.org/miri-ai-predictions-dataset/.
Grace, Katja. 2015. “Costs of human-level hardware.” AI Impacts. July 26. http://
aiimpacts.org/costs-of-human-level-hardware/.
Gully, Philippe. 2014. “Long and High Conductance Helium Heat Pipe.” Cryogenics 
64(November-December): 255–259.
Haldane, John. 1926. “On Being the Right Size.” Harper’s Magazine, March.
Haltiwanger, John. 2012. “Job Creation and Firm Dynamics in the United States.” 
In Innovation Policy and the Economy, edited by Josh Lerner, and Scott Stern. v. 12, 
17–38. University of Chicago.

references
398
Hampshire, Adam, Roger Highfield, Beth Parkin, and Adrian Owen. 2012. 
“Fractionating Human Intelligence.” Neuron 76(December 20): 1225–1237.
Hanna, Awad, Craig Taylor, and Kenneth Sullivan. 2005. “Impact of Extended 
Overtime on Construction Labor Productivity.” Journal of Construction 
Engineering and Management 131(6): 734–739.
Hanson, Robin. 1992. “Reversible Agents: Need Robots Waste Bits to See, Talk, 
and Achieve?” Workshop on Physics and Computation (October): 284–288. 
doi:10.1109/PHYCMP.1992.615558.
Hanson, Robin. 1994a. “Buy Health, Not Health Care.” Cato Journal 14(1): 135–
141, Summer.
Hanson, Robin. 1994b. “If Uploads Come First.” Extropy 6(2): 10–15.
Hanson, Robin. 1995. “Lilliputian Uploads.” Extropy 7(1): 30–31.
Hanson, Robin. 1998. “Economic Growth Given Machine Intelligence.” October. 
http://hanson.gmu.edu/aigrow.pdf.
Hanson, Robin. 2000. “Long-Term Growth as a Sequence of Exponential Modes.” 
October. http://hanson.gmu.edu/longgrow.pdf.
Hanson, Robin. 2001. “How to Live in a Simulation.” Journal of Evolution and 
Technology 7(September).
Hanson, Robin. 2003. “Combinatorial Information Market Design.” Information 
Systems Frontiers 5(1): 105–119.
Hanson, Robin. 2005. “He Who Pays The Piper Must Know The Tune.” April. 
http://hanson.gmu.edu/expert.pdf.
Hanson, Robin. 2006a. “Decision Markets for Policy Advice.” In Promoting the 
General Welfare: American Democracy and the Political Economy of Government 
Performance, edited by Eric Patashnik and Alan Gerber, 151–173. Washington 
D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, November.
Hanson, Robin. 2006b. “Five Nanotech Social Scenarios.” In Nanotechnology: 
Societal Implications II, Individual Perspectives, edited by Mihail Roco and William 
Bainbridge, 109–113. Springer, November.
Hanson, Robin. 2007. “Double Or Nothing Lawsuits, Ten Years On.” Overcoming 
Bias blog, October 30. http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/10/double-or-
nothi.html.
Hanson, Robin. 2008a. “The Rapacious Hardscrapple Frontier.” In Year Million: 
Science at the Far Edge of Knowledge, edited by Damien Broderick, 168–192. New 
York: Atlas Books, May 19.
Hanson, Robin. 2008b. “Economics of the Singularity.” IEEE Spectrum, 45(6): 
37–42.
Hanson, Robin. 2009. “A Tale Of Two Tradeoffs.” Overcoming Bias blog. January 
16. http://www.overcomingbias.com/2009/01/a-tale-of-two-tradeoffs.html.

references
399
Hanson, Robin. 2010a. “Two Types of People.” Overcoming Bias blog. October 4. 
http://www.overcomingbias.com/2010/10/two-types-of-people.html.
Hanson, Robin. 2010b. “Compare Refuge, Resort.” Overcoming Bias blog. 
December 
10. 
http://www.overcomingbias.com/2010/12/compare-refuges-
resorts.html.
Hanson, Robin. 2012. “AI Progress Estimate.” Overcoming Bias blog. August 27. 
http://www.overcomingbias.com/2012/08/ai-progress-estimate.html.
Hanson, Robin. 2013. “Shall We Vote on Values, But Bet on Beliefs?” Journal of 
Political Philosophy 21(2): 151–178.
Hanson, Robin. 2014. “Conservative vs. Liberal Jobs.” Overcoming Bias blog. 
November 
18. 
http://www.overcomingbias.com/2014/11/conservative-vs-
liberal-jobs.html.
Hanson, Robin, and Eliezer Yudkowsky. 2013. The Hanson-Yudkowsky AI-Foom 
Debate. Berkeley, CA: Machine Intelligence Research Institute.
Hartshorne, Joshua, and Laura Germine. 2015. “When Does Cognitive Functioning 
Peak? The Asynchronous Rise and Fall of Different Cognitive Abilities Across 
the Life Span.” Psychological Science 26(4): 433–443.
Haub, Carl. 2011. “How Many People Have Ever Lived on Earth?” Population 
Reference Bureau, October. http://www.prb.org/Publications/Articles/2002/
HowManyPeopleHaveEverLivedonEarth.aspx.
Hausmann, Ricardo, César Hidalgo, Sebastián Bustos, Michele Coscia, Alexander 
Simoes, and Muhammed Yildirim. 2014. The Atlas of Economic Complexity: 
Mapping Paths to Prosperity. MIT Press.
Hawks, John. 2011. “Selection for Smaller Brains in Holocene Human Evolution.” 
arXiv:1102.5604, February 28.
Healy, Kevin, Luke McNally, Graeme Ruxton, Natalie Cooper, and Andrew Jackson. 
2013. “Metabolic Rate and Body Size are Linked with Perception of Temporal 
Information.” Animal Behaviour 86: 685–696.
Hektner, Joel, Jennifer Schmidt, and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. 2007. Experience 
Sampling Method: Measuring the Quality of Everyday Life. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: SAGE.
Helliwell, John, Richard Layard, and Jeffrey Sachs. 2013. World Happiness Report 2013. 
United Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network, September 9.
Helliwell, John, and Shun Wang. 2015. “How was the Weekend? How the Social 
Context Underlies Weekend Effects in Happiness and other Emotions for US 
Workers.” NBER Working Paper No. 21374, July.
Henrich, Joseph. 2015. The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human 
Evolution, Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Smarter. Princeton University 
Press, October 27.

references
400
Herodotus. 440BC. The Histories. Translated by A.D. Godley, 1920.
Hofstede, Geert, Gert Hofstede, and Michael Minkov. 2010. Cultures and 
Organizations: Software of the Mind. 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill. May 24.
Hölzle, Patricia, Joachim Hermsdörfer, and Céline Vetter. 2014. “The Effects of 
Shift Work and Time of Day on Fine Motor Control During Handwriting.” 
Ergonomics 57(10): 1488–1498.
Horn, John, and Raymond Cattell. 1967. “Age Differences in Fluid and Crystallized 
Intelligence.” Acta Psychologica 26: 107–129.
Howe, Neil, and William Strauss. 1992. Generations: The History of America’s Future, 
1584 to 2069. Quill. September 30.
Hummels, David, and Georg Schaur. 2013. “Time as a Trade Barrier.” American 
Economic Review 103(7): 2935–2959.
Hunter, Emily M., and Cindy Wu. 2015. “Give Me a Better Break: Choosing 
Workday Break Activities to Maximize Resource Recovery.” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, in press.
Iannaccone, Laurence. 1994. “Why Strict Churches Are Strong.” American Journal 
of Sociology 99(5): 1180–1211.
Ichniowski, Casey, and Anne Preston. 2014. “Do Star Performers Produce More 
Stars? Peer Effects and Learning in Elite Teams.” NBER Working Paper No. 
20478, September.
Idson, Todd. 1990. “Establishment Size, Job Satisfaction and the Structure of 
Work.” Applied Economics 22(8): 1007–1018.
Inglehart, Ronald, and Christian Welzel. 2010. “Changing Mass Priorities: 
The Link Between Modernization and Democracy.” Perspectives on Politics 
8(2): 554.
2012. “International Labour Organization Global Estimate of Forced Labour 
2012: Results and Methodology.” June 1. http://www.ilo.org/washington/areas/
elimination-of-forced-labor/WCMS_182004/lang–en/index.htm.
Jacobs, Emma. 2015. “The Strange World of the Humans Who Loaned Their 
Voices to Siri.” Financial Times, February 12.
Jahncke, Helena, Staffan Hygge, Niklas Halin, Anne Green, and Kenth Dimberg. 
2011. “Open-plan Office Noise: Cognitive Performance and Restoration.” 
Journal of Environmental Psychology 31(4): 373–382.
Jay, Timothy, and Kristin Janschewitz. 2012. “The Science of Swearing.” 
Observer 25(5).
Jensen, Robert, and Emily Oster. 2009. “The Power of TV: Cable Television and 
Women’s Status in India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3): 1057–1094.
Johnson, Justin, and David Myatt. 2006. “On the Simple Economics of Advertising, 
Marketing, and Product Design.” American Economic Review 96(3): 756–784.

references
401
Jones, Benjamin, E.J. Reedy, and Bruce Weinberg. 2014. “Age and Scientific 
Genius.” Wiley Handbook of Genius, edited by Dean Simonton, 422–450. 
Wiley-Blackwell, June.
Jones, Garett. 2011. “IQ and National Productivity.” In New Palgrave Dictionary 
of Economics, Online Edition, edited by Steven Durlauf and Lawrence Blume. 
London, New York: Palgrave-Macmillan.
Jones, Garett, and Niklas Potrafke. 2014. “Human Capital and National Institutional 
Quality: Are TIMSS, PISA, and National Average IQ Robust Predictors?” 
Intelligence 46: 148–155.
Jones, Rhys, Patrick Haufe, Edward Sells, Pejman Iravani, Vik Olliver, Chris 
Palmer, and Adrian Bowyer. 2011. “RepRap—The Replicating Rapid Prototyper.” 
Robotica 29(January): 177–191.
Jones, Richard. 2016. Against Transhumanism: The Delusion of Technological 
Transcendence. Self-published, January 15, http://www.softmachines.org/
wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Against_Transhumanism_1.0.pdf.
Jordan, Gabriele, Samir Deeb, Jenny Bosten, and J. D. Mollon. 2010. “The 
Dimensionality of Color Vision in Carriers of Anomalous Trichromacy.” Journal 
of Vision 10(8): 12.
Jordani, Joseph. 2011. Why Do People Sing? Music in Human Evolution. Logos, 
March 25.
Joshel, Sandra. 2010. Slavery in the Roman World. Cambridge University Press, 
August 16.
Judge, Timothy, and Robert Bretz. 1994. “Political Influence Behavior and Career 
Success.” Journal of Management 20(1): 43.
Kaestle, Carl, and Helen Damon-Moore. 1991. Literacy in the United States: Readers 
and Reading Since 1880. Yale University Press. April 24.
Kahn, Herman, and Anthony Wiener. 1967. The Year 2000: A Framework for 
Speculation on the Next Thirty-Three Years. Collier Macmillan. February.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Alan Krueger. 2006 “Developments in the Measurement of 
Subjective Well-being.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(1): 3–24.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Dan Lovallo. 1993. “Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts: A 
Cognitive Perspective on Risk Taking.” Management Science 39(1): 17–31.
Kamilar, Jason, Richard Bribiescas, and Brenda Bradley. 2010. “Is Group Size 
Related to Longevity in Mammals?” Biology Letters 6(6): 736–739.
Kandler, Christian, Anna Kornadt, Birk Hagemeyer, and Franz Neyer. 2015. 
“Patterns and Sources of Personality Development in Old Age.” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 109(1): 175–191.
Kang, Joonkyu. 2010. “A Study of the DRAM Industry.” Masters Thesis, Sloan 
School of Managmenent, MIT. http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/59138.

references
402
Kantner, John, and Nancy Mahoney, 2000. Great House Communities Across the 
Chacoan Landscape. University of Arizona Press.
Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2014. “The Global Decline of the Labor 
Share.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1): 61–103.
Katz, Leo. 1996. Ill-Gotten Gains: Evasion, Blackmail, Fraud, and Kindred Puzzles of 
the Law. University of Chicago Press, May 8.
Kauffeld, M., M.J. Wang, V. Goldstein, and K.E. Kasza. 2010. “Ice Slurry 
Applications.” International Journal of Refrigeration 33(8): 1491–1505.
Kell, Harrison, David Lubinski, and Camilla Benbow. 2013. “Who Rises to the 
Top? Early Indicators.” Psychological Science 24(5): 648–659.
Kelly, Raymond. 2000. Warless Societies and the Origin of War. University of Michigan 
Press, November 7.
Kemeny, Anna. 2002. “Driven to Excel: A Portrait of Canada’s Workaholics.” 
Canadian Social Trends 64, March 11.
Kessler, Donald, and Burton Cour-Palais. 1978. “Collision Frequency of Artificial 
Satellites: The Creation of a Debris Belt.” Journal of Geophysical Research 83(June 
1): 2637–2646.
Kiger, Derrick. 1989. “Effects of Music Information Load on a Reading 
Comprehension Task.” Perceptual and Motor Skills 69: 531–534.
Killingsworth, Matthew, and Daniel Gilbert. 2010. “A Wandering Mind Is an 
Unhappy Mind.” Science 330(6006): 932.
Kim, Jungsoo, and Richard de Dear. 2013. “Workspace Satisfaction: The Privacy-
communication Trade-off in Open-plan Offices.” Journal of Environmental 
Psychology 36(December): 18–26.
Klein, Gerwin, June Andronick, Kevin Elphinstone, Toby Murray, Thomas Sewell, 
Rafal Kolanski, and Gernot Heiser. 2014. “Comprehensive Formal Verification 
of an OS Microkernel.” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems 1(32): article 2.
Klein, Mark, and Ana Garcia. 2014. “High-Speed Idea Filtering with the Bag of 
Lemons.” September 27. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=
2501787.
Kohli, Rajeev, and Raaj Sah. 2006. “Some Empirical Regularities in Market Shares.” 
Management Science 52(11): 1792–1798.
Kok, Suzanne, and Baster Weel. 2014. “Cities, Tasks, and Skills.” Journal of Regional 
Science 54(5): 856–892.
Koomey, Jonathan, and Samuel Naffziger. 2015. “Moore’s Law Might Be Slowing 
Down, But Not Energy Efficiency.” IEEE Spectrum 52(4): 35.
Kubanek, Jan, Lawrence Snyder, and Richard Abrams. 2015. “Reward and 
Punishment Act as Distinct Factors in Guiding Behavior.” Cognition 139(June): 
154–167.

references
403
Kyaga, Simon, Paul Lichtenstein, Marcus Boman, Christina Hultman, Niklas 
Langstrom, and Mikael Landen. 2011. “Creativity and Mental Disorder: Family 
Study of 300,000 People with Severe Mental Disorder.” British Journal of 
Psychiatry 199: 373–379.
La Ferrara, Eliana, Alberto Chong, and Suzanne Duryea. 2012. “Soap Operas and 
Fertility: Evidence from Brazil.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 
4(4): 1–31.
Lalley, Steven, and E. Glen Weyl. 2014. “Quadratic Voting.” December. http://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2003531.
Landes, David. 1969. The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial 
Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present. New York: University of 
Cambridge Press.
Lawrence, Robert. 2015. “Recent Declines in Labor’s Share in US Income: A 
Preliminary Neoclassical Account.” NBER Working Paper No. 21296, June.
Lawson, David, and Ruth Mace. 2011. “Parental Investment and the Optimization 
of Human Family Size.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366(1563): 
333–343.
Lawson, R., R. Ogden, and R. Bergin. 2012. “Application of Modular Construction 
in High-Rise Buildings.” Journal of Architectural Engineering 18(2): 148–154.
Laxman, Kiran, Kate Lovibond, and Miriam Hassan. 2008. “Impact of Bipolar 
Disorder in Employed Populations.” American Journal of Managed Care 14(11): 
757–764.
Lee, Kenneth. 2011. “Essays in Health Economics: Empirical Studies on 
Determinants of Health.” Doctoral dissertation, Economics, George Mason 
University.
Lehman, M., and L. Belady. 1985. Program Evolution: Processes of Software Change, 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press Professional, Inc., December.
Lentz, Rasmus, and Dale Mortensen. 2008. “An Empirical Model of Growth 
Through Product Innovation.” Econometrica 76(6): 1317–1373.
Levy, David. 1989. “The Statistical Basis of Athenian-American Constitutional 
Theory.” Journal of Legal Studies 18(1): 79–103.
Levy, David. 2008. Love and Sex with Robots: The Evolution of Human-Robot 
Relationships. Harper Perennial.
Liberman, Nira, and Yaacov Trope. 2008. “The Psychology of Transcending the 
Here and Now.” Science 322(5905): 1201–1205.
Lindenberger, Ulman. 2014. “Human Cognitive Aging: Corriger la Fortune?” 
Science 346(6209): 572–578.
Longman, Phillip. 2006. “The Return of Patriarchy.” Foreign Policy 153: 56–60, 
62–65.

references
404
López, Héctor, Jérémie Gachelin, Carine Douarche, Harold Auradou, and Eric 
Clément. 2015. “Turning Bacteria Suspensions into Superfluids.” Physical Review 
Letters 115(2): 028301, July 7.
Luo, Jinfeng, and Yi Wen. 2015. “Institutions Do Not Rule: Reassessing the Driving 
Forces of Economic Development.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Working 
Paper 2015–2001A. January.
Lupien, S.J., F. Maheu, M. Tu, A. Fiocco, and T.E. Schramek. 2007. “The Effects of 
Stress and Stress Hormones on Human Cognition: Implications for the Field of 
Brain and Cognition.” Brain and Cognition 65(December): 209–237.
Lykken, David, and Auke Tellegen. 1996. “Happiness Is a Stochastic Phenomenon.” 
Psychological Science 7(3): 186–189.
Macey, Jonathan. 2008. “Market for Corporate Control.” In The Concise Encyclopedia 
of Economics, edited by David Henderson. http://www.econlib.org/library/CEE.
html.
Madrigal, Alexis. 2015. “The Case Against Killer Robots, from a Guy Actually 
Working on Artificial Intelligence.” Fusion, February 27. http://fusion.net/
story/54583/the-case-against-killer-robots-from-a-guy-actually-building-ai/.
Magalhaes, Joao, and Anders Sandberg. 2005. “Cognitive Aging as an Extension 
of Brain Development: A Model Linking Learning, Brain Plasticity, and 
Neurodegeneration.” Mechanisms of Ageing and Development 126: 1026–1033.
Magee, Christopher, and Tansa Massoud. 2011. “Openness and Internal Conflict.” 
Journal of Peace Research 48(January): 59–72.
Mandel, Michael. 2014. “Connections as a Tool for Growth: Evidence from the 
LinkedIn Economic Graph.” November. http://www.slideshare.net/linkedin/
mandel-linked-in-connections-reportnov-2014.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Matthew Weinzierl. 2010. “The Optimal Taxation of 
Height: A Case Study of Utilitarian Income Redistribution.” American Economic 
Journal: Economic Policy 2(1): 155–176.
Mannix, Elizabeth, and Margaret Neale. 2005. “What Differences Make a 
Difference? The Promise and Reality of Diverse Teams in Organizations.” 
Psychological Science in the Public Interest 6(2): 31–55.
Marcinkowska, Urszula, Mikhail Kozlov, Huajian Cai, Jorge Contreras-Garduño, 
Barnaby Dixson, Gavita Oana, Gwenaël Kaminski, Norman Li, Minna Lyons, 
Ike Onyishi, Keshav Prasai, Farid Pazhoohi, Pavol Prokop, Sandra L. Rosales 
Cardozo, Nicolle Sydney, Jose Yong, and Markus Rantala. 2014. “Cross-cultural 
variation in men’s preference for sexual dimorphism in women’s faces.” Biology 
Letters 10(4): 20130850.
Markoff, John. 2016. “Microsoft Unit Dives Deep for a Data Center Solution.” New 
York Times, B1, February 1.

references
405
Martin, G.M. 1971. “Brief Proposal on Immortality: An Interim Solution.” 
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 14(2): 339.
Martin, Leonard, and Kees van den Bos. 2014. “Beyond Terror: Towards a Paradigm 
Shift in the Study of Threat and Culture.” European Review of Social Psychology 
25(1): 32–70.
McCarty, Christopher, Peter Killworth, H. Russell Bernard, Eugene Johnsen, and 
Gene Shelley. 2000. “Comparing Two Methods for Estimating Network Size.” 
Human Organization 60(1): 28–39.
Melnick, Michael, Bryan Harrison, Sohee Park, Loisa Bennetto, and Duje 
Tadin. 2013. “A Strong Interactive Link between Sensory Discriminations and 
Intelligence.” Current Biology 23(11): 1013–1017.
Melzer, Arthur. 2007. “On the Pedagogical Motive for Esoteric Writing.” Journal of 
Politics 69(4): 1015–1031.
Mercier, Hugo, and Dan Sperber. 2011. “Why do Humans Reason? Arguments for 
an Argumentative Theory.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 34(2): 57–74.
Merolla, Paul, John Arthur, Rodrigo Alvarez-Icaza, Andrew Cassidy, Jun Sawada, 
Filipp Akopyan, Bryan Jackson, Nabil Imam, Chen Guo, Yutaka Nakamura, 
Bernard Brezzo, Ivan Vo, Steven Esser, Rathinakumar Appuswamy, Brian 
Taba, Arnon Amir, Myron Flickner, William Risk, Rajit Manohar, and 
Dharmendra Modha. 2014. “A Million Spiking-neuron Integrated Circuit 
with a Scalable Communication Network and Interface.” Science 345(6197): 
668–673.
Miceli, Thomas, and Kathleen Segerson. 2007. “Punishing the Innocent along with 
the Guilty: The Economics of Individual versus Group Punishment.” Journal of 
Legal Studies 36(1): 81–106.
Mikula, Shawn, and Winfried Denk. 2015. “High-resolution Whole-brain 
Staining for Electron Microscopic Circuit Reconstruction.” Nature Methods 
12(6): 541–546.
Millar, Jonathan, Stephen Oliner, and Daniel Sichel. 2013. “Time-To-Plan Lags 
for Commercial Construction Projects.” NBER Working Paper No. 19408, 
September.
Miller, Mark, Ka-Ping Yee, and Jonathan Shapiro. 2003. “Capability Myths 
Demolished.” Systems Research Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University, Technical 
Report SRL2003–2002. http://srl.cs.jhu.edu/pubs/SRL2003-02.pdf.
Miller, Shawn. 2009. “Is There a Relationship between Industry Concentration and 
Patent Activity?” December 17. http://ssrn.com/abstract=1531761.
Miner, Andrew, Theresa Glom, and Charles Hulin. 2005. “Experience Sampling 
Mood and its Correlates at Work.” Journal of Occupational and Organizational 
Psychology 78(2): 171–193.

references
406
Minetti, Alberto, Yuri Ivanenko, Germana Cappellini, Nadia Dominici, and 
Francesco Lacquaniti. 2012. “Humans Running in Place on Water at Simulated 
Reduced Gravity.” PLoS ONE 7(7): e37300.
Minkov, Michael. 2013. Cross-Cultural Analysis: The Science and Art of Comparing 
the World’s Modern Societies and Their Cultures. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
June 6.
Mlodinow, Leonard. 2012. Subliminal: How Your Unconscious Mind Rules Your 
Behavior. Pantheon. April 24.
Mogilner, Cassie, Sepandar Kamvar, and Jennifer Aaker. 2011. “The Shifting 
Meaning of Happiness.” Social Psychological and Personality Science 2(4): 395–402.
Mokyr, Joel, Chris Vickers, and Nicolas Ziebarth. 2015. “The History of 
Technological Anxiety and the Future of Economic Growth: Is This Time 
Different?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29(3): 31–50.
Montgomery, Douglas. 2008. Design and Analysis of Experiments. John Wiley and 
Sons. July 28.
Moravec, Hans. 1988. Mind Children: The Future of Robot and Human Intelligence. 
Harvard University Press. October.
Morgan, Timothy. 2014. “A Rare Peek Into The Massive Scale of AWS.” Enterprise 
Tech Systems Edition, November 14. http://www.enterprisetech.com/2014/11/14/
rare-peek-massive-scale-aws/.
Morris, Ian. 2015. Foragers, Farmers, and Fossil Fuels: How Human Values Evolve. 
Princeton University Press. March 22.
Mrazek, Michael, Michael Franklin, Dawa Phillips, Benjamin Baird, and 
Jonathan Schooler. 2013. “Mindfulness Training Improves Working Memory 
Capacity and GRE Performance While Reducing Mind Wandering.” 
Psychological Science 24(5): 776–781.
Mueller, Dennis. 1982. “Redistribution, Growth, and Political Stability.” American 
Economic Review 72(2): 155–159.
Mulder, Monique. 1998. “The Demographic Transition: Are we any Closer to an 
Evolutionary Explanation?” Trends in Ecology & Evolution 13(7): 266–270.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Eldar Shafir. 2013. Scarcity: Why Having Too Little 
Means So Much. Times Books, September 3.
Müller, Vincent, and Nick Bostrom. 2014. “Future Progress in Artificial Intelligence: 
A Survey of Expert Opinion.” In Fundamental Issues of Artificial Intelligence, 
edited by Vincent Müller. Berlin: Springer.
Mulligan, Casey, Richard Gil, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 2004. “Do Democracies 
Have Different Public Policies than Nondemocracies?” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 18(1): 51–74.

references
407
Myers, David, and Ed Diener. 1995. “Who Is Happy?” Psychological Science 6(1): 
10–19.
Nagy, Bela, J. Doyne Farmer, Quan Bui, and Jessika Trancik. 2013. “Statistical Basis 
for Predicting Technological Progress.” PLoS ONE 8(2): e52669.
Nakamoto, Satoshi. 2008. “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.” 
November. https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.
Navarrete, C. David, Robert Kurzban, Daniel Fessler, and Lee Kirkpatrick 2004. 
“Anxiety and Intergroup Bias: Terror Management or Coalitional Psychology?” 
Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 7(4): 370–397.
Nguyen, Anh Ngoc, Jim Taylor, and Steve Bradley. 2003. “Job Autonomy and Job 
Satisfaction: New Evidence.” Doctoral dissertation, University of Lancaster, 
Lancaster.
Niederle, Muriel. 2014. “Gender.” NBER Working Paper No. 20788, December.
Nitsch, Volker. 2005. “Zipf Zipped.” Journal of Urban Economics 57(1): 86–100.
Nordhaus, William. 2015. “Are We Approaching an Economic Singularity? 
Information Technology and the Future of Economic Growth.” NBER Working 
Paper No. 21547, September.
Oi, Walter, and Todd Idson. 1999. “Firm Size and Wages.” In Handbook of Labor 
Economics 3(3), edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Elsevier.
Olsson, Ola, and Christopher Paik. 2015. “Long-Run Cultural Divergence: 
Evidence From the Neolithic Revolution.” University of Gothenburg Working 
Papers in Economics No. 620. May. http://hdl.handle.net/2077/38815.
Paine, Sarah-Jane, Philippa Gander, and Noemie Travier. 2006. “The Epidemiology 
of Morningness/Eveningness: Influence of Age, Gender, Ethnicity, and 
Socioeconomic Factors in Adults (30–49 Years).” Journal of Biological Rhythms 
21(1): 68–76.
Parker, Gordon, Amelia Paterson, Kathryn Fletcher, Bianca Blanch, and 
Rebecca Graham. 2012. “The ‘Magic Button Question’ for Those with a Mood 
Disorder—Would They Wish to Re-live Their Condition?” Journal of Affective 
Disorders 136(3): 419–424.
Pellegrino, Renata, Ibrahim Halil Kavakli, Namni Goel, Christopher Cardinale, 
David Dinges, Samuel Kuna, Greg Maislin, Hans Van Dongen, Sergio 
Tufik, John Hogenesch, Hakon Hakonarson, and Allan Pack. 2014. “A Novel 
BHLHE41 Variant is Associated with Short Sleep and Resistance to Sleep 
Deprivation in Humans.” Sleep 37(8): 1327–1336.
Perkins, Adam, and Philip Corr. 2005. “Can Worriers be Winners? The Association 
between Worrying and Job Performance.” Personality and Individual Differences 
38(1): 25–31.

references
408
Pfeffer, Jeffrey. 2010. Power: Why Some People Have It—and Others Don’t. 
HarperCollins. September 14.
Philippon, Thomas. 2015. “Has the US Finance Industry Become Less Efficient? On 
the Theory and Measurement of Financial Intermediation.” American Economic 
Review 105(4): 1408–1438.
Pickena, David, and Ben Ilozora. 2003. “Height and Construction Costs of Buildings 
in Hong Kong.” Construction Management and Economics 21(2): 107–111.
Piller, Frank. 2008. “Mass Customization.” In The Handbook of 21st Century 
Management, edited by Charles Wankel, 420–430. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications.
Pindyck, Robert. 2013. “Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models Tell Us?” 
Journal of Economic Literature 51(3): 860–872.
Pinker, Steven. 2007. The Stuff of Thought: Language as a Window into Human Nature. 
Viking Adult, September.
Pinker, Steven. 2011. The Better Angels of our Nature. New York: Viking, October.
Pizzola, Brandon. 2015. “The Impact of Business Regulation on Business 
Investment: Evidence from the Recent Experience of the United States.” 
Working Paper, May 11.
van der Ploeg, Hidde, Tien Chey, Rosemary Korda, Emily Banks, and Adrian 
Bauman. 2012. “Sitting Time and All-Cause Mortality Risk in 222,497 
Australian Adults.” Archives of Internal Medicine 172(6): 494–500.
Porat, Ariel. 2009. “Private Production of Public Goods: Liability for Unrequested 
Benefits.” Michigan Law Review 108: 189–227.
Porter, David, Stephen Rassenti, Anil Roopnarine, and Vernon Smith. 2003. 
“Combinatorial Auction Design.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
100(19): 11153–11157.
Posner, Richard. 2014. Economic Analysis of Law, 9th ed. Wolters Kluwer, January.
Potter, Andrew. 2010. The Authenticity Hoax: Why the “Real” Things We Seek Don’t 
Make Us Happy. Harper, April 13.
Pozen, Robert. 2012. Extreme Productivity: Boost Your Results, Reduce Your Hours. 
Harper Business. October 2.
Preckel, Franzis, Anastasiya Lipnevich, Sandra Schneider, and Richard Roberts. 
2011. “Chronotype, Cognitive Abilities, and Academic Achievement: A Meta-
Analytic Investigation.” Learning and Individual Differences 21: 483–492.
Provenzano, Davide. 2015. “On the World Distribution of Income.” Review of 
Income and Wealth (March 10) online early.
Raa, Thijs Ten. 2003. “A Simple Version of the Henry George Theorem.” Finance 
India 17(2): 561–564.

references
409
Ramscar, Michael, Peter Hendrix, Cyrus Shaoul, Petar Milin, and Harald Baayen. 
2014. “The Myth of Cognitive Decline: Non-Linear Dynamics of Lifelong 
Learning.” Topics in Cognitive Science 6(1): 5–42.
Randall, Jason, Frederick Oswald, and Margaret Beier. 2014. “Mind-Wandering, 
Cognition, and Performance: A Theory-Driven Meta-Analysis of Attention 
Regulation.” Psychological Bulletin 140(6): 1411–1431.
Rao, Venkatesh. 2012. “Welcome to the Future Nauseous.” Ribbon Farm blog, May 
9, http://www.ribbonfarm.com/2012/05/09/welcome-to-the-future-nauseous/.
Rayneau-Kirkhope, Daniel, Yong Mao, and Robert Farr. 2012. “Ultralight Fractal 
Structures from Hollow Tubes.” Physics Review Letters 109(20): 204301.
Regan, Pamela, Saloni Lakhanpal, and Carlos Anguiano. 2012. “Relationship 
outcomes in Indian-American love-based and arranged marriages.” Psychological 
Reports 110(3): 915–924.
Richter, Eugene. 1893. Pictures of the Socialistic Future. Translated by Henry Wright. 
London: Swan Sonnenschhein.
Roberts, Brent, Nathan Kuncel, Rebecca Shiner, Avshalom Caspi, and Lewis 
Goldberg. 2007. “The Power of Personality: The Comparative Validity of 
Personality Traits, Socioeconomic Status, and Cognitive Ability for Predicting 
Important Life Outcomes.” Perspectives on Psychological Science 2(4): 313–345.
Robinson, Robert, and Elton Jackson. 2001. “Is Trust in Others Declining in 
America? An Age–Period–Cohort Analysis.” Social Science Research 30(1): 
117–145.
Rockenbach, Bettina, Abdolkarim Sadrieh, and Barbara Mathauschek. 2007. 
“Teams Take the Better Risks.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 
63(3): 412–422.
Root-Bernstein, Robert, Lindsay Allen, Leighanna Beach, Ragini Bhadula, 
Justin Fast, Chelsea Hosey, Benjamin Kremkow, Jacqueline Lapp, Kaitlin 
Lonc, Kendell Pawelec, Abigail Podufaly, and Caitlin Russ. 2008. “Arts Foster 
Scientific Success: Avocations of Nobel, National Academy, Royal Society, 
and Sigma Xi Members.” Journal of Psychological Science and Technology 1(2): 
51–63.
Sabelman, Eric, and Roger Lam. 2015. “The Real-Life Dangers of Augmented 
Reality.” IEEE Spectrum (July): 51–53.
Sahal, Devendra. 1981. Patterns of Technological Innovation. Addison-Wesley.
Sailer, Steve. 2003. “Cousin Marriage Conundrum: The ancient practice discourages 
Democratic Nation-building.” The American Conservative, January 13, 20–22.
Salvador, Fabrizio, Martin de Holan, and Frank Piller. 2009. “Cracking the Code of 
Mass Customization.” MIT Sloan Management Review 50(3): 70–79.

references
410
Sandberg, Anders. 2014. “Monte Carlo model of brain emulation development.” 
Working Paper 2014–1 (version 1.2), Future of Humanity Institute. http://www.
aleph.se/papers/Monte%20Carlo%20model%20of%20brain%20emulation%20
development.pdf.
Sandberg, Anders, and Nick Bostrom. 2008. “Whole Brain Emulation: A Roadmap.” 
Technical Report #2008–2003, Future of Humanity Institute, Oxford University. 
http://www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0019/3853/brain-emulation-
roadmap-report.pdf.
Sandstrom, Gillian, and Elizabeth Dunn. 2014. “Social Interactions and Well-
Being: The Surprising Power of Weak Ties.” Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin 40(7): 910–922.
Savage, Van, Eric Deeds, and Walter Fontana. 2008. “Sizing Up Allometric Scaling 
Theory.” PLoS Computational Biology 4(9): e1000171.
Schmitt, David. 2012. “When the Difference is in the Details: A Critique of Zentner 
and Mitura (2012)—Stepping out of the Caveman’s Shadow: Nations’ Gender 
Gap Predicts Degree of Sex Differentiation in Mate Preferences.” Evolutionary 
Psychology 10(4): 720–726.
Schoemaker, Paul. 1995. “Scenario Planning: A Tool for Strategic Thinking.” Sloan 
Management Review 36(2): 25–40.
Schrank, David, Tim Lomax, and Bill Eisele. 2011. “2011 Urban Mobility Report.” 
Texas Transportation Institute, September.
Schwartz, Shalom, Jan Cieciuch, Michele Vecchione, Eldad Davidov, Ronald 
Fischer, Constanze Beierlein, Alice Ramos, Markku Verkasalo, Jan-Erik 
Lönnqvist, Kursad Demirutku, Ozlem Dirilen-Gumus, and Mark Konty. 2012. 
“Refining the Theory of Basic Individual Values.” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 103(4): 663–688.
Schwartz, Shalom, and Tammy Rubel. 2005. “Sex Differences in Value Priorities: 
Cross-cultural and Multimethod Studies.” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 89(6): 1010–1028.
Sedikides, Constantine, Tim Wildschut, Wing-Yee Cheung, Clay Routledge, 
Erica Hepper, Jamie Arndt, Kenneth Vail, Xinyue Zhou, Kenny Brackstone, 
and Ad Vingerhoets. 2016. “Nostalgia Fosters Self-Continuity: Uncovering 
the Mechanism (Social Connectedness) and Consequence (Eudaimonic Well-
Being).” Emotion, in press.
Shapiro, Carl, and Hal Varian. 1999. Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the 
Network Economy. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Shavell, Steven. 2004. Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law. Harvard University 
Press.

references
411
Shea, John. 1993. “Do Supply Curves Slope Up?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
108(1): 1–32.
Shulman, Carl. 2010. “Whole Brain Emulation and the Evolution of 
Superorganisms.” Machine Intelligence Research Institute working paper. 
http://intelligence.org/files/WBE-Superorgs.pdf.
Shulman, Carl, and Nick Bostrom. 2013. “Embryo Selection for Cognitive 
Enhancement: Curiosity or Game-Changer?” Global Policy 5(1): 85–92.
Shumpeter, Joseph. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York: 
Harper.
Shy, Oz. 1996. Industrial Organization, Theory and Applications. MIT Press.
Smith, Rosanna, and George Newman. 2014. “When Multiple Creators Are Worse 
Than One: The Bias Toward Single Authors in the Evaluation of Art.” Psychology 
of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts 8(3): 303–310.
Snir, Raphael, and Itzhak Harpaz. 2002. “Work-leisure Relations: Leisure 
Orientation and the Meaning of Work.” Journal of Leisure Research 34(2): 
178–203.
Society for Human Resource Management 2012. “2012 Employee Job Satisfaction 
and Engagement.” Society for Human Resource Management. October 3. 
http://www.shrm.org/Research/SurveyFindings/Documents/12–0537%20
2012_jobsatisfaction_fnl_online.pdf.
Solomon, Sheldon, Jeff Greenberg, and Tom Pyszczynski. 2015. The Worm at the 
Core: On the Role of Death in Life. Random House, May 12.
Song, Jae, David Price, Fatih Guvenen, and Nicholas Bloom. 2015. “Firming Up 
Inequality.” NBER Working Paper No. 21199, May.
Sorensen, Morten, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. 2014. “Valuing Private Equity.” 
Review of Financial Studies 27(7): 1977–2021.
Soto, Christopher, Oliver John, Samuel Gosling, and Jeff Potter. 2011. “Age 
Differences in Personality Traits from 10 to 65: Big Five Domains and Facets 
in a Large Cross-Sectional Sample.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
100(2): 330–348.
Sousa-Poza, Alfonso, and Alexandre Ziegler. 2003. “Asymmetric Information about 
Workers’ Productivity as a Cause for Inefficient Long Working Hours.” Labour 
Economics 10: 727–747.
Spengler, Marion, Martin Brunner, Rodica Damian, Oliver Lüdtke, Romain 
Martin, and Brent Roberts. 2015. “Student characteristics and behaviors at 
age 12 predict occupational success 40 years later over and above childhood 
IQ and parental socioeconomic status.” Developmental Psychology 51(9): 
1329–1340.

references
412
Staats, Bradley, and Francesca Gino. 2012. “Specialization and Variety in Repetitive 
Tasks: Evidence from a Japanese Bank.” Management Science 58(6): 1141–1159.
Stanovich, Keith. 2004. The Robot’s Rebellion: Finding Meaning in the Age of Darwin. 
University of Chicago Press. May 15.
Stanovich, Keith, Richard West, and Maggie Toplak. 2013. “Myside Bias, Rational 
Thinking, and Intelligence.” Current Directions in Psychological Science 22(4): 
259–264.
Stapleton, Karyn. 2010. “Swearing.” In Interpersonal Pragmatics, edited by Miriam 
Locher and Sage Graham. 289–305. De Gruyter Mouton. October 15.
Stebila, Douglas, Michele Mosca, and Norbert Lütkenhaus. 2010. “The Case for 
Quantum Key Distribution.” Quantum Communication and Quantum Networking 
36: 283–296.
Steen, Todd. 1996. “Religion and Earnings: Evidence from the NLS Youth Cohort.” 
International Journal of Social Economics 23(1): 47–58.
Stern, Chadly, Tessa West, and Peter Schmitt. 2014. “The Liberal Illusion of 
Uniqueness.” Psychological Science 25(1): 137–144.
Strand, Clark. 2015. Waking Up to the Dark: Ancient Wisdom for a Sleepless Age. 
Spiegel & Grau, April.
Stratmann, Thomas. 1996. “Instability of Collective Decisions? Testing for Cyclical 
Majorities.” Public Choice 88(1–2): 15–28.
Stross, Charles. 2006. Accelerando. Ace. June 27.
Stutzer, Alois, and Bruno Frey. 2013. “Recent Developments in the Economics of 
Happiness: A Selective Overview.” In Recent Developments in the Economics of 
Happiness, edited by Bruno S. Frey and Alois Stutzer. Cheltenham, UK: Edward 
Elgar.
Sun, Wei, Robin Hanson, Kathryn Laskey, and Charles Twardy. 2012. “Probability 
and Asset Updating using Bayesian Networks for Combinatorial Prediction 
Markets.” Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial 
Intelligence, Catalina Island, August 15–17, ed. Nando de Freitas and Kevin 
Murphy, 815–824.
Sutin, Angelina, Paul Costa Jr., Richard Miech, and William Eaton. 2009. 
“Personality and Career Success: Concurrent and Longitudinal Relations.” 
European Journal of Personality 23(2): 71–84.
Sutter, Matthias. 2005. “Are Four Heads Better than Two? An Experimental 
Beauty-contest Game with Teams of Different Size.” Economics Letters 88(1): 
41–46.
Swami, Viren, and Rebecca Coles. 2010. “The Truth is Out There.” The Psychologist 
23(7): 560–563.

references
413
Sylos-Labini, Francesca, Francesco Lacquaniti, and Yuri Ivanenko. 2014. 
“Human Locomotion under Reduced Gravity Conditions: Biomechanical and 
Neurophysiological Considerations.” BioMed Research International: 547242.
Syverson, Chad. 2004. “Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion.” 
Review of Economics and Statistics 86(2): 534–550.
Syverson, Chad. 2011. “What Determines Productivity?” Journal of Economic 
Literature 49(2): 326–365.
Tabarrok, Alexander. 1998. “The Private Provision of Public Goods Via Dominant 
Assurance Contracts.” Public Choice 96(3–4): 345–362.
Talhelm, T., X. Zhang, S. Oishi, C. Shimin, D. Duan, X. Lan, and S. Kitayama. 2014. 
“Large-Scale Psychological Differences Within China Explained by Rice Versus 
Wheat Agriculture.” Science 344(6184): 603–608.
Tay, Louis, Vincent Ng, Lauren Kuykendall, and Ed Diener. 2014. “Demographic 
Factors and Worker Well-being: An Empirical Review Using Representative 
Data from the United States and across the World.” In The Role of Demographics 
in Occupational Stress and Well Being (Research in Occupational Stress and Well-
being, Volume 12), 235–283, edited by Pamela Perrewé, Christopher Rosen, and 
Jonathon Halbesleben. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Thomas, Frank, and Ollie Johnston. 1981. The Illusion of Life: Disney Animation. 
Abbeville Press.
Thompson, Ben. 2013. “What Clayton Christensen Got Wrong.” Stratechery blog, 
September 22. http://stratechery.com/2013/clayton-christensen-got-wrong/.
Torelli, Carlos, and Andrew Kaikati. 2009. “Values as Predictors of Judgments and 
Behaviors: The Role of Abstract and Concrete Mindsets.” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 96(1): 231–247.
Tormala, Zakary, Jayson Jia, and Michael Norton. 2012. “The Preference for 
Potential.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 103(4): 567–583.
Tovee, Martin. 1994. “How Fast is the Speed of Thought?” Current Biology 4(12): 
1125–1127.
Towers, Grady. 1987. “The Outsiders.” Gift of Fire 22(April).
Treleaven, Michelle, Robyn Jackowich, Lesley Roberts, Richard Wassersug, and 
Thomas Johnson. 2013. “Castration and Personality: Correlation of Androgen 
Deprivation and Estrogen Supplementation with the Big Five Factor Personality 
Traits of Adult Males.” Journal of Research in Personality 47(4): 376–379.
Trougakos, John, and Ivona Hideg. 2009. “Momentary Work Recovery: The Role 
of Within-Day Work Breaks.” In Current Perspectives on Job-Stress Recovery, vol. 
7, edited by Sabine Sonnentag, Pamela Perrewe, and Daniel Ganster, 37–84. 
Bradford, U.K.: Emerald Group.

references
414
Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin. 1903. “The Exploration of Cosmic Space by Means of 
Reaction Devices.” The Science Review 5.
Ulku, Hulya. 2004. “R&D, Innovation, and Economic Growth: An Empirical 
Analysis.” International Monetary Fund Working Paper, September.
United Nations. 2013. World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision. United Nations, 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. DVD Edition.
Vakarelski, Ivan, Derek Chan, and Sigurdur Thoroddsen. 2015. “Drag Moderation 
by the Melting of an Ice Surface in Contact with Water.” Physics Review Letters 
115(July 24): 044501.
Vélez, Juliana. 2014. “War and Progressive Income Taxation in the 20th Century.” 
BEHL Working Paper WP2014-03, September. http://behl.berkeley.edu/
files/2014/10/WP2014-03_londono_10-3-14.pdf.
Ventura, Jaume, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2015. “Debt into Growth: How Sovereign 
Debt Accelerated the First Industrial Revolution.” NBER Working Paper No. 
21280, June.
Vermont, Samson. 2006. “Independent Invention as a Defense to Patent 
Infringement.” Michigan Law Review 105(3): 475–504.
Vestling, Monika, Fertil Tufvesson, and Susanne Iwarsson. 2003. “Indicators for 
Return to Work after Stroke and the Importance of Work for Subjective Well-
being and Life Satisfaction.” Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine 35(3): 127–131.
Viamontes, George, Igor Markov, and John Hayes. 2005. “Is Quantum Search 
Practical?” Computing in Science and Engineering 7(3): 62–70.
Vinge, Vernor. 2003. “The Cookie Monster.” Analog 123(10): 10–40.
Vohs, Kathleen, Joseph Redden, and Ryan Rahinel. 2013. “Physical Order Produces 
Healthy Choices, Generosity, and Conventionality, Whereas Disorder Produces 
Creativity.” Psychological Science 24(9): 1860–1867.
Voth, Hans-Joachim. 2003. “Living Standards During the Industrial Revolution: 
An Economist’s Guide.” American Economic Review 93(2): 221–226.
Walker, Mirella, and Thomas Vetter. 2015. “Changing the Personality of a 
Face: Perceived Big Two and Big Five Personality Factors Modeled in Real 
Photographs.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, September 7, online first.
Wassersug, Richard. 2009. “Mastering Emasculation.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 
27(4): 634–636.
Watkins Jr., John. 1900. “What May Happen In The Next Hundred Years.” Ladies’ 
Home Journal 18(1): 8.
Watts, Steve, Neal Kalita, and Michael Maclean. 2007. “The Economics of Super-
Tall Towers.” The Structural Design of Tall and Special Buildings 16(November 5): 
457–470.

references
415
Weil, David. 2012. Economic Growth, 3rd ed. Prentice Hall, July 9.
Weiner, Mark. 2013. The Rule of the Clan: What an Ancient Form of Social Organization 
Reveals about the Future of Individual Freedom. Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Weingast, Barry, and Donald Wittman. 2008. The Oxford Handbook of Political 
Economy. Oxford University Press. August.
Weinstein, Netta, Andrew Przybylski, and Richard M. Ryan. 2009. “Can Nature 
Make Us More Caring? Effects of Immersion in Nature on Intrinsic Aspirations 
and Generosity.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 35(10): 1315–1329.
Weiss, Alexander, and James King. 2015. “Great Ape Origins of Personality 
Maturation and Sex Differences: A Study of Orangutans and Chimpanzees.” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 108(4): 648–664.
Wiley, Keith. 2014. A Taxonomy and Metaphysics of Mind-Uploading. Alautun Press. 
September 13.
Wimsatt, William. 1986. “Developmental Constraints, Generative Entrenchment, 
and the Innate-Acquired Distinction.” Integrating Scientific Disciplines, vol. 2, 
edited by William Bechtel. 185–208. Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff.
Woolley, Anita, Christopher Chabris, Alex Pentland, Nada Hashmi, and Thomas 
Malone. 2010. “Evidence for a Collective Intelligence Factor in the Performance 
of Human Groups.” Science 330(6004): 686–688.
Wout, Félice van’t, Aureliu Lavric, and Stephen Monsell. 2015. “Is It Harder to 
Switch Among a Larger Set of Tasks?” Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 41(2): 363–376.
Wu, Lynn, Ben Waber, Sinan Aral, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Alex Pentland. 2008. 
“Mining Face-to-Face Interaction Networks Using Sociometric Badges: 
Predicting Productivity in an IT Configuration Task.” International Conference on 
Information Systems 2008 Proceedings. 127.
Yang, Mu-Jeung, Lorenz Kueng, and Bryan Hong. 2015. “Business Strategy and the 
Management of Firms.” NBER Working Paper 20846, January.
Yao, Shuyang, Niklas Långström, Hans Temrin, and Hasse Walum. 2014. “Criminal 
Offending as Part of an Alternative Reproductive Strategy: Investigating 
Evolutionary Hypotheses using Swedish Total Population Data.” Evolution and 
Human Behavior 35(6): 481–488.
Yetish, Gandhi, Hillard Kaplan, Michael Gurven, Brian Wood, Herman Pontzer, 
Paul Manger, Charles Wilson, Ronald McGregor, and Jerome Siegel. 2015. 
“Natural Sleep and Its Seasonal Variations in Three Pre-industrial Societies.” 
Current Biology 25(October 15): 1–7.
Youngberg, David, and Robin Hanson. 2010. “Forager Facts.” May. http://hanson.
gmu.edu/forager.pdf.

references
416
Younis, Saed. 1994. “Asymptotically Zero Energy Computing Using Split-Level 
Charge Recovery Logic.” Doctoral Thesis, Electrical Engineering, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology.
Yudkowsky, Eliezer. 2008. “Cognitive Biases Potentially Affecting Judgment of 
Global Risks.” In Global Catastrophic Risks, edited by Nick Bostrom and Milan 
Ćirković. 91–119. Oxford University Press.
Yudkowsky, Eliezer. 2013. “Intelligence Explosion Microeconomics.” Technical 
report 2013–1, Machine Intelligence Research Institute. September 13.
Zamyatin, Yevgeny. 1924. We. Translated by Gregory Zilboorg. New York: Dutton.
Zerzan, John. 2005. Against Civilization: Readings and Reflections. Feral House, 
May 10.
Zimmermann, Harm-Peer, and Heinrich Grebe. 2014. “‘Senior Coolness’: Living 
Well as an Attitude in Later Life.” Journal of Aging Studies 28(January): 22–34.

417
A
abstraction  102, 278, 281, 340
adaptations  128, 179, 180, 227, 313, 335
behavior  25–26
to new situations  2
adiabatic gates  79
advice  180, 187, 208–209, 356
on call  315–318
legal  271
on-call  315–318
prediction markets  255
relationship  172
safe-based  173
age  5, 10, 162, 201, 291, 325
peak productivity  11, 202–204, 356
agglomeration  215
aggression  175
aging  128, 129, 136, 169, 208, 358
air  75, 90–92, 95, 326, 360
pressure  95, 218
aliens  154, 364–365
alms  302
ancestors  1, 2, 29, 132, 310, 330, 358, 383
see also farming era; foragers
animals  5, 16, 22, 24, 28, 73, 74, 87, 128, 
147, 302
emulations of  105, 160–161
anti-messages  82
appearances  99–107
comfortable  101–103
merging real and virtual  105–107
of shared spaces  103–105
of virtual reality  99–101
application teams  210
archives  72, 80, 229, 271
frequency made  71
memory costs  70
message  81
art  203
artificial intelligence  6, 355, 370, 382
intelligence explosion  347–350
research  51–54, 60
artificial light  18
asexuality  10
assets  116, 181, 183, 196, 261, 273, 274, 363, 
377, 378
assumptions  45–54
alternative  354–359
artificial intelligence  51–54
of brains  45–47
complexity of emulations  49–51
of emulations  47–49
attacks  106, 252, 354–355
auctions  220–221 see also combinatorial 
auctions
audits  132, 172
authenticity  113, 305
autonomy  320, 321
B
bacteria  62, 92
baseline scenarios  7, 36–37, 38, 44, 354, 359
base speed  70–71, 131, 222, 265
beauty  163
behavior, energy-efficient hardware and  80
beliefs, false/biased  261
bets  116, 173, 183, 187, 360
biases  40–44, 174
bipolar disorder  165
birth cohort  202, 325
bits  78, 80
blackmail  274
bodies  72–74, 103, 106, 167
quality of  74
bosses  172, 176, 200
bots  113–114
brain cells  46
brain emulations see emulations
index

418
index
brain scanners  46
brain, the  6, 45–47, 341, 342, 346, 349
aging of  128
cell models  46
complexity of  49
emulating brain processes  59
function of  45
modeling  364
reaction time  72
size changes  357
synapses  78
brand loyalty  304
breach of contract  274
buildings  92–95, 191
bulk buying  231
Burj Khalifa, Dubai  93
business  179–188
combinatorial auctions  184–186
cycle fluctuations  197
institutions  179–180
new institutions  181–184
organizations  201
prediction markets  186–188
C
capacities  341, 342, 343, 345, 346, 347
capital  190, 191, 193, 361
careers  199–202
castration  285
celebrities  212, 298, 299
charity  302–303, 376–377
childhood  11, 48, 208, 210–212
children  210–212, 303, 383 see also youth
choices, regarding em world  367–379
charity  376–377
evaluation of  367–370
policies  372–376
quality of life  370–372
success  377–379
cities  17–18, 85–86, 215–217, 245, 303, 374
air-cooled  90–92
auctions  220–221
centers  86, 89, 90, 93–95, 137, 217–219, 
232, 238, 251, 257, 290, 324
first em  360–361, 362
optimal size  216
peripheries  89, 217–219, 223, 324
structure of  217–219
transport of items  226
water cooled  90–92
civilization  131, 132, 133, 135
clans  9–10, 144, 227–229, 291, 299
clan-specific computer hardware  355
concentration  155–156, 160, 237, 238, 
244–245
and finance  195
firm-clan relations  235–237
governance  258, 260–264
identity  304–307, 317
inequality between  248
managing  229–231,
nostalgia  308
one-name em  155
sexuality  286
signals  300, 301, 302
stories  333–334
voting via mindreading  265
classes  10, 12, 16, 258, 268, 310, 326
lower  312, 313
upper  312, 313
Cleisthenes  269
climate  85–98
clumping  215–226
clutter  103
CMOS (complementary metal–oxide–
semiconductor) materials  77
coalitions  266–268
cold war  252
collaboration  309–320
combinatorial auctions  93, 184–186, 220, 
261–262
communication  28, 58, 65, 71, 76, 89, 
126, 183
hardware  85, 86, 147
networks  65, 81, 125
commuting  224
competition  144, 149, 151, 168, 189
clan  155
efficiency  156–159
complexity  49–51, 340
computer capital  193
computer chips  77
computer gates see logic gates
computers  46
computer security  61
conceptual art  203
conflict  243–255
congestion  182, 215, 216
conscientiousness  163, 165

419
index
consciousness  48, 49, 343
consensus theories  37–39
conservatives  327
consortiums  363–364
construal level theory  24, 38, 42, 318
contract law  275
conversations  314–315
cooling  86–89, 126
fluids  90–92
systems  88
towers  90
coordination  200, 231, 234
copies  51, 71, 112, 113, 229
copy identity  305–308
copying  119–121, 144, 151, 323
cosmic rays  58
costs  60, 131, 233, 234, 236, 238, 240
and bulk buying  231
business cycle  197
communication  353
of cooling  357
and speed  70
critics  381–383
cultures  25, 41, 321–323
attitudes toward death  137
fragmentation  18, 258, 326
future  28, 29
global  29
identity  303, 305, 307
proto-industry  18
D
data centers  91
data redundancy  71
death  112, 134, 135, 136–138, 312
accidental  71
decentralization  183, 185
decision markets  187–188, 260–261
decisions  262
defense  354, 355
democracy  264–266
demographic transitions  25
descendants  1–2, 29, 365, 381, 383, 384
development,
cost of  355
research and  359
disasters  112, 369
discrimination see inequality
diversity  368
divisions  323–326
doubling time, of economy  190, 191, 192, 
193–194, 201–202, 221
drama  332
dreamtime  23–26, 29, 186
Drexler, K. Eric  33
dust  103
E
early scans  148, 150
earthquakes  93
eating  298
economic analysis, v
economic growth  28
economics  37–39, 382
economy  130, 179, 190, 276, 278, 374
doubling time of  190–194, 201–202, 221
early em  360
growth of  10, 92
size of  194
efficiency  155–165, 278
clan concentration  155–156
competition  156–159
eliteness  161–163
implications  159–161
qualities  163–165
elections  182, 183, 265
eliteness  161–163
ems see emulations
emotion words  217
emulations  2, 6–7, 130, 338
assumptions  47–48
brain  2
compared to ordinary humans  11–12
enough  151–154
envisioning a world of  34–37
inequality  244–246
introduction to  1–2
many  122–124
mass  308
models  48
niche  308
one-name  155–156
opaque  61
open source  61
overview of  5–8
precedents  13–15
slow  257
start of  5–11

420
index
emulations (continued)
summary of conclusions  8–11
technologies  46
time-sharing  65, 222
energy  70, 71, 74, 75, 82 see also entropy
control of  126
influence on behavior  83
entrenchment  344
entropy  77–80 see also energy
eras  13–14, 15 see also farming era; foraging 
era; industrial era
present  18–21
prior  15–18
values  21–23
erasures of bits  81, 82, 83
logical  78
rate of  80
reversible  79
eunuchs  285, 343
evaluations  367–370
evolution  22, 24, 25, 26, 134, 153
animal  24
em  153, 154
foragers  24, 25, 238
human  134, 153, 227
systems  344
existence  119–126
copying  119–121
many ems  122–124
rights  121–122
surveillance  124–126
existential risk  369
expenses  357
experimental art  203
experts, fake  254–255
exports  87, 95, 224
F
faces  102, 297
factions  268–270
factories  96–97, 190, 191, 192, 193
failures  208
fake experts  254–255
fakery  113–114
farmers  1, 5, 8, 13, 16–17
communities  216
culture  326–328
farming era  5, 13, 14, 190, 252
firms  253
inequality  243
marriages  289
stories  331
wars  251
fashions  257, 268, 298, 310, 325, 326
clothes  18
intellectual  301
local  296
music  28
fast ems  257
fears  343
feelings  217
fertility  25, 26
fiction  1, 2, 41, 334 see also science fiction
finance  195–197
financial inequality  247
fines  273
firms  231–234, 245
cost-focused  233
family-based  232
firm-clan relations  235–237
managers  234
mass versus niche teams  239–241
novelty-focused  233
private-equity owned  232
quality-focused  233
teams  237–239
first ems  147–150
flexibility  184, 202, 206, 224, 288, 378
flow projects  192
foragers  1, 5, 6, 8, 24–25, 29, 156, 
190, 238
communities  13
pair bonds  289
foraging era  14, 16
inequality  243
stories  331
forecasting  33–34
fractal reversing  79, 81
fractional factorial experiment 
design  115
fragility  127–130
friendship  320, 371
future, vi  1, 26, 28, 31–32, 381
abstract construal of  42
analysis of  382, 383
em  384
eras  27, 29

421
index
evaluation of  367
technology  2, 7
futurists  35
G
gates, computer  77–78
gender  290–291, 325
imbalance  291–293
geographical divisions  326
ghosts  132–133
global laws  124
God  316
governance  197, 258–262
clan  262–264
global  358
governments  364
gravity  74, 101
grit  164, 379
groups  227–241
clans  227–229
firm-clan relations  235–237
firms  231–234
managing clans  229–231
mass versus niche teams  239–241
signals  299–302
teams  237–239
growth  14, 15, 27, 28, 29, 189–197
estimate  192–194
faster  189–192
financial  195–197
modes  14
myths  194–195
H
happiness  42, 165, 204–205, 232, 238, 247, 
253, 303, 311, 320, 339, 370–371
hardware  54, 56–60, 63, 65, 278
clan-specific  355
communication  86
computer  86
deterministic  58, 86, 97, 174
digital  58
fault-tolerant  58
parallel  63–65
reversible  82
signal-processing  46, 57, 59
variable speed  82
heat transport  91–92
historians  vi, 35
history  31, 32, 41, 248, 301
leisure  204, 207
personal  111
homosexual ems  292
homosexuality  10
hospitals  302
humans  1, 5, 7, 8, 14
introduction of  13
I
identical twins  227
identity  49, 303–308, 317
ideologies  326
illness  305
implementation of emulations  55–65
hardware  56–60
mindreading  55–56
parallelism  63–65
security  60–63
impressions  295, 300
incentives  180, 181, 182, 183, 274
inclinations  342
income tax  182
individualism  20
industrial era  18–21
firms  253
stories  332
industrial organization  158
industrial revolution  232, 363
industry  5, 6, 13, 14
inequality  243–247
information  109–117
fake  113–114
records  111–112
simulations  115–117
views  109–111
infrastructure  85–98
air and water  90–92
buildings  92–95
climate controlled  85
cooling  86–89
manufacturing  95–98
innovation  189, 193, 275–277
institutions  179–180
new  181–184
intellectual property  124, 125, 147, 276, 277, 
324, 362, 378

422
index
intelligence  163, 194, 295, 297, 299, 346–347
intelligence explosion  347–350
interactions  83, 109–110
interest rates  131, 196–197, 224
J
job(s)
categories  153
evaluations  159, 233
performance  164
tasks  356
see also careers; work
judges  133, 173, 174, 261, 262, 267, 270, 272, 
277, 286
K
Kahn, Herman  33
kilo-ems  224
Kingdom Tower, Jeddah  93
L
labor  54, 143–154, 190, 361
enough ems  151–154
first ems  147–150
Malthusian wages  146–147
markets  237
selection  150–151
supply and demand  143–145
languages  16, 128, 172, 217, 278, 345
law  229, 271–273
efficient  273–275
lawsuits  274
leisure  100, 102, 129, 168, 207, 374
activities  329
fast  258
speeds  222
liability  229, 273, 274, 277
liberals  327
lifecycle  199–212
careers  199–202
childhood  210–212
maturity  204–205
peak age  202–204
preparation for tasks  206–208
training  208–210
lifespan  11, 245, 246, 247
limits  27–29
logic gates  78, 79
loyalty  115, 117, 297, 299
lying  205
M
machine reproduction estimates  192–193
machine shops  192
maladaptive behaviors  26
maladaptive cultures  25
Malthusian wages  146–147
management  200
of physical systems  109
practices  232–233
manic-depressive disorder  165
marketing  331
mass labor markets  239, 324
mass market teams  239–241
mass production  96
mating  285–293, 320, 342
gender  290–291
gender imbalance  291–293
open-source lovers  287–288
pair bonds  288–290
sexuality  285–287
maturity  204–205
meetings  75–77, 310
memories  48, 112, 136, 149, 207, 221, 
304, 307
memory  63–65, 70–71, 79, 145, 219
mental fatigue  170
mental flexibility  203
mental speeds see mind speeds
messages  81–82, 104
delays  77
methods  33, 34, 37, 40, 41, 42
Microsoft  91
military  359–360
mindfulness  165
minds  10, 335–350
features  344–345
humans  335–339
intelligence  346–347
intelligence explosion  347–350
merging  358
partial  341–343
psychology  343–346
quality  74
reading  55–56, 265, 271, 310, 314
speeds  65, 194, 199, 221–224 see also 
speed(s)

423
index
theft  10, 61, 62, 76, 124, 302
unhumans  339–341
modeling, brain cell  364
modes of civilization  13–30
dreamtime  23–26
era values  21–23
limits  27–29
our era  18–21
precedents  13–15
prior eras  15–18
modular
buildings  94
functional units  49
Moore’s law  54, 59, 80
moral choices  303
morality  2, 368
motivation, for studying future 
emulations  31–33
multitasking  171
music  311, 312, 328
myths  194–195
N
nanotech manufacturing  97
nations  39, 87, 159, 163, 184, 195, 216, 243, 
244, 245, 253
democratic  264
poor  22
rich  22, 39, 73, 94, 216, 234
war between  259
nature  81, 303
Neanderthals  21
nepotism  252–254
networks, talk  237
neurons  69
niche ems  308
niche labor markets  239, 324
niche market teams  239–241
normative considerations  44
nostalgia  308
nuclear weapons  251
O
office politics  236
offices  100, 102, 104
older people  204–205
see also aging; retirement
open-source lovers  287–288
outcome measures  260
ownership  120
P
pair bonds  286, 288–290, 292–293
parallel computing  63–65, 278, 279, 280, 353
parents  383
partial sims  115
past, the see history
patents  277
pay-for-performance  181–182
peak age  202–204
period  64–65, 70, 72, 76, 110
reversing  79–83
perseverance  164
personality, gender differences  290
personal signals  296–299
phase  65, 76, 81, 83, 110, 222
physical bodies  73, 75–76
physical jobs  73
physical violence  103
physical worlds  81
pipes  87, 88
plants  16, 87, 190, 303
police spurs  358
policy analysis  372–376
political power  354
politics  257–270, 322, 333
clan governance  262–264
coalitions  266–268
democracy  264–266
factions  268–270
governance  258–262
population  125
portable brain hardware  251
portfolios  196, 264, 378
positive considerations  44
poverty  246, 247, 249, 250
em  147, 153, 325
human  338
power  175–177
power laws  243
prediction markets  184, 186–188, 252, 255, 
274, 317
city auctions  220
estimates  231
use of  276
pre-human primates  15–16
pre-skills  143–144, 152–153, 158, 356

424
index
preparation for tasks  206–208
prices  181–184, 187
of manufactured goods  145
for resources  179
printers, 3D  192
prison  273
privacy  172
productivity  12, 163, 171, 209–210, 211, 371
progress  2, 46–47, 49, 52, 53, 54
psychology  343–346
punishments  229, 273
purchasing  97, 182, 183, 277, 304
Q
qualities  163–165
quality of life  370–372
quantum computing  357
R
random access memory (RAM)  70
rare products  299
reaction time  72–73, 76–78, 83, 217
body size and  73
physical em body  223
real world, merging virtual and  105–107
records  111–112
redistribution  246–250
regulations  28, 37–38, 106, 110, 123, 151, 159, 
217, 221, 264, 356, 358, 359
religion  276, 311–312, 326
research  194–195, 376
retirement  110, 127, 129–133, 135, 170, 174, 
221–222, 336–339
human  8
reversibility  77–80, 82, 83
rewards  159–160
rights  121–122
rituals  309–311
rulers  259
rules  164, 271–281
S
safes  172–173
salt water  91
scales  69–83
bodies  72–74
Lilliputian  74–75
speeds  69–72
scanning  148, 151, 363
scans  148–150
scenarios  34–37, 354–359, 363, 364
schools  v, 20, 164, 168, 181, 233, 295–296, 302, 
309, 333, 382
science fiction  v, 2, 6, 312
scope  39–40
search teams  210
security  60–63, 71, 101, 104, 110, 117, 231, 
306, 354, 357
breaches  85, 117
computer  104, 252, 357
costs  76
selection  5, 24, 26, 112, 137, 150–151, 153, 
158, 162, 175, 263, 292, 339, 346
self-deception  173, 261, 296
self-governance  230
serial computing  353
sexuality  285–287, 328
shared spaces  103–105
showing off  295–296
sight perception  341
signals  295–308
copy identity  305–308
groups  299–302
identity  303–305
personal  296–299
processing  46
sim administrators  116
simulations  115–117
singing  311
sins  312
size  69, 72, 73, 74, 75, 110
slaves  16, 60, 121, 123–124, 147, 149, 245, 302, 
327, 342
sleep  18, 60, 83, 133, 165
sleeping beauty strategy  131
social bonds  239
social gatherings  267
social interactions  238
social power  175–177
social reasoning  342
social relations  323
social science  382
social status  258
society  12, 321–334
software  54, 126, 277–279, 355
software developers  280–281
software engineers  200, 278, 280
souls  106

425
index
sound perception  341
spaces  110–114
space travel  225
speculation  39
speed(s)  69, 110, 137, 245, 246, 332
alternative scenario  355, 358
divisions  325, 326
em  8, 10, 353–354
em era  353
ghosts  132, 133
human-speed emulation  47
redistribution based on  248
retirement  130, 131
talking  298
time-shared em  65
top cheap  69, 70, 82, 89, 133, 222, 
280, 281
travel  329, 330
variable speed hardware  82
walking  74
spurs  9, 110, 136, 169–171, 271, 292
social interactions  171
uses of  171–174
stability  131, 132
status  257–258, 301
stories  32, 35, 102, 325, 330–333 see also 
fiction
clan  333–334
stress  20, 103, 134, 137, 164, 313
structure, city  217–219
subclans  227, 229
conflicting  356
inequality between  248
subordinates  200
subsistence levels  249
success  377–379
suicide  138–139
supply and demand  143–145
surveillance  124–126, 271
swearing  312–314
synchronization  309, 318–320
T
takeovers  196
talk networks  237
taxes  249–250, 337
teams  237–239, 296, 299, 301, 306, 307
application  210
intelligence  346
mass versus niche teams  239–241
training  204
technologies  362–364
temperature  85, 88–91
territories  374
tests  114–117
theory  37, 39, 143
tools, non-computer-based  279
top cheap speed  69, 70, 82, 89, 133, 222, 
280, 281
track records  181, 255
training  147, 151, 208–210, 212
transexuality  10
transgender conversions  292
transition, from our world to the em 
world  359–362
transport  224–226
travel  18, 22, 29, 43, 75, 102, 215, 218–219, 
303, 329–330
travel times  102
trends  353–354
trust  208, 236
clans  227, 228, 234, 235
maturity and  204, 205
Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin  33
tweaking  150, 151
U
undo action  104–105
unhumans, minds of  339–341
unions  236
United States of America  23
uploads see emulations
utilitarianism  370, 372
V
vacations  207
values  21–23, 237–238, 322, 383, 384
variety  20, 23, 96, 156, 157, 160, 189, 199, 234, 
298, 375
views  109–111, 381, 382, 383
virtual meetings  217
virtual reality  8, 102, 103–104, 112, 217, 288, 
291, 362
appearances  99–101
authentication  113
cultures  324
design of  104
leisure environments  102

426
index
virtual reality (continued)
meetings  76
merging real and  105–107
nature  81
travel, 224
voices, pitch of  297
voting  183, 265–266
W
wages  9, 12, 124, 143–145, 245, 336, 358
inequality  234, 248
Malthusian wages  146–147
rules  121, 122, 123
subsistence  354
war  16–17, 36, 131, 134, 250–252, 327, 354, 361
water  87, 90–92
Watkins, John  33
wealth  23, 26, 245–246, 321–322, 325, 
336–338
weapons  251
Whole Brain Emulation Roadmap (Sandberg 
and Bostrom)  47
Wiener, Anthony  33
wind pressures  92, 93
work  167–177, 327, 328, 331
conditions  169
culture  321, 322, 323, 324
hours  167–169, 299, 372
methods  202
social power  175–177
speeds  222
spurs  169–171
teams  237–239
workers, time spent “loafing”  170
workaholics  165, 167
World Wide Web  34
Y
Year 2000, The (Kahn and Wiener)  33
youth  11, 30, 376 see also children
Z
zoning  184, 185

