
The Babylonian Theory of the Planets 


N. M. Swerdlow 
The Babylonian Theory 
of the Planets 
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS 
PRINCETON, NEW JERSEY 

Copyright © 1998 by Princeton University Press 
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, 
Princeton, New Jersey 08540 
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 
Chichester, West Sussex 
All Rights Reserved 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Swerdlow, N. M. (Noel M.) 
The Babylonian theory of the planets / N. M. Swerdlow. 
p. 
cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and indexes. 
ISBN 0-691-01196-6 (cl : alk. paper) 
1. Astronomy, Assyro-Babylonian. 
2.Planetology—History. 
I. Title. 
QB19.S94 
1998 
528.0935—dc21 
97-34423 
The publisher would like to acknowledge the author of this volume for 
providing the camera-ready copy from which this book was printed 
Princeton University Press books are printed on acid-free paper and 
meet the guidelines for permanence and durability of the Committee 
on Production Guidelines for Book Longevity of the Council 
on Library Resources 
http: I /pup. princeton. edu 
Printed in the United States of America 
1 3 5 7 9 
10 
8 6 4 2 

To the Interpreters of the Scribes, 
O. Neugebauer, A. L. Oppenheim, A. J. Sachs, 
in Principle 


Contents 
Preface 
xi 
Introduction. Planetary Omens, 
Observations, 
and 
Calculations 
Ominous Phenomena in the Heavens 
1 
Observation of Phenomena 
16 
Calculation of Phenomena 
23 
Part 1. Periodicity 
and Variability of Synodic 
Phenomena 
Units of Distance and Location and of Time and Date 
34 
Dates and Locations of Phenomena in the Diaries: 
Observed and True Dates 
39 
Periods and Their Errors 
57 
Synodic Arc, Synodic Time, and Their Relation 
64 
Part 2. Derivation of the Parameters 
for Synodic 
Arc 
and Time from the Dates of Phenomena 
Theoretical and Empirical Considerations 
73 
System B 
78 
Saturn: System B 
80 
Jupiter: System B 
83 
Jupiter: System B' 
85 
Mars: System B 
86 
System A 
88 
Two-Zone System 
91 
Saturn: System A 
92 
Saturn: System A' 
93 
Jupiter: System A 
94 
Sun: Systems A and A' 
96 
Four-Zone Systems: Jupiter, Systems A', A", A'" 
97 
Six-Zone System: Jupiter, System Ae 
99 
Six-Zone System: Mars, System A 
100 
Mercury: Systems Αχ and A2 
104 
Method of Analysis and Derivation: 
'Stepping' through the Function 
108 
System A2: Ω, Last Visibility in the Evening 
112 
System Ai: Ξ. First Visibility in the Evening 
115 
System Ai: Γ, First Visibility in the Morning 
117 
System A2: Σ, Last Visibility in the Morning 
120 
Conclusion to the Analysis of Systems Ai and A2 
122 

viii 
Contents 
System A3: Ω, Last Visibility in the Evening 
127 
System A3: Ξ, First Visibility in the Evening 
132 
Part 3. Alignment to the Zodiac, Initial Position, 
Elongation, 
Subdivision of the Synodic Arc and Time 
Alignment to the Zodiac 
135 
Initial Position and Elongation 
141 
Elongation and Subdivision of the Synodic Arc and Time 
147 
Mars 
147 
Jupiter and Saturn 
152 
(a) Elongation of Ω and Γ 
153 
(b) Elongation and Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
156 
Mercury 
160 
Venus 
165 
Summary and Conclusion 
173 
Appendix. Alternative Methods of Deriving 
Parameters 
Derivation of System A from the Number of Phenomena 
183 
Finding the Synodic Arc from the Direct Measurement 
of Longitude 
186 
Tables 
191 
Figures 
221 
Notation and Abbreviations 
235 
References 
239 
Index of Names 
243 
Index of Subjects 
244 

Tables 
1.1. 
Periods and Errors of Periods 
191 
1.2. 
Saturn. Periods from Diaries 
192 
1.3. 
Jupiter. Periods from Diaries and LBAT 1409 
193 
1.4. 
Mars. Periods from Diaries 
194 
1.5. 
ACT Periods, Mean Synodic Arcs, 
Times, and Differences 
195 
1.6. 
Errors of Mean Differences of Time and Arc 
195 
1.7. 
Errors of Constant Conversion of Time and Arc 
195 
2. IA 
Saturn. Synodic Times from Diaries 
196 
2. IB. 
Saturn. Synodic Times from BM 76738 + 76813 
198 
2.2A. 
Jupiter. Synodic Times from Diaries 
199 
2.2B. 
Jupiter. Synodic Times from LBAT 1394 
200 
2.2C. 
Jupiter. Synodic Times from LBAT 1409 
200 
2.3. 
Mars. Synodic Times from Diaries and -665 to -657 
202 
2.4. 
Parameters of Principal Systems of Superior Planets 
203 
2.5. 
Parameters of Systems Ai and A2 of Mercury 
203 
2.6A. 
Mercury Ω. Synodic Times from Diaries 
204 
2.6B. 
Mercury Ω. Synodic Times from LBAT 1377 
205 
2.7A. 
Mercury Ξ. Synodic Times from Diaries 
206 
2.7B. 
Mercury Ξ. Synodic Times from LBAT 1377 
206 
2.8A. 
Mercury Γ. Synodic Times from Diaries 
208 
2.8B. 
Mercury Γ. Synodic Times from LBAT 1377 
209 
2.9A. 
Mercury Σ. Synodic Times from Diaries 
210 
2.9B. 
Mercury Σ. Synodic Times from LBAT 1377 
210 
2.10A. Mercury. System A3. Ω. Text M 
211 
2.10B. Mercury. System A3. Ω. Parameters 
211 
2.10C. Mercury. System A3. Ξ. Parameters 
211 
3.1. 
Limits of Zones of Saturn and Jupiter 
212 
3.2. 
Saturn. System B. Location OfA1n 
212 
3.3. 
Jupiter and Mars. System B. Location of Am 
213 
3.4. 
Jupiter. Subdivisions of the Synodic Arc and Time 
214 
3.5. 
Saturn. Subdivisions of the Synodic Arc and Time 
214 
3.6. 
Mercury. System Ai. Pushes 
215 
3.7. 
Mercury. System Ai. Elongations 
215 
3.8. 
Mercury. System A2. Pushes 
216 
3.9. 
Mercury. System A2. Elongations 
216 
3.10. 
Mercury. Elongations. Modern Computation 
217 
3.11. 
Venus. Systems Ai and A2. 
Dates and Longitudes, SE 111-120 
217 

X 
Contents 
3.12A. Venus. System Ai and A2. 
Subdivisions St of Synodic Time 
218 
3.12B. Venus. System Ai and A2. 
Subdivisions δλ of Synodic Arc 
218 
3.13A. Venus. Modern. Subdivisions St of Synodic Time 
219 
3.13B. Venus. Modern. Subdivisions δλ of Synodic Arc 
219 
3.14. 
Venus. St and δλ. BM 47151 
219 
3.15. 
Venus. ACT 1050 
219 
A. 1. 
Mars. Number of Phenomena per Zone 
220 
A.2. 
Wi Derived from Number of Phenomena per Zone 
220 
Figures 
1.1. 
Errors of Mercury's Periods in Reports of Observations 
221 
2.1. 
System B 
222 
2.2. 
Observed and Computed Synodic Times of Saturn 
222 
2.3. 
Observed and Computed Synodic Times of Jupiter 
223 
2.4. 
Observed and Computed Synodic Times of Mars 
223 
2.5. 
System A 
224 
2.6. 
Jupiter. System A' 
224 
2.7. 
Mars. System A 
225 
2.8. 
Mars. Symmetrical System 
225 
2.9. 
Mercury. Derivation of 11¾ 
225 
2.10A. Mercury. System A2. Ω 
226 
2.10B. Mercury. Ω. Observed and Computed Synodic Times 
226 
2.11A. Mercury. System Ai. Ξ 
227 
2.1 IB. Mercury. Ξ. Observed and Computed Synodic Times 
227 
2.12A. Mercury. System Ai. Γ 
228 
2.12B. Mercury. Γ. Observed and Computed Synodic Times 
228 
2.13A. Mercury. System A2. Σ 
229 
2.13B. Mercury. Σ. Observed and Computed Synodic Times 
229 
2.14A. Mercury. System A3. Ω (1) 
230 
2.14B. Mercury. System A3. Ω (3) 
230 
2.15A. Mercury. SyStCmA3. Ξ (3) 
231 
2.15B. Mercury. SyStCmA3. Ξ (1) 
231 
3.1. 
System B. Graph of Δλ and λ 
232 
3.2. 
Instantaneous Longitudes of AM and Am 
232 
3.3. 
Elongations of Ω and Γ 
233 
3.4. 
Mercury. System Ai. Elongations 
233 
3.5. 
Phenomena of Venus. Systems Ai and A2. SE 111-120 
234 

Preface 
The origin of this study goes back to the summer of 1984 at 
Brown University. Neugebauer was working through observations, 
which he had earlier been given by Abe Sachs, of distances of plan-
ets from normal stars, to determine what if any coordinate system 
was used for the directions 'above' and 'below', 'in front of and 
'behind', and what was the size of the unit of measurement, the 
kus (cubit), in us (degrees). Since there were a lot of observations, I 
tried my hand at it also, taking planetary positions from Tucker-
man's tables (1962) and graphing them with positions of the 
normal stars. My conclusion, for what it is worth, was that there 
was no coordinate system at all; when the planet was close to the 
star—although not necessarily at its closest approach, which 
could be several days away—a distance was measured and that was 
that. The specifications 'above' and 'below', 'in front of and 
'behind' refer roughly to the direction of the planet's motion. Since 
the planet moves more or less parallel to the ecliptic, above and 
below are more or less perpendicular to the ecliptic, but are not a 
coordinate of latitude and are often quite skewed; in front of and 
behind are to the west and east, but not a coordinate of longitude. 
For the equivalent of the cubit in degrees, by taking the average of 
many measurements, I found something over 2°, about 2.1° or 2.2° 
if I remember correctly—Gerd GraJ3hoff (1998), from a far more 
thorough study, has found about 2.4° and evidence for ecliptic 
coordinates—and I began to think that the kus used for the 
measurements is not strictly convertible to the us, that is to say, 
they are units of two different metrological systems, the kus for 
observation and the us for computation. Further, whatever the 
value of the cubit may be, the scatter of the measurements was so 
great that it was evident that the observations were not at all 
accurate—which probably has something to do with the skewed 
directions and missing the closest approach by several days—so 
inaccurate in fact, that it is hard to imagine how they could have 
been used to establish positions of planets, which one had 
assumed was their purpose. It is now my belief that such measure-
ments of distance at conjunctions of planets with stars, like the 
identical measurements at conjunctions of planets with each 
other, were purely for purposes of divination, and had no role 
whatever in the planetary theory of the ephemerides. 

xii 
Preface 
If planetary positions could not be found from distances from 
normal stars—and the problems, discussed in the Appendix to this 
study, are greater than I have thus far mentioned—how could the 
parameters of the ephemerides be derived? The ephemerides are 
based upon arithmetic functions for the computation of synodic 
arc and synodic time, the arc and time between successive 
phenomena of the same kind, as heliacal rising. Neugebauer had 
worked out a method of deriving the parameters of System B from 
the minimum and maximum synodic arc (HAMA, 429-30), and I 
wondered whether something similar could be done using synodic 
time. With some simple alterations it could, and by assuming 
suitable estimates of the minimum and maximum synodic times of 
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, I was able to derive exactly the parame-
ters of System B for synodic arc and time. I gave the results to 
Neugebauer, who thought they were interesting, but pointed out, 
correctly, that one would have to do more to show that this was 
what the Babylonians in fact did. But I could not see how to apply 
synodic time to System A, in which one had to work directly with 
synodic arc, and put the subject aside for nearly ten years. In fact 
the way was obvious, and I must have been blind not to see it. 
In May of 1994 a colloquium was held at the Dibner Institute 
for the History of Science and Technology on the subject of 
Ancient Astronomy and Celestial Divination. I decided again to 
attempt to derive the parameters from synodic time. This time it 
worked. The method depends upon a well-known relation found in 
the ephemerides of every planet except Venus, that synodic arc and 
synodic time differ by a constant, the numerical difference of the 
mean synodic arc and time, which is specific to each planet. The 
relation can be used in both directions. In the ephemerides it is 
used to find synodic time from synodic arc, but it may also be used 
the other way around. Now, the great series of observational 
reports, the Astronomical Diaries, contain observations of the phe-
nomena of the planets dated to the day of the calendar month but 
with only rough indications of location, by zodiacal sign, which is 
at best equivalent to specifying the date only by month; and the 
hundreds of distances from normal stars in the Diaries are, for the 
reasons just given, useless for determining position with greater 
accuracy. However, from the dates of phenomena in the Diaries, 
synodic times may be found, and by means of the relation between 
synodic arc and synodic time, synodic arcs may be found. And 
these suffice to determine the parameters of the ephemerides from 
the dates of phenomena alone without a single measurement of 
position more precise than location by zodiacal sign. 

Preface 
xiii 
The focus of this study, in Part 2, is an application of this 
method, which has its complications, especially for Mercury, which 
is also the most interesting. It is my belief that this was the way 
the Babylonians derived the parameters of their mathematical 
astronomy. If I did not believe it, I do not know who would, and I 
would not have expended the effort to apply it in ways that can 
only charitably be called trial and error. Whether the method is 
sound, in principle or in detail, and whether it was in fact the 
method used by the Babylonians, I leave to the judgment of the 
reader. As Neugebauer (1954, 74) once remarked, The safest 
method to avoid all possible errors consists in doing nothing.' I, at 
any rate, can see no plausible alternative, and an alternative must 
be applied in detail, not merely suggested. The Introduction is 
concerned with the relation of celestial divination to observational 
and mathematical astronomy—I believe the relation is close and in 
part provided the motivation for deriving the parameters from 
synodic times given by the dates of phenomena—and Part 1 to the 
observation of planetary phenomena, their periodicity and varia-
bility, and the relation of synodic arc and time, which are the 
foundation of Part 2. Part 3 takes up the remaining subjects of 
alignment to the zodiac of the functions for synodic arc and time, 
subdivision of the synodic arc and time, and initial position or 
epoch, the one precise location that is required, which I believe to 
have been found from conventional values of the elongations of 
phenomena from the (mean) sun without measurement of posi-
tion. Alternative methods of deriving the parameters for synodic 
arc are considered in an Appendix. This is not an analysis of every 
part of Babylonian planetary theory; rather it is concerned with its 
theoretical and empirical foundations, but in this way does cover 
most aspects of the subject. A yet larger subject is also treated in 
the course of this study, namely, that in the collection and 
interpretation of celestial omens, and in the observation and 
calculation of celestial phenomena, the Babylonians created the 
methods and practices of science itself as we still understand it. To 
say this is not new, but neither is it sufficiently appreciated, and I 
hope the reader will give it careful consideration rather than 
dismiss it out of hand in favor of the conventional attribution to 
Greek philosophers. That there are others more qualified to treat 
all of these subjects, I have no doubt, but rather than avoid all 
possible errors I have chosen to do and to say what I can. 
Needless to say, this investigation would have been impossible 
without Neugebauer's Astronomical Cuneiform Texts (ACT); the 
exposition of planetary theory in A History of Ancient Mathematical 

xiv 
Preface 
Astronomy (HAMA) is still more profound, especially after you have 
read it five or six times. Fortunately, I have been able to draw upon 
Astronomical Diaries and Related Texts from Babylonia (ADT), begun 
by Abraham Sachs and now nearing completion by Hermann 
Hunger, from which I have taken as many periods and synodic 
times as I could find—perhaps missing a few—to evaluate the 
ancient observations and compare them with the functions of the 
ephemerides. For celestial omens, the foremost science of antiquity 
and the foundation of our subject, I have used above all Hermann 
Hunger's Astrological Reports to Assyrian Kings (ARAK) and Simo 
Parpola's Letters of Assyrian and Babylonian Scholars (LABS), truly 
remarkable collections by any standard. Along with ACT and 
HAMA, the principal studies of planetary theory are Franz Xaver 
Kugler's Stemkunde und Stemdienst in Babel (SSB), Neugebauer's 
Babylonian Planetary Theory (1954), and Asger Aaboe's On Baby-
lonian Planetary Theories (1958) and later papers, to all of which I 
have turned constantly. I have attempted to make this study self-
contained, but the reader wishing a general introduction can do no 
better than to read Chapter 5 of Neugebauer's The Exact Sciences in 
Antiquity (1957) and on planetary theory in particular, the paper 
Babylonian Planetary Theory just mentioned. A fine survey of Baby-
lonian astronomy and astrology by John Britton and Christopher 
Walker (1996) has recently appeared. The References at the end of 
this study contain a number of works, not specifically cited, that I 
also consider pertinent. There is a short history of research on 
these subjects in Swerdlow (1998a), and an extensive bibliography 
of all aspects of Babylonian astronomy and celestial divination by 
Christopher Walker (1993). 
Finally, the people who wrote and used our texts cannot really 
be called astronomers, nor can they be called astrologers, although 
they were both. They were scribes, priests, and temple officials, at 
once civil servants and senior research fellows, at times advisors to 
the king, skilled in various sorts of ritual, divination, exorcism, 
and magic, in general, wise men, scholars learned in the wisdom of 
their day, as noted by Parpola (1993). To the Greeks they were 
known as 'Chaldaeans', a name still used by Epping and Kugler 
that has all but disappeared. In order to keep from referring to 
them over and over again as 'the Babylonians', and since reviving 
'Chaldaeans' would seem very quaint, I am calling them 'Scribes', 
as many of them were Scribes of Enuma Anu Enlil. 

Preface 
xv 
Acknowledgments: 
I have received helpful comments on this 
study from the participants in the conference at the Dibner 
Institute in 1994. Christopher Walker allowed me to use his 
edition of early observations of Saturn, presented at the confer-
ence, in advance of publication. After a preliminary version was 
circulated, Alexander Jones sent a detailed report, Erica Reiner 
gave advice on divination, Hermann Hunger sent the translation of 
the third volume of ADT in advance of publication and Abe Sach's 
transcription of LBAT 1409, and David Brown sent a copy of his 
dissertation (1995) on planetary omens and early astronomy. To 
these scholars, and to all scholars in these demanding subjects, 
both past and present, I am very grateful. Additional acknowledg-
ments are noted where they are pertinent. I owe my introduction to 
this subject, indeed, to the history of the exact sciences, to Asger 
Aaboe; if I have differed with him in a few places, it is because he 
taught me to take nothing on authority and work everything out 
for myself. And our differences are not great, for in his study of 
1958 (pp. 265-67), he too noted that functions for heliacal rising 
and setting, of Mercury in particular, could be based upon synodic 
time. My other great debt is to O. Neugebauer, for continuing the 
education begun by Aaboe through twenty years of talking about 
the exact sciences, and much else besides. There is hardly a page 
of this study that does not rely upon ACT, HAMA, and our endless 
discussions, although I should note that, like Kugler, he had little 
patience with celestial divination. Finally, I am grateful to my 
colleagues in the Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics of 
The University of Chicago, and particularly to S. Chandrasekhar, 
for recognizing and encouraging historical work as a serious part 
of the study of astronomy and astrophysics, which, after all, began 
with the Scribes of Enuma Anu Enlil. 
The University of Chicago, October 1996 
N.S. 


The Babylonian Theory of the Planets 


Introduction 
Planetary Omens, 
Observations, 
and 
Calculations 
Ominous Phenomena 
in the 
Heavens 
In the years preceding the fall of Babylon in 539 BC to the 
Lord's 'anointed' (mdslah), King Cyrus the Achaemenid, Second 
Isaiah condemned the Virgin daughter of Babylon,' the 'daughter 
of the Chaldaeans,' to sit silently in darkness while he reviled her 
with any number of comminations and prophecies, one of which is 
particularly interesting. 
Persist in your incantations and your multitude of spells, in which 
you have toiled from your youth, if by chance such is of use to you 
or makes you more bold; you have wearied yourself in your multi-
tude of consultations. Let the prognosticators of the heavens, who 
observe the stars and calculate the new moons, that from them they 
may make known your future, arise and save you. Behold, they have 
become as straw, the fire has consumed them, they shall not deliver 
their soul from the grasp of the flame; there are neither coals by 
which they may be warmed nor a hearth by which they may sit. 
[Isaiah 47.12-14) 
Clearly the prophet does not have a high opinion of 'Chaldaean' 
magicians and astrologers, and just how ineffective they were in 
advising the unfortunate king of Babylon at the time of the 
Persian conquest is well known from Daniel 5. But he has a good 
idea of the practices of the 'prognosticators of the heavens' (hobre 
samayim, perhaps 'partitioners of the heavens' into constellations, 
images, of which Second Isaiah would surely not approve) or, as we 
now call them, the Scribes (tupsar) of Enuma Anu Enlil. Their 
practices were still known to the translators of the Septuagint and 
Vulgate, but not to more recent translators of Scripture—Luther 
has in mind something like German almanac makers of his time, 
'die Meister des Himmelslaufs und die Sternkucker, die nach den 
Mond rechnen, was uber dich kommen werde.' Only with the 
publication in 1870 of Sir Henry Rawlinson's Cuneiform Inscriptions 
of Western Asia III and in 1874 of Astronomy and Astrology of the 

2 
Introduction 
Babylonians, one of the first works of Archibald Henry Sayce, could 
one learn something of the object of Isaiah's indignation, and 
what one learned was extraordinary. Prognosticate by the new 
moon they did, and by the full moon, and by the appearance of the 
moon, and by eclipses of the sun and moon, and by the risings and 
settings and conjunctions of stars and planets, and by halos and 
clouds and rain and winds, in short, by anything in the heavens, 
astronomical or meteorological, that could be taken as ominous, a 
prophetic sign given by the gods. 
And they did more than prognosticate, for just as Second 
Isaiah writes, they observed the stars and calculated the new 
moons, and calculated the phenomena of the sun, moon, and 
planets also. But this only became clear with the publication of 
Epping and Strassmaier's Astronomisches aus Babylon (1889) and 
Kugler's Die Babylonische Mondrechnimg (1900) and Sternkunde und 
Sterndienst in Babel (1907-24), from which it could be seen that the 
very origin of mathematical astronomy was Babylonian and the 
work of the Scribes of Enuma Anu Enlil. These discoveries were, 
and are, the most important, the most revolutionary in the entire 
study of science in antiquity, perhaps in the entire study of the 
history of science. Most of the known sources of mathematical 
astronomy are published in Neugebauer's Astronomical Cuneiform 
Texts (1955), of observational astronomy in Sachs and Hunger's 
Astronomical Diaries and Related Texts from Babylonia (1988-), and 
the sources for divination, the most obscure and difficult of all, 
have been in the course of publication for many years by a number 
of scholars, beginning with Rawlinson, Sayce, Craig, Harper, 
Thompson, Virolleaud, and Weidner, and more recently by Hunger, 
Oppenheim, Parpola, Pingree, Reiner, Rochberg, and van Soldt. 
Our first concern is celestial divination, as it is the motivation and 
foundation of observational and mathematical astronomy. 
The great omen series Enuma Anu Enlil, originally in seventy 
tablets containing about seven thousand omens, is divided into 
four parts, first identified by Rawlinson, comprising lunar omens 
(Sin), solar omens (Samas), meteorological omens (Adad), and 
omens of stars and planets (Istar). Omens are classically in the 
conditional form: If (protasis)..., then (apodosis)..., e.g. 'If Jupiter 
stands in Pisces: the Tigris and the Euphrates will be filled with 
silt' (LABS 159), 'If the moon is surrounded by a halo and the Bow 
star stands in it: men will rage, and robberies will become numer-
ous in the land' (ARAK 295), 'If the Plough star (here Mars) comes 
close to Scorpius: the ruler will die from the sting of a scorpion, 
variant: he will be seized in his palace' (ARAK 502), although there 

Ominous Phenomena 
3 
are also lists of phenomena followed by one or more prognoses 
without the conditional. The protasis may be a real phenomenon, 
as a heliacal rising, or something imaginary or even impossible, as 
an eclipse on the twentieth day of the month; the apodosis may be 
a specific event, perhaps even historical, as the murder of a king, 
or may be general and conventional, justice and good fortune, or 
the contrary, in the kingdom. Celestial omens concern kings and 
entire nations, and the most frequent subjects are political, 
military, and agricultural: life or death for the king, friendship or 
enmity between kings, victory or defeat in war, invasion by a for­
eign army, palace intrigue, insurrection, plentiful or poor harvest, 
health and abundance or sickness and death of sheep and cattle, 
rainfall, flood, drought, locusts, famine, pestilence. 
Although omens may be auspicious or inauspicious, and many 
are auspicious, the world of the omens, it must be confessed, is 
bleak and indifferent, even terrifying, with the same unremitting 
cruelty of gods and men found in the Assyrian royal chronicles, a 
frightful and accurate reflection of the violence of life in ancient 
Mesopotamia. Seemingly out of nowhere, kings are murdered, 
armies massacred, nations perish through warfare, famine, and 
disease, or so would it be were precautions not taken. And precau­
tions were taken. An omen is a sign or warning, not a cause, and 
apotropaic (namburbu, 'loosing') rituals were performed to avert 
events foretold by inauspicious omens. Fortune is decreed and 
revealed by the gods, but not irrevocably so. Apotropaic rituals may 
be religious or magical—the distinction is, as always, a fine one— 
at times employing the effects of stars or planets on the principle 
of homoeopathic magic, of like influencing like, as 'hand-lifting' 
(suillakku) prayers before the moon, stars, and planets; or evasive, 
as the enthronement of a substitute king (sar puhi) following an 
eclipse, to take on the guilt and punishment of the king, perhaps a 
form of contagious magic since the substitute, who is to 'go to his 
fate,' that is, to be executed, takes on the attributes of the king 
and even has a tablet containing the inauspicious omens read to 
him and affixed to his garment. Perhaps more practically following 
an evil omen, the king is often advised simply not to go outside. 
The principles of divination from natural phenomena are set 
out in a text of the Neo-Assyrian period, first noted by Sayce (1874) 
and published by Oppenheim as Ά Babylonian Diviner's Manual", 
containing catalogues of two series of ominous signs on the earth 
and in the heavens, both astronomical and meteorological, that 
explains the relation of signs in the heavens and on the earth to 
each other and to what will follow (1974, 203-05). 

4 
Introduction 
The signs in the sky just as those on the earth give us sig-
nals....their good and evil portents are in harmony (i.e., confirming 
each other). The signs on earth just as those in the sky give us 
signals. Sky and earth both produce portents; though appearing 
separately, they are not separate (because) sky and earth are 
related. A sign that portends evil in the sky is (also) evil on earth, 
one that portends evil on earth is evil in the sky. 
When you look up a sign (in these omen collections), be it one in 
the sky or one on earth, and if that sign's evil portent is con-
firmed(?), then it has indeed occurred with regard to you in refer-
ence to an enemy or to a disease or to a famine. Check (then) the 
date of that sign, and should no sign have occurred to counteract 
(that) sign, should no annulment have taken place, one cannot make 
(it) pass by, its evil (consequences) cannot be removed (and) it will 
happen. 
These are the things you have to consider when you study the 
two collections (called) 'If from the month Arahsamna on' (and) 'If a 
star has a crest in front.' (When) you have identified the sign and 
(when) they ask you to save the city, the king, and his subjects from 
enemy, pestilence, and famine (predicted), what will you say? When 
they complain to you, how will you make (the evil consequences) 
bypass (them)? 
In this rather fatalistic text, the way of averting an inauspicious 
omen is to find a counteracting auspicious omen, considering 
whether signs on earth and in the sky, or perhaps any two signs, 
confirm or contradict each other, and the only apotropaic practice 
described is to look further to the ominous character of months 
and days of the month, as though these overrule or take prece-
dence over other omens from the earth and sky. It is nevertheless 
clear that omens are taken to be signs rather than causes. 
The characterization of the celestial omen series by Parpola 
(1993, 53) seems to me entirely accurate. 
I understand the series Enuma Anu Enlil primarily as a scientific 
collection of signals sent by the gods to the king. They sent these 
signs in order to affect the conduct of the king, the actions that he 
should take, and these signs were there for this single purpose 
only—that the gods could express their pleasure or displeasure with 
the conduct of the king through a system of signs that could be 
interpreted and reacted to. 
As in Samuel 
and Kings, 
military defeat, intrigue, insurrection, 
injustice, sacrilege, immorality, as well as famine and pestilence 
are all the responsibility, or due to the irresponsibility, of the king, 

Ominous Phenomena 
5 
who the gods are warning to mend his ways, in Israel and Judah 
through irascible prophets, in Babylonia and Assyria through signs 
sent from heaven. One thinks of astrological history, explaining 
the fortunes of kingdoms by astrology, as an invention of late an-
tiquity, but the Scribes were doing something similar, although as 
a prophetic sign or warning, two thousand years earlier. The word 
'scientific' in Parpola's description is well chosen. If our modern 
understanding of nature may be characterized as above all scien-
tific, the ancient understanding may be characterized as above all 
ominous; every natural occurrence, regular or irregular, may be an 
omen. This was true when the compilation of the omen series 
began early in the second millennium, and perhaps remains true 
for much of the world even now. But the two are not necessarily 
mutually exclusive, indeed, in the belief in omens lies the birth of 
science. For the systematic collection of celestial and meteorologi-
cal omens as carried out in Mesopotamia required a systematic 
study of celestial and meteorological phenomena; and thus it is 
our belief that the collection and the interpretation of omens must 
be regarded as a science, in fact, as the first and the most impor-
tant science of antiquity—whether we consider it right or wrong, 
true or false, is irrelevant—and the ultimate origin of science as we 
understand it today, a subject to which we shall return. 
The most frequent object of celestial divination in Enuma Anu 
Enlil is the moon, but our interest is exclusively with the planets 
and here we can treat planetary divination only briefly, concentrat-
ing on the phenomena taken to be ominous rather than on the 
interpretation of the omens. There is a detailed study of planetary 
omens by Brown (1995), of celestial divination in general by Koch-
Westenholz (1995), a popular treatment by Baigent (1994), and of 
the yet larger subject of astral magic by Reiner (1995). Planetary 
omens are concerned with characteristic phenomena of the 
planets: heliacal risings and settings, stations, retrogradations; 
whether planets are bright or faint; conjunctions of planets with 
the moon, with stars, with constellations, and with each other; 
occultations of planets by the moon and their appearance within 
halos about the moon. Such omens appear to be determined by 
several criteria: the character of the planet, or rather of the deity 
represented by the planet; the character of the phenomenon; the 
appearance of the planet; the lunar calendar month and day on 
which the phenomenon occurs, each of which has an ominous 
character; the time of day, morning or evening, meaning before 
sunrise or after sunset; and the location of the phenomenon, 
either with respect to constellations or stars, which have their own 

6 
Introduction 
character and can also substitute for other planets, or by direction 
on the horizon, east or west, since heliacal phenomena have char-
acteristic directions as well as times. The number of permutations 
is very large, and thus the interpretation of omens was in principle 
a science of great complexity requiring a high degree of expertise 
and much specialized knowledge; the collectors and interpreters of 
omens were the first scientists of antiquity. Most of these criteria, 
phase, calendar date, time of day, location, direction, are periodic, 
recurring after variable periods that fall within fixed limits, and it 
is these periodicities that underlie, that make possible, the later 
development of mathematical astronomy. This is obviously of the 
highest importance. 
Examples of many of these criteria may already be found in 
Sayce's (1874) survey of tablets in the British Museum, published 
by Rawlinson and George Smith in Cuneiform Inscriptions of Wes-
tern Asia III (1870). Thus far, few collections of planetary omens 
from the Series have appeared in translation, although there are 
many individual omens, and even small collections, in the reports 
and letters in ARAK and LABS, which are among the most curious 
documents to survive from all of antiquity. Nearly all of the almost 
one thousand that are known were sent to the great Assyrian kings 
Esarhaddon and his son Assurbanipal in about 680-650 BC by 
court and temple officials of Nineveh, and by similar officials and 
scholars of Babylon and other cities, men wise and grave, who 
were either themselves Scribes of Enuma Anu Enlil or, even if not, 
faithfully consulted the Series and analyzed its voluminous 
interpretations of ominous phenomena for the edification of their, 
to say the least, formidable lord and master. In the Persian and 
Seleucid periods, when observational and mathematical astronomy 
reached its highest development, the Scribes were principally 
associated with Esagila, the temple of Marduk in Babylon, and 
there was also a notable center in Uruk. The Series continued to 
be copied, sometimes with commentaries, but nothing like the 
Assyrian letters and reports is known, at least in surviving 
sources, and it is not clear what purpose the work of the Scribes 
served. It may have become a purely scholarly, scientific activity, 
but since the astronomical and astrological wisdom of the 
'Chaldaeans', as the Scribes were called, was so celebrated in this 
late period, their divination must also have had a public function. 
The most extensive account of the Chaldaeans, by Diodorus (2.29-
31), which, although unreliable in some details, is generally con-
firmed by cuneiform sources, reports that prophecies were given to 
Alexander, Antigonus, and Seleucus Nicator, all of which naturally 

Ominous 
Phenomena 
7 
came to pass. Such renown contrasts notably with the sixth 
century, when Second Isaiah alone so much as noticed the 
Scribes, and not favorably. Here we shall give a sufficient number 
of examples from the letters and reports—we would wish to give 
more—to show the various kinds of planetary phenomena used for 
divination and the criteria for deducing their ominous significance. 
What is perhaps the most basic to the ominous character of 
phenomena, whether planetary or lunar, is the ominous character 
of the month and the days of the month, which correspond to 
particular phases or ages of the moon in the lunar calendar, a 
belief that may have originated in Mesopotamia, but was universal 
in the ancient world (Grafton and Swerdlow, 1988). Indeed, the 
principal purpose of a calendar until, say, the eighteenth century, 
was not so much to provide a register of dates as to observe the 
character of days, whether these days be dedicated to gods or 
saints, and perform the required rituals, offerings, and prayers. 
The Calendar of Lessons in the Book of Common Prayer is a living 
descendant of this practice. As examples of the ominous character 
of days with their prescribed rituals, consider 1, 14, and 21 Nisan, 
when the moon is new, full, and at third quarter, in the menology 
of the tenth century from Assur published by Langdon (1935, 73ff.) 
and Labat (1939, 51ff.). 
1 Nisan. God Enlil; sinister; difficult for the sick; a physician 
may not lay his hand upon the sick, a prophet may utter no word; it 
is not suitable for doing anything desirable. The king and lord may 
speak boldly. Lucky. Fish and lovage may be eaten. The king shall 
clean his garment. King must make offering to Enlil, Ninlil, 
Shamash, and Nusku. 
14 Nisan. Ninlil. Lucky and sinister, difficult for the sick. 
Physicians may not practice and seers not prophesy. Unsuited to do 
anything desirable. If one works he will lose his money. One may 
not swear in the name of god, nor worship Sin and Shamash. King 
must make offering to Sin, Shamash, and Ningal (wife of Sin). One 
may bring a wife into his house; he may put his house in order. 
21 Nisan. Day of the reckoning of Shamash. Unlucky, sinister. 
Difficult for the sick. Physicians may not practice and a seer may 
not speak. Unsuited for doing anything desirable. Let the king speak 
many charitable words (abound in good deeds). Because of Bau one 
may not sweep his house, nor wash his feet. The king makes offer-
ing to Shamash and Bau. All work of the weavers must cease, and 
may it not prosper. 
It is for the sake of these warnings and rituals that the first visibil-
ity and full moon were so carefully observed, since taking the 

8 
Introduction 
proper precautions and performing the proper ritual on each day of 
the month depends upon correctly identifying the first day and 
succeeding phases. As noted above, the 'Diviner's Manual' advises 
consulting the months and days of the month in order to avert 
inauspicious omens (Oppenheim 1974, 205, 209). 
This is the method to dispel them (the evil portents): 
Twelve are the months of the year, 360 are its days. Study the 
length of the year and look in (the tablets) for the timings of the 
disappearances, the visibilities (and) the first appearance of the 
stars, (also) the position!?) of the Iku star at the beginning of the 
year, the first appearance of the sun and the moon in the months 
Addaru and Ululu, the risings and first appearances of the moon as 
observed each month; watch the 'opposition' of the Pleiades and the 
moon, and (all) this will give you the proper answer, (thus) establish 
the months of the year (and) the days of the month, and do perfectly 
whatever you are doing. 
The concern with the length of the year, the risings and settings of 
stars, in particular the Iku (Field) star and the Pleiades, and of the 
sun and moon in Adar and Elul, are for intercalation, to know the 
correct month; the first appearance of the moon is to know the 
correct day. Both are essential to the ominous character of days. 
The ominous character of calendar dates appears already in 
Tablet 63 (lstar 13) of Enuma Anu Enlil, containing risings and 
settings of Venus for the reign of Ammisaduqa, first published by 
Rawlinson (1870) and translated by Sayce (1874), and known for 
its use in dating the first Babylonian Dynasty (Kugler, SSB 2, 257-
311; Langdon et cd., 1928; Huber et al, 1982), in which the phases 
and their omens are dated to days of the month. Here are two 
examples, omens 26 and 27 in Reiner and Pingree (1975-), probably 
part of a later addition to the original collection, incorporated into 
the series Iqqur Ipus, which contains hundreds of omens drawn 
from natural events and human activities month by month, as 
published by Labat (1965, 200-03). 
If in the month Abu on the 6th day Venus is seen in the east, 
there will be rain in the heavens, there will be desolation; until the 
10th day of Nisan it will remain in the east; the 11th day of Nisan it 
will disappear; for three months it will be invisible in the heaven, 
and on the 11th day of Duzu Venus will rise in the west; (then) there 
will be enmity in the land, the harvest of the land will be abundant. 
If in the month of Ululu on the 7th day Venus is seen in the 
west, the harvest of the land will be abundant, the heart of the land 
will be content; until the 11th day of Aiaru it will remain in the west; 

Ominous 
Phenomena 
9 
the 12th day of Aiaru it will disappear; for seven days it will be 
invisible in the heaven, and on the 19th day of Aiaru Venus will rise 
in the east; (then) there will be enmity in the land. 
Although the periods of visibility and invisibility here are 
schematic—in the group used for dating the reign of Ammisaduqa 
they are, in principle, observational—and the omens formulaic, the 
phenomena and their ominous significance are associated with 
specific days of the month, or so it appears, each of which, as we 
have seen, has its own ominous character. It is notable that in 
this text only the appearances of Venus are ominous, not the 
disappearances, and whether it is a morning appearance in the 
east or an evening appearance in the west must also be significant. 
More commonly, however, entire months determine the charac-
ter of planetary omens, perhaps on the principle that 'a sign from 
a star (is valid) for one month of days' (ARAK 399, 414) and be-
cause it would not be easy to devise different omens for each day of 
every month. 
If Venus disappears in the east in Nisan (I) from the 1st to the 
30th day: there will be wailings in the land. 'Waitings' are weepings. 
This is bad for Elam. (ARAK 145) 
Venus disappeared in the west. If Venus in Ab (V) descends 
darkly to the horizon and sets: there will be a fall of Elam. If Venus 
in Ab (V), from the 1st to the 30th day, disappears in the west: 
there will be rains; the harvest of the land will prosper. During this 
month (Venus) will become visible in the east in Leo. (ARAK 246) 
If in Kislev (IX) from the 1st day to the 30th day Venus disap-
pears in the east: there will be a famine of barley and straw in the 
land. (ARAK 338, cf. 51, 185) 
[Mercury] became visible [in Kislev (IX)I. If a planet becomes 
visible in Kislev (IX): there will be robbers in the land. (ARAK 249) 
[If] in Tammuz (IV) Mars becomes visible: the cemetery of war-
riors will enlarge. [If] a planet stands in the north: there will be 
deaths; attack of the king of Akkad against the enemy land. If a 
strange star (Mars) comes close to Gemini: the king will die, and 
there will be hostility. (ARAK 341, cf. 114, 143) 
If Jupiter becomes visible in Marchesvan (VIII): one king will 
send hostile messages to another. If Jupiter stands in the mishu of 
Sagittarius: there will be killings in the land. If the same star comes 
close to Indubanna: business will diminish. Indubanna is the mishu 
of Sagittarius. (ARAK 369, cf. 356) 
Note that the last two omens specify location as well as month, 
and deduce conclusions from both, and some omens refer only to 
'a planet' (bibbu), which usually means Mercury or Saturn. 

10 
Introduction 
It is, however, important to be certain the planet appears, as 
the following letter of -669 XII 7 to Esarhaddon from his trusted 
servant Nabu-ahhe-eriba shows. 
[He who] wrote to the king, my lord, The planet Venus is visible, 
it is visible [in the month Ad]ar (XII),' is a vile man, an ignoramus, a 
cheat! [And he who] wrote to the king, my lord, 'Venus is (...) rising 
in the constellation A[ries], [does] not [speak) the truth (either). 
Venus is not yet visible! Why does one so [deceitfjully send such (a 
report) to the ki[ng, my lo]rd? (LABS 72, which continues the same.) 
This diatribe seems to refer to an anticipated appearance of Venus 
that has not yet occurred. Whether appearances and disappearan-
ces are early or late is itself significant, as has been noted by 
Brown (1995, 2.2.b), of which the following are examples. 
[If Venjus stays in her position for long: [the da]ys of the king 
will become long. If the rising of [Venus] is seen early: the king of 
the land will extend his life. (ARAK 27, cf. 247) 
Venus set in the east. If Venus gets a flare: it is not good. This 
means she does not complete her days (of visibility) but sets. (ARAK 
145) 
(If) Jupiter passes to the west: the land will dwell in quiet. 
Jupiter stood there one month over its period. (ARAK 456, cf. 329) 
The solar eclipse which occurred in Nisan (I) did not touch the 
quadrant of Subartu. In addition, the planet Jupiter retained its 
position (in the sky); it was present for 15 more days. That is 
propitious. (LABS 100) 
The 'farmer' should perform the apotropaic ritual against evil of 
any kind; the 'farmer' should (also) perform the penitential psalms 
for Nergal and the 'hand-lifting' prayer for Nergal. Let them write in 
the apotropaic ritual and the prayer as follows: 'In the evil of the 
planet Mars, which exceeded its term (of invisibility) and aplpeared] 
in the constellation Aries; may its evil not [approach], nor come near, 
not press up[on (me)], not affect me, my country, the people of [my 
pal]ace and my army!' Let them write like this in the apotropaic ritual 
and the 'hand-lifting' prayer. (LABS 381) 
The remarks on the solar eclipse show the geographical signifi-
cance of which quadrant is eclipsed, and the delayed heliacal 
setting of Jupiter is taken as a good omen for the king. The 
'farmer' is the title taken by the true king while a substitute is 
enthroned following an eclipse. Mars is identified with Nergal, is 
even referred to as Nergal, and thus an apotropaic ritual, here a 
'hand-lifting' prayer, to avert the evil omen of a delayed appearance 
of Mars, and perhaps its appearance in Aries, is directed to Nergal. 

Ominous 
Phenomena 
11 
A letter from Mar-Issar, Esarhaddon's 'eye and ear' in Babylon, 
dated to -668 III 11, concerning a late appearance of Jupiter, is of 
still more interest. 
[Last year], it (Jupiter) became visible on the 22nd of Iyyar (II) in 
the constellation [Perseus]; it disappeared in Nissan (I) of the 
[present] year on the 29th day. Jupiter [may remain invisible] from 
20 to 30 days; now it kept itself back from the sky for 35 days. It 
appeared on the 6th of Sivan (III) in the area of Orion, exceeding its 
term by 5 days. The relevant interpretation is as follows: 
If Jupiter appears in Sivan: destruction of the land will be 
brought about, barley will become expensive. If Jupiter approaches 
Orion: the (pest) god will consume (the land). If Jupiter enters into 
Orion: the gods will consume the land. If Jupiter becomes visible in 
the path of the Anu stars: the crown prince will rebel against his 
father and seize the throne. The path of the Anu stars (means) Elam; 
it pertains to Elam. Nevertheless they should strengthen the guard 
and perform the relevant apotropaic ritual. 
Furthermore, when it had moved onwards 5 days, (the same 
amount) by which it had exceeded its term, it completed 40 days. 
The relevant interpretation runs as follows: 
If Neberu (Jupiter) drags: the gods will get angry, righteousness 
will be put to shame, bright things will become dull, clear things 
confused; rain and floods will cease, grass will be beaten down, (all) 
the countries will be thrown into confusion; the gods will not listen 
to praylers], nor will they ac[cept] supplications, nor will they 
an[swer] the queries of the haruspices. (LABS 362) 
The letter shows, not only that a late rising of Jupiter is a very bad 
omen—a following letter (LABS 363) of -668 IV 1 reports the good 
news that Jupiter has risen higher and cancels the previous 
omens—but also that a 'normal' period of invisibility, of from 20 to 
30 days, had been recognized. This range is among the periods in 
Mul.Apin, which we shall consider below, and as rough as it is, 
provides evidence that records had been kept of dates of heliacal 
risings and settings. In Part 2, we shall use records of Mars's 
risings and settings for -665 to -656 and of Saturn's for -646 to 
-633 to find synodic times. Regular observations of heliacal risings 
in particular, as we shall see, form the most important records for 
the later development of mathematical planetary theory. 
In addition to the phase, month, and day, location with respect 
to constellations and stars is significant. Consider, for example, 
another notable letter, of -671 X, to Esarhaddon from Issar-sumu-
eres, the chief scribe and the king's personal scholar (ummanu), 
concerning retrogradations of Mars and Jupiter. 

12 
Introduction 
When Mars comes out from the constellation Scorpius, turns 
and re-enters Scorpius, its interpretation is this: If Mars, retrograd­
ing, enters Scorpius, do not neglect your guard; the king should not 
go outdoors on an evil day. This omen is not from the Series (Enuma 
Anu Enlil); it is from the oral tradition of the masters. When Mars, 
furthermore, retrogrades from the Head of Leo (ε Leonis) and 
touches Cancer and Gemini, its interpretation is this: End of the 
reign of the king of the Westland. This is not from the Series; it is 
non-canonical. This aforesaid is the only area which is taken as bad 
if Mars retrogrades there. Wherever else it might retrograde, it may 
freely do so, there is not a word about it. 
And the matter of the planet Jupiter is as follows: If it turns 
back out of the Breast of Leo, this is ominous. It is written in the 
Series as follows: If Jupiter passes Regulus (a Leonis) and gets 
ahead of it, and afterwards Regulus, which it passed and got ahead 
of, stays with it in its setting, someone will rise, kill the king, and 
seize the throne. This aforesaid is the only area which is taken as 
bad if Jupiter retrogrades there. Wherever else it might turn, it may 
freely do so, there is not a word about it. Perhaps it was about this 
that the servant of the king, when (still) alive, and I spoke in the 
presence of the king, my lord. (LABS 8) 
Evidently, it is the location of the retrogradation, not retrograda-
tion itself, that is significant, although one may wonder how Mars 
can move retrograde from ε Leonis into Gemini, a distance of more 
than 30°. Here, for comparison, are further reports of locations of 
planets in relation to constellations. 
Mars, which stanfds] inside Scorpius, is about to move out; until 
the 25th of [Tammuz (IV)] it will move out of Scorpius; and its 
radiance is fallen. Let the king my lord be happy; the king should be 
very glad, (but) until (Mars) goes out, let the king guard himself. 
(ARAK 387) 
If Venus stands opposite Orion: land will become hostile to land, 
brother to brother, there will be fall of man and cattle. If the stars of 
Orion keep gaining radiance: an important person will become too 
mighty and commit evil. Venus stand in front of Orion. (ARAK 255) 
The planet Mars has gone on into the constellation Capricorn, 
halted (there), and is shining very brightly. The relevant interpreta­
tion is as follows: If [Mars] ri[des] Capricorn: devastation of Eridu; 
[its] p[eople] will be annihilated. And [the interpretation of the great] 
brightness is as follows: If Mars [shines brightly]: the king will gain 
in strength [and prosperity]. If the efful[gency of Mars is seen] in the 
sky: there will be an epidemic, variant: [an epidemy among the cattle 
of the country]. (LABS 104) 

Ominous 
Phenomena 
13 
Mars has reac[hed] Cancer and entered it. I kept wat[ch]: it did 
not become stationary, it did not stop; it tou[ched] the lower part (of 
Cancer) and goes on. (Its) going out (of Cancer) remains to be s[een]. 
When it will have gone out, I shall [send] its interpretation to the 
king my lord. Maybe someone will wr[itel to the king my lord as 
follows: 'If a strange star (Mars) comes close to Cancer: the ruler will 
[die].' If it had become stationary (and) stopped, that [would have 
been evil-boding]; this is bad for Akkad. Maybe someone will wr[ite] 
to the king my lord as follows: 'If a planet [...] in the middle of a gust 
of wind: the king of Subartu will [die].' This omen is a lie; the king 
my lord should not pay attention to it]. (ARAK 101) 
The last two are from the high official Akkullanu, the 'temple 
enterer* of Assur, ARAK 101 of -671 to Esarhaddon, LABS 104 of 
-649 to Assurbanipal. In this group we see that location, appear-
ance, and phenomenon, are all significant. Clearly these omens 
refer to sidereal constellations, not to equal zodiacal signs, which 
were not devised until more than three hundred years later as an 
approximation for purposes of computation. 
Conjunctions of planets with stars and with other planets— 
there appears to be no distinction—regardless of phase, are always 
significant, for divination and also for magical rituals, so signifi-
cant that the distances were eventually measured at each conjunc-
tion. There are many examples in the Assyrian reports, of which 
the following are a selection. 
If Jupiter goes with Venus: there will be praying of the land to 
the gods. Marduk and Zarpanitu will hear the prayers of your troops 
and will have mercy on your troops. Let them give me a donkey so 
that I can let my feet recover thereby. (ARAK 244) 
[If Mars] comes close to the Old Man star (Perseus): there w[ill 
be] a revolution [in the Westland, and brother] will kill [brother; the 
emblems of the lands] will be overthro[wn; a secret of the land] will 
go to another [land; the gods will leave] it (and) will turn away from 
it. (ARAK 400) 
If Jupiter stands in front of Mars: there will be barley: animals 
will fall, variant: a large army will fall. If Jupiter and the False Star 
(Mars) meet: a god will devour, variant: the gods will deliberate 
about, the land....If Mars comes close to Jupiter: there will be a 
severe miqiu disease in the land....If the red planet and the big star 
come close: fall of cattle....If a strange star comes close to Jupiter: 
in this year the king of Akkad will die, but the harvest of the land 
will prosper. This is a bad sign for all lands. Let the king my lord 
perform a namburbi ritual and so make its evil pass by. (ARAK 288) 
If Regulus is black: the commander of the palace will die. 

14 
Introduction 
Mercury stands together with Regulus. If a planet comes close to 
Regulus: the son [of the king] who [lives] in a city on my border will 
make a rebellion against his father, but [will not seize the throne]; 
some son of the king [will come out and seize] the throne; he will 
restore [the temples] and establish sacrifices of the gods; he will 
provide jointly for (all) the temples. (ARAK 245) 
[Mejrcury became visible in the west [wit]h the Pleiades. It will 
keep getting higher [...1 into the Old Man (Perseus): rain and flood. If 
the star of Marduk [becomes visible in] the beginning of the ye[arl: in 
this [ye]ar his furrow will prosper. (ARAK 486) 
[If Venus] se[ts] in Nisan (I): the harvest of the land will happen, 
variant: will pr[osper]. If the Frond star reaches the Pleiades: [Adad 
will devastate.] Venus [stands] in the Pleiades. (ARAK 536) 
Finally, a series of conjunctions of Mars, unfortunately in a poor 
state of preservation, partially published by Sayce (1874, 201ff.), 
some of which turn up in ARAK and LABS, here given in a trans-
lation by Erica Reiner dictated to me directly from Rawlinson's 
(1870) transcription. 
If Mars comes close to Iku (the Field): the sea will dry up and... 
If Mars comes close to: 
" 
the Great Twins: the king will die and there will be hostilities... 
the Fish: the produce of fish will disappear from the land 
and...plague. 
the star of the Tigris (var. Perseus): someone will arise and kill 
the king. 
the Pleiades: the land will perish and the people will be 
scattered. 
Emmesarra: the land will be happy. 
" 
Cancer: the prince will die... 
" 
Jupiter: in that year the king will die and (break)... 
" 
Entena-mashum: the land will (break)... 
" 
Venus: in that year within six months the king of the world will 
die and (break)... 
Mercury: the land... 
the star of Ninmah: the offspring of the people (break)... 
the star of Ana, the land will perish. 
As there are similar collections for the other planets, the number 
of omens for conjunctions of planets with stars and with other 
planets must have been very large. 
We may conclude with a splendid example of celestial divina-
tion, a very detailed letter from Akkullanu to Assurbanipal, dated 
to -656 III 1, concerning a heliacal rising of Mars that illustrates 
in itself nearly every criterion for ominous significance. 

Ominous 
Phenomena 
15 
[To] the king, my lord: [your servant] Akkullanu, Good health to 
the king, my lord! May [Nabu] and Marduk bless the king, my lord! 
[M]ars has appeared in the path of the Enlil stars at the feet of 
Perseus; it is faint and of a whitish color. I saw it on the 26th of 
Iyyar (II) when it had (already) risen high and I am subsequently 
sending the relevant information to the king, my lord: 
[If| Mars approaches Perseus, there will be a rebellion in the 
Westland; brother will slay his brother; the palace of the ruler will 
be plundered; the treasure of the country will go over to another 
country; the emblem of the country will be cast down; the king of 
the world will be delivered by his gods to his enemy. This portends 
misfortune for the Westland. (I swear) by your gods, that Assur, 
your god, will take away whatever dominance the Cimmerians have 
achieved and [giv]e it to the king, my lord. 
[If] the strange star approaches the god Emmesarra, the country 
will be happy [(and) its population will increase]. The strange star 
(means) Mars; (this portends) good fortune for the king. If Mars 
lights up faintly and its glow is yellowish, the king of the Eastland 
will die in that year. If, at his appearance, Nergal is small, whitish, 
and is very faint like a fixed star, he will have mercy on the land of 
Akkad; my armed forces will stand firm and slay the enemy, and the 
enemy army cannot stand before my army; the herds of Akkad will 
rest undisturbed in the pastures; sesame and dates will thrive; the 
gods will have mercy on the land of Akkad. If Mars becomes visible 
in the month Iyyar (II), there will be hostilities; destruction of the 
Umman-manda. Umman-manda (means) the Cimmerians. (LABS 100) 
This may be taken as a complete report specifying phenomenon, 
month and day, location by constellation, appearance of the 
planet, and interpretation of the omens, which depend upon four 
of the five criteria, that is, everything in the protasis is significant 
in the apodosis except the day of the month. The many prognosti-
cations for the appearance of Mars are clearly of the greatest 
importance to the king, to the kingdom, and to foreign kings and 
nations, not to mention cattle and produce. From all we have seen 
in this brief survey, celestial divination must be regarded as a 
subject of great seriousness, requiring the skill and knowledge of 
the most learned officials and scholars in the kingdom. And since 
the hundreds of surviving letters and reports can form only the 
smallest fraction of the original archive in Nineveh, let alone of 
other archives, the volume of reports for celestial divination must 
have been colossal, marking it as the foremost science of antiquity 
in both quantity and sophistication. 

16 
Introduction 
Observation of Phenomena 
Reports of the kind just quoted were certainly based upon 
observation, and there were doubtless many observational records 
in the omen literature—observation of some kind must precede 
divination—although not necessarily in a form that could be 
applied to anything beyond the recognition and interpretation of 
ominous phenomena. However, possibly even in the century 
preceding the Assyrian letters—the traditional date, following 
Ptolemy's remark on records of eclipses, is the reign of Nabonassar, 
-746 to -732—the Scribes of Enuma Anu Enlil (or their graduate 
students) began systematically observing celestial phenomena, 
both astronomical and meteorological, and recording them in 
reports, called 'regular watching' (nasaru sa gine), that, following 
Sachs, we know as Astronomical Diaries, now in the course of 
publication in ADT. There are excellent descriptions of the Diaries 
by Sachs (1974) and by Hunger in the introduction to ADT. The 
earliest surviving Diary is from -651, and it is not certain how 
much earlier the practice began. The Diaries are arranged by 
months, each tablet usually containing half a year, six or seven 
months, and there are also shorter records, from a few days to a 
month or so, that could be, as it were, the journals of the 'regular 
watching' from which the formal Diaries were compiled. In addi-
tion, there are other collections of observations, generally devoted 
to a single planet for some number of years, that are drawn either 
from the Diaries or, since they sometimes contain additional 
information, from the sources of the Diaries. It is possible that the 
Diaries themselves were official records of some sort—this was 
Neugebauer's opinion—and were not used directly for astronomi-
cal, as opposed to divinatory, purposes. Still, along with the few 
known collections, they are as close as we can come to the obser-
vations underlying the mathematical astronomy of the ephemer-
ides. We shall later consider the planetary phenomena reported in 
the Diaries in detail; here our concern is a general description. 
The Diaries as a whole are among the most extraordinary 
achievements in the entire history of science. The fundamental 
purpose of the Diaries was surely to record ominous phenomena in 
the heavens for divination and perhaps also for ritual and magic, 
but with a thoroughness that can only be characterized as scien-
tific research of a very high order, and we may be sure that the 
Scribes already knew a good deal about the phenomena of the 
heavens before they embarked on so ambitious and far-reaching a 

Observation of Phenomena 
17 
project. For although the collection and interpretation of celestial 
omens, above all concerning the moon and eclipses, had been 
practiced since the early second millennium, the systematic obser-
vation and recording of phenomena contained in the Diaries was 
something entirely new and has remained to this day the longest 
and most comprehensive program of astronomical observation ever 
carried out. Indeed, the Diaries, originally extending from the 
eighth or seventh to the first century, are by far the longest 
continuous scientific record, or should we say, the record of the 
longest continuous scientific research, of any kind in all of history, 
for modern science itself has existed for only half as long. And of 
course it is the Diaries, or the records from which the Diaries were 
compiled, that provided the observations that were later used as 
the empirical foundation of the mathematical astronomy of the 
ephemerides, in which the same phenomena of the moon and 
planets recorded in the omen texts and observational texts were 
reduced to calculation. 
We think of the Diaries as records of astronomical observa-
tions, and because of the importance of celestial phenomena as 
omens, that may well have been their primary purpose. But they 
are also concerned with meteorological phenomena, to so great an 
extent that what we distinguish as celestial and meteorological 
were probably considered to be related or even one and the same, 
phenomena in the heavens. In fact, the most extensive and 
detailed reports in the Diaries are of the weather, for the weather 
determines how clearly anything can be seen, or if it can be seen at 
all, and the Diaries are, whether intentionally or not, a continu-
ous weather report for Babylon for at least six hundred years, the 
longest ever kept for any place on earth. Such records of the 
weather were kept both for empirical, scientific reasons, relating it 
to periodicities and other celestial phenomena by which it could be 
forecasted, as proposed by Hunger (1977), and because the weather 
itself is ominous, for rain in certain months or on days of the 
month, winds from different directions, rainbows and halos, the 
visibility or invisibility of the sun and moon due to clouds, are all 
significant for divination. But, as we have noted, who is to say 
that the systematic recording of ominous phenomena is not in 
itself the beginning of the scientific study of nature, indeed, that 
any distinction between the classification and study of natural 
omens and the scientific description of nature is not an 
anachronism when applied to the first science of antiquity? 
Only unfavorable weather is reported, for if it is clear and warm 
and dry and calm the Diaries are silent. It appears from the 

18 
Introduction 
Diaries, however, that the weather in ancient Mesopotamia was 
frequently terrible, frustrating the efforts of the most devoted 
watcher of the heavens, with night after night of clouds and rain 
of various sorts, described in detail by numerous technical terms, 
as well as fog, mist, hail, thunder, lightning, winds from all direc-
tions, often cold, and frequent 'pisan dib', of unknown meaning 
but always associated with rain. The mean annual precipitation 
around Babylon is now little over ten centimeters, suggesting later 
desiccation. But such inclement weather may have been of 
unexpected benefit as the principal motivation, perhaps the entire 
motivation, for the development of mathematical astronomy, in 
order to determine by calculation the dates of ominous phenomena 
concealed by clouds, a subject to which we shall return in Part 1. 
After the weather, the most extensive observational records 
concern the moon: above all the date of first visibility that deter-
mines the numbering of days of the month; the time in us, degrees 
of time, between the rising and setting of the moon and sun at six 
specified times near first and last visibility and full moon; when 
two gods, the sun and moon, could be seen together; when the 
moon 'passes by', that is, reaches a conjunction with, a planet or 
a 'standard' or, from the German, 'normal' star, a term due to 
Epping (1889), with measurements of its distance in cubits and 
fingers; eclipses, noting the time, magnitude, direction of the 
darkness, color, distance from planets or normal stars if nearby, 
direction of the wind, and whether an anticipated eclipse did or did 
not occur; the appearance of the moon, and meteorological 
phenomena such as complete or partial halos. All of these are 
ominous, except the time between the rising and setting of the 
moon and sun used to determine the true date of first and last 
visibility and full moon, which themselves are ominous and are 
required to identify correctly the days of the month, each with its 
own ominous character. The presence of planets and stars within 
halos about the moon is often noted, and seems to be of particular 
significance, as indeed it is in the omen texts. 
Of the observations of planets in the Diaries, by far the most 
numerous are of conjunctions with the moon, fixed stars, and 
each other, with distances measured in cubits and fingers. Less 
frequent than conjunctions are heliacal phenomena, first and last 
appearances, stations, and acronychal risings; these are always 
dated, but vary widely in the specification of location, first and last 
appearances by zodiacal sign, stations by distances from normal 
stars or by zodiacal sign, and acronychal risings, which do not 
appear to be recognized as ominous, without any location at all. 

Observation of Phenomena 
19 
The first appearances seem to have been the most carefully 
observed, with measurements of the time in degrees of time 
between the rising or setting of the planet and the sun, just as for 
the first and last visibility of the moon and full moon, in order to 
determine the true date of first visibility, that is, the true date of 
the ominous phenomenon, on the chance that bad weather or 
inattention prevented its direct observation. These measurements 
of rising and setting times of the moon and planets are of great 
importance, for they are foundation of mathematical astronomy. 
Celestial phenomena had long been significant for agriculture, 
the risings and setting of Steu-S and constellations marking out the 
seasons in the agricultural calendar, and well before the time of 
the Diaries some clever agrarian economist had realized that the 
market price of commodities was an excellent index of the success 
of the harvest, which could be correlated with phenomena in the 
preceding months, and perhaps also an index of inflation. This can 
already be seen in omens for prices: 'If Mars keeps going around a 
planet: barley will become expensive' (ARAK 82). '[If Jupiter in] 
Sivan (III) approaches and stands where the sun shines forth, 
...barley and sesame will increase, and the equivalent of (only) 1 qa 
will (have to) be paid for 1 kur' (ARAK 170, etc.). There were even 
apotropaic rituals to keep prices stable. A late text from the fourth 
century gives specific, detailed criteria for predicting prices from 
planetary phenomena (Koch-Westenholz, 1995, 171). 
If you want to make a prediction for the market price of barley 
(broken), notice the movement of the planets. If you observe the first 
visibilities, the last visibilities, the stationary points, the conjunc­
tions,...the faint and bright light of the planets and zodiacal signs 
and their positive or negative latitude(?)..., your prediction for the 
coming year will be correct. 
Note the great number of phenomena, not all reported in the 
Diaries, pertinent to commodity prices, a matter of considerable 
importance. Hence, in the second earliest Diaiy, 37 Nebukadnezar 
II (ADT -567), and perhaps much earlier, each month concludes 
with a report, rather like the Commodity Research Bureau Index, 
on the quantity or weight of standard commodities that may be 
purchased at market for one shekel of silver. The first example, 
-567 X: That month, the equivalent (of one shekel of silver was): 
barley, 1 kur 2 sut; dates, 1 kur 1 pan 4 sut; mustard, 1 kur...' The 
units are, 1 kur = 5 pan = 30 sut = 180 qa, where 1 qa is about a 
liter. More complete reports survive for 5 Darius II (ADT -418): 

20 
Introduction 
-418 I. That month, a fox appeared in a broad street of the city. (For 
one shekel of silver): barley 4 sut, at the end of the month, 3 sut 5 
qa; dates, 2 sut 4 1/2 qa; mustard, 4 pan; cress, 3 sut for one 
shekel (and) one-eighth; sesame, 1 sut; wool, 1 mina. 
-418 XII2. The 24th, a bird hatched, and it had three feet. (For one 
shekel; of silver): Barley, 4 sut 1 qa; dates, 1 pan 2 sut; at the end 
of the month, 1 pan 2 sut 1 1 / 2 qa; mustard, 3 pan 2 sut; cress, 3 
sut; sesame, 1 sut; wool, 1 mina. 
The large quantities suggest that these are wholesale prices; a 
shekel of silver, about 8 grams, was many times a daily wage. Note 
that with the exception of mustard and wool, which alone is sold 
by weight—the common mina, of 60 shekels, is about half a 
kilogram—quantities have risen, and thus prices declined between 
months I (-418 Mar 27-Apr 25) and XII2 (-417 Mar 17-Apr 14), 
reflecting an improved harvest (or a shortage of silver). The fox and 
the three-footed bird are doubtless omens, and not good ones, but 
it appears that the commodity reports, along with the criteria for 
predicting prices, show an attempt to reduce the relation of celes-
tial phenomena and agriculture to an empirical science. 
Each month usually contains a report by the Hydrographic 
Survey on the change of level of the Euphrates, essential to irriga-
tion, which could presumably be correlated with seasonal rain and 
snow to the north as well as celestial phenomena. The units are 1 
cubit (kus) = 24 fingers (su-si), where the cubit is about 50 cm. 
-567 I. From the 8th of month XII2 (of the preceding year) to the 
28th (of month I), the river level rose 3 cubits and 8 fingers, 2/3 
cubits [were missing] to the high flood [....] 
-567 XI. From the 4th to the 15th, the river level rose 1 1/2 cubits. 
On the 16th, it receded. 
-346 X. [That month?, from the lst ? to?] the 14th, the river level 
rose 8 fingers, from the 15th to the 19th, the river level receded 8 
fingers; the 22nd, the river level rose 4 fingers; from the 23rd t[o 
the 26th?] [the river level receded?...;] the 27th, 28th, (and) 29th, 
the river level rose 1/2 cubit. 
Notices of the fortunes of kings, foreign and domestic warfare, 
epidemic disease, and famines so that people sold their children, 
are regularly included, as they are regularly found as the apodoses 
of omens. The correlation of such events with celestial phenomena 
may have been the principal purpose of the Diaries, and the entire 
series of Diaries could have provided something like a chronicle of 
the history of Babylonia and the surrounding regions for over six 
hundred years. Unfortunately, these reports are often badly pre-

Observation of Phenomena 
21 
served, and since they are neither astronomical nor as formulaic 
as the rest of the Diaries, can receive but little restoration. Here 
are examples, beginning with the earliest Diary: 
-651 XII. The 12th,...the troops of Babylonia fought against the 
troops of Assyria....The 27th, a rainbow whose brightness was very 
great stretched in the east, [....in] Hiritu in the province of Sippar 
the troops of Babylonia and of Assyria fou[ght with each] other, and 
the troops of Babylonia withdrew and were heavily defeated. 
-567 I. That month, a fox entered the city. Coughing and a little 
risutu-disease [....] 
-567 XII. That month, on the 26th, a wolf entered Borsippa and 
killed two dogs; it did not go out, it was killed [....] 
-381 III. That month, [there] was a small attack of locusts [....] 
-366 II. That month [....] the troops of the king fought against the 
troops [of the....I mountain between the rivers and the [....J between 
the rivers were killed. That month, [....] of Esagil at the command of 
the king to [....] went out. That month, the 19th day, the administra­
tor [....] in Susa to the governorship [....] on the 25th Tattannu, the 
chief [....] That month, sick people recovered9 [....] 
-346 XII. That month, the flood was cut off. That year, the barley 
harvest was affected by 'rust'. 
-254 IX. That month, the thieves [....] and had taken things away 
from the property of Zababa and Ninlil in Babylon, were burned in 
Babylon. 
-253 VII. That month it was heard in Babylon: queen Stratonike died 
in Sardis. 
-248 VII. That [month,] pregnant women died in childbirth.... 
-207 I. That month, five dogs approached one bitch. 
Again, wild animals entering the city are ominous. Sacrifices at the 
temple of Esagila and occasional extispicies, examinations of 
viscera, along with celestial omens the principal form of divination 
for the kingdom, were also reported. The following two notices, for 
months VI and VII of the 5th, and last, year of Darius III are of 
particular historical interest. 
-330 VI. [The 14th,...lunar] eclipse, in its totality covered. 10° night 
[totality7....] (broken) Jupiter set; Saturn [....] during totality the west 
wind blew, during clearing the east wind. [....] fourth7....; during the 
eclipse, deaths and plague7 [occurred7] in [....].... That month, on the 
11th, panic occurred in the camp before the king (Darius) [....] lay7 
opposite the king. On the 24th, in the morning, the king of the 
world (Alexander) [....] the standard7 [....] they fought with each 
other, and a heavy7 defeat of the troops of [....] the troops of the 
king deserted him and [went7] to their cities [....] they fled to the 

22 
Introduction 
land of the Guti [....] 
-330 VII. That month, from the 1st to [....] came to Babylon saying: 
'Esangila [....'] and the Babylonians for the property of Esangila [....] 
On the 11th, in Sippar an order of Alexander.... '....] I shall not 
enter your houses.' On the 13th, [....] to? the outer gate of Esangila 
and [....] On the 14th, these7 Ionians a bull (....] short, fatty tissue 
[....] Alexander, king of the world, [came7 in]to Babylon [....hor]ses 
and equipment of [....] and the Babylonians and the people of [....] a 
message to [....] 
What is reported here is (1) the total lunar eclipse of -330 Sep 20, 
during which Saturn was visible close to the moon in the east and 
Jupiter set in the west, (2) the defeat of Darius by Alexander at the 
Battle of Arbela (or Gaugamela), and (3) Alexander's entry into 
Babylon the following month. The eclipse was surely taken to be 
ominous of the defeat of Darius—or of someone—and it is this 
very eclipse that was later used by Plutarch [Camillus 
19.5, 
Alexander 
31.8) to date the battle to 26 Boedromion, since the 
battle was said to have taken place on the day after the eleventh 
night after a lunar eclipse, which had been observed in Athens at 
the beginning of the Mysteries in the middle of Boedromion 
(Grafton and Swerdlow, 1988, 19). The same highly ominous and, 
for that reason, famous eclipse, observed at Arbela on the Royal 
Road at the fifth hour of night and in Carthage at the second 
hour, three hours earlier, was used by Ptolemy in Geography 1.4 to 
establish a difference of longitude between Arbela (modern Arbll) 
and Carthage of 45°. Correctly the difference was 2; 15 hours and 
thus 33;45" (cf. HAMA, 938). This error had the effect of increasing 
longitudinal distances in Europe, the Mediterranean, and Western 
Asia by about one-third, a systematic error in cartography not 
entirely corrected until the seventeenth or eighteenth century. 
What do we make of the Diaries? Astronomical and meteoro-
logical phenomena, rising and setting times of the moon and plan-
ets, continuous records of (unfavorable) weather, monstrous births 
and stray wild animals, prices of commodities and the level of the 
Euphrates, disease, famine, locusts, movements of troops, battles, 
the rise and fall of kings and kingdoms, and other political events. 
The Diaries are a good deal more than records of astronomical 
observation. Indeed, considering their entire contents it appears 
that the Diaries were intended as an empirical, scientific record of 
ominous celestial phenomena, both astronomical and meteorologi-
cal, including detailed records of the weather, ominous events on 
the earth, and the fortunes, primarily political, military, and 
agricultural, of kingdoms, with the object of investigating whatever 

Observation of Phenomena 
23 
correlations could be found and reducing the interpretation of 
omens to an empirical science, and even to something approaching 
an exact science. This is by any standard extraordinary. It may 
also appear anachronistic, the imposition of a modern, scientific 
motivation on primitive and superstitious practices. But there is 
nothing primitive or superstitious about the motivation of the 
Diaries, nor about the reasoning of the Scribes, as long as it is 
believed that the phenomena of nature are ominous. I can see no 
other reason for consistently gathering these apparently disparate 
observations and reports into a single continuous record for more 
than six hundred years than just such correlations. And it appears 
to me that nothing more clearly shows the scientific spirit of the 
Scribes, their principal science being the interpretation of omens, 
than this systematic collection of information, understood to be 
vital to the welfare of the kingdom, on a scale not seen again until 
the statistical and economic surveys of modern states in the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. 
Calculation of Phenomena 
The systematization of planetary phenomena, as of lunar 
phenomena, in the Diaries is carried further, although selectively, 
in the ephemerides, published in ACT, which are concerned with 
those phenomena that may be calculated. The term 'ephemerides' 
is Neugebauer's; Kugler, who recognized them as showing 'the 
highest stage of Babylonian astronomy,' called them simply 'tables' 
(SSB 1, 117). Almost all lunar and planetary ephemerides date 
from the third to the first centuries, and even the earliest, if 
correctly dated, begin two or three hundred years later than the 
earliest Diaries. Conjunctions of planets with stars and the dis­
tances of planets from stars in general could not be calculated, at 
least not by the methods of the ephemerides, although they could 
be predicted by periodicities, as in the so-called 'goal-year' texts 
that are contemporary with the ephemerides. Conjunctions of 
planets with the moon and other planets, with their distances, 
could neither be calculated by the methods of the ephemerides nor 
predicted by periodicities. The Scribes knew exactly what they 
could and could not do. Heliacal phenomena, however, could be 
predicted by periodicities, as in the goal-year texts, and calculated, 
and it is exclusively these phenomena that are the subject of the 
ephemerides, devoted to the calculation of the dates and locations 
of the heliacal or synodic phenomena of the planets, called by 

24 
Introduction 
Neugebauer the 'Greek-letter phenomena'. All of them, even sta­
tions, are truly heliacal for they occur at characteristic elongations 
from the sun and, more obviously, are seen in the east or west 
either in the morning before sunrise or in the evening after sunset 
when most observation took place. They differ somewhat for the 
superior and inferior planets. Those for the superior planets are: 
Γ heliacal rising, first visibility, in the east before sunrise, 
after conjunction 
Φ first station, in the west before sunrise, before opposition 
Θ acronychal rising, in the east just after sunset, slightly 
before true opposition 
Ψ second station, in the east after sunset, after opposition 
Ω heliacal setting, last visibility, in the west after sunset, 
before conjunction 
Those for the inferior planets are: 
Ξ 
evening rising, first visibility in the west sifter sunset, 
after superior conjunction 
Ψ first 
(evening) station, in the west after sunset 
Ω evening setting, last visibility in the west after sunset, 
before inferior conjunction 
Γ 
morning rising, first visibility in the east before sunrise, 
after inferior conjunction 
Φ second (morning) station, in the east before sunrise 
Σ 
morning setting, last visibility in the east before sunrise, 
before superior conjunction 
Long before the ephemerides there were estimates of periods of 
visibility and invisibility based upon observational records of some 
kind. The reports of Venus's risings and settings quoted earlier 
follow the pattern 
Γ -> Σ 8m 5d, 
Σ -> Ξ 3m, 
Ξ 
Ω 8m 5d, 
Ω —> Γ 7d. 
If the month is taken as 30 days, the total is 587 days, close 
enough to Venus's mean synodic period of 584 days. These are not 
necessarily earlier in date than periods for all the planets cited in 
MuLApin, a collection, probably from the beginning of the first 
millennium, concerned mostly with the risings and settings of 
stars throughout the year. The periods are given in years, months, 
and days, and here we give them in days using the schematic 
calendar of MuLApin in which Im = 3Od and Iy = 12m = 360d. The 
periods of visibility and invisibility are given separately, and we 

Calculation of Phenomena 
25 
have put them together in the way that seems to make the most 
sense. For comparison, we also give the greatest and least periods 
of visibility and invisibility according to modern theory based upon 
P. V. Neugebauer's visibility tables (1938) and our computation of 
synodic times in Part 2; those for Mars are rounded to the nearest 
10 days. Note that since the year of Mul.Apin is about five days 
short, the periods are only roughly comparable. 
Planet 
Saturn 
Jupiter 
Mars 
MuLApin 
Γ-» Ω 
360
d 
360 
360 
540 
660 
720 
Ω-> Γ 
20
d 
20 
30 
200 
100 
60 
Γ-> Γ 
380
d 
380 
390 
740 
760 
780 
Modern 
Γ-> Ω 
346
d 
335 
367 
372 
670 
630 
Ω -> Γ 
31
d 
45 
28 
34 
90 
220 
Γ -» Γ 
377
d 
380 
395 
406 
760 
850 
The reversal of the periods of invisibility of Mars compared to 
the modern computation is peculiar, but the alternative is giving 
Mars synodic periods of from 600 days to 920 days, which seems 
even more peculiar, since 600 days is less than Mars's zodiacal 
period, and the sums for Γ -> Γ in this form suggest a deliberate 
pattern. Venus is given the same period of 9 months in both visible 
arcs, Γ -» Σ and Ξ -> Ω, the sum of which, 540 days, is too long, 
and variable periods for the invisible arcs, Σ —> Ξ of 30, 45 or 60 
days, Ω -* Γ of <1, 3, 7 or 14 days. In fact Σ -» Ξ varies from 54 to 
75 days and Ω -> Γ from 1 to 18 days, but a more difficult problem 
is that it is not clear how these values are to be combined to form 
synodic periods. Mercury is given five intervals of 7, 14, 21, 30, and 
45 days that are said to apply to both the visible and invisible arcs 
equally, that is, the planet is invisible for as many days as it was 
previously visible, which is quite nonsensical. It would be more 
plausible to combine these in opposite order, that is, 45 days of 
visibility followed by 7 days of invisibility, 30 days of visibility by 
14 days of invisibility, 21 days equally between the two, and the 
other way around, but that is not what the text appears to say and 
it would give synodic periods far too short. 
The visibility periods in Mul.Apin have been variously interpre­
ted. Pingree (Hunger and Pingree, 1989, 149) calls them crude, 
which they certainly are. Brown (1995, 3.1.b) suggests that they 
were intended as 'ideal' periods for purposes of divination, to deter­
mine whether risings and settings were sufficiently early or late to 

26 
Introduction 
be ominous, as we earlier saw Jupiter's invisibility period of 20 to 
30 days applied in LABS 362 when the planet remained invisible 
for 35 days. He points out that the invisibility period of Saturn 
and the same periods for Mercury are also found in Enuma Anu 
Enlil 56, showing that these periods are intended as criteria for 
interpreting omens, in this case early or late planetary phases. I 
believe Brown must be correct. Precisely because the periods are so 
rough, one cannot imagine how they would survive scrutiny after 
even ten or twenty years, let alone the three hundred years that 
may separate Mul.Apin from LABS 362, if their intention was 
accuracy. And for this reason, our attempt to make sense out of 
combining the visible and invisible periods into synodic periods 
may be premature because it appears that there was as yet no 
consistent idea of synodic period. Nevertheless, and this is our 
principle concern, like the Venus tablet, they show that at an early 
date there was observation and recording of periods of visibility 
and invisibility of planets, and thus indirectly of their synodic 
periods, however crude and schematic the periods in Mul.Apin may 
be. One might call this the earliest known theory of the planets. 
What is thus far missing is the recognition of a correspondence 
of the lengths of periods of visibility and invisibility, or synodic 
periods, to locations of first and last visibilities, either in the 
vicinity of conjunctions with stars and constellations recognized 
as ominous in Enuma Anu Enlil, or, what amounts to the same 
thing, to months of the year, which both determine the ominous 
significance of phenomena and correspond approximately to loca-
tions of the sun and thus of the phases. Perhaps such relations 
were recognized and simply not mentioned in any surviving texts, 
as even a record of dates of phenomena by month could lead to 
their discovery. But it is more likely that it required the systematic 
observation of the Diaries to identify this correspondence, for it 
would not be easy to see without both date and location in the 
same records, and thus it may not have been discovered prior to 
the recording of planetary phenomena by zodiacal constellations, 
which does not appear in the Diaries until the fifth century, many 
hundreds of years after the recording of the dates of phenomena in 
the second millennium. And while the calendar offered something 
equivalent to a fixed coordinate system for specifying time, finely 
and nearly uniformly divided into months of 29 or 30 days, the 
irregular distribution of stars and constellations of the zodiac form 
an indistinct and coarse-grained system for specifying location, so 
that even in the Diaries the recording of location remained of 
necessity far less precise than the recording of time. Nevertheless, 

Calculation of Phenomena 
27 
location, as rough as it may always have been, was a second es­
sential element, along with the measurement of rising and setting 
times to identify the true dates of phenomena, for the development 
of mathematical planetary theory. 
The ephemerides, as previously mentioned, are devoted to the 
computation of the dates and locations of synodic phenomena, 
and are always devoted to a single planet. For the superior planets, 
some contain a single phenomenon, and are based upon computa­
tion of the entire synodic time and synodic arc between phenom­
ena of the same kind; others contain several phenomena in order, 
with one taken as primary, as Ω or Γ, and the others computed by 
subsidiary rules for subdividing the synodic time and arc, as Ω —»Γ 
-» Φ -> Ω. Yet other rules cover the retrograde arc, Φ —» Θ -» Ψ, and 
according to rules in procedure texts, the entire series may be 
computed from a single initial time and longitude, for which there 
exist dateless lists of longitudes and ephemerides in the order Ω -> 
Ω or Γ -» Γ. For the inferior planets the ephemerides cover all the 
phenomena, evening and morning, in order, in the case of Mercury 
with subsidiary rules for the visible arcs Ξ -» Ω and Γ ^ Σ Ο Γ the 
invisible arcs Ω -» Γ and Σ -» Ξ, although the stations Ψ and Φ are 
not considered for Mercury as they are close to Ω and Γ and often 
invisible. The order of the ephemerides is always a column for time 
T followed by a column for longitude A, presumably because the 
dates of phenomena were of primary interest, and each is some­
times preceded by a column for their differences, the synodic time 
AT and synodic arc AA, which show how T and A were computed. 
It is a commonplace to point out that Greek astronomy is 
geometrical, based upon hypotheses or 'models' composed of circles 
with implications for the physical arrangement of the heavens, 
while Babylonian astronomy is arithmetic, using purely numerical 
functions—algorithms as it were, described in procedure texts 
much like computer programs—for intervals of distance and time, 
without any underlying descriptive models of the motions of the 
bodies in the heavens. Here as an example are the rules in ACT 
801.1 for Mercury's morning rising Γ: 
Concerning Mercury; (from one) appearance in the morning to 
(the next) appearance in the morning. From 1 Λ to 16 "Z you add 
1,46. (When) 16
 1Z is passed over, you multiply by 0;20 and add. 
From 16 Z to 30 6 you add 2,21:20. (When) 30 8 is passed over, 
you multiply by 0;20 and subtract. From 30 b to 1 Λ you add 
1,34;13,20. When 1 Λ is passed over, you multiply by 0;7,30 and 
add. The distance (from one) appearance to the (next) appearance 
you computet?), and add to it 3;30,39,4,20, and predict the dates. 

28 
Introduction 
Mercury, in its morning appearances, from IO T to 20 b , in its 
morning disappearances, will pass by (i.e., not appear); similarly. 
Hence, the commonplace is certainly true. For if the Scribes had 
any models in mind, they had the good sense to keep such esoteric 
doctrine within their own circle and not commit it to writing for 
the eyes of the uninitiated, either among their contemporaries or 
among scholars deciphering their mathematical astronomy after 
more than two millennia. In all that follows we shall respect their 
silence and make no inquiries into underlying models, whether 
geometrical, physical, cosmological or supernatural. Even the 
ephemerides were considered secret, as shown by the colophon of 
the lunar eclipse text ACT 135. 
Computation (according to) the wisdom of Anu-ship, the secret of [... 
(deity)], the guarded knowledge of the expert. The informed may 
show it to the [informed]; the uninformed shall not [see it. (It be-
longs) to the forbidden things] of Anu, Enlil, [and Ea, the great gods]. 
Like the curses in many colophons upon one who steals or alters 
or damages a tablet, this need not be taken all that seriously, but 
it does remind us that the astronomical texts were restricted to, 
indeed, intelligible to, a very small circle of scholars and were in 
no sense 'published' works. Hence, we should not be surprised that 
many contain computational and scribal errors, some appear to be 
working copies or exercises, and different methods of computation 
were in use at the same time. It is likewise a commonplace to 
point out that Greek mathematics is mostly geometrical—with a 
variety of fanciful stories, such as the irrationality of the side and 
diagonal of a square, to explain why—and Babylonian mathema-
tics algebraic, so that this alone may account for the differences in 
their mathematical astronomy. This may also be true, although so 
general as to explain everything and nothing, and seems more an 
article of faith than an exercise of reason. 
Yet there is one distinction between Babylonian and Greek 
mathematical astronomy that is significant. In Greek astronomy, 
at least as practiced by Ptolemy and in horoscopic astrology, the 
principal object is to find the location of a body in the heavens at 
a given time, at any given time, because the time of the horoscope 
is arbitrary and it is the locations that are significant. It is thus 
concerned directly with the continuous motion of the body, the 
location of which may be found for any time. And even the times of 
eclipses and heliacal phenomena are found by first computing a 
location at a time near the anticipated eclipse or phenomenon and 

Calculation of Phenomena 
29 
then using auxiliary methods to find the exact time and location. 
In Babylonian astronomy, on the other hand, the principal object 
is to find the time and the location of a particular phenomenon— 
because it is the date and the location that are ominous—and the 
phenomenon does not have a continuous motion but occurs 
intermittently, or periodically, from time to time and from place to 
place. The time is given in Greek astronomy but must be found in 
Babylonian. There are exceptions. There are cuneiform horoscopes, 
as those published by Sachs (1952a) and Rochberg (1998), in 
which the positions of the planets within zodiacal signs and with 
respect to normal stars are found for given times, partly by compu­
tation and partly, it appears, by consultation of observational 
records, and these are, one may presume, the ancestors of Greek 
horoscopes. And there are Greek papyri of tables used by astrolo­
gers, as among the Oxyrhynchus astronomical papyri in the course 
of publication by Jones (1998), in which the object is to find the 
time of heliacal phenomena or to find when a planet crosses from 
one zodiacal sign to the next, and the methods are Babylonian 
rather than Ptolemaic. But in general, Greek astronomy as 
commonly understood—although it was probably not the most 
common sort of Greek astronomy—is concerned with finding 
location for a given time, and Babylonian with finding the time 
itself of a phenomenon. 
Now, this is of some importance, for if the purpose of the plan­
etary theory of the ephemerides is to find the dates and locations 
of the heliacal or synodic phenomena in the omen and observa­
tional texts, the problem itself suggests methods along the lines of 
those the Scribes adopted. Since the lunar calendar month and 
day and the location with respect to constellations or stars 
determine the ominous character of phenomena, the problem may 
be stated thus: Given the date and location of a particular 
phenomenon, at what date and in what location will the next 
phenomenon of the same kind take place? Synodic phenomena, 
occurring at times T and locations Λ are separated by variable 
intervals of time, true synodic time AT, and variable intervals of 
distance, true synodic arc AA. Each synodic time and synodic arc 
is a quantity that may be taken as a number of units, say, months 
and days for time and degrees for arc. The observations in the 
Diaries give the dates of phenomena from which the number of 
months and days in each synodic time ATn, /IT n + 1 
may be 
found. Hence, it is only required to find an arithmetic function, as 
a difference sequence between limits, by which these variable 
synodic times may be computed in order, that is, given ATn, the 

30 
Introduction 
arithmetic function gives /ITn+1, and no model of the continuous 
motion of the phenomenon or of the planet is needed. Then from 
time T n one may find T n +1 = T n + ATn+χ. 
Synodic arc is more 
difficult as the Diaries give only rough locations for synodic 
phenomena, as by zodiacal sign, and something far more precise is 
computed in the ephemerides. But this problem can be solved if a 
relation between synodic arc AA in degrees and synodic time A T in 
months and days is found such that one may be computed from 
the other. And that is exactly what was done in the simplest possi­
ble form, namely, that synodic arc and synodic time differ by a 
numerical constant, AT- AA = C, which is different for each planet 
and applied to all of the planets except Venus. Hence, an unknown 
synodic arc may be found from a known synodic time by AA = ΑΤ­
Ο, and then treated in the same way as AT, that is, an arithmetic 
function, also a difference sequence between limits, may be found 
such that given AAn one may find AAn+1, so that from location An 
the next location An+ χ = An + AAn+ χ, and again no model for 
continuous motion is required. In fact, with some exceptions, the 
arithmetic functions for AA and AT in the ephemerides differ by 
the constant C, so one may be found directly from the other. 
The relation AT- AA = C is good for something more, for it also 
lies at the foundation of the derivation of the parameters underly­
ing the ephemerides, which is the principal subject of this study. 
As just noted, the Diaries give precise reports of the time of phe­
nomena, as first visibility, to the day of the lunar calendar month, 
but imprecise reports of location, by zodiacal sign, which is at best 
equivalent to giving the date only by month. However, if the limits 
of A T may be found from such reports, the limits of AA then follow 
from AA = AT- C without any measurement of position at all. And 
the limits of AA, or in some cases of AT by itself, along with the 
'period' of the phenomenon, that is, the number of occurrences of 
the phenomenon in some number of rotations of the phenomenon 
through the zodiac, suffice to determine the parameters used for 
the computation of true synodic arc and true synodic time in the 
ephemerides. Hence, it is possible to derive the parameters of the 
planetary theory of the ephemerides from the dates of phenomena 
alone without a single measurement of position. The primary and 
precise empirical element is time, and location is a secondary and 
less precise element. And this very method is in keeping both with 
the observational records in the Diaries, which give precise dates 
but imprecise locations, and even the omen texts, which by their 
very nature define the principal problem of planetary theory as de­
termining at what date and near what stars a particular ominous 

Calculation of Phenomena 
31 
phenomenon will take place. Forewarned is forearmed. First one 
must know when a phenomenon will take place, then one must 
know where in order to interpret it properly. Date takes precedence 
over location even though, as it turns out, synodic arc and time 
are a function of location in the zodiac. There is more to the 
derivations than this, for it is also necessary to align the variable 
synodic arcs and times to the zodiac, for which the observations of 
location by zodiacal sign are adequate, to find the intervals of arc 
between the successive phenomena of each synodic period, and to 
determine an initial position of a single phenomenon, both of 
which depend upon conventional values of the elongation of 
phenomena from the sun and of the intervals of time between the 
phenomena. But even with these additions, the observations 
required to derive the parameters are exactly those found in the 
Diaries, namely, dates of phenomena to the nearest day and 
locations by zodiacal sign, nothing more. 
This is but the briefest summary of the procedures underlying 
the computation of the ephemerides and the derivation of their 
parameters from observation. And these procedures are in fact 
based on something like a model, not a geometrical or physical 
model of the heavens, let alone an esoteric doctrine, but a purely 
astronomical model of four principles: 
1. The periods, and thus the mean motions, of the sun and 
planets are invariable. 
2. The (mean) sun moves uniformly with its mean motion of 
one zodiacal rotation in one year. 
3. The phenomena of the planets take place at fixed, 
characteristic elongations from the (mean) sun. 
4. The mean motion of the sun in the synodic time measures 
the synodic arc between phenomena. 
Only the first principle is strictly true, the remaining three are 
approximations, simplifications of something more complex and 
irregular, and this was known to the Scribes, who may even have 
regarded all four as approximations and made them, along with 
several others, in order to reduce to calculation the complex, even 
erratic, behavior of planetary phenomena given by observation or, 
in the case of location, not given with adequate precision by obser-
vation. The first two are basic, not only to Babylonian planetary 
theory, but to all planetary theory before Kepler. The third was first 
formulated by van der Waerden (1957), who called it the 'Sonnen-
abstandsprinzip', the solar-distance principle, The phenomena, as 

32 
Introduction 
first visibility, first station, etc., take place respectively at a fixed 
elongation from the sun,' and applied it to explain the relation 
between synodic arc and synodic time given above as AT-AA = C. 
This statement is not strictly true as the elongations are taken 
from the 'mean' sun, which moves uniformly, rather than from the 
'true' sun, which moves nonuniformly, and the elongations 
implicit in the ephemerides are subject to small periodic 
variations, which are, however, an artifact of computation. 
Nevertheless, it is a fundamental principle—every phenomenon in 
an ephemeris has an implicit elongation from the mean sun which 
is nearly fixed—and particularly in that it allows an unknown 
synodic arc to be found from a known synodic time by the fourth 
principle. The remainder of this study will be devoted in great part 
to the justification of these principles and, along with other con-
siderations both theoretical and observational, to their application 
to the derivation of the parameters of the ephemerides. 
From celestial divination to abstract methods of calculation 
seems a long way, but to the Scribes of Enuma Anu Enlil, prog-
nostication of events by interpretation of ominous phenomena and 
prediction of ominous phenomena by calculation may well have 
appeared equally essential and equally demanding parts of the 
same vast science of the heavens, of which they were the original 
inventors and to which they devoted centuries of study and 
research. If indeed this was their opinion, they were surely correct, 
for theirs was one of the greatest scientific enterprises in all of 
history, and we must rid ourselves of the idea, due to our scientific 
standards, that in their theory and practice divination was any less 
a science than calculation. They may have looked upon the world 
in ways differing from our own, but they were at least as intelligent 
and thoughtful as we are—they were certainly more original—and 
they were also as learned although what they knew was different. 
It was with good reason that the wisdom of the 'Chaldaeans' 
inspired wonder and admiration throughout the ancient world, 
and their legacy of the omen series, Diaries, and ephemerides is 
still worthy of our own wonder and admiration. In addition, 
Neugebauer always insisted that the Scribes developed a strictly 
mathematical interest in lunar and planetary theory comparable to 
that of Hipparchus and Ptolemy, and I have no doubt that he too 
was correct. For it is evident that the Scribes who worked out the 
systems for computing the first visibility of the moon and the first 
and last visibilities of Mercury had become as absorbed in the 
purely scientinc problems of the reduction of irregular but periodic 

Calculation of Phenomena 
33 
phenomena to precise mathematical description and calculation as 
any modern scientist, and were as ingenious in their methods. 
Here too I see no contradiction between a science of interpret-
ing ominous phenomena and a science of calculating ominous 
phenomena. Both are sciences, even empirical sciences, of great 
complexity, requiring classification and analysis of observational 
records, distinction between correct and erroneous observation, 
correction of the erroneous, and the development of systematic 
methods by which predictions of the future may be based upon 
regularities of the past. That we no longer believe nature to be 
ominous says nothing about the practice of science in a world in 
which nature is ominous. Indeed, the science of the Scribes is 
exactly what one would expect in such a world. And compared to a 
good deal of what passes for science in the tenuous theory and 
practice, not to mention erroneous and injurious prognostication, 
of some of our modern sciences—economics and other social 
sciences come first to mind, but the reader may make his own 
list—the prediction of a plentiful harvest from a first appearance of 
Venus in Elul or danger to the king from a retrogradation of Mars 
in Scorpio seems not only harmless, but rigorous. 
Although the development of mathematical astronomy followed 
the collection of celestial omens and systematic observation of 
phenomena by hundreds of years, the relation between the omen 
series, Diaries, and ephemerides is very close—they are all the 
work of generation after generation of Scribes of Enuma Anu Enlil 
and their colleagues—and divination, observation, and calculation 
must be regarded as parts of a single descriptive and interpretive 
science of the heavens that included both astronomical and mete-
orological phenomena, some of which could eventually be calcu-
lated, some not. That the complete development of this science 
took hundreds of years shows how difficult it was, far more diffi-
cult than any other science in the ancient world, both because of 
the magnitude and complexity of its subject—divination, observa-
tion, and calculation—and because it was the first empirical 
science and, along with mathematics itself, the first science. That 
we may be lacking sufficient evidence to demonstrate conclusively 
the relation and historical development of its three branches does 
not mean that the relation itself was not there and not certain; we 
must be grateful for what evidence we have, or even that we have 
any evidence at all. The Scribes' great science of the heavens is as 
close to the origin of science, and of the methods and practices of 
science, as we shall ever come. 

Part 1 
Periodicity and 
Variability 
of Synodic 
Phenomena 
Units of Distance and Location and of Time and Date 
The Babylonian zodiac (lu-mas-mes) is divided into twelve 
zodiacal signs (sing, lu-mas). Each sign is in turn divided into 30 
us, a term with the general meaning 'length' interpreted, according 
to modern usage, as degree (°), each of which may then be divided 
sexagesimally to as many places as desired. The zodiac, its twelve 
equal signs, and the divisions of signs into us and its fractions are 
purely conventional, an abstraction intended to facilitate compu-
tation, as in the ephemerides, while retaining the names of 
constellations of stars of irregular lengths unsuitable for computa-
tion. It is by no means obvious, and in fact is very unlikely, that 
the observational texts, the Diaries, use signs of equal length—for 
how would one know where their limits lie?—rather than simply 
regions around the constellations, and it is the presence of the 
planets and phenomena in the constellations and near stars that 
are of ominous significance, as we have seen. In Greek astrology, 
on the other hand, which depends principally upon computed 
horoscopes, it is equal signs rather than irregular constellations 
that are significant. But even this has Babylonian prototypes in 
the, apparently computed, positions of planets in horoscopes 
published by Sachs (1952) and Rochberg (1998), which, however, 
also contain positions with respect to stars and constellations, 
presumably taken from observational records. 
While it is conventional to call locations and distances 
measured in signs and us 'longitude', one should not take this to 
be a coordinate, in the sense of Ptolemy and modern astronomy, 
measured along the ecliptic or even a circle. Rather, it is more 
likely that the zodiacal signs are regions, for the purpose of 
computation of equal length, of a band or path around the heaven 
through which the sun, moon, and planets move, within which 
their phenomena take place, and any further divisions into us and 
smaller units are arithmetic and likewise for computation. The 

Units of Distance and Time 
35 
motion of a planet between the phenomena computed in the 
ephemerides is anything but an arc of a circle, and the us 
separating phenomena, which occur intermittently, are best 
thought of purely arithmetically rather than geometrically as parts 
of a circle divided into 360°, a Greek geometrical adaptation of a 
Babylonian arithmetical convention. There is but a single 'atypical' 
Text F (AT 1, 208-09) describing a second coordinate, a 'going up 
and down* that appears to be a zodiacally fixed latitude for Saturn, 
less likely Jupiter, and this is not an inclined circle but a 
truncated zigzag—which one must admit is a good approximation 
to an inclined circle—with 'up and down' in units of cubits and 
fingers, used more for observation than computation. Likewise, a 
more extended description of lunar latitude in atypical Text E (AT 
1, 200-05) considers the motion of the node and treats latitude 
itself, not as the inclination of a circle, but as the width of the 
moon's path or road (dagal ma-la-ka), of 10 us or 6 cubits (12 
us)—the latter also found in the procedure text ACT 200.6—in 
which the moon goes 'up and down' in cubits and fingers while 
passing by stars. 
In any case, the principal object of the planetary theory is to 
determine, not the motion of a planet, but the date arid location of 
a phenomenon, for which the very notion of a defined path is 
without meaning. Although there were methods of interpolation, 
some very sophisticated, for finding the motion of the planet 
between phenomena, the phenomenon itself may be regarded 
simply as taking place in one location after another each time the 
planet and the sun reach a characteristic elongation. It is not 
quite appropriate to compare the phenomenon to a pseudo-planet 
with a continuous motion of its own, like the lunar nodes, the 
head and tail of the dragon, in Indian and Arabic astrology, 
because the phenomenon does not exist most of the time while the 
lunar nodes move continuously along the ecliptic between the 
eclipses that make them apparent. Nevertheless, we shall, for lack 
of any alternative term, refer to locations and distances in us 
through the zodiac as longitude, and measure them in degrees, but 
without thereby implying that they are measured along a circular 
coordinate. We shall also use the term arc, as in synodic arc, to 
mean simply an interval of distance, without implying an arc of a 
circle projected on to the celestial sphere. 
Further, the us is a metrical unit for computation, not 
observation, for which a different unit, the kus (cubit), was used, 
divided into 24 or 30 su-si (finger). The conversion of the kus used 
for observation, principally of the distance of the moon and 

36 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
planets from fixed stars and from each other, and the us is uncer­
tain; possible values for the kus are 2 or 2j us, corresponding to 24 
or 30 su-si, although as used for observation the units may not be 
precisely convertible. Gerd GraJ3hoff (1998) has found an average 
value of about 2.4 us for the kus, suggesting a value of the kus of 
2| us, although the conversion still may have been neither pre­
cisely defined nor used. We have noted that in the atypical text for 
planetary latitude the distances 'up and down' are in cubits and 
fingers, while the lunar latitude text uses both us and cubits and 
fingers, with the moon's diameter taken as 12 fingers, which is 
here equal to 1 us, implying 1 kus = 2 us - 24 su-si, the same 
relation implicit in columns E and Ψ of lunar ephemerides for the 
computation of eclipses. But this defined kus may not be the same 
as the kus used for observation. 
The us is also a unit of time: one day contains 6,0 us, now 
called 'degrees of time' or the like, which may then be divided sexa-
gesimally to many places. The origin is, perhaps, a purely arith­
metic, not practical, division of each of the three night watches 
into 1,0 us and, by analogy, of three divisions of daylight to make 
6,0 us in all—this would be Epping's division of the day into 6 
parts and Neugebauer's 6 'large hours'—or perhaps a more practi­
cal division of watches into 2 beru (danna), each of which is 
divided into 30 us, so that one day contains 12 beru or 6,0 us. The 
term beru is also used for 30 us of longitude, but not specifically in 
the sense of a zodiacal sign. Like the division of the zodiac, the us 
of time is principally a unit of computation, although indirectly it 
can also be measured. In lunar ephemerides, Column C gives the 
computed seasonal length of daylight in us, where the longest day 
M = 3,36 us and the shortest m = 2,24 us; thus M/m = 3/2, a 
reasonable approximation in small numbers for Babylon, however, 
and in whatever units, it may originally have been measured. The 
time in us of the visibility of the moon between the rising and 
setting of the sun and moon may likewise be computed, as in the 
lunar ephemerides or from the rules given in the procedure texts 
ACT 200 and 201, or observed by some measure of time, as by 
weight or volume of water in a water clock—the unit of weight, the 
mina, is for water essentially a linear function of volume, and so 
may be measured by volume—but not by direct measurement of an 
arc. Us are also used for the time of visibility of planets at their 
first and last appearances, which we shall take up later. A recent 
study by Stephenson and Fatoohi (1994) of 53 reports from ADT 
and other sources extending from -561 to -66 of durations of lunar 
eclipses in us has confirmed that, however it was measured, the us 

Units of Distance and Time 
37 
is very accurately equal to 4 minutes of time where one day equals 
24 hours. When adopted by the Greeks and interpreted geometri­
cally, these us of rising and setting times and length of daylight 
became degrees of oblique ascension of a circle, the celestial equa­
tor, divided into 360° so that 15° equal one hour. But as used by 
the Scribes, the us must be considered purely arithmetically as a 
unit of time, and not as a unit of a coordinate of right or oblique 
ascension, just as the division of zodiacal signs into 30 us does 
not indicate a coordinate of longitude. 
The Babylonian lunar calendar contains months of 29 or 30 
days that are, in principle, determined astronomically, either by 
observation or by computation from lunar ephemerides of the 
evening of the first visibility of the moon. However, for practical 
and commercial purposes, just as banks often use uniform months 
for computing interest, a conventional month of 30 days was used, 
which was conveniently carried over into the planetary ephemer­
ides since it eliminates the problem of determining whether 
months between computed phenomena are 29 or 30 days long. This 
unit of time, which the Scribes did not distinguish from the day 
(umu, me), is now called by the Sanskrit term 'tithi' (
τ), and like 
the us may be divided sexagesimally to as many places as desired, 
a division that is also for purposes of computation since, for 
example, the dates of first appearances and synodic times between 
first appearances may be computed to several places even though 
first appearances only take place in the morning or evening 
separated by integral numbers of days. We thus have the parallel 
metrological divisions for distance and time, 1 sign = 30 us and 1 
month = 30 tithis, 12 signs = 6,0 us and 12 months = 6,0 tithis. 
Likewise for division of the day, 1 beru = 30 us and 1 day = 12 beru 
= 6,0 us. It happens that the sun moves about Γ per day, and thus 
about 1 us per tithi and 30 us per month, but these are in no way 
essential to the definitions, which are purely formal. Since the 
calendar month is 29 or 30 days long, the error in stating the 'day' 
of the month in tithis rather than days cannot exceed 1 day and is 
usually less. Like the us, the tithi is a unit for computation, not 
observation, for when dates are noted in observational records, 
they are days of the calendar month, not tithis of a conventional 
month. For the ominous significance of planetary phenomena and 
the effect of rituals and magic performed under the planets or stars 
depend upon the day of the lunar, that is, the calendar month, the 
days of which are themselves ominous, as we have noted. We have 
also seen that in many planetary omens only the month is taken 
to be significant, in which case all the more are the divisions of 

38 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
the month purely for the purpose of calculation, and a slight 
discrepancy of at most one day of no consequence. 
The length of the solar year in the planetary theory is likewise 
taken without regard to the length of each month in days, for in 
terms of the month m, the year y is denned as y = 12;22,8m, a 
parameter also found in System A lunar theory. If m = 30
τ, 
y = 12:22,8 · 30^ = 6,11:4^ = 6,0* + 11;4
τ= 12m+ 11;4*. 
where the 'epact' e = 11;4
τ is the excess of the solar year over the 
'lunar year' of 12m = 6,0
X. Within the complexities of a true lunar 
calendar with variable months, the use of tithis and a denned 
epact over 12 months is equivalent to the uniform day count of the 
Egyptian calendar or the modern Julian day number, and greatly 
simplifies the reckoning of time since all months and years are 
now equal and related in a simple way. The only necessary 
adaptation to the calendar is the insertion of additional months in 
accordance with the calendrical cycle 19y = 19 · 12m + 7m = 235m, 
by which the same month of 30
τ is transferred from the longer year 
of the planetary theory, y = 12:22,8m = 6,11;4
τ, to the shorter 
calendar year, y = (235/19)m= 12;22,6,20m= 6,11;3,10
τ. 
The Scribes' units of distance and time, of location and date, 
are economical and efficient, show a high degree of abstraction, 
and make no more assumptions depending upon observation and 
measurement than absolutely necessary. The irregularities of the 
lengths of zodiacal constellations and months are avoided by 
denning 1 sign = 30 us and 1 month = 30 tithis; the year is 12:22,8 
months in the planetary theory and 12:22,6,20 months in the 
calendar. All relations are purely formal except for a single astro­
nomical parameter, the relation of the year to the month, and even 
this is partly formal and defined differently for different purposes. 
In order to express time in the ordinary unit of the solar day, a 
second parameter derived from observation is required, the length 
of the mean synodic month in days. Like the relation of the year to 
the month, the Scribes employed different values of the relation of 
the month to the day, but it will suffice for our purpose to use the 
approximate values 
m = 30
τ = 29;31,50
d, Ι
τ = 0;59,3,40
d « 0;59
d, l
d = 1:0,57,...
τ = 1; 1*. 
Using days instead of tithis, all relations for the year and month 
become more cumbersome and less precisely defined, and with true 
months of 29 or 30 days all but unmanageable. Fortunately, we 
shall work entirely in tithis, months of 30
τ, and years of 12:22,8m 

Units of Distance and Time 
39 
= 6,11;4
τ. In this way, just as intervals of longitude are expressed 
in us, which are divided as required, signs s = 30 us, and zodiacal 
rotations r = 12s = 6,0 us, intervals of time are expressed in tithis, 
also divided as required, months m = 30
τ, years y = 12m + e = 
6,11;4
τ, and, for calendrical purposes, lunar years of 12m = 6,0
τ. 
Dates 
and 
Locations 
of Phenomena 
in the 
Diaries: 
Observed 
and 
True 
Dates 
The most important source for observations of planets is of 
course the Diaries, but in addition there are collections for indivi­
dual planets for periods of years, of which all too few survive, that 
may be closer to what was actually used for the development of the 
planetary theory. The dates and locations of the planetary 
phenomena interpreted in the omen texts and computed in the 
ephemerides are reported in the Diaries, but not necessarily 
directly from observation for either date or location, and must be 
used with care to distinguish what is, in descending order of 
directness, observed, even measured, estimated, inferred, or com­
puted. By far the most numerous observations of planets in the 
Diaries are of their distances 'above' or 'below' and 'in front of or 
'behind' normal stars and each other, measured in cubits and 
fingers, 
which are found in the earliest Diary, ADT -651. Here are 
early examples: 
-651 XII. The 19th, Venus stood in the region of Aries, 10 fingers 
behind Mars; the moon was surrounded by a halo, and α Scorpii 
stood in it. The 20th, Mars was 1 finger to the left of the front
9 of 
Aries; it came close. 
-567 II. The 18th, Venus was balanced 1 cubit 4 fingers above a 
Leonis. 
-567 III. At that time (the 1st), Mars and Mercury were 4 cubits in 
front of α [Leonis]. 
-567 XI. Night of the 23rd, [.... Mars
7] was balanced above [sic) the 
small star which stands 3 1/2 cubits behind Capricorn. 
-567 XII. (> The 12th, Mercury] was in front of the 'band' of the 
Swallow, 1/2 cubit below Venus, Mercury having passed 8 fingers 
to the east; when it became visible it was bright and (already) 
high....[< The 20th...Saturn] was balanced 6 fingers above Mercury 
and 3 fingers below Venus, and Mars was balanced 2/3 cubits 
below the bright star of.... 
-418 I. Night of the 7th, first part of night, Venus was 8 fingers 
below β Tauri, Venus having passed 4 fingers to the east. 
-418 VIII. Night of the 2nd, [Venus was] 1 2/3 cubits above α 

40 
Part 1. Synodic 
Phenomena 
Virginis; I did not watch. 
-418 XII2. Night of the 13th, beginning of night, Mercury was 1 2/3 
cubits in front of η Tauri. 
-384 IX. [> The 28th,]...Saturn was 6 fingers above ζ Tauri. 
-384 XII. I> The 5th,]...Mercury was 2 cubits 4 fingers below β 
Arietis, Mercury being 8 fingers back to the west. 
It is notable that -418 VIII 2 is marked Ί did not watch' (nu pap), 
showing, presumably, that the distance could be inferred from 
nearby observations, which is more likely at this date than any 
sort of prediction, as by goal years. How the distances were mea­
sured is not known. Although precise in their units, they are not 
particularly accurate, and the measurements could have been 
made with something as simple as a graduated rod held at arm's 
length. One would guess that the intention was to measure the 
distance at closest approach, which, however, is often missed, 
sometimes by several days in the case of the slower planets. 
The reason for these apparently meticulous measurements 
seems to be that conjunctions of planets with stars and with each 
other—there appears to be no distinction, particularly since in 
omens stars may represent planets—only become ominous if they 
are within a certain distance, and possibly that the ominous or 
magical effect of the conjunction was thought to be greater the 
closer the approach or even to differ for each measured distance. 
Among the Assyrian reports and letters, there are a few specifica­
tions of distances: 
Concerning the planets [Satur]n and ]Mars...[missing lines] 
...There is (still) (a distance of) about 5 fi[ngers] left; it (the conjunc­
tion) is not y]et] certain. Presently we keep observing and shall write 
to the king, our lord. It (Mars) moves about a finger a day. (LABS 47) 
If Jupiter has awesome radiance: the weapons of the king of 
Akkad will prevail over the weapons of his enemy. Regulus stands 
either to the right or left of Jupiter. Now it stands to the left of 
Jupiter by three fingers. (ARAK 489) 
Saturn did not approach Venus by (less than) 1 cubit; there is 
no sign from it. (ARAK 500) 
Mars was sighted in the month of Ab (V); now it has approached 
within 2;30 spans of Libra. As soon as it has come close to it, I shall 
write its interpretation to the king, my lord. (LABS 172) 
If Mars keeps going around a planet: barley will become expen­
sive....Mars remained four fingers distant from Saturn, it did not 
come close. It did not reach it. I have (nevertheless) copied (the rele­
vant omen). What does it matter? Let the pertinent 
namburbi 
(apotropaic) ritual be performed. (ARAK 82) 

Dates and Locations of Phenomena 
41 
An apotropaic ritual to control prices seems entirely practical, and 
even now might be of interest to commodity traders, whether in 
Baghdad or Chicago. (One of the figures in relief on the Chicago 
Board of Trade Building (1932) is, appropriately, a Babylonian 
grain merchant.) The term 'going around' perhaps means passing 
in direct, retrograde, and direct motion. The distinction of left and 
right, as in ARAK 489, meaning east and west, is also ominous: 
If Mars stands in (...) to the left of Venus: [there will be] devas-
tation in Akkad; the pen of horses [...]. (ARAK 415) 
If Jupiter passes to the right of Venus: a strong one will conquer 
the land of the Guti in battle. If Jupiter...to the right of Venus [and] 
stands there: for three years.... (ARAK 448) 
To see these measured distances of planets from stars purely, or 
even principally, as a primitive coordinate system, or simply as a 
way of specifying location seems to me anachronistic; they must 
have some divinatory or magical purpose, just as the numerous 
reports in the omen texts of conjunctions of planets and stars 
without distances. Any time the moon passes a planet, or one 
planet passes another, the distance is also measured, but such 
conjunctions, undoubtedly ominous, could hardly serve to estab-
lish location. We are concerned with distances from normal stars 
only when they are associated with some phenomenon, as they 
often are for stations, presumably as a way of estimating the date 
the planet was stationary, and occasionally for risings and settings 
when, by chance, these take place close to a normal star. 
Reports of planetary phenomena are less frequent than the 
passing of normal stars because the phenomena themselves are 
less frequent. There are two aspects of these reports we shall 
consider, date and location. In the early Diaries, these are rather 
vague, the date being approximate and the location near a star or 
constellation. In the earliest Diary, ADT -651 I, the 12th, 13th, 
and 14th were overcast, and, presumably on the 14th, both 
Mercury and Saturn had their last appearances 'behind Pisces; I 
did not watch (nu pap) because the days were cloudy.' The earliest 
to specify location by zodiacal signs, although these are surely not 
signs of equal length as in the ephemerides, and location by 
constellations is also used, is ADT -463 from Uruk, e.g. month VI, 
'Around the 12th or 13th, Mercury's [last] appearance in the east 
in Virgo,' but since the next preceding Diary is ADT -567, there is 
about a century in which the practice could have been introduced. 
The better preserved ADT -418 gives similar reports with either a 

42 
Part 1. Synodic 
Phenomena 
specific or approximate date, locating the planet by either sign or 
constellation, including the Chariot (gigir) for the latter part of 
Taurus, a practice found even in Diaries of the third century (ADT 
-266 II 12). 
The reports that interest us begin in the early fourth century. 
In ADT -380 X, we read. The 20th, Mercury's last appearance in 
the west in Capricorn; I did not watch (nu pap),' and in ADT -375 
VII, T h e 21st, Mercury in the west...its last appearance o[mitted] 
(dib).' Here it is noted that an appearance of Mercury was 'not 
observed' (nu pap), often, but not always, because of bad weather, 
showing either prediction or, more likely, inference from a nearby 
observation, or 'passed by' (dib), meaning that it did not occur, 
and a hypothetical date estimated in some way. Still more inter­
esting are dated observations of a first appearance followed by a 
date, always earlier, when it should have taken place. The earliest 
fragmentary examples are from ADT -391 XII2: '[Saturn's]...(ideal) 
first appearance on the 24th of month XII,' and ADT -382 III: 
'[< the 21st...Saturn's] first appearance [...] β Geminorum; it was 
bright (and) high (kur nim), (ideal) first appearance on the 15th.' A 
more striking example occurs in ADT -372 IV. After two days of 
'zi ir', which is some kind of bad weather, we read, T h e 26th, 
Mercury's first appearance in the west in Leo; (ideal) first appear­
ance on the 19th.' How is this interval of no less than seven days 
known? Prediction from Mercury's 46-year goal-year period of 569 
months, after which phenomena are repeated one day earlier in the 
month, is one possibility, but not at all likely. 
For there is another, that first appears in canonical form in 
ADT -366, of which we give several early examples, 
including 
morning (east) and evening (west) for each inferior planet. The time 
of visibility between the rising or setting of the planet and sun is 
in us. 
-366 IV. The 10th, Mercury's first appearance in the west in Leo, 3 
cubits in front of Venus to the west; sunset to setting of Mercury: 
16°; (ideal) first appearance on the 8th. 
-366 IV. The 28th, Mars' first appearance 1 1/2 cubits behind α 
Leonis to the east; rising of Mars to sunrise: 22°; (ideal) first 
appearance on the 15th. 
-346 XII. The 20th, Venus' first appearance in the west in Aries; 
sunset to setting of Venus: 9°; (ideal) first appearance on the 16th. 
-321 V. The 5th, Saturn's first appearance in Cancer; rising of 
Saturn to sunrise: 16°; it was small (tur), (ideal) first appearance on 
the 2nd. 
-321 VI. The 8th, Jupiter's first appearance in Virgo; rising of 

Dates and Locations of 
Phenomena 
43 
Jupiter to sunrise: 11' 30'; (ideal) first appearance on the 6th. 
-308 VI. The 12th, Venus' first appearance in the east in Virgo; it 
was bright (kur), rising of Venus to sunrise: 9'; (ideal) first appear­
ance on the 11th. 
-293 II. [The 25th, Mars'] first appearance [in the beginning of 
Tau]rus; it was bright (kur), rising of Mars to sunrise: 20°; (ideal) 
first appearance on the 5th. 
-289 IV. The 7th, Mer[cury's] first appearance in the east in Cancer; 
rising of Mercury to sunrise: 18° 30'; [(ideal) first appearance] on the 
5th. 
-283 VII. The 30th, Mars' first appearance in Libra; rising of Mars to 
sunrise: 19°; (ideal) first appearance on the 21st. 
Many of these differences between an observed and 'ideal' or, as we 
prefer, 'true' first appearance, meaning the date the planet should 
have appeared had it been observed, reported simply as 'on η 
appearance' (in η igi), which amounts to fully 20 days for Mars in 
-293 II, can be explained by bad weather recorded in the Diaries. 
There are also reports of first appearances and times of visibility 
without the second, 'ideal' date: 
-378 VIII. [The l]6th, Jupiter's first appearance in Scorpius; it was 
bright (kur); rising of Jupiter to sunrise: 1Γ 30'. 
-346 XII. [The 17th
?,] Mercury's first appearance in the west in 
Aries; sunset to setting of Mercury: 14°. 
-324 III. The 3rd, Mercury's first appearance in the west in Cancer; 
sunset to setting of Mercury: 12°. 
-324 III. [The 18th, Saturn's] first appearance [in Gemini]; rising of 
Saturn to sunrise: 15°. 
The time in us between the rising or setting of the planet and the 
sun during which the planet is visible is called 'na', the same term 
used for the time from sunset to moonset on the evening of new 
moon and from sunrise to moonset the morning after full moon. 
Presumably it was measured using a water clock, and while 
eventually there may have been a method of computing it, here it 
appears to be an essential part of the observation. A collection of 
observations of Mercury (LBAT 1377) from a later period, Seleucid 
Era 116 to 132 (-195 to -179), published by Hunger (1988), gives 
similar information for last appearances—not contained in the 
contemporary Diaries—the time of visibility in us between the 
rising or setting of Mercury and the sun, and the date, always 
later, on which the last appearance should occur. For last appear­
ances, the Diaries give only the date and zodiacal sign for all the 
planets, although visibility times are sometimes given a few days 

44 
Parti. 
Synodic 
Phenomena 
prior to last appearance, but it appears that for Mercury, and 
perhaps also for Venus, the time of visibility and ideal date were 
also recorded. Here is evidence that the Diaries, as extensive and 
apparently 'official' as they may be, are only a selection from still 
more complete observational records; and it is such more complete 
records, arranged into collections for individual planets that would 
be more suitable to mathematical astronomy. 
As proposed by Hunger, certainly correctly, the ideal date was 
inferred from the time of visibility between rising or setting of the 
planet and the sun; if this was over some amount, the true first 
appearance must have been earlier and last appearance later than 
the observed by some number of days, although the method of 
computation, or inference, is not clear, and as would be expected, 
the times of visibility in the reports without an ideal date seem to 
be shorter. This has the advantage, over assuming prediction by 
goal-year periods, of explaining why the true date for first appear-
ance is always earlier and for last appearance always later than 
the observed. Further, for prediction through goal-year periods to 
succeed, the goal-year periods must be known to the day, that is, 
their 'error' from an integral number of years or synodic months 
must be known exactly. In fact, the phenomena in the Diaries 
separated by goal-year periods, including 'not observed' and 'passed 
by' dates, show no such consistency, so we may be virtually certain 
that goal-year prediction was not used for the recorded dates. 
The same procedure was used to determine the date of the first 
visibility of the moon, in which the time in us between sunset and 
moonset provides the criterion. Here examples exist as early as the 
second earliest preserved Diary, ADT -567: 
-567 III, (the 1st of which was identical with) the 30th (of the 
preceding month), the moon became visible in Cancer; it was thick; 
sunset to moonset: 20°; the north wind blew. 
-567 XII, the 1st (of which followed the 30th of the preceding 
month), the moon became visible behind Aries while the sun stood 
there; sunset to moonset: 25°, measured; earthshine; the north 
wind blew. 
-453 [XI, (the 1st of which was identical with) the 30th (of the 
preceding month)7,] sunset to moonset: 14°; there were dense 
clouds, so that I did not see the moon. 
-440 [IJ, the 1st (of which followed the 30th of the preceding month); 
sunset to moonset: 24° 30'; dense clouds so that I did not see the 
moon. 
-373 VIII, (the 1st of which was identical with) the 30th (of the 
preceding month); sunset to moonset: 10° 40'; mist, I did not see 

Dates and Locations of Phenomena 
45 
the moon. 
-372 III, (the 1st of which was identical with) the 30th (of the 
preceding month); dense clouds, I did not see the moon; sunset to 
moonset: 19° (expected). 
The term 'earthshine' in -567 XII 1, literally (the moon) 'wore a 
crown', 'aga apir' or 'apir', is thought to refer to the secondary light 
reflected from the earth to the dark part of the moon near new 
moon, an explanation of the secondary light, to the best of my 
knowledge, first proposed by Leonardo da Vinci and demonstrated, 
over much opposition, by Galileo. Perhaps a meteorological effect, 
as some sort of halo, is intended. It appears to be a good omen: 
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the harvest of the 
land will prosper; [the king wi]ll reach the highest rank. (ARAK 389.) 
But to our subject. ADT -567 also contains the entry for month II: 
The 26th, (moonrise to sunrise) 23°; I did not observe (nu pap) the 
moon.' Evidently by the mid-sixth century, as the distinction 
'measured' for -567 XII 1 would also appear to indicate, there was 
a method for determining the evening of first appearance and of 
calculating the time between sunset and moonset or moonrise and 
sunrise when the moon was not visible or not observed. Whenever 
possible these intervals were measured, presumably with a water 
clock, and their use for determining the date of first and last 
appearance goes back in some form at least to the Neo-Assyrian 
period, as shown by the 'Diviner's Manual' (Oppenheim 1974, 205): 
Should it happen to you that at the first visibility of the moon the 
weather should be cloudy, [the water clock(?)l should be the means 
of computing it; should it happen to you that at the disappearance of 
the moon the weather should be cloudy, the water clock(?) should be 
the means of computing it. 
How measurements of rising and setting times of the moon at first 
and last visibility and full moon, called by Sachs (1948) the 'lunar 
six', were used as criteria for finding the date of the phase and 
length of the month was first discovered by Epping (1889, 17ff.), 
from detailed analyses of two normal-star almanacs, LBAT 1055 
and 1059 for SE 189 (-122) and SE 201 (-110). Brack-Bernsen 
(1990 etc.) has recently shown that such measurements were the 
source of fundamental parameters of the lunar theory. 
Perhaps visibility times is the sort of calculation of new moons 
referred to by Second Isaiah, although a rougher method, depend-
ing upon the height of the moon, is found in the Assyrian reports: 

46 
Part 1. Synodic 
Phenomena 
I observed the (crescent of the) moon on the 30th day, but it 
was high, too high to be the (crescent of the) 30th. Its position was 
like that of the 2nd day. If it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let 
the king wait for the report of the Inner City before fixing the date. 
(LABS 225) 
Another report uses the height of the moon and the weather to 
avoid an inauspicious omen: 
If the moon becomes visible in Tebet (X) on the 30th day: the 
Ahlamu will devour Subartu; a foreigner will rule the Westland. 
Tebet (X) means Elam. From Bullutu. We watched on the 29th day; 
the clouds were den[se], we did not see the moon. We watched on 
the 30th day; we saw the moon, (but) it was (already) very high. The 
weather of the 29th day has to do with it. What is it that the king 
my lord says? (ARAK 120) 
Curiously, the implication of both these reports is that the first 
visibility actually occurred prior to the 30th day, which is not 
possible, as one presumes must have been known even at the early 
date of the reports. It should be noted that the height of the new 
moon is also ominous: 
If the moon at its appearance is high and becomes visible: the 
enemy will plunder in the land. (ARAK 391) 
If the moon at its appearance stands low and becomes visible: a 
present from a distant land will come to the king of the world. (ARAK 
393, cf. ARAK 121, 390) 
So is an early new moon: 
If the moon at its appearance is visible early: the month will 
bring worry. (ARAK 391) 
In the case of the moon, as difficult as the problem of first appear-
ance is, there are only two possibilities, following the 29th or 30th 
day of the preceding month, and finding the time between sunset 
and moonset is a part of finding the correct date of new moon. But 
for the first appearance of a planet, there are no simple restric-
tions, so the correct date of first appearance must be inferred from 
the measured time of visibility when the planet is observed. 
The same method turned around was used for last appearance. 
On the chance that the planet would not be visible on the true 
date, the time of visibility was measured in the mornings or 
evenings before the anticipated last appearance, from which the 
true date could be inferred. The Diaries contain only a few reports 
of this procedure, of which these are examples: 

Dates and Locations of Phenomena 
47 
-346 XI. The 12th?, rising of Mercury to sunrise: 11°. [The 13th?, 
Mercury's] last appearance in [the ea]st in Aquarius. 
-324 IV. The 14th, sunset to moonset: 5°; sunset to setting of 
Mercury: 12°. The 15th, Mercury's last appearance in the west in 
Leo. 
-261 VII. The 12th,...rising of Venus to sunrise: 8"....on the 13th or 
14th, Venus' [last appearance] in the east [in Libra]. 
-253 VII. [The >13th,] sunset to setting of Saturn: [1]8\...Around the 
18th, Saturn's [last appearance in Scorpius]. 
-251 XII. The 28th, sunset to setting of Venus: 9°; around the 1st of 
month I, Venus' last appearance in the west in Aries (to be 
expected). 
-194 VII. The 8th, sunset to setting of Saturn: 15". Around the 11th, 
Saturn's last appearance in Scorpius. 
-187 VIII. The 3rd,...[sunset to setting of Ju]piter: [nn°].... Around 
the 11th, Jupiter's last appearance in Sagittarius. 
-179 V. The 3rd, sunset to setting of Jupiter: 13°....Around the 6th, 
Jupiter's last appearance in Leo. 
-164 VII. The 26th, sunset to setting of Jupiter: 11°; very overcast, 
the north wind blew....The 30th, Jupiter's last appearance in 
Scorpius; very overcast. 
The reports of last appearances of Mercury in LBAT 1377 (Hunger, 
1988) essentially combine these two statements into the canonical 
form for first appearance: 
SE 119 (-192) V. The 12th(?), morning, last appearance of Mercury 
in Leo; rising of Mercury to sunrise: 13°; (ideal) last appearance on 
the 16th in Leo. 
SE 125 (-186) [VI. The 1st, morning,] last appearance lof Mercury in] 
Virgo; rising of Mercury to sunrise: 11*(?); (ideal) last appearance on 
the 2nd. 
SE 131 (-180) I. The 1st, evening, last appearance of Mercury in the 
west in Taurus; sunset to setting of Mercury: 17°; (ideal) last 
appearance on the 4th. 
Both this combined form and the separated form of the Diaries are 
very uncommon compared to the detailed reports of first appear-
ance—most reports of last appearance give only the date, presum-
ably the inferred true date, and zodiacal sign—and one might 
conclude that first appearance was taken as the more important 
and therefore more carefully observed and recorded. 
The distinction of observed and true or ideal dates of first, and 
sometimes last, appearances raises the question of which dates 
underlie the synodic times used to derive the parameters of the 

48 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
ephemerides, which will in turn very closely determine the synodic 
times and arcs, and thus the dates and locations of phenomena, 
computed with the ephemerides. I believe the answer can only be 
true dates, for of what conceivable use are dates of observed first 
appearances that by reason of bad weather, poor seeing, inatten­
tion or whatever are several days later—in the case of Mars, as we 
have seen, 20 days later—than the dates the first appearances 
actually occurred or were believed to have occurred? None at all, I 
should think, and thus the true or ideal dates determined by 
inference from rising and setting time must form the basis of the 
true synodic times, and thus the true synodic arcs, underlying the 
ephemerides. Further confirmation that the Scribes regarded the 
true dates as the actual dates of first appearances may be found in 
the summaries at the end of each month of the Diaries, in which, 
with some exceptions, true dates are specified. 
If we consider other phenomena, the Diaries also appear to be 
reporting inferences of true dates. Most observation took place 
during the first watch, in the evening after sunset, and the third 
watch, in the morning before sunrise. For the superior planets, 
first station is observed in the west before sunrise because the 
preceding evening the planet had not yet risen; second station in 
the east after sunset because by the following morning the planet 
has set. The Diaries call first station 'stationary to the east' (ana 
nim ki us-ύ), the planet has stopped moving eastward, and second 
station 'stationary to the west' (ana su ki us-a), the planet has 
stopped moving westward. For the inferior planets, first station is 
observed in the west after sunset and second station in the east 
before sunrise. The stations of Mercury, which occur close to or 
between evening setting Ω and morning rising Γ, and are therefore 
difficult to detect or even invisible, are neither reported in the 
Diaries nor computed in the ephemerides; the stations of Venus, 
which are always visible, are computed in the ephemerides but, 
except for a single known example (-136 XII2 29), not reported in 
the Diaries, further evidence for more extensive observational 
records. A reasonable way to detect a station is to measure the 
distance of the planet from a nearby star, presumably for several 
nights, and the reports frequently contain a measured distance 
'above' or 'below' or 'in front of or 'behind' a normal star. But this 
is by no means easy. Stations are in fact the only phenomena that 
require measurement—first and last appearances either occur or do 
not occur—which makes them particularly uncertain, and even 
with such measurement it is difficult to determine the exact date 
of a station because the planet is sensibly unmoving in longitude 

Dates and Locations of Phenomena 
49 
for several nights but can continue to move in latitude; hence the 
distance from the star may never be constant. Consider repre­
sentative early reports of stations and resumption of motion: 
-651 I. The 17th...Mars became stationary (to the east) in the area of 
the Lip of the Scorpion, it came close to the bright star of the 
Scorpion's head (β Scorpii?)....The 25th, Mars was east of the star to 
the right (west) of the Scorpion. 
-346 X. Around the 17th, Saturn, when it became stationary to the 
east, was (expected to be) stationary 2 cubits above α Virginis, 
having passed 1/2 cubit to the east; I did not watch. 
-346 XI. Night of the 12th,...[end of night...Satu]rn, while moving 
back to the west, was 2 cubits above α Virginis. 
-346 XII. Around the 19th, when Jupiter was becoming stationary to 
the west, it was (expected to become) stationary 1 cubit 4 fingers in 
front of α Leonis; (but) I did not watch....Night of the 27th, Jupiter 
moved back to the east. The 27th, 28th, (and) 29th, locusts 
at[tack]ed. 
-333 V. Around the 1st, when Mars became stationary to the 
west 
Around the 7th, Mars went back to the east. 
-322 XII. Around the 21st, when Jupiter became stationary to the 
west, [it became stationary] 1/2 cubit above ρ [Leonis]....Around the 
30th, Jupiter moved back to the east; clouds were in the sky. 
-300 VIII. Around [the nnth, when Satu]rn became stationary to the 
west, [it became stationary] 2 1/2 cubits in front of η Piscium in the 
end of Pisces, [nn is 21 or 22) 
-284 VII. Around the 15th, when Mars became stationary to the 
west, [it became stationary] 2/3 cubit below η Piscium....Night of the 
24th,...[last part of the night]...Mars moved back to the east. 
As is only reasonable, the dates of stations are approximate, given 
as 'around' (en), and the dates of resumed motion several days 
later, retrograde to the west or direct to the east, may also be ap­
proximate. Some reports of stations give only location by zodiacal 
sign without a distance from a normal star, so one may wonder 
how it was determined that the planet was stationary. While 
stations seem mostly to have been inferred from observations with 
measurements, estimated dates, as some conventional interval of 
time after first appearance, may have been used when there was no 
measurement, and may, for all one knows, have been used to 
assign a date even when a station was measured, since the records 
themselves show that the planet was considered stationary for 
more than one day. Thus it is possible that all dates of stations 
are precariously 'ideal' rather than observed, so that stations are 
of little help in establishing the duration of synodic times. 

50 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
Acronychal risings are also ill-defined. The Diaries report only 
the date with no location, and they are sometimes 'not observed'. 
Some early examples: 
-567 I. [The 11th] or 12th, Jupiter's acronychal rising. 
-380 X. Around the 26th, Saturn's acronychal rising. 
-357 XI. The 15th, Jupiter's acronychal rising. 
-342 I. The 21st, Saturn's acronychal rising; clouds, I did not watch. 
-322 IX. The 23rd, the sun rose in a cloud; Saturn's acronychal 
rising; clouds crossed the sky. 
-276 XI. The 15th, Mars' acronychal rising. 
-273 XII. Around the 16th, Jupiter's acronychal rising. 
-232 X. The 27th, Saturn's acronychal rising; I did not watch. 
As a superior planet 'moves' from first visibility in the east before 
sunrise, through first station, and through its retrograde arc 
toward opposition, it rises earlier each night. While the elongation 
of the planet from the sun increases to 180°, most of the motion 
actually belongs to the sun since in this period Saturn moves less 
than 6°, Jupiter less than 16°, and Mars between 140° and 180° 
while the sun has moved between 260° and 340°. In the retrograde 
arc, while the longitude of the planet decreases, its elongation 
from the sun increases the most rapidly. Acronychal rising itself 
occurs before true opposition in the early evening when the planet 
is last seen to rise in the east, because of twilight, just after the 
sun sets in the west. But who is to say exactly when this occurs? 
By the next night the planet has already risen when the sun sets, 
but, again because of twilight, it only becomes visible shortly after 
sunset, so this is not 'either you see it or you don't,' like heliacal 
rising or setting. Consequently, the date of acronychal rising is a 
guess within a range of a few days, and if there are hills or sloping 
land toward the east where the planet rises or the west where the 
sun sets, like life, it is six-to-five against. This the Scribes surely 
knew, and thus the dates of acronychal rising are all precariously 
'ideal', although they may have been used to find the synodic times 
of Mars because of still greater uncertainty in the true dates of its 
first visibility. Ptolemy's oppositions, found by repeatedly measur­
ing the position of the planet, computing the position of the mean 
sun, and interpolating for the time the elongation is exactly 180°, 
are entirely different and, at least in principle, accurate to a few 
hours. It is notable that the corresponding setting phase, cosmical 
setting, when the planet is first seen to set in the west in the 
morning just before the sun rises in the east, which occurs slightly 
after true opposition, is not recognized in our sources. 

Dates and Locations of Phenomena 
51 
The situation for location—I hesitate to use the word 
'longitude' in connection with the Diaries—is even less precise. 
First and last visibilities are located by zodiacal sign, sometimes 
specifying beginning or end of the sign; occasionally a distance 
from a normal star or a planet is also noted, combining two 
observations, of a phenomenon and of the passing of a normal star 
or a planet. Sometimes only a distance from a normal star or 
planet is given, the latter hardly a specification of location. Surely 
the purpose of these observations is not so much location itself as 
the ominous significance of first appearances in particular signs 
and near stars and planets. Stations specify distances from a 
normal star or, in their absence, zodiacal sign. Acronychal risings 
give no location at all; they could be assumed to occur in the sign 
opposite the sun, although a zodiacal sign is never given for the 
sun. The recording of location is thus very rough, and this raises a 
number of questions. Were the zodiacal signs used for location in 
the Diaries regions of equal length, as in the ephemerides where 
the equal length of signs is essential for computation? How would 
one then mark out regions of equal length and distinguish their 
boundaries? Or were signs in the Diaries loosely defined regions in 
relation to stars and constellations used to define location, just as 
they determine ominous significance, of phenomena? Or, consid-
ering each alternative, were stars used to estimate location by 
zodiacal signs that were taken to be of equal length only when the 
observations were applied to the derivation of parameters, which is 
what I believe to be true? Could distances from normal stars be 
used to assign precise location in a sign by using locations of 
normal stars in a 'star catalogue', a fragment of which was 
published by Sachs (1952)? Could the assumption of fixed elonga-
tions of phenomena from the sun, the solar-distance principle, to 
be discussed later, be used to assign a longitude by adding the 
elongation to the computed longitude of the sun? Or could the 
measured times of visibility in us at first or last appearance be 
used to locate the planet precisely within a sign by converting 
them to elongation from the computed longitude of the sun? These 
possibilities are discussed in Part 3 and the Appendix on alterna-
tive methods of deriving parameters. 
Leaving aside these questions, it seems to me that precise 
location is of no importance to the derivation of the parameters of 
the ephemerides, except for a single epoch position, and that the 
most secure information for the mathematical planetary theory 
from the observations in the Diaries and related texts is the true 
or ideal dates of first, and, for inferior planets, last, appearances 

52 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
and the locations by zodiacal sign. It is time that is of the essence. 
The very foundation of Babylonian mathematical astronomy is the 
measurement, not of position, but of time, of intervals of months 
and days between phenomena drawn from records of calendar 
dates, and of visibility times in us measured with a water clock. 
The Scribes understood perfectly well that measurement of loca­
tion was far less precise than measurement of time, and they show 
the highest ingenuity in their methods of deriving the parameters 
of the ephemerides from nothing more than the dates of phenom­
ena and location by zodiacal sign as reported in the Diaries. 
But not even the dates in the Diaries are free of ambiguity. The 
observed dates are, as we said, uncertain, if for no other reason on 
account of adverse weather hiding the 'true' phenomena and the 
'true' dates; hence, the first requirement is a method of inferring 
true dates. This was done by means of visibility times in us, 
although unfortunately the number of examples in the surviving 
Diaries, even though not small for Mercuiy, does not appear 
sufficient to show the criteria for estimating the interval in days, 
which were presumably similar to those for finding the date of first 
and last visibility and full moon, as in the lunar ephemerides and 
the procedure texts ACT 200 and 201. All I have been able to 
determine is that in the case of Mercury a visibility time of 11°-14° 
leads to a difference of 0 or 1 day, 14°-18;30° to 2 days, 16°-20° to 
3 days, and 18;30°-20° to 4 or 5 days. Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars 
are completely different—in the case of Mars a visibility time of 20° 
in Taurus leads to 20 days, 22° in Cancer to 13 days, and 19° in 
Libra to 9 days—and it is evident that the criteria depend upon 
both the planet and the zodiacal sign in which the phenomenon 
takes place. A proper analysis will have to be done theoretically 
using modern computation, as Brack-Bernsen (1990 etc.) has done 
for lunar rising and setting times. If the criteria for the interval to 
true first and last visibility can be found in this way, one may also 
find that rising and setting times contribute still more directly to 
the determination of synodic time, just as visibility times of the 
moon contribute to the determination of the length of the synodic 
month. It seems clear, in any case, that the measurement of rising 
and setting times in us lies at the very foundation of both lunar 
and planetary theory. 
In considering the origin of this method, the dates of our 
sources are of interest. The earliest is three fragments from 
Kuyunjik, hence from the seventh century or earlier, published by 
Reiner and Pingree (1975a), of first 
and last appearances of 
Mercury with periods of visibility and invisibility, like the Venus 

Dates and Locations of Phenomena 
53 
Tablet of Ammisaduqa although without omens and, most unfor­
tunately, without dates. At first appearance in the west, the sun is 
said to be η us 'below', meaning to the west, and at first appear­
ance in the east the sun is η us 'to the left', meaning to the east. 
The number in us is presumably the setting time of Mercury after 
sunset in the west and the rising time before sunrise in the east. 
These are by far the earliest sources to show visibility times, and it 
is not clear what their purpose was at so early a date, although a 
possibility is that they were being used to estimate the true dates 
of phenomena as much as three centuries before their appearance 
in the Diaries. Another early stage in such inference may be shown 
in the first and last appearances of Saturn located with respect to 
stars or constellations for -646 to -633 published from a later copy 
by Walker (1998). Two of the first appearances are 'high' (nim-a), a 
term also used in the Diaries for later observed appearances, as we 
have seen for first visibility of the moon; a dated last appearance 
and two undated first appearances are 'not observed', and a dated 
last appearance is 'computed', whatever that may mean. Perhaps 
the measurement of rising and setting times began as a way of 
quantifying 'high' observed appearances of the moon and planets, 
understood to indicate an earlier 'true' appearance. 
The next source is computed dates of solstices, equinoxes, and 
phenomena of Sirius in atypical Text A (AT 1, 183-90), dated -616 
to -588 although the copy is later, which gives computed times in 
us before or after sunrise or sunset of the solstices and equinoxes, 
although not of Sirius. As noted, the earliest preserved time in us 
of the visibility of the new moon is in ADT -567, and already it 
appears that the time could be both measured and in some way 
computed or inferred; the 'Diviner's Manual' shows that visibility 
times were used to determine the dates of first and last visibility 
prior to the seventh century. The earliest preserved distinctions of 
an observed and ideal date for the first appearance of a planet are 
in ADT -391 and ADT -382, the earliest visibility time in us in ADT 
-378, and the earliest record of both in canonical form in ADT 
-366. None is present in ADT -418 and ADT -384, but this could be 
an accident of preservation, for ADT -418 also does not record 
setting times of the moon. In any case, it is certain that the 
relation of the date of new moon to the time of visibility in us was 
understood and could be calculated or inferred by the mid-sixth 
century, and the same relation for the first appearance of a planet 
by the early fourth century, both at the latest. 
Most of the planetary ephemerides are for the third to the first 
centuries, far later than the preceding sources. It appears from 

54 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
dates and names of kings in colophons of tablets that ephemerides 
could be prospective, for the future, retrospective, for the past, or 
both. The earliest texts falling into the class of ephemerides, 
although later copies, are for the late fifth century, if they have 
been correctly dated. One has longitudes alone for Ω in System A3 
of Mercury, dated to -423 to -401 if it contains regnal years of 
three Persian kings, which would necessarily make it retrospective 
(HAMA, 469 ff., Aaboe, et αι., 1991, Text M, analyzed here in Part 
2). Another, atypical Text C (AT 1, 192-98), has phases for one 
synodic period of Venus, probably for either -431/30 or -423/22, 
and longitudes of Ω, Γ, Φ, Ψ for Mars in a variant of System A with 
regnal years and months, but no dates, for either -358 to -341 or 
-311 to -294. Perhaps these few examples, whatever their date of 
origin, merely represent the poor preservation of earlier sources. 
The earliest regular ephemeris, ACT 300a of System A2 for Mercury, 
is securely dated to SE 4-22 (-307 to -289). It could well be retro­
spective since there is no known System Ai ephemeris until ACT 
300 for SE 118-43 (-193 to -168), and although Systems A1 and A2 
have their inconsistencies, they also complement each other in 
covering, respectively, first and last visibilities as the primary 
phenomena. While one might expect prediction by goal-years to be 
early, preserved texts using this method date only from the third to 
the first centuries, contemporary with most of the ephemerides. 
Now, the essential elements for the development of a mathe­
matical planetary theory are (1) a method of inferring true dates of 
phenomena from observed dates by means of times of visibility and 
(2) a recognition of the periodicity of phenomena, of goal-year 
periods with their 'errors' to the nearest day from an integral 
number of years or synodic months, which lie at the foundation of 
the longer ACT periods, discussed in the next section. The first is 
definitely in place by the early fourth century. However, finding the 
exact errors of the goal-year periods can only follow the discovery of 
a method of inferring true dates. Without true dates, it would be 
possible to find, as from records in the earlier Diaries, that, for 
example, Mars has 22 heliacal risings in about 47 years. But only 
the true dates would reveal that there is a deficit of 8 days from 47 
years and an excess of 1 day over 581 months, which are necessary 
if the period is to be used for prediction to the day as in the goal-
year texts. It is possible that the identification of the errors of the 
goal-year periods can only follow the discovery of a method of 
correcting observed dates to true dates by as long as the goal-year 
periods themselves, although there are also shorter periods with 
larger errors from which the goal-year periods can be formed, but 

Dates and Locations of Phenomena 
55 
these too require true dates in order to find their errors. 
When were the errors of the goal-year periods discovered? The 
Diaries, with their dates of 'not observed' and 'passed by' phenom-
ena, may show that these too were known by the early fourth 
century, although here one must be cautious since there may have 
been other, less secure, ways of inferring these dates from conven-
tional intervals between phenomena, as from first appearance to 
first station, and goal-year prediction may never have been used in 
the Diaries. The System A3 ephemeris for Mercury just mentioned, 
even if correctly dated, is surely retrospective and cannot be used 
to place these discoveries in the fifth century. Finally, the absence 
from earlier Diaries of observed and true dates of first appearance 
prior to ADT -391 and ADT -382, and of times of visibility in us 
prior to ADT -378, may be taken to date the discovery or applica-
tion of the method of inferring true from observed dates rather 
narrowly to, say, the late fifth or early fourth century, although 
the fragment for Mercury suggests the possibility that attempts to 
do so may go back much farther. And without this discovery, it is 
difficult to see how periods with their errors could be found or 
methods of computing planetary phenomena developed, for it 
would not be clear what are the true phenomena to compute. Still, 
in any consideration of chronology one must be very cautious, 
since even a single newly discovered fragment can refute the most 
carefully drawn conclusions and change everything by a hundred 
years and more, as again the Mercury fragment warns us. 
What we have in the distinction of observed dates, subject to 
vicissitudes of weather, and true or ideal dates, on which the 
phenomena actually occur, is of the highest importance, indeed, 
may be said to mark the beginning of mathematical astronomy or 
even of a mathematical science of nature itself. For the distinction 
of observed and true dates must precede everything else in the 
lunar and planetary theory, as must some method of estimating a 
correction from observed to true. Only through true dates can the 
periodicities underlying the lunar and planetary theories and the 
variable synodic times of the planetary theory be found accurately, 
and thus some method of inferring true from observed dates is the 
essential first step in mathematical astronomy. It is perhaps 
significant that the introduction of the 19-year cycle occurred only 
at the beginning of the fifth century, years after the application of 
setting time to the date of first visibility attested in ADT -567. And 
as for eclipse periods, whether of 6 months or 223 months, their 
discovery too is at the mercy of the weather for the obvious reason 
that eclipses can be missed. The invention of mathematical 

56 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
astronomy is therefore owed directly, not merely to the desire to 
predict ominous phenomena, including eclipses, although the 
phenomena certainly are ominous and forewarned is forearmed, 
nor to the regulation of the calendar of ominous days of each 
month, for both could be determined infallibly by observation were 
the sky clear eveiy night, and surely it is preferable for ominous 
phenomena and new moons to be seen, but above all to bad 
weather, concealing the true dates of lunar and planetary phenom­
ena. All those nights of rain and clouds and poor visibility reported 
in the Diaries turned out to be good for something after all. When 
it is clear, observe; when it is cloudy, compute—a principle first 
applied to visibility times to determine dates of appearances and 
eventually to all lunar and planetary phenomena that could be 
computed. Such a simple, natural explanation of something of 
such great importance as mathematical astronomy may not be 
profound, and is certainly not philosophical, but appears to be 
supported by the evidence. 
But there is more. From a purely scientific point of view the 
recognition of the distinction between observed and true dates of 
phenomena, and of the necessity of correcting from observed to 
true, although motivated by the ominous character of phenomena, 
shows the earliest recognition of the inherent unreliability of raw, 
unreduced observation and the necessity of correction, of the 
elimination of disturbing effects, of scatter, of random error, to 
produce an accurate observation, the truth if one wishes, that may 
then be used to infer what nature truly shows or truly is, and then 
to infer yet deeper truths about interrelations or even causes in 
nature and to predict what nature will do. It is this recognition, 
this distinction, that lies at the foundation of all science, which is 
not the collection of indiscriminate observation, but the study of 
accurate, corrected, true observation—something that seems to 
disturb historians and philosophers—even if the first scientific 
observation was of ominous phenomena. For the principle first 
understood by the Scribes of Anuma Anu Enlil in order to take 
account of adverse weather has remained, with ever increasing 
sophistication, the foundation of observational and experimental 
science, whether in measuring distances of galaxies or masses of 
subatomic particles. Here above all, science was born in Babylon. 
From bad weather was born good science. And the reduction of 
periodic natural phenomena, however great their irregularities, to 
a precise mathematical description that may be applied to both 
prospective and retrospective calculation, that is, to mathematical 
science, was also the achievement of the Babylonians. 

Periods and Their Errors 
57 
Periods and Their Errors 
Through the continuous action through agons of gravitational 
perturbations within the planetary system, or perhaps through 
conditions in its initial formation, the orbital periods of the plan­
ets have long been forced into relations, called 'resonances', that 
may be expressed as the ratios of small numbers. For example, the 
periods of Saturn and Jupiter are very close to the ratio of 5/2, 
Mars and the earth 15/8, the earth and Venus 13/8, Venus and 
Mercury 5/2. Although the cause of these relations was first 
formulated by Newton, and their full explanation, with profound 
consequences for the stability of systems of planets and satellites, 
by Laplace, the existence of such relations of small numbers was 
first discovered, albeit indirectly for the synodic phenomena of the 
planets as seen from the earth, by the Scribes. For at the founda­
tion of their planetary theory are periodic relations between the 
number of phenomena Π and the number of rotations Z of the 
phenomenon, not necessarily of the planet, through the zodiac in 
some number of years Y. For example, to give a short and some­
what inexact period, Mars has 15 heliacal risings, which in turn 
have 2 rotations through the zodiac, in 2 · 15 + 2 = 32 years, while 
Mars itself has 15 + 2 = 17 rotations through the zodiac in 15 + 17 
= 32 years. More accurately, Π- 15, Z= 2 rotations + -11°, Y= (2Π 
+ Z) years = 32 years + -11 days, and Mars has (Π + Z] rotations = 
17 rotations + ~11°. Since, within a certain range of variation, 
each phenomenon takes place at a specific, characteristic elonga­
tion of the planet from the sun, in the synodic period or time, that 
is, in the time between successive phenomena of the same kind, a 
faster inferior planet, with a limited elongation on either side of 
the sun, must return to the specific elongation, and the sun must 
overtake a slower superior planet and return to the specific 
elongation. The number of phenomena Π is therefore equal to the 
difference between the number of zodiacal rotations of the sun Y 
and of the phenomenon Z, which is not necessarily the same as 
the number of rotations of the planet, and the period relation 
between Π, Z, and Y may be expressed as 
Ul=Y-Z 
or 
Y= ίΠ+Z 
where i = i 
1 for Saturn 
1 for Jupiter 
2 for Mars 
1 for Venus 
0 for Mercury 

58 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
The meaning of i is this: Since Π is the number of phenomena, 
o f  s ynodic periods, in Y years, the integer quotient i = [Y - Zj/Π is 
the number of complete years in the planet's synodic period, that 
is, the sjTiodic period of Mars is greater than 2 years, of Saturn, 
Jupiter, and Venus greater than 1 year, and of Mercury greater 
than O and less than 1 year. The reason is the relative speeds of 
the sun and the planet. The sun overtakes Saturn, with a period of 
30 years, and Jupiter, with a period of 12 years, in just over 1 year, 
hence i = 1. The sun overtakes Mars, with a period of just under 2 
years, in somewhat over 2 years, so i = 2. While the zodiacal period 
of Mars is less than 2 years, the zodiacal period of Mars's phenom­
ena is Υ/Ζ ~ 16 years. The inferior planets are less obvious. Venus, 
moving about the sun in just under 8/13 year, returns the to the 
same elongation in 8/(13 - 8) = 8/5 years, in which time the 
phenomenon itself completes (8-5)/5 = 3/5 zodiacal rotation, or 
(8 - 5)/8 = 3/8 zodiacal rotation in 1 year. Hence, were this period 
exact, Y= 8, /7=5, Z = 3, i = 1. Mercuiy, moving about the sun in 
just under 1/4 year, returns to the same elongation in just under 
1/(4-1)=1/3 year, in which time the phenomenon itself, occur­
ring 3 times per year, completes 1/3 zodiacal rotation, or 3 · 1/3 = 
1  z o d i a c a l  r o t a t i o n  i n  1  y e a r .  H e n c e ,  w e r e  t h e  p e r i o d  e x a c t ,  Z = Y  =  
1, Π = 3, i = 0; in fact, for Π= 3, Z = Y= 0.95. 
However, no model of the motion of the sun and planets—and 
here we have used a heliocentric model, no less—is required to find 
Π, Ζ, Y, and i, and I express no opinion about how the Scribes 
thought about the cause of these relations. It is only necessary to 
count the number of phenomena 77 and rotations of the phenom­
enon Z that occupy nearly an integral number of years Y, as in the 
short period for Mars just given, for which a record of dates and 
approximate locations of phenomena, as are provided by the 
Diaries, is sufficient, although finding nearly an integral number 
of, strictly sidereal, years when calendar years may be 12 or 13 
months long is indirect, and we shall see that the periods must 
first be found through days of the calendar month. It is helpful, 
although not absolutely necessary, if the dates be true, not merely 
observed, since errors of a few days in the dates of the first and 
last phenomena may make an accurate period appear faulty or a 
faulty period accurate. In fact, although locations are useful in 
finding which phenomena may fall at the beginning and end of 
periods, the true dates themselves are sufficient. When Y is nearly 
an integer, Z will be nearly an integer and known from Z = Y - ίΠ 
without need for locations, provided that i is known from the ap­
proximate synodic period, which may itself be found from the dates 

Periods and Their Errors 
59 
alone. Hence, nothing more than a record of the true dates of 
phenomena is required to determine /7, Z, Y, i, and from them the 
mean synodic period and motion. For the integer part of the mean 
synodic period in years, i, is the integer quotient i = (Y- Z]/Π, and 
the fractional part is Z/Π times the length of the year, as 6,11;4
τ. 
Likewise, the integer part of the mean synodic arc of the sun is i 
and the fractional part, the mean synodic arc of the phenomenon, 
is Ζ/Π, both times the annual motion of the sun, 6,0°. 
The planetary ephemerides are based upon rather long periods, 
known as ACT periods, of several hundred years, but these were 
surely not discovered by counting phenomena for hundreds of 
years. Rather, shorter periods, as the goal-year periods, discussed 
in the last section, for the prediction of planetary phenomena and 
passing of normal stars by their anticipated repetition after each 
period, were found by counting dated phenomena along with their 
'error' from an integral number of years, as we saw in the 32-year 
period for Mars. Of course, finding the errors accurately makes the 
use of true, not observed, dates imperative, and the dates must be 
not only true, but correct, a very demanding condition often not 
fulfilled by the 'true' dates in the Diaries. Just as the Scribes had 
to decide which dates of phenomena were correct and which 
erroneous for finding true synodic times between phenomena, a 
subject we shall take up in considering the individual planets in 
Part 2, the same distinction had to be made for finding the errors 
of the shorter periods. By combining multiples of different periods 
with known errors, the errors could be compensated, at least in 
principle, to produce a long period in which the number of years 
and rotations are integers, or nearly so. Take as an example two 
periods of Mars, α = 32 years and b = 47 years, with their com­
binations c - a + b = 1,19 years and d = b + 3c = 3a + 4b = 4,44 
years, where, as before, Y = 1Π + Z, and their errors ε, which we 
estimate to the nearest degree and day. 
Period 
α 
b 
C 
d 
Π 
15 
22 
37 
2,13 
Z 
2 
3 
5 
18 
ε 
+ 11° 
-8 
+3 
+ 1 
Y 
32 
47 
1,19 
4,44 
ε 
+ l l
d 
-8 
+3 
+ 1 
It is possible, as attested in procedures texts for Jupiter, that the 
errors were believed to be completely compensated in the ACT 
period, here d, which would therefore be a perfect period. However, 
the ACT periods are not perfect, although the errors, which can be 

60 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
estimated from the shorter periods, are quite small. And the errors 
in the shorter periods were surely determined, not by measuring 
the difference in degrees from Z rotations, but by noting the differ­
ence in days from Yyears. For since the phenomenon recurs at the 
end of the period when the sun reaches very nearly the same elon­
gation from the planet that it had at the beginning, and the sun 
moves about Γ per day, the error in degrees from Z rotations of the 
phenomenon and Y rotations of the sun will be about equal to the 
error in days from y years. 
In order to find the errors of the shorter periods that lead to 
the ACT periods, we could use the ACT periods themselves under 
the assumption that they are perfect, but it is more informative, 
and more indicative of what the Scribes could have recovered from 
their records, to use modern, correct values of the planets' synodic 
periods In combination with some value of the length of the year 
that could have been used to find the errors in the first place. 
Thus, if we call the year in days or tithis y and the synodic period 
in days or tithis p, we shall compute Y • y, Π • p, and the error will 
be Ey = (Π • p) - [Y · y). The problem is deciding on a value of y, to 
which ε is quite sensitive since y is multiplied many times. The 
years used by the Scribes extend from below 12;22,6 months to 
nearly 12;22,9 months, a difference of about 0:1,30 day or 0;36 
hour, but we may reasonably exclude all except (1) the 19-year 
cycle underlying the interpolation of months in the calendar, 19y = 
235m, y = 12;22,6,20m, and (2) y = 12;22,8m of System A lunar 
theory and the planetary theory. Letting m = 30
τ = 29;31,50
d, 
which is sufficiently accurate for our purpose, and using conven­
ient roundings, the possibilities are 
yi = 12;22,6,20m = 6,11;3,10
τ = 6,5; 1 4 , 4 8 ^ 3 6 5 1 - 3 ^ 
y2 = 12;22,8m = 6.11:4* = 6,5; 15,36
d = 365^ + j
^ 
Note that y\ is the tropical year of Hipparchus and Ptolemy 
and yi is strictly a sidereal year. However, it is pointless to 
compute the error for either of these years directly. The relation ey 
= (77 · p) - (Y • y) is all well and good for finding the error theoreti­
cally, but the observational sources, the Diaries, are arranged in 
calendar years of 12 or 13 months, which are equal to neither yj 
nor y 2. Hence, the only practical way to find the error from an 
integral number of years with dates of observations is first to find 
the error from an integral number of months close to the period in 
years, and then convert to the error for years. This is what the 
Scribes themselves must have done, and with good reason, for 

Periods and Their Errors 
61 
some of the goal-year periods are nearly an integral number of 
months, and thus repeat the calendar dates of phenomena 
very 
closely. The error e m of Π synodic periods in M months, the error Ey 
in Y years, and their difference Δε are 
£m = [Π • p) - (M • m), 
ey = (M · m + e m) - (Y · y), 
Δε = εΎ - e m. 
The most consistent way of applying these relations is first to 
compute e m with m = 30
τ and then Ey with y 2 = 6,11;4
τ. Since the 
units of m and y are the same for both e m and £y, they are together 
equivalent to £y = (Π · p) - (Y · y). The difference Δε is useful for 
evaluating the errors of periods taken from the dates of phenom­
ena reported in the Diaries since it is a constant conversion for all 
values of Em and £y in the same period, e.g., 32 or 47 years for 
Mars. Table 1.1 shows for each planet the modern mean synodic 
period converted to tithis by ρ
τ = (6,11;4/6,5; 15,36)p
d, and for each 
period, 77, Z, Y, the closest value of M, and the 'period' P = 77/Z, to 
be discussed in Part 2. These are followed by the errors e m from M 
months and £y from Y years, where m = 30
τ and y = 6,11;4
τ, and 
their difference Δε = Ey - e m. We begin with the shortest useful 
periods for each planet, continue through the goal-year periods, 
marked with asterisks, and conclude with the ACT periods, omit­
ting intermediate periods except one for Mercury. 
Consider first the errors Ey. It is obvious that the ACT periods 
are not perfect, although the errors are small when extended over 
so many hundreds of years. Nevertheless, with the exception of 
Mercury, none of the shorter periods is more accurate than the 
ACT periods, although of course yet longer periods could be. The 
errors for Jupiter's shorter periods in ACT 812.10 and 813.20, all 
sums of multiples of α and b, take £y for α as +5° or +5
τ and for b 
as -6° or -6
τ, so that for 7,7 years 6a + 5b = 0 and the ACT period 
is assumed to be perfect. ACT 813.1 and 814.1 take α as +4; 10° and 
b as -5°, so again 6 a + 5b = 0. The same integer values apply when 
the errors are stated in degrees or tithis since the sun moves about 
0;58° = 1° per tithi. More precisely, and to anticipate the analysis 
of arc and time in the next section, since £y may be taken as the 
error in tithis from Y years or in degrees from Y zodiacal rotations 
of the sun, the ratio of the error in tithis Ey
x to the error in degrees 
ey° is equal to the ratio of the length of the year, (6,0 + e)
T, to the 
annual motion of the sun, 6,0°, that is, where the epact e = 11;4
τ, 
ε ν
τ 
6,0 + e 
e 
„ = 
6
0 
= 1 + QQ, 
£y
T = 1:1,50,40^°, 
ε/ = 0;58,12,38^. 

62 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
Hence the 59-year period of Saturn, the 83-year period of Jupiter, 
the 79-year period of Mars, the 8-year period of Venus, and the 46-
year period of Mercury will repeat longitudes, and thus the passing 
of normal stars, with errors of 1° or 1°. Of course a slower planet 
may take several days, in the case of Saturn even 30 days, to move 
1°, so the identical longitude or distance from a normal star will 
occur either earlier or later. 
The errors em from an integral number of months are as impor­
tant as the errors Ey from an integral number of years, and are the 
foundation of some of the goal-year periods for predicting the 
calendar dates of phenomena. The 71-year period of Jupiter with 
e m = 0
τ and the 47-year period of Mars with E 1 n = I
1 are nearly an 
integral number of mean synodic months, as are the 8-year period 
of Venus, the 46-year and 125-year periods of Mercury, and even 
the 59-year period of Saturn. Thus, each planet has at least one 
short period close enough to an integral number of mean synodic 
months to be used for prediction, some of which, along with more 
curious periods, are mentioned in atypical Text E (AT 1, 206-7), 
written by a scribe who also wrote atypical Text H of dates of 
Mars's stations and entries into zodiacal signs for -318/17 (AT 2, 
93-94). That the long ACT periods of Venus and Mercury have 
small em is of no real use, although it may explain the selection of 
the 480-year period for Mercury since in relation to the year it is 
less accurate than the 46-year period. The less accurate 125-year 
period was also noted as perfect in Text E. Considering £ m for 125y 
= 3 · 46y - 13y: if emc * - 3
d and emj~ -l
d, then emg = 3emj- emc = 
3(-l
d) - (-3
d) = 0
d. Since three mean synodic periods of Mercury 
fall about 7
τ short of 12m = 6,0
τ, both dates and longitudes may 
be computed year by year three synodic periods apart by subtrac­
tion, which is used in System A3 discussed in Part 2, but this is 
only a convenient method of computation, not a real period. 
Thus far we have considered periods and their errors theoreti­
cally using modern values of the synodic periods. If we inquire into 
how the shorter periods and errors could be discovered from the 
dates of phenomena reported in the Diaries, difficulties arise for, 
as we remarked, finding the errors accurately requires that the 
dates be not only true but correct, a condition not often satisfied 
by the dates in the surviving Diaries that bound periods. All the 
useful observations I have found for Saturn, Jupiter, including 
those in the collection LBAT 1409, and Mars are given in Tables 
1.2, 1.3, 1.4; while I assume that the Scribes would have preferred 
using true dates of first appearances, there are so few of these that 
I have taken every pair of dates bounding periods regardless of 

Periods and Their Errors 
63 
phenomenon. Since most of the observations are from the third 
and second centuries, they could hardly have been used to find the 
errors in the first place, but are taken to be representative of the 
much larger selection the Scribes had to work with in the 
preceding centuries. Each table gives the phenomenon followed by 
the year, month, day, and zodiacal sign of the two observations, 
the period in months M and years Y with the theoretical errors em 
and &f, and the errors implied by the dates of the observations, em 
directly from the calendar dates, taking months as 30
τ, and Sy from 
ey = em + Δε rounded to integers. The special notation used in the 
tables is explained in the list of abbreviations. For Mercury, since 
there are nearly 140 pair of dates bounding its six shorter periods, 
I have graphed the errors in Figure 1.1 with the number for each in 
parenthesis. I have included a number of 'not observed' dates and 
'passed by' phenomena, which, although necessarily estimated in 
some way, are as erratic as the observed dates, and in a few cases I 
have selected from two or three possible dates. The vertical axis is 
£ m, the horizontal axis Cy, the number of errors at each point if 
greater than one is indicated, and the open circles show the theo­
retical errors. The errors lie on a straight line since Sy = e m + Δε. 
Many additional periods may be recovered by combining with the 
Diaries the collection LBAT 1377 published by Hunger (1988), but 
the results do not differ from the Diaries alone. 
What is evident both for Mercury and the other planets is that 
the eirors are erratic, mostly falling within ±3
τ or ±4
τ of the theo­
retical values, but on occasion much larger, showing that what we 
have are observations or inferences from nearby observations, 
some obviously inaccurate, rather than predictions from goal-year 
periods with defined errors. In the case of Mercury in particular, 
the larger errors of the shorter periods would be difficult to find 
accurately since the highly irregular motion of the planet in only a 
few days would itself introduce inequalities depending upon its 
location in the zodiac, and it may be significant that the range for 
the 46-year period, with an error of less than one day, is smaller. 
The scatter of these errors is in itself interesting since there has 
been doubt about whether entries in the Diaries were observed or 
in some way computed or predicted by goal-years, and we shall 
later see that the dates of phenomena defining synodic periods are 
equally erratic and thus also observed rather than computed. 
Indeed, the errors of the periods provide, at least for the dates of 
about four hundred observations bounding periods, which may be 
taken as representative of all observations of phenomena, a far 
simpler test of this question than the difficulties and uncertainties 

64 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
of recomputing the phenomena by modern theory for comparison. 
However, if these dates are representative of the quality of the 
observations used by the Scribes, it is by no means obvious how 
they could find the correct errors, if indeed they ever found them, 
although the ACT periods would seem to indicate that they found 
something very close for every period of every planet. In the case of 
Venus, with only the short period 5p = 8y = 1,39m - 4
τ, which is 
used in the ephemerides and is the empirical basis of the long ACT 
period, there were only eleven pair of dates for single periods, with 
e m = -4
τ in five cases, -5
τ in two cases, and the rest more erratic. 
In conclusion to our discussion of periods, we note that there 
are five, and only five, exact ACT periods, one for each planet. 
Saturn, Jupiter, and, especially, Mercury, each have variants, 
some of which appear much longer, that is, extend over much 
larger values of Π, Z, and Y when these are expressed as integers. 
However, not one of these variant periods is an independent 
parameter, or an intentional alteration of the period. For in every 
case the variant can be explained, for Saturn and Jupiter, by 
modifications, usually small, in the synodic arcs and synodic times 
that are used to derive the parameters, or in the length of the 
segments of the zodiac in which particular synodic arcs and times 
occur, and for Mercury as the closest approximations to the exact 
ACT period that could practically be reached, considering that the 
synodic arcs and times of its four heliacal phenomena differ so 
much as to require independent treatment. And it is worth repeat­
ing that the length of the ACT periods, and of the variant periods, 
in years has no more to do with the period during which the 
planets were observed than do the periods in Indian astronomy. 
Synodic Arc, Synodic Time, and Their Relation 
The relation between synodic arc and synodic time in the 
ephemerides may be stated simply: with the exception of Venus 
and System A2 of Mercury, the numerical difference between 
synodic arc in degrees and synodic time in tithis is a constant, 
specific to each planet. This relation, along with the periods 
discussed in the last section, is the foundation of Babylonian 
planetary theory, and it rests in turn upon two more fundamental 
principles. The first is that in the planetary theory the sun is taken 
to move uniformly, that is, only the mean motion of the sun, the 
'mean sun' is considered, and any inequalities in the motion of the 
true sun have no effect on either the time or location of planetary 

Relation of Synodic Arc and Time 
65 
phenomena. The second, formulated by van der Waerden (1957), 
who called it the 'Sonnenabstandsprinzip', the solar-distance 
principle, is that each phenomenon takes place at a fixed, 
characteristic elongation from the sun, although strictly the 
elongations are taken from the mean, not the true, sun. Doubts 
have been expressed about the solar-distance principle, e.g. by 
Schmidt (1969), who substituted for it a very ingenious 'mean 
value principle', but I believe that van der Waerden's principle is 
exactly what the Scribes had in mind; it of course holds strictly for 
mean synodic arcs, and the elongations implicit in the ephemer-
ides show only small variations for true synodic arcs. 
However, both fixed elongations and the use of the mean sun 
are approximations, and were intended as such by the Scribes. 
Heliacal phenomena, as is most obvious for first and last visibili-
ties, take place at highly variable elongations from the true sun, 
which does not move uniformly. The variation of the elongations, 
both according to modern theory and implicit in the ephemerides, 
will be taken up in Part 3, in which it will be seen that the latter 
have only small periodic variations that are artifacts of computa-
tion with no relation to the large variations shown by modern 
theory. But it is these approximations that make the planetary 
theory of the ephemerides possible at all, for it is the uniform 
motion of the mean sun, known from the length of the year, 
returning to the same elongation at each occurrence of the same 
heliacal phenomenon, that measures the synodic arc of the phe-
nomenon, which is otherwise unknown as it cannot be found with 
sufficient precision by observation. Since the synodic time between 
phenomena is known from the dates of phenomena alone, a fixed 
relation between synodic time and arc allows the synodic arc to be 
determined without need for measurement of position, and for this 
reason the relation is essential to the derivation of the parameters 
of the ephemerides. And it is worth noting that likewise in the 
lunar theory of Systems A and B, the synodic motion of the moon 
is never treated independently, but is taken as the computed 
monthly motion of the sun, in this case the true sun, although 
the earlier lunar eclipse Text S (cf. Aaboe and Sachs, 1969, 18; 
Britton, 1990, 33) also shows only the uniform motion of the 
mean sun at five and six-month intervals. Whether in fact the 
motivation of the principle was to allow an unknown synodic arc 
to be deduced from a known synodic time, I do not know, although 
it is what I suspect, but that is exactly how it may be applied to 
the derivation of parameters. Here we shall begin with a considera-
tion of mean arc and time, which may then be extended to true arc 

66 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
and time with only a small inaccuracy. 
The periods in Table 1.1, along with a definition of the year, the 
annual motion of the sun, suffice to determine the mean synodic 
arcs and times of the planets, that is, the mean intervals of 
longitude and time between successive occurrences of the same 
phenomenon. Let us define one rotation of the zodiac as 
and 
one year as 12;22, 
where the epact e = 
is the excess of the solar year over the lunar year of 12 
months, 
In the case of the sun, which completes 
in 
these two quantities are equivalent and differ only in 
their units, tithis or degrees, in the ratio 
that is, we may define the year as the motion of the sun through 
of longitude or in 
of time. Further, provided that the 
sun move uniformly, the numerical relations between the time 
in 
which the sun describes any arc 
and the numerical difference 
are given by 
The four proportional coefficients, where 
are 
Relation (lb) is the multiplication of the time 
by (2b), the 
velocity of the sun in degrees per tithi; relation (la) is the multi-
plication of the arc 
by (2a), the reciprocal of the velocity of the 
sun in tithis per degree. There is no common name for the recipro-
cal of velocity; Kepler, who uses it constantly, calls it mora (delay, 
time required). Strictly (lc) gives the difference 
as tithis, 
but we shall treat it as a pure number. These relations apply only 
to the mean sun, assumed to move uniformly, not to the motions 
of the planets; the synodic arcs of the planets are found through 
the synodic arcs of the sun's motion with respect to the planets. 
More picturesquely, the uniform, mean motion of the sun, the 
'mean sun', is the great ruler and clock of the planetary system, for 

Relation of Synodic Arc and Time 
67 
the arcs and times of each planet's motion are measured by the 
return of the mean sun to a specific elongation with respect to the 
planet. Thus, the Scribes invented what we call the mean sun, 
which is implicit in all their planetary theory, and without essen­
tial change remained the foundation of planetary theory from 
Ptolemy, who referred motions, oppositions, and elongations of the 
planets to the mean sun, to Copernicus, who used it in exactly the 
same way as Ptolemy, interpreted it geometrically as the center of 
the earth's orbit, and dignified it as the center of the planetary 
system for all purposes of mathematical astronomy. And the 
importance of this invention is still greater, for it is the uniform 
motion of the mean sun, measuring the arcs of the motions of the 
planets, that allows time to be taken as the principal independent 
variable in their planetary theory, and in this sense it stands 
behind the distinction between mean and true motion and the ap­
plication of mean motion as a linear function of time in lunar and 
planetary theory from Ptolemy to the present, including treating 
time as the independent variable for the variation of parameters in 
the perturbation theory of modern celestial mechanics. 
Since the return of the sun to a specific elongation.with respect 
to a planet defines the synodic arc and synodic time, from the 
relation of Π phenomena in Z rotations of the phenomenon and Y 
rotations of the sun through the zodiac, ίΠ = Y-Z, 
the mean 
synodic motion of the sun ΔΛ and the mean synodic time AT are 
given by 
— 
Y 
AA = - 6,0' = 
Π 
r 
\ 
i + - 6 , 0 ° , 
(3a) 
AT=^- (6,0 + eY = (i+-) 
(6,0 + e)*. 
(3b) 
Π 
{ 
Π 
Since the mean synodic motion of the sun exceeds the mean syn­
odic motion of thejphenomenon by iJ3,0°, the mean synodic arc of 
the phenomenon Αλ, and the excess At of 4Tover il2m = i 6,0
τ, are 
AX = AA - ί 6,0° = - 6,0°, 
(4a) 
Π 
Zi = Z t - ( 6 , 0
τ = -(6,0 + e)* + ie
T. 
(4b) 
And from (Ic), the numerical difference c between synodic time and 
synodic arc is in both cases 

68 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
C = At-AX = AT-AA = ^AA 
= ~
^ 
AT=U+ ^ e. 
(5a) 
Finally, the numerical difference C of the mean synodic time AT 
and the mean synodic arc of the phenomenon AX, used for conver­
sions between synodic arc and time in the ephemerides, is 
C = Z t - AX = ί 6,0 + (i + - Ί e = i 6,0 + c = Q2m + c, 
(5b) 
where AT is expressed in months and tithis and AX in degrees. 
Table 1.5 gives for each planet Π, Z, and Y for the ACT periods 
of the ephemerides; the 'period' P = 6,0°/AX = Π/Ζ, the number of 
phenomena, not an integer, in one rotation of the zodiac, based 
upon Π phenomena in Z rotations, its application to be explained 
in Part 2; the mean synodic arc of the phenomenon AX; the excess 
At of the mean_synodic time AT over i 6,0
τ; and the numerical 
difference c = At -AX, which we give without units here and in 
what follows. Fractions ending in commas are non-terminating. 
For Venus, At and thus c, which is never used, follow, not from the 
ACT period, but from the short period 5p = 1,39m - 4
τ, as will be 
explained in Part 3. 
It thus follows from the principles that (1) heliacal phenomena 
are taken with respect to the mean sun which moves uniformly 
and (2) occur at fixed, characteristic elongations from the mean 
sun, that (1) the mean synodic motion of the sun AA measures the 
mean synodic arc AX of the phenomenon described in the mean 
synodic time AT and (2) the numerical difference between the mean 
synodic time and mean synodic arc is constant, AT- AX = C. Since 
only mean values have been considered, this is hardly surprising. 
But it may be significantly extended, for it is evident from the 
ephemerides that, with some exceptions, the difference between 
true synodic time AT and true synodic arc AX is also taken as 
constant, for this approximation, and it is an approximation, is 
applied to find AT from AX by AT= AX + C, which shows that the 
principles and consequences just stated must also hold for true 
synodic arc and time. Suppose a phenomenon occurs at an elon­
gation η from the mean sun; the next phenomenon will occur after 
the true synodic time AT in which the phenomenon has moved 
through the true synodic arc of the phenomenon AX and the mean 
sun through the true synodic arc of the sun AA = AX+ i 6,0°. Since 
the motion of the phenomenon and of the mean sun differ by 

Relation of Synodic Arc and Time 
69 
t 6,0°, the elongation is again η and the synodic motion of the 
mean sun ΔΛ in the synodic time ΔΤ still measures the synodic arc 
of the phenomenon Δλ. Thus, the relation ΔΛ-Δλ+i 
6,0° is itself 
a statement of the solar-distance principle. 
There is, however, now an error in using a constant difference 
between true synodic arc and true synodic time, although it is 
quite small. From (5a) the mean difference c between synodic time 
and arc 
Ii-Δλ 
= ΔΤ- Δλ = g ^ Δλ = 6 Q + e ΔΤ, 
(6a) 
and since the true synodic arc, as any arc, is also measured by the 
mean motion of the sun, the true difference, from (Ic), 
Δι - Δλ = ΔΤ- ΔΛ = ^Q ΔΛ = Q Q+ 
ΔΤ. 
(6b) 
Subtracting (6a) from (6b) and substituting Δλ - Δλ for ΔΛ - ΔΛ, 
since they are equal, the error in time in tithis e(t) in adding C to 
Δλ to find ΔΤ, or c to Δλ to find Δί, 
ε(ί) = -^Q (Δλ - Δλ) = 0; 1,50,40
τ/
0 (Δλ - Δλ). 
(7a) 
And since, from (lb), for any arc ΔΛ = (6,0/(6,0 + β))ΔΤ, the error in 
arc in degrees ε(λ) in subtracting C from ΔΤ or c from Δί to find Δλ, 
ε(λ) 
= 6 0 + e
 £(t) 
= 6,0*+ β (4λ - ZX) « 0; 1,47,22 (Δλ - Δλ), 
(7b) 
only slightly smaller than (7a). The errors ε(ί) and ε(λ) thus have 
the same ratio as the errors ε/
1 and £y° of Π synodic periods in the 
previous section. 
We may find the maximumvalues of e(t) and ε(λ) by taking the 
greatest difference of Δλ - Δλ for each planet and for each 
phenomenon of Mercury. None of this applies to Venus, for which 
the difference between synodic time and arc is not constant. In 
Table 1.6 we give for the superior planets the system in which the 
greatest difference occurs, and for Mercury the phenomenon, from 
which each Δλ is taken. The errors are insignificant for Saturn and 
Jupiter, reach a maximum of about 1
τ and Γ for Mars, and are in­
termediate for Mercury; the negative sign for Σ is because Δλ < Δλ. 
The errors can accumulate with each synodic period, but they are 
periodic in each rotation of_the phenomenon through the zodiac, 
and are positive for Δλ > Δλ and negative for Δλ < Δλ, so in the 
course of each rotation and, even more, in Z rotations in Π synodic 

70 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
periods, should sum close to zero. 
What this means is that for the variable, true synodic times 
and arcs of heliacal phenomena the two principles just given, of 
fixed elongations from the mean sun, hold, and that small periodic 
errors result only from the approximation of using the mean 
values of (6a) in place of the true values of (6b). Further, the same 
principles may be applied to find AT from Δλ, as in the ephemer-
ides, or Δλ from AT, that is, Δλ = ΔΤ- C, where ΔΤ is known from 
the dates of observed phenomena. In this way an unknown true 
synodic arc Δλ may be found from a known true synodic time AT 
without any measurement of location, and it is this possibility 
that allows finding the parameters of the ephemerides from the 
dates of phenomena recorded in the Diaries. Of course, without 
the use of the mean difference C, it would still be possible to find 
AA from AT by (lb), AA = (6,0/(6,0 + e))AT, and then Δλ = ΔΛ -
ί 6,0°, but this does not appear to be necessary since (la) is not 
used to find AT from Δλ in the ephemerides. The difference ε(λ) from 
the constant conversion is, in any case, very small, and it is the 
constant difference between synodic time and synodic arc that 
stands at the foundation of the derivation of parameters. 
An important question remains. Under the principles that 
heliacal phenomena take place at fixed elongations from the mean 
sun, which moves uniformly, the use of a constant mean value for 
conversion between synodic time and arc, At - Δλ = At - Δλ = c, is 
more or less harmless. However, in fact heliacal phenomena take 
place at variable elongations from the true sun, which does not 
move uniformly, and it is of interest to determine how great an 
error is committed in using a constant difference between synodic 
time and arc. We have investigated this with a large number of 
synodic times and arcs computed according to modern theory for 
the first visibilities Γ of the superior planets and the first and last 
visibilities, Γ and Ξ, Σ and Ω, of Mercury, used in Part 2, where the 
method of calculation is explained, for examining the accuracy of 
the ancient observations and computations of synodic time. The 
calculation is sensitive to cumulative errors of rounding and inter­
polation, and the numerical difference At- Δλ may be in error by 
±2 units for Mars and Mercury. Our concern here is only with the 
extremal values, the minimum [At - Al)1n and the maximum [At -
ZiA)M- hi Table 1.7 we give these numerical quantities as integers 
for the first visibility of each superior planet and the four visibility 
phases of Mercury with the zodiacal signs in which they occur, c = 
At - Δ λ of the ACT periods used in the ephemerides to minutes, 
and in parentheses the errors [At - Δλ) - c rounded to 0;30. 

Relation of Synodic Arc and Time 
71 
It is evident that the use of the constant difference c between 
synodic time and arc is more or less harmful. The errors in paren­
theses, small for Saturn and Jupiter but exceeding the range -4 to 
+ 12 for Mars and -10 to +10 Mercury, mean that errors of this 
magnitude can be introduced into the conversion between synodic 
arc and time in the ephemerides. Although these are the extreme 
values of At - Δλ, and most will be closer to c, errors of ±3 and 
more will still be very common for Mercury. It appears, however, 
that in System A2 for Mercury the variable At - Δλ for Ω of between 
0 and 10, and also for Σ of between 0 and 6, is an attempt, rather 
crude as it turns out, to correct the error that would result from 
consistent use of c. Such corrections to At, if that is what they 
are, could be made by adjusting the computed Δί = Δλ + c to a At 
found empirically, say, for each zodiacal sign, with no empirical 
control of Δλ required, but why this should have been done only 
for System A2 and not for System Ai escapes me, although a pos­
sibility is to bring the dates of both systems into agreement. But 
the most serious flaw in the conversion between At and Δλ by c is 
more fundamental than any adjustment of At, and more difficult to 
control, because it affects the derivation of the parameters 
themselves, which are found, in System A, by first finding /lAm and 
ΔλΜ though applying c to Atm and AtM, which is also assumed in 
System B where At may be used directly. For the superior planets, 
Mars in particular, these are at the limits [At - AX)m and (At -
Δλ)Μ. where the errors are greatest, although the relation is less 
direct for Mercury. Consequently, even an accurately observed At 
can lead to an erroneous Δλ. It is possible that the Scribes made 
some attempt to correct this problem by adjusting Atm and Atu in 
accordance with the change of longitude over several synodic peri­
ods, in which, through the successive addition of Δλ, an observ­
able difference of a full zodiacal sign could accumulate. But this 
would be neither easy nor secure because of the variations in 
synodic arc and time near their maximum and minimum. 
What are we to make of this? If we consider both the constant 
difference between synodic time and arc and the theoretically fixed 
elongation of phenomena from the mean sun, I believe we must 
conclude that the Scribes, although aware that the differences 
between synodic time and arc are not strictly constant and that 
the elongations of phenomena from the mean sun are not strictly 
fixed, had no choice but to assume constant differences and fixed 
elongations because they had no sufficiently accurate method of 
finding the true length of synodic arcs and the true variation of 
elongations by observation. And the reason for both is that they 

72 
Part 1. Synodic Phenomena 
had no reliable method of finding longitude more precisely than by 
zodiacal sign, or by beginning and end of zodiacal sign, as reported 
in the Diaries, meaning in both cases nothing more precise than 
location in the vicinity of particular stars of irregular zodiacal 
constellations. There is one way of finding a precise, although not 
necessarily an accurate, longitude, not by direct observation but by 
adding the elongation of each phenomenon to the computed longi­
tude of the mean sun for the date of the observation, Ap = Xs ± η, 
which is the way of finding initial positions, as we shall see in Part 
3. Since, however, the elongation is assumed to be fixed, between 
two observations bounding a synodic period, we should still have 
AX = AA- i 6,0°, and since AA is a linear function of the time AT, 
so too is AX, from which the constant conversion of synodic time 
to synodic arc would differ by only the small error ε(λ). The funda­
mental principles of Babylonian planetary theory, of constant 
difference of synodic time and arc and of fixed elongation of phe­
nomena from the mean sun, are therefore based upon eliminating 
the requirement for direct and accurate measurement of longitude 
and replacing it with the more secure measurement of time to the 
nearest day. And this can hardly be counted a failure, rather it 
shows the highest ingenuity, for in making a virtue of this necessi­
ty, the Scribes did so with great economy and with the minimum 
introduction of cumulative error. For by taking as the constant 
difference the mean value c = At -AX, 
from which individual 
synodic arcs and times can diverge greatly, in the course of many 
synodic periods in many zodiacal rotations the errors should to 
some degree cancel, just as the errors e(t) and ε(λ), although here 
the errors, which were not strictly known, are much larger. We 
shall see that the parameters of the systems for each planet are 
also derived under strict conditions to avoid cumulative error. 

Part 2 
Derivation of the Parameters for Synodic Arc 
and Time from the Dates of Phenomena 
Theoretical and Empirical Considerations 
For deriving the parameters of the ephemerides, we assume the 
following relation of synodic time and synodic arc: From the obser­
vational records are taken, in principle, the dates Τχ and T2 of 
successive phenomena of the same kind, which may then be used 
to find the synodic time AT= T^ - T\, with AT taken as lunar years 
of 12m = 6,0
τ and tithis. Then, from AT we take the excess At = AT 
- i 6,0
τ, from which the synodic arc Δλ = At - c. Thus, by synodic 
time we shall generally mean the excess At and by synodic arc the 
synodic arc of the phenomenon Δλ. For the superior planets the 
derivations depend upon only the maximum and minimum At and 
Δλ, while Mercury requires either one or two additional values and 
Venus is not amenable to these methods because the difference 
between At and Δλ is not constant. Each heliacal phenomenon of 
Mercury is treated separately, with its own synodic times and arcs, 
while for the superior planets, the same synodic times and arcs 
serve for all phenomena, except that Mars has separate methods 
for the retrograde arc. This is clear both in the ephemerides and in 
the dateless lists of longitudes and rules in procedure texts for 
computing the phenomena in order. It is thus possible that At for 
the superior planets was adjusted to fit the entire range of 
phenomena, and we shall see in the treatment of the individual 
planets that rounding must also have been applied to At or Δλ. 
Our derivations, however, are theoretical and are based, not 
upon observational records, but upon the synodic times implied by 
the ephemerides, which means that in a sense, our entire proce­
dure is circular. But there is no other way, for the ephemerides 
produce very closely the synodic arcs and times that are used to 
derive their parameters; very simply, what comes out had to go in, 
and very precisely so. Were it possible to find Δλ independently of 
At, precisely the values used here would be required. How the 
Scribes may have derived, adjusted or rounded these values of At 

74 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
from the irregularities of the recorded dates of phenomena, I do 
not know, but I do know that only these values will do. It is simply 
not possible to derive the parameters of the ephemerides from the 
heliacal phenomena according to 'correct' modern calculation without 
adjusting At and AX to something close to the values computed from 
the ephemerides. And I do not believe it possible to derive the para-
meters by any method without equivalent adjustments. Likewise, 
we shall use algebraic relations that are imbedded in the systems, 
that are the foundation of the systems, and arithmetic relations, 
ratios of 'regular' numbers, that are implied by the parameters or 
by the assumed values of At or AX. But these are hardly accidental, 
and can only be there because the Scribes put them there, or 
because they follow directly from At or AX, so we are attempting, as 
far as possible, to reproduce the actual steps, or at least those 
steps for which there is evidence, of the Scribes themselves in 
deriving the parameters. All mathematical techniques used here 
were within the competence of the Scribes, except for some statis-
tical analyses in Part 3, and I would not be surprised if they could 
manage them too. Since our object is the derivation of numerical 
parameters, we shall work numerically, in the case of Mercury at 
rather great length. But the only way of showing that a method of 
deriving parameters is sound is to derive the parameters. 
So much for theory. We shall also examine the synodic times 
shown by the observational records in the Diaries and related 
collections, and, since these are insufficiently numerous or accur-
ate, by modern computation. Although the synodic times and arcs 
used to derive parameters were most likely taken from true dates of 
first, and, for the inferior planets, last, visibilities, since the dates 
of stations and acronychal risings are poorly defined, there are few 
first and last visibilities bounding synodic periods in the surviving 
records. Consequently, we have used all phenomena we could find 
bounding synodic periods, including those with only observed 
dates, and we have also taken mean values from more than one 
successive period, which is safe for Saturn and Jupiter, since their 
speed changes slowly, and may even have been done by the Scribes 
to minimize the effect of errors of single observations. Further, 
most of the surviving observational records are from the period the 
ephemerides were in use, and thus after the parameters were 
derived, so the examples are merely illustrative of the quality of 
the observations and were surely not the ones used to derive the 
parameters. We show both in tables and figures all values of At 
that we have been able to recover. In the tables, the first column 
contains the number of synodic periods, the second the phenome-

Theoretical and Empirical Considerations 
75 
non, the third and fourth the year, month, day, and zodiacal sign 
for each observation, and the last column the resulting At for one 
synodic period. The special notation in the tables is explained in 
the section on notation. In the figures, the synodic times from 
observation are shown by filled circles; most are placed in the 
middle of the signs, those specified as at the beginning of the sign 
are placed at 5° and those specified as at the end are placed at 25°. 
In finding At from the dates in the Diaries and collections, 
months were taken as 30
τ, hence 12m = 6,0
X, and excess days as 
tithis; if an excess month over twelve months is 29
d, this can 
result in an excess of l
x over a day count. In order to include the 
largest number of synodic times possible, we have erred toward 
excess in including those with questionable or missing dates or 
locations, and have made whatever emendations and restorations 
could be made safely, as by using surrounding dates to set limits, 
although we have not restored hopeless cases. Due to the 
disparate state of preservation, and still more to inaccuracies of 
observation or recording, we have found At to show a notable 
scatter in the vicinity of those computed with the ephemerides and 
even many gross errors, as we shall report separately for each 
planet. On the one hand, as with the errors of the periods, the 
scatter of these synodic times shows that we are for the most part 
dealing with observations or inferences from observations rather 
than computations. But on the other, the inconsistency of the 
synodic times, and thus of the dates in the Diaries and collec­
tions, with those that would be computed with the ephemerides 
raises the interesting question of whether the Scribes themselves 
considered the ephemerides to give unique, theoretically accurate 
dates or only approximations to more complex phenomena that 
were taken to be correctly recorded in the Diaries, but strictly 
unattainable by mathematical planetary theory. 
The synodic times according to modern theory have been taken 
for the superior planets from first visibility, which seems to have 
been the phenomenon the most carefully observed and the most 
likely to have been used for the derivation of parameters, and for 
Mercury from morning and evening first and last visibility. Dates 
and longitudes of these phenomena have been computed using an 
ephemeris program of our own, intended to reproduce Tuckerman's 
tables (1962), and P.V. Neugebauer's visibility tables (1938), which 
give the interval in days from true conjunction to first and last 
visibility at intervals of 20° of solar longitude for Saturn and 
Jupiter and 10° for Mars, Venus, and Mercury. Thus, we compute 
the date and longitude of conjunction from our program, and use 

76 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
the visibility tables to determine the number of days to the date of 
first or last visibility, the longitude of which is then given by our 
program. We have begun our computation in the year -200 (for 
Mars -202), and have computed the following number of years y 
and synodic periods p: Saturn, 3Oy, 29p; Jupiter, 38y, 34p; Mars, 
82y, 38p; Venus, 8y, 5p; Mercury, 2Oy, 63p. To say that these 
computations were laborious is an understatement. The longitudes 
of the planet at each phenomenon have been converted to the 
Babylonian zodiac by adding 6° for -200, in accordance with 
Huber's (1958) conclusion that the difference for -100 is about 
4;30°. Since our concern is with synodic time as a function of 
longitude rather than with longitude per se, At computed for this 
period may be compared with At from earlier or later observations 
and ephemerides with no harm. The excess synodic time in tithis 
has been computed from the total synodic time in days by AF = 
(30/29:31,50)/17
13 - i 6,0
τ rounded to integers; for all planets except 
Mercury with AT > 6,0
τ, this is nearly the same as At
1 = AT^ -
i 5,54
d since 6,0
τ = 5,54;22
d. These values of At are shown in the 
figures by open circles placed at their proper longitudes within 
zodiacal signs; any uncertainty in converting modern longitudes to 
the Babylonian zodiac, of no more than one or two degrees, affects 
only the placement of the circles and nothing more. Note that a 
comparison of A t is far more useful than a comparison of dates T 
computed with specific ephemerides, in which an error in epoch 
can throw all dates off by many days, since At can be treated 
purely theoretically and is independent of epoch. And it is At taken 
from observation that is required for the derivation of parameters. 
However, an important caution is in order: we do not know the 
accuracy of the visibility tables, interpolation in the intervals of 
10° or 20° of the longitude of conjunction is not always secure, and 
the intervals in days are restricted to integers while conjunction 
itself may occur at any time of day. We find by comparison of suc­
cessive values of At that the computation for Saturn and Jupiter is 
usually accurate to ±1
τ, but for Mars and Mercury the errors are 
often ±2
τ or ±3
τ or larger, and although we have adjusted some of 
the synodic times by ±Ι
τ or occasionally ±2
τ, irregularities remain, 
as is obvious from the graphs. And these errors arej with respect to 
a theoretically perfect computation of At, not to At found by obser­
vation, even perfect observation, which is even more uncertain. 
One may also wonder about the effect of smoke from a hundred 
thousand cooking fires on visibility conditions in Babylon. Hence, 
the modern computation of At shown in the figures can only be 
taken as approximate, although sufficiently precise to evaluate the 

Theoretical and Empirical Considerations 
77 
quality of the ancient observations and theory. 
There is a further caution concerning comparisons with 
modern computation. Neugebauer had little interest in them, in 
fact he rather disapproved on the grounds that they lead to easy 
and anachronistic judgments of the quality of Babylonian astron-
omy, and of earlier astronomy in general, rather than to a proper 
understanding of what was accomplished within the limitations of 
the methods and observations possible at the time, for which such 
comparisons can be misleading in giving the false impression that 
reaching anything even close to modern theory was possible. I 
entirely concur. However, the modern computations are set out 
here, not to pass judgment on the accuracy of ancient planetary 
theory—although that is hard to resist when the comparison is as 
straightforward as it appears in the figures, and I have made my 
share of perhaps unwarranted comparisons—but to show the true 
behavior of the synodic times of the phenomena as a substitute for 
missing observations and as a standard for evaluating the ancient 
observations, without which we would have little idea of the qual-
ity of the empirical foundation of the planetary theory. In this way, 
the modern computations, by setting out the theoretically correct 
empirical foundation, show us what the Scribes could discover 
through observation for deriving the parameters of their theory, 
and also use to evaluate and correct their theory, which they prob-
ably did periodically through adjustments to the epoch. That their 
results usually fall short of the ideal is itself of interest for what it 
shows of the limitations of their observations, which in turn 
imposed limitations on the accuracy of their theory, although, as 
we shall see, the most important limitations in the ephemerides 
were in fact theoretical rather than empirical, for as a result of the 
methods of computation, even perfect observations would have 
produced nearly the same sequence of synodic times and arcs with 
only the minimum and maximum limits altered. 
For these reasons, only comparisons of synodic time, not of 
synodic arc, are informative, for the Scribes could, in principle, 
find synodic time with an accuracy of a day or so, but in no way 
could they find synodic arc by observation with anything even close 
to the same precision. Comparisons of synodic arc are not inform-
ative because the Scribes could neither find it directly for their 
derivations of parameters nor use it for evaluating and correcting 
their theory, and the direct comparison of longitude suffers from 
all the same difficulties as synodic arc and has the additional 
uncertainty of being sensitive to the conversion between Babylon-
ian zodiacal longitude and modern tropical longitude. The modern 

78 
Part 2, Synodic Arc and Time 
computation of longitude is necessary for the dating of undated 
texts, and it was for that reason that Neugebauer made the 
suggestion that initiated the first volume of Tuckerman's tables 
(1962). But longitude is the weakest empirical element in Babylon­
ian astronomy, and the least suited for the evaluation of either 
observation or theory, for it shows what no Scribe could find in the 
first place or evaluate when computed, while time is the empirical 
element that could both be found most directly from observation 
and used as a check on computation. Hence, although in com­
puting the synodic times we have necessarily computed every 
longitude and every synodic arc—and also every elongation from 
the mean and true sun—we shall not use them for comparisons, 
which we shall restrict to synodic times. 
We may now turn to the derivation of the parameters for each 
planet in each system, and we begin with System B, which is the 
more straightforward in that the parameters can be derived from At 
directly without using Αλ. In considering System B, we shall also 
examine the relation of the empirically derived synodic times, from 
both ancient records and modern computation, to both systems. 
System B 
System B is an arithmetic function of constant and numeri­
cally identical second differences for the first differences of both 
longitude and time, the synodic arc Αλ and synodic time At of each 
phenomenon, that fall within fixed limits. As pointed out by Aaboe 
(1964, 225), each value of Αλ and At is a function, not of longi­
tude, but of the number of each phenomenon in the period of Π 
phenomena in Z zodiacal rotations. System B is used to compute 
longitude, but its relation to zodiacal longitude is indirect and in 
fact variable, and will be taken up in Part 3 in considering the 
alignment of the function to the zodiac. Examples of System B for 
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars are shown in the columns for Αλ and λ 
of Tables 3.2 and 3.3. When graphed the function forms alternately 
ascending and descending branches of a 'linear zigzag'. A drawing 
is shown in Figure 2.1 in which the graph of Aλ or At is the 
function y on the sloping lines between the maximum limit M and 
minimum m; the range or amplitude A = M- τη = Αλ^ - 4Am = At^ 
- Atm, and the mean value μ = !(M + m) is Αλ or At. The constant 
difference for each value of y is d such that yn+i = yn± d, where d 
is added on an ascending branch and subtracted on a descending. 
Where a limit would be crossed, the part of y n ± d, that is, of d, 

System B 
79 
that falls outside the limit is turned back within, so that 
at M: y n +i = M- ((yn + d) - M) = (2M- d) - yn, 
at m: y n +i = m + (m - (yn - d)) = (2m + d) - yn. 
And letting y be 4t or Δλ, the date and longitude of each successive 
phenomenon are then 
ίη+1 = ^n + ^ t n + I . 
Λ-n+l = -^n + ^ η + 1 · 
The synodic time and arc may also be computed from each other by 
Δί- Δλ = c, although At and Δλ appear to operate independently in 
the ephemerides and may even be out of phase, presumably by 
error, which could not happen if c were used for conversion. 
The period P is the number of phenomena, not an integer, be­
tween successive identical points of the function in magnitude and 
direction, as M or m, which is also the number of mean synodic 
arcs Δλ in one rotation of the zodiac or 6,0°, and is given by 
P-£-%?.g 
in 
a 
Δλ
 
Δ 
where Π and Z are the number of phenomena and number of rota­
tions of the phenomena through the zodiac in Y years. It follows 
that a function of System B is determined by specifying M and m, 
which determine Δ, and P. Since P = Π/Ζ is presumed known from 
records of the dates of phenomena through some number of years, 
all that is necessary is values of the greatest and least synodic 
times between successive phenomena, AtM and Atm, recoverable 
from the true dates in the same records, to find d and completely 
determine the function. A similar method of derivation using Δλ 
rather than At was proposed by Neugebauer (1968; HAMA, 429-30). 
It is of course possible to derive the function either way, since A 
and d are numerically the same for longitude and time and Δλ may 
be found from Δλ = At- c, but we shall use time directly, which 
receives some additional support from System B' for Jupiter in 
which At and Δλ have slightly different values of Δ and P, with At 
primary and Δλ derivative. 
Suppose now that we have our basic period relations: 
π 
Ρ 
Zi = -6,11;4
τ +ί11;4
τ 
At- Δλ * At - Δλ= c 
Π 
P = Π 

80 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
From records of the true dates of phenomena to the nearest day, 
take the maximum and minimum synodic times, /ItMo and 
Atmo, 
converted, if necessary, to an integral number of tithis. Then, as a 
first approximation, 
Z 
2A0 
A0 = AtMo - Atmo,
 
d o = Tr
 2Δ°
 
= ~~P~' 
'
2^ 
d 0 is then rounded to d, where d is a small, preferably 
regular 
number, small for convenience in calculation, since d must be 
added or subtracted for each entry, regular so that its reciprocal 
will be a terminating fraction, although this last is not strictly 
necessary and is violated in an ephemeris for Mars. In order to 
maintain the proper period, P = 2A/d = Π/Z, a new value of A is 
then found from 
4 = 0
d ) = l
pd·
 
(3) 
and since A is the same for both At and AX, the final parameters 
for the limits M and m are then 
AtM = At + 1/1, Atm = At- τΑ, /IAM = Δλ + ^A, AXm = AX - \A 
(4) 
The final values will have odd fractional places, which 
have 
nothing to do with the precision of the function, only the necessity 
of preserving the correct period. We shall illustrate the application 
of this method for each of the superior planets for which a System 
B function is known. 
Satu[rn] became visible [in]side Leo. If Leo is dark: for 
three years,lljions and wol[ves] will kill people and cut 
off traffic with the [Westjland. If a planet rises in Ab 
(V): the cemetery of warriors will expand. (ARAK 324) 
Saturn: System B 
All the ephemerides for Saturn, ACT 700-09, are System B, 
although some use rounded parameters. The system was 
first 
analyzed, not completely, by Kugler from ACT 704 and 704a (SSB I, 
176-78). The reports of phenomena found in the Diaries for estab­
lishing At are shown in Table 2.1, in which we have taken observa­
tions separated by up to six synodic periods, about 65 years, in 

Saturn: System B 
81 
which Saturn's speed changes little. The 50 synodic times from the 
Diaries are supplemented by 21 from a very early record of first and 
last appearances from year 1 to 14 of Kandalanu, -646 to -633, 
recently published by Christopher Walker (1998) from BM 76738 + 
76813 and shown here in Table 2.1B. Many of these observations 
also give distances from normal stars, by which the phenomena 
can be located by constellation from Cancer to Sagittarius, nearly 
half the zodiac. All the synodic times are graphed by zodiacal sign 
in Figure 2.2, which also shows the steps of System A with the 
transitions between the zones and the linear zigzag of System B; 
Δ t computed by System B would be close to the zigzag, but not 
exactly on it. The synodic times computed by modern theory from 
first appearances are shown as open circles, all within 23
τ to 26
τ. 
It can be seen that both Systems A and B, because of their narrow 
range, show fairly good agreement, any better fit being precluded by 
the restriction of System A to two zones and the symmetry of 
System B. The synodic times derived from the reports are shown as 
filled circles. As was earlier true of the observations used to find 
the errors of the periods, there is a considerable scatter within ±3
τ 
and errors as high as +6
τ, again showing that these are for the 
most part observations or inferences from observations rather than 
computation or prediction by goal-year period, although the 
observation of -635 VIII 5 is marked 'computed' and one may well 
wonder what this could mean. Interestingly, the observations from 
the third and second centuries are not more accurate than those 
from the seventh century. Mostly from the early observations, 
there is a notable clustering at 21
τ to 23
τ from Leo to Scorpio 
where Saturn's motion is slow and thus the synodic times short. 
The Scribes themselves, of course from many more examples, also 
had to decide which synodic times were possible and which errone­
ous, or useful and not useful, and they evidently decided upon the 
narrow range of 23
τ to 26
x, considerably smaller than that given by 
the observations, but correct according to modern computation. 
Perhaps a larger number of observed dates fell within this range. 
Now we may address the question mentioned before, here 
specifically for Saturn: since At computed with the ephemerides 
must fall within about 23
τ to 26
τ, in agreement with modern com­
putation, did the Scribes consider the observed values outside this 
range to be the result of errors of observation or of complexities of 
the phenomena that they did not attempt to control, indeed could 
not control, in their planetary theory? Of course we know that 
synodic time and synodic arc are strictly a function of longitude, 
so to our way of thinking there can be only a unique value for any 

82 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Ήπιε 
location in the zodiac. But I am not sure that we should attribute 
so strict a rule to the Scribes, for even if this is precisely what the 
ephemerides of System A follow, System B does not, although it is 
not far off, and for whatever reason, all the surviving ephemerides 
of Saturn are System B. The observations giving synodic times 
beyond the range of the ephemerides continue in the Diaries 
during the same time that the ephemerides were in use, and these 
very observations were the only check the Scribes themselves had 
on the accuracy of their theory. Did they consider their theory 
accurate and many of their observations erroneous, or did they 
consider their method of computation to be an approximation—a 
very good approximation perhaps based upon the range of most of 
the observed synodic times—to more complex phenomena shown 
by observations that they had no choice but to trust? We, perhaps 
with Ptolemy for example, would choose the former; the Scribes, I 
believe, chose the latter, that is, just as the true month was ap­
proximated by 30 tithis, the true length of a zodiacal constellation 
by 30 us, and the true motion of the sun between phenomena by 
its mean motion, the dates and locations computed with the 
ephemerides, whether as a function of the number of the phenom­
enon in System B or of longitude in System A, were intended as 
approximations to the true phenomena, and there was no surprise 
when they deviated by a few days from the observed dates, a 
deviation that, were it to accumulate, could be corrected by intro­
ducing a single new observation to establish a new epoch. We 
shall, however, see that for Mars the deviations are much larger 
and cannot so easily be corrected. 
For our derivation of parameters, the period and mean synodic 
arc and time are: 
P= 28:26,40 
Δλ = 12:39,22,30° 
4ί=24;6,43,7,30
τ 
c= 11:27,20,37,30 
We confine our assumption of At to integers and let 
AtM0 = 26*. 
Atmo = 23*. 
A0 = 3*. 
Then, from (2), 
do = 4^Q 6
τ = 0; 12,39...
τ = 0;12* = d, 
from which, by (3), 
A = U^- 
0:12
τΊ = 2;50,40
τ, 
\A = 1;25,20
τ, 

Saturn: System 
B 
83 
and the final parameters are, from (4), 
Atu = 25;32, 3, 7,30
τ, 
ΔλΜ = 14; 4,42,30°, 
At1n = 22:41,23, 7,30
τ, 
AXm = 11; 14, 2,30°. 
The procedure texts ACT 801 and 802 and the ephemerides ACT 
704 and 705 use the rounded At = 24;6,45
τ, leading to AtM = 
25;32,5* and Atm 
= 22;41,25
τ, and the ephemeris ACT 707, very 
badly preserved and useless for At, appears to use the rounded AX = 
12:39,25°, Alu 
= 14;4,45°, AXm = 11:14,5°. In ACT 702 and 704, 
surely by error, At is out of phase with AX, showing that they were 
computed independently. 
[If Jupiter in] Sivan (III) approaches and stands 
where 
the sun shines forth, (if) it is [br]ight and its features 
are red, its [rijsing is as perfect as the rising of the sun: 
angry [go]ds will be reconciled with Akkad; there will 
be copious rain (and) regular foods 
in Akkad; barley 
and sesame will increase, and the equivalent of (only) 
1 qa will (have to) be paid for 1 kur; [the gods] in the 
sky will stand in their (appropriate) positions; 
their 
shrines will see wealth. (ARAK 170) 
Jupiter: System B 
Most of the ephemerides for Jupiter are System A or A' 
although ACT 620-29 are in System B and ACT 640 in an inconsis­
tent System B'. All but System B' were described by Kugler (1900, 
208) and analyzed thoroughly from ACT 622-23 and the fragment 
621 (SSB I, 150-71). Next to Mercury, Jupiter has the greatest 
number of surviving ancient observational reports. Table 2.2A 
shows 24 synodic times derived from reports in the Diaries sepa­
rated by up to three synodic periods. Table 2.2B contains 10 
synodic times from a collection, LBAT 1394, published by Kugler 
(SSB I, 80-85), originally of 43 years from 18 Artaxerxes II to 13 
Artaxerxes IH (-386 to -344), of which only the first three years 
survive (two obvious errors of 10 days have been corrected). 
Finally, Table 2.2C contains 37 synodic times from LBAT 1409, a 
collection for 13 years, SE 160-172 (-151 to -139), a transcription 
of which by Sachs was sent to me by Hermann Hunger. Although 
-151 to near the end of -149 lack dates, and part of -143 is 
missing, the dated phenomena cover most of the zodiac from the 
end of Pisces to the beginning of Sagittarius. The synodic times are 

84 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
graphed by zodiacal sign as filled circles in Figure 2.3, which shows 
the steps of Systems A and A' with the transitions between zones, 
the linear zigzag of System B with At graphed against λ, adapted 
from Δλ and λ in ACT 620a (see Table 3.3), shown as open squares, 
the departure of which from the linear zigzag is easily noticeable. 
The modern computation of At is shown by open circles. Compared 
to both the Babylonian functions and modern computation, there 
is a scatter in the observed At, generally within ±4* but with a 
number of larger errors, showing, as with Saturn, that these are 
indeed observations or inferences from observations rather t h a n 
calculations or predictions from goal-year periods. Considering the 
discrepancies near maximum and minimum, in particular that 
System A falls short by 4
τ of the maximum of 52
x, it is evident 
that the Scribes had to decide, presumably from a greater number 
of observations, which synodic times were possible and which 
erroneous, or which useful and which not useful for establishing 
their limits, and all the remarks concerning the relation of 
observations and approximations in the ephemerides for Saturn 
apply here too, as is particularly shown by the round values of the 
limits of Jupiter's synodic times and arcs in both systems. 
Jupiter's period, mean synodic arc, and time are: 
P = 10:51,40 
Al = 33:8,44,48...° = 33:8,45° 
4 i = 45:13,52,56...* = 45; 14* 
C= 12:5,15 
For the derivation of parameters, it appears to have been assumed, 
with some obvious rounding, that 
AtMo = 50*, 
Atmo = 40*, 
^ 0 = 10*, 
from which, by (2), 
36 
do = g-gj 20* = 1:50,29...* = 1;48* = d, 
1;48 being the closest small, regular number, so that, from (3), 
A = U^§r- 1:48*") = 9:46,30*. 
\A = 4;53,15*, 
and using the rounded values of At and Δλ, from (4), we find the 
limits of the ephemerides, 
AtM = 50; 7,15*, 
ΔλΜ = 38; 2, 0°, 
Atm = 40:20,45*, 
AXm = 28:15,30°. 

Jupiter: System 
A', 
A", 
A'" 
85 
Jupiter: System B' 
System B', preserved in the ephemeris ACT 640 and described 
in the procedure text ACT 813.21-22, both first published in ACT, 
appears to be a variant derived from System B in which, because of 
roundings, the periods and amplitudes of - 
and 
are not consis-
tent. Here is a possible origin: Let us initially assume, in agree-
ment with System B, 
Considering 
first 
less plausible as an estimate 
than the previous 
but perhaps derived from a periodic 
variation of 
or, more likely, 
in 
This is the only new observational quantity. Thus, 
the closest small, regular number, so that 
It is of interest that the rounded value of 
leads directly to 
rather than 
As a consequence of the rounding o f t h e period 
of 
is now 
For 
with 
and, as just found, 
so that 
and, again because of rounding, 
the period of 
aecomes 
Hence, the two different amplitudes and periods are due to 
rounding, and are not independent parameters. We shall see 

86 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
similar variants of the ACT periods in System A that likewise 
result from small adjustments. 
[Majrs became visible in Tammuz (IV) and is faint. [If 
Mars] becomes visible in Tammuz (IV): the cemetery of 
the warriors will enlarge. [Mars] is said to portend 
death. [IfMalrs stands in the east: attack of Subartu 
and Kassites against the land. [If] Mars rises scintil­
lating and its radiance is yellow: the king of Elam will 
die. (ARAK 114) 
Mars: System B 
System B for Mars is known from a tiny fragment, ACT 510, of 
ten lines of the column for longitude of an unknown phenomenon, 
containing only one complete number, and an obscure reference in 
the procedure text ACT 811a. 11. It was correctly identified and 
restored by Huber and first published by Aaboe (1958); the most 
detailed analysis is in HAMA (p. 457). Because of its long synodic 
period, the phenomena of Mars occur infrequently, and are the 
most poorly represented of any planet in the Diaries (although 
Venus is a close second). Since Mars moves rapidly near conjunc­
tion, it remains close to the sun for a long period of invisibility, 
from 90 to more than 220 days, and is then obscured by twilight, 
so that its first appearances are notoriously difficult to spot, which 
is just as well because they are very bad omens. (There are, 
however, exceptions (ARAK 419): 'If Mars becomes visible in Elul 
(VI): the harvest of the land will prosper; the land will become 
happy. If the red planet [becomes visible]: plenty for the people'). 
Table 2.3 contains the few reports of phenomena from the Diaries, 
bounding up to two synodic periods, that may be used to find 
synodic times, in which At is the excess over 24 months, supple­
mented by a very early series of first and last visibilities from a text 
at Harvard, communicated to me by John Britton, that originally 
extended for many years, of which 2-10 Samas-sumu-ukln (-665 to 
-656) provide seven synodic periods, although some of the months 
require emendation. These are graphed as filled circles in Figure 
2.4 along with the function for At in Systems A, the linear zigzag 
of System B with At graphed against λ, computed from Δλ and λ in 
ACT 510 extended (see Table 3.3), as open squares distinctly sepa­
rated from the linear zigzag, and At computed by modern theory as 
open circles. The displacement of the limits of Systems A and B of 
from one to two zodiacal signs, to be taken up in Part 3, could be 

Mars: System B 
87 
specific to the single System B ephemeris. 
It can be seen that the observed At agrees with the modern 
computation fairly well for the lower values of At, and System A 
also follows the lower values, while the minimum of System B is 9
τ 
too low. However, the most notable error is that both systems fall 
short of the true maximum by over 40
τ. Not more than about 12' 
of the error is due to the use of c to compute At = AX + c; most is 
due to AX. Aaboe (1958, 247-51) found deficits of up to 30" for AX 
near its maximum at first and last visibility, and, remarkably, a 
nearly perfect agreement for AX at opposition. Perhaps for Mars 
acronychal rising was used to find At because of the large range of 
uncertainty in the true date of first visibility. According to our 
computation of first visibilities, AX extends from 30° to 110°, while 
System B lies between 17° and 80° and System A between 30° and 
82;30°, each falling short of the maximum by about 30°. Since the 
longer synodic times must have been observed and recorded, it is 
clear that the functions can only be considered as approximations, 
something the Scribes must have understood and intended. It is 
also possible that the longer synodic times, beginning in Scorpio, 
Sagittarius or Capricorn at intervals of fifteen or seventeen years, 
were regarded, not as normal, but as late first appearances, which 
are taken to be ominous, or as errors of observation, in Pisces, 
Aries, and Taurus where the synodic arcs end—each is followed by 
a far shorter synodic time ending in Taurus or Gemini—and for 
that reason excluded from the mathematical theory of the ephem-
erides. Whatever the explanation, an omission so obvious can be 
due only to deliberation rather than negligence. The result is a 
cumulative anticipation of dates of up to 40
τ and a deficit of 
longitudes of up to 30° every fifteen or seventeen years, which will, 
however, eventually be compensated as long as the period, and 
with it AX and At, are maintained. 
The period and mean synodic arc and time for the derivation of 
parameters are: 
_P= 7:23,20 
Zl = 48;43,18,29,46...° «48:43,18,30° 
At= 1,12:21,10,22.. .'= 1,12:21,10 
C = 23:37,51,30 
We take as the synodic times, 
AtM0 = 1,44*. 
Atmo = 40*. 
A0 = 1.4'. 
from which, by (2), 
18 
<3ο = 2 ΐ 3
2 · 8
τ = 17:19,23...'= 17'= d, 

88 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
and d is in this case not a regular number (although it is small). 
The final values follow from (3), 
Δ = ψ ^ 
17
χ]= 1,2;48,20
τ. 
\ Δ = 31:24,10*. 
so that, taking the rounded values of Δί and Δλ, from (4), 
ΔίΜ = 1,43;45,20
τ, 
ΔΧΜ = 1,20; 7,28,30°, 
Δ^= 
40:57, 0*. 
-4I1n= 
17; 19. 8,30". 
The values of Δλ are those of Huber's reconstruction; there is no 
evidence for confirming Δί. ACT 81 la. 11 describes the calculation 
(2,13 · 17)/18 = 2.5:36,40. that is. (77 · d)/Z= 2Δ. 
System A 
System B is limited by the symmetry to its mean value, and is 
entirely determined once its period and limits have been specified. 
System A is adaptable to any number of different synodic arcs and 
times, in any order and extending over any part of the zodiac, each 
of which, order and extent, may be specified separately, although 
this advantage does not appear until more than two synodic arcs 
and times are used. Its principle is to divide the zodiac into zones 
in which the synodic arc and time are of constant length, subject 
to algebraic and arithmetic conditions that are essential to both 
the derivation and application of the system. All System B 
ephemerides are the same except for their parameters. System A 
ephemerides vary greatly because of their parameters; Saturn and 
Jupiter have long stretches of constant Δλ and Δί, which for Mars 
and Mercury differ in every synodic period. In place of examples, a 
hypothetical System A of three zones is shown in Figure 2.5. The 
zodiac is divided into zones αϊ, α<ι, as in which the length of the 
synodic arc or time is w\, w-i, W3, called, for obvious reasons, a 
'step' function. The graph of the synodic arc Δλ or time Δί is the 
function y on the heavy line, which coincides with w if it lies 
entirely in one zone or has a constant slope if it extends through 
two or more zones. Given an initial value of the longitude or time 
Zn, the next value will be Zn+1 = Zn + yn+i- If Zn and Zn + w\ lie 
within the same zone αϊ, then y n+i = w\. But if z n + w\ extends 
into the next zone αι+i by an amount x, then χ must be adjusted 
in the ratio wi+i/wi, that is, 

System A 
89 
For Mars and Mercury, the function may extend into a third zone 
in the same way. In Figure 2.5, the short stretch of the graph of 
reduced slope near the end of 
extends into 
and 
, so is 
affected by both W3/W2 and W1/W3. Finally, letting t oi 
or be z 
and 
or 
be y, the date and longitude are 
The synodic time or arc may also be found irom the other by 
although there is an exception for System A2 ofMercury. 
System A is based upon the same period 
as 
System B, but where in System B the period appears as the 
number of steps of d in the return of the function to the same 
value, 
in System A it is the sum of the synodic arcs per 
zone, i 
We shall call the sum of the zones 
divided by 
the synodic arc wi in each zone, 
the 'system'—it is often 
called the 'generating function'—the resulting true synodic arcs 
or synodic times At, shown in Figure 2.5 by the heavy line, the 
'function', and 
the 'period". There are three 
conditions essential to System A: 
where p/q is a ratio of small, 'regular' numbers, composed only of 
the prime factors 2,3,5. The first condition is the fundamental 
definition of System A, while the second and third specify the 
conditions for 
and wi. The meaning of the condition for 
is a 
metrical specification of the division of the zodiac into 6,0 parts; 
other units, including units of time, could likewise be used, taking 
ai as a part of the planet's zodiacal period in which wi is the 
synodic time, but this would be very cumbersome. The condition 
for w\ is more complex. Each time a boundary between zones is 
passed, a correction W[+ \/ W{ is applied, and as the function passes 
through successive zones and returns to its original value, the 
reciprocal of wi+i/wi will likewise be applied, either at once in a 
two-zone system or through a product of ratios in a system of 
more than two zones. In order for both wi+i/wi and its reciprocal 
to be terminating sexagesimal fractions, it must be reducible to a 
ratio of numbers with the prime factors 2,3,5, a consequence of 
the sexagesimal system, called 'regular' numbers, which are used 

90 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
constantly in Babylonian mathematics to replace division with 
multiplication by a reciprocal. wi and u>i+i themselves may con­
tain other prime factors, but they must be contained in common. 
Were wi+i/wi not reducible to a ratio of regular numbers, it or its 
reciprocal would not be a terminating sexagesimal fraction, and 
would have to be rounded or truncated in order to be used with 
convenience. But multiplication by a rounded or truncated number 
would introduce an error each time a boundary is crossed, which 
would immediately violate the period, affect every subsequent value 
of the function, and eventually accumulate to notable errors. It is 
possible to use ratios of other than regular numbers under condi­
tions to be discussed shortly, but none of the principal planetary 
systems do so. In fact, wi+i/wi not only fulfills the condition of 
small, regular numbers, but is almost always of the form (η ± I)/n. 
There is one exception for Mercury in System Ai and several 
remarkable exceptions in System A3. 
The fundamental period relations for System A are the same as 
those for System B: 
P = ? 
ZX = ^6,0° =
 
6'°° 
Ζί = ^6,11;4
τ + ί11;4
τ 
Δί-Δλ~ 
Zi-ZX= c 
The distribution of the phenomena in each zone requires further 
examination, the principal studies of which are van der Waerden 
(1957) and Aaboe (1964), which we follow along with HAMA. If we 
consider only mean arcs, the Π phenomena will be distributed, not 
successively ,_into the mean intervals, also called 'steps' (Schritte), 
δ = 6,0°/TJ = Δλ/Ζ, and thus the mean synodic arc Δλ = Ζ(6,0°/Π) = 
Ζδ. However, the phenomena are not distributed 
uniformly 
throughout the zodiac, but occur in greater numbers, and are more 
closely spaced, where Δλ and Δί are small, and in lesser numbers 
and further apart where Δλ and Δι are large. Since the total 
number of phenomena Π = ZP, and P = Σ(αι/ΐϋι), the number of 
phenomena τη in each zone cq and the true interval (¾ between 
them are given, and related to each other, by 
αϊ 
Or1 
wi 
ai 
Obviously, Στη = Π and Σίτηδι) = Σ«ι = 6,0°. It turns out that πι is 
usually an integer, requiring that Zcci be divisible by Wi, which will 

System A 
91 
be true if ZaI contains all the prime factors of LUI when LLM is 
multiplied to a least integer. Just as the mean synodic arc 
so, provided that the synodic arc remain within the same zone ai, 
the true synodic arc 
And in general, as the synodic 
arc extends into successive zones, the true synodic arc 
that is, as each zone is passed 
will contain Z intervals of length 
which is the maximum extent reached. 
Neugebauer has pointed out (HAMA, 532; cf. Aaboe and Sachs, 
1969, 7) that if every 
is an integer, and initial positions are 
chosen such that some 
begins at the transition points between 
zones, meaning that each phenomenon will fall at the beginning of 
a 
may contain uncancelled irregular prime factors that 
may be cancelled by whatever part of 
extends into the 
following zone. An example is found in the six-zone system for 
in System 
of Mercury, although just how the system was 
applied, that is, where any 
"alls, is not known. Ephemerides in 
which wi+i/wi is a ratio of regular numbers are inconsistent about 
following this rule. In fact, 
and 
have only a secondary role in 
the derivation of parameters for synodic time and arc, but 
is 
used for the subdivision of the synodic arc of Mars treated in Part 
3. We may now turn to the derivation of parameters for System A 
of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, which are summarized in Table 2.4. 
Two-Zone System 
Conditions 1-3 above, which, as we have said, define System A, 
along with the difference c between synodic arc and time, are 
sufficient to derive the parameters from the true synodic time, just 
as was done for System B. From the records of the true dates of 
phenomena, assume initial values of the minimum and maximum 
synodic time 
and 
Then as a first estimate 
We now solve the simultaneous linear equations from conditions 1 
and 2, 
If necessary, 
and 
are then rounded to 
and 
, and new 
values of w\ and it>2 found by simultaneous linear equations from 
conditions 1 and 3, 

92 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
where p/q is a ratio of small regular numbers. I need hardly point 
out that the solution of simultaneous linear equations would pose 
no problem for the Scribes. The corresponding synodic times are 
[Saturn] stands in Libra [in front of Scorp]ius; it will 
move [from] Libra [into] Scorpius; that is bad [...], (and 
hence) I am writing to the king my lord. [The xth day 
is] an evil day, [...] and catastrophe. [The king my 
lord] must not go out [of the do]or; let him [guajrd him-
self [against uprising] and rebellion, [until it] comes 
out from Sc[orpius]. (ARAK 386) 
Saturn: System A 
There are no known ephemerides of System A for Saturn, which 
is known only from the procedure texts ACT 801.3-8, from which 
Kugler derived its parameters (SSB II, 578-79), and 802 and two 
dateless series of longitudes, 'template' texts, of the phenomena 
published as DCL Texts A-B. There is a graph of System A 
for synodic time in Figure 2.2. The zones ai and synodic arcs w\ 
are shown in Table 2.4; the period, system, and mean synodic arc 
and time are: 
In order to derive the parameters, we assume 
just as for System B, from which, by subtracting c = 11;30, 
From conditions 1 and 2, we have the simultaneous equations 
from which 

Saturn: System A 
93 
We now round 
satisfying conditions 2 and 3, 
and, from conditions 1 and 3, solve the simultaneous equations 
to find 
the final parameters of System A. However, as John Britton point-
ed out to me, correctly 29/23 = 5/4, which curiously had escaped 
me, so there is clearly an inconsistency in the two steps of the 
derivation, meaning either that the derivation is incorrect or that 
the inconsistency was permitted. It is worth remarking that Kugler 
applied just this last solution in order to find the parametersof 
System A from ACT 801.3-5 in the form wi = 
and u>2 = 
(SSB II, 578-79; noted in ACT, p. 370). From the unrounded value 
of c, the corresponding synodic times are 
although there is no textual evidence for the use of these numbers, 
which would probably be rounded in an ephemeris. It is notable 
that the numbers of phenomena per zone, 
, leading to 
7Ti = 2,33;36 and 7r2 = 1,42;24, are not integers, the reason being 
that wi and u>2, when multiplied to a least integer,each contain a 
prime factor of 5 in excess of the prime factors of 
and 
Saturn: System A' 
DCL Text C is a fragment of a template of longitudes of an 
unidentified phenomenon in a variant System A' in which Wi is the 
same as System A, but the length and location of 
are changed: 
Evidently in System A' the beginning of 
_ has been advanced by 
10°, but of greater importance, 30°, the length of one zodiacal sign, 

94 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
has been shifted from the slow zone αϊ to the fast zone a2, with 
the result that while in System A the slow zone is 40° longer than 
the fast zone, in System A' the fast zone is 20° longer t h a n the 
slow zone. These are thus nontrivial changes, and have the effect 
of moving midpoints of the slow and fast zones from 20° to 15° of 
Scorpio and Taurus, as we shall see in Part 3, although there may 
be another motivation based upon the number of phenomena in 
each zone. The result, however, is a reduction in the period, 
2,50 
3,10 
1,45,4 
P~ 
11:43,7,30
 
+ 14;3,45~ 3,45 
~
2 8 ; 1 ·
4 · 
which is in fact a defect, due only to changing the length of the 
zones, and in no way an independent parameter. The period of 
System A could be retained by applying conditions 1 and 3, 
^ 
+ ^
= 
28:26,40. 
» * * 
Wi 
W2 
W\ 
5' 
leading to u>i = 11:32,34,41,15°, and W2 = 13:51,5,37,30°, which 
would be cumbersome to use. However, the number of phenomena 
per zone, τη = Z[ai/w{), in System A' is π\ = 54,24 and π2 = 50,40, 
so unlike System A these are now integers, and further, they are as 
nearly equal as one can have with a\ to the nearest 10° and a 
reasonable approximation to the period of System A. We shall see 
a similar, although much smaller, alteration in the length of two 
zones in System A" of Jupiter, apparently for the same reason. 
If Jupiter [becomes visible] in [Ab]: the land will expe­
rience joy. If Jupiter Irises] in the path of the [Enlil] 
stars: the king of Akkad 
will become strong 
and 
(overthrow] his enemies in all lands in battle. (ARAK 
54) 
Jupiter: System A 
Unlike Saturn, Jupiter is well represented by ephemerides of 
System A, ACT 600-08, and template DCL Text D that appears to 
have covered a full period for all five phenomena Γ, Φ, Θ, Ψ, Ω. 
System A was first described by Kugler (1900, 208), and his full 
analysis was based upon ACT 602, 603, and a small part of 607 
(SSB I, 117-25). The synodic times of System A are graphed in 
Figure 2.3. The zones a\ and synodic arcs Wi are shown in Table 
2.4; the period, system, and mean synodic arc and time are: 

Jupiter: System 
A', 
A", 
A'" 
95 
The derivation of the parameters for Jupiter is straightforward. We 
assume that 
while System B uses 40T and 50T respectively. Subtracting c = 12, 
from which W2/W1 = 6/5, satisfying condition 3 so that W\ = Wi0 
and u>2 = u>2o- From conditions 1 and 2, we thus have the simul-
taneous equations 
from which the final parameters are directly 
From c = 12;5,10, the corresponding synodic times are 
as in the ephemerides. Itis notable that for Jupiter 
and 
are 2 units greater and 
and 
2 units less in System A than 
in System B, while for Saturn they are about the same. One might 
explain the difference for Jupiter by noting that the limits of 
System B are seldom reached so the wider limits of 10° and 10x are 
necessary to keep most of the function close to the narrower limits 
of System A of 6° and 6T, while in the case of Saturn the very small 
range of less than 3° and 3T makes such a distinction of no practi-
cal purpose. By modern calculation, the range of AX is from about 
30° to 37.3° and of At from 41x to 52T; hence System A is closer for 
and System B for At. 
A variant System Ai for Jupiter described in procedure text ACT 
813.11, concerned with the subdivisions of Jupiter's synodic arc, 
moves the boundaries of the zones slightlv, bv 5:45° or less, such 
that thev differ for 
missing from the text. For 
unchanged, but for 
there is a change of 
the length of the zones is 
3°, ai = 2,38° 

96 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
instead of 2,35° and 
instead of 3,25°. Since wi and W2 
have their normal values, the period of rnly is altered to 
= 16,19/1,30 = 10;52,40. The motivation for such minute and 
inconsistent alterations is not clear. 
Sun: Systems A and A' 
Although appearing only in lunar ephemerides and playing no 
role in planetary theory, the true monthly motion of the sun can 
be treated in the same way as the two-zone systems of Saturn and 
Jupiter except that the initial assumptions concern arc rather 
than time. The parameters of System A are: 
The initial assumptions appearto be simply that 
and 
, about ±1° from 
and thus not due to precise mea-
surement. However, since 28/30 is not a ratio of regular numbers, 
it is altered as little as possible with small numbers to 
We shall see a similar minimal alteration in System 
of Mercury 
for three synodic periods of 
although resulting in rather pecu-
liar ratios. Hence, we now have the simultaneous equations 
from which directly 
The limits of the zones are chosen such that the midpoint of the 
fast zone falls at 
and of the slow zone at 
System A' (HAMA, 531; Aaboe and Sachs, 1969, 7), known in a 
single early lunar text dated from columns 
and F to about -397, 
is a curious relative or predecessor of System A. Its parameters are: 

Sun: Systems A and A' 
97 
By letting W2 = 28;20°, presumably a rounding, wi/w\ = 17/18 is 
not a ratio of regular numbers. System A' may then be derived 
algebraically from wi and P in the same way as System A, leading 
to 
and 
virtually the reverse of System 
A, which is quite remarkable, although the midpoints of the fast 
and slow zones are shifted by only 1; 15° to 
and 
Four-Zone Systems: Jupiter, Systems 
System A with two zones is as constrained as System B in that 
it is completely determined by conditions 1-3 once the period and 
the limits of the synodic arcs or times have been specified. The 
great advantage of System A is realized only when additional zones 
with different synodic arcs and times are introduced, which, as we 
shall see in the systems for Mercury, can be of any order and 
length, provided conditions 1-3 are not violated. The simpler form, 
however, is the introduction of transitional zones, as in the three 
four-zone systems for Jupiter, of which the most important, and 
presumably the basic one, is System A' found in ephemerides ACT 
609-14, first described by Kugler (1900, 208), and analyzed in detail 
from parts of ACT 610-12 and procedure texts ACT 810 and 813.14-
15,23 (SSB I, 126-50). In all three systems, the two zones of 
System A are separated by transitional zones W2 = W4 = 33;45\ 
System A' is shown in Figures 2.2 and 2.6, the zones ai and 
synodic arcs w\ are given in Table 2.4, and the system is 
The period, and thus 
and c are the same as System A, and 
the transitional zones 
and 
are nearly equal, suggesting that 
they were formed by dividing a zone equal to their sum as closely 
as possible to integer degrees. Therefore, to investigate the origin of 
System A', consider the three-zone system 
Note that conditions 2 and 3 are fulfilled with the relations 

98 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
The transitional W2 must be formed by partitioning the ratio 
W3/W1 into two ratios of regular numbers; in this way 33;45° was 
selected, rather than, say, 
which would correspond to 
because the ratio 9/8 is the very next ratio of small, regular 
numbers less than 6/5, while 33° would give 11/10, which is not 
regular. And 32°, although also in a ratio of regular numbers, 
16/15. was presumably excluded because it is farther than 33;45° 
from 
System A6, described below, uses 32°. The simple 
relations between the zones, reducing ai from 2,35° in System A to 
2,0°, is also for algebraic purposes, for after letting 
= 2,0°, the system follows from conditions 1 and 2, that is, 
from which 
a<z is then divided closely into the two transitional zones of 53° 
and 52°. From c = 12;5,10, the corresponding synodic times are 
System A", known from ACT 813.7 and a template for longi-
tudes of an unspecified phenomenon excerpted in ACT (p. 310) and 
published as DCL Text E, appears to be an adjustment of System 
A' to make the numbers of phenomena in the transitional zones 
integers, as has been pointed out by Aaboe (1964, 223). In System 
A' the intervals S and phenomena n in zones 2 and 4 are 
so that 
In System A" the transitional zones are partitioned as the integers 
7:2 = 1,0 and 7T4 = 52, and thus 
The only other examples of zones that are not integer numbers of 
degrees are in System A' of the sun and System A3 of Mercury. 
System A'", known only from ACT 813.8 and 813b.3, is yet 

Jupiter: System A', A", A'" 
99 
another adjustment of System A', and while the adjustment itself 
is minor, the period is altered to 
All that has been done to System A' is to shift 5° from a2 to <23, 
and the period is shorter and less accurate as a result. Since the 
numbers of phenomena in a-i and a4, 7t2 = 38;24 and 714 = 41;36, 
are not integers, the only explanation for the change is to give the 
zones the round numbers ai = 2,0°, a3 = 2,20°, 0:2+4 = 1,40°. 
For comparison, we give the boundaries and lengths of the four 
zones of Systems A', A", and A"': 
Sys. 
ai 
«2 
«3 
«4 
A' 
S 9° 
2,0° m. 9° 
53° 
% 2° 2,15° 
« 17° 52° 
A" 
O 5;45 2,0 n\. 5;45 56;15 •Z 2 2,15 
8 17 48:45 
A"' 
O 9 
2,0 n\ 9 
48 
27 2,20 
b 17 52 
uu = 30° 
w2 = 33:45° 
w3 = 36° 
W4 = 33:45° 
As we have seen, these adjustments are concerned with the num-
ber of phenomena in the zones in System A" and the length of the 
zones in System A'". The alignment of the zones to the zodiac will 
be considered in Part 3. Since System A' is formed by inserting two 
transitional zones into System A, aside from noting that transi-
tional arcs and times must occur within the 6° and 6T range of 
System A, observations are not utilized in these four-zone systems. 
And just as the small range of Saturn did not require different 
limits in Systems A and B, it is also clear that for the same reason 
no four-zone systems were necessary, since within the range of less 
than 3° and 3T such transitions would be superfluous. 
Six-Zone System: Jupiter, System Ae 
ACT 811.1 contains a fragmentary description of a six-zone 
system for Jupiter, which Neugebauer has restored as follows: 
Sign 
OCi 
wi 
O 
2, 0° 
30° 
m 
30 
[32]? 
s 
30 
34 
a ccc X r 
2, 0 
[36] 
a 
30 
34:210...1? 
I 
30 
32 

100 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
The system is simple enough in appearance, but poses problems. 
Between the limits of 30° and 36°, each occupying zones of 2,0° 
and nearly coincident with the corresponding zones in System A', 
two 30° transitional zones have been inserted of 32° and, it 
appears, of 34° and 34;2[0...]°, which create difficulties if Wi+i/wi 
is to be of small, regular numbers. The same problem turns up in a 
six-zone system for three synodic arcs of Ξ in System A3 of 
Mercury, and, as Neugebauer points out, the implied period, P = 
Σ{αι/ινύ 
< 10:58,22,56..., is rather long. How the system is to be 
fully restored and whether it was ever used in practice are difficult 
to say, but it is obvious that we again have only a modification of 
System A with transitional zones. 
Twice or thrice we watched for Mars today (but) we 
did not see (it); it has set. Maybe the king my lord will 
say as follows: 'Is there any (ominows) sign in (the 
fact) that it set?' (I answer): There is not.' (ARAK 7) 
Six-Zone System: Mars, System A 
System A for Mars is known in fragmentary ephemerides ACT 
500-03 for Φ, Θ, and Ψ, and in templates for Ω, Γ, Φ, Θ, Ψ (DCL 
Texts G-J, the last also ACT 504) and an unspecified phenomenon 
(DCL Text K). It was first analyzed by Kugler from ACT 501 (SSB II, 
580-81). Only a single phenomenon, as Ω, Γ, or Φ, need be 
computed by System A, and then subsidiary rules may be used for 
the arcs Ω -» Γ -» Φ -» Ω, the order in the template—although it is 
far easier to use System A consistently once a single initial series 
has been found—and for the retrograde arc Φ -» Θ -» Ψ. The zones 
0¾ and arcs 11¾ are given in Table 2.4, the synodic times are graphed 
in Figure 2.4, the system is shown in Figure 2.7, and we give here 
the period, the system, and the mean arc and time. The zones have 
been reordered from ACT and HAMA to begin with the slowest. 
r ^ i . W 
I1O 
I1O 
^ 0 _ 
1,0 
1,0 
2,13 
ZJW1
 
_ 30 + 40 + 1,0 + 1,30 + 1,7;30 + 45 ~ 18 " ' " " " * u 
AX = 48:43,18,29,46...° « 48:43,18,30° 
Ii= 
1,12:21.10.22,33.. .
τ = 1,12:21.10.30* 
c = 23:37,51,52,47... = 23:37.52 « 24 
The rounded values are used in the ephemerides, and c = 24 will be 

Mars: System A 
101 
used in our analysis to convert synodic time to arc. 
System A for Mars, with six equal zones, is simpler than it 
appears, and may be derived from a symmetrical system based 
upon the limits of the synodic times with an adjustment to fit the 
period. We assume that from observational records, perhaps with 
considerable adjustment, as shown by the round numbers for AX, 
the minimum and maximum synodic times are 
from which, subtracting c = 24, the synodic arcs. 
Note that 
ind 
igree with System B while Atmo and AXmo 
are about 14 units greater, so that the range A, a round number, is 
smaller for System A than for System B, as was also true of Jupi-
ter. And as was evident in Figure 2.4, AtM falls alarmingly short, 
more than 40T, of the true maximum by modern computation. Yet 
the range is so great, more than eight times that of Jupiter, that 
some number of transitional zones are a necessity, even more so 
than in Jupiter's Systems A' and A6- Therefore, assuming a system 
of six equal zones of 1,0°, between the minimum arc of 30° and the 
maximum of 1,20°, we must fill in the transitional zones; so we 
initially assume a symmetrical system with a slow zone of 30°, two 
transitional zones of 1,0°, and three zones, including the 
maximum, yet to be determined. 
Since AXMo = 1,20° is greater than a4 = 1,0°, we must find the value 
of W4 that gives AXM0 = 1,20°, which occurs if AX either (1) begins 
at the beginning of w4 and ends within wq or (2) begins within W3 
and ends at the end of W4. (We shall use conditions of this kind 
repeatedly in deriving the parameters of Mercury; here they occur 
but once.) We may use either case, but taking (2), we have 
and using case (1) would give the same result. Hence, for case (2) 
u>4 = 1,30° will give the required 

102 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
ΑλΜ = W4 + (^ 
- l ) (W4 - CC4) = 1,30° - I 30° = 1,20°. 
Now, using the same ratio of 3/2 with respect to w\ = AXmo = 30°, 
we find W2 = WQ = 45° and fill in the symmetrical system, 
vB._ii°- 1£ M ^
0 - I ^ 
1,0 22 
2-iWi ~ 30
 + 45
 + 1,0
 + 1,30
 + 1,0
 + 45 ~ 3 "
 
7 ; 2 ϋ · 
The symmetrical system is shown in Figure 2.8, and while the 
system itself is symmetrical the resulting function for AX and At is 
not, but not so irregular as the final function in Figure 2.7. The 
system is quite interesting in itself since Π/Ζ = 22/3 forms the 
period Y= 1Π + Z = 47, that is, 47 years, the goal-year period used 
for the prediction of dates of phenomena since it is nearly an 
integral number of months, 22p = 9,41m + ~l;20
d. Since we have 
made no assumption about the period, it may appear remarkable 
that a standard period simply falls out of the symmetrical system, 
but such simple, round numbers for a\ and w\ must give ratios of 
small numbers for Π/Ζ, and we shall see even shorter periods in 
preliminary systems for Mercury. The result is nevertheless signifi­
cant, for it shows that the observations necessary to find the para­
meters of such systems need not extend over a period longer than, 
say, the goal-year periods themselves—all that are required are /liM 
and Atm—and 
further that these very systems could have been 
developed, although not necessarily used, for the goal-year periods, 
and then adjusted to the longer and more accurate ACT periods. 
And that is precisely what we must do now, that is, we must 
change the values of one or more wi—αϊ is fixed—so that the 
period is increased by 0:3,20, from 7;20 to 7;23,20. No adjustment 
was necessary for Saturn or Jupiter since each algebraic step in 
deriving 0¾ and w\ maintained condition 1, Z(ai/u>i) = P. However, 
in finding Wt for Mars with «j given, condition 1 was not applied, 
and now it must be under three special conditions: 1. The ratios of 
UJi+1/ w\ must be small, regular numbers. 2. Neither UJj = 30° nor 
W4 = 1,30° can be changed since these are required for the correct 
limits of AX and At. 3. The symmetry must be disturbed as little as 
possible. The adjustment must have been done by trial, and one 
cannot, to maintain symmetry, alter either w-ι = we = 45° or U)3 = 
W5 = 1,0° equally, for the former gives 44;4,53...° and the latter 
58:22,42...°, both violating condition 1. It is necessary to alter two 
transitional zones, and the Scribes made the optimal choice in 

Mars: System A 
103 
altering 11¾ to 40° and W5 to 1,7; 30°, at least for keeping the ratios 
of Wi+i/w\ 
small and regular. In this way, decreasing w<i to 
(4/3)wi 
= 40° increases P by 0;10 to 7;30, and, maintaining 
symmetry as far as possible, increasing w*, to (3/4)W4 = 67;30° 
decreases P by 0;6,40 to 7;23,20 exactly. We thus have the system 
and period given at the beginning of this section and the ratios of 
wi+i/Wi given in Table 2.4. However, AXu has become 
AXu = W4 + 0^-- 
l") (Lu4 - OC4) = 1,30° - 5 30° = 1,22;30°. 
slightly in excess of AXuo = 1,20° underlying the symmetric system, 
which, however, was doubtless a rounding (and, for whatever 
reason, far short of the correct maximum). Finally, the limits of At 
follow from adding c = 23:37,52, 
Atm = 53;37,52
τ, 
AtM = 1,46;7,52
τ; 
the former in good agreement with Atmo = 54
τ, the latter about 2
τ 
higher than Atu0 = 1,44
τ owing to the increase of AXu-
There are in fact vestiges of a symmetrical system for Mars. The 
first is in a method of computing daily velocities υ set out in ACT 
81 la. 10. Between i>m = 0;30°/
d in Cancer and υΜ = 0;50°/
d in 
Capricorn, there is a constant difference of 0;3,20°/
d per sign and 
0;0,6,40°/
d per degree. The result is a linear zigzag with its limits 
in the same locations as System A. More interesting are the rules 
for computing the retrograde arc -SX from first station Φ to 
acronychal rising Θ and from Θ to second station Ψ. There are four 
methods, called by Neugebauer (ACT, p. 305f.) R, S, T, U, consist­
ing of constant-difference sequences for -SX in the interval Φ -» Θ, 
divided into the six equal zones of System A. For R and T -δλ is 
constant in each zone, for S linear interpolation is used in the 
second sign of each zone, and for U linear interpolation is used 
throughout to produce a continuous linear zigzag. For S alone it is 
also known that in the interval Θ -» Ψ, 
-δΧ(Θ -> Ψ) = § (-<5λ(Φ -» Θ)), 
and thus for the entire interval Φ -» Ψ, 
-δΧ(Φ -> Ψ) = § (-δΧ{Φ -> Θ)), 
which, for the first sign of each zone, turns out to be an integer. 
For each method, -δΧ for each zone, and the differences A per zone 
and δ per degree, are as follows: 

104 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
Zone. 
1 
2, 6 
3, 5 
4 
Δ per zone 
δ per degree 
R 
7;12· 
6;48 
6;24 
6; 0 
0;24 
— 
S 
7;12° 
6;48 
6;24 
6; 0 
0;24 
0; 0,48 
8(Φ->Ψ) 
18° 
17 
16 
15 
1 
0;2 
T 
7;30° 
7; 0 
6;30 
6; 0 
0;30 
— 
U 
7;30° 
7; 0 
6;30 
6; 0 
0;30 
0; 0,30 
What is notable here is that all four are symmetrical to the 
slowest zone αϊ and fastest zone a.\, with no distinction for the 
unequal w\ in a-i, a^ and 0¾, 0¾. S was certainly taken to be 
compatible with System A as it is used to compute the retrograde 
arc in DCL Texts G-J. Of course, the differences would be very 
small. Since the range for the entire retrograde arc in S is only 3°, 
distinctions based upon the differences in w\ of a^, a& and (%, as, 
would be minimal and difficult to control. So perhaps the 
symmetry of these methods proves nothing at all, especially when 
it is noted that the true greatest and least retrograde arcs of Mars, 
about 20° and 12° respectively, differ by nearly three times the 
greatest difference in S. This also shows that no accurate informa-
tion on the length of retrograde arcs was recovered from the 
numerous measurements of the distances of stations from normal 
stars reported in the Diaries. 
A method of deriving the parameters for Mars from the number 
of phenomena in each zone, proposed by Aaboe (1980), is discussed 
in the Appendix on alternative methods. 
Concerning Mercury, about which the king my lord 
wrote to me: yesterday Issar-sumu-eres had an 
argument with Nabu-ahhe-eriba in the palace. Later, 
at night, they went and all made observations; they 
saw (it) and were satisfied (ARAK 83) 
Mercury: Systems Ai and A2 
The most difficult, and impressive, accomplishment in Baby-
lonian planetary theory, second only to the lunar theory, is for the 
heliacal phenomena of Mercury. In the case of Saturn, Jupiter, 
and Mars, the same systems, with auxiliary rules, were used for all 
phenomena, but for Mercury the four heliacal phenomena, first 
and last visibility in the morning and evening, behave so differ-
ently and, compared to the superior planets, are so irregular and 
asymmetrical, that four entirely different functions were developed 

Mercury: Systems Ai and A2 
105 
with the condition that they have (very nearly) the same period. 
The four functions have been divided into two systems, for first 
and last visibility respectively, each with its own procedure for 
finding the adjacent, following phenomenon. The systems, sum­
marized in Table 2.5, are: 
System A1: 3 zones (ACT 300-05) 
Γ, First visibility in the morning 
Ξ, First visibility in the evening 
System A2: 4 zones (ACT 300a-b) 
Σ, Last visibility in the morning 
Ω, Last visibility in the evening 
The original and adjusted limits of the zones will be explained 
below. System Ai was first described by Kugler, who published 
parts of ACT 301-02 and analyzed first Γ and then Ξ using ACT 
801.1-2 (SSB I, 178-201, II, 577-78). System A2 was analyzed by 
Neugebauer from ACT 300a, the earliest securely dated ephemeris, 
SE 4-22 (-307 to -289), of any planet. There is also a System A 3 
with functions for Ξ and Ω, apparently for a still earlier period, to 
be considered separately. Unlike the other planets, the stationary 
points of Mercury receive no treatment, doubtless because they lie 
so close to Ω and Γ and are often not visible. The 'exact' period, 
found only for Ξ but closely approximated in the other three, with 
its mean synodic arc and time, is as follows: 
/7=25,13 
Z=8,0 
P=3;9,7,30 
Δλ = 1,54; 12,36,38,32,45...° 
Zt = 1,57:43,15,54,7,57...
τ 
C= 3:30,39,15,35,12... = 3:30,39 = 4 
The procedure text ACT 801.1-2 gives c = 3:30,39,4,20, while the 
ephemerides for System Ai use the rounded c = 3:30,39, which is 
compatible with the slightly different periods of all four functions 
for conversions between Δλ and At. There are no procedure texts 
explaining the conversion for System A2, and although no consis­
tent rule can be derived from the two surviving ephemerides, in 
which only integer dates are given, it is clear that c is not used, 
since Δι - Δλ for Σ lies between 0 and 6 and for Ω between 0 and 
10. It is probably significant that the constant applies to the first 
visibilities of Aj and the variable relation to the last visibilities of 
A2. Since it seems odd that Δλ would be known independently of Δί 
for just last visibilities, there was probably another reason for the 
greater flexibility in A2, which appears to be just the other way 
around, that is, an attempt to compute Δί given by observation 

106 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
independently of At = Δλ + c. In our conversions for deriving the 
parameters, we shall use the integer c = 4 for both systems. 
Each system also has its own procedures, called 'sprungweise 
ubergang' by Kugler (SSB I, 198) and 'pushes' by Neugebauer, for 
finding the adjacent phenomenon, that is, in Ai the visible arcs Γ 
-> Σ and Ξ -> Ω, and in A2 the invisible arcs Σ -» Ξ and Ω -> Γ, 
which are analogous to the rules for finding consecutive phenom­
ena for the other planets, although more complex. However, the 
results of using pushes within each system and using Systems Ai 
and A2 independently are not consistent, and Neugebauer (1954, 
77-78) has shown that for Ω the differences in Δλ can amount to 
as much as 10°. Perhaps the more complex rules relating Δί and Δλ 
in A2 bring Δί, and thus the dates of last visibilities, into closer 
agreement with the dates computed from pushes in Ai. In the case 
of System Ai, the auxiliary tables ACT 800a-e give the interval of 
arc δλ and time δι for Γ -» Σ and Ξ -> Ω. Integer values of δλ and 
δι, with δί- δλ equal to 0, 1 or 2, are assigned to the 15th degree of 
each sign (see Table 3.6), between which linear interpolation is 
used. The sum of δί - δλ for both arcs, which should be less than c 
= 4, is 2, 3 or 4. The ephemerides use this method, one in which 
the fractions are dropped from the initial λ, and a rough approxi­
mation in which the integer values of δλ—extracted from ACT 301 
for Γ-> Σ by Kugler—and δί apply to the entire sign without 
interpolation. In the absence of auxiliary tables for System A2, 
Neugebauer has reconstructed a similar procedure from the 
ephemeris ACT 300a for finding δλ and δί for Ω -> Γ, which is 
contained by or contains the retrograde arc, so δλ is usually 
negative, but for Σ -» Ξ only a partial reconstruction is possible. 
The functions for Mercury's phenomena are continuous in that 
they assign Δλ and Δί between phenomena everywhere in the 
zodiac even though there are regions in which an entire morning 
or evening phase is omitted because the planet does not reach 
sufficient elongation from the sun to be visible. In such cases a 
morning or evening appearance, Γ or Ξ, cannot be observed, and 
likewise the following disappearance, Σ or Ω. Nevertheless, in a 
method of calculation that proceeds through successive phenom­
ena, it is necessary to compute the longitude and time of each one 
without omission, even if not visible, in order to proceed to the 
next. Hence in the ephemerides all such omitted appearances are 
computed and said to 'pass by' (dib), the same term used for 
omitted appearances in the Diaries, and the same is true of disap­
pearances, whether found by pushes in System Αχ or independently 
in System A2. ACT 801.1-2 specifies for System Ai that Γ will 'pass 

Mercury: Systems Aj and A2 
107 
by" from T 10° to b 20' and Ξ from Tfl? 30° to ΤΠ. 5°, and the disap­
pearances are said to 'pass by, similarly' without specifying exactly 
where, although they must be at a greater longitude. Using the 
pushes, Neugebauer has estimated that Σ will 'pass by* from T 24° 
to I 5° and Ω from ^ 
18° to TR 30°. What these limits are for 
System A2 is not known, and they are not necessarily the same, 
but we shall assume that they are similar, as appears from ACT 
300a. In our figures for each system, the invisible regions are 
shown by a broken line in the graph of the function. 
For observations from which to find the true synodic times of 
Mercury's phenomena we are particularly fortunate, if that is the 
right word, since not only do the Diaries contain nearly three 
times as many observations of phenomena of Mercury as of Saturn 
and Jupiter, but the collection LBAT 1377 published by Hunger 
(1988) contains more phenomena bounding true synodic times 
than all the surviving Diaries. So much for Mercury's being seldom 
seen and hard to observe. The reports in the Diaries extend from 
-373 to -60 and those in LBAT 1377 from -195 to -179 (SE 116-
132). There are about thirty duplications of phenomena, but only 
three pair bounding synodic periods. In some cases the dates or 
visibility times in us differ, and LBAT 1377 also contains some 
visibility times of last appearance, which are not included in the 
Diaries, both evidence that such collections are not based directly 
upon the Diaries, although surely upon related records, perhaps a 
common source. In all, we have found 146 usable synodic times, 
from 225 observations, 98 from the Diaries and 127 from LBAT 
1377, which contains as many as 14 synodic times in a row from 
15 dated observations, for Ξ, and several runs of 7 synodic times 
from 8 observations. Of course these are not the observations used 
to derive Mercury's parameters, but are representative of observa­
tions over a period of more than three hundred years. We have not 
combined observations from the Diaries and LBAT 1377, which 
give three additional, rather erratic, synodic times and several 
duplications or variants of synodic times from LBAT 1377 alone. 
In extracting synodic times from the observed dates, we have 
taken m = 30
τ, which can exceed a day count by from l
x to 3
τ. The 
synodic times from the observations have been tabulated by 
phenomenon and graphed as solid circles in the figures. Perhaps 
erring on the side of excess, we have used 40 dates marked 'not 
observed' (nu pap), identified as 'n' in the tables, which were 
presumably inferred from nearby observations, and 18 marked 
'passed by' (dib) in the invisible arcs, identified as 'd', since, 
however these were determined, they are every bit as erratic as the 

108 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
observed dates. The observed synodic times for Mercury show a 
greater scatter than for Saturn and Jupiter, which is perhaps to be 
explained by the difficulty of observing it at small elongations from 
the sun, the irregularity of its motion, and the great effect of 
latitude and the inclination of the ecliptic to the horizon on its 
visibility, so that very different synodic arcs and times may occur 
within the same zodiacal sign. We have also computed the synodic 
times from modern theory, for 20 years containing 63 synodic 
periods, -200 to -181 inclusive, and have placed in the figures 13 
years containing 41 synodic periods, -200 to -188 inclusive, which 
are shown as open circles. 
In each figure, we include a preliminary version of the function 
for At that follows from the initial assumptions of the true synodic 
times and lengths of the zones, which are discussed below. It is 
probably significant that these functions track the general contour 
of the observed synodic times considerably better for first appear­
ances, Γ and Ξ, than for last appearances, Σ and Ω. Although 
strictly the computed synodic times of Σ and Ω, shown as open 
squares, do not follow from At = Αλ + 4, and are not well under­
stood, the scatter of the observed synodic times is itself greater for 
Σ and Ω than for Γ and Ξ, and, perhaps as a consequence, the 
inaccuracies of the function are greater than can be explained by 
differences of At - Ak of 0 to 6 for Σ and 0 to 10 for Ω. It appears as 
though last appearances were less carefully observed than first 
appearances, and perhaps the method of inferring true dates from 
observed dates by rising and setting times was also less 
satisfactory. As impressive as the functions are in tracking the 
sequence of synodic times through the zodiac, and considering the 
irregularity of the phenomena they are very impressive, it is 
nevertheless apparent, for Mercury above all, that the functions 
computed in the ephemerides are only an approximation to a 
series of phenomena distributed in a more complex way. Since the 
Scribes had countless recorded dates of phenomena from the 
Diaries for comparison, they must surely have known this. 
Method 
of Analysis 
and 
Derivation: 
'Stepping' 
through 
the 
Function 
For Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, the length of each zone αϊ 
exceeds the synodic arc Ak, and thus directly w\ = Ak < a\, the one 
exception being Mars's AXM, which extends through more than one 
zone, so that it was necessary to find both w\ and LUI+J. In the case 

Mercury: Method of Derivation 
109 
of Mercury, for ten out of the fourteen zones in the four systems 
iUi > «i. which means that AX must extend into a following zone 
and cannot be directly identified with w\, nor can W{ be found 
directly from AX. However, when each of the functions is graphed, 
certain values of AX appear, either for linear stretches or at inflec-
tion points of the graph, which occur where AX first reaches into a 
following zone. These were first noted by Aaboe (1958), and it is 
our assumption that it was integer forms of these values of AX, 
found from At, that were used to derive w\, along with further 
conditions, both observational and algebraic, for specifying the 
length of the zones 0¾. Of course the three necessary conditions of 
System A also hold. For the other planets, we used only the limits 
of AX and At, but for Mercury we must use the values implied by 
the function itself, which always include the limits and either one 
or two additional values. For the phenomena of Mercury are so 
idiosyncratic (that is the right word) that the only way to get at 
what the Scribes observed and used is to extract it from what their 
systems produce—which is not mere circular reasoning—on the 
principle that each system was designed to produce something 
close to the true dates and locations of phenomena. Very simply, 
as we remarked earlier in general, what comes out had to go in. 
What we wish to find are the successive values of w\ implied by 
each AX, which itself follows from At, for this is what we assume 
the Scribes did in deriving the systems. In order to do this, we use 
a technique called 'stepping' through the function, which we do 
one 0¾ and wi at a time. In the few cases where 0¾ > w\, AX may be 
contained in a single zone uninfluenced by following zones, so 
directly u>i = AX, just as for the other planets. If, however, a\ < w\, 
and thus AX extends through two or more zones, our problem is to 
find wt+\/Wi, if necessary rounded to a ratio of small, regular 
numbers, and from that u>i+1, such that w\ and wi+i will produce 
AX. We did this once for Mars, and now we shall do it repeatedly 
for Mercury. There are two cases to consider depending upon where 
AX begins and ends, which are illustrated in Figure 2.9. 
Case 1: AX begins at the beginning of at and ends within orj+i. 
Thus, we consider the effect of wi+i/wi on the part of AX within 
0¾+!, that is, 
AX = W1 + (-7771 - 1] (U)1 - at) = αχ + —777 (W1 - 0¾), 
from which 

110 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
Case 2: AX begins within ai and ends at the end of ai+i- Here we 
initially consider the effect of wi/wi+i 
on the part of AX within a\, 
as though AX ran backward from the end of ai+i to within ai, that 
is, 
Note that, except for the ratio, the unknown ioi+i has dropped out 
of the right side of the equation, while the known w\ remains. It 
follows that 
It goes without saying that these relations would have posed 
no problems to the Scribes. Each can also be applied backwards, 
from AI+I to ai to find wi/wi+\ from a known UJI+I, for which case 
(1) applies if AX begins within ai and ends at the end of aj+i and 
case (2) applies if AX begins at the beginning of aj and ends within 
ai+i. We shall use this only once, as an alternative calculation, 
but it could also be applied frequently. We are, of course, taking 
AX to begin or end wherever it happens to in the ACT function, but 
in deriving the system in the first place, the Scribes had to specify 
in which zones AX would begin or end, and these decisions must 
have been made on the basis of the observational records of the 
approximate distribution in the zodiac of the phenomena from 
which AX and At begin, which also in part determined the length of 
the zones. Under the original assumptions for the lengths of the 
zones as multiples of 1,0° or 1,30°, AX and At used for the deriva-
tions always begin or end at the beginning of a zodiacal sign. 
In order to apply this method, we shall first examine the func-
tion given by the ACT system to extract the values of AX in linear 
stretches and at inflection points of the graph of the function. 
Obviously the Scribes never drew such graphs—how they visualized 
these functions is not a trivial question—but they provide the 
clearest way for us to see the function as a whole. The precise val-
ues of some of these 4A's are merely artifacts of the function, but 
most, in an integer form, provide the synodic arcs, following from 
their implied synodic times, that determine the successive values 
of wi. In the case of Mercury, like Mars, the lengths of the zones 

Mercury: Method of Derivation 
111 
were assumed in advance, but whereas for Mars these were simply 
six equal zones of 1,0°, those for Mercury show a greater diversity 
determined, I assume, by the approximate locations in the zodiac 
of the phenomena from which Δλ and At begin. But the initial 
assumptions for the lengths of the zones are still simple multiples 
of 1,0° or 1,30°, coinciding with integral numbers of zodiacal signs, 
the original limits in Table 2.5, that correspond approximately to 
the distances between the locations of linear stretches or inflection 
points in the graphs of Δλ. In addition, three of the four systems 
show adjustments to the lengths of the zones in order to 
approximate the exact period. 
The reason for these adjustments is that Mercury must also 
maintain the three essential conditions of System A: 
LE^=Z
 = P· 
2.1«i=6,0, 
3 . — = * 
where p/q is a ratio of small, regular numbers. Condition 2 has 
been applied in selecting the length of the zones and condition 3 
in finding the successive values of w\. However, as was also true of 
Mars, in which a\ and u>i were likewise determined independently, 
condition 1 has not yet been fulfilled. Therefore, after the initial 
values of a\ and w\ have been found, condition 1 is applied in a 
series of adjustments, changing 0¾ by not more than 15°, one-half 
a zodiacal sign, or as little as 1°, to the adjusted limits in Table 
2.5, or changing u>t by a smaller amount, in each case maintaining 
conditions 2 and 3, in order to approximate the exact period P = 
3;9,7,30, which is reached only for Ξ while the other systems are 
exceedingly close. 
To begin the procedure of stepping through the function, one 
must have an initial Wi. In all four systems there is a w\ lying 
between 1,46° and 1,48;30°, and in Γ, Ξ, Ω the corresponding a\ > 
wi, so wi = Δλ directly, but in Σ we shall assume a w\ within this 
range, and we shall take these as w\. We have renumbered the 
zones of Ξ from their order in ACT and HAMA so that W\ falls in 
this range. For didactic reasons we shall examine the systems in 
the order in which we succeeded in working them out—although 
we shall not trouble the reader with our failed efforts, nor with 
alternative calculations that produce the same results—in this 
way going from the more straightforward to the more complex 
cases in which the final system depends upon adjustments related 
to the period. For this reason, we begin with what is normally 
taken as the last of the systems, System A2, Ω. 

112 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
[If] Mercury disappears] 
in the west: when it 
appears, it will rain; when it disappears, it will 
rain. (ARAK 274) 
System A2: Ω, Last Visibility in the Evening 
The parameters of Ω are in Table 2.5, the synodic times from 
the Diaries and LBAT 1377 are in Tables 2.6A and B, the graph of 
the ACT function is shown in Figure 2.10A, and in Figure 2.10B 
the true synodic times are shown, from the observational reports 
as solid circles, from modern computation as open circles, and 
from ACT 300a as open squares, with a graph of the function 
following from the initial assumptions of At and a\. The system 
and period are 
v c q 
3,0 
1,0 
1,0 
1,0 
11,24 
2uWi
 
= 1,48:30
 + 2,0:33,20
 + 1,48:30
 + 2,15,37,30 " 
3,37 
= 3:9,7,27,55..., 
and the true synodic arcs at the inflection points, 
Al1 = Al1' = 1,48:30°, Al2 = Al2' = 1,54:30°, Al3 = Al3' = 2,0:30°. 
The small dip, of 0:36,40°, at the beginning of a2 is an artifact of 
the function—Al extends far into a3, but has not yet reached cn4— 
and another artifact, too small to illustrate, is that Al3 
begins 
0;3,20° before «3. These are of no consequence for the derivation or 
application of the system. 
Letting c = 3; 30, from At = Al + c, the implied synodic times are 
Atx = Atm = 1,52*. 
At2 = Δίμ= 1,58\ 
At3 = AtM = 2,4*. 
Note that the differences are exactly 6
τ, and we have minimum, 
mean, and maximum synodic times and arcs, which is hardly 
obvious from the resulting values of w\\ something similar t u r n s 
u p in the initial assumption of At for Σ. For whatever reason, the 
observed values of At for Ω show the greatest scatter of any of the 
four phenomena, although Σ is not much better, as though last 
appearances were not particularly well observed. Thus, something 
as simple as a minimum, mean and maximum At with equal 
differences could be a way of treating a considerable scatter with 
less distinct synodic times than for the first appearances Γ and Ξ. 
The agreement of the function for At with modern computation, 
however, is much better, and may thus better represent the obser-

Mercury: System A1, Ω 
113 
vations upon which the function was based. It is of interest that 
the first and second linear stretches in both figures are actually 
primary and secondary minima with notable dips and the third a 
maximum with a notable rise, of which the function for Δλ in 
2.1OA takes no account. However, At from ACT 300a, shown by the 
open squares, which differ from Δλ by from 0 to 10, appears to 
follow the dips and rises as though an attempt, not all that 
successful, was made to compute the observed At more accurately 
than by the addition of a constant to Δλ. Thus, it appears that the 
variable relation of At to Δλ in System A2, at least for Ω, was an 
attempt to correct the computation of At in accordance with 
observation while leaving Δλ unaltered, as there was no way of 
observing it. 
For the derivation of parameters we assume that At was taken 
with some adjustment or simplification, and from Δλ = At- 4, 
Al1 = Αλγ = 1,48°, 
Ah1 = Ah1' = 1,54°, 
Al3 = Δλχ = 2,0°, 
carrying over the constant difference, now of 6°. It appears to be 
assumed in advance that there are four zones divided as 
αϊ = 3,0°, 
α2.3,4 = 1.0°. 
The reason for selecting these divisions seems to be that they 
produce nearly equal stretches of constant All < Δλ1 < ^A3 with 
nearly equal transitions between them, all about 1,0°, which I 
assume was more or less given by the observational records of the 
distribution of At in the zodiac. Such a distribution of cc\ can 
indeed do this, provided that W\ < W1 < w$ and W3 = Wi, both of 
which conditions turn out to be fulfilled. It is all very ingenious 
and elegantly simple. For this system alone all zones begin at the 
beginning of zodiacal signs with αϊ at O 0°, and there are no 
adjustments to the length of the zones. 
Now, since αϊ = 3,0° > AIi = 1.48°, we may let u>i = All = 1,48°. 
And taking Al 2 to begin within αϊ and end at the end of a 2, with 
wi = 1,48° and Al2 = 1,54°, we find from (2), 
ut
= 1,0+1,48-1,54 = Ψ =
 1 : 6·
4 0· 
^ = 2,0°. 
Next, taking Al2' to begin at the beginning of a 2 and end within 
a3, with W1 = 2,0° and Al2' = 1,54°, from (1), 
IU3 
1,54-1,0 
9 
_ C/1 
W1= 2,0-1,0 =Ϊ0
 = 0 : 5 4 · 
u* =1.48. 

114 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
rhen, letting AX3 begin at the beginning of 0:3 and end within (ac-
tually at the end of) a4, with w3 = 1,48° and /U3 = 2,0°, from (1), 
Finally, to show that the function can return consistently to its 
beginning, letting AX$ begin at the beginning of a4 and end within 
a\, with W4 = 2,15° and AXy = 2,0°, from (1), 
Thus, by the assumption of minimum, mean, and maximum 
values of At and thus AX, we have the system and period 
Here again the result is itself interesting, for as with the symmet-
rical system for Mars, we have reached a very short period, in this 
case the shortest useful period for Mercury, of 19 synodic cycles in 
6 years + -10 days. Since the three required values of At and thus 
of AX could likewise be found within a short period—perhaps not 
of 6 years, but surely of 13 or 20 years—we see that here too short 
periods of observation suffice to establish something close to the 
ACT system, which now requires an adjustment for the period. 
Now, the exact period is taken to be 3;9,7,30, and the six-year 
period gives 3; 10, in excess by 0;52,30. There are different ways of 
making the adjustment, and in the other systems for Mercury we 
shall see changes in 05. But here, as ai is in every case 1,0° or 3,0°, 
the adjustment could only have been made in u>i, as for Mars. 
Since the period is to be reduced, 
must be increased, and so, 
presumably by trial, if wi is raised by 0;30° from 1,48° to 1,48;30°, 
and w2, W3, W4 recomputed from the ratios of wi+i/wi just found, 
we shall have 
which will hardly change the computed AX and At but are exactly 
the values of the ACT system. And the resulting period, P = n/Z = 
11,24/3,37 = 3:9,7,27,55..., is close enough to 3:9,7,30 to serve for 
all practical purposes. Thus, the slightly different period for Q is 
not an independent parameter, but as close an approximation to 
3;9,7,30 as could reasonably be reached from the values of ai and 

Mercury: System A2, Ω 
115 
w\ derived from the observed At and computed AX. 
It should be noted that had we begun by finding AX from AX = 
At - 3;30, we would directly reach the final values of the function, 
AXi = 1,48:30', AX2 = 1,54;30\ AX3 = 2,0:30°, which should be no 
surprise since we started with these values, and then, by the same 
steps just used for the integer values of AX and xv\, could directly 
reach the final values of Wi. While I first worked out the system in 
this way, I believe it more likely that it was originally done with 
integers followed by an adjustment to the period, since this is 
more consistent with the other systems. 
Mercury [became vilsible in the west in Aries; it is good 
for the king my lord, [bad for the Westland], The king 
of the Westland will fall in battle. [The troops of the 
king] my lord who are in Egypt will conquer [...]. (ARAK 
505) 
System Ai: Ξ, First Visibility in the Evening 
The parameters of Ξ are in Table 2.5, the synodic times from 
the Diaries and LBAT 1377 in Tables 2.7A and B, the function is 
graphed in Figure 2.1IA, and the observed and computed synodic 
times are shown with a graph of the function from the initial as­
sumptions of At and a\ in Figure 2.1 IB. The system and period are 
^ a 1 
2,14 
1,56 
1,50 
25,13 
. . . 
Σ ϊ ^
= Μ 6 ί 4 0
 + ΐ36
 
+ 2^δ
 
= "8^"
 
= 3 : 9 ·
7 ·
3 0 
(
e x a c tW' 
and the true synodic arcs at the inflection points, 
AX1 = AXY = 1,46:40°, 
AX2 = AX2' = 1,36°, 
AX3 = 2,20°, 
AX3' = 2,23:20°. 
The distinction of AX3 and AX3' is again an artifact of the function, 
and it appears that the derivation began with a yet higher value. 
Let us assume that from observational records of true dates, 
evidently with some rounding, 
At1 = 1,50
τ, 
At2 = 1,40
τ, 
At3 = 2,30
τ, 
and here we note that, unlike Ω, the graph of the preliminary 
function in Figure 2.11B follows the observed values of At quite 
closely, while the observed values have sufficient scatter to show 
that they are indeed based upon observations. The agreement with 
the modern computation is also excellent. It happens that, for 

1
1
6
P
a
r
t 
2. Synodic Arc and Time 
whatever reason, 
is the most accurate of the four functions and 
is based upon the most accurate observations. Hence, from 
- 4, we find for the derivation, 
Let the zodiac initially be divided into three equal zones, 0:1,2,3 = 
2,0°, corresponding roughly to the distances between the locations 
of 
and 
in the figure. 
To begin, since 
and 
we may estimate 
of which the former will be adjusted. To find W3, taking 
to 
begin within 
and end at the end of 0:3, with w2 = 1,36° and 
= 2,26°, from (2), 
This is the only ratio among the principal systems that is not as 
(n ± 1 )/n, and it is as (n + 2)/n. Then to adjust w 1, with W3 = 2,40° 
and AX3 = 2,26°, from (1), 
It follows that w2/wi = 1,36°/1,46:40° = 9/10. 
We have now reached the final values of wi with the system 
and period 
a short, although none-too-accurate, period of 25 synodic cycles ir 
8 years - -26 days, that falls short of 3:9,7,30 by 0; 1,37,30. Coulc 
this have been adjusted to the values of a\ in the final system? II 
seems a lot to ask, especially because it would seem more natura 
to adjust W[ and leave the equal zones alone. However, reducing 
w 1 at intervals of 0;10° and recalculating w2 and W3 from the 
ratios just found still leaves an error in the period of about 0;0,9 
for Wi = 1,45:40°, while the greatest error for any other system, F 
is less than 0;0,0,9. Hence, instead of reducing u>i, we increase th« 
period by increasing a\ by 15°, one-half a zodiacal sign, a 'step' ir 
later Greek astronomy, which we take from a2 and a3, nov 
dividing the zodiac as 

Mercuru: System Ai, E 
117 
Were these taken as the initial values of ai, exactly the same 
values of u>i could be derived, but I think it far more likely that the 
initial values were all 2,0° and that these are adjusted. A shift of 
15° to adjust the period is also made for T. The system and period 
are now 
which falls short of 3;9,7,30 by 0;0,3,45. Shifting 1° from ai to a2, 
presumably by trial, gives the final system and the exact period 
3;9,7,30, in fact, the only system for Mercury to reach the exact 
period. A consequence of the reduction of a3 is to reduce AX3 from 
2,24° to 2,20° and . 
from 2;26,40° to 2,23;20°, which will also 
reduce At3 accordingly by 3X or 4X, somewhat greater than the 
increase of AXM and AtM for Mars by 2;30° and 2;30T as a conse-
quence of adjusting the period. And although the locations of 
computed values of AX and At are shifted by as much as 15°, the 
specific values at each location differ little. 
Mercury [became visible] in the east; its period will not 
pass; its [...] is made manifest. Let [the king] my lord 
be happy. (It means) [well-being] for the king, the son 
of the king, [and] his wives. (ARAK 381) 
System Aj; r , First Visibility in the Morning 
The parameters of r are in Table 2.5, the synodic times from 
the Diaries and LBAT 1377 in Tables 2.8A and B, the graph of the 
ACT function is shown in Figure 2.12A, and the observed synodic 
times are graphed in Figure 2.12B. The system and period are 
and the true synodic arcs at the inflection points, 
Because w2 is so much greater than w3, and a3 is so short, there 
is a large difference between AX3, which begins in a2 and ends at 

118 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
the end of a3, and AXy, which begins at the beginning of a3 and 
ends in a\. Curiously, AX3 occurs at the beginning of the region of 
invisibility and AX3- at the end. Either AX3 or AX3' is an artifact of 
the function, and either may be used for the derivation, although 
with AX$ it is necessary to work backwards from u>i to W3, which 
may seem an odd way of proceeding. 
Assume that from observational records of true dates the 
synodic times are 
The observed synodic times in Figure 2.12B are on the whole 
higher than the graph of the function derived from these values of 
At and at, but the function follows the general contour of the 
observed values almost as well as in Figure 2.1 IB for E. Note that 
At shows a continuous decline from At2 to Aty, which suggests 
that A A3 is the artifact of the computed function. The agreement 
with modern computation is fairly good as far as it goes, but the 
invisible zone in Aries and Taurus also makes it impossible to find 
At for synodic arcs that begin in Sagittarius and Capricorn and 
end in Aries and Taurus. The corresponding synodic arcs, from AX 
= At - 4, are 
For the original length of the zones, we assume 
which are close to the distances between 
and AX3' in the 
figure. 
Since 
we let 
and t a k i n g t o 
begin within a\ and end at the end of 
with Wi = 1,46° 
= 
2,20°, and a2 = 2,0°, from (2), 
Then, letting 
begin within a2 and end at the end of a3, with 
and 
again from (2), 

Mercury: System Ai,r 
119 
Hence W1/W3 = 9/8. It follows that 
is given by 
and with w3 = 1,34; 13,20° and 
= 1,38;30°, we may confirm 
from (1) that 
Of course this step is circular, but does show the consistency of 
the system. If we wish to use 4A3' = 1,38° as an initial value, we 
may work backwards from uji to u>3, that is, since AX3' begins at 
the beginning of <23 and ends within a\, with 101 = 1,46° and AX3' = 
1,38°, from (2), 
I do not know how likely this last, backward, step is, but evidently 
it can be done, and it also seems perfectly reasonable to begin with 
the one w\ < ai and work in both directions. 
We now have the final values of W{, but with the period, 
which exceeds 3;9,7,30 by the large amount of 0; 1,54,45. The first 
change would appear to be a shift of 15°, one-half a zodiacal sign, 
as we also did for E, from a\ to a2 to give 
and the period is now too small by 0;0,12,36. Again, it would be 
possible to derive the same values of wi with these as the initial 
values of a\, but I think that unlikely. Shifting 1° from a2 to 
will give the final system and period P = J7/Z = 44,33/14,8 = 
3:9,7,38,29..., with an error of +0;0,0,8,29, which, although it is 
the largest of any of the systems, was evidently considered satis-
factory. These changes can produce differences of no mores than 1° 
and l xin computing AX and At, although, as for E, the locations of 
specific values can be shifted by as much as 15°. 

120 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
System A2: Z, Last Visibility in the Morning 
The parameters of Z are in Table 2.5, the synodic times from 
the Diaries and LBAT 1377 in Tables 2.9A and B, the function is 
graphed in Figure 2.13A, and the observed and computed synodic 
times are shown with a graph of the function from the initial as-
sumptions of At and a\ in Figure 2.13B. The system and period are 
and the true synodic arcs at the inflection points, 
Unlike the four-zone system for CI, which had three significant 
values of AX, £ has four, that is, there are two nearly equal max-
ima for the synodic arc of Mercury's evening appearance given by 
and 
Let us assume that from observational records of 
true dates 
which agree fairly well with the contour of the observed values of 
At in Figure 2.13B except for one following an observation in 
Aquarius (-191 XII 19) marked 'not observed' that is off the graph 
of the function by 20T and two rather low values in Libra, the 
lowest of which is missing part of the terminating date and should 
probably be higher. Note that, as for Q, we have a minimum, 
mean, and maximum At with equal differences, that is, At\ is a 
mean between Ati and 4t3, with differences of ±12x, while for Q At^ 
was a mean between At$ and At\, with differences of ±6T. The 
difference of 4X between At% and At4, only slightly supported by the 
surviving observational reports, is essential to the final values of 
the system. In fact, the difference is far too small, for the modern 
computation, with which the agreement is in general good, shows 
that the primary maximum At2 should be 2,12T and the secondary 
maximum Abt 1,58T, so the correct difference is not 4T but 14T. 
There are but 19 restorable lines of I in ACT 300a, giving 18 values 
of At, shown as open squares in 2.13B, with At-AX 
extending 
from 0 to 6. Unlike Q, they seem to bear no relation to the modern 
computation, so that if they are intended as empirically corrected 

Mercury: System A2, Z 
121 
At, the corrections are mostly in the wrong direction. For our 
derivation, the synodic arcs, taken as 
are 
We shall initially assume four equal zones 
which 
are close to the final distribution and correspond approximately to 
the distances between the locations of 
in both figures. 
Now, £ is the only system for wmcn no AT > u>[, so no LUI 
appears directly as AX, and we must therefore assume some initial 
value. And since all the other systems have one 
lying 
between 1,46° and 1,48;30°, we shall initially assume for 
that w\ 
= 1,48°, just as we originally took for w\ of 
although there 
directly from AX. Next, since 
is taken to begin within a\ and 
end at the end of a2, with 
= 1,48° and 
from (2), 
And t a k i n g t o begin in a2 and end at the end of 0:3, with w2 = 
2,9;36° and 
= 1,40°, we find from (2), 
Letting 
begin in a3 and end at the end of a4, with 0)3 = 
1,37:12° and 
= 2,0°, from (2) 
Finally, to return to iuj, t a k i n g t o begin in 0:4 and end at the 
end of ai, with w4 = 2,9;36° and 
= 1,52°, from (2), 
What remains appear to be three small adjustments. We now 
have the system 

122 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
the period of which, 85 synodic cycles in 27 years — 1 2 days, is 
short by 0;0,14,10. Since the period must be increased, reduce w3 
from 1,37;12° to 1;37° and recompute the other u>i by the ratios 
just found. The result is 
which is now too long by 0;0,9,12, but note that these are the final 
values of w\. To reduce the period, shift 1° between two zones, as 
was done for E and r, in this case from c*3 to 
to give 
which is in fact the final period. But the system also shifts 5° from 
a4 to ai, the two zones with equal wu which therefore cannot 
affect the period. Why? The reason appears to be the difference of 
4° between AX2 and 
Since this is the only effect of shifting 5° 
from a4 to a<i, the only plausible reason is to raise 
and lower 
AX4 in keeping with a difference, presumably of 4° in 
following 
from 4X in At, although, as noted, the correct difference of the 
primary and secondary maxima is 14^ That a matter of 4° and 4T 
should be of concern, when a similar difference was overlooked or 
actually introduced in the adjustment of the zones for S may seem 
strange, but I can see no other motivation for the change. 
Conclusion to the Analysis of Systems Ai and. A2 
'Nulle planete n'a demande aux astronomes plus de soins et de 
peines que Mercure, et ne leur a donne en recompense tant 
d'inquietudes, tant de contrarietes.' (Leverrier, quoted by Kugler, 
SSB I, 178.) The reader who has passed through, or 'passed by', the 
calculations for Mercuiy may be pleased to know that there are but 
five steps to the procedure for deriving its parameters: 
1. Selection of the maximum, minimum, and either one or 
two additional, true synodic times At from the observa-
tional records of the dates of phenomena. 
2. Computation of the true svnodic arcs AX from the true 
synodic times 
where c = 4. 

Mercury: Conclusion to Systems Aj andA2 
123 
3. Determination of the lengths and locations of the zones 
cci to the nearest 1,0° or 1,30°, based upon observational 
records of the locations of phenomena by zodiacal sign. 
4. Derivation of the ratios Wi+i/wi and the successive values 
of u»i through applying case 1 or case 2 as required to the 
true synodic arcs AX and the zones 0¾. 
5. Adjustment of 0¾, for Γ, Ξ, Σ, and of u>i, for Σ, Ω, while 
maintaining the ratios of w\+\/u)i, to adjust the period as 
closely as practical to P= Σ(αι/ιχ>ι) = 3;9,7,30. 
When set out in this way, the procedure may not seem too com­
plex, and in any case I can see no simpler or more direct way of 
reaching the final parameters. There is no direct algebraic solution 
as for the two-zone systems of Saturn and Jupiter, or even the 
four-zone systems of Jupiter, without making assumptions that 
amount almost to the solution—I have tried—nor a symmetrical 
system of equal zones between a maximum and minimum, with an 
adjustment for the period, as for Mars. Each initial At and 0¾ must 
be found from observational records of the dates and locations of 
the phenomena, each AX found from At, and each w\ then found 
from AX and αχ, which makes Mercury the most empirical, the 
most directly dependent upon observation, of all the planets for 
the derivation of its parameters, although it is possible that the 
synodic times of Venus are even more directly empirical. 
Of the five steps, I regard 3-5 as more secure, but 1 and 2 as 
less secure. Step 3, a partitioning of the zodiac into 2, 3, 4 or 6 
zodiacal signs, multiples of 1,0° or 1,30°, is entirely in keeping with 
the observational records, specifying only the zodiacal sign of 
phenomena. Table 2.5 shows for comparison the original zones, 
with their limits coinciding with zodiacal signs, and the adjusted 
zones, with 0¾ altered and the limits therefore moved, in which, 
however, Ω is not adjusted at all. Step 4, the most complex, is, as 
far as I can tell, the most direct way to derive U>I+I/LUI and w\ from 
AX and 0¾; it must be done one step at a time, there is no simpler 
method. If anything, it is too simple and direct, for our own deriva-
tions may well be only a small part, the final part, of a far longer 
procedure involving the trial and adjustment of different values of 
AX. The various adjustments in step 5, which are not as numerous 
as they may seem, make sense of the peculiar length of the zones, 
differing from 2, 3, 4 or 6 zodiacal signs by ±1°, or by 5°, 10° or 15° 
± 1°, and also show why the exact period P = 3;9,7,30 is only 
closely approached in three of the four systems by variants, which 
are therefore exceedingly good approximations rather than inde-

124 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
pendent, inconsistent periods. Although not likely, it is possible 
that the displacements of 15° in Ξ and Γ were part of the original 
division, since the same values of u>i can still be derived, but I can 
see no other purpose in shifting Γ in Ξ, Γ, and Σ than correcting 
the period. (Admittedly, for Σ the shift of 5° from 0¾ to 0¾ is not an 
adjustment to the period, but to Δλ% and Αλ$.) 
Step 2, the derivation of Δλ from the observational record of At 
by AX = At - c where c = 4, is less certain, at least for System A2, by 
which Σ and Ω are computed. For in System A2 At - Δλ is variable, 
for Σ from 0 to 6 and for Ω from 0 to from 10, so far as the relation 
is known from ACT 300a. It appears, however, that the conversion 
from Δλ to Δ t in System A2 is an empirical correction of the 
computed At = Δλ+ c based upon the observed At in different parts 
of the zodiac that does not affect Δλ and has no role in the deriva­
tion of parameters. For it is hard to believe that, of all planetary 
phenomena, for Mercury's last visibilities alone would Δλ be 
known independently of At. In fact, there should be a more com­
plex relation of synodic time and arc in both systems, for At- Δλ = 
4 is not a satisfactory conversion, as can be seen in Table 1.7. 
However, there was no way for the Scribes to know Δλ indepen­
dently of At for any of Mercury's phenomena, least of all last 
visibilities. Neither by observations specifying beginnings and ends 
of zodiacal signs nor by any other kind of observation, a subject 
taken up in the Appendix, could Δλ be found with sufficient 
precision. Hence, there was no alternative to the derivation of Δλ 
from At, and if this was not done by subtracting c = 4 for System 
A2, it was done by something very close. 
The most interesting questions concerns step 1, the selection 
of the required values of At from the observed true synodic times. 
Consider first only the observations, deferring for the moment the 
computation by modern theory. What we have seen in our figures 
is a scattering of observed At that follows the contour of the graph 
of the function closely for Ξ, rather high for Γ, less well for Σ, 
rather badly for Ω. Some of the values, those far off the graph, are 
clearly erroneous, and this would have been evident to the Scribes 
from comparing lists of A t by zodiacal sign. But many are not 
obviously in error, reflecting the variation of At possible within a 
single sign or errors of 2 or 3 days in the dates of the observations, 
which the Scribes would have no reason to question, for to do so 
would eliminate almost all their observations as erroneous. What 
then were the criteria for selection? Consider the values of At used 
for each phenomenon: 

Mercury: Conclusion to Systems Ai and A2 
125 
Phen 
Γ 
Ξ 
Σ 
Ω 
At1 
1,50
τ 
1,50 
1,56 
1,52 
At2 
2,24
τ 
1,40 
2. 8 
1,58 
At3 
1,54
τ (1,42T 
2,30 
1,44 
2, 4 
At4 
2, 4
τ 
Of course these are from our own derivations and are not neces­
sarily what the Scribes used, although if their method was the 
same, their values could not differ by much, as the functions 
reproduce very closely Δλ and At used for their derivation. For the 
functions less clearly defined by observation, the last appearances 
Σ and Ω, the selected values of At are schematic: minimum, mean, 
and maximum, with differences respectively of 12
x and 6
X, and one 
additional value for Σ, a secondary maximum. For the functions 
more clearly defined by observation, the first appearances Γ and Ξ, 
perhaps reflecting more careful observation of first appearances, 
the selected values of At and the resulting functions are character­
istic of the observations, although the observations are high for Γ 
and the selected At rounded for Ξ. These would seem to be the 
Scribes' own criteria for selection, schematic for Σ and Ω, more 
precise for Γ and Ξ, assuming that the preserved observations are 
representative of those actually used. Even so, the scatter of 
observed At after the elimination of outliers still offers a range of, 
say, ±4
X for each selected value, and here is where trial and 
adjustment in carrying out step 4 with different values of Δλ, 
perhaps with the period as criterion, may have determined At and 
Δλ that underlie the parameters as finally derived. 
But since only three or four values were selected from the 
entire range and scatter of At, there is no way the resulting 
function can reproduce all, or even most, of the observations. This 
the Scribes must also have known, since they could make far more 
extensive comparisons than we can of the synodic times taken 
from observation and computed with the ephemerides. We earlier 
invoked the principle that each system was designed to produce 
something close to the true dates and locations of the observed 
phenomena, that "what comes out had to go in.' The systems most 
certainly do this, but only selectively for those synodic arcs and 
times used to derive the parameters or that happen to fall exactly 
on the function, which are few, and I have no doubt that the 
Scribes understood this also. For the systems can only be regarded 
as approximations to a great number of observations that were 
believed, for a good reason, to be accurate and reliable. What we 
said earlier in general is particularly applicable to Mercury, 

126 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
namely, that although we hold synodic time and arc to be a strict 
function of longitude, that is, uniquely determined by longitude so 
that only one value for each longitude can be right and all others 
wrong, this was probably not the way the Scribes understood their 
own planetary theory, in which the functional dependence upon 
longitude, not strictly defined and in fact variable in System B, 
was itself an approximation. The observations in the Diaries were 
the only check on the accuracy of the ephemerides; if the 
computed and observed synodic times disagree by a few days, as 
almost always happens, the reason must be, not that most of the 
observations are faulty, but that the computed synodic times and 
arcs, which by the methods of System A are indeed uniquely 
determined by longitude, are only an approximation to the more 
complex behavior of the phenomena. 
The same is true if we compare the ancient synodic arcs and 
times, both observed and computed, with modern computation as 
representative of observation. For if modern computations are 
plotted along with the ancient observations, as we have done in 
the graphs of the functions for 13 years of 41 synodic periods, the 
contour is much the same as the synodic times taken from dates 
of observed phenomena, although the large errors are eliminated. 
For Ξ and Γ the agreement between the observations and modern 
computation is quite good, although the observations also contain 
many errors. For Ω and Σ the number of observations is too small, 
and the errors too large, to detect much of a pattern, but a 
comparison of the filled and open circles in the graphs shows that 
the general trend is similar, which a larger number of observations 
would perhaps make more obvious. And if we compare the Baby­
lonian functions with modern computation, the agreement ranges 
from excellent, for Ξ, to good, for Γ—although the modern compu­
tation is not complete for the invisible zones—and also quite good 
for Ω and Σ, although the two distinct minima of Ω appear as 
linear stretches of constant At and the two maxima of Σ are too 
close together. Thus, here too the functions appear, just as when 
compared to the synodic times from the ancient observations, as 
approximations to more complex phenomena. Hence it is not 
specifically the errors in the observations that determine the 
Babylonian parameters and functions, or account for their limita­
tions as approximations to the true phenomena, for a selection of 
At from modern computations according to the criteria used by the 
Scribes would give similar parameters and consequently similar 
functions. As remarked earlier of all the planets, but especially of 
Mercury, it is simply not possible to derive the parameters of the 

Mercury: Conclusion to Systems Ai and. A2 
127 
ephemerides from the heliacal phenomena according to 'correct' 
modem calculation without adjusting At and Δλ to something close to 
the values computed from the ephemerides. Here adjustment means 
principally selection. 
May I just say in conclusion that, although Mercury's systems 
have their inconsistencies, some to be taken up in Part 3, and A2 
is decidedly inferior to Ai in reproducing the visibility phases 
according to modern computation, I wonder whether both systems 
could actually be the work of a single hand. If so, he was one of 
the most ingenious applied mathematicians of antiquity, and after 
his considerable pains and troubles, he would have agreed with 
Leverrier completely. 
System A3: Ω, Last Visibility in the Evening 
System A3, which differs notably from Ai and A2, is known only 
from ACT 816 and a list of longitudes of Ω published in Aaboe et 
al. (1991) as Text M, a tour de force of restoration from four 
fragments, none adjacent or containing a complete longitude; both 
sources are discussed in HAMA (469ff.). ACT 816 describes related 
systems for one and three synodic arcs and for 20 years containing 
63 synodic arcs, all of which are apparent in Text M, which is 
either dated to regnal years or a template of undated longitudes in 
three columns: read across the interval is one synodic arc, read 
down three synodic arcs, and the lines are numbered from 1 to 17, 
three further numbers, perhaps 18, 19, 20, are broken off, and 
then begin again with 1. Table 2. IOA gives the first six lines of the 
text. ACT 816 also describes a system for Ξ for three synodic arcs 
and for 20 years, to be considered below, for which no computed 
example is known, and contains obscure references to Γ and the 
synodic arc between stations as using the same system as Ω. In 
the systems for Ω for one and three synodic arcs, which we call 
A3(d and A30), there is an inconsistency in the length of the 
zones, and the interval for 63 synodic arcs, A3(63), is related to 
A3(3) rather than A3(i), but we shall first consider them as though 
all three were consistent. 
Before examining the individual systems, we consider the rela­
tion between systems for one and three synodic arcs and for 20 
years containing 63 synodic arcs. Suppose a system for one syn­
odic arc with the period P(u = /7(i)/Z(i); then, observing the correct 
signs of P and Z, periods for three synodic arcs Ppj and 63 synodic 
arcs P(63) are related to P(i) and to each other by 

128 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
Since the systems of 3 and 63 synodic arcs each give deficits from 
6,0°, both 2(3) and Ppj, Z[63) and P(63). are negative. The ratios be-
tween the periods, which are used for the conversion of wi between 
the systems, can be expressed P m/P n = Z^/Zm, where 17 has the 
same numerical value for each period. In terms of single periods, 
the ratios are 
and their reciprocals. For example, using the ACT period, 
System A3(I) for one synodic period is shown in Figure 2.14A in 
which, from comparing its range and contour with Figures 2.10-
2.13, it is evident that the function can only be for Q. System 
A3(3), shown in Figure 2.14B—for the moment ignore the scale for 
At and the small circles—gives the deficit of three synodic arcs 
from 6,0°, and thus runs through the zodiac in the negative sense 
in the order 
The parameters are given in Table 
2.10B, in whicn we do not consider the discrepancy for the zones 
of A3(3), shown by the broken lines in Figure 2.14B. The reason for 
the peculiar ratios wi+i/wi, which for A3(3) are applied in the neg-
ative sense wn/iui, will be taken up in explaining the derivation 
of the systems. From 
the periods and, from 
(2a), the ratios of the periods are 

Mercuru: Sustem 
129 
rhe synodic arcs of 
are 
\side from wi, there is no plausible way of deriving ix>i from these 
values of AX, and we shall see that U»KIJ is derived indirectly from 
A(3) by 
Were 
consistent, one would expect, from (lc), the period 
ffld, from (2bc), the ratios of the period 
rhus, from 
we should have 
iowever, these are not the values in either ACT 816 or in Text M, 
md to understand why, we must investigate the discrepancy in the 
tones of A3(D and A30). The difference is small, shifting the limit 
Detween 
n A3(3), as shown by the broken line in Figure 2.14B, but it has a 
lotable effect, for we now have for the periods of A30) and A3(63) 
md their ratio 
rhese values, as we shall see, axe related to Mercury's 46-year goal-
rear period. From 
we find 
vhich are exactly the differences of 21 lines, 63 synodic arcs, in 
rext M, while ACT 816 gives 

130 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
(with Neugebauer's emendation of 32 to 42 in 102)- These appear to 
have been rounded from 
which gives 
Hence, the residual arcs of A3(63) in both Text M and ACT 816 are 
consistent with the zones of A30) rather than of A3(I), and are 
further evidence that these zones are not an error. 
We have seen that both A 3 ( D and A3(63) may be derived from 
A3(3). Thus, we now consider the origin of A3(3), which turns out to 
be simple enough but hardly satisfactory as a representation of 
three synodic periods of 
From P(3) computed above from the ACT 
period, we have for three synodic periods the meanarc 
as a 
deficit from 6,0°, the mean t i m e a s a deficit from 
and their 
difference c, 
The 46-year period gives the same results to minutes so that it too 
could be the basis of what follows. The rounding 
is harsh, 
but explains the selected values of uJip), for if we subtract 10 from 
the mean At ~ -6;50T, we 
find 
, which is nearly the 
same as u>i(3) = -16;52,30°. Hence, this value, which holds for fully 
4,0° of the zodiac, is simply a small adjustment of AX\ derived from 
the mean At so that wi-i/w{ will be regular and terminate, 
although compared with all other systems the ratios for A3 are 
unusual. The other values of At, in principle derived from observa-
tional records are, At2 = -10T and At3 = -6T, from which, by sub-
tracting c = +10, we have w2(3) = -20° and ^3(3) = -16°. The values 
of Wi in A3(D and A3(63) were then derived from those in A3(3) by 
the ratios of the periods, as explained above, and have no inde-
pendent empirical foundation. However, as shown by the scale for 
At in Figure 2.14B, System A3(3) is very crude indeed. As before, the 
solid circles show the synodic periods derived from the Diaries and 
LBAT 1377, in this case the deficits of three synodic periods from 
6,0T, and the open circles the deficits according to modern compu-

Mercury: System 
A3, 
E 
131 
tation. The surviving ancient observational values are so erroneous 
as to suggest nothing at all—and I have eliminated a few so erro-
neous as to be off the graph—and the modern computation shows 
a fine structure in the deficit of three synodic periods not even 
hinted at by System A30), which must therefore be regarded as the 
crudest approximation of all the systems for Mercury. In fact, 
basing parameters on the deficit of three synodic periods from 6,0T 
is far too precarious since errors of even two days in the dates of 
the observations produce fatal errors in the deficits within the 
small range of about ten days, while for single synodic periods the 
range of more than thirty days makes such errors harmless. 
There remains the determination of the zones 
Here we can 
only guess. Suppose that originally 1 
Taking the ACT period as correct, 
but with the values of 
and wi just given 
an error of -0; 14,47. Shifting 20° from as to a2, will give the zones 
of System A3(u and the period P(3) = (6.13/-18) = -20;43,20, very 
close to the ACT period -20;43,33..., which is why P(u = 
3:9,7,36,20... is close to the ACT 3;9,7,30. So far, so good. But 
what explains the further shift of 0;37,30° from 03 to 02, which 
impairs the period, complicates the computation of longitudes, 
and introduces the inconsistency between A3(i) and A30)? Curi-
ously, it appears to be an adjustment to bring P(3) and P(63)/P(3) 
close to Mercury's 46-year goal-year period, in which, 
Thus, 
of A30) is quite close tc 
for the 46-
year period, and the ratio 
used earlier for finding 
">l(63) in ACT 816, is exactly that of the 46-year period, to which 
the value implicit in Text M is very close. Neugebauer (ACT, p. 428) 
had already noted that, in effect, u>i(63) could be computed from 
P(i) of the 46-year period, and it is also notable that the only 
statement of P found in a procedure text, possibly with an error, is 
that of Mercury's 46-year period in ACT 800 (from Uruk, ACT 816 is 
from Babylon). Hence, in System A3, we have the curious inconsis-
tency that P(i) is close to the ACT period, while P(3) and P ( 6 3 ) / P ( 3 ) 

132 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
are adjusted by shifting the limit of two zones to agree with the 
46-year goal-year period. What we see is thus similar to the shift 
of the limits of zones to fit the period in Ξ, Γ, and Σ of Systems Ai 
and A2. although here the shift is minute, just over half a degree. 
One may wonder how and why this came about—of course it has 
no empirical basis—but it is certain that the shift is not an error 
since it is independently confirmed by ACT 816 and Text M. 
Finally, a word on the dating of the phenomena in Text M. 
Aaboe etcd. (1991) have dated these to 41 Artaxerxes I to 2 Artax-
erxes II (-423 to -401), interpreting the numbers 1 to 11 in column 
2 and 11 to 17 in column 3, followed by three missing numbers, as 
the 19 regnal years of Darius II (-422 to -404/3), which requires a 
repetition of year 5 in column 1, 13 in column 2, and 18 in column 
3, all numbers that are missing in the text. The agreement with 
modern computation of Ω for -423 to -401 is fairly good, longitudes 
in the text exceeding the modern values by between 4° and 13°, and 
further support comes from the reverse of the tablet, which con­
tains regnal years, months, longitudes, and magnitudes of lunar 
eclipses from 7 Darius II to 24 Artaxerxes II (-416 to -380). This is 
not to say that the texts are so early—they must be later—just 
that these are the dates of the computed phenomena in each, as 
much as a century before the writing of ACT 816 by the scribe who 
wrote the Diary for -321 (cf. Britton and Walker, 1991, 110). This 
dating is certainly possible, and it would be a coincidence to find 
agreement with modern computation for the regnal years of Darius 
if these were not in fact his regnal years. Yet a coincidence is 
possible, and it is hard to know why regnal years alone would be 
given without months and days if these are indeed dated phenom­
ena, a deficiency apparently unique to this text although atypical 
Text C for Mars (AT 1, 192ff.) gives years and months without days. 
The other possibility is that this is an undated template of 
longitudes, like those published for Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars in 
DCL, the lines numbered 1 to 20, then beginning again with 1, 
showing years of Mercury's 20-year cycle, the residuals of which 
are specifically given in ACT 816 and can be found at 21-line 
intervals in Text M. In any case, neither Text M nor ACT 816 gives 
any information about how dates are computed in System A3. 
System 
A3: Ξ, First Visibility 
in the 
Evening 
System A3 for Ξ is known only from ACT 816, in which it 
appears as a system of six zones for the deficits of 3 synodic arcs 

Mercury: System A3, E 
133 
from 6,0° and the residual deficits of 63 synodic arcs in 20 years. It 
has the distinction of violating the condition that wi±1/wi be a ra-
tio of regular numbers. The system for three synodic arcs, A3(3), is 
shown in Figure 2.15A, in which AX runs through the zodiac in the 
negative sense in the order 
Table 2. 10C gives the zones ai 
and arcs wi, set out in the positive sense, and their ratios wi_1/wi 
in the negative sense in which they are applied. From 
(1c), and (2c), the periods and ratio of the periods are 
but these are not used, for the ratio applied in deriving wi(63) from 
just as for ft, is that of the 46-year p
e
r
i
o
d
,
w
i (63) 
(correctly in this way 
Again in principle, the period and ratio of the period for one 
synodic arc, are, from (lb) and (2a), 
although there is no evidence for P(u and these were also probably 
not used. Since the conversion from W{(3) to wi(63) uses the same 
ratio as ft, if we likewise apply to w(i) the ratio used for 
that is, 
wi(1) = (5,55/-54)uJi(3) = -6;34,26,40wI(3), we shall have the values 
of u>i(i) in the table, of which w 1 and w2 also appear for 
There 
is no evidence for u)j(i)—and this, strictly unmotivated, conversion 
has a low period P(u = 3,19,59,33/1,3,30,20 = 3;8,57...—but u^i) is 
required to apply thp svstem, and any plausible ratio, as from the 
46-year period, 
= 46/-7 = -6;34,17..., gives wtu) within a 
few minutes of these. System A3(j), shown in Figure 2.15B, has 
twelve inflection points for AX, those starting at the beginning of a 
zone numbered Ali_6 and those ending at the end of a zone shown 
by arrows. Because only W2/W1 is a ratio of regular numbers, only 
AXj, and the two 
ending at theend of ai and a<i have termin-
ating fractions. 
exactly and 
to one place are 
Presumably 
should not occur as computed values in an 
ephemeris, if such there were, although these values of 
are only 
hypothetical. Since 
and can pass through as many 

134 
Part 2. Synodic Arc and Time 
as four zones, AX is quite cumbersome to compute, so that it 
would make sense to use w\{\) for only the first three synodic arcs 
and then compute the following arcs by ΐϋχβ) < a\ for three synodic 
periods, just as in Text M for Ω. 
The basis of System A3 for Ξ, as also for Ω, is the deficit of 
three synodic arcs from 6,0°, derived empirically from_the_deficit of 
three synodic periods from 6,0
τ. Using as before c = At - AX = +10, 
the implied values of At\, as a deficit from 6,0
τ, corresponding to 
each iui(3) are 
Atx = -6\ At2 = -10*. At3 = -18
τ, At4 = -13
x, At5 = -8
τ, At6 = -4
τ, 
of which At\, holding for five zodiacal^signs, I -» COC, taken in the 
negative sense, is close to the mean At ~ -6;50
τ. In Figure 2.15A it 
can be seen that the function more or less follows both the filled 
circles, the deficits from 6,0
τ of three synodic periods from the 
Diaries and LBAT 1377, and the open circles, the same deficits by 
modern computation, the irregularities of which are due to the 
accumulation of roundings and imprecisions of interpolation. 
Hence, unlike the very rough function for Ω, System A30) for Ξ is 
quite good, as was also true of Ξ in System Αχ, so good in fact, 
that it is not evident which values of At\ in the function are 
observational and which transitional. It is also notable that the 
ratios w\-\/Wi for three synodic arcs are not of regular numbers, in 
five out of six cases no less. But because in each zone π\ = Z(Cq/11¾) 
is an integer, as may easily be verified for Z = -1,4,24, it is possible 
to chose initial positions such that irregular numbers will cancel 
in crossing between zones—which is not true for the values given 
here for A3(u—although in the absence of any computed example it 
is not known just how this was treated. Also, as was the case for 
Ω, nothing is known from the procedure text about how dates are 
to be computed. 

Part 3 
Alignment to the Zodiac, 
Initial Position, 
Elongation, 
Subdivision of the Synodic Arc and Time 
The remaining parameters to be found are the alignment to the 
zodiac of the zones of System A and of the points at which the 
greatest and least synodic arcs and times occur in System B— 
these are both equivalent to finding the direction of the apsidal 
line in a geometrical model—the subdivision of the synodic arc and 
time, that is, the arc and time between the successive phenomena 
within one synodic period, and a single longitude of the planet at 
one phenomenon to take as an initial position. The subdivision of 
the synodic arc and the initial position depend upon conventional 
values of the elongation of phenomena from the mean sun, which 
are taken to be fixed, aside from small variations that are artifacts 
of the computation of the ephemerides, and are thus applications 
of the solar-distance principle. Only for Mars are these elongations 
in any way explicit, in procedure text ACT 811a, while for Jupiter 
and Saturn they must be found by analyses of the subdivision of 
the synodic arc in procedure texts and dateless lists of longitudes, 
and for Mercury by analyses of ephemerides. Fixed elongations 
have no role in the theory of Venus, but it is as subdivisions of the 
synodic arc and time that we consider the ephemerides of Venus, 
which are formed of five different subdivisions in its short cycle of 
five synodic periods in eight years. 
Alignment 
to the 
Zodiac 
The alignment of the zones of the superior planets in System A, 
in Table 2.4, is straightforward, based upon locations by zodiacal 
sign of the greatest and least synodic arcs and times. For Mars, 
the zodiac is divided into six equal zones of two signs each with 
the least arcs and times in the slowest zone a\, the greatest in the 
fastest zone 014, and the remaining zones transitional. Because of 
the asymmetry of the function Δλ, evident in Figure 2.7, the least 

136 
Part 3. Alignment to the Zodiac 
synodic arc and time occur through all of Cancer and the greatest 
arc and time only at Capricorn 0° exactly. The original zones for 
Mercury, in Table 2.5, are nearly as simple: 2, 3, 4, or 6 zodiacal 
signs with their limits at the beginnings of signs, defined by the 
locations, by sign, of the beginnings or ends of the synodic arcs 
and times used to derive the parameters, and then altered for all 
phenomena except Ω by ±1° or by 5°, 10°, or 15° ±1° in order to 
bring the periods close to P = 3:9,7,30. 
The lengths of the zones for Saturn and Jupiter were found 
algebraically from the synodic arcs and periods, but the alignment 
to the zodiac was an estimation depending upon the location of 
the greatest and least synodic arcs and times by zodiacal sign. 
Table 3.1 shows the slow and fast zones for the two systems of 
Saturn and five of Jupiter, with each zone bisected to find the 
points Xm and AM at which the least and greatest synodic arcs and 
times occur. We have omitted the transitional zones of Jupiter's 
four- and six-zone systems and ignored the sloping transitions of 
the functions between zones, shown in Figures 2.2 and 2.3, since 
neither has a role in determining the alignment. The criteria seem 
to be placing A1n and AM about where they are given by observation 
while letting one zone begin at the beginning of a sign, in both 
cases the fast zone, Saturn at K 0°, Jupiter at S 0°. This last 
approximation in turn affects the location of Am and AM. which 
one would guess were originally tl\ 15° and b 15° for Saturn, and 
TT)? 15° and K 15° for Jupiter, that is, the middle of each sign, 
which will receive further confirmation from System B. In System 
A' for Saturn, the advance of the slow zone by 10° and the ex­
change of 30° in the length of the zones place A1n and AM in exactly 
these positions. For Jupiter, in the four-zone systems the symme­
try of Am and AM is slightly disturbed, although they are retained 
in the first part of Virgo and Pisces. None of these alterations has 
a significant effect on the synodic arc or time. 
System B is quite another matter. As noted earlier, in System 
B AX and At are not a function of A, but of the number of each 
phenomenon in the period once the initial values of AX and At are 
specified, so that a graph of the function as a linear zigzag with 
each AX uniformly separated, as in Figure 2.1, is to be taken purely 
numerically. Since An+1 = An + 4An+1, where 4An+1 is determined, 
not by An, but by the number of the phenomenon in the period, if 
AX is graphed against A, the intervals AX will not be uniform and 
the function will not be a linear zigzag. Rather, the graph is a 
series of lines of irregular length more or less following the linear 
zigzag, but behind on the ascending branch, in the first half of 

Alignment to the Zodiac 
137 
which AX < AX and in the second AX > AX, so the separation 
increases in the first half and decreases in the second, and ahead 
on the descendingbranch, in the first half of which AX > AX and in 
the second AX < AX, so again the separation increases in the first 
half and decreases in the second. Figure 3.1 shows, with some 
exaggeration, graphs of the linear zigzag and, as a heavy line, of AX 
against X for a hypothetical function with a period Π/Ζ = 12, 
exactly 12 phenomena in one zodiacal rotation, beginning at X1n 
andmeeting XM- The separation between the two graphs is greatest 
at AX, and at the intersections of the_branches at M and τη, the 
two graphs coincide, although since AX, M, and m need not occur 
among the computed values of AX in the period, the graph of AX 
against X for an ephemeris will be irregular. Just how irregular can 
be seen in the graphs of At against X of System B for Jupiter and 
Mars, shown by the open squares in Figures 2.3 and 2.4 based 
upon ACT 620a and 510; the irregularities for Saturn are much 
smaller since the range of AX is about 3° while for Jupiter it is 10° 
and for Mars 60°. Since each point in the graph in Figure 3.1 has a 
specific value of X and AX, a line through the point parallel to the 
linear zigzag may be used to define instantaneous longitudes of AM 
and Am. These oscillate about mean positions, behind on the 
ascending branch, ahead on the descending, by an amount equal 
to the separation of the two graphs; hence again the greatest 
separation from the mean occurs at AX. (Defining the slope of the 
line through X and AX by any two successive values would produce 
a considerably larger variation and place AM and Am at arbitrary 
separations rather than 180° apart.) 
The longitude AM or A1n may be found by interpolation between 
pairs of AX and A on either side of M or m, but this longitude will 
lie between the instantaneous AM and X1n applying to each AX and 
A and will differ for each pair of AX and A. Since interpolation is 
not consistent, we can only determine AM and Am implied by the 
ephemerides statistically. A method of finding the instantaneous 
AM and X1n is shown in Figure 3.2. Suppose a synodic arc AX on an 
ascending or descending branch with a longitude A at a distance δ 
from AM and δ' from Am. The sloping line through AX, parallel to 
the corresponding branch of the linear zigzag in Figure 3.1, which 
may be called the instantaneous linear zigzag, defines the 
locations of AM and Am, which differ by 3,0°, for, since Z rotations 
of the phenomenon traverse Z · 6,0°, each branch of the linear 
zigzag extends through 3,0°. What we have done is to place AX on 
the branch with an assigned value of A, and we wish to find the 
distances δ to AM and δ' to A1n. The same procedure may be applied 

138 
Part 3. Alignment to the Zodiac 
the other way around. with A and an assumed value of either AM or 
Am given. for finding an initial value of ,1A. as we shall later see. 
We are given the maximum synodic arc M. the minimum arc m. 
and their difference ,1 = M - m. From the similar triangles. 
o 
= 
0' 
= 3.0· 
0 = 3.0· (M _ ,1A) 
0' = 3.0· (,1A - m) (1) 
M - ,1A 
,1A - m 
,1' 
,1 
• 
,1 
• 
and 0' = 3.0· - o. Then. on an ascending branch. where Am < A < 
AM. 
Am = A - 0'. 
(2a) 
and on a descending branch. where AM < A < Am. 
Am = A + 0'. 
(2b) 
although as AM and Am differ by 3.0·. only one need be computed. 
Once an initial value of AM or Am has been found. succeeding 
values may be computed directly. Since in System B. 
~ 
= 6.0·. 
,1A = 3.~· d. 
(3a) 
,1A 
LJ 
,1An+l - ,1An = ±d. 
(3b) 
it follows from (1) and (3) that successive values of 0 differ by 
3 O· 
3 O· 
-
,10 =On+l - On = -'- ((M - ,1An+tl - (M - ,1An)) = -'- d = ,1A. 
(4) 
,1 
,1 
and likewise ,10' = ,1A. Thus. combining the computati,on of A from 
,1A and of 0 and 0' from ,10 = ,10' = ,1A. AM = A ± 0 and Am = A ± 0' 
may be computed from ,1AM = ,1Am = ,1A - ,10 = ,1A - ,10' = ,1A - ,1A by 
AM(n+ll = AM(n) + (,1An+1 - ,1A). Am(n+l) = Am(n) + (,1An+l - ,1A). 
(5) 
The effect of the subtraction of ,1A from ,1A is (1) to confine AM and 
Am within a limited range on either side of mean pOSitions. and (2) 
to place AM and Am at their limits when ,1A = ,1A. as shown in 
Figure 3.1. Since ,1A need not occur as a value of ,1A in any 
ephemeris. these limits need not be reached. 
In order to apply this method to ACT ephemerides. we must 
first determine which ,1A to assign to each A. Since each successive 
A is computed by An+l = An + ,1An+l. one might suppose. reason-
ably enough. that ,1An+l corresponds to the location An. But this 
turns out to be false. for it results in Am and AM for Jupiter being 
thrown back by about one sign. to Leo and Aquarius. although in 

Alignment to the Zodiac 
139 
System A Xm is at ITJ 12; 30° and AM at K 12; 30°, which, as we have 
noted, are slightly affected by placing the beginning of the fast 
zone at *" 0° and were probably originally 1$ 15° and H 15°. 
Further, ACT 812.1 and 813.12,21-22 specify that in Systems B 
and B' Am is at TO? 15° and AM at K 15°, that is, the original 
locations in System A. Hence, 4An must take the longitude An, 
Δλη+\ 
the longitude An+1, etc., which may also be confirmed by 
interpolation in an ephemeris for Am and AM, and this relation is 
also of interest for determining the initial value of the function, in 
which AX must be assigned to A. We have computed the longitude 
of A1n, least synodic arc and time, for short periods from three ACT 
ephemerides from relations (1) and (2) for each line; the use of (5) 
differs by only a few seconds. Table 3.2 shows 32 synodic periods of 
Saturn, from ACT 702 obv., exceeding its shortest period of Π = 28 
and Y = 29, Table 3.3 shows 16 periods of Jupiter, from ACT 620a 
obv. cols. 2-3, exceeding /7=11 and Y" = 12, and 16 periods of 
Mars, extended from ACT 510, exceeding /7= 15 and Y= 32. 
To find the mean value of X1n, we have computed the arithmetic 
mean for 28 synodic periods of Saturn, 11 of Jupiter, 15 of Mars, 
and rounded: 
Saturn ΤΠ, 9;59° = TH. 10° 
Jupiter Ί5? 16;33° = TQ? 15° 
Mars 
Λ 21; 1° « Λ 20° 
Saturn is 10° lower than System A and 5° lower than TW, 15°, which 
we presume to have been the original location in System A, and 
the same was probably assumed for System B. Jupiter agrees with 
the procedure text and the original location in System A, and Mars 
is 20° farther into Leo than in System A; but they are all close 
enough to System A to show that the principle of selection was the 
same, that is, an estimation of the midpoint of the part of the 
zodiac in which the least and great synodic arcs and times occur. 
The results change by only a few minutes with longer periods—and 
out of curiosity we checked the full ACT periods—but can differ by 
a degree or two in different ephemerides and even in different 
columns of the same ephemeris, which is probably to be explained 
by the distance of the initial A from the assumed location of Am, 
which we shall consider shortly. For example, the mean values of 
A1n in most ephemerides for Jupiter are TlJ 15° ± 2° (after emending 
the restored signs in ACT 620b by +5 signs), and TlJ 11° in ACT 627 
and ACT 640 for System B'. The procedure texts for Systems B and 
B' specify Tty 15°, which is probably intended here also. A single 
exception is ACT 625, in which Am is Λ 23°, perhaps by some kind 

140 
Part 3. Alignment to the Zodiac 
of error. In the case of Saturn, there is a greater variation. To the 
nearest 0;30°, in ACT 702 A111 is TH. 10°, in 708 TR 10;30, in 704 
obv. ITV 13° and 704 rev. TR 14° (after emending the restored signs 
by +2 signs), in 707 TR 18:30° and in 703 TR 19;30°. Perhaps all of 
these can be taken as intending TR 15°. But in 705 and 705a Am is 
S 14°, and in 704a *" 15;30°, and these must be deliberate altera­
tions, or errors, advancing Am by one sign. There are no other 
System B ephemerides of Mars for comparison, but Am at Sl 20° 
may be specific to ACT 510 and the assumed value could well have 
been O 0° or Λ 0°, as in System A. 
The range of the computed positions of Am in ACT 702, 620a, 
and 510 from the unrounded mean positions amounts to about: 
Saturn ±5° 
Jupiter ±6;45° 
Mars ±29;30° 
The other ephemerides for Saturn and Jupiter are much the same. 
The range for Mars is so large, about G 20° to TTJ? 20°, that it is 
almost without meaning to consider a fixed direction for Am and 
AM· Nevertheless, in finding an initial value of Δλ some location of 
A1n or AM must be assumed. Once this is done, System B is aligned 
to the zodiac, at least for the initial Δλ and A, and will oscillate 
within a defined range for each planet for each succeeding Δλ. 
However, because the instantaneous locations of Am and AM 
vary, strictly as a function of the number of each phenomenon in 
the period, but more or less as a function of A, finding an initial 
Δλ corresponding to A is itself non-trivial. Suppose we have an 
initial value of A, and wish to find Δλ using the closest preceding 
Am or AM· Then, on an ascending branch, where Am < A < AM, we 
find δ' = λ- Am, and on a descending branch, where AM < A < Am, 
we find δ - λ - AM- Δλ may then be found from 
f 
Δλ = δ'\-^-^\-τη = Μ-δ 3,0' 
(6) 
which is simple enough. But where is Am or AM? If we were to apply 
the mean value to A, the mean locations of Am and AM will them­
selves be shifted by some distance within the range of about ±5° for 
Saturn, ±6;45° for Jupiter, but ±29;30° for Mars, which seems in­
tolerable. This might explain the variation of the mean values of a 
few degrees found for Saturn and Jupiter, although not the change 
for Saturn of about one sign, and there are no other ephemerides 
of Mars for comparison. Another possibility, which eliminates the 
necessity of computing Δλ at all, is to take Δλ empirically from the 
preceding synodic period, by Δλ = At- c, which would explain why 

Alignment to the Zodiac 
141 
4An rather than 4An+1 corresponds to An. However, for Saturn At 
changes hardly at all over several synodic periods, and for Jupiter 
changes by at most ±2 days in one period, so it would be difficult 
to assign a specific value; and an error of one or two days in At, 
common enough in the observations we have examined, would 
produce an error of one or two degrees in 4A and introduce a 
systematic error in every succeeding 4A and At. In System B, an 
error of a few degrees in A is harmless, but an error of a degree in 
4A is fatal. Hence this method is far too risky. 
A third possibility is that the Scribes understood and took 
account of the oscillation of Am and AM, although there is no 
evidence for this in any surviving source and the variation we have 
found in the mean locations may argue against it. But even an 
estimate of the location of Am or AM as a function of longitude 
would be helpful. For example, taking ACT 620a for Jupiter, we 
wish to find 4A for A = b 12;35° in line 6. If AM = M 15°, the mean 
value, then δ = A - AM = 57;35°. For Jupiter, M = 38;2° and the 
coefficient 4/3,0° = 9;46,30/3,0 = 0;3,15,30. Hence, 
4A = M- δ A \ 
3,0° = 38;2° - 3:7,38° = 34:54,22°. 
The ephemeris has 35:20°. Suppose, however, it is known that 
when A is in Taurus AM = K 23°, as can be seen in Table 3.3. Then 
δ = 49:35° and 
4A = 38:2° - 2:41,34° = 35:20,26° « 35;20°, 
which agrees with the ephemeris. Elsewhere AM changes by more 
than 4° in one sign, and a more extended tabulation of its location 
would be required. Something like this would be adequate to 
finding 4A with only minimal error, but the variation in the mean 
locations of A1n and AM shows that it was applied inconsistently, if 
at all. 
Initial Position and Elongation 
The next parameter to be considered is an initial position, or 
epoch, and here alone a precise longitude is required. At least in 
theory, the date and longitude of only a single phenomenon is 
required, for rules for the subdivision of the synodic arc allow the 
computation of the date and longitude of all succeeding phenom­
ena. The Diaries offer no evidence for how the initial position was 

142 
Part 3. Initial Position and Elongation 
found; visibility times in us at first appearance are a possibility, 
although only indirectly, as we shall see. The use of distances from 
normal stars to find longitude, which we consider very unlikely, is 
considered in the Appendix on alternative methods. There is, how­
ever, a way of finding an initial longitude from an elongation from 
the sun without any measurement at all, and that is van der 
Waerden's solar-distance principle, that each phenomenon takes 
place at a fixed, characteristic elongation from the (mean) sun. In 
the synodic time AT = i 6,0
τ + At, the phenomenon moves through 
synodic arc AX and the mean sun through AA = i 6,0° + Δλ; hence 
the phenomenon will have the same elongation from the mean sun 
at the beginning and end of the synodic period. The elongation η of 
each phenomenon is therefore constant, and the longitude of the 
phenomenon and of the planet can be found by adding η algebraic­
ally to the longitude of the mean sun, λρ = A8 ± η. 
In analyzing the procedure text ACT 81 la for the subdivision of 
the mean synodic arc and time of Mars, van der Waerden (1957) 
found that in the interval Ω -» Γ the elongation changes by 30°, in 
the interval Γ -»Φ by 1,45°, and in the interval Φ -> Ω by 3,45°. If it 
is assumed that Ω and Γ are symmetrical to conjunction with the 
mean sun, which is reasonable for mean arcs and times, then the 
elongations of the phenomena and the planet from the mean sun 
measured in the direction of increasing longitude are 
Γ -15°, 
Φ -2,0°, 
Ω +15°. 
With complete symmetry and only mean motions, the second 
station Ψ would be at +2,0°, but it is not mentioned, doubtless 
because it would produce only a fixed retrograde arc rather than 
the variable retrograde arcs described in 81 la. 1-2, perhaps a 
variant of method T or U, due to which the elongation at Ψ is 
likewise variable. Correctly, by modern theory, the elongations of 
Mars's stations vary between ±2,10° and ±2,25°, a range of 15°. We 
shall see that the elongations of stations of Jupiter and Saturn 
implicit in procedure texts are also close to ±2,0°. In fact, the 
elongation for stations of ±2,0°, trine aspect, as rough as it is, 
became canonical, referred by Vitruvius (9.1.11) and Pliny (2.59), 
among others, and even by Copernicus (HAMA, 411 n. 11). 
Symmetrical elongations of Ω and Γ are shown in Figure 3.3, in 
which the conjunction point is C, the planet moves from Ω ρ to Γ ρ 
through δλρ and the sun from Ω8 to T 8 through <5AS, passing the 
planet at C. The elongation of the planet from the sun, measured 
in the direction of increasing longitude, changes from +η at Ω to 0 

Initial Position and Elongation 
143 
at C to -η at Γ because at conjunction the sun passes the planet. 
Note that the planet has been placed above the sun purely as a 
matter of convention. 
From our examination in the next section, the elongations of 
Ω and Γ implicit in the subdivision of the synodic arc are: 
Saturn 13;30M3;40M 4° 
Jupiter 10;40\10;50U 1* 
Mars 15° 
It is likely that only the integer values were used for finding initial 
positions, and that the others are artifacts of the subdivision of 
the synodic arc. These are all mean values of a small variation of 
the elongation implicit in the fast and slow zones of System A, 
also artifacts, of at most ±1;10" for Jupiter and ±0;25° for Saturn, 
and we have assumed symmetry of Ω and Γ to conjunction, as the 
procedure texts imply. If each phenomenon is computed separately 
from its own synodic arc Αλ, or by the subdivisions in the 
templates and procedure texts, the implicit elongations and the 
symmetry of Ω and Γ will remain fixed aside from this small 
variation—Mercury is more complex—since the synodic motion of 
the mean sun is taken to be ΔΛ = i 6,0° + Δλ, the solar-distance 
principle. However, compared to the variation of the elongation 
according to modern computation, these elongations are all very 
close to the minimum. The true variation, independent of the 
velocity of the sun and planet, is due to the inclination of the 
ecliptic to the horizon, and to the latitude and brightness of the 
planet, which are all functions of the longitude of the planet near 
conjunction, but different functions. From the calculation of the 
synodic times between first appearances given previously in Part 2, 
the range of elongations from the mean sun for Γ is approximately: 
Saturn -12° to-25.5° Jupiter -9.7° to-17° Mars -15.6° to-26.8° 
The range of elongations from the true sun is about 2° greater. I 
have not computed the elongations of Ω, which are not necessarily 
the same as Γ. The far smaller variations from the mean of the 
elongations implicit in the subdivision of the synodic arc, zero for 
Mars, ±0;25° for Saturn, ±1;10° for Jupiter at most, are additional 
evidence that fixed elongations were intended, that is, these small 
variations, which have nothing to do with the large variations 
according to modern theory, are evidence for the solar-distance 
principle. That the values implicit in the subdivision of the synodic 
arc are all close to the minimum may be significant and may offer 
a clue to how they were found, perhaps from the visibility times in 
us measured at first visibilities discussed in Part 1, although I do 

144 
Part 3. InMaI Position and Elongation 
not know how a conversion from visibility time to elongation was 
made. Visibility times would presumably also show something 
close to the true range of the elongations, but only a single value, 
it appears close to the minimum, was used for each planet. 
In the case of Mercury, elongations must be found for four heli­
acal phenomena, and they differ slightly for Systems Ai and A2. 
From a statistical analysis of ephemerides for each system, again 
assuming symmetry to conjunction, we have found: 
System Ai: Σ and Ξ 14°, Ω and Γ 13;30° 
System A2: Σ and Ξ 15°, Ω and Γ 14° 
The values for System A2, particularly for Σ and Ξ, are not secure, 
and it is possible that all phenomena were taken to be at an elon­
gation of 14° or even 15° for finding initial positions. These again 
are mean values, from which there is a variation of about ±1° for Σ 
and Ξ in both systems and for Ω and Γ in System Ai, and of-1:30° 
to +3° for Ω and Γ in System A2. The elongations according to 
modern theory show a far greater variation. From the calculation 
of the synodic times in Part 2, the range of elongations from the 
mean sun for each phenomenon is approximately: 
Σ -9° to -20° 
Ξ +10° to +19° 
Ω +13° to +22° 
Γ-10° to -20° 
Here the values implicit in the ephemerides are close to the mean 
for Σ, Ξ, Γ, and the minimum for Ω. Again, it is possible that the 
elongations were found from visibility times in us, but from these 
wide ranges only a single value was used for each pair of phases. 
If now the elongation of the planet from the mean sun at Ω or 
Γ, and for Mercury Σ or Ξ, is known, adding it algebraically to the 
longitude of the sun immediately gives the longitude of the 
phenomenon and planet, λ ρ = A8 ± η, for the date of the phase 
without need for measurement. In fact, the dates and longitudes of 
first and last appearance depend upon elongations from the true 
sun, and the true longitude of the sun may be found for any date 
by interpolation in Column B of a lunar ephemeris, preferably of 
System A since the year, 12;22,8m = 6,11;4
τ, is the same as that of 
the planetary theory. However, since the synodic arcs and times, 
and their subdivisions, in the ephemerides are referred to the 
uniform motion of the mean sun, it is surely a mean longitude of 
the sun that is required, which can be found in tables such as ACT 
185 and 186 of the mean longitude for each day of the year, with a 
motion, a bit high, of u s = 0;59,9°/
d. How the epoch of the mean 
sun underlying such tables was found, I do not know. The same 

Initial Position and Elongation 
145 
question arises for the epoch of the true sun in the lunar theory. 
Both could be based upon something like the 'Uruk Scheme' for 
solstices and equinoxes (cf. HAMA, 357-63), which is for the true 
sun and the calendar year of 6,11;3,10
τ, differing slightly from 
6,11;4
τ, and there is no reason to expect great accuracy. 
The subdivision of the synodic arc, appropriate to the zone in 
which the initial phenomenon is located, then allows the longi­
tudes of the remaining phenomena to be found, and the subdivi­
sion of the synodic time, of less certainty than the subdivision of 
the arc, at least from the surviving evidence in ephemerides and 
procedure texts, presumably gives the dates. It is, of course, easier 
to say all this than to demonstrate it in fact! For we must also 
explain how the subdivisions of the synodic arc were found, which 
is equivalent to finding a series of initial positions or elongations. 
Nevertheless, in principle, the entire ephemeris can be computed 
from a single date of, say, Γ, and a single longitude found by 
adding an elongation to the mean longitude of the sun for that 
date. Mercury again is more complex, and requires initial positions 
of two phenomena. Of course this may seem too simple a solution 
to the problem of initial longitude, and it does involve an assump­
tion of symmetry to conjunction of Ω and Γ, and for Mercury of Σ 
and Ξ, requiring justification that will be forthcoming, but the 
principle is simply this: if an elongation from the mean sun can be 
associated with the date of any phenomenon, presumably of first 
appearance, which seems to have been the most carefully deter­
mined, the longitudes of all phenomena can be found without any 
additional observation or measurement whatever. 
Here it is again worth noting that the variation of the elonga­
tions implicit in the ephemerides is far smaller than their true 
variation according to modern theory. And aside from this small 
variation, once an elongation is selected, it is locked in forever, 
since the phenomenon, moving through Δλ, and the mean sun, 
moving through ΔΛ = i 6,0° + Δλ, return to the same elongation in 
every synodic period no matter what zones or transitions are 
covered. Hence, the true variation of elongations is excluded by the 
method of computation in the ephemerides; only a mean value is 
suitable to finding an initial longitude, and for the same reason 
one must assume symmetry of first and last visibility to the point 
of conjunction. If one could somehow find the correct elongation of 
a particular Ω or Γ, and Σ or Ξ for Mercury, and use it for an 
initial position, it too would be locked in forever and would soon 
be more inaccurate than the symmetrical, mean elongation. I 
assume that all of this was known to the Scribes, who doubtless 

146 
Part 3. Initial Position and Elongation 
gave a good deal of attention to the problem of how to establish an 
initial position that was both accurate and at an elongation that 
could then be repeated in every synodic period with minimal error. 
It is evident that the suitability of the elongation is more 
important than the longitude of the initial position, that is, the 
longitude must be found from the elongation, not the other way 
around, for a perfectly correct longitude may be at a completely 
unsuitable elongation for succeeding synodic arcs. Hence the 
problem of initial position is really the selection of a mean 
elongation, which will be taken up in the next section. 
The determination of the initial position is somewhat different 
for Systems A and B. For System A, the location of, say, Γ at a 
longitude A places the phenomenon and the planet at some point 
in one of the zones, which itself determines the arc Αλ and time At 
= Αλ + c of the following synodic period; so there is nothing more 
to do. Although it is reasonable that λ also be slightly adjusted to 
the beginning of an interval (¾ between the π\ phenomena in the 
zone, the ephemerides are inconsistent about this. In System B Αλ 
corresponding to λ must also be computed, as explained in the 
previous section, by taking the distance of λ from the location of 
the greatest or least synodic arc, AM or A1n, preferably using a true 
rather than a mean location; then At = Αλ + c and both Αλ and At 
apply to the preceding synodic period. If the initial longitude is 
found from Ap = A8 ± η, since A8 may have one or more fractional 
places and be in any part of the zodiac, and in System A A may be 
adjusted in accordance with the intervals δι, there is no reason to 
expect an initial A to be an integer or in any particular location; 
nor should Αλ be an integer in System B. Hence, it is pointless to 
extrapolate ephemerides backwards to look for integer values of A 
or Αλ or any particular locations to identify the initial position. 
One would expect an integer date, but neither is this helpful since 
in most ephemerides all dates are given only as integers. Further, 
the initial longitude, the epoch, of an ephemeris may be corrected 
at any time using the same method. Suppose an observed first 
appearance is later or earlier than the ephemeris by ±n days; then 
a corrected longitude may be found for the corrected date by adding 
to the ephemeris longitude ±n · us°/
d, or by finding A8 for that date 
and adding ±77 to it. The planetary ephemerides are in general not 
connectable, and since all other parameters remain the same in 
each system, this suggests that the epoch was 
periodically 
corrected, perhaps when comparison with the dates of observed 
phenomena showed a more or less consistent error. 

Mars 
147 
Elongation and Subdivision of the Synodic Arc and Time 
The evidence for the subdivision of the synodic arc and time 
into the arcs and times separating successive phenomena consists 
of ephemerides, templates for longitude alone in DCL, and 
procedure texts that are not altogether consistent with either the 
ephemerides or the templates or with each other. Only in the case 
of Mars does the procedure text ACT 811a give the change of 
elongations between phenomena directly. For Jupiter and Saturn 
the elongations must be inferred from the subdivisions of the 
synodic arc and time, and finding them is not altogether certain 
both because of inconsistencies in the sources and because 
slightly different elongations are implied by the subdivisions of the 
fast and slow synodic arcs. Mercury, as we shall see, poses yet 
greater difficulties in that there are no fixed subdivisions of the 
synodic arc, and the elongations must be found from the variable 
arcs and times between the four heliacal phenomena. We shall 
therefore begin with Mars, for which the elongations are known, 
then take up Jupiter and Saturn, and last consider the entirely 
different conditions for Mercury. 
Mars 
We have seen that the subdivisions of the mean synodic arc in 
ACT 81 la contain differences of elongation for the arcs Ω -> Γ, Γ -> 
Φ, Φ —> Ω. If it is assumed that Ω and Γ are symmetrical to the 
point of conjunction, these lead to elongations of +15° for Ω, -15° 
for Γ, and -2,0° for Φ. These are all we need for finding an initial 
position of Ω or Γ, but we may also investigate the origin of the 
subdivisions from the elongations and the mean intervals of time 
between phenomena, and how they may be adapted to true arcs 
and times. I should first remark that ACT 811a is a text of the 
greatest obscurity, and its decipherment by Neugebauer, which 
provided van der Waerden (1957) with the most important evidence 
for the solar-distance principle, is a wonder of ingenuity. We shall 
make use of Neugebauer's exposition in ACT and HAMA, and the 
templates for Mars in DCL Texts G-J. 
The method in ACT 81 la is first to divide the mean synodic arc 
of Mars (not of the phenomenon or of the sun) ΔΛρ = 6,0° + Δλ into 
three parts δλ^ for the arcs Ω -> Γ, Γ -> Φ, Φ -> Ω. Their length is 
determined by assigning a number % of mean intervals δ = 6,0°/Π 
= Δλ/Ζ to each—and there is no doubt that here the intervals are 

148 
Part 3. Elongation and Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
used—so thai 
Now the meansynodic arc of the sun is 
of 
which 
s the mean synodic arc of Mars and the 
excess 
is the additional motion of elongation of the sun 
in one synodic period, at the end of which the sun returns to the 
same elongation from Mars. The total elongation 
is also divided 
into three arcs of elongation 
such that 
Hence, the entire synodic motion of the sun may be written as 
The corresponding synodic time is 
To di-
vide 
in the same way as 
we note that the time for 
of the sun's motion is necessarily 
hence the time 
for the sun's motion through 
is the difference 
Analr,rtr,usly with the synodic motion of the sui 
the synodic 
time 
may be written as 
Now we must find the time corresponding to the subdivisions 
and 
For the entire synodic arc 
the time is given by 
and in general, for any arc 
of the sun's mean motion, the time 
Hence for each subdivision 
and 
the 
time 
and 
and the sum of the times are 
and the sum of the times for the entire synodic motion of the sun 
is 
There are no less than six parameters to be chosen, of which 
four are free and two are then determined. There are three 

Mars 
149 
which depend upon the nonuniform motion of Mars in each inter-
val 
under the condition that 
so that choosing any two determines the third, and 
three 577k, which depend upon the elongations at which 
and 
take place, under the condition that 
so again 
any two determine the third. Each free parameter must be found, 
at least indirectly, by observation. The simpler is 
which in 
turn may be used to find 
The s e l e c t e d t h e computed 
I 
and the sum 
are: 
Arc 
5% 
Crik 
<5%T 
Q 
T 
30' 
0;55,20x 
30:55,20* 
r-*<I> 
1,45 
3:13,40 
1,48:13,40 
<J>->Q 
3,45 
6:55 
3,51:55 
Q - » F L 
AT] 
6, 0 
e 
11; 4 
AT;x 6,11; 
4 
As noted previously, if it is assumed that the point of conjunction 
lies midway between 
and . the elongations of each phenomenon 
and the planet from the mean sun are 
Obviously these are rough estimates—the difference of elongation 
in the interval 
is one zodiacal sign, the elongation of 
is 
four zodiacal signs—without any precise observational control. The 
arcs 
are computed from the mean interval 
by taking 
where 
In this way we find 
which we give without the last four places in the 
procedure text(!), and the sum 
Arc 
sjj 
SXjj 
33 
1,29; 19,23,55° 
r - » ® 
1. 0 
2,42:24,21,40 
<U 
Q 
58 
_ 
2,36:59,32,56,40 
FL —> FL N+ Z 2,31 
AAP 6,48:43,18,31,40 
Arc 
Q i 
5AkT 
Q->T 
2;44,45x 
1,32; 4, 8,55x 
r 
<& 
4;59,33 
2,47;23,54,40 
<D-»Q 
4:49,33,50 _ 
2,41;49, 6,46,40 
n->fl c - e 12:33,51,50 AAPT 7, 1:17,10,21,40 
Arc 
SVk 
cnk 
<5r?kx 
Q - ^ r 
30° 
0:55,20* 
30;55,20x 
r -> a> 
1,45 
3;13,40 
1,48:13,40 
<J> —> Q 
3,45 
6:55 
3,51:55 
Q 
AT] 
6, 0 
e 
11; 4 
At? 
6,11; 4 
Arc 
Sk 
5Xk 
Q 
r 
33 
1,29:19,23,55° 
r - » o 
1. 0 
2,42:24,21,40 
<& 
a 
58 
2,36:59,32,56,40 
Q —> n n+Z 
2,31 
AAp 6,48:43,18,31,40 
Arc 
Clk 
SXkx 
q -> r 
2;44,45x 
1,32; 4, 8,55x 
4;59,33 
2,47:23,54,40 
® 
£1 
4:49,33,50 
2,41:49, 6,46,40 
n -> n c - e 12:33,51,50 AAPX 7, 1:17,10,21,40 

150 
Part 3. Elongation and Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
For 
the velocity template in 81 la. 10 has 
= 2,42;40\ 
Clearly the arcs 
are not derived directly from observation, 
nor are the numbers for Sk pulled out of a hat. If anything, the 
arcs are derived from approximate values of the subdivisions of the 
synodic time in the intervals 
taken from the 
dates of the phenomena in observational records, or at least they 
should be if the calculation is to have any value. We may find the 
approximate observed subdivisions ofthe synodic time from the 
final results of the calculation. 
The sum, 
is precisely the mean 
synodic time in the ephemerides. It appears that the approximate 
values of the observed times were 
both round numbers, presumably something like mean values or 
approximations based upon observational records. Hence, their 
sum and the remainder of the synodic time 
The time for 
is confirmed by the velocity 
template in 811a. 10. Taking the mean velocity of the sun, 
we compute the mean motion of the 
sun " " i n the approximate time 
and by subtracting Srjk, we 
find 
which we then divide by 
to find Sk, all of which we need 
give to only one place. 
Arc 
SXk 
Sk 
Q->T 
2, 0T 
1,56:25° 
30° 1,26:25° 
31;55 
r_>fl> 
4,40 
4,31;39 
1,45 
2,46:39 
1, 1;34 
6,32:21 
6,20:39 
3,45 
2,35:39 
57;30 
Q->Q 
13,12:21 
12,48:43 
6, 0 6,48;43 
2,30:59 
The only options are in the choice of sk- Evidently it was decided 
to let sj = 33, S2 = 1,0, S3 = 58, as in the previous table, which are 
close enough to those found here, and thus 
= 2,31 = 77 + Z, as 
required; then each accurate 
in the previous table follows from 
In the template for Mars (DCL, 9-10, Texts G-J), s\ = 33, 
but S2 = 1,3 and the remainder from 
the same 
distribution found in a fragment of a procedure text published by 
Arc 
Stk 
<5Ask 
8Xk 
Sk 
a -> r 
2, 0T 
l,56:25° 
30° 1,26:25° 
31:55 
r - > ® 
4,40 
4,31:39 
1,45 
2,46:39 
1, 1:34 
6,32:21 
6,20:39 
3,45 
2,35:39 
57:30 
n 
n 
13,12:21 
12,48:43 
6, 0 
6,48;43 
2,30:59 

Mars 
151 
Aaboe (1987); the adjustment of S2 is thus about ±1;30. 
In summation, the subdivisions of the synodic arc of Mars, for 
all their apparent precision, may be derived from (1) a difference of 
elongation of 30° for 
divided into elongations of +15° for Q 
and 
and an elongation of 
(2) intervals of 
time of 
for 
and 
for 
with (3) 
taken 
as the remaining 3,45° of elongation and 6,32;21T of the mean 
synodic time. As noted before, the elongations according to modern 
theory are notably greater,varying f
r
o
m
a
n
d 
from about 
The method of ACT 811a described thus far applies to mean 
arcs and times, and can be extended to true arcs and times only 
with two additional assumptions. The first is that the elongation rj 
at each phenomenon, and thus the differences of elongation ST], 
are independent of the arcs and times 
and 
which depend 
upon the velocity of the planet. This is correct for 
and 
for 
which T\ and Sri depend only upon the inclination of the ecliptic to 
the horizon and the latitude and brightness of the planet, but not 
for 
But since 77 for 
is in error by from 
its variation 
may have been neglected or unknown. The alternative is treating 
and 
of 
as variable, and for this there is no evidence in our 
sources. The second assumption is that the divisions of 
into (c -
and e, that is, 
retain their 
mean values. This is reasonable since 
is itself taken 
as constant whatever the true value of 
. Hence, if we write the 
total true synodic time in the form 
the only variable i s a l t h o u g h c o u l d 
also be 
treated as variable. 
The mean values of 
were found from 
the true 
values arefound by replacing the mean interva 
with the true 
intervals 
= wi/Z appropriate to each zone ai through which the 
planet passes between successive phenomena, so that 
"*<11 
contain s^ intervals of length 
etc. The computation of 
; 
can then be done exactly as for the total true synodic arc 
u/ 
assigning a value of 
to the arc between each phenomenon 
appropriate to each zone, and correcting whatever falls into follow-
ing zones by the ratio u)\+\/Wi. 
and 
are tabulated in DCL (p. 
10) and HAMA (424-25). However, this is so cumbersome, since the 
arc 
can extend through five zones and 
is nearly as 
long, that it is far simpler to compute only the first synodic arc of 

152 
Part 3. Elongation and Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
phenomena in this way, to establish epochs for each phenomenon, 
and then compute all following phenomena separately by complete 
synodic periods, which is presumably the method underlying the 
template. The true intervals of time <5ik corresponding to the true 
subdivisions of the synodic arc <5Ak would then be computed from 
Stk = &lk
T + (cxk + &7k + Qik)
T, with δλ^ variable and the quantity in 
parenthesis the mean value for each subdivision. 
However, there is no evidence that this procedure was applied— 
of course we are at the mercy of the surviving sources—and the 
reason may be that, although it was known that η and δη could 
not be treated as constant for any phenomena of Mars, the 
variation itself was unknown. If so, in assigning mean values of 
±15° to the elongations of Ω and Γ, and perhaps even -2,0° for Φ, 
the Scribes were simplifying what they knew to be a more complex 
situation that affects not only η and δη, but δί for all the divisions 
of Mars's synodic arc. The only known ephemeris for Mars with 
dates of consecutive phenomena is ACT 500 containing Φ and Θ, 
the first part of the retrograde arc. In every case the difference is 
47;55,4
X, implying a fixed subdivision of the synodic time for con­
secutive phenomena in all zones, with all variation concentrated 
in the invisible arc Ω -» Γ, which is one of the ways of treating 
Jupiter and Saturn that will be described below. 
Jupiter and Saturn 
There are no procedure texts for Jupiter or Saturn giving the 
elongations directly as ACT 81 la does for Mars, so we shall inves­
tigate them using procedure texts and templates for the subdivi­
sion of the synodic arc. These are all for System A and its variants 
as it would be difficult to divide the synodic arc of System B which 
differs in each synodic period. The sources are not entirely consis­
tent with either the ephemerides or each other, and it is thus 
questionable whether information from different sources may even 
be combined. From them we may find the arcs δλ, times <5i, and 
velocities of the planet u p in degrees per day, which may be 
regarded as degrees per tithi, for the consecutive phenomena Γ —> Φ 
—»Θ—>Ψ->Ω-»Γ, although Θ is sometimes omitted. 
Table 3.4 for Jupiter shows: (1) for System A' a constant and 
very schematic δί and the corresponding δλχ dividing each ινχ, com­
puted by Neugebauer from ACT 810.3-6 and 813.9, which give only 
δί and υρι for each arc; (2) for System A δλχ from ACT 813.2, from 
which template DCL Text D differs only in the retrograde arc, with 

Jupiter and Saturn 
153 
a more refined St from ACT 813.23,30, which applies to the fast arc 
W2 and divides Φ -» Ψ = 4m 2
τ as Φ -» Θ = 58
τ, θ -> Ψ = 2m 4
1, 
and also contains unequal divisions of 8λ\ in the retrograde arc. In 
each case δλι and t»Pj are in the ratios of u>i. Table 3.5 for Saturn 
shows δί and 5A1 implied by ACT 801.4-5 and 802.2-3, which give δί 
and Upi, and δλι from DCL Text A, which are not entirely consis­
tent. The additions to δλι for Ω -4 Γ in small numbers are required 
to complete iz>i, and δί is missing entirely for Ω -> Γ, perhaps 
because it was to take up the entire variation of the synodic time. 
There are other variants, particularly for Jupiter, including values 
that may be recovered from the ephemerides. One could go on 
endlessly computing with these variants, but our only concern is 
approximate values of the difference of elongation δη in the inter­
vals between phenomena in order to find the approximate elonga­
tion η at each phenomenon, for which a selection is adequate. 
(a) Elongation of Ω and Γ 
Our first concern is δη in the interval Ω -> Γ, for with this and 
the assumption of symmetry to conjunction, the elongation of 
each phenomenon may be found. We begin with Jupiter. There are 
two ways of treating δί in the interval Ω -» Γ. ACT 813.11 and 
817.1 give δί as 27
d to 32
d, as though the entire variation in the 
true synodic time, in the ephemerides 6
τ, occurred in the invisible 
interval Ω -» Γ, which is not true, but will give the widest range for 
δί in Ω -» Γ. By contrast, where velocities for Ω -» Γ are given, as in 
ACT 810.3-6 and 813.9, they follow from u p l = δλι/St with δί, 
although not given, treated as constant in both the slow and fast 
arcs, so the entire variation occurs in the visible interval Γ -> Ω. 
These are the sorts of inconsistencies found in the procedure texts, 
and all we can do is live with them and investigate the elongations 
both ways. In addition to Ω -» Γ, velocities are given for periods of 
30 tithis before Ω and after Γ, that is, Ω' -» Ω = Γ -> Γ = 30
τ. These 
velocities are always equal, and thus the corresponding arcs are 
equal, which is significant, for since they occur on arcs of constant 
velocity, that is, in the same zone, Ω' and Γ' must therefore be 
taken as symmetrical to the point of conjunction, C in Figure 3.3, 
as any asymmetry would require unequal velocities upi = δλι/30
τ, 
which shows that Ω and Γ must also be taken as symmetrical to C, 
as we assumed for Mars. 
The method of analysis is as follows: Suppose one has, from 
ephemerides, templates or procedure texts, 8λ for the arc Ω -> Γ 

154 
Part 3. Elongation and Subdivision of the Synodic 
Arc 
and the velocity of the planet u p; then the time St = δλ/υ ρ, or St 
may be taken directly from a procedure text. The mean motion of 
the s u n in the time St is δλ 8 = St • vs, where vs = 6,0°/6,11;4
τ = 
0;58,12,38°/
τ. The difference SX3 - δλ = δη is the change of elonga­
tion in the arc Ω -* Γ; if it is assumed that the point of conjunc­
tion lies midway between Ω and Γ, the elongation at Ω and Γ is η = 
±5<5η. Since for Saturn and Jupiter δλ$ >> δλ, the elongation 
depends far more on St, which determines δλ3, than on the small 
arc δλ of the planet's motion from Ω to Γ; hence, the maximum 
possible elongation is |δλ 8, and this is not reduced much by the 
subtraction of τδλ. Due to the variation of δλ and SXs, we shall find 
slightly different elongations for the fast and slow arcs. These are 
artifacts of the subdivision of the synodic arc and time since, as 
noted, the elongations at Ω and Γ are independent of the velocities 
of the sun and planet, and vary principally due to the inclination 
of the ecliptic to the horizon, and slightly due to the latitude and 
brightness of the planet, which are all functions of the longitude 
of the planet near conjunction, but different functions. Whether 
the Scribes took the variations in each arc seriously I do not know. 
In the course one or more zodiacal rotations the elongations will 
average to a mean value, and it is the mean value alone that is of 
use for finding initial positions. 
We begin with System A' for Jupiter, about which we have the 
most complete information. For the slow arc, the two transitional 
arcs, and the fast arc, from ACT 810.3-6 and 813.9, and Table 3.4, 
Lui = 30° 
W2 = W4 = 33:45° 
Lf3 = 36° 
δλ! 
6; 15° 
7; 1,52,30° 
7;30° 
Up1 
0;12,30°/
τ 
0;14, 3,45°/* 
0;15°/
τ 
In each case δί = δλι/υρι = 30
τ, so that δλ8 = δί · u s = 29:6,19° and 
thus, 
δλ5-δλί=δηι 
22:51,19° 
22:4,26,30° 
21:36,19° 
ηΐ = Ηδλ5-δλί) 
11:25,39,30° 
11:2,13,15° 
10:48,9,30° 
We have carried the calculation to more fractional places t h a n 
necessary—one would be adequate—but it is clear that ή = 11°, as 
the mean of the extreme values ή = 11:6,54,30° and if we average 
over the length of each zone by ή = Σ[ηι • αι)/6,0°, ή ~ 11;4,45°. Yet 
this value of ή may be too large. ACT 813.23,30 gives explicitly δί = 
2 9
τ for the fast arc, and since δί is a strong variable, this has a 
notable effect on the remainder of the computation. In fact δί = 29
τ 
makes sense as a mean value. The sum of the times for Γ -» Ω in 

Jupiter and Saturn 
155 
thesame text is 6,16T, and Jupiter's mean synodictime 
the excess for 
is therefore 
Assuming that St is the same for all arcs, as in the preceding 
computation, it follows that 
and, rounding to minutes. 
The mean of the extremes is now 
The range of 
in the slow and fast zones in these derivations is about 0;40°. 
The greatest range of 
more than 2°, occurs if one assumes that 
the entire variation of AT occurs in 
bv taking the true 
for each zone of System 
to find a 
variable 
and computing the rest 
accordingly. Thus, 
and the mean is 
Note that 
now varies 
with St, the stronger variable. ACT 813.11 and 817.1 give periods of 
invisibility for Jupiter of 
to 
, which agree fairly well with 
to 
used here. 
For System A, if we combine 
for the slow and fast arcs from 
ACT 813.2 and DCLText D with upt for the same arcs from System 
A', which is suspect since Upi was computed from 
for System A', 
we shall have 
from which in both 
c
a
s
e
s
a
n
d 
Hence 
If, from ACT 813.23,30, 
so that 
Again, the range of 
in the slow and fast zones is about 0;40°. 
Using the true 
as we did for System A', gives 
varying with 8t[ over its widest range. Thus, 
and 
are as for 
the slow and fast arcs of System A' and, wit' 
for System A, 

156 
Part 3. Elongation and Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
With all the alternatives of System A'and A, andthere are yet 
more variations of these calculations, 
for 
and 
lies between 
about 10;40° and 11° with the range of 
about 0;40° or 2;20\ As 
earlier noted, by modern calculation Jupiter's elongations from the 
mean sun at first appearance vary from -9.7° to -17°, so all the 
values of 
and 
Found here are close to the minimum. 
Saturn is less certain. As noted. Table 3.5 shows St and <5Aj 
implied by ACT 801.4-5 and 802.2-3, which give St and upl, and <5Ai 
from DCL Text A. If we compute 
we find for both fast 
and slow arcs 
This is too high 
since, added to the time for r 
D, 5,52;30T, the total synodic time 
is 6,32;30T, exceeding the mean synodic time 
by 
although the maximum range of 
in System A is about 
And carried through it results in 
which is impossible. 
We can therefore find a better estimate by taking the excess of 
over the time for 
as we did for Jupiter, that is, 
for which 
and for each zone 
Using the true 
foreach zone of System A—6,23 
and 
From 
we have 
Thus, 
is in the narrow range of 13;30° to 13;40°, and the range of 
tji in the slow and fast zones is either 0;20° or about 0;50° by each 
computation. As was true of Jupiter, the modern computation of 
elongations from the mean sun at first appearance shows a far 
wider variation, of -12° to -25.5°, so the values found here are 
again close to the minimum. 
(b) Elongation and Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
The addition of 
for the subdivisions of the synodic arc to 
for r will give for each succeeding phenomenon a longitude 
and 
an elongation from the mean sun 
We may find these 
elongations by adding to the elongation of V the difference of elon-
gation appropriate to each succeeding phenomenon, 
where 
is given by the subdivisions of the 

Jupiter and Saturn 
157 
synodic arc for each zone, which, although partly conventional— 
their sum must equal wi—are at least secure; but St must be taken 
from rather crude figures for the subdivision of the synodic time in 
procedure texts without distinction of zones, and is anything but 
secure. Here the assumption seems to be that the time in the arc 
is constant, with any variation in the total synodic time AT 
taken up by St in the arc 
Still, as we shall see, the resulting 
elongations are compatible with the elongations for 
and 
just 
found, which can only happen if the values of St are reasonable. 
Considering first Jupiter, ACT 810.3-5, 813.9, and818.1 give 
equal times of four months for the intervals 
, but these are too short to produce symmetry of 
and 
How-
ever, more refined times, doubtless to fill up the synodic time, are 
given in 813.23,30, and we shall take these as St and compute the 
corresponding mean motion of the sun 
For System A' in Table 3.4, we have for 
in the slow and fast 
arcs, given here as pairs of numbers, omitting transitional arcs, 
and thus the differences of elongation 
As a matter of convention,we now take the elongation of the 
morning phenomena r and 
to be negative, at a smaller longitude 
than the sun, and the evening phenomena 
and 
positive, at a 
greater longitude than the sun. For the values of TJI to apply at 
we have choices from our preceding demonstrations. But the great-
est variation in 
will be for those computed with for 
taken from the true synodic time for the slow and fast arcs, that 
is, from 
, which is consistent with the assumption 
that the time in the arc 
is constant. Thus, beginning from 
-9;32° and -11;49° for 
from the successive values of 
we find 

158 
Part 3. Elongation arid Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
with the mean values 
ή 
Γ -10:40,30° Φ -1,53:6° Ψ +1,59:22° Ω +10:40°. 
The mean values for Γ and Ω are extremely close to symmetry to 
conjunction at η = 0°, as they should be, and the individual values 
at Γ Eind Ω on the slow arc, -9;32° and +9:26°, and the fast arc, 
-11:49° and +11:54°, are also within 0:6° of symmetry. What we 
have done here is much the same as finding the elongation for Ω 
and Γ in the first place from the arc Ω —» Γ, but now proceeding 
through the rest of the synodic arc in the order Γ -» Ω, and we 
have not assumed symmetry, we have found it. Small adjustments 
in the initial Γ of -0:2° on the slow arc and +0:1° on the fast arc 
can produce perfect symmetry of Γ and Ω with mean values of 
10:40°. 
In the same way, we can find the elongations for System A, for 
which two of the arcs δλι differ from System A'. In System A, from 
Table 2.4, 
δλι 
Γ - > Φ  16:15° 19:30° 
Φ -» Ψ -10° - 1 2 °  
δλι 
Ψ —» Ω 17:45° 21:18° 
and with the previous values of 5ij and δλ8ι, the differences of 
elongation δηι = δλ^ι - δλι, 
δηι 
Γ - > Φ  
1,44: 3° 
1,40:48° 
Φ -> Ψ 2,8:22° 2,10:22° 
δηι 
Ψ —> Ω 
1,48:22° 
1,44;49°. 
We again take values of ηι at Γ from the computation using Sti = 
ΔΤι - 6,16τ, that is -9;39° and -11:58°, and from the successive 
values of δη, find 
Tfc 
Γ 
-9:39° 
-11:58° 
Ψ +1,57:56° +1,56:52° 
Tj1 
Φ -1,53:42° -1,52:46° 
Ω 
+9:34° 
+12:3°. 
The symmetry of Γ and Ω in both arcs is within 0;5°, and for the 
mean values, 
ή 
Γ -10:48,30° 
Φ -1,53:14° 
Ψ +1,57:24° 
Ω +10:48,30°, 
with perfect symmetry of Γ and Ω, which we compare with the 
values just found for System A': 
ή 
Γ -10:40,30° 
Φ -1,53: 6° 
Ψ +1,59:22° 
Ω +10:40°. 
The significance of these elongations is that initial estimates, 
along with estimates of <5t, were used to find δλ for the subdivisions 

Jupiter and Saturn 
159 
of the synodic arc, although the precise numbers we have found 
result from adjustments to 
in order that their sum in each true 
synodic arc 
:>e equal to Wj. The initial estimates were probably 
as simple as 
for the elongations of 
and 
and 
for 
St in the intervals 
as given in ACT 
813.9 and 818.1. These are applicable to both the slow and fast 
arcs since 
with elongations of about 
is assumed to 
take up the remainder of the synodic time and synodic arc. The 
mean elongations at 
and 
underlying the subdivisions of the 
synodic arc, no longer exactly 
then follow from some 
assumption about the length of the retrograde arc. Suppose, for 
example, that in the interval 
is assigned 
and the retrograde arc 
, which happens to apply to 
tne slow arc of System A and the fast arc of System A' . The motion 
of the sun in 
the difference of elongation 
between 
and 
, and 
the elongation at 
or, in 
keeping with our convention of calling elongations of morning 
phenomena, 
and 
negative, 
very 
close to the mean values ,, 
and 
just found for 
each system. And this from very crude assumptions. As mentioned, 
the precise values of 
and the implied 
i for the slow and fast 
arcs result from adjustments to 
so that 
with 
each 
adjusted in the ratio wt+i/wi for each arc. Although it is 
possible to come very close with simple assumptions, as we have 
just seen, I have been unable to derive the precise values of 
and of course there are variants, without assuming most of what 
is to be found. 
We may use the same procedure for System A of Saturn; taking 
from ACT 801.4-5 and 802.2-3 in Table 3.5, all but 
integral months, we compute the mean motion of the sun 
From DCL Text A, we have for <SAj in the slow and fast arcs, 
the odd fractions for 
in order to give a sum equal to wi; 
thus, the differences of elongation 
:o minutes. 

160 
Part 3. Elongation and Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
Note that Γ 
Φ and Ψ -» Ω are nearly identical. Using the values 
of rji at Γ derived from taking for Ω -» Γ δίι = ΔΤ\ - 5,52;30τ, i.e., 
-13; 13° and -14; 1°, from δηι for each arc, we have 
ηΐ 
Γ 
-13:13° 
-14; 1° 
Ψ 
+2,2; 3° +2,1:25° 
ηΐ 
Φ 
-2,2; 8° -2,1;26° 
Ω 
+13;11° 
+14; 4° 
with the mean values 
ή 
Γ -13:37° 
Φ -2, 1;47° 
Ψ +2, 1;44° 
Ω +13:37,30°. 
Both the individual elongations on the slow and fast arcs and the 
mean elongations are essentially symmetrical—the greatest differ­
ence is only 0;5°—and this can be no accident. It appears that Γ 
and Ω were assigned elongations of, say, ±14°, Φ and Ψ of ±2,0°. In 
the same way, the intervals Γ 
Φ and Ψ —> Ω were each assigned 
the time St of 2,0X, and the retrograde arc 52;30τ for Φ —> Θ and 
1,0τ for Θ —» Ψ, a ratio of 7/8, presumably based upon observa­
tional records showing something close. As mentioned before, it is 
simple assumptions of this kind that underlie the subdivision of 
the synodic arc, and the numbers we have found result from ad­
justments to δλ\ so that the sum Δλ for each synodic arc is equal 
to u>i. However, as was true of Jupiter, although it is possible to 
come veiy close, I have been unable to derive the precise values of 
δλι in the procedure text and template. 
Mercury 
Because in the course of a single synodic period each of the 
four heliacal phenomena of Mercury, whether treated indepen­
dently or successively, usually crosses into different zones, the 
intervals of arc and time between phenomena are highly variable, 
and there is no simple method for the subdivision of the synodic 
arc by zones, as for Saturn and Jupiter, that spend several synodic 
periods in the same zone, or the strict observance of successive 
zones shown in the template for Mars, DCL Texts G-J. The arcs 
and times between Mercury's successive phenomena are given by 
the pushes, which, along with the ephemerides, provide the 
evidence for changes of elongation between phenomena, and the 
pushes are entirely different in System Αχ, in which they cover the 
visible arcs Ξ 
Ω and Γ 
Σ, and System A2, in which they cover 
the invisible arcs Σ 
Ξ and Ω H> Γ. From investigating the elonga­
tions, we have found that the differences between Systems Ai and 

Mercury 
161 
A2 run still deeper, so we shall treat each separately, beginning 
with Αχ, which is both better understood and better behaved. 
For the pushes Ξ 
Ω and Γ —> Σ, ACT 800a-e and 820a give 
integer values of δλ and St for the 15th degree of each sign, shown 
here in Table 3.6, with linear interpolation in between. Those for Γ 
Σ, fairly well preserved in 800a, have been reconstructed by 
Neugebauer with a high degree of certainty, but those for Ξ 
Ω, of 
which only fragments survive in 800c-d, are more doubtful. To find 
the implied change of elongation δη, we compute the change of 
longitude of the sun, <5AS = δί · 0;58,12,38°/x, and then δη = δλ -
δλς. We subtract &ls from δλ because Mercury moves faster than 
the sun at superior conjunction and its elongation is positive in 
the evening phases, Ξ and Ω, and negative in the morning phases, 
Γ and Σ. Thus, a negative δη for Ξ 
Ω means a smaller positive 
elongation at Ω than at Ξ; a negative δη for Γ -> Σ means a larger 
negative elongation at Σ than at Γ, conditions that hold for most 
of the pushes, δη is confined to a range of about ±l|°, generally de­
creasing slightly in Ξ 
Ω and increasing in Γ —» Σ, but erratically, 
in part because δλ and St are integers and the differences in δη are 
fractions of a degree. (For Ξ —> Ω we have emended St of TJ1 from 
20τ to 23τ, as noted in HAMA, 472 n. 19, but have resisted any 
other emendations.) As we shall see, the mean change of elonga­
tion is in both cases close to zero, but such as to give slightly 
larger elongations at Σ and Ξ than at Ω and Γ. 
In order to find δη for the invisible arcs Σ —> Ξ and Ω —» Γ, we 
use the ephemeris ACT 302, in which the pushes are computed 
with interpolation—ACT 301 uses only the integers for midpoints 
of signs—and although I am suspicious of such methods, the 
examination will be done statistically. ACT 302 itself, however, 
gives the dates only to integers and contains many errors of ±1 or 
greater, particularly in the dates computed by pushes, so we have 
first recomputed the first 42 lines, containing 41 synodic periods, 
accurately to all fractional places. From two successive phenom­
ena, we find δί = t2 - ti and δλ = λ<ι - λι, and <5AS and δη are as 
before. We then compute the arithmetic mean δή and standard 
deviation σ(δη) of all 41 synodic periods. Table 3.7 shows the least 
and greatest times <5tm and &m. arcs SAm and <5Am, and differences 
of elongation <5i7m and δηΜ, and the arithmetic mean δ ή and 
standard deviation σ(δη) for the 41 synodic periods, all given to 
minutes. The extreme values of δί and δλ may be exaggerated due 
to errors, but the effect on δη should be small since its range is 
much smaller than δί and δλ. The first group of four elongations, 
marked 'adjacent', are between successive phenomena Σ 
Ξ —> Ω 

162 
Part 3. Elongation and Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
-» Γ -> Σ, the second, marked 'across', cross over between appear­
ances and disappearances Ξ <-> Γ and Σ «-> Ω, and the third group 
of two are the pushes Ξ -> Ω and Γ -> Σ from Table 3.6. 
The results cannot be pressed too closely, but suggest three 
simple assumptions. Consider first the adjacent elongations. In 
the invisible arcs, near superior conjunction Σ -> Ξ δη = +28°, and 
near inferior conjunction Ω -* Γ δη ~ -27°. That the difference is 
significant is shown by the visible arcs Ξ -> Ω and Γ -> Σ, also 
given by the pushes, in which δη ~ -O;20°, which agrees with a 
larger δη in Σ -> Ξ than in Ω H> Γ since δη should then be negative 
in Ξ -» Ω and Γ -> Σ. Further support is given by the arcs that 
cross between appearances and disappearances, both of which 
should fall between ±28° and ±27°. Ξ -> Γ and Γ -» Ξ between ap­
pearances, which are independent, are about ±27;30°, while Σ —» Ω 
and Ω —> Σ between disappearances, both containing pushes, are 
about ±27;40°. We now assume, analogously to the superior plan­
ets, that each pair, Σ and Ξ, Ω and Γ, is symmetrical to conjunc­
tion. The assumptions that appear to underlie the elongations at 
each phase, shown schematically in Figure 3.4, in which I have 
stopped just short of placing Mercury on an epicycle, are therefore 
(1) an increase of +28° in Σ -» Ξ, (2) a decrease of -27° in Ω -> Γ, 
and consequently (3) a change of -0;30° in Ξ -» Ω and Γ -» Σ, so 
that, assuming symmetry to conjunction, Σ and Ξ take place at 
elongations from the mean sun of ±14° and Ω and Γ at ±13;30°. 
These, of course, are mean values, while the individual values in 
the ephemeris show a variation in δη of about ±2°, although most 
are within ±1°, as shown by σ(δη). If these assumptions appear too 
refined, the alternative is taking either 28° or 27° to hold for both Σ 
—» Ξ and Ω -> Γ, with Ξ -» Ω and Γ -> Σ equal to zero, to which 
they are close. An initial position for an observed date of Ξ may 
therefore be found by adding 14° to the mean longitude of the sun, 
and of Γ by subtracting 13;30°, since they are independent and 
must be treated separately, or perhaps by applying the same value 
to both, and Ω and Σ are then computed by pushes. 
System A2 is quite different and less consistent. There are no 
texts explaining or tabulating the pushes, which cover the invisi­
ble arcs Σ -> Ξ and Ω -» Γ, so all that can be learned must be 
derived from ACT 300a, the single ephemeris that is more or less 
intact. Neugebauer has reconstructed the pushes, and although 
they are essentially complete and appear reliable for Ω -> Γ, for 
which about fifty lines survive, they are neither complete nor 
secure for Σ -» Ξ, for which there are only sixteen completely 
restorable lines. Fortunately, Σ -» Ξ appears rather consistent, and 

Mercury 
163 
the better preserved Ω -» Γ is the more erratic. Table 3.8 shows the 
pushes arranged for 15° of each sign, analogously with ACT 800a-e 
for System Ai, although additional values are needed at 0° of 
Aquarius and Aries and the restoration is doubtful in places. For 
parts ofE-> Ξ that are absent from the ephemeris, I have filled in 
St or δλ by interpolation or estimation. For Σ -» Ξ δη is mostly 
between 29° and 31;20° with a mean of about 30°, although there 
is a peak of 32; 49° in Cancer and there could be a sharper drop in 
Taurus. For Ω -» Γ, which includes the retrograde arc, the range is 
from about -31° to -29:20° for the six signs from Aries to Libra, 
followed by a rise through three signs to a maximum of -21; 42° at 
Aquarius 0° and a steep decline to -30; 26° at Pisces 15°. The reason 
is, not the large retrogradation δλ = -12°, but the sharp drop in <5t 
from 22τ in Libra to as low as IOx at Aquarius 0°, presumably 
based upon observations showing short periods of invisibility near 
inferior conjunction in these signs, followed by a recovery in 
Pisces. The slight rise in the second half of Pisces is due to δλ 
suddenly increasing by +12° while δί increases by 9;30τ. 
The statistical analysis of ACT 300a and of the pushes derived 
from it is shown in Table 3.9. The analysis not secure since it is 
confined to the 16 complete synodic periods that survive, which do 
not form a period as the 41 synodic periods did for System Αχ; 
there is no way of controlling errors in the dates, which are given 
only in integers, and some longitudes of Ξ and Γ, computed by 
pushes, are also uncertain. Note that in the invisible arcs Σ —» Ξ 
δή = 30; 13° = 30° and in Ω —» Γ δή = 27;43° = 28°, which agree 
closely with the pushes—for Ω -» Γ to the minute—showing that 
the reconstruction of the pushes is statistically consistent with 
the ephemeris. The visible arcs Ξ —» Ω and Γ —> Σ have a much 
greater range than the corresponding arcs in System Αχ, and the 
large negative δή of -1:36° and -0:59° in these arcs is roughly 
consistent with δή being 2° or so larger in Σ 
Ξ than in Ω 
Γ. 
The mean of the absolute values of the four arcs crossing between 
appearances and disappearances is 29; 8° = 29°, which is also to be 
expected if δή for Σ -> Ξ is about 30° and for Ω -» Γ about 28°. 
Note, however, that the range and standard deviations of every δη 
is two or even three times the corresponding δη in System Αχ, and 
the mean values could well be in error by ±1°. Thus, although this 
analysis is suggestive, it is also very rough since the evidence is 
limited, and it is only a tentative conclusion that in System A2 the 
difference of elongation in Σ -> Ξ is taken as 30° and in Ω —> Γ as 
28°, so that the elongation at Σ and Ξ is ±15° and at Ω and Γ ±14°. 
It does appear, however, that System A2 is in fact more erratic in 

164 
Part 3. Elongation and Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
its elongations than System Ai. 
Particularly because of the inconsistencies of Systems Ai and 
A2, it is of interest to compare the differences of elongation implied 
by the ephemerides with modern theory. Table 3.10 shows a 
statistical analysis of elongations between phenomena for at least 
19 synodic periods computed along with the synodic times used in 
Part 2. In order to avoid any appearance of false precision, 8t, 
which includes half-day intervals between morning and evening 
phases, has been rounded to days and δλ and δη to degrees, since 
the visibility tables give the time between conjunction and the four 
phases in integer days and interpolation is uncertain. Thus, the 
extreme values could be in error by ± 1 or more and even the mean 
δη and standard deviation σ(δη), given to half-degrees, could be in 
error by ±0;30°. Nevertheless, it is certain that for the visible arcs Ξ 
—» Ω and Γ -> Σ δή is now positive, and that the absolute value of 
δη for Ω -» Γ is greater than for Σ -> Ξ, the very opposite of the 
relation of these arcs in both systems. Further, δη is far more 
variable than implied by either of the systems, for both the range 
between <577m and <5T7M and σ(δη) are two, three or even four times as 
large as in the previous tabulations. The range of the elongations η 
at first appearances of the superior planets and at all four pheno­
mena of Mercury given earlier was also much larger than implied 
by the ephemerides. As noted, the variation of the elongations at 
first and last appearance has nothing to do with the velocity of the 
planet, the sole cause of variation in the ephemerides, but is due 
to the changing inclination of the ecliptic to the horizon, and to 
the latitude and brightness of the planet, both of which vary 
widely for Mercury. The mean values δη implied by the ephemerides 
are all within 2° or 3° degrees of δή according to modern theory, 
which may not seem very good agreement but is probably as much 
as can be expected considering the large variation of δη. 
It thus appears that the ephemerides are based upon estimates 
of δή between phenomena, and the variation of δη implicit in the 
ephemerides is an artifact of computation resulting from the varia­
tion of <5f and δλ. Not surprisingly, the best agreement with modern 
computation is for δί, and System Ai is for most intervals superior 
to System A2. To what extent δί in the pushes was derived from 
observation and to what extent it is formulaic, I cannot say; and I 
have no idea how δλ was found, although I very much doubt that 
it was based upon measurement of position. From this analysis, 
and far too many days of calculation, the most that may be 
concluded is that in System Ai the elongation from the mean sun 
is ±14° for Σ and Ξ and ±13;30° for Ω and Γ, or perhaps both are 

Mercury 
165 
assigned ±14°, and possibly in System A2 the elongation of Σ and Ξ 
is ±15° and of Ω and Γ ±14°. That slightly different elongations 
appear in the two systems is yet another inconsistency, although 
it is possible that 14° or even 15° was assumed for all four phe­
nomena in both systems. The sole function of these elongations is 
to determine initial positions by addition to the mean longitude of 
the sun for the date of each independent phenomenon given by 
observation, that is, to find initial longitudes of Ξ and Γ in System 
Ai, and of Ω and Σ in System A2. 
Venus 
The methods used in Part 2 for the derivation of parameters, 
depending upon a constant difference between synodic arc and 
time, are not applicable to Venus because it has no such constant 
difference; nor do the phenomena of Venus take place at fixed 
elongations from the mean sun, for the range of their variation 
implicit in the ephemerides is far wider than for Mercury. The 
theory of Venus is at once the simplest and the most puzzling of 
the planets, the simplest because it has but a single short period 
of eight years containing five synodic periods that allow only a 
limited variation in synodic time and arc, the most puzzling 
because the methods for the computation of time and arc are 
understood imperfectly or not at all. There is no shortage of texts 
concerning Venus, and ACT 410, 421, and 421a were already pub­
lished in part by Kugler (SSB I, 202-06), but most are fragmentary 
and the one large ephemeris, ACT 420, containing five of the six 
synodic phenomena, inconsistently combines the different periods 
of Systems Ai and A2. The ephemerides are best considered as 
constructed upon subdivisions of the synodic arc and time since 
they consist of cycles of five synodic periods of the phenomena in 
order, 3 8 Ξ - » Ψ - » Ω - » Γ - » Φ - » Σ - > Ξ , 
after which the entire 
sequence is repeated with dates reduced by -4
τ and longitudes by 
-2;30° in System Ai and -2;40° in System A2. The synodic arcs and 
times and their subdivisions are thus not permanently a function 
of location in the zodiac, but of the number of the period within 
each cycle, with the locations of the phenomena drifting slowly 
back through the zodiac at the rate of-2;30° in Ai and -2;40° in A2 
in each cycle of five synodic periods in eight years, or just over one 
zodiacal sign per century. This means that in eight years each 
phenomenon can occur in only five locations and even in a century 
each phenomenon cannot occur in nearly 7/12 of the zodiac. 

166 
Part 3. Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
The empirical basis of the ACT period of Venus is the relation 
5p = 8y = 1,39m - 4
τ, five examples of which can be found in the 
observational reports in the Diaries, in which, of course, the deficit 
from 1,39 months is 4 days. Due to rounding in computing the 
mean synodic time, the relation is slightly modified. The mean 
synodic time AT = i 6,0
τ + M is 
AT = \ (1,39 · 30
τ-4
τ) = 6,0* + 3,53; 12
τ = 6,0
τ + 3,53; 10
τ. 
Thus, now 5p = 54T = 49,30
τ - 4; 10
τ = 1,39m - 4; 10
τ, although the 
ephemerides actually use the original 5p_= 1,39m -_4
τ for both 
systems. The mean synodic arc of the sun AA = i 6,0° + AX is then 
AA = Af-QQ 
+ 6AT= 6,0° + 3,35:28,33...° 
|3,35;30° in System Aj 
~
 6·°
 
+ [3,35:28° in System A2 
Hence, in 5 synodic periods the_deficit of AA from 8 zodiacal rota­
tions of the mean sun, and of AX from 3 zodiacal rotations of the 
phenomena, are: 
System Ax: 
5AA = 8r- 2;30° 
5ZX = 3r-2;30° 
System A2: 
5AA = 8r - 2;40° 
5AX = 3r - 2;40° 
The period of System Ai is the ACT period. The deficit -2;30° will 
accumulate to - I r in 6,0/2:30 = 2,24 periods of 5p in 8y, so that 
2,24 · 5p = 12,Op in 2,24 · 8y - Iy = 19,1 Iy, which is the ACT 
period. Thus Π = 12,0, Y= 19,11, and the number of rotations of 
the phenomena is their difference Z = 7,11. The deficit -2;40° 
accumulates to - I r in 6,0/2:40 = 2,15 periods of 5p in 8y, leading 
to 11,15p in 17,59y, the period of System A2, in which Π = 11,15, Y 
= 17,59, and Z = 6,44. These periods do not apply to time, which 
has only the original period 5p = 1,39m - 4
τ in both systems. In 
principle in Ai c = AT- AA = 17;40 and in A2 c = 17;42, but neither 
is ever used. 
In ACT 420, Γ and Σ are in A1, Ψ, Ω and Φ in A2, and Ξ, which 
is missing, was presumably in A1. It is difficult to understand why 
two incompatible periods were combined in the same ephemeris, 
for they lead to cumulative inconsistencies in longitude, although 
not in date, of phenomena in each system. The error, if that is 
what it is, is not simple because the procedure text ACT 821b, 
which is written on the same tablet as ACT 420, gives the synodic 
arcs and times for each of five synodic periods of all phenomena, 
with the zodiacal signs in which they begin—although these 

Venus 
167 
cannot remain fixed—for computing the phenomena by complete 
synodic periods, in the same incompatible systems, and ACT 421 
and 421a are also in System A2 and partly coincide with 420. The 
inconsistency, however, is so serious in ACT 420 that in one or 
two out of five synodic periods the longitude increases from Ω to Γ, 
even though both are in the retrograde arc, followed by Γ to Φ 
again retrograde. In order to make sense of the ephemeris, it is 
necessary to project it backwards prior to this inconsistency. 
Now, ACT 420, for SE 180-242 (-131 to -69), is lacking the 
columns for date and longitude of Ξ, but it overlaps for three 
synodic periods, SE 236-241 (-75 to -70), with ACT 410, which 
contains dates and longitudes of Ξ and Ψ in System Αχ. The dates 
of Ψ are the same in both ephemerides, but the longitudes in 420, 
in A2, are 2;30° behind those in 410, in Αχ. Since the two systems 
differ by 0;10° in 8 years containing 5 synodic periods, the longi­
tudes of Ψ were identical in both systems (2;30/0;10) · 8y = 15 · 8y 
= 120 years earlier, an interval containing 15 · 5p = 75 synodic 
periods. Although it is questionable whether the two ephemerides 
can be combined for longitude, they clearly can for date; hence by 
computing back 120 years, we can see a complete ephemeris for 
Venus without the inconsistencies of ACT 420. (Of course it is also 
questionable whether there was an ephemeris of Systems A1 and 
A2 120 years earlier.) 
We have therefore projected Ξ and Ψ from ACT 410 and Ω, Γ, Φ, 
and Σ from ACT 420 back by 15 · (1,39m - 4
τ) = 24,43m from SE 
231 V 21 to SE 111 VI 21 to SE 120 XI 13 (-200 Oct 2 to -190 Feb 
9), containing five plus one synodic periods bounded by Ξ and Σ. 
The dates and longitudes of all phenomena in these periods are in 
Table 3.11. Figure 3.5 shows the locations of the phenomena of 
each period, which extend through about 8/5r and are to be read 
in the order Ση_ι -»Ξ->Ψ-»Ω-»Γ-»Φ-»Σοη each line with Ψ -» 
Φ retrograde. The longitude of Σο, not in the table, is O 21;50°. 
Table 3.12A gives the intervals of time St for five periods and Table 
3.12B gives the intervals of longitude δλ, with the additional first 
period showing the effect of System A2 in slowly altering δλ. The 
intervals <5t are secure because they are the same in both systems; 
the intervals δλ are not secure for intervals containing Ω and Φ 
because it is not known whether the difference of 2; 30° found for Ψ 
in SE 236-241 also applies to Ω and Φ. Nevertheless, the resulting 
arcs δλ do not seem out of line, so presumably any errors are 
small, at least compared to the inherent errors of the systems. 
Were the phenomena taken in a different order, as beginning 
with Γ or Σ, AT and AA in the last columns would be different, but 

168 
Part 3. Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
the totals for five synodic periods would still be 1,39m- 4
X and 8r-
2;30°. However, AT- AA taken from the last columns for Ξ -> Ξ is 
not constant, that is, c does not hold for Venus, and the same 
would be true for any phenomena. Taking all possible synodic 
periods, Ξ -» Ξ, Ψ -» Ψ, etc., AT- AA varies by as much as -11;50 
to +49:20, for Φ -» Φ II—III and III—IV, the great range probably due 
to an error in the date of III Φ identified below. Nor are the implied 
changes of elongation of Σ -> Ξ and Ω -» Γ, computed as for 
Mercury from δη = δλ - δλ8 where δλ8 = δί · υ8°
/τ, anywhere near 
constant. For Σ -» Ξ δη varies from -3:29°, which makes no sense 
as δη must be positive near superior conjunction, to +18:42°—by 
modern computation the range is limited to about 14° to 17°—for 
Ω -> Γ from -21;37° to -2;8°—modern computation gives about -26° 
to -3°—and mean values have no significance, showing that fixed 
elongations, the solar-distance principle, do not hold for Venus. 
In order to evaluate these times and arcs, we have computed 
the phenomena of the first five synodic periods bounded by Ξ 
according to modern theory for -200 Sep 9 to -192 Sep 6, and in 
Tables 3.13A and 3.13B show the intervals of time δί and of arc δλ. 
The intervals δλ are rounded to 0; 10° and δί converted to tithis and 
months of 30 tithis; the deficit from 1,39 months of 5
τ instead of 
4
X is due to an imprecision of the modern computation of the first 
or last Ξ. The dates of individual phenomena in the ancient and 
modern computations can differ by more than 20 days, which 
shows the ancient theory to be rather inaccurate, and thus the 
longitudes can also differ greatly—comparison of ACT 420 directly 
with modern computation for SE 228-236 shows equally large dif­
ferences—but the intervals δί and δλ can nevertheless be compared 
although with some caution for δλ where System A2 is involved. 
There are three serious errors in δί of about a month, I Ξ -> Ψ, III Γ 
-> Φ and III Φ -» Σ, the two latter due to the misplacement of III Φ 
nearly a month late, which may also account for the great range of 
AT - AA for Φ -» Φ II—III and III-IV, but most are much closer. It is 
possible that δί was derived empirically from reports of dates of 
phenomena during a single eight-year period, or from a few eight-
year periods, but then it is hard to know why such large errors 
were permitted. The intervals of longitude δλ have smaller errors— 
the largest is for III Φ -» Σ—although some of the retrograde arcs 
and their segments have very large errors in proportion to their 
size, but δλ does not appear to have any clear relation to δί, which 
makes its origin quite puzzling. It may be significant that all 
values of δλ end in multiples of 0;10°. We shall review what is 
known from other texts about the computation of δλ from δί, but 

Venus 
169 
none of their methods appears to account for Systems A1 and A2. 
There are four additional texts setting out subdivisions of 
Venus's synodic arc and time. The earliest is atypical Text C (AT 1, 
194-98) covering the synodic arc from 
to 
with dates and longi-
tudes, probably for -431/-430 or 8 years later -423/-422. The text 
also contains years, months, and longitudes for Mars for either 
-359 to -341 or 47 years later -312 to -294, which must be closer to 
its origin. The nearly symmetrical scheme for Venus, based mostly 
upon velocities of 
can be set out as follows: 
The odd arcs of 
and 
occur at the arrows. Britton 
and Walker (1991) have modified the interpretation of this text, 
including a direct motion from 
to 
which is very strange, and 
published a procedure text, BM 33552, probably written by the 
scribe of ACT 816 for System A3 of Mercury and ADT -321, with the 
following symmetrical scheme for 
in 
days rather than tithis: 
In the first 
the velocity increases at the rate of 
from 
averaging 
a constant 
of which 
, and then in the 
second 
it decreases at the same rate from 
again averaging 
the retrograde arc is 
- 
The result is 
that for both 
and 
and 
, and 
for the entire synodic period 
and 
which are the mean values to the nearest integer, that is. 
and 
The 
periods of invisibility 
are given by zodiacal sign: 
It should be noted that in the late fourth century 
is 
confined to 
in order. 
The preceding schemes are very rough, and every synodic period 
appears to be identical. A more sophisticated method is shown in 
BM 37151, published by Aaboe and Huber (1977), that gives dates 
and longitudes for five synodic periods, probably -128 to -120 or 
-120 to -112—years included within ACT 420, 421, and 421a—of 

170 
Part 3. Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
which only the first and fifth are recoverable. Here St and δλ differ 
for each of the synodic periods, Ξ -» Ψ is divided into four velocity 
zones, Φ -¥ Σ into three, while Σ -> Ξ and the retrograde arc Ψ -> Ω 
-» Γ -> Φ each have constant velocities: 
Ξ-» l;15°M_»i;57d->0;30'
7d-->0;20Vd->4' 
Ψ -» -0;20°/d -> φ 
Φ - ^ Ο ι δ Ο ^ - ^ ι ^ ν ΰ ^ χ . χ δ ν ΰ ^ Σ 
Σ -> l;15"/d_»s 
The subdivisions δί, in days rather than tithis, and δλ for periods I 
and V are shown in Table 3.14, and it can be seen that we now 
have something that at least looks like an ephemeris of Systems 
Ai and A2—in days rather than tithis—although Ξ —> Ξ seems to 
intend only the mean synodic arc 9,35;30° and is close to the mean 
synodic time of 9,44 days. Hence we are still not up to the level of 
Systems Ai and A2. Britton and Walker (1991) have modified this 
scheme to make Ξ -» Ψ and Φ -» Σ more symmetrical, which would 
reduce it still more toward the level of the earlier schemes. Again δί 
could in principle be derived empirically from observational records 
of one or more eight-year periods—it was certainly selected prior to 
computing δλ—and something of this kind could stand behind the 
five synodic periods of Systems Ai and A2. However, I have been 
unable to compute δλ in ACT 420, either original or as corrected, 
by dividing δί into zones of constant velocity, perhaps because the 
inconsistency of the two systems has made it impossible to find 
the correct δλ for arcs including Ψ, Ω or Φ, or perhaps because the 
method is not applicable, as even for Σ -> Ξ, which is entirely in 
System Ai and by this method has a single velocity, there is no 
consistent velocity for the five periods in ACT 420. 
The most extensive text concerning the subdivisions of 
Venus's synodic arc and time is ACT 812.11-24, unfortunately very 
poorly preserved, particularly for δλ; other subdivisions are 
explained in 25-31. It appears as though originally δλ and δί were 
given for the intervals between successive phenomena, for the two 
intervals between risings Γ -> Ξ and Ξ -> Γ, and for the two visible 
arcs Γ -> Σ and Ξ -> Ω, of which only the former is present. These 
are given by zodiacal sign and for every zodiacal sign, which is 
quite extraordinary as it requires about three hundred years for 
every phenomenon of Venus to occur in every zodiacal sign, so 
were δί derived empirically it would be necessary to examine three 
hundred years of observational records. If it is assumed that δί and 
δλ are permanently fixed by zodiacal sign, then this method differs 
from Systems Ai and A2, in which they are not fixed. The sequen­
ces for δί are in some cases close to constant differences by sign, 

Venus 
171 
but never exactly, and the same is true of the only well preserved 
sequence for δλ for Γ -> Ξ. Some are identical or very close to δλ or 
<5t in Tables 3.12A-B, or to their sums for longer intervals, but 
these are not necessarily in the same signs and are so few as to be 
fortuitous. Hence, these values of δλ and δί do not stand behind δλ 
and <5i in Systems A1 and A2, although a different tabulation along 
the lines ofACT 812.11-24 but regarding the location by zodiacal 
sign as temporary cannot be excluded. ACT 812.27 contains an 
entirely different method of computing the longitudes of Ω and Γ, 
and thus δλ in the interval Ω -» Γ, by taking a constant 4,19; 15° 
for Ξ -> Ψ and -6; 15° for Ψ -» Ω0, adding a variable correction by 
zodiacal sign of from -3;30° to +4° for the longitude of Ω, and then 
adding to a preliminary T0 the same correction with opposite sign 
to find the longitude of Γ. This too seems to have nothing to do 
with the subdivisions in Systems Ai and A2. I have mentioned 
these things lest it be thought I leave anything undone. 
Finally, there are two further texts for Venus concerned with 
eight-year cycles of five synodic periods. The simpler is ACT 401, 
which gives dates and longitudes of Σ for 16 eight-year cycles, 
possibly for SE 175-303 (-136 to -8) although the very badly 
damaged longitudes appear to be about 12° too high, with differ­
ences in each line of -4;5
d = -4;10
τ, and, it appears, -2;30°. It is 
thus a sort of 'epoch table', a term used by Jones (1998). If it 
originally gave the epochs of other phenomena, it could then be 
used along with a template of At and Δλ, or, if it were restricted to 
a single phenomenon, it could be used with a template of <5t and 
δλ, for five synodic periods to compute all dates and longitudes. 
Considerably more elaborate and interesting is ACT 1050, one 
of the first astronomical texts to be identified, described by Strass-
meier (1881, 281) as belonging to a class for computing the risings 
and settings of planets. Neugebauer (ACT, pp. 451-52) thought it 
might concern Mercury and strangely dismissed the possibility of 
Venus. In fact, the text gives longitudes of the four visibility 
phases Ξ, Ω, Γ, Σ of Venus for two of five synodic periods at eight-
year intervals. Each row contains two synodic periods beginning 
and ending with Ξ, and the difference between each row in each 
column is the deficit for eight years. The longitudes are given by 
zodiacal sign, as a number from 1 to 12, and degrees. The first 
three rows are shown in degrees in Table 3.15. Five complete 
synodic periods in each row would require another tablet of 11 
columns. There are in the present text 29 rows, thus 28 intervals 
of 8 years or 224 years in all; additional tablets could have con­
tained yet more years, and this is not necessarily the first tablet of 

172 
Part 3. Subdivision of the Synodic Arc 
the series. The deficit in columns 1-4 for all phases, until the last 
value of Γ, is -2;30\ but in 5-9 δλ between phases and the deficit 
change separately for each phase: Ξ varies from -2:30° by ±0; 16,40° 
to -2:13,20° and -2:46,40°, then returns to -2;30°; Ω remains at 
-2;30°; Γ decreases to -2;40°, then returns to -2;30°; Σ decreases to 
-2:46,40°. The intervals of longitude δλ between phases in the first 
10 rows of columns 1-5 are 
Ξ ^ Ω 4,16' 
Ω->Γ -1:30° Γ -» Σ 4,17:30° Σ -» Ξ 1,3:30° 
the sum of which, 9,35;30°, is the mean synodic arc. The principle 
effect of the changes in columns 5-9 is to alter the retrograde arc Ω 
—» Γ by as much as -6° and the other arcs by ±6°, while changing 
the total synodic arc somewhat less. Whether the longitudes in 
ACT 1050 are supposed to refer to specific dates or whether it is an 
undated template is not clear, but my guess is that it is part of a 
template originally containing five synodic periods in each row and 
perhaps covering more years than this single tablet. (I have been 
told by Alexander Jones that Norman Hamilton has shown that 
ACT 1050 was computed by a System A method, and that this will 
be published by Asger Aaboe.) 
In summation, it appears that although the sources for Venus 
are fragmentary or inconsistent, and not all that well understood, 
Venus actually shows a greater variety of sources and methods 
than any other planet. This in itself is interesting because it shows 
something of how the Scribes could experiment with different 
methods and parameters for treating a limited sequence of five 
synodic periods, each containing either four or six phenomena 
depending upon whether stations were included, in a way that 
would be too difficult to control for planets with far longer periods 
containing many more phenomena. Hence, the texts for Venus 
may take us into the workroom of the Scribes, and, over a period 
of more than two hundred years, from the late fourth to the early 
first centuries, show us, as we see for no other planet, the evolu­
tion of a planetary theory from the simple and symmetrical scheme 
of atypical Text C to the ephemerides of Systems A1 and A2 and 
the complete list of intervals of ACT 812.11-24, in both of which St 
between phenomena appears to be mostly empirical and δλ found 
in ways that are, as yet, too subtle to yield up their secrets. 
Unfortunately, as much as one would wish, one cannot say too 
much of Venus. 

Summary and Conclusion 
The Astronomical Diaries and related collections contain 
systematic observations of the phenomena of the planets dated to 
the day of the lunar calendar month and located by zodiacal sign, 
or beginning and end of zodiacal sign, and, in the case of most 
stations and occasional first appearances, by distances from 
normal stars. There are also a great number of measurements of 
distances of planets from normal stars, as there are also many 
measurements of distances of the moon from planets and of 
planets from each other, but these do not appear to have any 
function in the mathematical astronomy, nor to define location 
more precisely than by zodiacal sign. The distances of planets from 
normal stars could be predicted, if that is the right word, by their 
recurrence after periods, specific to each planet, utilized for just 
this purpose in goal-year texts; there was no way of predicting dis-
tances of the moon from planets or of planets from each other. The 
phenomena of the planets could also be predicted by periods, and 
this too was done in the goal-year texts, but there was another 
way, by controlling not only periodicities but inequalities of the 
intervals of time and arc between phenomena. It was this method, 
or rather methods, since they are diverse, that lie at the founda-
tion of the ephemerides, the purpose of which is to determine the 
date of phenomena by day of the lunar calendar month and the 
location by zodiacal sign, just as in the reports in the Diaries. The 
observations in the Diaries were undoubtedly divinatory, the 
phenomenon and appearance of the planet, the month and the day 
of the month, and the location in constellations or near specific 
stars determining the character of the omen, which may concern 
anything from the political and military fortune of the king and 
the kingdom to the price of agricultural commodities; and perhaps 
also magical, using stars, planets, and their conjunctions for 
apotropaic rituals to avert prognostications from inauspicious 
omens, and for other magical practices believed to depend upon 
the influence of stars and planets, which are, after all, gods or 
representative of gods. 
The ephemerides, one may suppose, originally supplemented 
observations of the sort recorded in the Diaries, either as a substi-

174 
Summary and Conclusion 
tute when observation was impossible or missed because of bad 
weather—when it is clear, observe, when it is cloudy, compute—or 
for any reason, or as a guide to the most promising dates for 
anticipating the phenomena to be observed. Eventually, one may 
also suppose, they were also computed, both retrospectively and 
prospectively, for the very good reason that it was possible to do 
so, that is, through an interest on the part of the Scribes in 
applied mathematical science for its own sake. If such an interpre-
tation of their motivation seems anachronistic, so be it, but the 
complexity and diversity of the ephemerides go far beyond what is 
necessary to predict ominous phenomena, for which goal-year 
periods would suffice, and suggest nothing less than a rigorously 
scientific interest in the mathematical description of periodic 
natural phenomena. And after all, modern national ephemerides 
are computed and published not so much because they are used— 
their use is now slight—but because it is possible to do so, now 
using computer programs of the sort available to anyone. However, 
the earliest application of mathematical techniques to planetary 
phenomena appears in the Diaries near the beginning of the fourth 
century, a century before the earliest securely dated ephemeris— 
ACT 300a for System A2 of Mercury, which could be retrospective— 
in the form of inferences of true or 'ideal' dates of first and last 
appearance from the rising or setting time of the planet, presum-
ably measured with a water clock, on an observed date following 
true first or preceding true last appearance, the same method 
applied to the moon since the sixth century. These inferences of 
true dates were applied because it was the true appearance, not an 
observed appearance at the mercy of the weather, that was 
ominous, but the inference of true from observed dates was also 
essential to the development of a mathematical theory of the 
planets. For only with true dates could one find with sufficient 
accuracy the periodicities of phenomena and their 'errors' from 
integral years or months, from which longer and theoretically more 
accurate periods could be formed, and the variation of the true 
synodic times between phenomena, upon both of which is founded 
the planetary theory of the ephemerides. 
In addition to periods and true synodic times, the planetary 
theory depends upon a number of approximations, some of which 
had a lasting effect on the practice of mathematical astronomy. 
The ominous character of phenomena is determined by the lunar 
calendar month and perhaps by the day of the month, but in place 
of true months of 29 or 30 days, each of which would strictly have 
to be observed or computed by the lunar theory, the ephemerides 

Summary and Conclusion 
175 
use equal months of 30 'days', which we call by the Sanskrit term 
'tithis'. The ominous character of phenomena is also determined 
by the constellations or stars near which the phenomena occur, 
but in place of zodiacal constellations of irregular or undefined 
length the ephemerides use equal signs of 30 us, which are arith­
metic units for calculation, not a coordinate system of longitude, 
although by convention we have here used the term longitude to 
describe location within the zodiac. In Greek astronomy signs of 
30 degrees, interpreted geometrically as divisions of a circle, 
became a coordinate of longitude, and equal signs the principal 
significative divisions of the zodiac in all later astrology, although 
computed, unequal divisions of 'loci' or 'houses' were also used. 
Heliacal phenomena, as first and last appearance, take place at 
characteristic but variable elongations from the true sun, but in 
place of the nonuniform motion of the true sun, which is used in 
the lunar theory, the planetary theory uses as an approximation 
the uniform motion of the mean sun, the same mean sun used 
later in Ptolemy's planetary theory, and in place of variable elon­
gations assumes in general that the phenomena occur at fixed 
elongations. This is what van der Waerden (1957) called the 'solar-
distance principle', and it was doubtless also intended as an 
approximation. Consequently, the synodic arc of the phenomenon 
AX can be found from the synodic arc of the mean sun AA, a linear 
function of the synodic time AT, by the relations 
4T 
60 + e 
— = ' ο Λ 
, 
AT-AA = AT-AA = C, 
Δλ = ΔΛ-ί6,0°, 
AA 
6,0 
and various other forms, which apply to true synodic arc and time 
with only small periodic errors. It is the second relation between 
arc and time, that they differ by a constant, that underlies, with 
some exceptions, both the conversion between arc and time in the 
ephemerides and the derivation of parameters from the dates of 
phenomena without location more precise than by zodiacal sign. 
The relation depends upon two approximations, uniform motion of 
the sun and fixed elongations of phenomena, but considering the 
difficulty, if not impossibility, of precise measurement of position, 
computing synodic arc from synodic time was probably more 
accurate than any measurement that could be made, and consis­
tently related the phenomena to the elongations from the sun 
upon which they were known to depend. The Scribes were nothing 
if not sensible about what could and could not be done, and the 
most efficient and reliable way of doing it. 

176 
Summary and Conclusion 
The observations in the Diaries show a general relation be­
tween location in the zodiac and synodic time, given by the dates 
of phenomena, combined with a considerable scatter that we take 
to be errors in the dates of the observation, but that, except in the 
case of extreme discrepancies, the Scribes would have no reason to 
distrust. After all, the dates of first and, for the inferior planets, 
last appearances, probably the most important for the determina­
tion of synodic times, were simply observations of whether the 
planet was or was not visible, with true dates inferred from rising 
or setting times if necessary, and to doubt their reliability is to 
accuse virtually all the observations of errors of a few days. There 
would thus appear to be any number of factors determining the 
intervals of true synodic time, not all of which could be con­
trolled—in this sense the entirety of Babylonian planetary theory 
is an approximation—although the most important was recognized 
to be location in the zodiac. With geometrical models for the 
motion of the planets within a system of coordinates, such as 
those of Ptolemy or Kepler, the inequalities of motion, and thus of 
synodic arc and time, are necessarily and precisely a function of 
longitude, of location in the zodiac, and, for visibility phenomena, 
of location within the coordinates of spherical astronomy, which is 
itself a model. But with purely arithmetic functions for synodic arc 
and time such a relation is not a necessity, but an assumption or 
an approximation for the purpose of calculation supported for the 
most part by the observations. 
The Scribes developed two distinct methods of approximating 
the complex behavior of the observed phenomena. In one, charac­
teristic of System B, the synodic arc and time are a function, not 
of longitude directly, but of the number of the phenomenon in the 
period. Since the period contains Π phenomena in Z zodiacal rota­
tions, or Π/Ζ phenomena in one zodiacal rotation, by giving the 
function for the variation of synodic arc and time the period P = 
Π/Ζ and aligning it properly to the zodiac, the true synodic arcs 
and times correspond more or less to location in the zodiac, with 
only periodic discrepancies that are small for Saturn and Jupiter, 
although perhaps excessively large for Mars. System B thus 
provides further evidence that the relation of synodic arc and time 
to longitude was taken to be approximate, for if synodic arc and 
time were known to be a strict function of longitude. System B 
would not have been used or would have been abandoned, which it 
was not since ephemerides of Jupiter in Systems A, A' and B are 
all in use in the first century. In the more adaptable System A, the 
true synodic arc and time are precisely a function of location in 

Summary and Conclusion 
177 
the zodiac, of longitude, but this too, although we know it to be 
strictly correct, could only have been considered an approximation 
to the synodic time between true dates of phenomena given by 
observation—unless most of the observations were taken to be in 
error—and thus to the synodic arc since arc is given by time. 
Venus has the properties of both systems in that the synodic arc 
and time depend upon the number of the phenomenon in a cycle of 
five synodic periods in eight years, but the longitudes of the 
phenomena drift slowly back through the zodiac at the rate of 
-2;30° in System Aj and -2;40° in System A2 in each eight-year 
period. Hence, for a considerable time Venus's phenomena behave 
as though a function of location in the zodiac, although the 
locations regress by about one zodiacal sign per century. 
In yet another approximation in both systems, the same func­
tion is used for all phenomena of the superior planets—only the 
retrograde arcs of Mars receive separate treatment—although the 
synodic times between successive first or second stations, which 
depend upon the velocities of the sun and the planet, are not 
necessarily the same as the intervals between successive first or 
last appearances, which also depend upon the inclination of the 
ecliptic to the horizon and the latitude and brightness of the 
planet, each a function of longitude, as we have noted, but not the 
same function. However, due to the scatter of the synodic times 
derived from observations, and the uncertainty of the exact dates 
of stations, such distinctions may have been without significance 
or impossible. Even for Mercury, for which only first and last 
appearances were considered, in each system two of the four 
phenomena are treated independently and two as functions of the 
longitude, or just the zodiacal sign, of the preceding phenomenon, 
which is itself an approximation to fully independent treatment. 
Only in Systems Αχ and A2 of Venus is each phenomenon treated 
independently with its own succession of synodic arcs and times, 
but these are a consequence of the subdivision of the synodic arc 
and time, of the arcs and times between adjacent phenomena, in 
each of the five synodic periods in an eight-year cycle, which are 
closer to the empirical basis of the systems for Venus, although 
how the arcs were determined is not clear. 
The approximations depending upon location are still greater 
than those depending upon time. The observed locations of phe­
nomena by zodiacal sign, at times specifying beginning or end of 
the sign, permit only approximate locations of longer and shorter 
synodic arcs and times. In System A of Saturn and Jupiter, in 
which the lengths of the zones are determined algebraically, one 

178 
Summary and Conclusion 
zone is taken to begin at the beginning of a zodiacal sign, for Mars 
all zones are exactly two signs, for Mercury all zones were original-
ly taken from the beginning of signs as integral numbers of signs, 
and then adjusted to bring the periods of the four phenomena into 
agreement. The locations of the greatest and least synodic arcs and 
times in System B, estimates of the midpoints of the regions of the 
zodiac in which the greatest and least synodic arcs and times 
occur, and strictly variable, agree in their mean positions more or 
less with the midpoints of the fast and slow zones of System A, 
although some ephemerides for Saturn show a forward shift of a 
full sign. Location could be specified with precision only where it 
could be found as a function of time, as in the relation of synodic 
time and arc. Where it depends upon independent measurement, 
although estimation would be a better word, as in the limits of 
zones or the locations of the greatest and least synodic arcs and 
times, it was necessarily rough. The determination of initial 
longitude by the addition of a mean elongation, probably for first 
appearance, to the mean longitude of the sun, although not as 
theoretically precise as the relation of synodic arc and time, was 
nevertheless preferable to a direct measurement of position. 
However, the most important approximation, indeed, the most 
important limitation of the planetary theory is mathematical 
rather than astronomical, and this too the Scribes surely realized. 
For System A, which is far superior to System B, and for Mercury 
in particular, the computation of the synodic arc or time can be 
considered as the integration by summation of a discontinuous 
function for AX and At of one, two or at the most three steps W{ 
through one synodic period. The Scribes would understand this 
perfectly, although in different words, for they also knew how to 
compute the daily motion of a planet, which is the equivalent of 
taking the derivative of the same discontinuous function by 
interpolation. The language here is modern, but the concepts are 
ancient, at least in mathematical astronomy. In principle, the 
Babylonian methods are startlingly modern, analogous to an inte-
gration of the equations of motion. If the zodiac were divided into 
60 or 120 or 360 zones with very close but still discontinuous wi 
for AX and At in each, and wi+i/wi still a ratio of regular numbers, 
which could hardly remain small, it would be possible to integrate 
the motion and time through the synodic period with very great 
precision. But the computation would be horrendous, as Kepler 
discovered when he attempted to do something similar in summing 
distances between the sun and planet, which he thought to be 
proportional to the time in each small arc of the planet's orbit. 

Summary and Conclusion 
179 
The Scribes understood discontinuous functions, indeed, they 
invented discontinuous functions, and they were surely aware of 
the possibility of using a great number of zones and of the obstacle 
of carrying out the calculation. Hence for this reason too, they 
must have seen their own theory as an approximation, in this case 
to a completely impractical computation. With only a few zones 0¾ 
and a few steps w^ for AX and At selected as maximum, minimum, 
and mean or one or two transitions, even if these were perfectly 
accurate according to modern theory, the functions would still be 
only approximate for intermediate AX and At, as noted earlier for 
Mercury. The constant second differences of System B give a more 
nearly continuous and symmetrical function, of the number of the 
phenomenon in the period rather than of longitude, which may be 
satisfactory for Saturn, but seems to have been found too 
inflexible for Jupiter and Mars, and altogether inappropriate to the 
asymmetries of Mercury's four heliacal phenomena. 
There is, however, one essential part of the planetary theory in 
which no approximation, no estimation, is tolerated, in which the 
highest precision is scrupulously maintained within each system, 
and that is the period. It is true that there are slightly different 
periods in variant systems for Saturn and Jupiter, some of which 
are in error, and Systems Ai and A2 of Venus have a notable 
discrepancy, but for Mercury's four phenomena in Systems Αχ and 
A2, adjustments were applied to bring their periods into agreement 
with the 'exact' value to nearly three fractional places, which is 
necessary if they are to be used together, and System A3 also 
shows adjustments to fit the period. For upon the period depends 
the continuing accuracy of the theory, which may be subject to 
periodic or isolated imprecisions and approximations, as in the 
length or location of one or another synodic arc or zone, but must 
be free of cumulative error. Even large errors, such as falling short 
of the maximum AX and At of Mars by as much as 30° and 40
τ, 
which will affect subsequently computed longitudes and dates, and 
thus AX and At, will eventually be compensated so long as the 
period, and with it the mean values AX and At, are maintained. It 
is to maintain the period that longitudes and dates are sometimes 
computed to three and even five otherwise insignificant fractional 
places. The bedrock of the entire planetary theory is the inviolabil­
ity of the period P = Π/Z, and algebraic relations between the fixed 
period and variable synodic arcs and times both maintain the 
period without error and determine the parameters of the systems. 
In System B the parameters depend upon the amplitude of the 
function A = M- τη, originally given by observed synodic times, and 

180 
Summary and Conclusion 
the difference d such that 2A/d = Π/Ζ = P, which results in odd 
fractional places in M and m but assures that the period will be 
maintained. System A is more complex, but more refined and 
adaptable to specified synodic arcs and times. The system is 
denned and the parameters are determined by the three conditions, 
LXu^
=Z
 = P· 
2.Σα1 = 6,0, 
3. — = £ 
where p/q is a ratio of regular numbers. These are sufficient to set 
up a system of linear equations in which the parameters 0¾ and u>i 
may be found from the fixed period and variable synodic arcs, de-
rived from observed synodic times by the constant relation between 
synodic time and the synodic arc of the phenomenon, ΔΤ - Δλ= C. 
In addition, the third condition assures that the period will be pre­
served in computing ephemerides by preventing the introduction of 
cumulative errors due to rounding or truncation in the transitions 
between zones. 
In summation, of all these principles, some intended as 
approximations, the most important are: (1) the invariability of 
the period, through which the mean synodic arc and time are 
determined and the computation of true synodic arcs and times 
continued over long periods without cumulative error; (2) the 
recurrence of phenomena at characteristic elongations from the 
sun, regarded as fixed except for small periodic variations that are 
an artifact of computation in the ephemerides; (3) the uniform 
motion of the mean sun, which measures the synodic arc, through 
which an unknown synodic arc may be found from a known 
synodic time; (4) as a consequence of (2) and (3), the constant 
numerical difference between synodic time and synodic arc 
measured by the uniform motion of the mean sun; and (5) the 
relation of the variation of true synodic arc and time to location in 
the zodiac. Of these, (1) was considered precise and (2) through (5) 
were thought to be approximations, although it is now known that 
(5) is a precise relation. 
As mentioned at the end of the brief review in the Introduction, 
we have come a long way from reports of ominous phenomena in 
the heavens, but so have the Scribes, for what began as observa­
tion for purposes of divination and magic has become applied 
mathematical science very much in the modern sense. Only the 
gods could decree the phenomena of nature, but the Scribes 
learned to interpret the phenomena of nature and then to predict 

Summary and Conclusion 
181 
the phenomena of nature through the first exact science. That the 
most sophisticated natural science of antiquity, mathematical 
astronomy, arose, not from philosophical speculation about 
causes, but from the systematic recording of portents and omens 
in the service of prognostication and magic, both of which 
themselves work through unknown causes, is against all received 
wisdom but nonetheless true. For prediction of planetary phenom-
ena by calculation and prognostication of events by omens, 
although their methods differ, were both predictions, prophecies if 
you will, and both carried out by the very same scholars. Yet, as 
Neugebauer pointed out again and again, both in speech and in 
writing, the Scribes of Enuma Anu Enlil developed a mathematical 
and scientific interest in the intricacies of lunar and planetary 
phenomena that went far beyond their application as omens, for 
which goal-year prediction alone would be adequate with no need 
for mathematical astronomy. That the men who created this new 
science,' he wrote in his last paper (1989, 392), 'were fully aware of 
the revolutionary character of their approach cannot be doubted.' 
Revolutionary it was, the origin, I believe, of science as we still 
understand it, and although the path has not been continuous, 
the mathematical sciences properly understood have followed in its 
course ever since. From the earliest omen texts and Diaries to the 
latest almanacs and ephemerides, for century after century, 
generations of teachers and students observed, calculated, and 
also pondered deeply how these irregular but periodic phenomena 
were to be described, reduced to precise rules, and computed for 
the past, present, and future. They have left no record of their 
theoretical analyses and discussions, but to judge from the works 
they have left us, the Diaries and ephemerides, the goal-year texts 
and almanacs, the discussions of two Scribes of Enuma Anu Enlil 
contained more rigorous science than the speculations of twenty 
philosophers speaking Greek, not even Aristotle excepted. I say 
this seriously, not as provocation, and further, I believe it is due 
precisely to the scientific and technical character of Babylonian 
astronomy that most historians and philosophers remain without 
comprehension of it, still preferring to dote upon childish fables 
and Delphic fragments of Pre-Socratics, requiring no knowledge of 
mathematics and less taxing to the intellect. Although pure 
mathematics reached a high level of development in the fourth and 
third centuries, there was nothing comparable in Greek natural 
science, including the zoological and botanical treatises of Aris-
totle and Theophrastus, as interesting and admirable as they are. 
Observational astronomy was limited to calendars of risings and 

182 
Summary and Conclusion 
settings of stars and constellations with correlations, or prognosti-
cations, of weather; mathematical astronomy to the nineteen-year 
calendar cycle and the inequality of the seasons, both long known 
to the Scribes; the models of Eudoxus, and likewise Aristarchus, 
were clever but useless. And it has come to be seen that the far 
more significant work of Hipparchus was in great part an assimila-
tion of Babylonian methods and parameters, which both formed 
the foundation of Greek mathematical astronomy and, as shown 
by Jones's (1998) investigation of the Oxyrhynchus astronomical 
papyri, continued in use among astrologers virtually unchanged for 
more than four hundred years, that is, a century after Ptolemy. 
The origin of rigorous, technical science was not Greek but 
Babylonian, not Indo-European but Semitic, something I believe 
no one who has read Kugler and Neugebauer with understanding 
can doubt, and, my God, those Scribes were smart. 
More than a century has passed since Strassmaier and Epping, 
and nearly a century since Kugler, made the extraordinary sophis-
tication of Babylonian mathematical astronomy apparent, and the 
succeeding scholarship of Neugebauer, Oppenheim, and others has 
confirmed again and again that it is to the Scribes that we must 
look for the true origins of the methods and practice of science and 
of the scientific description of nature. And to say this is not 
anachronism, nor is it selecting some parts of the concerns of the 
Scribes and ignoring others; mathematical science in the service of 
the interpretation of natural omens is still mathematical science. 
For the Scribes' continuous and patient collection of observations, 
which they could evaluate and correct, their investigations into 
periodicities and variations shown by those observations, for 
which they devised precise theoretical and mathematical descrip-
tions, their trial and application of methods of calculation, which 
they could then check against the very same observations, differ in 
degree, that is, in accuracy, but not in kind from the methods of 
the mathematical sciences that have continued from Ptolemy to 
Galileo to our own day; including what appears to be a healthy 
agnosticism concerning causes—in common, it should be noted, 
with divination and magic—although that may only reflect our 
ignorance of thoughts they did not chose to commit to writing. 
And in this silence, they best consulted their own reputations, for 
in science causes are ephemeral while mathematics endures. 

Appendix 
Alternative Methods of Deriving 
Parameters 
The method we have set out for deriving the parameters of the 
ephemerides, although applied in various ways under specific con­
ditions, both algebraic and for preserving the period, is consistent 
in its empirical foundation, the dates of heliacal phenomena and 
location by zodiacal sign, exactly the observational records in the 
Diaries and related collections. The dates are used to determine 
limits of the synodic times and, for Mercury, one or two additional 
synodic times, and the difference between synodic time and arc is 
then taken as constant, as in the ephemerides, to find the synodic 
arc. None of this is applicable to Venus as the difference between 
synodic time and arc is not constant. The principal decisions to be 
made, over which we have no control, are the selection of these 
values of the synodic times from the large body of observations, 
which we have seen to be inconsistent and contain many errors, 
some obvious, some not, and any roundings or adjustments that 
may have been introduced to fit the period P = Π/Ζ and to apply 
the same synodic time and arc to most of the phenomena of each 
superior planet. The question arises of whether there are alternate 
methods. Here we shall consider two, of which one has been 
applied to Mars and the other not yet applied to any planet. 
Derivation of System A from the Number of Phenomena 
In 'Observation and Theory in Babylonian Astronomy,' Aaboe 
(1980} proposed deriving the parameters for Mars from the number 
of phenomena in each zone of two zodiacal signs. Like the synodic 
times, these also may be directly extracted from the Diaries, which 
give the zodiacal sign of each phenomenon except acronychal 
rising, sometimes specifying beginning or end of the sign. In order 
to test this method, Aaboe took the first stations in each zodiacal 
sign from Tuckerman's tables (1962) beginning in -500 for six 
different periods of phenomena, and tabulated them for compari­
son with the phenomena per zone derived from the 284-year ACT 
system by π\ - Z[ai/w{j. With τη taken independently from observa-

184 
Appendix. Alternative Methods 
tion, w\ can then be found from w\ = Ζ(α\/π\), thereby completely 
determining the system. We reproduce Aaboe's tabulation in Table 
A. 1 rearranged to begin with the slowest zone. For each period, in 
the heading are given the number of phenomena 77, here first 
stations, the number of zodiacal rotations Z, the period in years 
2/7 + Z, the period P = 77/Z, and the difference ε between the 
tropical longitudes of the initial and final stations. The first 
column gives the zone and zodiacal signs and the last column the 
number of phenomena per zone of the 284-year ACT system. In the 
remaining columns are given, under π the number of stations 
counted in each sign, and under Σπ the sum for each zone, 
beneath which is the anticipated number of stations were those in 
each shorter period extended to the ACT period, by (18/Ζ)Σπ, 
rounded to the nearest integer. 
It is this last quantity that may be compared with the number 
of phenomena in the last column; those that agree are marked 
with an asterisk. In no case do more than three out of six agree, 
and these, interestingly, are for the shortest periods of 32 and 47 
years which together contain five out of six; the period of 126 years 
and the 284-year period itself show two agreements; the 79-year 
and 205-year periods, which reproduce longitudes quite accurately, 
agree only in zone 3, which is common to all the periods. The 
agreement may be improved if it is allowed that some phenomena 
may be off by one zone and adjusted accordingly, as in the case of 
the 284-year period zones 2 and 6 differ from the ACT system by +1 
phenomenon, and shifting one from each of these to zone 1 would 
increase it to 34. And the adjustment of (18/Ζ)Σπ to a regular 
number could then raise zone 1 from 34 to 36. The shorter periods, 
however, cannot be so easily adjusted since a difference of ±1 
phenomenon in a zone multiplied by 18/Z can produce a large 
discrepancy with the ACT Σπ, in the zones of some periods no 
integer multiplied by 18/Z can round to the ACT Σπ, and fractional 
phenomena do not make sense. 
We may examine the method further by computing w\ corres­
ponding to Στη counted in each period from w\ = Ζ(αι/Σπϊ), where Z 
is specific to each period and 0¾ = 1,0°. The results are shown in 
Table A.2 in which wi, if it ends with a comma, is non-terminating 
(since it results from division by a non-regular π\, something that 
a Scribe, we presume, would not do). Those that agree with the 
ACT function in the last column are marked with an asterisk, and 
it is notable that every single ACT w\ turns up in one or another 
period. Again the shortest periods of 32 years and 47 years show 
the best agreement, while only in the 284-year period does w*, = 

Number of Phenomena 
185 
1,7; 30°, which in our derivation was introduced as an adjustment 
to the period. Further, the shift of one phenomenon from the first 
to the second zone in the 47-year period, as shown by the numbers 
in parentheses, will produce exactly the symmetrical system we 
earlier derived, which may then be adjusted to the ACT period. And 
the 32-year period is itself completely symmetrical as it stands, 
although with a high w4 = 2,0°, from which AXm = 1,30°. This is 
interesting as it would actually be preferable to AXM = 1,22;30° in 
the ACT function, in coming closer to Mars's long AX and At in 
Scorpio, Sagittarius, and Capricorn, shown in Figure 2.4, and in 
fact superior to the ACT function over all. It thus appears that 
counting the locations of phenomena by zodiacal sign for shorter 
periods of observation, perhaps by (1) combining different periods 
for different zones, with (2) a sufficient number of allowances for 
phenomena shifting between zones and (3) adjustments to produce 
regular numbers and the required ACT period, which must be 
taken as given and not as an arbitrary result of the distribution of 
phenomena, can be used to establish the ACT parameters, at least 
for a system of equal zones, as that of Mars. 
The method has not been applied to any other planet. I have 
attempted it for Mercury, taking the four phases computed by 
modern theory for 13 years containing 41 synodic periods as part 
of the comparisons in Part 2, and assuming the original limits of 
the zones, and I could not get close to the final values of either τη 
or Wi by any reasonable adjustments. This is not surprising since, 
as remarked earlier, I do not believe it possible to derive the 
parameters from phenomena according to modern calculation 
without adjustments, and I may simply have been unable to find 
appropriate, plausible adjustments. 
But what appears to be a more serious problem with the 
method is that it offers no explanation for why zones of unequal 
length should ever be used, for it would seem natural simply to 
divide the zodiac into, say, from two to six equal zones, and then 
let the number of phenomena in each, along with some correction 
for regular numbers and maintaining the ACT period, determine 
the resulting values of τη and w\. Saturn could be given two equal 
zones, Jupiter two or four, and Mercuiy three or four, and the 
number of phenomena in each would then yield π\ and u>i appro­
priate to such equal divisions. On the other hand, the direct use of 
AX, derived from At, and its locations by zodiacal. sign in the 
Diaries for finding both αϊ and wj, would seem to explain the 
unequal division of the zodiac that we find for every planet except 
Mars, so perhaps the remarkable thing is that Mars alone has 

186 
Appendix. Alternative Methods 
equal zones. Thus, Mercury's original zones and the relation of 
their limits to the maximum and minimum, and for Ω and Σ the 
mean, Δλ and At seem to indicate this more direct approach rather 
than first dividing the zodiac unequally, and differently for each 
phenomenon—for what reason?—and then counting phenomena in 
each zone to find π\ and wi. Again, the equal differences of the 
minimum, mean, and maximum At and Δλ of Ω and Σ, of 6 and 12 
respectively, would seem to indicate that these were selected in 
advance rather than the indirect result of counting phenomena in 
each zone, which have no simple relation. Likewise, the adjusted 
limits of the zones would appear to be for the purpose of approxi­
mating the exact ACT period rather than divisions selected in 
advance—again, for what reason?—and the large number of phe­
nomena πι in each zone, from 96 to 1320, a secondary result of πι = 
Z(a\/wi), where Z, which differs for each phenomenon, is itself a 
result of the approximation to the ACT period. Nor does it seem 
that the unequal zones «ι of Saturn and Jupiter, which can be 
derived algebraically directly from wι and P, would have been 
selected for counting phenomena or appear as adjustments of 
originally equal zones. Finally, it is not clear how counting 
phenomena can be applied to System B. For these reasons, I doubt 
whether the method was used to derive the ACT parameters, and it 
appears that concern with τη, as in the adjustment of Jupiter's 
System A' to A" to produce integer values of πι, was a secondary 
refinement of existing parameters rather than the basis of their 
derivation, and much the same applies to the use of the intervals 
<5i, as in the subdivisions of the synodic arc of Mars. In fact, the 
significance of πι and δι, which, with few exceptions, follow from 
and do not determine aj, wi, and Z, has, I believe, been overstated. 
Finding the Synodic Arcfrom the 
Direct Measurement of Longitude 
The other possibility is the use of synodic arcs derived, not 
from synodic times, but from the direct measurement of zodiacal 
longitude by observation. Now, every derivation that has been done 
here from Δλ derived from At can also be done from Δλ taken 
directly from observation. The question is, was it possible to find 
Δλ by the direct measurement of longitude? One's first guess is 
that this could be done by the measurement of distance 'above' or 
'below', 'in front of or 'behind' a normal star at first visibility, the 
date of which is, at least in principle, more accurately determined 

Direct Measurement of Longitude 
187 
than that of other phenomena, using a 'star catalogue', of which a 
fragment published by Sachs (1952) gives locations of stars of Leo, 
Virgo, and Libra to integer degrees of each zodiacal sign, to locate 
the normal star and then the planet. The difficulties here seem to 
me very great. From the limited examination I have made, which 
was not restricted to first visibilities, the measurements are not at 
all accurate, indeed, are very rough and inconsistent, whatever the 
unit of measure. As noted earlier, they could have been made with 
something as simple as a graduated rod held at arm's length; and 
arms differ in length and the center of curvature for moving the 
arm is the shoulder, not the eye. The line joining the star and 
planet in these observations may be at a wide range of inclinations 
to the ecliptic, so it is hard to see how a measurement of separa-
tion could be reduced to difference of longitude with any precision. 
It should, however, be noted that in a recent study using 
distances of the moon from normal stars, GraJ3hoff (1998) has 
found that the directions 'above' and 'below' refer to differences of 
latitude and 'in front of and 'behind' to differences of longitude, 
and concluded that the measurements are in a system of ecliptic 
coordinates. Perhaps, although directions perpendicular and 
parallel to the direction of motion would themselves be very close 
to ecliptic coordinates, but if the true date of first visibility was 
prior to the observed date, as is often the case, the measurement 
would be of little use since the location of the planet at the earlier 
date is unknown, and interpolation by daily motion seems 
uncertain. Even less so could measurements at conjunctions that 
happened to occur several days after first visibility, or at several 
days separation from any phenomenon, be used to find an accurate 
longitude on the date of the phenomenon. Of course, the selection 
could be restricted to first visibilities in which the true and 
observed dates are the same. However, such a restriction raises 
another problem, that the surviving Diaries contain very few 
reports of distances from normal stars at first visibility even when 
the true and observed dates differ, which may of course be 
fortuitous, but may also reflect the scarcity of observations of a 
planet close to visible stars shortly before sunrise or after sunset. 
And then there is the problem that about 60° of the zodiac, in 
Aquarius and Pisces, are without normal stars. 
What the Diaries do contain more often at first visibility is 
measurements of distances from other planets, which are brighter 
than most stars. Although the ominous significance of such 
conjunctions was doubtless considerable, they are of no use for 
determining position. Here are examples of both kinds: 

188 
Appendix. Alternative Methods 
-567 XII. [> The 12th, Mercury) was in front of the 'band' of the 
Swallow, 1/2 cubit below Venus, Mercury having passed 8 fingers to 
the east; when it became visible it was bright and (already) high. 
-382 III. [> The 15th, Saturn's] first appearance [....] β Geminorum; 
it was bright (and) high, (ideal) first appearance on the 15th. 
-463 VI. The 5th, Jupiter's first appearance behind γ Virginis. 
-375 XI. The 11th, Mars' first appearance in Capricorn, 2 1/2 
cubits behind Venus to the east; it was bright (and) high. 
-373 VII. Night of the 25th, last part of night, [...Saturn's first 
appearance ...] behind α Librae, it was 1/2 cubit high to the north. 
-366 IV. The 10th, Mercury's first appearance in the west in Leo, 3 
cubits in front of Venus to the west; sunset to setting of Mercury; 
16° (ideal) first appearance on the 8th. 
-366 IV. The 28th, Mars' first appearance 1 1/2 cubits behind α 
Leonis to the east; rising of Mars to sunrise: 22°; (ideal) first 
appearance on the 15th. 
-284 VII. [The 23rd, Saturn's] first appearance 4 1/2 cubits behind 
Jupiter to the east; it was high, rising of Saturn to sunrise: 17°; 
(ideal) first appearance on the 21st. 
-218 VIII. The 21st, Mercury's first appearance in the east in Scor-
pius, 2/3 cubit behind β Scorpii, [...] in front of Venus to the west; 
it was bright (and) high, rising of Mercury to sunrise: 19°. 
ADT -185 XII contains first visibilities of Jupiter and Saturn 
with distances from each other and from Mercury and Mars, surely 
all very ominous. There is no distinction in the Diaries between 
distances from stars and from planets—stars may even substitute 
for planets in omens—and they must have been recorded for the 
same reason, which has everything to do with ominous signifi­
cance and nothing to do with precise location. Likewise, the use of 
normal stars to find positions at stations or computed positions of 
the sun to find positions at acronychal risings, applicable only to 
the superior planets, would be not better, but worse because the 
date of these phenomena is only an approximation (or a guess). At 
least with first and last appearance, it either happens or it does 
not. What then was the purpose of the star catalogue? Of course I 
do not know, but one possibility that comes to mind is as an aid 
to estimating the dates of ominous conjunctions with those stars, 
using the computed date and location of the phase nearest to a 
star and the planet's daily velocity between phases, as in procedure 
texts on subdivisions of the synodic arc. I would, however, doubt 
whether the more complex methods of interpolation known for 
Jupiter and Mercury (cf. HAMA1 413ff.) were used for this purpose. 
And I have no idea of how the locations in the star catalogue were 

Direct Measurement of Longitude 
189 
found nor just what they are supposed to mean. In any case, it 
appears to me that distances from normal stars had no role in 
finding the parameters of the ephemerides; Neugebauer (HAMA, 
546-47), I should note, held much the same opinion. If this 
conclusion appears too skeptical, it may certainly be refuted by 
finding longitudes from distances from normal stars and then 
deriving the parameters of the ephemerides from those longitudes. 
But the situation for precise determination of longitude by any 
kind of measurement actually appears to me even worse because 
errors in the planetary theory of the ephemerides indicate that 
there was little control over longitude independently of time. (Of 
course a longitude could always be found for any phenomenon 
from the computed mean longitude of the sun and fixed elongation 
by Ap = A8 ± η, as in finding an epoch. But this is neither measured 
nor independent of time, and the resulting synodic arcs would 
differ from AX = At - c by only the small differences in Table 1.6.) 
Consider the large errors, if that is what they may be called, 
implicit in the ephemerides compared to modern theory, of as 
much as 10° in the elongations at first visibility of the superior 
planets and at first and last visibilities of Mercury, of from 10° to 
25° at the stations of Mars, of the restriction of the variation of 
Mars's retrograde arc to 3° when it actually varies over 8°, all of 
which presumably could have been corrected were it possible to 
measure longitude independently of time with any precision. The 
use of conventional values of the elongations, with implicit varia­
tions far smaller than actually occur would appear to indicate that 
the true elongations could not be found. Or if they could be found, 
we must presume that they were then ignored because the method 
of computation in the ephemerides can use only mean values. A 
comparison of the differences of longitude δλ between the phases 
of Mercury in System A\ in Table 3.7 and according to modern 
computation in Table 3.10 shows that, although some values are 
close, there are also disagreements of 10° and more, which of 
course makes one wonder just how δλ for the pushes was found. 
Likewise, if longitude could be measured with 
sufficient 
precision to find synodic arc independently of synodic time, we 
must ask why At - AX is so consistently taken as constant, for this 
would also mean first finding and then ignoring differences of ±10 
or even more in taking At-AX = c, as can be seen in Table 1.7. For 
if Δλ could be found independently of At, precisely or very nearly 
the same values of AX used here would have to be used to derive 
parameters since, as mentioned earlier, the ephemerides produce 
very closely AX and At used to derive their parameters; what comes 

190 
Appendix. Alternative Methods 
out had to go in, and very precisely so. Hence, were Δλ independ­
ent of At, we should have the remarkable coincidence that Δ λ 
found from observation just happened to differ from At, also found 
from observation, by the same mean constant c used in the 
ephemerides, and erroneously so. And to suggest that Δλ and At 
were originally found independently and then adjusted to differ by 
c, or Δλ found independently and At computed from At = Δλ + c, is 
to offer a difficult way to the same result than can be reached easily 
from Δλ = At- c, since it is easier to find At than Δλ. In addition, 
the great irregularity in At itself shown by the Diaries, due to 
errors of observation, would make an empirical conversion between 
At and Δλ even less certain than the use of the mean value c 
derived from the ACT period, as appears from the irregularity of the 
computed At for Σ of Mercury in Figure 2.13B although At for Ω in 
Figure 2.10B is somewhat better. 
It appears that the methods used by the Scribes for deriving 
parameters from the measurement of time were motivated above all 
by avoiding the requirement of precise measurement of longitude 
for the obvious reason that they knew perfectly well that they 
could do no such thing. They were aware that the difference 
between At and Δλ is not constant, they were aware that the elon­
gation at each phase is not fixed, just as they were aware that first 
and last appearances depend strictly upon elongation from the 
true sun rather than the mean sun, but they did not know either 
the full range or the precise behavior of the variation of each, and 
they did not construct a planetary theory based upon the true 
difference between synodic time and arc and the true variation of 
elongation because they could not measure longitude with 
sufficient precision to find them. In this sense, the entirety of 
Babylonian planetary is an approximation, and was intended as 
such, to phenomena whose behavior was too complex to compute, 
in part due to errors of observation of time, in part due to the 
inherent uncertainty of longitude that could not be directly and 
precisely measured. In surmounting these obstacles the Scribes 
formulated for the first time what has ever since been the funda­
mental principle of the applied mathematical sciences, namely, to 
devise methods to achieve an accurate theory from less than 
accurate observations, and in this sense they are the ancestors, 
not only of Ptolemy and Kepler, but of Newton and Laplace and 
everyone who has tried to reduce the complexities of nature to a 
mathematical description up to the present day. 

Tables 
Table 1.1. Periods and Errors of Periods 
Planet 1 pz 
Period 
n 
Z 
Y 
M 
p = n/z 
£mT 
A& 
Saturn 
a 
28 
1 
29 
5,58 28; 0 
+14;52,22 
-6; 3,38 -20;56 
384.1026 
b* 
57 
2 
59 
12,10 28;30 
-6; 9, 6 
+0;54,54 
+7; 4 
c = a + 4b 
4,16 
9 
4,25 
54,38 28;26,40 
-9;44, 4 
-2;24, 4 
+7;20 
Jupiter 
a 
11 
1 
12 
2,29 11; 0 
-12:31,18 
+4;40,42 +17:12 
405.2253 
b* 
1,5 
6 
1,11 
14,38 10;50 
-0;21,20 
-6; 5,20 
-5;44 
c* = a + b 
1,16 
7 
1,23 
17, 7 10;51,25,42, 
-12;52,38 
-1;24,38 +11;28 
d = a + 5c = 6a + 5b 
6,31 
36 
7,7 
1,28, 1 10;51,40 
+13; 5,32 
-2;22,28 -15;28 
Mars 
a 
7 
1 
15 
3, 5 
7; 0 
-3;39,23 -19:39,23 -16; 0 
792.3348 
b 
8 
1 
17 
3,31 
8; 0 
+8;40,42 +30:32,42 +21:52 
c = a + b 
15 
2 
32 
6,36 
7;30 
+5; 1,19 +10:53,19 
+5;52 
d* = a + c = 2a + b 
22 
3 
47 
9,41 
7;20 
+1;21,56 
-8;46, 4 -10; 8 
e* = d + c = 3a + 2b 
37 
5 
1,19 
16,17 
7;24 
+6;23,15 
+2; 7,15 
-4;16 
f = d + 3 e = 3c + 4d 
2,13 
18 
4,44 
58,33 
7;23,20 
-9;28,18 
-2;24,18 
+7; 4 
Venus 593.2055 a* 
5 
3 
8 
1,39 
1;40 
-3;58,21 
-2;30,21 
+1;28 
b = 2,24a 
- l . y 
12, 0 
7,11 19,11 
3,57,17 
1;40,13,55, 
-2; 2,24 +10:13,36 +12:16 
Mercury 
a 
19 
6 
6 
1,15 
3; 10 
-13;20,14 +10:15,46 +23;36 
117.7191 
b 
22 
7 
7 
1,26 
3; 8,34,17, 
+9;49,13 
-7;38,47 -17;28 
c = a + b 
41 
13 
13 
2,41 
3; 9,13,50, 
-3;31, 1 
+2;36,59 
+6; 8 
d=b 
+ c= 
a + 2b 
1, 3 
20 
20 
4, 7 
3; 9 
+6:18,12 
-5; 1,48 -11;20 
e = c + d=2a 
+ 3b 
1,44 
33 
33 
6,48 
3; 9, 5,27, 
+2;47,11 
-2;24,49 
-5;12 
f* = c + e = 3a + 4b 
2,25 
46 
46 
9,29 
3; 9, 7,49, 
-0;43,50 
+0;12,10 
+0;56 
Z = e + 2f=5c 
+ 3d 
6,34 
2, 5 
2, 5 
25,46 
3; 9, 7,12 
+1;19,31 
-2; 0,29 
-3;20 
h = 5f+2g 
= 2e + 9f 
25,13 
8, 0 
8, 0 
1,38,57 
3; 9, 7,30 
-1; 0, 6 
-3; 0, 6 
-2; 0 

192 
Tables: 1.2 
Phen 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign M 
£mx 
$ 
-261 
IX 
-18 [SI] 
-232 
IX 
-2 
SI 
5,58 
29 
+14 
-7 
r 
-197 
VII 
10 
^ 
-168 
VI 
27 
= 
+14;52 
-6;4 
+17 
Q 
-193 
VIII 
-9 
m 
-164 
VII 
-20 
m 
= +15 
= -6 
+11 
-10 
V 
-190 
V 
24 
/ 
-161 
V 
8 
s 
+14 
-7 
r 
-185 
XII 
21 
Kb 
-156 
XII 
11 
+20 
-1 
<P 
-173 
VIII 
-27 
si 
-144 
IX 
5 
[ X ] 
+8 
-13 
a 
-170 
V 
-7 
HP 
-141 
V 
16 HPb 
+9 
-12 
r 
-170 
VI 
12 
Tip 
-141 
VI 
25 
HP 
+13 
-8 
n 
-163 
VIII 
-11 
N\e 
-134 
VIII 
4 
TRn 
+23 
+2 
r 
-136 
VIII 
18 
m 
-107 
VIII 
9 
TRb 
+21 
0 
Q 
-134 
VIII 
4 
-105 
VII 
-15 
m 
+11 
-10 
0 
-322 
IX 
23 
[O] 
-263 
IX 
18 [O] 
12,10 
59 
-5 
+2 
n 
-266 
II 
12 
8 
-207 
II 
5 
8 
-6;9 
+0;55 
-7 
0 
<D 
-256 
XI 
15 
-
-197 
XI 
-10 
^ 
= -6 
= +1 
-5 
+2 
Q 
-253 
VII 
-18 
m 
-194 
VII 
-11 
m 
-7 
0 
¥ 
-249 
IV 
-29 
R^I 
-190 
V 
24 
[-"] 
-5 
+2 
<D 
-232 
IX 
-2 
SI 
-173 
VIII 
-27 
Si 
-5 
+2 
¥ 
-232 
XII 
28? [ f t ] 
-173 
XII 
-23 
a 
-5 
+2 
r 
-202 
V 
-11 
SI 
-143 
V 
10 
a 
-1 
+6 
Q 
-193 
VIII 
-9 
m 
-134 
VIII 
4 
TT\n 
-5 
+2 
n 
-191 
VIII 
22? 
s 
-132 
VIII 
15 
^ 
-7 
0 
n 
-170 
V 
-7 
HP 
-111 
V 
1 
HP 
-6 
+1 
r 
-166 
VIII 
11 [•*] 
-107 
VIII 
9 
mb 
-2 
+5 
n 
-164 
VII 
-20 
TT\ 
-105 
VII 
15 
•m. 
-5 
+2 
0 
-149 
VII 
-28 [ 8 ] 
-90 
VIII 
-20 [ 8 ]n 
-8 
-1 
r 
-141 
VI 
25 
HP 
-82 
VI 
18 
HP 
-7 
0 
Table 1.2. Saturn. Periods from Diaries 

Tables: 1.3 
193 
Phen 
Γ 
Γ 
Ψ 
Γ 
Ω 
Φ 
Φ 
Γ 
Ψ 
Φ 
Φ 
Ψ 
Φ 
Γ 
Ψ 
Γ 
Θ 
Φ 
Γ 
Φ 
Φ 
Θ 
Ψ 
Γ 
Φ 
Ψ 
T 
Γ 
Γ 
Φ 
Ψ 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-321 
VI 
6 
το? 
-289 
II 
6? 
b 
-257 
V 
15 
2 
-197 
XII 
1 
Kb 
-191 
IV 
15
? 
Λ 
-170 
VI 
<21 
X 
-158 
VII 
-6 
X 
-156 
IV 
29 
Λ 
-156 
XII 
30 
[Λ] 
-146 
VI 
22 
X 
-144 
IX 
18 
Λ 
-141 
III 
12 
=* 
-134 
VII 
-8 
X 
-108 
V 
7 
Λ 
-322 
XII 
21 
Λ 
-241 
II 
-16 
6 e 
-218 
VIII 
7 
[ b ] 
-195 
IV 
26 
[T] 
-189 
VII 
13 [=s=] 
-158 
VII 
6 
X 
-148 
IV 
23 
T 
-148 
VI 
22 
[T] 
-148 
VIII 
20 
T 
-324 
II 
28 
Ib 
-253 
VII 
1 
X 
-245 
VI 
5 
# 
-232 
VII 
-14 
CCO6 
-232 
XII 
(29) 
K 
-230 
I 
-18 
b 
-170 
VI 
<21 
I 
-160 
IX 
5 
[K] 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-309 
V 
23 
TO? 
-277 
II 
(28) 
b 
-245 
VI 
5 
% 
-185 
XII 
21 
K 
-179 
V 
-6 
ει 
-158 
VII 
-6 
X 
-146 
VI 
22 
X 
-144 
V 
15 
Λ 
-144 
XII2 
13 
Λ 
-134 
VII 
-8 
X 
-132 
IX 
-5 
Λ 
-129 
II 
24 
^= 
-122 
VI2 
26 
X 
-96 
V 
24 
TQ? 
-251 
XII 
-21 
Λ 
-170 
II 
18 
b 
-147 
VIII 
8 
[ b ] 
-124 
IV 
-26 
[T] 
-118 
VII 
12 
=2= 
-87 
VII 
-6 
X 
-77 
IV 
-23 
K 
-77 
VI 
-21 
[K] 
-77 
VIII 
-21 
[K] 
-241 
II 
-16 
b e 
-170 
VI 
<21 
[X] 
-162 
V 
-23 
-Z 
-149 
VII 
7 CCO 
-149 
XII 
18 
K 
-147 
II 
[6] 
b 
-87 
VII 
6 
X 
-77 
VIII 
20 
[K] 
Ml£ m* 
2,29 
-12;31 
= -12 
14,38 
-0;21 
= 0 
17, 7 
-12;53 
= -13 
Y Ιε/ 
12 
+4;41 
= +5 
1,11 
-6;5 
= -6 
1,23 
-1;25 
= -1 
£ιη
τ 
-15 
-8 
-10 
-10 
-9 
>-15 
-14 
-16 
-17 
-14 
-13 
-18 
-12 
-13 
0 
+2 
+1 
O 
-1 
O 
O 
-1 
+1 
-12 
<-10 
-12 
-7 
-11 
-12 
>-15 
-15 
V 
+2 
+9 
+7 
+7 
+8 
>+2 
+3 
+1 
O 
+3 
+4 
-1 
+5 
+4 
-6 
-Λ 
-5 
-6 
-7 
-6 
-6 
-7 
-5 
O 
<+2 
O 
+5 
+1 
O 
>-3 
-3 
Table 1.3. Jupiter. Periods from Diaries and LBAT 1409 

194 
Tables: 1.4 
Phen 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign M l£m* Y 
£mT 
£Yt 
-212 
XI 
-4 [TNI 
-197 
X 
1 
ID? 
3,5 
15 
-3 
-19 
<D 
-197 
X 
1 
TO? 
-182 
X 
-10 
m? 
-3;39 -19;39 
+9 
-7 
r 
-144 
VI 
-13 
TTg -129 
V 
-9 
a 
= -20 
-4 
-20 
¥ 
-124 
IX 
-15 
6 
-109 
IX 
<8 
a 
<-1 
<-23 
Q 
-123 
V 
10 
Iff 
-108 
IV 
-15 
Slt 
+5 
-11 
a 
-108 
IV 
-15 
-93 
IV 
-17 
SI 
+2 
-14 
r 
-251 
VII 
27? 
-234 
IX 
8 
m 
3,31 
17 
+11 
+33 
T 
-141 
VIII 
2 
T 
-124 
IX 
-15 
T 
+8;41 +30;33 
+13 
+35 
<t> 
-107 
VII 
22 
I 
-90 
VIII 
22 
o 
= +9 
= +31 
0 
+22 
r 
-289 
IV 
(8) 
o 
-257 
IV 
-16 
G 
6,36 
32 
+8 
+14 
Q 
-287 
I 
28 
I 
-255 
II 
23 
I 
+5;1 + 10;53 
-5 
+1 
r 
-283 
VII 
21 
-251 
VII 
27? 
-
~ +5 
= +11 
+6 
+12 
y 
-261 
XII] 
-23 
a 
-229 
XII 
>27 
>+4 >+10 
r 
-257 
IV 
-16 
G 
-225 
IV 
14 
G 
-2 
+4 
y 
-229 
XII 
>27 [<l]„ 
-197 
XII 
-30 
a 
<+3 
<+9 
y 
-173 
VII 
-21 
X 
-141 
VIII 
2 
r 
+11 
+17 
Q 
-168 
VI 
-16 TTlb 
-136 
VII 
-10 
m 
-6 
0 
Q 
-164 
XII 
-18 
T 
-132 
XII 
14 
-4 
+2 
y 
-141 
VIII 
2 
T 
-109 
IX 
V 
8 
+5 
+11 
r 
-293 
II 
5 
-246 
I 
18 
T 
9,41 
47 
+13 
+3 
r 
-281 
IX 
(5) mie 
-234 
IX 
8 
m 
+1;22 
-8;46 
+3 
-7 
© 
-276 
XI 
15 TTT)??1 -229 
XI 
19? w 
= +1 
= -9 
+4 
-6 
r 
-191 
VI 
(7) 
tie 
-144 
VI 
13 
TW 
+6 
-4 
a 
-132 
XII 
14 rn 
-85 
XII 
-27 
T 
+13 
+3 
n 
-366 
I 
-28 
8 c 
-287 
I 
28 
I 
16,17 
1,19 
0 
-4 
£2 
-202 
V 
8 
HP 
-123 
V 
10 
TU? 
+6;23 
+2;7 
+2 
-2 
n 
-164 
XII 
-18 
T 
-85 
XII 
-27 
T 
= +6 
= +2 
+9 
+5 
Table 1.4. Mars. Periods from Diaries 

Tables: 1.5-1.7 
195 
Planet 
n 
Z 
Y 
p = rvz 
AX 
At 
c = At-AX 
Saturn 
4,25 
9 
4,16 28;26,40 
12;39,22,30° 
24; 6,43, 7,30* 11:27,20,37,30 
Jupiter 
6,31 
36 
7, 7 10;51,40 
33; 8,44,48, 
45; 13,52,56, 
12; 5, 8, 8, 
Mars 
2,13 
18 
4,44 
7;23,20 
48;43,18,29, 
1,12;21,10,22, 
23;37,51,52, 
Venus 
12, 0 
7,11 19,11 
1;40,13,55, 3,35;30 
3,53;10 
17;40 
Mercury 25,13 
8, 0 
8, 0 
3; 9, 7,30 
1,54;12,36,38, 
1,57;43,15,54, 
3;30,39,15, 
Table 1.5. ACT Periods, Mean Synodic Arcs, Times, and Differences 
Planet 
AX 
AX 
£(t) 
e(X) 
Saturn 
B 
14; 5° 
12;39° 
0; 2,38T 
0; 2,33° 
Jupiter 
B 
38; 2 
33; 9 
0; 9, 0 
0; 8,44 
Mars 
A 
1,22;30 
48:43 
1; 2,18 
1; 0,27 
Mercury AI r 
2,19;30 
1,54;13 
0;46,53 
0;45,29 
» 
A, 
2,23;20 
0;53,42 
0;52, 6 
A2 z 
1,39;40 
» 
-0;26,50 
-0;26, 2 
» 
A2 £2 2, 0;30 
» 
0; 11,35 
0;11,14 
Table 1.6. Errors of Mean Differences of Time and Arc 
Planet 
Signs 
- AX)m 
c 
Signs 
(At-AX)M 
Saturn 
r a x 
10 (-1;30) 
11:27 
>0 vw / \ 13 (+ 1;30) 
Jupiter 
T b 
10 (-2) 
12; 5 
15 (+ 3) 
Mars 
r a 
19 M;30) 
23;38 
TT\ S 
36 (+12;30) 
Mercury r 
XOrt.1T)? -l 
M;30) 
3;31 
15 (+11:30) 
" 
^ 
X 
-3 (—6;30) 
» 
m 
8 (+ 4;30) 
Z 
r a 
-3 (-6:30) 
14 (+10:30) 
£2 
X 
-7 (-10:30) 
» 
14 (+10;30) 
Table 1.7. Errors of Constant Conversion of Time and Arc 

196 
Tables: 2.1A 
Per 
1 
3 
2 
6 
3 
3 
5 
2 
4 
6 
3 
2 
2 
6 
5 
2 
2 
5 
6 
5 
2 
1 
1 
1 
3 
6 
2 
4 
2 
Phen 
Θ 
Γ 
Ω 
Ω 
Ω 
Ω 
Φ 
Ω 
Γ 
Γ 
T 
Γ 
Φ 
Φ 
Ψ 
Ω 
Γ 
Γ 
Φ 
Γ 
Ψ 
Ω 
Ω 
Γ 
Γ 
Φ 
Ω 
Γ 
Γ 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
-333 
IV 
19
? [CCO] 
-324 
III 
(18) 
I 
-291 
IV 
6 
O 6 
-289 
IV 
24 
Λ 
-273 
XI 
7
? 
K n 
-270 
XII 
-23 
T 
-261 
IX 
-18 
[Λ] 
-253 
VII 
-18 Τ1\ 
-253 
VIII 
(23) TR 
-253 
VIII 
(23) 
IR 
-249 
IV 
-29 
[S] 
-249 
IX 
26 
^ b 
-234 
VIII 
1 
O 
-232 
IX 
~2 
Λ 
-232 
XII 
28
? 
[Λ] 
-209 
I 
7 
T 6 
-209 
II 
22 
b b 
-207 
III 
12 
b 
-207 
VI 
29? 
I 
-202 
V 
11 
Λ 
-201 
I 
(12) 
Λ 
-194 
ViI 
- I i 
τη, 
-191 
VIII 
-22? 
S 
-186 
XII 
1 CX 
-185 
XII 
21 
K 
-179 
VI2 
-2 
[ b ] 
-170 
V 
-7 
TlJ 
-170 
VI 
12 TD? 
-168 
VI 
27? =2= 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
-332 
V 
16 [CCC] 
-321 
V 
2 
O 
-289 
IV 
24 
Λ 
-283 
VII 
15 
Tn 
-270 
XII 
-23 
T 
-266 
II 
12 
b e 
-256 
XI 
15 
= 
-251 
VIII 
6 
Sb 
-249 
IX 
26 
#b 
-247 
XI 
(17) 
2 
-246 
VI 
11? 
2 
-247 
XI 
(17) 
2 
-232 
IX 
-2 
Λ 
-226 
XI 
23 
^ 
-226 
II 
28 TO? 
-207 
II 
5 
b 
-207 
III 
12 
b 
-202 
V 
-11 
Λ 
-201 
X 
4 
Λ 
-197 
VII 
10 
=^ 
-199 
II 
-ι 
ει 
-193 
VIII 
-9 TR.e 
-190 
IX 
-19 
a b 
-185 
XII 
-30? 
Kb 
-182 
I 
(23) 
Ke 
-173 
VIII 
-27 
a 
-168 
V 
-19 
^ b 
-166 
VIII 
11 [^=] 
-166 
VIII 
11 =^= 
At 
27
τ 
24;40 
24 
23;30 
25;20 
26;20 
23;24 
24 
23;15 
24 
24 
25;30 
30;30 
23;30 
24 
29 
25 
23;48 
25;50 
23;48 
24;30 
28 
27 
29 
20;40 
24; 10 
21 
22;15 
22 
Table 2. IA. Saturn. Synodic Times from Diaries 

Tables: 2.1A 
197 
Per 
1 
1 
2 
4 
5 
5 
2 
2 
1 
2 
5 
1 
5 
1 
6 
5 
1 
5 
3 
4 
5 
Phen 
Ω 
Θ 
Γ 
Ψ 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Ω 
Θ 
Ω 
Ψ 
Ω 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Θ 
Ψ 
Ψ 
Ψ 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-164 
VII 
-20 
τη. 
-158 
IV 
-18 
[Z] 
-143 
V 
10 
Λ 
-141 
I 
20 
Λ 
-141 
V 
16 
70?b 
-141 
VI 
25 
TD? 
-136 
VII 
-13 
TRb 
-134 
VIII 
4 
ΤΠ. η 
-123 
VI 
<28 
[T] 
-122 
XII 
19 
T 
-117 
XII 
6? 
I 
-111 
V 
1 TB? 
-110 
V 
-24 
TT)? 
-108 
VII 
10 
^ 
-105 
VII 
-15 
τη. 
-103 
IX 
-6 
Sn 
-99 
X 
-2 
Zn 
-95 
VI 
-16 
[X] 
-90 
X 
-27 
[ β ] 
-87 
XII 
-17 
I 
-82 
VI 
18 TTJ? 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-163 
VIII 
-11 
TRe 
-157 
III 
11? [CX] 
-141 
VI 
25 
TTJ? 
-137 
II 
20 
^= 
-136 
VII 
-13 
TRb 
-136 
VIII 
18 .τη. 
-134 
VIII 
4 
ΤΠ, η 
-132 
VIII 
15 
S 
-122 
VI2 
23 
[T] 
-119 
I 
10 
[ 6 ] 
-119 
I 
1 
Λ 
-110 
V 
-24 
TTJ? 
-105 
VII 
-15 
Tn 
-107 
VIII 
(9) 
TRb 
-99 
X 
-2 
Zn 
-98 
XII 
7 
CX 
-98 
X 
25 
K 
-90 
VIII 
-20 [ U ] n 
-87 
XII 
-17 
I 
-82 
I 
16 [Λ ] e 
-77 
VIII 
-12 TIXn 
At 
21 
23 
22;30 
22;30 
23;24 
22;36 
25;30 
20;30 
>25 
25;30 
23 
23 
22;12 
29 
22;50 
24; 12 
23 
24;48 
26;40 
22;15 
22;48 
Table 2. IA. Saturn. Synodic Times from Diaries (concl.) 

198 
Tables: 2.1B 
Per 
2 
1 
2 
Phen 
Γ 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-646 
IV 
24 
O 
-644 
IV 
7 
[Λ] 
-644 
V 
16 
Λ 
-643 
IV 
[29] [Λ] η 
-642 
V 
23 
[Sl]n 
-642 
VI 
[30] 
[Sl] 
-641 
V 
20 
[Sl] 
-641 
VI 
22 
Λ 
-640 
VI 
1[2
?] [TiS] 
-640 
VII 
15 
TTJ 
-639 
VI2 
5 
TtJ 
-639 
VII 
5 
TTJ? 
-638 
VI 27/28 [^=] 
-638 
VIII 
1 
^= 
-637 
VII 
20 
^ 
-637 
VIII 
23 
ΤΤ\ 
-636 
VII 
13 
ΤΤ\ 
-636 
VIII 
15 
Tn 
-635 
VIII 
5 [Tn] 
-635 
IX 
5 
A 
-634 
VIII 
26 [w"]n 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-644 
V 
16 
Λ 
-643 
IV 
[29] 
[Sl] 
-642 
VI 
[30] 
[Λ] 
-642 
V 
23 [Λ] η 
-641 
V 
20 
[Λ] 
-641 
VI 
22 
Λ 
-640 
VI 
1[2?] [TTJ?] 
-640 
VII 
15 
TTl? 
-639 
VI2 
5 
TTJ? 
-639 
VII 
5 
TTJ? 
-638 
VI 27/28 [^=] 
-638 
VIII 
1 
^ 
-637 
VII 
20 
^ 
-637 
VIII 
23 
ΤΠ. 
-636 
VII 
13 
Tn 
-636 
VIII 
15 
TIV 
-635 
VIII 
5 [Τηΐ 
-635 
IX 
5 
w"b 
-634 
VIII 
26 [>] η 
-634 
X 
1 
S 
-633 
VIII 
20 
[w"] 
At 
26 
22 
22 
23 
27 
22 
22 
23 
23 
20 
22/23 
22 
23/22 
22 
23 
22 
22 
20 
21 
26 
24 
Table 2.1Β. Saturn. Synodic Times from BM 76738 + 76813 

Tables: 2.2A 
199 
Per 
3 
3 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
3 
2 
2 
3 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
1 
3 
Phen 
Γ 
Φ 
Φ 
Γ 
Θ 
Θ 
Ω 
Ω 
Φ 
Ω 
Γ 
Γ 
Γ 
Ω 
Ψ 
Ψ 
Γ 
Θ 
Φ 
Φ 
Φ 
Γ 
Γ 
Ω 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
-324 
II 
28 
I b 
-256 
III 
10 COO 
-253 
VII 
1 
I n? 
-232 
XII 
(29) 
X 
-209 
V 
2? [COO] 
-201 
XII2 
30? 
[Λ] 
-198 
IX 
-12 
"Ζ 
-197 
X 
28? COO 
-195 
IV 
26 
[T] 
-193 
II 
25 
I 
-189 
VII 
13 [ = ] 
-186 
XI 
3 COO 
-173 
XII 
11 
K 
-165 
VI 
-14 
«* 
-162 
V 
23 
tf 
-149 
VII 
7 COO 
-143 
V 
28 
TI)? 
-141 
I 
-12 
[^] 
-134 
VII 
-8 
I 
-124 
IV 
-26 
T 
-124 
VI 
12 
8 
-121 
IV 
9 
O 
-118 
VII 
12 
^ 
-90 
XI 
-24? 
X 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
-321 
VI 
6 
TW 
-253 
VII 
1 
I n ? 
-251 
VIII 
17 
a 
-230 
I 
-18 
b 
-208 
V 
22 [X] n 
-198 
IV 
~4 
[Z] 
-197 
X 
28? 
000 
-193 
II 
25 
I 
-193 
VII 
-26 
I 
-191 
IV 
25 
Λ 
-186 
XI 
3 
000 
-185 
XIIi 
21 
[K] 
-170 
II 
18 
b 
-164 
VII 
30 
TR 
-160 
IX 
5 
[X] 
-146 
X 
20? 
I 
-141 
VII 
21 
τη. 
-140 
I 
27 [TR] 
-132 
IX 
-5 
a 
-123 
VI 
12 
b 
-122 
VI2 
26 
I 
-118 
VII 
12 
^= 
-117 
VIII 
-23 TT\ 
-86 
II 
24? 
I 
ΔΙ 
42;40 
47 
38 
49τ 
50 
41-,20 
46 
49 
45 
45 
46;40 
48 
48;30 
46 
51 
44;20 
41;30 
45 
43;30 
46 
44 
41 
41 
50 
Table 2.2A. Jupiter. Synodic Times from Diaries 

200 
Tables: 2.2B-2.2C 
Per 
Phert 
Φ 
Θ 
Ψ 
Ω 
Γ 
Φ 
Θ 
Ψ 
Ω 
Γ 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
-386 
III 
[3] 
[K] 
-386 
V 
28 
[K] 
-386 
VII 
-23 [CX] 
-386 
XII1 
11 
[K] 
-386 
XII2 
18 
K e 
-385 
IV 
19 
T 
-385 
VI 
16 
[T] 
-385 
VIII 
14 
T 
-385 
XII 
28/29 
[T] 
-384 
II 
6 
b b 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
-385 
IV 
19 
T 
-385 
VI 
16 
[T] 
-385 
VIII 
14 
T 
-385 
XII 
28/29 
[T] 
-384 
2 
6 
b b 
-384 
VI 
6 
b 
-384 
VIII 
3 
[ b ] 
-384 
X 
~1 
b 
-383 
I 
16 
b c 
-383 
[III] [24/25] 
[ b ] 
At 
46 
48 
51 
47/48 
48 
47 
47 
47 
48/47 
48/49 
Table 2.2B. Jupiter. Synodic Times from LBAT 1394 
Per 
Phen 
Γ 
Φ 
Θ 
Ψ 
Ω 
Γ 
Φ 
Θ 
Ψ 
Ω 
Γ 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
-149 
XII 
18 
K 
-148 
IV 
23 
T 
-148 
VI 
22 
[T] 
-148 
VIII 
20 
T 
-147 
I 
3 
T 
-147 
II 
[6] 
T 
-147 
VI 
11 
b 
-147 
VIII 
8 
[ b ] 
-147 
X 
7 
b 
-146 
I 
19 
I 
-146 
II 
19 
X 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-147 
II 
[6] 
T 
-147 
VI 
11 
b 
-147 
VIII 
8 
[ b ] 
-147 
X 
7 
b 
-146 
I 
19 
I 
-146 
II 
19 
I 
-146 
VI 
22 
I 
-146 
VIII 
22 
[X] 
-146 
X 
19 
I 
-145 
III 
3 
O 
-145 
IV 
2 
O 
At 
48 
48 
46 
47 
46 
43 
41 
44 
42 
44 
43 
Table 2.2C. Jupiter. Synodic Times from LBAT 1409 

Tables: 2.2C 
201 
Per 
Phen 
Φ 
Θ 
Ψ 
Ω 
Γ 
Φ 
Θ 
T 
Ω 
Γ 
Ψ 
Ω 
Γ 
T 
Ω 
Γ 
Φ 
Θ 
Ψ 
Ω 
Γ 
Φ 
Θ 
Ψ 
Ω 
Γ 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
-146 
VI 
22 
I 
-146 
VIH 
22 
[X] 
-146 
X 
19 
I 
-145 
III 
3 
O 
-145 
IV 
2 
O 
-145 
VIII 
4 
O 
-145 
X 
5 
[G] 
-145 
XII 
5 
O 
-144 
IV 
17 
Λ 
-144 
V 
15 
Λ 
-144 
XII2 
13 
Λ 
-143 
IV 
25 
TT)? 
-143 
V 
28 
TT)? 
-142 
I 
25 
TTJ? 
-142 
VI 
7 
^= 
-142 
VII 
9 
^ 
-142 
XI 
12 
== 
-141 
I 
13 
[^] 
-141 
III 
[6] 
•*= 
-141 
VI2 
11 
τη. 
-141 
VII 
20 
τη. 
-141 
XI 
23 
τη. 
-140 
I 
27 [IR] 
-140 
III 
19 
TR 
-140 
VIII 
5 
S 
-140 
IX 
6 
S 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-145 
VIII 
4 
O 
-145 
X 
5 
[G] 
-145 
XII 
5 
Ό 
-144 
IV 
17 
it 
-144 
V 
15 
Λ 
-144 
IX 
18 
Λ 
-144 
XI 
15 
[Λ] 
-144 
XII2 
13 
ει 
-143 
IV 
25 
TR? 
-143 
V 
28 
TR? 
-142 
I 
25 
TR? 
-142 
VI 
7 
^ 
-142 
VII 
9 
^= 
-141 
III 
[6] 
^ 
-141 
VI2 
H
T 
-141 
VII 
20 
TR 
-141 
XI 
23 
TR 
-140 
I 
27 [TR] 
-140 
III 
19 
TR 
-140 
VIII 
5 
S 
-140 
IX 
6 
S 
-139 
I 
10 
'[*"] 
-139 
III 
12 
[**] 
-139 
V 
I
S 
-139 
IX 
24 
Z 
-139 
X 
24 
Z 
At 
42 
43 
46 
44 
43 
44 
40 
38 
38 
38 
42 
42 
41 
41 
44 
41 
41 
44 
43 
44 
46 
47 
45 
48 
49 
48 
Tables 2.2C. Jupiter. Synodic Times from LBAT 1409 (concl.) 

202 
Tobies: 2.3 
Per 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
2 
2 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Phen 
Γ 
Γ 
Γ 
φ 
Γ 
φ 
Ω 
Ψ 
Ω 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Γ 
Ω 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-293 
II 
5 
b b 
-291 
III 
8 
I 
-283 
VII 
21 
^ 
-212 
XI 
~4 [ITU 
-191 
VI 
(7) 
ae 
-182 
X 
-10 [TIP] 
-168 
VI 
-16 
TRb 
-143 
VI 
Γ21
? 
CiC 
-97 
II 
~6 
I 
-665 
[II] 
20 
[ « ] 
-665 
VI 
30 [TO?] 
-663 
III 
27 
[G] 
-663 
VII 
25 [^=e]
? 
-661 
[IV] 
15 
[Λ] 
-661 
IX 
25 
[TR] 
-659 
V 
20 [TTJ?] 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-291 
III 
8 
I 
-289 
IV 
(8) 
G 
-281 
IX 
(5) [TRIe 
-207 
II 
-20 
-Z 
-189 
VII 
(1)
? 
=^b 
-178 
XII 
-28 
[TR] 
-164 
XII 
-18 
T 
-141 
VIII 
2 
T 
-93 
IV 
-17 · Sl 
-663 
III 
27 
[G] 
-663 
VII 
25 [^b]
? 
-661 
[IV] 
15 
[Λ] 
-661 
IX 
25 
[TR] 
-659 
V 
20[TTJ?] 
-659 
XII 
10 
[K] 
-657 
VII 
13 [=^ e]
? 
At 
1, 3
τ 
1, o 
1,14 
1,23 
54 
1, 9 
1,46 
1,30 
50;30 
1, 7 
55 
38 
1, o 
1, 5 
1,45 
1,23 
Table 2.3. Mars. Synodic Times from Diaries and -665 to -657 

Tables: 2.4-2.5 
203 
wj+i/vfj 
n | z 
System 
Zone 
Limits 
a; 
w, 
=p/q 
P= IT/Z 
wj+i/vfj 
n | z 
System 
Zone 
Limits 
a; 
w, 
=p/q 
P= IT/Z 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
— > 
— » 
— » 
X 
si 
s 
X 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
— > 
— » 
— » 
X 
si 
s 
X 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
— > 
— » 
— » 
X 
si 
s 
X 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
— > 
— » 
— » 
X 
si 
s 
X 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
-> IR 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
- » 
— > 
— > 
— > 
— > 
z 
8 
G 
HP 
m 
X 
8 
O 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
- » 
— > 
— > 
— > 
— > 
z 
8 
G 
HP 
m 
X 
8 
O 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
- » 
— > 
— > 
— > 
— > 
z 
8 
G 
HP 
m 
X 
8 
O 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
- » 
— > 
— > 
— > 
— > 
z 
8 
G 
HP 
m 
X 
8 
O 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
- » 
— > 
— > 
— > 
— > 
z 
8 
G 
HP 
m 
X 
8 
O 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
- » 
— > 
— > 
— > 
— > 
z 
8 
G 
HP 
m 
X 
8 
O 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
- » 
— > 
— > 
— > 
— > 
z 
8 
G 
HP 
m 
X 
8 
O 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
- » 
— > 
— > 
— > 
— > 
z 
8 
G 
HP 
m 
X 
8 
O 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Saturn A 
Jupiter A 
Jupiter A' 
Mars 
A 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SI 10° 
X 
o 
X 25 
S 
0 
G 
9 
m. 9 
2 
2 
8 17 
G 
0 
ID? 0 
m. o 
z 
0 
X 
o 
8 
0 
- » 
— > 
— > 
— > 
— > 
z 
8 
G 
HP 
m 
X 
8 
O 
0° 
10 
0 
25 
9 
2 
17 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3,20° 
2,40 
2,35 
3,25 
2, 0 
53 
2,15 
52 
1, 0 
1, o 
1, o 
1, o 
1, 0 
1, o 
11 ;43, 7,30° 
14; 3,45 
30 
36 
30 
33;45 
36 
33;45 
30 
40 
1,0 
1,30 
1,7;30 
45 
6/5 
5/6 
6/5 
5/6 
9/8 
16/15 
15/16 
8/9 
4/3 
3/2 
3/2 
3/4 
2/3 
2/3 
4,25 | 
9 
28;26,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
6,31 | 36 
10;51,40 
2,13 | 18 
7;23,20 
Table 2.4. Parameters of Principal Systems of Superior Planets 
Original 
Adjusted 
ivj+1/w, 
/7 
| 
Z 
Zone 
Limits 
a; 
Limits 
a, 
w; 
= p/y 
P = IT/Z 
Original 
Adjusted 
ivj+1/w, 
/7 
| 
Z 
Zone 
Limits 
a; 
Limits 
a, 
w; 
= p/y 
P = IT/Z 
r 
1 SI o°-»cco 0° 
3, 0° SL l ° - > 2 16° 
2,45° 
1,46° 
4/3 
44,33 | 14,8 
2 vw 0 ->X 
0 
2, 0 
Z 16 - » X 0 
2,14 
2,21;20 
2/3 
3;9,7,38,... 
3 X 0 
A 0 
1, o 
X o 
a 
l 
1, 1 1,34;13,20 
9/8 
H 
1 in. o - > x 0 
2, 0 
26 —> X 10 
2,14 
1,46;40 
9/10 
25,13 | 8,0 
2 X 
0 —> G 0 
2, 0 
X 10 —> G 6 
1,56 
1,36 
5/3 
3;9,7,30 
3 
0 
2, 0 
—p 6 —> 
26 
1,50 
2,40 
2/3 
z 
1 
0 —» — 0 
1,30 
G 0->=== 0 
1,30 
1,47;46,40 
6/5 
20,23 | 6,28 
2 
0 
0 
1,30 
^ 
0-> Z 
6 
1,36 
2, 9;20 
3/4 
3;9,7,25,... 
3 * 
0 —» "T 0 
1,30 
z 
6 —> T 5 
1,29 
1,37 
4/3 
4 T 
0 —> G 0 
1,30 
T 
5 —> G 0 
1,25 
2, 9;20 
5/6 
Q 
1 G 0->Z 
0 
3, 0 
G 
0 
3, 0 
1,48;30 
10/9 
11,24 | 3,37 
2 
0-> X 0 
1, o 
0 - > X 
0 
1, o 
2, 0;33,20 
9/10 
3;9,7,27,... 
3 X 
0 —» 8 0 
1, o 
X 
0-> 8 
0 
1, 0 
1,48;30 
5/4 
4 8 
0 - » G 0 
1, o 
8 
0 - » G 
0 
1, o 
2,15;37,30 
4/5 
Table 2.5. Parameters of Systems Ai and 
of Mercury 

204 
Tables: 2.6A 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
At 
-284 
VI 
-25 m i d 
-284 
XI 
8 
Xn 
1,53 
-266 
IX 
1 
/ 
-266 
XII2 
-10 
T 
2, 9 
-234 
IX 
-22 [*] 
-234 
XII2 
-23 
S 
2, 1 
-211 
XI 
5 
X 
-211 
III 
12? 
o 
2, 7 
-161 
I 
-18 
a 
-161 
V 
15 
Tfl? 
1,57 
-141 
VIII 
-17 
-141 
XII 
-11 
T 
1,54 
-129 
I 
26 
« e 
-129 
V 
-22 
TiPn 
1,56 
-124 
II 
22 
Ob 
-124 
VI 
10 
1,48 
-124 
VI 
10 
^ 
-124 
X 
2 
VW 
1,52 
-105 
III 
6 
O 
-105 
VI 
-26 
1,50 
-85 
VII 
-7 [=]d 
-85 
XI 
4 
CCD 
1,57 
-77 
II 
-13 
In 
-77 
VI 
2 T0?e 
1,49 
Table 2.6A. Mercury Q. Synodic Times from Diaries 

Tables: 2.6B 
205 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
-193 
V 
(3) 
a 
-192 
III 
28 
Λ η 
-192 
VII 
25
? [ITUn 
-192 
XI 
15 
K n 
-191 
III 
22 
O n 
-191 
VII 
21 [==*]d 
-191 
XI 
11 
K n 
-190 
III 
16 
O n 
-189 
II 
8 
I n 
-189 
[VI] 
18 "TTJ?n 
-189 
X 
1 
CXn 
-188 
II 
1 
b e 
-188 
V 
(19)
? TTJ? 
-188 
IX 
(20) 
Z 
-188 
XII2 
(23) 
b 
-187 
[IV] 
(22) TT)?b 
-186 
VIII 
14 
[^] n 
-186 
XII 
1 
K 
-185 
IV 
11 
O n 
-184 
X 
24 
CX 
-183 
II 
25 
I 
-183 
VI 
11 [*=]d 
-181 
IX 
(6) 
[Z] 
-180 
I 
4 
b 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
-193 
VIII 
29 
A 
-192 
VII 
25? [TiIJn 
-192 
XI 
15 
K n 
-191 
III 
22 
O n 
-191 
VII 
21 [===]d 
-191 
XI 
11 
K n 
-190 
III 
16 
O n 
-190 
VII 
5 [==]d 
-189 
[VI] 
18 TTJJn 
-189 
X 
1 CCCn 
-188 
II 
1 
b e 
-188 
V 
(19)
? TTJ? 
-188 
IX 
(20) 
Z 
-188 
XII2 
(23) 
b 
-187 
[IV] 
(22) 
Ttfb 
-187 
VIII 
18 
S 
-186 
XII 
1 
K 
-185 
IV 
11 
O n 
-185 
VIII 
6 [TTlJd 
-183 
II 
25 
I 
-183 
VI 
11 
[ ^ ] d 
-183 
X 
17 
CXn 
-180 
I 
4 
b 
-180 
V 
3 
Sln 
Δι 
1,56 
1,57 
1,50 
2, 7 
1,59 
1,50 
2, 5 
1,49 
2,10 
1,43 
2, O 
1,48 
2, 1 
2, 3 
1,59 
1,56 
1,47 
2,10 
1,55 
2, 1 
1,46 
2, 6 
1,58 
1,59 
Table 2.6B. Mercury Ω. Synodic Times from LBAT 1377 

206 
Tables: 2.7A-2.7B 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-372 
I 
4 
[T] 
-321 
I 
20 
«c 
-308 
I 
16? 
b b 
-284 
VII 
16 [TIUd 
-255 
I 
27 
B n 
-234 
IX 
(7) 
[#] 
-232 
VIII 
9 
^ n 
-230 
I 
(24) 
I b 
-193 
VIII 
20 
S 
-187 
VIII 
(3) 
S 
-133 
XI 
20 
K 
-132 
II 
5 
1 
-124 
VI 
1 
===n 
-105 
I 
-24 
X 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-372 
IV 
19 
Λ 
-321 
VI 
8 
=* 
-306 
VI 
1 
^ 
-284 
X 
>24 [CCOd] 
-255 
VI 
(2) 
TT)? 
-234 
XII 
-22 
[T] 
-232 
XI 
-14? 
COCb 
-230 
VI 
-12 [===] 
-193 
XII 
<4 
H 
-187 
XI 
15 
H 
-132 
II 
5 
1 
-132 
VII 
2 [TIUd 
-124 
IX 
21 
-Z 
-105 
VI 
-3 [ = ] d 
At 
1,45 
2,18 
2,15 
>I,38 
2, 5 
1,45 
1,35 
2,18 
1,44 
1,42 
1,45 
2,27 
1,50 
2, 9 
Table 2.7A. Mercury Ξ. Synodic Times from Diaries 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
-195 
VIII 
25 
2 b
? 
-194 
VIII 
12 
^ 
-194 
XII 
5? 
T b 
-193 
III 
19? 
O 
-193 
VIII 
20 
•" 
-193 
XI 
26 
K 
-192 
II 
17 
K 
-192 
VII 
15 
Ta 
-192 
X 
28 
K 
-191 
II 
11 
I 
-191 
VII 
7 [ = ] d 
-191 
X 
20 
-Z 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-195 
XII 
11 
T 
-194 
XII 
5? 
T b 
-193 
III 
19? 
O 
-193 
VIII 
20 
V 
-193 
XI 
26 
H 
-192 
II 
17 
I 
-192 
VII 
15 
Ta 
-192 
X 
28 
K 
-191 
II 
11 
K 
-191 
VII 
7 
[^] d 
-191 
X 
20 
2 
-190 
II 
6 
ΰ β 
At 
1,46 
1,53 
1,44 
2,31 
1,36 
1,51 
2,28 
1,43 
1,43 
2,26 
1,43 
1,46 
Table 2.7B. Mercury Ξ. Synodic Times from LBAT 1377 

Tables: 2.7B 
207 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
At 
-190 
II 
6 
8 e 
-190 
VI 
21 
2,15 
-189 
V 
(3) 
1® 
-189 
IX 
(13) 
m 
2,10 
-189 
IX 
(13) 
IR 
-189 
XII 
26 
8 
1,43 
-189 
XII 
26 
8 
-188 
IV 
(23) 
SI 
1,57 
-188 
IV 
(23) 
Si 
-188 
IX 
(7) 
/ 
2,14 
-188 
IX 
(7) 
/ 
-188 
XII 
(22) 
T 
1,45 
-188 
XII 
(22) 
T 
-187 
III 
(12) 
G 
1,50 
-187 
III 
(12) 
© 
-187 [vim 
2? 
2,40 
-187 [VIII] 
2? M 
-187 
XI 
10+ [X] 
>1,38 
-187 
XI 
10+ [X] 
-186 
III 
(5) [©] 
<1,55 
-186 
III 
(5) 
[©1 
-186 
VII 
28 
m 
2,23 
-186 
VII 
28 
u\ 
-186 
XI 
11 [X] 
1,43 
-186 
XI 
11 [X] 
-185 
II 
(26) 
i 
1,45 
-185 
II 
(26) 
X 
-185 
VII 
21 [-id 
. 2,25 
-185 
VII 
21 [^1(1 -185 
XI 
(8) 
/ w 
v w 
1,47 
-184 
X 
(1) 
C£ 
-183 
I 
(17) 
8 
1,46 
-183 
I 
(17) 
8 
-183 
VI 
1 [=^]d 
2,14 
-183 
VI 
1 [ - k 
-183 
IX 
26 
1,55 
-183 
IX 
26 
-182 
I 
11 
8 
1,45 
-182 
I 
11 
8 
-182 
V 
12 TD?b 
2, 1 
-182 
V 
12 TT)?b -182 
IX 
23 
2,11 
-182 
IX 
23 [*] 
-182 
XII2 
8 m n 
1,45 
Table 2.7B. Mercury 
Synodic Times from LBAT 1377 (concl.) 

208 
Tables: 2.8A 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
At 
-291 
I 
25? m d 
-291 
V 
(16?) 
a 
1,51 
-277 
I 
4? m d 
-277 
V 
7 
o 
2, 3 
-251 
VIII 
(13) 
TI\ 
-251 
XII 
(20) 
X 
2, 7 
-197 
VII 
17 
-197 
XI 
14 
/V«A 
WV 
1,57 
-195 
IX 
-24 
z 
-194 
II 
-16 [Old 2,22 
-182 
VII 
4 [Iff] 
-182 
X 
17 
•z 
1,43 
-170 
III 
22 
I 
-170 
VII 
(7) 
=2= 
1,45 
-161 
II 
-19 [Old -161 
VI 
7 
fie 
1,48 
-136 
VII 
(6) w 
-136 
X 
21 [Z] 
1,45 
-108 
II 
-5 [8]d 
-108 
V 
15 [«] 
1,40 
-105 
IV 
(5) 
<r> 
—p 
-105 
VII 
-17 
—n 
1,42 
Table 2.8A. Mercury F. Synodic Times from Diaries 

Tables: 2.8B 
209 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
Year 
Mon 
Day Sign 
At 
-195 
VI 
10 
HP 
-195 
IX 
24 
Z 
1,44 
-194 
IX 
22 
S 
-193 
II 
14 [bid 
2,22 
-193 
II 
14 [ 0 ] d 
-193 
VI 
3 
SI 
1,49 
-192 
IV 
24 
si 
-192 
VIII 
8 n 
1,44 
-192 
VIII 
8 
m 
-192 
XII 
22 
Xn 
2,14 
-192 
XII 
22 
Xn 
-191 
IV 
22 
a 
2, 0 
-191 
IV 
22 
SI 
-191 
VIII 
2 
vs. —e 
1,40 
-191 
VIII 
2 
—e 
-191 
XII 
4 
/VSA* 
WV 
2, 2 
-191 
XII 
4 
-190 
IV 
17 
On 
2,13 
-190 
IV 
17 
On 
-190 
VII 
28 
1,41 
-189 
III 
10 
I 
-189 
VI 
20+ 
HP 
<1,40 
-189 
VI 
20+ 
HP 
-189 
X 
13 
Z 
>1,53 
-189 
X 
13 
Z 
-188 
III 
(11) 
I 
2,28 
-188 
III 
(ID 
I 
-188 
VI 
(21) 
HP 
1,40 
-188 
VI 
(21) 
HP 
-188 
X 
(8) 
1,47 
-188 
X 
(8) 
^e 
-187 
I 
28 [bid 
2,20 
-187 
I 
28 [ b ] d 
-187 
V (10+) 
SI 
>1,42 
-185 
V 
4 
-185 
VIII 
19 
H\ 
1,45 
-184 
XI 
10? 
^—< 
-183 
III 
26 
In 
2,16 
-183 
III 
26 
In 
-183 
VII 
11 
1,45 
-183 
VII 
11 
•TV 
-183 
XI 
2 
1,51 
-183 
XI 
2 Zn 
-182 
III 
24 
In 
2,22 
-182 
X 
24 
z 
-181 
II 
18 
ben 
2,24 
-181 
II 
18 
8 en 
-181 
VI 
(3) [HP1 
1,45 
-181 
VI 
(3) [HP1 
-181 
IX 
(17) 
[*] 
1,44 
-181 
IX 
(17) 
m 
-180 
II 
20 [ b ] d 
2,33 
-180 
II 
20 [ « l d 
-180 
V 
23 
SI 
1,33 
Table 2.8B. Mercury r . Synodic Times from LBAT 1377 

210 
Tables: 2.9A-2.9B 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-353 
VII 
-28 
TTl, 
-202 
VII 
-28 
^ 
-197 
VIII 
27 
S 
-149 
III 
10 
I 
-132 
IX 
13 
Sn 
-125 
I 
16 
T n 
-122 
IH 
23 
[X] 
-87 
XII2 
27 
T n 
-77 
VII 
-30 
==» 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-373 
XI 
<27 CCO 
-202 
XI 
-20+ CCOe 
-197 
XII 
13 
K 
-149 
VII 
-7 
^= 
-132 
XII 
29 
[K] 
-125 
V 
-17 
a 
-122 
VI2 
-21 
^= 
-86 
V 
-4 
a 
-77 
XI 
-28 CCO 
At 
^1,59 
>1,52 
1,46 
1,57 
1,46 
2, 1 
1,58 
2, 7 
1,58 
Table 2.9A. Mercury Σ. Synodic Times from Diaries 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-192 
V 
16 
Λ 
-192 
IX 
20 
Sn 
-191 
I 
10 
T n 
-191 
V 
10 
Λ η 
-191 
IX 
13 [ITUn 
-191 
XII 
19 CCOn 
-190 
V 
5 
O n 
-189 
VII 
24 
^ 
-189 
XI 
15 CCO 
-188 
IH (20
?) 
X 
-188 
VII 
(11) 
TTI? 
-186 
VI 
2 TTJ? 
-186 
X 
8 
^ n 
-185 
I 
26 [ b ] d 
-185 
V 
28 
Λ 
-184 
IX 
2 
Sbn 
-184 
XII 
12 
K 
-183 
IV 
17 
O n 
-183 
VIII 
11 
τη,η 
-182 
VIII 
1 
[^] 
Year 
Mon 
Day 
Sign 
-192 
IX 
20 
Sn 
-191 
I 
10 
T n 
-191 
V 
10 
Λ η 
-191 
IX 
13 [TTV]n 
-191 
XII 
19 CCOn 
-190 
V 
5 
O n 
-190 
IX 
5 TTVn 
-189 
XI 
15 CCO 
-188 
III (20
?) 
I 
-188 
VII 
(11) 
TIP 
-188 
XI 
(17) CCO 
-186 
X 
8 
-Zn 
-185 
I 
26 [ b ] d 
-185 
V 
28 
Λ 
-185 
X 
1 
S 
-184 
XII 
12 
K 
-183 
IV 
17 
O n 
-183 
VIII 
11 TTVn 
-183 
XII 
12 
K n 
-182 
XII 
7 CCOn 
At 
2, 4 
1,50 
2, O 
2, 3 
2, 6 
2,16 
2, O 
1,51 
2, 5 
1,51 
2, 6 
2, 6 
1,58 
2, 2 
2, 3 
1,40 
2, 5 
1,54 
2, 1 
2, 6 
Table 2.9B. Mercury Σ. Synodic Times from LBAT 1377 

Tables: 2.10A-2.10C 
2211 
I 
II 
Ill 
... 
24; 4;10° a 
... 
14;40,57,25,18,45° ** 
... 
5;37,12,25,18,45° T 
8; 4,10 
a 
1 
27;48,27,25,18,45 
m 
... 
18;44,42,25,18,45 
X 
... 
22; 4,10 © 
2 
10;55,57,25,18,45 1T\ 
1;52,12,25,18,45 X 
... 
2;25,50 G 
3 
24; 3,27,25,18,45 
... 
14;59,42,25,18,45 CCS 
... 
12;25,50 
I 
4 
7; 10,57,25,18,45 
^ 
... 
28; 7,12,25,18,45 Z 
... 
22;25,50 
8 
5 
20;18,27,25,18,45 m? 
... 
11; 14,42,25,18,45 Z 
Table 2.10A. Mercury. System 
Text M 
Zone 
Limits 
ai 
wi+1/wi 
Wi_1/wi 
1 
SI 30° —» T 
30° 
4, 0° 
1,50;56,15° 
32/27 
-16;52,30° 
2,8/2,15 
2 
T 30 
O 20 
1,20 
2,11;28,53,20 
4/5 
-20 
27/32 
3 
G 20 
SI 30 
40 
1,45;11, 6,40 
2,15/2,8 -16 
5/4 
Table 2.10B. Mercury. System A3. 
Parameters 
Zone 
Limits 
ai 
wi_1\wi wi(63) 
wi(1) 
wi+1/wi 
1 
2 
30° - » I 
30° 
2,30° 
-16° 
7/8 
—4;34° 
1,45;11, 6,40° 
5/4 
2 
I 
30 
SI 30 
1, 0 
-20 
4/5 
-5;43 
2,11;28,53,20 
7/5 
3 
SI 30 
mp 
30 
30 
-28 
5/7 
-7;58 
3, 4; 4,26,40 
23/28 
4 
HP 30 
30 
30 
-23 
28/23 
-6;34 
2,31; 12,13,20 
18/23 
5 
=^30 —> m 30 
30 
-18 
23/18 
-5; 8 
1,58;20 
7/9 
6 
m 
30 
Z 
30 
1, 0 
-14 
9/7 
-4; 0 
1,32; 2,13,20 
8/7 
Table 2.10C. Mercury. System 
Parameters 

212 
Figures: 
3.1-3.2 
System 
Slow Zone 
Am 
Fast Zone 
AM 
Saturn 
A 
a 10° 
X 0° 
m 20° 
X 0° 
SI 10° 
8 20° 
A' 
SI 20 
000 10 
TT\ 15 
000 10 
SI 20 
8 15 
Jupiter 
A 
X 25 
S 
0 
TO? 12;30 ^ 
0 -> 
I 
25 
X 12;30 
A' 
G 9 
m 
9 
TD? 9 
2 
2 
b 
17 
X 
9;30 
k" 
S 5;45 
1T\ 5;45 TIP 5;45 * 
2 -> 8 
17 
X 
9;30 
A'" 
O 9 
m 
9 
Tl}? 9 
27 —> 8 
17 
X 
7 
A6 
0 0 
- » ^ 30 
TO? 0 
a 
0 -> T 
30' 
X 
o 
Table 3.1. Limits of Zones of Saturn and Jupiter 
Saturn 
A C T 702 
No 
AX 
X 
Tt\ 
Am No 
AX 
A 
TT\ 
Am 
1 12;35,20 SI 
19:18,25 
15; 2,39 
17 
13; 4,45 X 
2;25,55 
5;40, 9 
2 
12;23,20 Tfl? 
1:41,45 
14:46,36 
18 
13; 16,45 
15;42,40 
6;17,31 
3 
12;11,20 
13:53, 5 
14;18;34 
19 
13;28,45 
29:11,25 
7; 6,54 
4 
11;59,20 
25:52,25 
13:38,31 
20 
13:40,45 r 
12:52,10 
8; 8,16 
5 
11 ;47,20 
-A. 
7:39,45 
12:46,29 
21 
13:52,45 
26;44,55 
9;21,39 
6 
11;35,20 
19:15, 5 
11;42,26 
22 
14; 4,40 8 
10;49,35 
10;46,56 
7 
11.23.20 
30:38,25 
10:26,24 23 
13;52,40 
24;42,15 
12; 0,14 
8 
11;16,45 TT\ 11:55,10 
9; 3,46 
24 
13;40,40 X 
8;22,55 
13; 1,31 
9 
11:28,45 
23:23,55 
7;53, 9 
25 
13;28,40 
21:51,35 
13:50,49 
10 
11;40,45 
5; 4,40 
6;54,31 
26 
13:16,40 & 
5; 8,15 
14;28, 6 
11 
11:52,45 
16:57,20 
6; 7,54 
27 
13; 4,40 
18:12,55 
14:53,24 
12 
12; 4,45 
29; 2,10 
5:33,16 
28 
12;52,40 Si 
1; 5,35 
15; 6,41 
13 
12;16,45 z 
11:18,55 
5:10,39 
29 
12;40,40 
13;46,15 
15; 7,59 
14 
12:28,45 
23:47,40 
5: 0. 1 
30 
12:28.40 
26:14,55 
14:57,16 
15 
12;40,45 
vw 
6:28,25 
5; 1,25 
31 
12;16,40 
8;31,35 
14;34,34 
16 
12:52,45 
19:21,10 
5:14,46 
32 
12; 4,40 
20;36,15 
13:59,51 
Table 3.2. Saturn. System B. Location of 

Tables: 
2.1OA-2.IOC 
213 
Jupiter 
A C T 620a 
Mars 
A C T 510 
No 
AX 
A 
TIP 
Am 
AX 
A 
Am 
1 31;44 
14; 7 10: 7.36 
31;36,40 W 
3;43,57 G 
22;46,17 
2 
33;32 S 
17;39 
10;30,52 
48;36,40 ^ 
22;20,37 
22:39.39 
3 
35;20 
22;59 
12;42, 7 1, 5:36,40 s 
27;57,17 ft 
9;33, 0 
4 
37; 8 K 
0; 7 16;41,22 1,17;38,17 X 
15;35,34 TW 
8;27,59 
5 
37; 8 T 
7; 15 20:40,37 1, 0;38,17 
a 
16; 13,51 
20;22,57 
6 
35;20 a 
12;35 22;51,52 
43;38,17 i 
29;52, 8 
15;17,56 
7 
33;32 i 
16; 7 23;15, 7 
26:38.17 G 
26;30,25 ft 
23; 12,54 
8 
31;44 G 
17;51 21;50,23 
25 
ft 
21;30,25 G 
29;29,36 
9 
29:56 ft 
17;47 
18;37,38 
42 
3;30,25 
22:46.17 
10 
28;23 m? 16;10 
13;51,53 
59 
/ 
2;30,25 ft 
3; 2,59 
11 
30; 11 
16;21 
10;54, 8 
1,16 
CCS 
18;30,25 TIP 
0;19,40 
12 31;59 m 
18;20 
9:44.23 1, 7; 14,57 T 
25;45,22 
18:51,19 
13 
33;47 / 
22; 7 
10;22,39 
50; 14,57 I 
16; 0,19 
20;22,57 
14 35;35 * 
27;42 
12;48,54 
33:14.57 G 
19;15,16 
4;54,36 
15 
37;23 X 
5; 5 
17; 3, 9 
18;23,20 ft 
7;38,36 ft 
4;34,37 
16 
36;53 T 
11;58 20;47,24 
35;23,20 11J 13; 1,56 G 
21:14.39 
Table 3.3. Jupiter and Mars. System B. Location of 

214 
System A' 
System A 
Arc 
St 
<5A, 
8X2 = sx$ 
<5A3 
Arc 
5X\ 
SX2 
St 
r - > r 
30T 
6;15° 
7; 1,52,30° 
7;30° 
3m 
10 
11;15 
12 
r-><j> 
16;15° 
19:30° 4m 
41 
<D_>4/ 
4m 
-8;20 
-9:22,30 
-10 
<t> 
-10 
-12 
4m 
2 
3m 
9;35 
10:46,52,30 
11;30 
17;45 
21;18 
4m 10 
30 
6;15 
7:1,52,30 
7:30 
30 
6;15 
7:1,52,30 
7;30 
a->r 
6 
7;12 
29 
Total 
13m 
30 
33;45 
36 
Total 
30 
36 
13m 15x 
T a b l e 3.4. Jupiter. Subdivisions of the Synodic A r c a n d T i m e 
A C T 801.4-5,802.2-3 
Arc 
St 
8 X 1 
8 X 2 
DCL Text A 
Arc 
5Aj 
8 X 2 
r - > r 
30* 
2;30° 
3° 
3 m 
5 
6 
7;30° 
9° 
52;30 
-3;41,57,30 
^t;26,21 jBHHHIl 
2m 
-3;20 
-4 
-6;40 
- 8 
3 m 
5;23,20 
6;28 
7;33,7,30 
9;3,45 
30 
2;30 
3 
3:20+0; 1,45 
4 +0;2,6 
n - > r 
3;20 
4 
Total 
lim 22:30 + 11:43,7,30 
14; 3,45 
Total 
11;43, 7,30 14;3,45 
T a b l e 3.5. Saturn. Subdivisions of the Synodic A r c a n d T i m e 
Figures: 3.1-3.2 

Tables: 3.6-3.7 
215 
Sign 
15° of 
5 - > Q 
Sign 
15° of 
St 
<SAs 
«5A 
SV 
St 
81, 
SI 
Sri 
T 
36* 
34;56° 
36° 
+1; 4° 
14* 
13;35° 
12° 
-1 ;35° 
a 
42 
40;45 
42 
+1;15 
16 
15;31 
14 
-1;31 
i 
48 
46;34 
46 
-0;34 
19 
18;26 
18 
-0;26 
o 
44 
42;41 
42 
-0;41 
24 
23; 17 
22 
-1;17 
SI 
38 
36;52 
36 
-0;52 
27 
26; 12 
26 
-0;12 
Tfl? 
23 
22;19 
22 
-0;19 
30 
29; 6 
30 
+0;54 
-/•v. 
15 
14;33 
14 
-0;33 
36 
34;56 
34 
-0;56 
m 
15 
14;33 
14 
—0;33 
46 
44;38 
44 
-0;38 
16 
15,31 
16 
+0;29 
46 
44;38 
44 
-0;38 
z 
22 
21;21 
20 
—1 ;21 
44 
42;41 
42 
+0; 19 
vw 
24 
23;17 
22 
—1; 17 
34 
32;59 
34 
+1; l 
X 
24 
23;17 
22 
-1;17 
24 
23;17 
24 
+0;43 
Table 3.6. Mercury. System Ax. Pushes 
A C T 
302 
Adjacent 
Across 
Pushes 
A C T 
302 
Z - > S 
E^Q. 
r->z 
z->n 
r->z 
Stm 
23;23* 
15; 0* 
12;12T 
14;25x 
33;10T 
39; 0* 
54;24T 
45; 7* 
15T 
14T 
StM 
50; 9 
47; 4 
32;53 
46; 0 
70;43 
76;34 
76;34 
64;37 
48 
46 
SXm 
50; 16° 
14; 0° -14;57° 
12;25° 
4;18° 
63;30° 
79;54° 
16; 1° 
14° 
12° 
SXM 
77;17 
45;49 
+4; 6 
44; 0 
41;30 
102; 4 
101 ;52 
34;36 
46 
44 
Sim 
25;43 
-1;19 
-28;40 
-1;34 
-28;31 
25;40 
26;25 
-29;29 
-1;21 
-1;35 
8>1M 29;12 
+1;12 
-25; 13 
+0;54 
-25;57 
28;17 
29;25 
—25; 18 
+1;15 
+i; 1
Sfj 
27;53 
-0;22 
-27; 9 
—0;23 
-27;27 
27;25 
27;41 
-27;37 
-0;23 
—0;21 
o(Sn) 
0;48 
0;45 
0;50 
0;45 
0;36 
0;37 
0;47 
1;19 
0;53 
0;55 
Table 3.7. Mercury. System Ai. Elongations 

216 
Tables: 
3.8-3.9 
Sign 
15° of 
Sign 
15° of 
St 
5AS 
SA 
Srj 
St 
<5AS 
SA 
T 
38T 
36;52° 
+6° -30;52° 
30* 
29; 6° 
58;30° 
29;24° 
8 
35 
33;57 
+4 
-29;57 [-26:151 25:28 [~54;30] 29; 2 
I 
28;30 
27;39 
-2 
-29;39 
22; 15 
21;35 
52;30 
30;55 
© 
22 
21;21 
-8 
-29;21 
35;45 
34;41 
67;30 
32;49 
a 
22 
21 ;21 
-8 
-29;21 
49;15 
47;47 
[-77] 
29;13 
Tfl? 
22 
21;21 
-8 
-29;21 
52;15 
50;42 
[-80] 
29; 18 
-
22 
21;21 
-8 
-29;21 
44;45 
43:25 
74;45 
31;20 
IR 
14 
13;35 
-12 
-25;35 
37;15 
36; 8 
67;15 
31; 7 
S 
12;24 
12; 2 
-12 
-24; 2 
30 
29; 6 
59;45 
30;39 
Z 
10;48 
10;29 
-12 
-22;29 
30 
29; 6 
58;30 
29;24 
OS 0° 
10 
9;42 
-12 
-21;42 
30 
29; 6 
58;30 
29;24 
COO 15 
13 
12;37 
-12 
-24;37 
30 
29; 6 
58;30 
29;24 
X 15 
19 
18;26 
-12 
-30;26 
30 
29; 6 
58;30 
29;24 
T 0 
28;30 
27;39 
0 
-27;39 
30 
29; 6 
58;30 
29;24 
Table 3.8. Mercury. System A2. 
Pushes 
ACT 
300a 
Adjacent 
Across 
Pushes 
ACT 
300a 
£->E 
E —> £2 £2->r 
R-^Z 
E —> r r - > s 
£ —> E N-^R 
Stm 
22* 
17* 
11* 
15* 
29* 
41* 
56* 
45* 
22;15* 
10* 
StM 
51 
51 
37 
47 
73 
77 
81 
59 
52; 15 
38 
SXm 
52° 
13;30° -12° 
15; 4° 
1;30° 
71;36° 
83:45° 
16° 
52;30° -12° 
SXM 
77;57 
46 
+5;36 
42;45 
38;51 
103 
104:30 
30;45 
[-80] 
+6 
Srim 
28;28 
-5:14 -30; 18 
-4;40 
25;22 
-32; 6 -32;49 
24;43 
29; 2 -30;52 
ST]M 
32;26 
+2;42 -22;40 
+3;14 
33;21 
-26; 0 -26;16 
34;18 
32;49 —21 ;42 
8fj 
30; 13 
-1;36 -27;43 
-0;59 
28;24 
-29; 3 -29;29 
29;36 
30;10 -27;43 
<y(8n) 
l; 6 
2; 0 
2;48 
2;21 
2;11 
2; 3 
2; 2 
3;20 
1;11 
2;48 
Table 3.9. Mercury. System A2. 
Elongations 

Tables: 3.10-3.11 
217 
Adjacent 
Across 
E —» S 
a - > r 
s - » r 
E->Q 
S'm 
26d 
19d 
13d 
15d 
31d 
50d 
49d 
41d 
StM 
50 
47 
29 
49 
69 
77 
77 
64 
8/lm 
51° 
16° 
-15° 
22° 
1° 
87° 
74° 
11° 
<5Am 
81 
51 
-5 
49 
39 
106 
110 
34 
8r\m 
24 
-3 
-39 
-5 
-26 
24 
22 
-25 
817M 
32 
+8 
-24 
+7 
-34 
37 
37 
-36 
28; 0 
+1;30 
-31 ;30 
+2;30 
-29;30 
30; 0 
29;30 -29;30 
af^Sif) 
2;30 
3;30 
4;30 
3;30 
2;30 
4; 0 
5; 0 
3; 0 
Table 3.10. Mercury. Elongations. Modern Computation 
Period 
E 
T 
S A A, 
T 
T 
4* A A| 
£2 T 
QA 
A 2 
I 
1,51 VI 
21 *== 
5° 
1,52 I 
29 X 19° 
1,52 II 
21 
I 
12;40° 
II 
1,53 I 
14 
S 
5;30 1,53 VIII 30 
Z 
26;30 1,53 IX 
19 
Z 
18;40 
III 
1,54 VIII 21 
S 
10 
1,55 IV 
9 
SI 25 
1,55 IV 
29 
SI 18;10 
IV 
1,56 III 
6 O 
12 
1,56 XI 
18 T 
3;30 1,56 XII 
3 X 26;10 
V 
1,57 XI 
6 CCC 26 
1,58 VII 
9 m. 17 
1,58 VII 
16 TT\ 8 
I 
1,51 VI 
17 =2= 
2;30 1,52 I 
25 X 16;30 1,52 II 
17 X 10 
Period 
r 
T 
r A 
A, 
<J> 
T 
OA 
A2 
I 
r 
Z A 
A, 
I 
1,52 III 
2 X 
7;40° 1,52 III 
21 
U 29;30° 1,52 XI 
17 CX 21;30° 
II 
1,53 IX 
20 Z 17;30 
1,53 X 
10 
Z 10 
1,54 VI 
16 -TT3? 26;40 
III 
1,55 V 
15 a 13 
1,55 VI 
24 
SL 4;40 
1,55 XII2 17 T 25;30 
IV 
1,56 XII 
7 X 24; 10 1,56 XII 25 K 17;30 
1,57 IX 
1 ^ 10;50 
V 
1,58 VII 29 1T\ 4;30 
1,58 VIII 20 
— 26;40 
1,59 III 
28 O 19;20 
I 
2, 0 II 
28 
I 
5; 10 2, 0 III 
17 
8 26;50 
2, 0 XI 
13 CCD 19 
Table 3.11. Venus. Systems Ai and A2. 
Dates and Longitudes, SE 111-120 

218 
Tables: 3.12A-3.12B 
Period 
E - > T 
V —» Q 
O ^ £ 
£ - > 5 
E - > E 
I 
7m 
8T 
22* 
11* 
I9T 
7m 26T 
jm 27t 
18m 23T 
II 
8 
16 
19 
1 
20 
8 
6 
2 
5 
20 
7 
III 
7 28 
10 
16 
l m 9 
6 
23 
2 
19 
19 15 
IV 
8 12 
15 
4 
18 
8 
6 
2 
5 
20 
V 
8 
3 
7 
13 
21 
8 
8 
2 
19 
20 
11 
Total 
1,39™-4T 
Table 3.12A. Venus. System A1 and A2. 
Subdivisions 
of Synodic Time 
System 
A, 
A, A, 
A 2 A 2 
A] A, 
A2 A2 
A, A, 
A, A, 
A, 
Period 
E —> S 
I 
4,14° 
-6;20° 
-5° 
-8;10° 
4,22° 
1,14° 
9,30;30° 
II 
4,21 
-7;50 
—1; 10 
-7;30 
4,16;40 
1,13;20 
9,34;30 
III 
4,15 
-6;50 
-5;10 
-8; 20 
4,20;50 
1,16;30 
9,32 
IV 
4,21 ;30 
-7;20 
-2 
-6; 50 
4,23;20 
1,15;20 
9,44; 10 
V 
4,20;50 
-9 
-3;30 
-7;50 
4,22;40 
1,13;10 
9,36;20 
Total 
8r-2;30° 
I 
4,14 
-6;30 
-4;50 
-8;20 
4,22; 10 
1,14 
9,30;30 
Table 3.12B. Venus. Systems A1 and A2. 
Subdivisions δλ of Synodic Arc 

Tables: 
3
.
1
3
A
-
3
.
1
5
1
9 
Period 
r-><t 
L - > S 
r, —> a 
I 
8m 
3T 
17T 
11* 
15T 
7m 28* 
2m 
5* 
19m 19* 
II 
8 
10 
19 
3 
19 
8 
7 
2 
19 28 
III 
8 
11 
17 
15 
7 
21 
2 
11 
19 15 
IV 
8 
12 
19 
2 
22 
8 
6 
1 
27 
19 28 
V 
8 
5 
9 
16 
16 
8 
8 
2 
1 
19 25 
Total 
1,39m - 5T 
T a b l e 3 . 1 3 A . V e n u s . M o d e r n . S u b d i v i s i o n s St of S y n o d i c T i m e 
Period 
E —» E 
I 
4,17;30° 
-5;40° 
-6;40° 
4,11;50° 1,19;10° 9,31;50° 
II 
4,24;30 
-7 
-1;50 
-6;50 
4,18;30 
1,14;20 
9,41 ;40 
III 
4,11 ;20 
-2; 20 
-9;30 
-4; 10 
4, 3;40 
1,26 
9,25 
IV 
4,30 
-6;40 
-1;20 
-8; 30 
4,19;30 
1,10;10 
9,43; 10 
V 
4,15;50 
—1 ;30 
-8;40 
-5; 10 
4,21;30 
1,13;20 
9,35;20 
Total 
8r- 3;0° 
T a b l e 3 . 1 3 B . V e n u s . M o d e r n . 
S u b d i v i s i o n s 
of S y n o d i c A r c 
Period 
E —»Y 
r - » < t 
<J>->£ 
£ —» S 
E - > E 
I& 
4, 2d 
20d 
10d 
23d 
3,49d 
1, 2d? 
9,46d 
V St 
4, 0 
12 
16 
21 
3,56 
56 
9,41 
I 8X 
4,15;20° 
-6;40" 
-3;20° 
-7;40° 
4,20;25° 1,17;30° 9,35;35° 
V SX 
4,12;40 
-4 
-5; 20 
-7 
4,29; 10 
1,10 
9,35;30 
T a b l e 3.14. V e n u s . 
a n d 
B M 4 7 1 5 1 
1 S, 
2 £1, 
3 r. 
4 Zi 
5 E2 
6 Q2 
7 r 2 
8 Z2 
9 
1,36;30° 5,52;30° 5,51° 
4, 8;30° 5,12° 
3,28° 
3,21 ;34° 1,44° 
2,54;46,40° 
1,34 
5,50 
5,48;30 
4, 6 
5, 9;30 
3,25;30 
3,18;54 
1,41;26,40 2,52 
1,31 ;30 3,47;30 
5,46 
4, 3;30 
5, 7 
3,23 
3,16;14 
1,38;40 
2,49;13,20 
T a b l e 3.15. V e n u s . A C T 1050 

220 
Tables: A. 1-A.2 
Π 
Z 
2Π+Ζ 
P 
ε 
No. 
Sign 
1 
Λ 
TD? 
2 
= 
3 
S 
•ζ 
4 
COJ 
K 
5 
T 
a 
6 
I 
15 
2 
32 yrs 
7;30 
+8° 
π 
Σπ 
2 
4 
2 
36* 
1 
3 
2 
27* 
1 
2 
1 
18* 
1 
1 
0 
9 
1 
2 
1 
18 
1 
3 
2 
27 
22 
3 
47 yrs 
7;20 
-5° 
π 
Σπ 
2 
5 
3 
30 
2 
5 
3 
30 
1 
3 
2 
18* 
1 
2 
1 
12* 
1 
3 
2 
18 
1 
4 
3 
24* 
37 
5 
79 yrs 
7;24 
+3° 
π 
Σπ 
4 
9 
5 
32 
4 
8 
4 
29 
2 
5 
3 
18* 
2 
3 
1 
11 
2 
5 
3 
18 
3 
7 
4 
25 
59 
8 
126 yrs 
7;22,30 
-2° 
π 
Σπ 
6 
14 
8 
32 
6 
12 
6 
27* 
4 
8 
4 
18* 
3 
6 
3 
13 
3 
8 
5 
18 
4 
11 
7 
25 
96 
13 
205 yrs 
7;23,4,... 
0° 
π 
Σπ 
11 
23 
12 
32 
11 
20 
9 
28 
7 
13 
6 
18* 
5 
10 
5 
14 
5 
12 
7 
17 
8 
18 
10 
25 
133 
18 
284 yrs 
7:23,20 
+3° 
π 
Σπ 
15 
32 
17 
32 
15 
28 
13 
28 
10 
18 
8 
18* 
7 
14 
7 
14 
7 
16 
9 
16* 
11 
25 
14 
25 
Σπ 
in 
ACT 
Σπ 
36 
27 
18 
12 
16 
24 
Table A. 1. Mars. Number of Phenomena per Zone 
Π 
Z 
2Π+Ζ 
P 
Zone 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
15 
2 
32 yrs 
7;30 
w 
Σπ 
4 
30* 
3 
40* 
2 
1,0* 
1 
2,0 
2 
1,0 
3 
40 
22 
3 
47 yrs 
7;20 
w 
Σπ 
5(6) 
36(30) 
5(4) 
36(45) 
3 
1,0* 
2 
1,30* 
3 
1,0 
4 
45* 
37 
5 
79 yrs 
7;24 
w 
Σπ 
9 
33;20 
8 
37;30 
5 
1,0* 
3 
1,40 
5 
1,0 
7 
42:51,25, 
59 
8 
126 yrs 
7;22,30 
w 
Σπ 
14 
34:17,8, 
12 
40* 
8 
1,0* 
6 
1,20 
8 
1,0 
11 
43:38,10, 
96 
13 
205 yrs 
7:23,4,... 
w 
Σπ 
23 
33:54,46, 
20 
39 
13 
1,0* 
10 
1,18 
12 
1,5 
18 
43:20 
133 
18 
284 yrs 
7:.23,20 
w 
Σπ 
32 
33:45 
28 
38:34,17, 
18 
1,0* 
14 
1,17:8,34, 
16 
1,7;30* 
25 
43;12 
ACT 
284 yrs 
7:23,20 
w 
Σπ 
36 
30 
27 
40 
18 
1,0 
12 
1,30 
16 
1,7:30 
24 
45 
Table Α.2. w\ Derived from Number of Phenomena per Zone 

Figures 
Figure 1.1. Errors of Mercury's Periods in Reports of Observations 

222 
Figures: 
2.1-2.2 
Figure 2.1. System B 
Figure 2.2. Observed and Computed Synodic Times of Saturn 

222 Figures: 
2
.
1
-
2
.
2 
Figure 2.3. Observed and Computed Synodic Times of Jupiter 
Figure 2.4. Observed and Computed Synodic Times of Mars 

224 
Figures: 2.5-2.6 
Figure 2.5. System A 
Figure 2.6. Jupiter. System A' 

222 Figures: 
2
.
1
-
2
.
2 
Figure 2.7. Mars. System A 
Figure 2.8. Mars. Symmetrical System 
Figure 2.9. Mercury. Derivation of 

226 
Figures: 
2.10A-2.10B 
Figure 2.10A. Mercury. System 
Figure 2.10B. Mercury. 
Observed and Computed Synodic Times 

Figures: 
2.11A-2.11B 
227 
Figure 2.11 A. Mercury. System 
Figure 2.1 1B. Mercury. 
Observed and Computed Synodic Times 

Figures: 2.11A-2.12B 227 
Figure 2.12A. Mercury. System 
Figure 2.1 1B. Mercury. 
Observed and Computed Synodic Times 

Figures: 
2.13A-2.13B 
229 
Figure 2.13A. Mercury. System 
Figure 2.13B. Mercury. 
Observed and Computed Synodic Times 

230 
Figures: 
2.14A-2.14B 
Figure 2.14A. Mercury. System 
Figure 2.14B. Mercury. System 

Figures: 
2.15A-2.15B 
231 
Figure 2.15A. Mercury. System 
Figure 2.15B. Mercury. System 

232 
Figures: 3.1-3.2 
Figure 3.1. System B. Graph of 
and 
Figure 3.2. Instantaneous Longitudes of 
and 

Figures: 3.3-3.4 
233 
Figure 3.3. Elongations of 
Figure 3.4. Mercury. System 
Elongations 

234 
Figures: 3.5 
Figure 3.5. Phenomena of Venus. Systems 
and 
SE 111-120 

Notation and Abbreviations 
Numbers 
and 
Dates 
Numbers 
Sexagesimal numbers are written with commas separating places 
and a semicolon separating the integer and fractional parts, e.g., 
7:23,20 = 7 + 23/60 + 20/60
2, 
13,12:21,10,22,33... = 13 · 60
1 + 12 · 60° + 21 · 60"
1 + 10 • 60"2 
+ 22 • 60-
3 + 33 · 60-4... = 792.352882..., 
the mean synodic period of Mars in 'tithis'. 
In tables only, non-terminating fractions end in commas. 
Dates 
Dates are given in negative AD years, which are one less than 
equivalent BC years, e.g., 0 = 1 BC, -99 = 100 BC, -289 = 290 BC. 
Month I of the Babylonian calendar begins in March or April; 
X-XII, or XI-XII2 in an intercalary year, are in the following year. 
The calendar date begins at sunset preceding the equivalent Julian 
date that begins at midnight, e.g., 5 Darius II, IV 21 = -418 Jul 14. 
Beginning of the Seleucid Era, SE 1 Nisan (I) 1 =-310 Apr 3. 
Conversions of dates between the Babylonian and Julian calendars 
and intervals in months and days between dates are from Parker-
Dubberstein (1956) with corrections from ADT. 
Standard Notation 
Us, degree, degree oftime 
Mean: synodic time AT and At or synodic arc AA and AX 
a 
Zone, length ofzoneJSystem A) 
C 
Constant C = Z T - Z l = 0.2m + c = ί6,0
τ +c 
c 
Constant c = AT - AA = At - AX; 
by assumption AT- AA = At - AX = c, AT- AX = C 
d 
Second difference (System B); day of 6,0 us = 6,0° 
A 
Amplitude M - m (System B); difference 
δ 
Interval, 'step' (System A); 
distance from AM, δ' distance from X1n (System B) 
e 
Epact e = y - 12m = y - 6,0
τ; generally e = 11;4
τ 
ε 
Error in period or approximation 

236 
Notation and 
Abbreviations 
η 
Elongation from (mean) s u n 
δη 
Change of elongation from (mean) s u n 
i 
Integer coefficient of Π, y, e, 6,0°, (6,0 + e)
x, 12m = 6,0
X; 
number of zone of a, w, δ, π, δλ, δί, 5A8, η (System A) 
Λ, A 
Longitude 
AM 
Location of greatest Δλ and At 
A 1 n 
Location of least Δλ and At 
AA 
Synodic arc of sun, AA = AX+ i 6,0°; difference of longitude; 
in Introduction Δλ 
Δλ 
Synodic arc of phenomenon, Δλ = ΔΛ - ί 6,0° 
δλ 
Subdivision of synodic arc Δλ between adjacent phenomena 
5A8 
Arc of motion of (mean) s u n in time δί 
M 
Maximum value; months 
m 
Minimum value; month, generally m = 30
τ = 29;31,50
d 
μ, ' 
Mean value 
P 
Period, P = Π/Z, phenomena in one zodiacal rotation 
ρ 
Synodic period; phenomenon; planet 
Π 
Synodic phenomena in Y years and Z zodiacal rotations 
π 
Phenomena per zone (System A) 
r 
Rotations of 12s = 6,0° 
s 
S u n (mean); zodiacal sign of 30°; number of intervals δ 
σ 
Standard deviation 
SE 
Seleucid Era, SE 1 Nisan (I) 1 = -310 Apr 3 
T, t 
Time, date 
τ 
Tithi, τ = 30m 
Δ T 
Synodic time, AT= At+ H2m = At+ i 6,0
τ; difference of time 
At 
Synodic time over il2 months, At = AT- il2m = AT- i 6,0
τ 
δί 
Subdivision of synodic time ΔT between adjacent phenomena 
υ 
Velocity, Vp of planet, us of (mean) sun 
w 
Synodic arc within zone (System A) 
Y 
Years; zodiacal rotations of (mean) sun 
y 
Year of 12m + e = (6,0 + β)
τ, generally y = 12;22,8m = 6,11;4
τ 
Z 
Zodiacal rotations of phenomena in Y years 
Notation in Tables of 
Observations 
[...] 
(...) 
? 
~ 
< 
> 
Restored 
Observed date 
Questionable reading 
About (en) 
Earlier than; less than 
Later than; greater than 
+ 
b 
C 
d 
e 
η 
Plus digit after tens 
Beginning of zodiacal sign 
Chariot (end of Taurus) 
Passed by (dib) 
End of zodiacal sign 
Not observed (nu pap) 

Notation and Abbreviations 
237 
Months, with Common Hebrew Names 
I 
bar 
Nisannu 
Nisan 
VII 
du6 
Tasritu 
Tishri 
II 
gu4 
Ajjaru 
Iyyar 
VIII apin 
Arah- 
Mar-
samnu 
chesvan 
III 
sig 
Simanu 
Sivan 
IX 
gan 
Kislimu 
Chislev 
IV 
su 
Du'uzu 
Tammuz 
X 
ab 
Tebetu 
Tebeth 
V 
izi 
Abu 
Ab 
XI 
ziz 
Sabatu 
Shebat 
VI 
kin 
Ululu 
Elul 
XII 
se 
Adaru 
Adar 
VI2 kin-a 
Ululu II 
— 
XII2 dir-se Adaru II 
WeAdar 
Zodiacal Signs 
T 
hun, lu 
Aries 
-
rin 
Libra 
S 
mul 
Taurus 
m 
gir-tab, gir 
Scorpio 
X 
mas 
Gemini 
/ 
pa 
Sagittarius 
O 
kusu, alia 
Cancer 
% 
mas 
Capricorn 
SI 
a 
Leo 
WV 
gu 
Aquarius 
HP 
absin 
Virgo 
H 
zib-me, zib 
Pisces 
Sun, Moon, and Planets 
0 
samas 
Sun 
C? 
sal-bat-a-nu, an 
Mars 
<[ 
sin 
Moon 
4-
mul-babar, sag-me-gar Jupiter 
gu4-utu 
Mercury 
K 
germa 
Saturn 
9 
dil-bat 
Venus 
Planetary Phenomena 
Superior Planets 
r 
igi 
heliacal (morning) rising 
<D 
us, us igi, us mahrltu(igi-tu) 
first (morning) station 
O 
e, e-me, ana me-e 
acronychal (evening) rising 
¥ 
us, us ar, us arkltu(ar-tu) 
second (evening) station 
£2 
su 
heliacal (evening) setting 
Inferior Planets 
E 
igi, igi sa su, ina su igl 
evening rising 
¥ 
us, us sa su, ina su us 
evening (first) station 
ft 
su, su sa su, ina su su 
evening setting 
r 
igi, igi sa kur, ina kur igi-su 
morning rising 
<D 
us, us sa kur, (ina kur us) 
morning (second) station 
X 
§u, su sa kur, ina kur su-su 
morning setting 

238 
Notation and Abbreviations 
Abbreviations and Forms of Citation 
ACT 
Neugebauer, O. Astronomical Cuneiform Texts. 
Cited by ACT number: 
1- 
Lunar System A 
500- Mars 
100- 
Lunar System B 
600- Jupiter 
200- 
Procedure Texts 
700- Saturn 
300- 
Mercury 
800- Procedure Texts 
400- 
Venus 
1000- Unidentified 
Procedure texts cited by number and section, e.g., 
ACT 810.3-6 for sections 3 to 6. 
ADT 
Sachs, A.J., H. Hunger. Astronomical Diaries and Related 
Texts from Babylonia 
Cited by negative AD year and month of the Babylonian 
calendar, e.g., -289 IV; month I begins in March or 
April, X-XII or XI-XII2 are in the following year. 
ARAK 
Hunger, H. Astrological Reports to Assyrian Kings. 
Cited by report. 
AT 1 & 2 Neugebauer, O., A. J. Sachs. Some Atypical Astronomi-
cal Cuneiform Texts. JCS. Cited by text. 
C 
Centaurus 
DCL 
Aaboe, A., A.J. Sachs. Some Dateless Computed Lists of 
Longitudes. JCS. Cited by text. 
HAMA 
Neugebauer, O. A History of Ancient Mathematical 
Astronomy. 
JCS 
Journal of Cuneiform Studies. 
LABS 
Parpola, S. Letters from Assyrian and Babylonian 
Scholars. Cited by letter. 
LBAT 
Sachs, A. J. Late Babylonian Astronomical and Related 
Texts. Cited by text. 
SSB 
Kugler, F.X. Stemkunde und Sterndienst in Babel. 

References 
Aaboe, A. 1958. On Babylonian Planetary Theories. C 5, 209-77. 
1964. On Period Relations in Babylonian Astronomy. C 10, 213-31. 
1974. Scientific Astronomy in Antiquity. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A. 
276, 21-42. 
1980. Observation and Theory in Babylonian Astronomy. C 24, 14-
35. 
1987. A Late Babylonian Procedure Text for Mars, and Some 
Remarks on Retrograde Arcs. Studies...in 
Honor of E. S. Kennedy, 
ed. D.A. King, G. Saliba. Annals of the New York Academy 
of 
Science, 500, 1-14. 
Aaboe, A., P.J. Huber. 1977. A Text Concerning Subdivision of the 
Synodic Motion of Venus from Babylon: BM 37151. Ancient 
Near 
Eastern Studies in Memory of J.J. Finkelstein. Connecticut Academy 
of Arts and Sciences, Memoir 19, 1-4. 
Aaboe, A., A.J. Sachs. DCL. Some Dateless Computed Lists of 
Longitudes of Characteristic Planetary Phenomena from the Late 
Babylonian Period. JCS 20 (1966), 1-33. 
1969. Two Lunar Texts of the Achaemenid Period from Babylon. C 
14, 1-22. 
Aaboe, A. et al. 1991. Aaboe, A., J.P. Britton, J.A. Henderson, O. 
Neugebauer, A.J. Sachs. Saros Cycle Dates and Related Babylonian 
Astronomical Texts. Trans. Am. Phil. Soc. 81,6. 
Baigent, M. 1994. From the Omens of Babylon: Astrology and Ancient 
Mesopotamia. London. 
Brack-Bernsen, L. 1990. On the Babylonian Lunar Theory: A Construc­
tion of Column Φ from Horizontal Observations. C 33, 39-56. 
1993. Babylonische Mondtexte: Beobachtung und Theorie. In Gaiter, 
1993, 331-58. 
1994. Konsistenz zwischen Kolonne Φ und Babylonischen Aufzeich-
ungen. AD RADICES, ed. A von Gotstedter. Stuttgart, 45-64. 
1998. Goal-Year Tablets: Lunar Data and Prediction. In Swerdlow, 
1998. 
Brack-Bernsen, L., O. Schmidt. 1994. On the Foundations of the Baby­
lonian Column Φ: Astronomical Significance of Partial Sums of the 
Lunar Four. C 37, 183-209. 
Britton, J.P. 1990. An Early Function for Eclipse Magnitudes in Baby­
lonian Astronomy. C 32, 1-52. 
1993. Scientific Astronomy in Pre-Seleucid Babylon. In Gaiter, 1993, 
61-76. 
Britton, J.P., C.B.F. Walker. 1991. A 4th Century Babylonian Model for 
Venus: B.M. 33552. C 34, 97-118. 

240 
References 
1996. Astronomy and Astrology In Mesopotamia. In Walker, 1996, 
42-67. 
Cohen, M.E. 1993. The Cultic Calendars of the Ancient Near 
East 
Bethesda. 
Epping, J. 1889. Astronomisches aus Babylon. Freiburg im Breisgau. 
Gaiter, H.D. 1993. ed. Die RoUe der Astronomie in den Kulturen Mesopo-
tamiens. Grazer Morgenlandische Studien 3, Graz. 
Grafton, A.T., N.M. Swerdlow. 1988. Calendar Dates and Ominous Days 
in Ancient Historiography. Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld 
Institutes 51, 14-42 
GraJ3hoff, Gerd. 1998. Normal Star Observations in Late Babylonian 
Astronomical Diaries. In Swerdlow, 1998. 
Huber, P.J. 1958. Ueber den Nullpunkt der Babylonsichen Ekliptik. C 
5, 192-208. 
Huber, P.J. et al. 1982. Astronomical Dating of Babylon I and Ur III. 
Occasional Papers on the Near East 1.4. Malibu. 
Hunger, H. ARAK. Astrological Reports to Assyrian Kings. State Archives 
ofAssyria8. 
Helsinki, 1992. 
1977. Astrologische Wettervorhersagen. Zeitschrift fur 
Assyriologie 
66, 234-60. 
1988. A 3456: eine Sammlung von Merkurbeobachtungen. In 
Leichty, 1988, 201-23. 
1998. Non-mathematical Astronomical Texts and Their Relationships. 
In Swerdlow, 1998. 
Hunger, H., D. Pingree. 1989. MUL.APIN. An Astronomical 
Compendium 
in Cuneiform. Archivfur Orientforschung, Beiheft 24. 
Jones, A. 1998. A Classification of Astronomical Tables on Papyrus. In 
Swerdlow, 1998. 
Astronomical Papyri from Oxyrhynchus. 2 vols. Mem. Am. PhiL Soc. To 
appear. 
Koch-Westenholz, U. 1995. Mesopotamian Astrology. An Introduction to 
Babylonian and Assyrian Celestial Divination. Copenhagen. 
Kugler, F.X. SSB. Sternkunde 
und Sterndienst 
in Babel. I (1907), II 
(1909/10-24). Erganzungen. I (1913), II (1914). Minister in West-
falen. 
1900. Die Babylonische Mondrechnung. Freiburg im Breisgau. 
Labat, R. 1939. Hemerologies etMenologies dAssur. Paris. 
1965. Un Calendrier Babylonien des Travaux des Signes et des Mots 
(Series Iqqur Ipus). Paris. 
Langdon, S. 1935. Babylonian Menologies and the Semitic 
Calendars. 
London. 
Langdon, S. et al 1928. Langdon, S., J.K. Fotheringham, C. Schoch. 
The Venus Tablets of Ammizaduga. Oxford. 
Leichty, E. et al. 1988. ed. A Scientific Humanist, Studies in Memory of 
Abraham Sachs. Occasional Papers of the Samuel Noah Kramer Fund 
9, Philadelphia. 

References 
241 
Neugebauer, O. ACT. Astronomical 
Cuneiform Texts. 3 vols. London, 
[1955], rpr. New York, 1983. 
HAMA. A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy. 3 pts. New 
York, 1975. 
1951. The Babylonian Method for the Computation of the Last 
Visibilities of Mercury. Proc. Am. PhH Soc. 95, 110-16. 
1954. Babylonian Planetary Theories. Proc. Am. Phil Soc. 98, 60-89. 
1957. The Exact Sciences in Antiquity. 2nd ed. Providence. 
1968. The Origin of 'System B' of Babylonian Astronomy. C 12, 209-
14. 
1989. From Assyriology to Renaissance Art. Proc. Am. Phil. Soc. 133, 
391-403. 
Neugebauer, O., A.J. Sachs. AT 1 & 2. Some Atypical Astronomical 
Cuneiform Texts I & II. JCS 21 (1967), 183-218; 22 (1969), 92-113. 
Neugebauer, P.V. 1938. Tafeln zur Berechnung der jahrlichen Auf- und 
Untergange der Planeten. Astronomische Nachrichten 264, 313-22. 
Oppenheim, A.L. 1969. Divination and Celestial Observation in the Last 
Assyrian Empire. C 14, 97-135. 
1974. A Babylonian Diviner's Manual. Journal of Near 
Eastern 
Studies 33, 197-220. 
1978. Man and Nature in Mesopotamian Civilization. Dictionary of 
Scientific Biography 15, New York, 634-66. 
Parker, R.A., W.H. Dubberstein. 1956. Babylonian 
Chronology. 
626 
B.C.-A.D. 75. Providence. 
Parpola, S. LABS. Letters from Assyrian and Babylonian Scholars. State 
Archives of Assyria 10. Helsinki, 1993. 
LAS. Letters from Assyrian Scholars to the Kings Esarhaddon 
and 
Assurbanipal. 
Part I: Texts, Part II: Commentary. Alter Orient und 
Altes Testament 5, pts. 1-2, Neukirchen-Vluyn, 1970-83. 
1993. Mesopotamian Astrology and Astronomy as Domains of the 
Mesopotamian 'Wisdom'. In Gaiter, 1993, 47-59. 
Pingree, D. 1993. Venus Phenomena in Enuma Anu Enlil. In Gaiter, 
1993, 259-73. 
Rawlinson. H. 1870. Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia III. London. 
Reiner, E. 1995. Astral Magic in Babylonia. Trans. Am. Phil. Soc. 85,4. 
1998. Babylonian Celestial Divination. In Swerdlow, 1998. 
Reiner, E., D. Pingree. 1975-. Babylonian Planetary Omens. Part 1. 
Enuma Anu Enlil, Tablet 63: The Venus Tablet of Ammisaduqa. Part 
2. Enuma Anu Enlil, Tablets 50-51. Bibliotheca Mesopotamia 
2.1-2. 
Malibu, 1975-81. 
1975a. Observational Texts concerning the Planet Mercury. Revue 
a"Assyriologie 69, 175-80. 
Rochberg, F. 1988a. Aspects of Babylonian Celestial Divination: The 
Lunar Eclipse Tablets of Enuma Anu Enlil. Archivfur 
Orientforschung, 
Beiheft 22. 
1988b. Benefic and Malefic Planets in Babylonian Astrology. In 

242 
References 
Leichty, 1988, 323-28. 
1993. The Cultural Locus of Astronomy in Late Babylonia. In Gaiter, 
1993, 31-44. 
1998. Babylonian Horoscopy: The Texts and Their Relations. In 
Swerdlow, 1998. 
Sachs, A.J. LBAT. Late Babylonian Astronomical 
and Related 
Texts 
Copied by T.G. Pinches and J.N. Strassmaier. Providence, 1955. 
1948. A Classification of the Babylonian Astronomical Tablets of the 
Seleucid Period. JCS 2, 271-90. 
1952a. Babylonian Horoscopes. JCS 6, 49-75. 
1952b. A Late Babylonian Star Catalog. JCS 6, 146-50. 
1974. Babylonian observational astronomy. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 
A. 276, 43-50. 
Sachs, A.J., H. Hunger. ADT. Astronomical Diaries and Related Texts 
from Babylonia. I—III. Denkschr. d. Oster. Akad. d. Wiss. Phil.-Hist. 
Kl. 195 (1988), 210 (1989), 246 (1996). 
Sayce, A.H. 1874. Astronomy and Astrology of the Babylonians. 
Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archaeology 3, 145-339. 
Schmidt, O. 1969. A Mean Value Principle in Babylonian Planetary 
Theory. C 14, 267-86. 
Stephenson, F.R., L.J. Fatoohi. 1994. The Babylonian Unit of Time. 
Journal for the History of Astronomy 25, 99-110. 
Strassmeier, J.N., J. Epping. 1881. Zur entzifferung der astronom-
ischen Tafeln der Chaldaer. Sttmmen aus Maria-Laach 21, 277-92. 
Swerdlow, N.M. 1998. ed. Ancient Astronomy and Celestial Divination. 
Chicago. 
1998a. Introduction to Swerdlow, 1998. 
1998b. The Derivation of the Parameters of Babylonian Planetary 
Theory with Time as the Principal Independent Variable. In 
Swerdlow, 1998. 
Thompson, R.C. 1900. The Reports of the Magicians and Astrologers of 
Ninevah and Babylon in the British Museum. 2 vols., London, rpr. 
New York, 1977. 
Tuckerman, B. 1962. Planetary, Lunar, and Solar Positions 601 B.C. to 
A.D. 1 at Five-day and Ten-day Intervals. Mem. Am. Phil. Soc. 56. 
van der Waerden, B.L. 1957. Babylonische Planetrechnung. Vierteljahrs-
schrift der Naturforschenden Gesellschafl in Zurich 102, 39-60. 
1966. Die Anfange der Astronomie. Erwachende 
Wissenschaft 
II. 
Groningen. 
van Soldt, W.H. 1995. Solar Omens ofEnumaAnu 
Enlil: Tablets 23(24)-
29(30). Istanbul. 
Walker, C.B.F. 1993. Bibliography of Babylonian Astronomy and 
Astrology. In Gaiter, 1993, 407-49. 
1996. ed. Astronomy before the Telescope. London. 
1998. Babylonian Observations of Saturn during the Reign of 
Kandalanu. In Swerdlow, 1998. 

Index of Names 
Aaboe, A. xiv, xv, 54, 65, 78, 86, 
87, 90, 91, 96, 104, 109, 127, 
132, 151, 169, 172, 183, 184 
Akkullanu 13, 14, 15 
Alexander 6, 21,22 
Ammisaduqa 8, 9 
Antigonus 6 
Aristarchus 182 
Aristotle 181 
Artaxerxes I 132 
Artaxerxes II 83, 132 
Assurbanipal 6, 13, 14 
Baigent, M. 5 
Brack-Bernsen, L. 45, 52 
Britton, J. xiv, 65, 86, 93, 132, 
169, 170 
Brown, D. xv, 5, 10, 25 
Chandrasekhar, S. xv 
Copernicus, N. 67, 142 
Cyrus 1 
Darius II 19, 132 
Darius III 21, 22 
Diodorus 6 
Epping, J. Xiv, 2, 18, 36, 45, 182 
Esarhaddon 6, 10, 11, 13 
Eudoxus 182 
Fatoohi, L.J. 36 
Galileo 45, 182 
Grafton, A.T. 7, 22 
GraJ3hoff, G. xi, 36, 187 
Hamilton, N. 172 
Hipparchus 32, 60, 182 
Huber, P. 8, 76, 86, 88, 169 
Hunger. H. xiv, xv, 2, 16, 17, 25, 
43, 44, 47, 63, 83, 107 
Isaiah, Second 1, 2, 7, 45 
Issar-sumu-eres 11, 104 
Jones, A. 29. 171, 172, 182 
Kandalanu 81 
Kepler, J. 31, 66, 190 
Koch-Westenholz, U. 5, 19 
Kugler, F.X. xiv, xv, 2, 8, 23, 80, 
83, 92, 93, 94, 97, 100, 105, 
106, 122, 165, 182 
Labat, R. 7, 8 
Langdon, S. 7, 8 
Laplace, P.S. de 57, 190 
Leonardo da Vinci 45 
Leverrier, U.J.J. 122 
Luther, M. 1 
Mar-Issar 11 
Nabonassar 16 
Nabu-ahhe-eriba 10, 104 
Nebukadnezar II 19 
Neugebauer, O. xi, xii, xiii, xiv, 
xv. 2, 16, 23, 24, 32, 36, 77, 78, 
79, 91, 99, 103, 105, 106, 107, 
131, 147, 152, 161, 162, 171, 
181, 182, 189 
Neugebauer, P.V. 25, 75 
Newton, I. 57. 190 
Oppenheim, A.L. 3, 8, 45, 182 
Parpola, S. xiv, 4, 5 
Pingree, D. 8, 25, 52 
Pliny 142 
Plutarch 22 
Ptolemy 16, 22, 28, 32, 34. 50, 60, 
67, 82. 175, 182, 190 
Rawlinson, H. 1,2, 6, 8, 14 
Reiner, E. xv, 5, 8, 14, 52 
Rochberg, F. 29, 34 
Sachs, A.J. xi. xiv, xv, 2, 16, 29, 
34, 45, 51, 65, 83, 91, 96, 186 
Samas-sumu-ukin 86 
Sayce, A.H. 2, 3, 6. 8, 14 
Schmidt, O. 65 
Seleucus Nicator 6 
Smith, G. 6 
Stephenson F. R. 36 
Strassmaier, J.N. 2, 171, 182 
Stratonike 21 

244 
Index 
Theophrastus 
181 
Tuckerman, B. xi, 75, 78, 183 
van der Waerden, B.L. 
90. 142, 147, 175 
31. 65, 
Vitruvlus 
142 
Walker, C.B.F. xiv, xv, 53, 81, 
132, 169, 170 
Index of Subjects 
alignment to zodiac 
System A 135-36 
System B 
136-41 
apotropalc rituals 3, 10, 13, 41-42 
approximations 31, 34, 37, 65, 
71-72, 81-82, 126, 174-79 
Arbela, battle of 22 
Assyrian letters and reports 
2-15 pass., described 
6 
Astronomical Diaries: see Diaries 
Babylon 1, 6, 17, 22, 36. 76, 145 
Book of Common Prayer 
7 
calendar: see lunar calendar 
Chaldasans xiv, 1, 6, 32 
Chicago Board of Trade 41 
Commodity Research Bureau 
19 
dates, notation of 235 
observed and true 41-50, 
174 
dates of sources 
52-54 
day, divisions, units 36-37 
length of daylight 
36 
Diaries 16-23 et pass. 
commodity reports 
19-20 
historical notices 20-22 
level of Euphrates 20 
meteorological reports 
17-18 
observations: see moon, 
normal stars, periods, 
phenomena of planets, 
planets, individual planets, 
visibility times 
purpose 17, 20, 22-23 
difference (constant) of synodic 
arc and time 30, 64, 67-72, 
189-90, Part 2 
error 69-72 
'Diviner's Manual' 3, 8, 45, 53 
elongations, fixed mean 65, 68, 
Part 3 
error 70-72, 143-44 
of Ω and Γ, Σ and Ξ 142-44 
small variation 143-44 
see Individual planets 
elongations, variable 65, 70-72 
by modern theory 143-44 
Enuma Anu Enlil 2 et pass, 
epact 38, 66 
ephemerides Part 2, Part 3 
see Individual planets, 
mathematical astronomy 
described 23-24, 27 
purpose 173-74 
epoch 141-46 
Esaglla 6, 21 
Euphrates, level 20 
extlspicy 
21 
goal-year periods 23, 44, 54, 59, 
61-62 
horoscopes 28-29, 34 
initial position 141-46 
intervals: see System A 
IqqurIpus 8 
Jupiter 83-86, 94-100, 153-59 
alignment to zodiac 136, 139 
elongations 153-56, 157-59 
observations 
83-84 
periods 61, 62, 84, 95 
subdivision of synodic arc 
and time 157-59 
System A 94-95 
Systems A', A", A" 97-99 
System Αχ 95-96 
System Αβ 99-100 
System B 83-84 
System B' 85-86 
'large hours' 36 
latitude xi, 19, 35, 187 

Index 
245 
longitude 34-35 
in System B 
136-38 
synodic arc and time a 
function of 81-82, 126, 176 
direct measure of 
186-90 
lunar calendar 7-8, 37-38 
names of months 237 
year 38, 60 
Mars 86-88, 100-04, 147-52 
acronychal rising 50, 87 
alignment to zodiac 135, 
139-40 
daily velocity 
103 
elongations 
147-52 
observations 
86-87 
periods 57, 59, 62, 87, 100 
phenomena per zone 183-85 
retrograde arcs 
103-04 
subdivision of synodic arc 
and time 147-52 
symmetrical system 
102-04, 
185 
System A 100-04 
System B 86-88 
mathematical astronomy 
described 
23-33 
invention and purpose 
32-33, 55-56, 174, 180-82 
Mercury 104-134, 160-65 
alignment to zodiac 136 
derivation of parameters 
method 
108-11 
discussion 
122-27 
elongations 
160-65 
by modern theory 164 
'exact' period 105 
length of zones 
111 
observations 52-53, 107-08, 
112, 115, 118, 120, 124-27, 
130-31, 133-34 
'passed by' phenomena 
106-07 
periods 58, 63, 105 
'pushes' 106, 161-63 
Systems Ai and A2 
described 
104-7 
System Ai Γ 117-19 
System Ai Ξ 115-17 
System A 2 Σ 120-22 
System A 2 Ω 112-15 
System A 3 Ξ 133-34 
System A 3 Ω 127-32 
date of Text M 132 
months: see lunar calendar, 
moon 
moon, first visibility 36, 44-46 
height of 45-46 
mean synodic month 38 
observations 
18, 44-46 
visibility times 44-45 
MulApin 24-26 
Nineveh 6 
normal stars xi, 18, 39-41, 186-89 
notation 235-36 
numbers, notation of 235 
observations: see moon, normal 
stars, periods, phenomena of 
planets, planets, individual 
planets, visibility times 
omens 1-15 et pass, 
conjunctions 
13-14 
criteria 5-6 
early and late appearances 
and disappearances 
10-11 
location 11-13 
lunar 45-46 
meteorological 17, 18, 45 
month and day of month 7-9 
Oxyrhynchus papyri 29, 182 
period P = Π/Ζ Part 2, 179-80 
System A 89 
System B 79 
periods: see goal-year periods, 
individual planets 
periods and errors 
57-64 
by observation 
62-64 
phenomena of planets pass. 
acronychal rising 50, 87 
dates, observed and true or 
'ideal' 41-50, 174 
defined 23-24, 237 
first visibilities 42-44 
last visibilities 46-47 
location 26, 51-52 
ominous 5-15 
per zone: see System A 
stations 48-49 

246 
Index 
philosophers xiii, 56, 181 
planets, names 237 
distances from normal 
stars xi, 39-41. 186-88 
observations 18-19, 39-52, 
74-75, 186-88, 
see individual planets, 
phenomena of planets, 
visibility times 
visibility and invisibility 
periods 24-26 
procedure texts 27-28 et pass. 
'regular' numbers 80, 89-91 
rising and setting times: see 
visibility times 
Saturn 80-83, 92-94, 156, 159-60 
alignment to zodiac 136, 
139-40 
elongations 156, 159-60 
observations 53, 80-82 
periods 62, 82, 92, 94 
subdivision of synodic arc 
and time 159-60 
System A 
92-93 
System A 
93-94 
System B 
80-83 
Scribes of Enuma Anu Enlil xiv, 
1, 6-7 et pass, 
secrecy 28 
Seleucid Era 235 
Sirius 53 
solar-distance principle 31, 65, 
69, 142, 143, 168, 175 
solar year 38. 60, 66 
solstices and equinoxes 53, 145 
star catalogue 51, 186, 188 
subdivision of synodic arc and 
time: see individual planets 
sun (mean) 31-32, 64-72, 144 
sun (true) 32, 64-65, 144 
Systems A and A 96-97 
synodic arc 64-72, 77-78, Part 2 
subdivision 147-72 
see individual planets 
synodic time 64-72, Part 2 
from observation 74-75 
from modern theory 75-77 
subdivision 147-72 
see individual planets 
System A 88-134, 147-65, 176-80 
see individual planets 
conditions 89-90 
described 88-91 
intervals (steps) 90-91,98, 
146, 149-50, 186 
phenomena per zone 90-91, 
94, 98, 183-86 
synodic arc and time a 
function of longitude 81 -82, 
126, 176 
two-zone system 91-92 
System B 78-88, 136-41, 176, 179 
see alignment to zodiac, 
individual planets 
described 78-80 
relation to longitude 136-38 
tithi, denned 37 
units 34-39 
distance and location 34-36 
observational xi, 35-36 
time and date 36-39 
volume, weight, length 19, 
20,36 
Uruk 6, 41, 131 
'Uruk Scheme' 145 
Venus 165-72 
ACT 1050 171-72 
modern theory 168 
observations 8-9, 24-25 
period 62, 68, 166 
Systems Ai and A2 165-68 
various theories 169-71 
visibility and invisibility periods 
24-26 
visibility times 
moon 44-45 
planets 42-48, 52-53, 174 
water clock 36, 43. 45, 174 
weather 17-18, 55-56, 174, 181 
year: see lunar calendar, solar 
year 
zodiac 34 
see alignment to zodiac 
zodiacal signs 34,41,51 
names 237 


